PRIVATE DEVOTION AND A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

Matthew. VI. 6. Thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet; and when thou
have shut the door, pray to thy Father, which is in secret: and thy Father,
which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. OXON. Printed at the THEATER
for Henry Clements Bookseller in Oxford. A. D. MDCLXXXIX.

Imprimatur. GILB. IRONSIDE Vicecancellarius.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAPTER
I. DAILY PRAYER, in the Morning. II. At Noon. III. At Evening. IV. Pious
Resolutions. V. Select Lessons of Holy Scripture. VI. Occasional Lessons. VII.
Going to or from the Church. VIII. Occasional Reflections. IX. The Larger
Office at Rising, when my affairs will permit. X. The Larger Office at
Reposing. XI. Private Devotion at the HOLY COMMUNION. XII. At Receiving the
Bread. XIII. At Receiving the Cup. XIV. At home after the Communion.
PREPARATION for DEATH and ETERNITY:
XV. Forgiveness and Charity. XVI. Repentance. XVII. Sickness and Pain. XVIII.
Hope in God and Resignation to his pleasure. XIX. Profession of the Catholic
Faith. XX. Desire of Absolution and of my Change. XXI. Psalm cxxxix. XXII. The
TEN COMMANDMENTS Expounded.
DAILY PRAYER.
CHAP. I. The Morning Office.
I. At Rising.
BLessed be God my Creator and Preserver. Amen.

O Almighty Lord and everlasting God, vouchsafe I beseech thee to direct
sanctify and govern both our hearts and bodies, in the ways of thy laws and in
the works of thy commandments; that through thy most mighty protection, by
which Heaven and Earth consist, both here and ever we may be preserved in body
and soul, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen. See Chap. ix.

II. Before Dinner.
OUr Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, adored be thy Majesty,
which is great, wonderful, holy, almighty and eternal.

Thy Kingdom come, where dwells righteousness and peace.

Thy will and holy commandment be done; as in heaven by the blessed angels and
souls of righteous men, continually, zealously and un^nimously: so on earth by
me and all mine, by this church, by the church Universal, and by all that
breath. For of thee we live and move, and have our time and the hope of
everlasting happiness. Again and for ever adored by thy name.

Give us this day our daily bread and necessaries, in diligence, honesty,
moderation and content. And blessed be the most bountiful Creator for all his
blessings spiritual and temporal, conferred on me and all mankind. Give comfort
and relief, and in part by our hands, to the sick, the poor, the fatherless,
the stranger and the afflicted.

Forgive us, miserable and ungrateful sinners, all our trespasses, in thought
and word and deed, against thy Divine Majesty, for the infinite merits and by
the efficacious intercession of Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior: as we
now entirely forgive those that trespass against us.

And lead us not into temptation and trouble, as we deserve. But of thy great
goodness deliver us from all evil and hurt both of soul and body; from our
enemies seen and unseen: from the wiles and suggestions of the Devil, the
corruptions of the World, and all other occasions of sin: from thy wrath, and
the terror of death, and everlasting damnation, for the sake of the only
beloved Son, who has taught us this Prayer.

For thine is the Kingdom; thou rulest what thou have made: thine the power,
insinitely surpassing all that we can ask or think or sear: thine the mercy, of
which we are the unworthy instance and example: and thine the glory, the
praise, the worship and the obedience, world without end. Amen.

III.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all
things visible and invisible.

And in Jesus Christ his only and eternal* Son our Lord. Who was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate ^or the
sins of the world, was cruci^ied dead and buried; He descended into hell, and
triumphed over the powers of darkness. The third day he rose again from the
dead, He ascended into heaven, and as I most surely believe, now sitte^h at the
right hand and eminent glory of God the Father Almighty, interceding for his
faithful people. From thence he shall come at the end of the world, to judge
the quick and the dead according to their works.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life and wisdom, and virtue
and all that good is.

The holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, where is the word of God, the
Sacraments, and all other means of salvation.

The Communion of Saints in the service of God and expectation of consummate
bliss.

The forgiveness of sins by the alone merits of Jesus Christ* The resurrection
of the body, by his rising: And the life everlasting, through his purchase.
Amen.

Grant, O Lord, that I may behave my self this day suitable to this Revelation
and holy Confession; for which I humbly bless thy Name. Amen.

IV.
I Will say every morning and evening the Collect for the Week, and also for
each day of the week one of the Collects following.

Sunday. Collect for Easterday, or S. after Easter. And, Glory be to God on
high, etc. (...).

Monday. 1 S. in Advent. or 2. S. after Epiphany, or 4. S. after Epiphany.

Tuesday. 2 S. in Advent. or 7 S. after Trinity. or 4 S. after Easter.

Wednesday. Ashwednesday, or 12 Sun. after Trinity. or 4 S. after Trinity.

Thursday. Ascensionday, or 14. Sunday after Trinity, or 6. Sunday after
Trinity.

Friday. Goodfriday, or 18 S. after Trinity. or 24. S. after Trinity.

Saturday. Easter Eve. or 12. S. after Trinity. or 3 S. after Trinity.


V.
LOrd God Almighty, to thy grace and mercy, to thy protection, disposal and
governance, I now most humbly and entirely commit my soul and body, which thou
have created, redeemed, preserved, and in measure sanctified: my goods and
estate, which thou have given and continued (and increased) to me: All my
thoughts and desires, my words and works, my designs and affairs, particularly,
etc. which I undertake in thy fear and for thy glory.

My dear Family and Kindred, as etc. blessing thee for their health, mutual
love and piety; and humbly beseeching thy Divine Majesty to preserve them in
this grace.

My friends and acquaintance, my Superiors and benefactours, as etc. Lord ever
direct and prosper them. The King and Queen and the whole Realm; blessing thy
holy name for the health and peace and plenty we enjoy, and beseeching thee to
continue these thy mercies and to forgive us all our offenses.

This Holy Church, of which by thy grace I am a member: Blessed be God our
helper and defender.

The Church Universal: Enlarge and unite thy people, O triumphant Savior. All
that are distressed in mind, body, or estate, especially such as suffer for
righteousness sake throughout the whole world. Thy eye is ever upon them,
Almighty and most merciful Father: Grant them patience and deliverance.

Finally I commend to thy goodness thy whole Creation. Thy mercy is over all
thy works: thy mercy, O Lord, endures for ever.

VI.
UTmost obedience, fear, love, hope, and affiance; continual praise and
thanksgiving* glory and Adoration be to the one GOD Almighty, the Creator, the
Redeemer, and the Sanctifier, as it was in the beginning, is now, ( accept O
Lord my affection and devotion) and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

As long as I live, I will serve thee with all my soul and with all my might.
As long as I live, I will magnify thee in this manner, and lift up my hands
with my heart in thy name. And let heaven and earth give thanks unto thy Holy
Majesty for ever and ever, Amen. Hallelujah.

VII.
THis day I will do, as I would be done to.

This day I will do some good, God helping me.

This day I will set the Lord before my face, that I may not sin against him.

The Lord bless my going out and my coming in and all my employments, from this
time forth for evermore, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. II.
AT Noone Every day I will say the Lords Prayer, and Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost, as it was in the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be world without end. Amen.

DAILY PRAYER. CHAP. III. The Evening Office.
I. Before Supper.
I Will say the Lords Prayer, and the Collects for the Week and for the day, as
before Dinner.

II.
ALmighty God, who see we have no power of our s^lves to help our selves;
keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls: that we may be
defended from all adversities which may happen to the body, and from all evil
thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

III.
THen looking up to heaven, I will think and Meditate with all seriousnes^ and
serenity of mind, with fear and reverence, with firm belief, good affection and
admiration upon the chief articles of the Christian Faith:

Most especially upon the Eternal, everlasting, invisible, omnipresent,
almighty, omniscient, incomprehensible, immutable, most perfect, most
excellent, most high, most happy, most holy, most just, and infinitely merciful
and gracious GOD and Father, Lord and King, Creator, Preserver and Governor
of Men and Angels, and of all things in Heaven and Earth. I fear thee, I bless
thee, I thank thee* I adore thee with all submission of soul and body, I put my
whole trust in thee, I love thee, I will obey thee, Author of all good, and
endless fountain of life and wisdom and power and peace and felicity.

I will likewise meditate with all thankfulness upon our most gracious Lord and
all sufficient Savior Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the Father* who has
loved us, and taken our nature, and washed us from our sins in his own blood:
the perfect rule and pattern of holiness, and the perpetual and ever prevailing
Advocate at Gods right hand for all the penitent and believing.

I will also meditate upon the pure and glorious Majesty: the quickening,
piercing, enlightening and burning power: the prophecies and miracles: the
long-suffering, warning and instruction: the sanctification, preven^ion,
assistance and consolation, and the manifol^ gifts and virtues of the Holy
Ghost. Pardon, I most humbly beseech thee, O God of love and mercy, my too
frequent neglects of thy grace and presence.

Glory be now to the Eternal Trinity, which innumerable spotless Angels and
souls of righteous men, and all the powers of heaven incessantly do serve, and
praise, and worship with fear and trembling. To these I join my humble voice,
and my willing but polluted heart, saying, Amen. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
hosts, heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most
high.

Moreover, from daily experience and example I will Reflect on the brevi^y,
vanity, various temptations, sinfulness and sorrows of this mortal life; upon
which the eternal depends.

I will also Contemplate with faith, fear and solicitude the general
Resurrection, and final Judgment of all mankind, according to our works* words
and designs, at Christ's most glorious, most dreadful, most righteous and
all-searching Tribunal. Lord Jesus have mercy upon us all, and prepare us for
thy coming.

Finally, I will Ponder and congratulate the present satisfaction an^ internal
peace, and the future everlasting joy and happiness; O un^xp^essible and
everlasting happiness both in soul and body, for all the faithful and obedient,
through the inestimable merits of Christ Jesus. Amen, Hosanna in the highest.

IV.
Furthermore, I will constantly use Self-examination. Oh my soul, what have I
done this day? what have I omitted? How have I offended against God or man, in
thought, word, or deed?

O Lord Almighty, God most holy, thou Judge eternal* have mercy upon me a vile
sinner, and for thy in^inite goodness forgive me the transgressions of this
day, in particular, etc. together with the rest of the sins of my life,
especially the more heinous and presumptuous, as etc. I am heartily sorry for
these my misdoings. The remembrance, the stain, the guilt, the burden of them
is grievous unto me. For Christ's sake pity and pardon me, and establish my
heart by thy grace: that I may hereafter more earnestly and faithfully pursue
those necessary and solemn vows of a cautious, sober, honest and godly life,
which I have often made unto thee, especially at thy holy Sacraments. Amen.

V.
I now render most humble and hearty thanks unto th^e, Almighty and most
gracious God* f^r all thy Blessings vouchsafed me this day, especially, etc.

Thanks be to the Divine grace, that I have passed this day without scandal and
without trouble.

Blessed be God, my strength and hope, that I have done any thing this day,
which I ought to do.

Here I am, O Father; do with me as seems best in thine own eyes.

O let my service be acceptable to thee, while I live: and my soul ready for
thee, when I die. Amen, Lord God Almighty, who have created me and redeemed me.
Hallelujah.

VI. Going to bed I will say,
THe Lord bless and keep me and mine all this night. Oh keep our souls. Amen.
For Christ's sake.

Here ends the Shorter Office for every day.

See the Larger at Rising and R^posing* Chap. ix. and x.

PIOUS RESOLUTIONS. CHAP. IV.
I.
I Will frequently say, The Lord sees me in all my ways. Or, if I have time, I
will repeat Psalm. 139.

II.
I Will love and fear and serve the Lord my God, by his grace and help, with
all my heart and affection, with all my soul and intention, with all my mind,
contrivance and understanding, and with all my might, faculties and industry.
And I will love my neighbor as my self. For says the Gracious Savior, on
these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. Matt. c. 22. Luke c.
10. Deuteronomy. c vi. 5. and x. 12* 20. etc. 11.3.

III.
I will often recite Tit. c. 11.11, 12.

The Saving grace of God has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously and godly
in this present world: looking for the blessed hope, and glorious Appearing of
our Savior JESUS Christ who gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
iniquity.

Or Prove. c 19.16. He that keeps the commandment, keeps his soul.

Or, The fear of the Lord, the practice of piety, is the beginning, is the
perfection of wisdom, and the praise of it endures for ever. Psalm. 111.10.
Prove. c 1.7. etc. 9.10.

Or, Cor. c. vi. 9.10. Be not deceived: nor fornicators, nor effeminate, nor
idolaters, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.

IV.
I will not tell a lie.

I will not cousen or deceive any one in any matter.

I will never act against my conscience: but carefully observe Psalm. 36.38*
Keep innocence, and take to the thing that is right; and that shall bring a man
peace at the last.

V.
I will obey my Superiors.

VI.
I will not be idle.

VII.
I will be moderate and tender in the use of lawful things: the Lord is at hand.

VIII.
I have made a covenant with my eyes and ears, not to attend to vanity: but by
labor and temperance I will subdue my body.

O mercy of heaven, that our breasts are the ark of the Divine Law, and our
bodies the temple of the Holy Ghost: if any defile the temple of God, them God
will destroy. 1 Cor. c. 6.5, 9. Preserve therefore, O Holy Father, my body and
soul in chastity. Thy grace is sufficient for me.

I will be sure to check and resist the beginning and occasions of vice, as
dangerous company, excess in eating and drinking, sloth and idleness,
melancholy, self-conceit, a covetous eye, and the like.

IX.
I will often pray: O Lord set a watch before my mouth, the awe of thy presence
and future vindication: and keep the door of my lips, that I offend not in my
tongue. Psalm, 141.3. Psalm. 34.12, 13. James c. 1.26. Prove. 39.1, 2. Eccles. c.
22.27.

X.
The sun shall not go down in my wrath.

I will first be reconciled to my offended brother or sister, and then come and
offer my gift and sacrifice of praise and supplication. For, says the Lord,
in whose name I pray and confide if you forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. Mat. c. 6.15.
and 5.24.

XI.
I will often recite the Beatitudes, Mat. c. 5. ver. 1, to the 12. And often
say, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. 1 Pet* c. 5.3.

XII.
I will love and cherish the Creatures of God.

I will render no man evil for evil, or railing for railing, but in stead
thereof prayers and charity and blessing.

I will live peaceably and courteously with all men: for Christ's sake who
against all demerit has loved me.

XIII.
Forasmuch as JESUS the King will say unto them on his right hand at the last
day, Come ye blessed of my Father, take the inheritance of the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world: For I was naked and ye clothed me, I
was sick and ye visited me, I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I was in prison
and ye came to me, I was a stranger and ye took me in: for verily I say unto
you, inasmuch as you have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me, Matt. c. 25.34. I will therefore relieve the poor,
visit and pity and help the sick and afflicted: teach the ignorant, direct and
love the stranger: easily pardon offenders, hurt no body, and do all the good I
can* through Jesus Christ my Savior and Judge. Amen.

XIV.
Whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever else I do, I sincerely desire and will
carefully endeavor to do all to the glory of God and my own salvation, through
Jesus Christ my Savior and Support. Amen. 1. Cor. c. 10.31.

XV.
I put my trust in the living God only.

I am very well content, I am very thankful for my present estate. Phil. c.
4.11, 12. Hebr. c. 13.5.

Moreover with an humble and serene mind I wait for my Dissolution, in hope of
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ my Redeemer. Amen.

God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke c. 16, 17.

SELECT LESSONS. CHAP. V.
I.
I Will read often in secret or in the family, for the preservation of piety
and temperance and honesty through Gods help, the Church-Catechism, and also
these Chapters of Holy Scripture.

Our Saviors Sermon on the mount, Matt. c. 5. and c. 6. and c. 7.

Another Sermon Luke c. 12. and c. 13.

Jesus Christ God and man. S. Ioh. Gosp. c. 1.

Christ's comforting his Church. S. John's Gosp. c. 15. and c. 16. and c. 17.

II.
The Duties of a Christian man. Romans c. 12. and c. 13. Gal. c. 5, and c. 6.
Phil. c. 4. Col. c. 3, and c. 4. Ephesians. c. 4.1 These. c. 4. and c. 5. S. Peter's
1 Epistle. S. James Epistle. Deuteronomy. c. 6. Job. c. 31. Ecclesiastes. c. 12. Psalm.
15. and 34, and 41, and 119, and 1. and Proverbs throughout.

III.
The Duties of Governors and Governed, as Kings and Subjects, Priests and
People, Fathers and Children, Masters and Servants, Romans c. 13.1 P^t. c. 2. and
c. 3. Col. c. 3. Ephesians. c. 5. and c. 6.1 Tim. c. 6. Tit. c. 11. and c. 3.

IV.
I will delight to read our Lords Parables, as of the

Publicane and Pharisee, Luke c. 18.

Prodigal Son, Luke c. 15.

Lost Sheep, Luke c. 15.

Ten Talen^s, Luke c. 19.

Widow and unjust Judge, Luke c. 18.

Wise Virgins, Matt. c. 25.

Two Debtors, Luke c. 7.

Kind Samaritane, Luke c. 10.

Rich man and Lazarus, Luke c. 16.

Sower, Luke c. 8.

V.
I will also frequently review the Forty Great and Merciful Miracles of our
Lord, as so many excellent Subjects of his inexhaust^ble Praise, and so many
Pilla^s of our Hope and Devotion.

1. Water made Wine, Ioh. 2.1, 10.

2. Lunatic dispossessed, Mark 1* 21, 28.

3. Peter's mother in law cured of a Fever, Luke 4.38.40.

4. Stupendous Draught of Fishes at the lake of Tiberias, Luke 5.1, 11.

5. Leper cleansed, Matt. 8.2, 4.

6. Paralytick let down by the roof and healed, Luke 5.17, 26.

7. The withered hand restored, Luke 6.6, 10.

8. Good Centurions servant cured, Luke 7.2, 10.

9. Widows son of Naim revived out of the bier, Luke 28.11, 17.

10. Deaf and dumb and blind demoniack recovered, Matthew. 12.22, 23.

11. Storm cease at Christ's word, Mark 4.35, 40.

12. Legion of devils sent out of a man into the swine, Mark 5.1, 21.

13. Bloody flux cured by the touch of the Lords garment, Mark 5.^22, 34.

14. Jairus his daughter restored to life, Mark 5.35, 43.

15. Two blind men restored by Christ's touch, and a dumb devil cast out, Matt.
9.26, 32.

16. Rulers son healed at a distance, John 4.46, 53.

17. Impotent at Bethesda healed with a word, Ioh. 5.1, 15.

18. Five thousand fed with five loaves and two fishes, Mark 6.30, 34.

19. Jesus walks on the sea, Matt. 14.22, 23.

20. Syrophenicians daughter dispossessed, Matt. 15.21, 28.

21. Deaf and dumb man of Decapolis cured by a touch, Mark 7.31, 37.

22. Blind man of Bethsaida recovered by our Lords hand, Mark 8.22.26.

23. Christ's Transfiguration, Mat. 17.1, 8.

24. Raving Lunatic recovered. Mar. 7.13, 28.

25. Cesars Tribute miraculously procured from the mouth of a Fish, Matthew.
17.23, 26.

26. Sight given to one born Blind, Ioh. 4.1, 38.

27. Believing Woman cured of eighteen years Infirmity, Luke 13.10, 17.

28. Dropsy cured on the Sabbathday, Luke 14.1, 6.

29. Ten Lepers cured, Luke 17.11, 19.

30. Two blind men of Jericho restored by Christ's singer. Matt. 20.21, 34.

31. Lazarus raised from the dead, Ioh. 11.1, 44.

32. Fruitless fig tree cursed and withered, Mark. 11.12.23.

33. Our Lords Passion, Ioh. c. 18. and c. 19. Luke c. 22. and Matt. c. 26. and
c. 27.

34. Our Lords Resurrection, Mark c. 16. Luke c. 14.

35. His Appearing to Mary, John 20.11, 18.

36. His Appearing to the two disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.13, 33.

37. His Manifestation to the Apostles, except Thomas, Luke 24* 34, 42.

38. His Rising and Humanity proved to Thomas, John 20.24, 29.

39. His Eating with his disciples at the lake of Tiberias after a miraculous
draught of fishes, John 21.1, 14.

40. Our Lords Ascension into Heaven, Luke 24.49, 50. Acts 1.1, 12.

VI.
I will also add the Miracles following.

1. Descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, Acts c. 2.

2. Creeple at the Temple cured by S. Peter and S. John, Acts c. 3.

3. Conversion of five thousand by one Sermon, and a second Descent of the Holy
Ghost, Acts c. 4.

4. Ananias and Sapphira are struck dead for Lying, and the very shadow of S.
Peter heals, Acts c. 5.

5. Wonders, Confession, and Martyrdom of S. Stephen, Acts c. 6. and c. 7.

6. Philip miraculously carried away from the converted Ethiopian, Acts c.
8.26, 40.

7. S. Paul's Conversion, Acts c: 9* and c. 22.

8. S. Peter's Deliverance from prison, Acts c. 12.

9. S. Peter cures Eneas of a Palsy, and restores Tabitha to life, Acts c.
9.32, 43.

10. Creeple of Lystra cured by S. Paul, Acts 14.8, 18.

11. Witch of Thyatira dispossessed by S. Paul, and the prison miraculously
opened, Acts 16.16, 40.

12. Touch of S. Paul's body cures diseases, and expells devils, Acts c. 19.1,
20.

13. Dead Eutychus recovered by S. Paul, Acts c. 20.6, 12.

14. S. Paul's strange cures at Melita, Acts c. 28.1, 10.

VII.
Moreover I will research and ponder these miracles of the Old Testament.

1. Creating, drowning and restoring of the world, Genesis c. 1. and c. 6. and c.
7. and c. 8.

2. Furnace and lamp passing through Abraham's sacrifice, Genesis 15.

3. Sodoms destruction, Genesis c. 18. and c. 19.

4. Isaacs birth, and his rescue from the altar on Moriah, Genesis 18.1, 15. and
21.1, 8. and 22.

5. Plagues of Egypt, and the renowned Exodus, Exodus c. 7. c. 8. c. 9. c. 10.
c. 12.31, 51. c. 13.17, 22. c. 14. and c. 15. and Psalm. 78.

6. Quails, manna, water struck from the dry rock, and Amalek de^eated by
Moses his elevated hands. Exodus c. 16. and c. 17.

Terrible wonders of Sinai, Exodus c. 19. c. 24. c. 33. and c. 34.

8. Cloud of fire on the Tabernacle, Exodus c. 40.34, 38.

9 Fire from heaven upon Aarons first sacrifice, Lev. c. 9.22, 24. As before on
Abels Genesis c. 4.4. and after on Solomon's, 2 Chronicles. c. 7. and upon Elias, 2
King. c. 18.

10. Swallowing up of Korah, Number. c. 16. Psalm. 106.

11. Brasen-serpent against the venom of the fiery, Number. c. 21.4, 9.

12. Balaams ass and prophesies, Number. c. 22. c. 23. and c. 24.

13. Ten commandments written upon two tables of stone, Deuteronomy. 10.1, 5.

14. Dividing of Jordan before the ark and priests of the Lord, Josh. c. 3. and
c. 4.

15. Archangel encouraging Joshua, Josh. c. 5.13, 15.

16. Downfall of Jericho, by the priests procession and trumpets. Josh. c. 6.

17. Sun and moon stand still, Josh. c. 10.8, 14.

18. Gideons cakes and fleece and victory with three hundred men only, Judge.
c. 6.11, 40. and c. 7.

19. Wonders of Manoahs Angel, Judge. c. 13.

20. Samsons foxes and jawbone: his removing the gates and pulling down the
temple of Gaza, Judge. c. 15. and c. 16.

21. Philistines plagued and Dagon destroyed before the Ark of God, 1 Samuel c.
5. and Uzza struck dead for touching the Ark, when it shook, 2 Samuel c. 6.6, 11.

22. David's killing Goliath the giant. 1 Samuel c. 17.

23. Elijah is nourisht by ravens and by the unwasting meal and oil of the
widow of Zarepta, whose dead son he restores to life, 1 Kings c. 17.

24. Elijah by prayer obtains rain and also fire from heaven. 2 Kin. c. 1.

24. Rapture of Elijah, wonderful like the recess of Enoch and the Expiration
of Moses. 2 Kings c. 2. Genesis c. 5.24. Deuteronomy. c. 34.

26. Elisha divides Jordan with the mantle of his master Elijah, heals the
corrupt waters, and destroys the mocking children.

27. Elisha refreshes the armies of three kings with water from heaven, 2 Kings
c. 3.

28. Elisha multiplies the widows oil to pay her debts: and by prayer both
obtains and revives the child of the old and good Shunamite: and cures the
poysond pottage, and also feeds a multitude with 20 loaves. 2 Kings c. 4.

29. Elisha cures Naamans leprosy by the waters of Jordan, and smites his
greedy servant Gehazi with the same disease, 2 Kings. c. 5.

30. Elisha makes iron swim, discloses the cabinet counsel of the king of
Syria, and blinds his army. 2 Kings c. 6.

31. King Azariah smitten in the ^orehead with leprosy for invading the
priests office, 2 Chronicles. c. 26.16, 23.

32. Incredible plenty by Elishas prophecy upon a sore famine, and Hazaels
treason and cruelty foretold. 2 Kings c. 7. and c. 8. And Josiahs three
victories over the Syrians predicted, 2 Kings c. 13.14, 19.

33. Proud Sennacheribs great army destroyed in a night according to Isaias
prophecy 2* Kings c. 19.35.37. Hist. Herodoti.

34. Hezekiah is cured by Isaias prophecy and a lump of sigs, the sun also then
going back ten degrees. 2 Kings c. 20.1, 11. Isaiah c. 38*

35 Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego saved in the fiery furnace, and Daniel in
the lions den. Dan. c. 3. and c. 6. and profane Belshazzar scared with a
prodigious hand writing. Dan. c. 5.

36. Jonahs deliverance from the fishes belly, and his gourd, Jonah c. 2. and
c. 4.

OCCASIONAL LESSONS CHAP. VI.
I.
SIckness. Psalms 39.6.22.38.69.7. Isaiah 38. Jonah 2. And the Visitation of
the sick, and the Burial of the dead, and CHAP. XIV, etc. of this book.

II.
Recovery. Psalms 30.107.116.22.

III.
Afflictions. Psalms 25.34.4. and La^ent. of Jeremiah.

IV.
Deliverance. Psalms 40.107.118.28.34.

V.
Repentance. The seven penitential Psalms, viz. 6.32.38.51.102.130.143. And
also Psalms 3.63.88. and 103. The Litany. The Commination. The Service for
Ashwednesday and the holy week before Easter. The last Prayer in the Visitation
of the sick; And CHAP. XV. of this book.

VI.
Petitions for pardon and peace of Conscience. Psalms 103.32.43.63.

VII.
Petitions for grace with vows of holy living. Psalms 25.26.50.

VIII.
Faith and entire hope in God. Psalms 23.27.16.31.62. Habak. v. 17.18.19* Heb.
11. and 12.

IX.
Happiness of the pious, and misery of the ungodly. Psalms 1*11.37.52.112.24.34
73.

X.
Prai^es of God for his creation and providence. Psalms 103.104.135.145.
146.136.147.107.113.8.5.19.65.66.67.74.33.36.

XI.
Praises of God for his salvation and wonderful works. Psalms 105.106. Acts 7.
Deuteronomy. 32. Exodus 15.

XII.
Church. Psalms 46.47.48.

XIII.
King. Psalms 20.21.61.72.

XIV.
Public peace, plenty and health. Psalm. 144.

XV.
Wars and tumults. Psalms 25.64.59.3.

XVI.
Victory. Psalms 144.124. Exodus 15.

GOING TO OR FROM THE CHURCH. CHAP. VII.
I. Going into Church.
Sunday.
LOrd, I love the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells, Psalm. 26.8.

One day in thy courts is better then a thousand, Psalm. 84.10.

Lord most merciful, hear me in the house of prayer.

Monday.
I now enter the Church, as I would heaven it self; with all reverence of the
Majesty Eternal, which fills heaven and earth: with utmost affection and
intention to my bounden duty and most honorable service: with faith and hope
in the Almighty and most Gracious Creator and Preserver of all things: with
full purpose of holy living: and also with great joy for the fellowship of all
blessed men and of all blessed Angels in my devotion.

Tuesday.
How amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord God of hosts? my soul has a desire and
a longing to enter into thy courts, Psalm. 84.1, 2.

My heart and my flesh rejoices in thee, O merciful God. Amen.

Lord, let me by faith behold thee in thy sanctuary; and there see thy power
and glory, and there find thy favor and remission. Amen.

Wednesday.
Send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me unto the altar of
God, even unto the God of my joy and gladness, Psalm. 84.4

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be always praising thee.
Amen. Psalm. 84.4.

In the multitude of his mercies we will go into his tabernacle, and fall low
on our knees before his footstool. For the Lord our God is holy, Psalm. 99.9.

Thursday.
I will take heed to my feet, and to the motions of my heart, now I go into the
house of God: and not dare to carry wrath, or lust, or dishonesty, or
intemperance in thither.

We wait for thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple.

O Let us magnify the Lord our God together. Glory and worship are before him:
power and honor are in his sanctuary. Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due
unto his name, and worship him in the beauty of holiness. Yea let the whole
world stand in awe of him. Amen.

Friday.
I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I go to thine altar, that I may
show the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.

[For ever blessed be God, who has made me a Priest in his Church, and
perpetually engaged me to his house, and to his sacraments, and to the study
and example of piety]

Saturday.
I was glad, when they said unto me: We will go into the house of the Lord, to
give thanks to the name of our God.

O pray for the peace of the Church: they shall prosper that love thee. Amen.
Psalm. 122.1, 4, 6.

Open me the gates of righteousness that I may go in unto them, and praise the
Lord. This is the gate of the Lord; the righteous shall enter into it. Psalm.
118.10, 20.

II. Going out of the Church.
Sunday.
BLessed be God for his Grace.

Monday.
Be it unto us all, most gracious Savior, according to our faith.

Tuesday.
We have thought of thy loving kindness in the midst of thy temple.

This God is our God for ever and ever: and he will be our guide unto death.
Amen for Jesus his sake.

Wednesday.
Look down, O God of mercies, upon me and these my brethren, who have kneeled
unto thee. Accept our zeal and devotion, and ever prosper us from thy holy
place, Christ being our Mediator. Amen.

Thursday.
Thy word is the truth, O Blessed Jesus: Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Hallelujah.

Friday.
O when shall I come again and appear before the presence of the living God?
either in thy temple amongst thy faithful people, or else (O blessed hour) at
thy holy seat in heaven?

Saturday.
O Lord God Almighty, who know the hearts of all the children of men, whom
the heaven of heavens cannot contain, have respect unto the sincere and humble
and united supplications of thy servants, when they pray unto thee in the
church: and when thou hear forgive, and maintain our right and peace: and
teach us the good way, wherein we should walk; that we may fear thee all the
days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 1 Kings c. 8.

OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS^ CHAP. VIII.
I. Reading.
O Wisdom and Love Eternal, instruct and bless me. Amen.

II. Doubts and Cases of Conscience.
If I forgo my Profit and my Pleasure; if I take up thy Cross as well as thy
Name, O holy Jesus, I shall easily resolve my Scruples of Conscience.

III. Distraction and dullness at Prayer.
The Lord is here, the Lord is here: yea I have invoked him. I dare not tempt
the Almighty. Will God regard my Prayer, when I regard it not my self?

IV. Vain Objects.
Turn away mine eyes, O Lord, that they behold not Vanity: and convert my heart
to thy Commandments, for Christ his sake. Amen.

V. Temptation to sin.
How can I do this wickedness, and sin against my God?

VI. Great danger.
For Jesus his sake save thy servant, O Lord, who puts his trust in thee.
Amen.

VII. Losses.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the Name of the Lord
now and for ever. Amen.

VIII. Suffering for Righteousness sake.
The light Afflictions of this life, work for us an Eternal Weight of Glory;
while we look not on the things that are Seen and Temporal, but after the
Invisible and Eternal.

IX. Dressing.
I desire, I delight to put on, as the Elect of God and Baptized into Christ,
the Armor of Light, Love, Righteousness, Meekness, Mercy, and the rest of the
Virtues of the Lord Jesus.

X. Washing.
Wash me thoroughly, O Lord, from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, as
once thou did at my Baptism* I am ready for the meanest offices of Charity
and Humanity; since the Lord of Glory washed his Disciples Feet. I will lift up
pure and innocent hands to God most Holy, that dwells in the heavens. Amen.

XI. Candletinding.
Bring us all, O God, to the Light Everlasting, for Christ his sake. Amen.

XII. Vndressing.
I have put off the old man with all his evil deeds; I am ready also to be
unclothed of this mortal flesh, when and where and how thou please, O
Almighty Creator, O most Faithful Preserver of men.

XIII. Medicine.
Blessed Jesus, who during thy three years Preaching, did very often heal
both the Bodies and Souls of thy Lowly and Believing Supplicants, Bless this
Medicine to the Relief of t^y devoted Servant. Amen.

XIV. Age.
Cast me not away in the time of Old Age: O Lord forsake me not, when my
strength fails me. The hoary head is a crown of glory, especially if it be
found in the way of Righteousness.

XV. Iourneying.
O God, the God of Abraham, the Fear of Isaac, and the Mighty One of Jacob, the
Defense and direction of the Isr^elites in the wilderness, and the light of ^he
wise gentiles in their travail toward the infant Jesus, O Gracious Creator and
Preserver of men, Guide me, Guard me, and succeed and bless me in this journey,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XVI. Passing by a Church.
O let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord, Amen for Christ's sake.

XVII. Mortality.
With faith and humility I will wait till my change comes. Behold man is a
thing of naught. Blessed be our me^ciful Father for this space of repentance
and renovation.

XVIII. Executions.
O crucified Savior have pity on thy relenting servants: and remember them in
thy Kingdom. Amen. Bloodthirsty and deceitful men live not out half their
days.

XIX. Conflagration.
O deliver us all from the unquenchable fire and the neverdying worm, most
merciful Lord. Amen.

XX. Inundation.
The Lord sits above the waterflood, the Lord remains a King for ever: the
Lord rules the raging of the sea, and the madness of the people: the Lord
drowned the old world for their impiety and debauch: and has reserved this for
fire. Just and righteous are thy judgments.

XXI. Earthquake.
I seek a city that has foundations, a Kingdom that cannot be moved. Preserve
us evermore from the crime and punishment of Corah: deliver us, Good Lord, from
sudden death.

XXII. Thunder and tempest.
The voice of the Lord is a glorious voice, and the rest of Psalm. 29.

XXIII. Rain.
God has not left himself without witness, both to Jews and Gentiles, giving
us rains and fruitful seasons and filling our hearts with gladness.

XXIV. Sunshine.
This one lamp illustrates and beautifies, moves and quickens the whole world.
How great then is the power, how bright the glory of the Creator!

XXV. Starlight.
Such is the footstool of the great King.

XXVI. Clockstriking.
So much nearer eternity. The next minute, and all my remaining time I entirely
dedicate to thy glory, O Lord most merciful. That past hour and so many years
of my evil life will never return again, but must all be accounted for at
Chris^s tribu^al.

XXVII. ^ospital or prison.
I was in prison, ^aith our gracious Savior, and ye visited me: naked, and ye
clothed me. Come therefore, ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom
prepared for you.

XXVIII. Deformity.
Nothing is so monstrous and deformed to the Divine eye as a proud and
impenitent sinner.

XXIX. Fair sight.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive the good things, which God has prepared for them that love and
serve him.

XXX. Rare piece of art.
Lord, how excellent is the reason thou have given us! What cannot wit and
diligence effect, be the matter secular or sacred?

XXXI. Singing birds, hunting dogs, variety of nests, etc.
Blessed be God for the docility and sagacity of the beasts that perish: which
condemn dull and sensual men.

XXXII. Passing by the Blind, deaf, lame, foolish, or ragged.
Blessed be thy name, O Father Eternal, for the sight, the hearing, the limbs,
the reason, and the goods thou have given and preserved to me: make them all I
earnestly beseech thee, the instruments of thy glory and of my salvation,
through Jesus Christ Amen. I heartily pity these my brethren.

XXXIII.
In the midst of my business and study I will often use such breife, Lauds and
Prayers as these: God is all: Blessed be God. Lord help me. Lord have mercy
upon me. Halleluiah. Eternity hastens. I trust in the living God. Blessed be
God my Savior. I adore thee Father eternal. The Lord is my strength and my
worship. I am a vile sinner. All is weak and vain on this side heaven. Deliver
me, O Lord, from the Tempter. I am a Christian. [I am a Priest, oh Favor, oh
Duty!] God is here.

THE LARGER OFFICE AT RISING, When my Affairs will permit. CHAP. IX.
I. Sunday.
BLessed be the Almighty, most Holy, most Gracious and Glorious Trinity now and
for evermore. Thou, O Lord, art my Defender: thou art my Worship, and the
Lifter up of my head. I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord
sustained me. Psalm. 3.3, 5. O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in
all the world? Psalm. 8. Thou openest the eyes of the Creation every Morning.
Hallelujah.

Defend thy servant this day, and lead me, O God, in the Way Everlasting: for
unto thee do I lift up my soul. Psalm. 143.8, 9.

O Father Eternal, who causedst the Light to shine out of Darkness on the first
day of the world, shine also into this heart with the Glorious Light of Divine
Knowledge, by Jesus Christ. Amen. 2 Cor. 4.6.

Or, I will stand up, and bless the Lord our God for ever and ever. And blessed
be thy Glorious Name, which is exalted above all Blessing and Praise. Thou,
even thou art Lord alone: Thou have made Heaven, the heaven of heavens with all
their hosts, the Earth, and all things that are therein, the Sea and all that
is therein: the Angels and all the invisible world. And thou preservest them
all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee. Nehem. 9.5, 6. And at thy
Footstool thy poor and unworthy servant falls down, and Adoreth thee with
humble Awe and Devotion, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Day is thine, the Night is thine: Eternity is thine, and I am thine, O
holy Father. Thou have lightened mine eyes, that I should not sleep in death:
wherefore with this new body, soul and spirit, I thank thee, I worship thee.

O grant me the Light everlasting. For in thy presence there is Light, and at
thy right hand is Joy, at thy right hand is my dear Savior and Advocate for
evermore.

The Lord is risen, the Lord is risen indeed. Luke 24.34. Raise me likewise,
most gracious Father, this day to a new and heavenly Life. I seek, I affect the
things that are above, that are Eternal. Romans 6.5. I op^n my breast this
morning to the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost, who once miraculously
inflamed the heads and hearts of the blessed Apostles Acts c. 2. and also
abides a certain and powerful Helper and Comforter and Patron to all the Meek
and Faithful unto the worlds end.

Or, Blessed Jesus, very God of very God, by whom all things were made, thou
did take upon thee this Nature, which I and my consorts in humanity have so
grievously abused, and did endure the shame and torment of a Crucifixion
without Jerusalem between two thieves, for the Remission of the Sins of the
world, and the Saving this poor soul; I believe, I adore this unconceivable
Condescension, this strange and God like Charity. And I now most humbly
acknowledge and confess, that all my Duty, Zeal and Service, in respect of this
thy Love and Passion, is very vileness and ingratitude. Wherefore renouncing
the works of Satan and the vanities of the world, I will for ever obey thee,
worship thee, thank thee. O help me by thy Grace, Blessed Redeemer, and hold up
my goings in the paths, that my footsteps slip not. Amen.

II. Monday.
MOst holy and most merciful Father, to whom all things in heaven and earth do
bow and obey, with utmost Reverence I adore thy divine Majesty, thy eternal
and infinite Perfection: and rendering my humble and early Thanks to thee, for
restoring to me this morning my Senses and Reason and Vigor, I again submit
and dedicate both my Soul and Body with all their Powers and Actions to thy
holy Will and Pleasure; desiring and fully purposing to serve thee faithfully
this day, and all the days of my life, by the Grace of thy holy Spirit, and
through the Merit and Intercession of Jesus Christ thy beloved Son and my most
blessed Savior. Amen. Teach me thy way, O God, and I will walk in thy Truth.
Unite my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. Psalm. 86.11.

Or. By thy great Goodness, O Lord, I here present my self unto thee, as a
living, reasonable, and bounden Sacrifice and perpetual Devote. Romans 12.1.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me and mine this day without Sin and without Peril,
Amen for Christ his sake. I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him. I
lift up my heart to the Lord. It is meet and right and our bounden duty, it is
our greatest honor and glory, that we, that I above all living, should at all
times, and in all places, give thanks unto thee, and praise and bless and Adore
thee, heavenly Father, Lord God Almighty, my Creator, Savior and Defender.
Wherefore with thousands, and thousands of thousands of glorious and innocent
Angels, Archangels, Thrones and Dominions, with Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Benefactours, and all blessed Souls, and with all the Faithful
upon earth, of every Kindred, People and Language, I fall down and Worship, and
laud and magnify thy holy Name, evermore praising thee, and saying; Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of hosts, heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.
Glory be to thee, O Lord most high. Amen. Regard, O Eternal, the devotion and
accent of thy humble Creature, made lower and courser then the Angels, of a
tainted life, inhabiting the dust, and now trembling by reason of his offenses
and guilt.

By thy Word, O Lord, were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of thy mouth. Thou layest the beams of thy chambers in the waters, and
make the clouds thy chariots, and walk upon the wings of the wind. Praise
him all ye heavens, and ye waters which are within the heavens: hail and snow,
clouds and storm, thunder and lightning, fulfilling his word. Psalm. 33. and
104. and 19.

III. Tuesday.
O Lord, thou art my God: early will I seek thee. O let me hear thy loving
kindness betimes in the morning: for in thee is my trust. Lift now up, O Lord,
the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and be my support all the day
long, for the sake of the dearest Jesus. Amen. There is no true peace but in
thy favor through well doing; wherefore my awakened soul flees first unto
thee, O Lord: O Lord, receive me.

I humbly and constantly beg of thee, Almighty and most benign Father, a sound
mind and body, a devout heart, an honest, humble, meek and charitable
Disposition, an innocent and peaceable Life, a good Name, an inoffensive Old
Age, a serene and Christian Death, and a blessed Immortality, resigning my Life
wholly to thy holy Will and Pleasure, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior.
Amen.

With faithful and blessed men of all ages, with the never-ceasing Seraphims
and with the Voices of the heavenly multitude, as the voice of many waters, and
as the voice of mighty thundrings, I close in now with all ardor and
cheerfulness, saying: Halleluiah, Glory and Honor, Salvation and Power unto
the Lord our God. Let us rejoice and be glad, and with open and elevated hands
and hearts give honor unto him. For the Lord God Omnipotent reigns in
Righteousness and Mercy world without end. Amen. Rev. c. 19.

Or, Let us watch and be sober, as children of the light and of the day, always
looking to Jesus the Author of our Faith, the Rule of our Life, and the Pledge
of our Glory. Amen. O Lord be gracious to me and all mine. We have waited for
thee. For thou art our Arm every morning, and our Salvation in the time of
Trouble. Isaiah 33.2. Gracious God, I am not worthy of the least of all thy
Mercies and the Truth thou have shown unto thy servant. Genesis 31.10.

Let them praise the Lord, that go down to the sea in ships, and trade in
mighty waters. Yea, let all the earth fear the Lord, and stand in awe of him
all ye that dwell in the world; who gathered the waters together on an heap,
and laid up the deep as in a treasure house: who made the dry land to appear
out of confusion, and commanded it to bring forth herbs and trees for the use
of man and beast. Hallelujah.

IV. Wednesday.
O Thou that hear Prayer, to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.3. In the
morning thou shall hear my voice: in the morning I will stand before thee, and
will look up and wait for thy favor. The glorious Majesty of the Lord be upon
me and all mine. Prosper thou the works of our hands: O direct and prosper thou
our handy work. Psalm. 90.17. The Lord is a light and defense. The Lord will
give grace and worship, and no good thing will he withhold from them that lead
a godly life. O Lord God of hosts, blessed is the man that puts his trust in
thee. Psalm. 84.12, 13.

Lord pardon all my sins, confirm me in piety: bless me in my lawful calling:
keep my soul and body from all evil, and fit me for Eternity, for the immense
merits of Jesus Christ my Savior and Advocate. Amen.

O Lord our Governor, when I consider the Sun and Moon and Stars, those vast
and glorious Lights which thou have created, and that thou can create ten
thousand worlds more, what is Man, that mite upon this Globe, that thou art
mindful of him, and visitest him every morning. Thou, O Jesus, art the true and
eternal Light, the Sun of Righteousness, that lights every man that comes
into the world, Oh quicken and irradiate my heart. Amen.

Or, How dear are thy Counsels, thy Mercies to me, O God? how great is the sum
of them? They are more in number then the sand: they are new every minute. When
I awake I am always with thee, thanking and praising and adoring thy Majesty,
who continually keep the world from returning to nothing, from whence thou
first made it. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the
heavens, with the affection and reverence of a child, with the fear and
solicitude of a servant. Psalm. 123.1, 2. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Omnipotent,
which was and is and is to come, glory and honor and worship be to thee, world
without end, Amen. Rev. 4.8.

Keep thy servant by thy grace, O Lord, that Hypocrisy, Pride, Envy, Anger,
Gluttony, Covetousness, or Sloth, or any other grievous sin may never have the
dominion over me, and become habitual and customary to me: and ever keep me, O
Lord most holy, from Fornication, Drunkenness, Theft and Dishonesty, Idolatry,
Manslaughter, Cursing, Swearing and Lying, Extortion and Oppression, and all
other scandalous and heinous actions and practices. But engraft in my heart the
contrary fruits of thy holy Spirit, Piety, Humility and Mildness, Faithfulness
and Honesty, Modesty, Temperance and Chastity, Content and Quietness,
Compassion, Charity and Liberality, Prudence, Care and Diligence: and let this
be my habit, my custom and my life, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

V. Thursday.
THe Lord is my strength and my praise. There is none holy as the Lord; neither
is there any rock like our God. The Lord kills and makes alive: he brings
down to the bed and to the grave, and brings up. He keeps the feet of his
saints, and exalts the horn of his anointed. Hallelujah. My heart rejoices
in his salvation 1 Samuel c. 2. Thou art my hope in the land of the living: thou
art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that dwell in broad sea:
yea, thou, O God, art my hope and joy to all eternity. Amen. Psalm. 141.4. The
Providence of the Father almighty guide me, the Wisdom of his eternal Son
enlighten me, and the Power of his holy Spirit quicken me. Amen.

What now shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits, ^or my Birth, my
Education, my Baptism, Catechism and Confirmation? What for the blessed
Eucharist, for the Sermons and the Prayers of this Church? What for Sundry
Deliverances and special Blessings through so many years of living? Yea, what
shall I render unto thee holy JESUS, for thy expiatory Blood, for thy grand
Example? for the Mission of the Holy Ghost with various and unexpressible
Grace? and for the reserve of everlasting Blessedness, O Lord, what shall I
render unto thee? Take, O take again, most merciful Lord, these Gifts, together
this Soul and Body and their abilities, which I now kneeling humbly and
faithfully offer to thy everadored Divinity. O despise not, but take again the
works of thy own hands, and receive all into the bosom of perpetual happiness.
Amen. Hallelujah.

Or, Is not this to be my last day, and then Eternity? O prepare me for thy
self holy JESUS. I know not the day nor the hour of thy Judgment. Matthew. 24.30.
Or receive to thee in peace, or visit this dearly purchased soul, this piece of
Immortality drenc^t in thy Blood. Yea come quickly Lord Jesus. Amen.

I will magnify thee, O God my King, and praise thy name for ever and ever.
Every day will I give thanks to thee, and bless thy name for ever and ever.
Great is the Lord, and marvelous worthy to be praised. There is no end of his
Greatness, no end of his Mercy. Hallelujah. Psalm. 145.1, 23. etc.

Grant me, I humbly beseech thee, Almighty and most merci^ul Father, a quiet
Mind and a ^ound Body, a good Report, and a liberal Conversation, in all Piety,
Prudence, Charity, Honesty and Chastity, and at last (if I may not be a Mart^r
for thy Truth) grant me a mild Death and happy Immortality, for Christ Jesus
his sake, the Source of all Blessings, as well visible and secular, as
invisible, inconceivable, and everlasting. Amen.

Christ is ascended up on high, has led captivity captive, and given gifts
unto men, that God might dwell amongst us. Set up thy self, O JESUS, above all
the heavens, and thy Glory above the earth. I now worship thee with all
humility and affection, as thy Apostles did, when thou departedst from mount
Olivet to the Joy of superc^lestial Glory.

The fowls of the air are thine, O bountiful Creator, and the fishes of the
sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the sea, and thou feedest
them, and multipliest them. Wherefore I will seek the kingdom of God before
food and raiment. For our heavenly Father knows that we have need of these
things. Matthew. 6.25.

VI. Friday.
I Awakt and looked up, and my sleep was sweet unto me. Blessed be the Lord our
God the God of our fathers, who satisifieth the weary soul, and replenisheth
every sorrowful heart: who converteth the shadow of death into the morning, and
daily renews the face of the earth: and makes the evening and the morning
alternately to praise him, Ier. 31.25, 26. Psalm. 104.30. and 65.9. Who holds
our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to slip: who rules with his power
for ever. Hallelujah. On this day, O crucified Savior, have mercy on me and
all mankind. Amen.

I will walk this day, God being my helper, soberly, chastely decently, humbly,
and in diligence and content, as a child of light and of God. Sufficient to the
day is the evil and trouble of it. I fully trust in the perpetual Grace of my
heavenly Father through his Eternal Son. Amen.

Or, I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law.
Psalm. 119.55.

Our help stands in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. Psalm.
124.8. O Lord God of hosts, blessed is the man who puts his trust in thee:
yea blessed is the man to whom thou imputest no sin. Psalm. 84.13.

All the world does worship thee, sing of thee, and praise thy name; which is
great, wonderful, gracious and holy. Hallelujah. Praise the Lord, O my soul. O
Father Eternal, Almighty God, Lord and Possessor of infinite perfection,
Majesty and mercy, Maker and Upholder of all things visible and invisible! O
blessed Jesus, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, who have loved us and dyed on
the cross for us! O most holy Spirit, founder and fountain of light and
knowledge of virtue and grace, of li^e peace, and bliss everlasting! with
utmost humility intention of mind and affection I adore and glorify thee. All
power and riches and wisdom and salvation and glory and honor and blessing be
to the eternal Trinity now and for ever. Amen. Hosanna in the highest, Hosanna.

I bless thee, O Lord, Almighty, that thou have made the world out of nothing,
and created me and all mankind after thy own image, and have set us over the
works of thy hands, and given thy holy angels charge of us to keep us in all
thy ways: and that after the early loss of paradise etc. many and late
transgressions and presumtions, thou yet openest the door of repentance and
life to us all, allowing us all means of emendation and conversion, the
admirable treasure of the divine Scriptures, the wonderful benefits of the holy
Sacraments, innumerable patterns of good living and dying, and together with
all the comforts of this visible world rejoice and honor with his hope of
everlasting felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII. Saturday.
THe heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work. One day tells another, and one night certifyeth another of the great
power and bounty of the Creator, blessed for ever. There is neither speech nor
language, but their voices are heard amongst them. Their sound is gone out to
all lands, and their words to the worlds end. Psalm. 19. The Lord gives food to
all flesh, and feeds the young ravens that call upon him. The Lord cloatheth
the grass of the field, and brings forth herbs for the use of man and beast.
The Lord helps them to right that suffer wrong, and loses men out of
prison. The Lord gives sight to the blind and to the seeing. The Lord helps
them that are fallen, and raises the dead. He cures the broken hearted, and
gives medicine to heal the sick. The Lord ca^eth for the righteous and humble,
but scorneth and debaseth the proud. The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon
him, that call upon him faithfully. My mouth shall speak the praise of the
Lord, and let all the world, above and below, give thanks, unto his holy name
for ever and ever. Amen.

Tread firmly O disciple of Christ, in the footsteps of thy meek and holy
master: for these lead still upwards, unto supercelestial and endless glory.

Interpose, O blessed Jesus, thy passions, cross and death, between the Divine
Justice and this poor soul, both now and in the hour of death and in the day of
judgment, Grant O Lord, to the living mercy and grace; to the faithful departed
a joyful resurrection. To thy Catholic Church peace and concord, truth and
righteousness: and to me and all sinners repentance and pardon and life
everlasting. Amen.

Or, By thy bloody Sweat, thy Thorny Crown and Scourges, thy pierced Hands and
Feet, the fountain of Blood and water opened in thy precious side, by thy dying
groans and acclamations, thy prayers and benedictions; be merciful unto me a
vile sinner, spare me and bless me, O my crucified Love. Amen.

THE LARGER OFFICE GOING TO BED. CHAP. X.
I. Sunday.
I Will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only that
make me dwell in safety. Psalm. 4.9. Whom have I in heaven but thee, O Lord?
and what is there on earth, that I desire in comparison of thee? Thou art about
my path and my bed, and spiest out all my ways. Psalm. 139.2. Have mercy upon me
and all mine this night, O blessed Jesus, who did die and revive for us; that
whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with thee Hallelujah. 1 Thessalonians. 5.10.

Or, From morning to night I will bless the Lord. Now to him who is able to
keep me and all his servants from falling, and to present us at length pardoned
and faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding great joy; to the
only wiseGod, our Savior and Defender, be glory and majesty, dominion, power,
and praise, both now and for ever. Amen.

My trust is in the tender mercy of God for ever and ever. Psalm 52.9. Let me
and all mine, yea let me and all thine, O holy Father, now sleep in peace, and
wake in Christ, begin the next return of reason with heavenly Meditation. Amen.

Or, To Gods gracious Protection I most humbly commit my self, my family and
friends, and all the faithful and all the afflicted. The Lord bless us and keep
us. The Lord make his face to shine upon us, and be gracious unto us. The Lord
lift up his countenance upon us, and give us peace both now and evermore. Amen,
by the merits and intercession of Jesus our only Savior and Advocate.
BENEDICTIO.

II. Monday.
IN the Name of God I will lay me down to rest. The almighty Lord be now and
evermore my Defense against all perils both of Sleep and Death. Amen for Jesus
his sake.

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, Honor and Power: for thou have
created all things, and for thy Wills sake they were created and are preserved.
Blessed be thy name world without end. Amen.

Or,

Great Ruler of the day and night,
Upon our darkness cast thy Light:
With safe and kind Repose allay
The Care and Trouble of the day;
That when thou shall unclose my eyes,
Healthful and pure I may arise,
Fit for the morning Sacrifice.
Or, O praise the Lord, ye Angels of his that excel in strength, that are
always waking and always active O praise the Lord, all ye his Hosts, ye Spirits
and Souls of the Righteous, ye servants of his that do his pleasure; O speak
good of the Lord, all ye works of his in all places of his dominion. Praise
thou the Lord, O my soul, and in praising turn thee to thy rest. The glorious
Majesty of the Lord endures for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works.
Amen. Psalm. 103.

III. Tuesday.
THis night, and the days and nights of my appointed time, defend, O Lord,
protect, spare, deliver and bless thy servant, who puts his trust in thee,
through Jesus Christ. Amen. I will remember thee upon my bed; and think upon
thee, when I am waking. Because thou have been my helper, therefore under the
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice: my soul hangs upon thee, and thy right
hand upholdeth me. Thy loving Kindness is better then life, better then all the
glories and pleasures of the whole world. Let me now rest, O benign Savior,
where thy beloved Disciple did: that my sleep may be sweet; that my dreaming
may be of thee, of thy Redemption and of thy glorious mansions.

Or, my flesh shall rest in hope, that thou, Lord, wilt raise me both from the
Bed and from the Grave, and wilt show me the paths of Life, both temporal and
eternal, for the sake of thy wellbeloved Son, whom thou sufferedst to die for
the world, but not to see corruption. Amen. Just and righteous are thy ways, O
Lord: who will not fear and serve thee? Let us rejoice and be exceeding glad
and secure: for the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Rev. 19.5.6. Every where and
at all times will I think upon my mortal and sinful life, and upon thy
continual and great Mercys. In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, that I be not
confounded, though altogether unworthy of thy eye and regard. In thee only I
confide. Amen with great ardor and expectation: O God, leave not my soul
destitute.

IV. Wednesday.
THe Lord is my shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing. Though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, and sleep is that valley, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff comfort me. Psalm. 23. The
Lord has granted his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night season
will I sing of him, and make my prayer to the God of my life. Psalm. 42.10. My
soul rejoices in the Lord, and I have put my trust in his holy name. Psalm.
33.21. Blessed be thou, Lord God of our fathers, for ever and ever. Thine, O
Lord, is the Greatness and the Power and the Glory and the Victory and the
Majesty. For all that is in heaven and earth is thine: and thou rulest over all
for ever. Amen. 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 13.

V. Thursday.
EVerlasting Praise and Thanks to thee, most gracious God and Father, for my
Life and Reason, Integrity of Body and Soundness of Memory: for my pious and
generous Parents: my Education in good Learning and Manners: for my
Regeneration by Baptism, and my frequent access to the holy Communion of the
Body and Blood of Christ my Savior: [for my place and order in the Holy and
Apostolic Church:] for my competent Estate, Content, Liberty and Quiet: for my
power and greater will for Alms-doing: [for my Profession in this place, my
good Name and various Friendship; and for whatever I have well done or said
throughout my whole life:] for my Relations, and Benefactors: for the divine
Forbearance, Clemency and Beneficence, unto to this age of my life: for sundry
remarkable Deliverances of me and my friends from Diseases, Troubles and
Dangers: for innumerable Blessings known and unknown, remembered or forgotten,
spiritual and temporal: most chiefly for the means of Grace of all sorts, and
for the hope of immarcessible Glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. O all ye
blessed, all ye righteous, O all the world, behold here the monument of
Almighty Mercy. Is not this a brand plucked out of the burning? Zach. 2.4.

Or, O holy Father, the thoughts of thy infinite Grace and Mercy, thy continual
and almighty Providence, how dear are they unto me? Thy Redemption, O blessed
Jesus, shall now lie next my heart: and in the meditation of thine inestimable
Passion, and of thy numberless and everlasting Benefits, will I go to sleep or
to die, as it shall seem best to thee, my most gracious Lord and Savior. This
night, most Holy, Pure and Eternal Spirit, guard I humbly beseech thee, and
possess my soul, whilst the meaner nature lies languid, useless and insensible.
Amen.

VI. Friday.
THe Lord is my stony rock and my defense; my Savior, my God, and my might, in
whom I will trust: my buckler, the horn also of my Salvation and my refuge.
Psalm. 18.1. With my soul have I desired thee in the night season, and early in
the morning have I sought thee. When I awake by thy empire and pity, let my
soul be still with thee, O Lord my God.

Or, And now Lord what is my hope? my hope is even in thee. My help stands in
the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. Psalm. 132.2.

From evil Designs and unlawful Desir^s, from impure and vain Thoughts, from
the Illusions and Suggestions of the devil, from inordinate Passions and
Disturbances of Body and Mind, good Lord deliver me this night. Amen.

VII. Saturday.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto the
name of the Lord most highest. To tell of thy loving kindness in the morning,
and of thy faithfulness every night. Psalm. 92.1, 2. Grant thy servant, O Lord,
a Christian end of this day and this week and this [declining] mortal life.
Amen for Christ Jesus his sake. Bless me also, holy Father, as thou did this
day at the finishing of thy Creation, and sanctify and separate me to thy
Service for ever. Amen.

He that keeps Israel, he that keeps thee, O Christian, does neither
slumber nor sleep. The Lord himself is thy keeper. The Lord is thy defense on
thy right hand. The Lord preserves thee from all evil: yea it is even he that
keeps thy soul. Amen, God most holy, most mighty.

Or, Lord Jesus Christ, the cheerful Ray and Glory of the Father immortal,
heavenly, holy and happy; being come to close of this day and the confines of
darkness, we laud and magnify the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit of God,
thou indeed art worthy to be praised with holy voices, O son of God, giver of
life. Therefore the whole world glorisieth thee, and worshippeth thee. Amen.
(...).

I will not give sleep to my e^es, nor slumber to my eyelids, till I be at
peace with all men: till I have sought thy peace, most gracious Father, which
the world cannot give, and have confessed unto thy Majesty the Faults and
Omissions of this day, together with the more heinous Sins of my life. Whatever
I have devised, said, or done unworthy my Place, my Age, my Christianity, [and
my Priesthood] good Lord, forgive me for the Bowels of Jesus Christ. Amen. And
let the grief and trouble of such Confessions henceforth deter me from the like
Presumptions, Transgressions, and Neglects, and from their several Causes and
Occasions. Amen. Amen.

I will frequently read two or three Verses of the Holy Bible before I go to
bed.

Here ends the Larger Office at Rising and going to Bed.

WHen I go not to Church, I will say secretly or in the family Te Deum, or Nunc
dimittis, and also the Collects for Peace and Grace, and the Collects for all
Conditions, and the general Thanksgiving. Our most gracious Father hear both
the Church and me: Oh hear them supplicating for me and all well employed and
afflicted people. Amen for the alone merits of Christ our Lord.

PRIVATE DEVOTION At the HOLY COMMUNION. CHAP. XI.
I. At the Offering.
MOst bountiful Father, I return Mites for Talents received. I offer to thee
still of thy own. Accept I pray thee, most gracious Lord, together with this
small token of my Duty and Gratitude, my Soul and Body and Action; all which I
here humbly dedicate unto thee at thy Altar: And also forgive me all my Debts
and Trespasses against thy divine Majesty, for the one Oblation and
transcendent Worthiness of thy beloved Son, our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

II. Before the general Confession.
HAving already in my retirement read over the Communion-service, and also
Matthew. c. 28. and 1 Cor. 11.17, etc. and thereupon leisurely and carefully
examined and recollected as in the presence of the Living God, what I have
done, what I have amended or not amended, (O wretched and inconstant creature)
since the last Communion and solemn Promise of a correct Life: And having also
satisfied to my power for all Injuries and Offenses done by me against any man:
and likewise with hearty Sorrow, Aversation and Repentance, implored at home
Gods Pardon for those sins and the rest of my whole life; I now fasting ( Dan.
c. 9.3.) do again beseech the same indulgence with Humility, Intention of Mind,
and enlarged Hopes, here in the midst of his devout People, before his Priest,
near his holy Altar, and under the regard of glorious angels, saying:

Holy Father, I am prostrate at thy dreadful Tribunal. I humble my self both
soul and body before thee; and bow down my grieved head at thy Footstool, as
once my Meek and Dying Savior did. My God, my God, forsake me not. Look, O
heavenly Father, on the Scars and Merits of Jesus. O hear his Mediation,
receive his Intercession: and be merciful unto me a sinner, a vile and
ungrateful sinner. What I have neglected, what I have ignorantly or wilfully
committed against thy Majesty most Holy, most Mighty, and Long-suffering, from
my Birth and Baptism unto this moment, by sundry sorts of vain Thoughts and
irregular Imaginations, by inordinate Desires and Affections, by injurious and
corrupt Discourses, and by innumerable evil Actions, Follies and Provocations,
for Christ's, sake forgive me. Such is my Condition, so many and great my sins
and relapses, that unless thy mercy were infinite, I could have no hope, no
comfort. I have transgressed beyond all humane pardon, beyond seventy seven
times. For the Bowels of the Savior that were opened on the Cross for me, for
thine own immense Goodness which embraces Heaven and Earth, Holy Father, have
mercy upon me and pardon me. Consider my Sorrow and Contrition. Accept, most
merciful God, my Tears, my Subjection, my Repentance, my Vows and resolved
Amendment. And then speak Peace to my Conscience, through Jesus Christ my only
Hope and Redeemer. Amen.

Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses,
which have been ever of old. Oh remember not the sins and offenses of thy
servants. Spare us all good Lord; spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed
with the Blood of thy dear Son. Amen. Psalm. 25.5, 6. See CHAP. XVI of this Book.

III. At the Absolution.
O Lord God almighty, most gracious and merciful Father, will all Humility,
Faith and Thankfulness, I receive and embrace this Absolution, as pronounced
upon my Repentance from the Throne of thy Eternal Glory. Amen. Hallelujah.
Amen, Amen.

Here then I have laid down my burden and fear, the stain and disquiet of my
life; by name, my Anger, Lust, Pride, Envy, Covetousness, and the rest of my
grievous sins, never, never, to take them up again. Blessed be God for this
salvation.

Most holy Father, assist and forward the Vows and Resolutions of the meanest
of all that serve thee.

Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, says S. Paul. I thought on my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: I made haste, and prolonged not
the time to keep thy commandments, says king David.

I look for the Lord: in his word is my trust: in the Lords word will I comfort
me. Psalm. 56.10. My soul longs for thy salvation. Psalm. 119.81* I here humbly
wait for the Grace and Benefits of my dying Saviors Institution and Legacy,
for the Precious Treasure of Heaven.

Visit me O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people* that I may
see the felicity of thy chosen, and give Thanks with thine Inheritance.

The Lord pardon me, and every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the
Lord God of his fathers, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, though he be not
cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary; though he fall short
of the frame and disposition due to this holy and tremendous Mystery. 2 Chronicles.
c. 30.18.19.

I come to a known Altar. This Sacrament has often corrected, restored and
comforted me. Thy Benediction, holy Father, is always ready, thy hands ever
open to the sincere and humble Client: and I now pray for thy wonted Goodness,
through Jesus Christ, the sum and substance of this Office.

IV. At Lift up your Hearts.
YEa I lift up my Eyes and my Heart unto thee, O Eternal, my Mediation, my
Desire, my Hope, my Faith, my Affection, my Invention and Design, all my Soul
and Strength are now with thee, most high and most gracious Father. I have past
this Altar unto the sublime and pure seat of thy Majesty: which all orders of
holy Angels and blessed men ever fear and adore. Let me, O let me there behold
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Show me Jesus and it
suffices.

Behold, O my Faith, reach and embrace what the Prime Martyr saw at the right
hand and eminence of Eternal Blessedness, the Prince of Peace, the mighty
Savior, the triumphant Jesus, lifting up his glorious and gracious Arms to
bless and to defend me, the vilest and unworthiest of all living.

Blessed and most loving Savior, by thine inestimable blood wash me thoroughly
from my wickedness and cleanse me from my sin: by the ardor of thy soul toward
mankind in the dark hour of thy Passion commiserate me, and rid me of all my
evil habits, customs, and practices, I most humbly beseech thee.

Now Lord remember me in thy kingdom, as thou did the penitent companion of
thy cross and dolours: And say to my soul, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise; thou shall by faith see my glory, to which from the obedience of the
Cross and the humble grave the Almighty Father has exalted me, has exalted
thy nature.

My heart is ready, O Lord, my heart is ready for this sacrifice of Praise and
Gratitude. Like as the heart desires the water brooks, so pants my soul after
thee, O God, my hope, my refuge, my rest, my life and my happiness.

O Savior of the world, who by thy Cross and precious blood have redeemed us,
save us now and help us, we humbly beseech thee: that we may all receive these
holy and dreadful mysteries without condemnation and ruin, and to our great
consolation and benefit: for the mortifying all our inordinate passions,
repressing all sinful temptations and occ^sions, conquering the devil,
increasing our hope and faith, correcting and beautifying our conversation, for
the abolishing our guilt, and for the attaining eternal life. Am^n.

Dear Jesus, I address to thy holy Altar with great desire. I come as near
thee, O blessed Redeemer, as mortality will let me. I come with a penitent,
earnest and open heart, to praise thee, to adore thee, and to kiss by faith thy
wounded feet, as once thy astonished disciples did, Matt. 28.9. I behold by
faith the prints of the nails; by faith I touch the wound in thy side, whence
flowed water and blood, my sanctification and my pardon, O fill me with thy
influence and virtues, Luke 8.46.1 Cor. 11.29. now I apprehend, discern and
embrace thy precious body, thy all saving passion. My lord and my God, Confirm
thy word unto thy servants; Blessed are they that see not and have believed.

Merciful Savior, at this most noble and pious mystery remove and banish from
my mind all worldly cares, all vain imaginations, means thoughts, errors, and
misconceits; Unite, I most humbly beseech thee, the sundry powers and facultyes
thou have given me, and point and direct them all unto the instant office.
Govern now, O Lord, and bless my apprehension: Exalt my Faith: enlarge my
affections and devotion, and then Consign to my soul thy Remission, Favor and
Approbation, and make me welcome at thy feast, For thy flesh is meat indeed,
and thy blood is drink indeed, the sufficient and only expiation of all humane
guilt, O holy Jesus.

An offering of a free heart, will I give thee and praise thy name, O Lord.
Psalm. 54.6,

The Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost, and to make
superabundant amends for the faults of the first transgressour. Luke 19.10.
Romans 5.12, etc.

V At the Consecration.
HOly things for holy men. S. Basil.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who sit at the right hand of the Father, and art here
invisibly with us, sanctify these thy gifts of Bread and Wine and us thy
humble servants; and make us from this institution partakers of pardon and
peace and good hope of Eternal life, and all other benefits of thy Incarnation,
Passion, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, second Advent and
Judgment: which we now ponder and contemplate with reverence and faith and joy
and thanksgiving, by the grace and succor of the holy Ghost, our Patron and
Comforter. Amen.

Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word, in which
thou have caused me to hope.

Holy Jesus say but the word, and I shall be clean, M^tt. 8.8. say bu^ the
word, and I shall be meet and ready for thy most Divine gift, for thy self.

By the grace of Jesus Christ we all hope to be saved, to be eternally happy.
Hallelujah. Acts. 15.11.

Heavenly Father, Almighty God, who alone workest wonders, Lord most Holy, into
a clean, charitable, devout, humble, and grateful heart let me now receive
through faith the pure and blessed Body of my most gracious Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, for the remission of all my sins and the attaining everlasting
life. Amen, Amen, Amen. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of hosts, heaven and earth
and this place are full of thy Glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou son of David. I know it is not meet to take
the childrens bread, and to cast it unto dogs. Yet, Lord, the dogs eat of the
crumbs which fall from their mast^rs tabl^. Ma^th. 15.22, 26, 27.

AT RECEIVING THE BREAD. CHAP. XII.
I.
LOrd I am not worthy thou should come under my roof. Matthew. 8.8. I fear, I
tremble by reason of my sinfulness, and of the unsupportable Brightness of thy
Majesty, O Savior and Judge Eternal.

Lord have mercy upon me a most miserable sinner. Amen.

Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna to the son of
David. Good will toward men, peace on earth. Hosanna in the highest. Matthew.
21.9.

Stand open now, O my soul, stand open ye everlasting doors, and let the King
of glory enter in. Let the Lord mighty to save, Jesus the king of glory enter
in.

II.
Feed on him by faith etc. Amen. I feed on him, I remember his Sufferings and
bloody Sweat, I meditate on his Cross and dying Exclamations. I believe, I most
humbly and heartily embrace this invaluable and most miraculous Redemption;
this great mystery of Godliness: God manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit by diverse wonderful works and holy sermons: seen and worshipped by the
angels: believed on throughout the world, and received up into Eternal glory. 1 Timothy 3.16. Thou art, O Christ the everlasting Son of God: thou art indeed the
Savior of the world; thou art the king of Glory, Ioh 1.49. c. 4.42. c. 10.11,
27. Acts 8.37.

Surely thou have born our griefs and carried our sorrows thou wast wounded for
our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was laid upon thee, and by thy stripes we are healed. Isaiah 53.4. This
man receives sinners, Luke 15.2. Zaccheus, Mary Magdalene, the crucified
thief, the persecuting Saul, these and millions of millions more upon their
sorrow, faith and repentance. And let me receive now at this holy Altar,
Almighty Savior, that most blessed sentence: [Son or Daughter,] thy sins,
which are many, are forgiven thee; and thy faith has saved thee; go in peace.
Luke 7.47, 48, 50. c. 5.20.

Go to my brethren (behold the early compassion of the revived Jesus!) and say
unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.
Ioh. 20.16. I know that my Redeemer lives, and I shall see him at the latter
day (behold, here is the pledge of his coming again:) I shall see him for my
self, and I trust to kiss his glorious feet. I know that imaculate high priest
is entered with the atonement into the holiest.

III.
Lo here is grace, here infinite goodness and mercy. This is the beauty of
holiness, and the glorious presence of the Redeemer: this is the gate of heaven.

O happy day, the glory of my life. Now I am well, now I live: now I rejoice
with thee, O triumphant Jesus, O bliss everlasting! my content, my devotion, my
affection, my soul is fixed on thee: there let it ever rest. Amen.

The Lord is my strength and my song, and is become my salvation. This is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is my God and I will
glorify him: the God of my Father and I will exalt him. Exodus c. 15.2.

O let the serious thoughts of thy passion, intercession, kingdom and reward
enter all my actions, and regulate my whole life: which upon such observance
will surely become pious prudent and cheerful. Amen dearest Jesus.

IV.
Most gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, that we together with all thy
saints, who have pleased thee from the beginning of the world, may be partakers
of those everlasting Blessings which thou have prepared for all that love thee
and continue faithful unto death, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord now send prosperity. Bless thy people and extol them for ever. Bless now
the king, the Royal Family, and all in civil office. Inspire and bless the
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, who administer thy holy mysteries and by thy sole
command and authority do absolve and bless and feed thy chosen people. Now
sanctify, reward and prosper my kindred and friends, my superiors and
benefactors, as, etc. whom at his happy Eucharist and golden hour I commemorate
with eulogy, joy and gratitude. If there be any consolation in Christ, any
peace in the Divine favor, any happiness and glory in heaven by the throne of
Eternity; if any goodness in the Ocean of grace and beneficence, Requite them O
God a thousand fold for all their kindness and bounty and affection toward me.
Amen, for the infinite deserts of thy beloved Son our Lord. All thanks to thee,
O Jesus, king of heaven and earth, for defending and blessing this Apostolic
Church, where we now communicate, the most unworthy of all her children.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me,
e^pecially for snatching me from the fire of hell, and making me an heir of
everlasting happiness in his presence. I will receive the cup of salvation, and
call upon the name of the Lord and offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving
through Jesus Christ. Amen. Psalm. 116.11, 12, 15.

AT RECEIVING THE CUP^ CHAP. XIII.
I.
AMen. Jesus Master, have mercy on us. Luke 17.13.

Let this Blood purge my Conscience from dead works, to serve thee, the
Almighty and most gracious Father: to honor thee, the Everliving Savior: and
for ever to obey and fear thee, most holy and quickening Spirit. Amen.

Lord I will serve thee better, I will obey thee. Succor my weakness, pity my
infirmity, Dear Lord.

Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. John 21.17.

What honor has Almighty God done me, that I should be the vessel of this
divine mystery, and bear within my breast the Lord Jesus. I adore, I give
thanks.

II.
Thou art made whole, go and sin no more: no more by anger, lust, excess,
fraud, slandering, etc. Ioh. 8.11. Our God is a consuming fire to the perverse
and impenitent. Our God is a merciful Father to the humble and relenting Orator.

As is his Majesty, so is his mercy. Ecclus. 2.18. Both infinite and
incomprehensible; both to be acknowledged, admired and adored.

O Majesty everlasting I fear thee, I worship thee, I trust in thee, through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Let me not, O let me not again pollute this body and soul with my habitual and
grievous sins, as etc. after I have received thy body and blood, O Lord, who
have created me and redeemed me.

Grant me thy grace, O God, that I may fulfill the places and offices thou
call me to in this life. Amen.

III.
Lord bless these and the rest of my brethren, and let us live eternally
together, ever praising and Adoring thee. For by this great and attractive
sacrament, we all become one bread, one blood, one soul and consent: have all
one faith, one hope, one heaven, one Lord, the blessed Lord Jesus, the knot and
center of this most immense and pious fraternity, and eminently one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all, to whom be
glory and obedience everlasting. Amen in heaven, Amen on earth. From thy one
precious body, O wonderful Savior, thou feedest and revivest five thousand and
five thousand thousand millions of thy disciples and followers: Aeternae tanta
est opulentia mensae. Prudent.

Say O Lord, and thy word is omnipotent, This day salvation is come unto this
house. Luke 19.9.

IV.
The bread of God is he that came down from heaven, and gives light to the
world. Lord evermore give us of this bread. Ioh. 6.33, 34. Thus, thus will we
show sorth thy death, O Jesus, till thou come again: and blessed are those
servants, whom at the end of the world the Lord shall find so doing: yea verily
blessed is he that eats meat in the kingdom of God. Luke 12. 43. c. 14.15. He
that solemnly and faithfully and seriously contemplates my Passion and
Philanthropy, and amends his life for that consideration: He that eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. Amen Holy Jesus, who art the Resurection and the life. Ioh. 6.54, 56.

Master, it is good for us to be here. Mark. 9.2. Do not our hearts burn within
us, while the Lord opens to us the scriptures, opens to us his precious side.

Full is the satisfaction, inexpressible the joy of those that love thee, O
Jesus. Angels and men consent, heaven and earth join together to praise thee,
serve and worship thee: and with these my poor soul, the meanest of all thy
creation; Good Lord accept us. I will give thanks unto thee among thy people,
and sing praises unto thee among the faithful.

My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: For thy ^ercy is greater then the
heavens, and thy truth rea^heth above the clouds. Set up thy self, O Lord,
above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth. Thou have wrought
redemption in the midst of the earth, O Jesus, and vanquished all the enemies of
guilty mankind, and art seated at the right hand of Father, the Lord and
worship of angels. Hosanna in the highest. The right hand of the Lord has the
preeminence, the right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. The
word was made flesh, the beloved Son of God died for us. Let them now that fear
the Lord confess, that his mercy endures for ever*

V.
I ^ill read Ioh. c. 18. and c. 17. the security and consolation of the Church,
and also Romans c. 8. and the hymn, Come holy Ghost our souls inspire, etc. In
the ordering of Priests.

Almighty God, who have given thy only Son to be unto us both a sacrifice for
sin, and also an example of Godly life; Give us grace that we may always most
thankfully receive that his inestimable benefit, and also daily endeavor our
selves to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Most holy spirit, the efficacy and life of this mystery, bless me with these
thy gifts and fruits, meekness, modesty, sobriety, prudence, diligence,
honesty, fidelity, constancy, chari^y, kindness, and devotion, from the time of
this holy Sacrament. For I have now dedicated and given up entirely my soul,
senses, and affections, my will, wit and reason to the glory and service of
Jesus Christ, who dyed for me. I must, I will obey him in all things. Lord
forgive, Lord help me.

My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. O
how plentiful is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee. Psalm. 21.21.

I am altogether confounded and swallowed up with the immense grace of God: I
am thoroughly possessed, glorious Lord, with thy love and boundless favor to me.
I long, I here endeavor, yet cannot tell how to express my thankfullness and
obedience. My thoughts and contrivance, and my words and lauds, my action and
zeal cannot do it to any fitness or content. Lord still excite, and still
direct my gratitude. I would be as thankful to thee, as humble, as obedient, as
any creature in heaven or earth. Father Almighty make me so. Amen.

Now Lord Jesus, who wast expanded on the cross for me, command me what thou will. Use me in the hazards and difficulties of thy Church, thy purchase and
thy glory. Bid me walk upon the sea, I will obey thee, and thy right hand shall
hold me up. And I will not deny thee in the Court or in the Garden. I am ready
to lay down my estate, my liberty, and also my life (would to God it were a
clean and entire sacrifice) for Christ's religion, and to be obedient unto the
death. Assist and strengthen my mind, O blessed Savior, by thy grace, thy
intercession, thy example. Amen.

All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, (faith the ascending
Jesus.) Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with you always even unto
the end of the world. Amen. Matthew. 28.18. The doctrine attested, when needful
by sundry miraculous works, the discipline, the sacraments, the preservation,
the piety, the zeal, and the patience of thy Catholic Church has indeed
sufficiently demonstrated thy gracious presence, O Savior. And he lift up his
hands and blessed them: and while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and
carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with
great joy. And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
Luke 24.50.

AT HOME AFTER THE COMMUNION. CHAP. XIV.
I.
IT is finished. Blessed Sacrament, the Bread of Heaven, and the Cup of
Salvation, the Feast of God, the Taste of Eternal Bliss, and the Strength,
Comfort and Life of my Soul. This has united me to all the Faithful on Earth,
and to all the Blessed in Heaven. This has joined me in Affection and
Gratitude, in Interest and Inheritance unto thee, most blessed Jesus, the head
and defense, the ruler and Savior of the Church, the first fruits and security
of the resurrection and glory and immortality of this nature.

Now Lord whether I live o^ die, I trust I am thine. I verily believe to see
the goodness of the Lord in the region of the blessed, through infinite mercy
and indulgence. Psalm. 27.13. O keep me ever, Dear Jesus, in this good
condition, by constant and cheerful obedience and observance of all Christian
duties, by an awful reverence of the Divine name and presence: by imitating the
best examples living or dead, and. and most especially by following thy meek
and immaculate life, thy pure and heavenly doctrine and admonitions: by caution
and frequent meditation: by daily examination and prayers: and by all other
means of a pious and innocent life.

O Lord, I thank thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee; because by this sacrament
thou have confirmed me in the Catholic faith: in reverence, duty and love to
thy Eternal Majesty; in charity toward all mankind, friends or enemies: in
meekness, pity, humility, patience, contentedness, industry, sobriety,
chastity, honesty and integrity: And have thereby given me new and lively hopes
of endless felicity both in soul and body, against all the malice and attempts
of men or devils, and against the terrors of death and my sinful life past. So
great is thy mercy to me for the merits of Jesus Christ, thy eternal Son, my
everlasting Savior and advocate, my Lord and king.

II.
O Stupendous Grace and Piety of the Eternal, that I should be (I fear, I
tremble ^o say it) the work of Gods hands, the image of his wisdom and power,
the price of Christ's blood, the temple of the holy Ghost, a part of the
Catholic and perpetual Church, and an heir of immortal glory. What now ought
my life to be, if this be my portion and my privilege?

Holy Father, let the intercession of Jesus, that poured out his tears and
sweat and precious blood for us, be nigh unto thee day and night, that thou
may have mercy upon us, and bless us, and prevent our falling from so great
salvation. Amen.

Dearest Savior, I desire still to r^^lect and meditate on thy humble life,
thy bir^h, circumcision, presentation in the Temple, domestic Obedience,
Baptism, Fasting, Temptations, Hunger, Thirst, Uncertain abode, Travails,
Watching, Prayers, Sermons, Miracles, Dangers, Abuses, Tortures, Bloodshedding,
and review the ^hole map of thy condescensions, griefs and compassions, from
the Manger to the Cross: until I become my self averse, separated, and
cruci^yed and dead to the world. Amen.

III.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name.
Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all
thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities: who saves thy soul from
destruction and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. The merciful and
gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works of Creation, Providence and
Redemption, that they ought to be had in perpetual remembrance. Thou art my
God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise thee. All the
works of the Lord are verity and judgment. He has sent redemption unto his
people, he has commanded his covenant for ever. Holy and Reverend is his name.

Thus long have I lived upon thy bounty; thus and thus etc. have thou
nourished, protected, delivered and advanced me, and now, O Father, thou
confirmest to me the expectation of everlasting life in thy heavenly kingdom.
Wherefore I give thanks unto thee with my whole heart.

Glory, Worship, Obedience and Praise to God the Father Almighty and most
beneficent, that sits on the Eternal throne; and to the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world, and to the most holy Spirit, the Lord of
life and peace, for ever and ever. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
gracious. I have tasted that he is gracious; and his mercy endures for ever.
Hallelujah. Salvation is of the Lord: again Hallelujah.

Blessed be God for his unspeakable gift.

Lord hasten the glory of the General Resurrection. Amen: So come Lord Jesus.
Into thy hands, thy pierced hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit.

PREPARATION FOR DEATH AND ETERNITY^
CHAP. XV. Forgivenesss and Charity.
I.
HAving lately perused CHAP. VI. of this Book, and also received the Holy
Communion in this Apostolic Church, I am the more ready and willing to set my
self in order to depart this world, for the vision of Christ; humbly commiting
the time and manner of my Dissolution to the Providence of God, which has
hitherto defended and sustained me.

II.
Wherefore I freely and fully forgive all that have in any sort wronged and
injured me, as I desire that God, most just and omniscient, should now for
Christ's sake forgive me. Amen.

And I humbly beseech God to forgive them those wrongs and all other their
sins. Amen.

I farther desire that it may be certified to them, namely to etc. that I do
remit and release to them all satisfaction and amends in word or deed; only
entreating their prayers for me, that my humiliation and repentance may be
accepted in heaven.

Yea I wish I could show more indulgence and forgiveness toward men, who need
and implore so much of God, for my innumerable and most ungrateful offenses
against his Eternal Majesty.

III.
I likewise humbly and heartily beg pardon and forgiveness of all those whom I
have wronged in any manner, particularly of etc. and do earnestly desire that
this my request be signified to them.

Furthermore, forasmuch as slander and fraud, and the like scandalous sins, are
not remitted before God without all possible restitution; I am most willing and
ready to my utmost power to restore and repay whatever I have couzened and
defrauded, without delay and without deceit. I am also ready to make reparation
of fame and credit, together with an ingenuous and humble acknowledgement, to
all that I have slandered and calumniated, namely to etc. And accordingly I
forthwith take order that Restitution and Satisfaction be made to them all to
the utmost of my ability: and that their Release and Acquittance for all
injuries done to them be obtained, or else most justly and verily presumed,
before I adventure to crave the benefit of Absolution.

If I am ashamed of such a Confession and Restitution, I am not ashamed nor
afraid to be the everlasting contempt and scorn of the most holy Creator, and
of all that is blessed: I am not ashamed nor affrighted to be the companion of
devils and all villainous men that ever lived, in darkness, horror and torment.
Let no father, patron or master think of bettering the worldly condition of his
successors by his own dreadful condemnation, for finally concealing and
retaining his illgotten estate or frauds.

IV.
Moreover with a charitable heart, according to the b^st of my understanding
and enquiry, imploring the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, I ^ave made my Last
will and Testament, disposing the goods and estate God has given me for his
greatest glory: Namely, amongst my Relations, and likewise in a due
acknowledgment of sundry precious benefi^s received by me in this Apostolic
Church, of which ^ hope to continue a part to my life's end, and also for the
poor: Blessing Almighty God for enabling me to give them some relief, and so to
lend unto himself his own temporal blessings, to obtain far better riches in
heaven. Amen.

I rest upon thy merits and upon thy word, O Triumphant Savior: Forgive, and
ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be given into your bosom, good
measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over. Luke c. 6.37. and c.
11.9. Amen.

Finally, I have given my Relations and Friends the best advise and counsel I
could, for the good of their neverdying souls, and for their well-living in
this world.

V.
Having thus rid my self of all the cares and troubles and concerns of
mortality, having now perfectly done with this world, with a clear and humble
heart I address my self to thy Grace, Almighty and most merciful God and
Father, beseeching thee to instruct, exer^ise and prepare me for the succeeding
glo^ious and immortal life, to which by the Chris^ian Profession thou have
advanced my hope and awful expectation. Hallelujah through the glorified Jesus,
Hallelujah to all Eternity. Amen.

But I foresee the passage to this Beatitude to be very dark and Dismal, full
of Thorns and Tears; full of Confessions, Remorse and Contrition for the many
faults of a short life, and also full of disease, and pains and anguish,
reaching unto dissolution, insensibility, stench and rottenness. By all thy
agonies and experience, help me, O holy Jesus, through this terror. Amen.

REPENTANCE^ CHAP. XVI. See CHAP. VI.. 5. and CHAP XI.. 2.
I. Consession.
I Have sinned, O Lord, I have dealt wickedly, I have led an unequal, untoward
and polluted life. I have sinned before thee, when ashamed of humane view;
before thee my Father, my Judge, my Benefactor, my Worship and my God. O absurd
and stupid wretch!

In thought, word and deed, with all the powers and abilities thou have given
me, with affection and design have I sinned against thee, most Mighty and most
Holy! Ungratefully and basely, grievously and presumtuously, particularly, etc.
have I sinned: and Lord, how often? secretly and openly: in the chamber, as,
etc. an^ in public, as, etc. treading upon thy earth, and covered with thy
heavens: yea ^ have sinned in the House of God, and in the midst of my Pray^rs
and Invocations, as etc.

Is this then the Image of God, is this a Christian, an heir of eternal Life?
[^his a Priest and Dispenser of the pure Word and Sacraments of the Lord
Jesus.] Ah this is nothing but clay and dirt, uncleanness and misery.

II. Contrition.
THe soul that is troubled and the spirit that is vexed cries unto thee, O
Lord.

I Relent, I grieve, I am heartily sorry for this demerit and irritation of thy
Divine justice. I am ashamed, I abhor my self. I am perfectly we^ry of this
corrupt life.

What shall I do, whi^her shall I turn? I am ashamed to look up to heaven, that
beh^lds my vileness, to heaven which I have abused and despised. I will bow my
self to the earth and the grave, that waits to hide and devour such a wretch. I
will s^ite upon my breast, with the conscious publicane, upon my breast the box
and origin of all this mischief. And do thou strike this rock, O holy Jesus,
that the waters may freely flow: that my tears may mingle with thy blood; my
humble and sincere repentance reach thy propitiation and remission.

Dissolve thou sinful clod, tremble thou earth, earth, earth, at the presence
of the Lord, at the presence and vindication of the God of Jacob, who turned
the ^lint stone into a springing well. I wish for the tears of David pierced
with the matter of Uriah, the mourning of Jeremiah, and the dejection of
Manasseh.

I recollect and confess in particular unto thee my more grievous sins (the
rest are without number) in the bitterness of my soul. Thus and thus have I
done etc. I give glory to thee as Achan, I confess and am confo^nded at the
enormity and presumption and villainous circumstances of my offenses, as etc.

I hide not my unrighteousness, as Adam in the garden, who led the way of
sinning and of repentance. I hide not, I cannot hide, but with tears and dread
remorse acknowledge to thy most pure and omniscient Majesty my faults, my
follies, yea rather my wilfulness, my hardness, my vices, my criminal and
deplorable life. And lo here I judge and reprove and condemn my self at the
bottom of thy throne: and yet I am not enough abased. He cannot fall too low,
whose merit is hell. My deformation and destruction is only from my self, from
my perverse and incorrigible self: my relief and salvation is from thee only.
Father, thou know my sins, and thou know my anguish. It is not easy to
transgress thy commands, and reflect upon the transgressions. My flesh
trembles for f^ar of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments, O Lord. I dread
that great day, when the thrones shall be set, the books opened, and my
shameful life recited, and all my works of darkness exposed in perfect light. I
tremble, lest the blessed Jesus, who shed his blood for my redemption, and has
so earnestly urged and offered me pardon and peace and eternal life, should
then condemn me: and the mighty angels and holy men of all ages and nations,
newly clothed with immortal and illustrious bodies, hiss me from the righteous
Tribunal, and the mouth of hell receive my body and soul into exquisite
torments without light or pity. My present horror and confusion is great: but
what is this to everlasting burnings?

III. Supplication.
GReat and gracious God, Father and fountain of mercies, have mercy upon me an^
spare me. Out of the depths do I cry unto thee. I have depressed by staind and
miserable soul to the brink of hell. Out of the depths do I cry unto thee,
Father spare me, Father pity me. I am oppressed, I am in great misery: my soul
is exceeding sorrowful as unto death: Eli, Eli, hear me and pardon me. Enter
not into ^udgment with me, who am dust and ashes, sin and weakness: Let not the
storm overwhelm me, nor the depth of sorrow swallow me up, nor the sense of thy
anger destroy me. Psalm. 69.15. Father, I am no more worthy to be called thy
son, or to be reckoned in thy creation. But according to the infinity of thy
mercies, O Lord, do away my iniquity, and blot out my transgressions. Psalm.
51.1, 2. My heart fails me: O Lord make hasts to help me. Psalm. 40.30.

By thy cries and pains, O Jesus, deliver me from the guilt and burden of my
sins, from the terrors of my wakned conscience, and from the unconceivable
torments of hell. By thy wounded head, thy bored hands, they lanced side, thy
pierced feet, thy tortured body and afflicted soul; by all the disgraces and
passions of Gethsemane, Gabbatha and Golgotha save me and deliver me, O Christ,
at this hour, and at the hour of death, and in the day of judgment. Amen.
Father and Savior and Comforter, let this bitter cup pass from me I humbly
beseech thee. Look upon me, O precious Savior, Lamb of God, in my sorrow and
distress, as once thou did on Peter that denied thee and wept bitterly:
Compassionate me as thou did the sinful Magdale^e, and as thou did the
penitent thief, who confessed and believed in the anguish and paroxysme of the
Cross. I deserved all their griefs and ten thousand pains and punishment more.
Intercede now for me, Holy Jesus, with thy dying petition, Father forgive them;
for they know not what they do. O Lord of glory, I look unto thee, I earnestly
look unto thee whom I have pierced: whom not so much Herod and Pontius Pilate
and the Roman soldiers, as sinful and wretched I have dishonored, pierced and
crucified. Lord forgive, Lord save me, or I perish for ever. The Christ of God
hide me in thy wounds. By the blood of thy testament revive and release me. I
hope in thy merciful intercession.

For thy Fatherly tenderness, and the numberless blessings already received
from thy bountiful hand, and through the passion and mediation of thy beloved
Son, and by the unutterable groans and suggestions of thy holy Spirit, pardon
and deliver me, Lord God Almighty. Amen.

IV. Resolution.
I will never adventure more to try and weary the grace and patience of
Almighty God, the righteous judge and avenger. I now break off my sins by
repentance and resolved amendment. I see what brought me to this shameful and
perilous defection: it was this occasion, that invitation, that excess, that
eye; this rashness, that supinity. Wherefore I now solemnly Renounce, cast off,
and abominate the wicked and wounding practices of my life, as etc; together
with all their inducement, and principles.

From this very hour, and blessed be God who has granted me this hour, by
prayer, temperance, charity, industry, fear and caution in all my actions and
enterprices, I fully purpose, and now begin, God hel^ing me of his infinite
goodness and pity, to alter and Reform my life, according to the gospel and
example of Jesus Christ my Lord: and also by kindness, charity and almsdoing, I
will manifest to the world the sincerity and vigor of my Repentance and
renovation.

V. Petition for grace.
HOly Father, incline, direct and fortify my heart to pursue this pious and
necessary Resolution; that iniquity be not my ruin. Ezekiel. 18.30. Thy grace is
sufficient for me. Lord soften, bruise* change and reform my soul according to
thy own will according to thy own image, and after the likeness and innocence
of Adam, when thou first breathest into him life and reason; yea according to
the same t^mper and purity, I most humbly beseech thee, wherein by thy grace I
once ascended from the laver of Regeneration. Tit. 3.5. Amen for Jesus Christ
his sake.

Pardon and destroy not: Am^nd and destroy not, Most merciful Creator, the work
of thy own hands, by me presumptuously and shamefully profaned: Destroy not, O
blessed Savior, the purchase of thy precious blood, the decaying part of thy
mystical body. Destroy not, O Holy Spirit, the subject of thy regeneration and
various bounty. Destroy not, O everblessed and everadored Trinity, the humblest
and meanest of all that believe and worship thy Majesty. Oh break not this
bruised re^d.

Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon, for Jesus's sake. Isa. 55.7. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, (alas, I feel my transgressions heavy and
numberless as the sands of the sea) and I will give you rest, says the
compassionate Savior.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and
ye shall find rest for your souls. Matthew. 26.28.29.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief, I the vilest. 1. Tim.
1.15. Such gracious sentences of the Holy Scriptures are my last hold, are my
plank. O Lord, make haste to help me.

Sickness and Pain. CHAP. XVII.
I Will bear thy indignation, O Lord, till mercy prevails against judgment,
because I have sinned against thee. Micah. 7.9. Why should I, yet living I
complain for the punishment of my sin, for any thing short of unquenchable fire?

Thou know whereof we are made. Remember O Lord that I am but dust, a fading
flower, and a transient blast: remember for his sake, who out of infinite
condescension and pity bore our nature and our infirmities. Amen. Psalm. 103.14,
15, 16.

All my desire is before thee, O Lord, and my groaning is not hid from thee.
Turn unto me, O Lord, and deliver my soul for thy mercies sake. Enlighten and
cleans^ and heal and revive thy servant, that my ways may please thee: that I
may see the goodness of thy chosen, and rejoice with thine inheritance. Amen.

Though the outward man perish, (alas I perceive, I feel it perishing) yet,
good Lord, renew the inwar^ ^an day by day: Secure the part immortal, that
which understands thee, loves thee, praises thee, and now aspires to thy
beatifick presence, for Christ's sake.

See CHAP. VI.. 1. of this Book.

Hope in God, and Resignation to his Pleasure. CHAP. XVIII. See CHAP. VI.. 8.
of this Book.
O Wretched creature that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Romans c. 7.24. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
1. Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

I will run with patience the race that is set before me, for the crown of
indefectible glory which it leads to; looking unto a great cloud of witnesses
of godly fortitude and constancy, yea rather looking unto the meek Jesus, the
author and finish^r of our faith, our hope and our resolution. Hebr. 12.1, 2.

Thee only do I fear, O heavenly Father, and in thee only do I trust. Thy
mercy is as ready as thy power: and thy power makes and maintains all
things. I will ever hope in thy mercy, through Jesus Christ: for I know no end
thereof. Amen.

Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives.
Hebr. 12.6.

It is good for me that I have been afflicted. I know, O Lord, that thy
judgments are right: and that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be
troubled. Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now thy law is my delight
and my attention. O let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be no more
ashamed. Psalm. 119.67, 71, 75, 80.

Behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good unto him. 2 Samuel 15.26.

O my Father, not as I will, but as thou will, for his sake; who for the life
of the world once prayed thus unto thee, with great affection, tears and
innocence. Amen. Matthew. 26.39. My cup is not so bitter: I am not yet come to
the cross.

O Lord God of hosts, blessed is the man that confideth in thee. Psalm. 84.13.

The Profession of the Catholic Faith. CHAP. XIX.
I.
AS I have often, God giving me the grace and opport^nity, professed and
recited the sum of a Christian man's belief, contained in the Apostles Creed and
in the Nicene Creed in the Liturgy of the Church: so now at my wished departure
from this world, I renew the same Confession and recognition, desiring that
heaven and earth might now hear me, as I hope they will at the happy day of the
Resurrection, cheerfully, thankfully and sincerely declaring:

II.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, I
acknowledge, fear and adore one God, spiritual, invisible, eternal, most holy,
Almighty and omnipotent, distinguished into three glorious persons, the Father
and the Son and the holy Ghost. I will always own, and to utmost peril assert,
the infinite power and justice and mercy of God the Father, who made the world
out of nothing, and every moment upholds and governs it by his gracious
providence, and in this Systeme has made, sustained, and blessed me by
wonderful favor.

And I believe in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord: who was
conceived by the holy Ghost, O inestimable mercy and most astonishing mystery,
born without sin of the Virgin Mary: suffered under Pontius Pilate, a plenary
sacrifice and expiation for the sins of the world: was crucified with exquisite
torment and anguish: dead and buried, to teach us profound humility and self
denial and martyrdom, and to take away the sting and terror of death. He
descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead, to justify all
the faithful; and to invite them to a new and noble and heavenly life. He
ascended into heaven: where I long to see thee, and to kiss thy seet, most
bl^ssed Savior. Wash my soul first in thy blood: cleanse it from thy pierced
side, that it may be fitted and prepared for that most holy and sublime
mansion. And sittteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, a most
merciful and benign mediator. From whence he shall come with astonishing glory
and pomp to juage me and all the quick and dead. O judge impartial and
Almighty, I fear thee, I prepare for thy advent, I prejudge and condemn my self
for the corruptions of my life, I fly to thy cross, I hide me in thy wounds. My
faith embraces thy salvation. Lord pardon me and receive me into thy favor.

I believe in the holy Ghost, the efficacious and invisible guide and patron of
all humble souls, and the author of wisdom, compunction, holiness and constancy.

I believe and own the holy Catholic Church the choice and inheritance, and
the care and love of God, called from all nations of the world into one faith
and one hope: wherein I have a part by infinite grace. I believe the Communion
of saints, I hasten to the Church triumphant.

I believe the remission of sins, by thy merits, O holy Jesus, the sure hope
and comfort of the living and of the dying.

I believe the resurrection of the body, of this diseased, earthy, painful,
decaying body. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that at the last day after
death and corruption this very flesh, shall stand up spiritual, illustrious and
immoral by the power and the example of Christ's rising, and be rapt up to meet
him, in the clouds. Job. c. 19. and 1 These. 4*7. Blessed, ever-blessed be the
glorious and glorifying JESUS.

Finally I believe the life everlasting, even for me, who am unworthy of
another secular and encumbered life, worthy of perpetual misery and fiery
indignation altogether unworthy of the vision of God and unchangeable felicity.
But thy grace is like thy self, O Lord, infinite and incomprehensible. I
receive it with all lowliness and confusion. I humble my self to the dust for
this unvaluable mercy. Father, fit me for thy promise and bounty. Amen, Amen.

III.
I Heartily bless God, that I was so early baptized into this faith. I glorify
him, that by his own support in frequenting the offices of the church, I have
so long lived in a firm profession of this saving doctrine. And now, God
preserving me from the snare of the devil, I resolve and I rejoice to die in
the same belief.

Moreover I humbly beseech the Church the pillar and ensign of truth, and all
my friends, to pray for me, that my faith fail not, especially at the hour and
agony of death* and also to implore Gods forgiveness, as for the rest of my
sins, so especially if through the violence of my dis^ase or pain, I shall then
speak unadvisedly and against the intention of a sober and Christian mind; for
the sake of the wounded and crucified Savior. Amen.

O my friends, live better then I have done. No service, no care, no vigor and
zeal can any ways answer the bounty of Almighty God; who nourishes us upon his
earth, enlightens us from his heavens, and concludes our mortality with
everlasting life, satisfaction and glory. O love the Lord by whom you br^ath:
love the Lord that sent Jesus Christ into the world to save sinners.

IV.
I Lay hold on this occasion to declare freely before Gods minister and my
friends, the more remarkable passages of my life, from my birth to this hour:
that they may glorify God for his many benefits and extraordinary indulgence
to me a most unprofitable and ungrateful servant: and may also beware
themselves of the errors and offenses, which have disgraced and polluted my
conversation: and likewise, if I have done any thing worthy and laudable, that
it may sink down into their hearts, and be followed by them and all the church,
to the greater honor of Christ, whose purchase and pity we are. Amen.

V.
ALmighty and most merciful Author and Father I bless thee, I glorify the,
with all holy angels and happy souls, for thy six days Creation, for the light
shining out of Chaos and darkness, and the Chaos made out of nothing: for the
heavens and waters, the earth and plants, the sun and moon, the fish and fowl:
for the beasts of the earth; but especially for Adam, the origin of humanity,
the archive of reason and piety, the admirable and admiring possessour of the
recent and impolluted world.

I praise thee for thy holy Sabbath, the image and notice of solemn devotion on
earth, and also of everlasting rest in heaven to all the workers of
righteousness.

I bless thee for conserving the world for so many thousand years in the same
estate and order: for delivering and defending thy faithful people in all ages
with or without natural means: and for overruling the counsels and attempts of
potentates unto thy own greater glory*

I praise thee, I adore thee for recovering lapsed Adam and his tainted
posterity, by the early promise and opportune advent of the alsufficient
Savior Jesus Christ.

I bless thee for the Holy Bible the richest treasure upon earth.

I thank thee for setting me down in the world in this age of great knowledge,
both humane and divine.

I praise thee for all the wisdom and invention, prudence and virtue,
magnificence, good works and piety of all that ever lived in the world.

I praise thee for the noble and numberless host of guardian angels, wise and
powerful prophets, and apostles and evangelists, valiant martyrs and
confessors, pious kings and priests and benefactors, and for the humble and
holy men of all times, our ^imitation and comfort and glory.

O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his Amen
for Christ's sake.

Desire of Absolution, and of my Change. CHAP. XIX.
I.
VOuchsafe me, O Lord, the power and occasion of doing some good, after all the
evil I have committed and the scandals I have given, before I go hence and be
no more seen: But chiefly grant me a good end of this vain and troublesome
life, and at length a glorious resurrection, through Jesus Christ Amen.

We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, and I
perceive my frame now loosning and falling, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands eternal in the heavens. And this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from heaven. We groan,
being burdened with disease and sin and sorrow and vanity and flesh, to be
clothed upon with a immarcescible vest of purity and glory; that mortality may
be swallowed up of endless life, and we be no longer absent from the Lord.
Amen. Cor. c. 5.1, 4.

I am now ready to be offered, the time of my departure is at hand. I have
foug^t a good fight ( O words of gold, O happy exite of Christian zeal and
fidelity,) I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of right^ousness, which the Lord the righteous judge
shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to all them also that love
his appearing. 2 Timothy c. 4.7.

II.
COme now, O holy Priest, servant of the most high God, direct and amend my
confessions, dissolve my doubts, especially etc. Pray for me, pray earnestly
for me particularly concerning etc. the more, grievous lapses and blots of my
life. Help forward, Divine man, my repentance; compassionate and concur with my
tears* Then preach to me the saving Gospel of Jesus Christ, and open the vail
of infinite mercy to my tender and trembling soul.

I have Forgiven all the world. I have made Restitution to my utmost power of
all injuries and scandals done by me: and am very sorry, that I cannot make
greater amends, quadruple amends for all wrongs.

I have renounced and abominated all my evil practices with contrition and
shame.

I have thrown my self entirely upon the mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

I have recited the Creed with sincerity, resolution, and thankfulness.

I verily believe, that God who gave me this mortal life together with
numberles^ blessings, is now as ready to grant me everlasting happiness,
through the alone merits of Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior.

Come therefore, O holy Priest, my esteem and reverence: Come, happy guide of
my flitting soul; use I humbly beseech thee the authority and office, which our
blessed Lord has given thee: And pronounce over this lowly* cleansed and
renew^d creature, by God^ command, and in his name, and through his power
alone, the sentence that I ardently long for, the words worthy o^ all
acceptance, worthy the ministry of an angel. The Lord hear, the Lord bless,
the Lord Absolve, the Lord Ratify.

THE PRIEST. OV^ Lord Jesus Christ, who has l^st power to his Church to
abso^ve all sinners, who truly repent and believe in him, of his great m^rcy
^orgive thee thine offenses: And by his authority committed to me, I absolve
thee from all thy sins, In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.


Amen in heaven. Amen. Amen. Hosanna in the highest. I take this Remission with
utmost humility. I believe it ratifyed by thee, most gracious Father, the only
Author and source of pardon and peace. I give thanks unto thee, most
affectionate thanks unto thy Eternal Majesty for this inestimable mercy, and I
long to expire in thanksgiving. Henceforth to me to live is Christ, to die is
gain. Phil. 1.21.

III.
I Humbly thank thee, holy Priest, for this great, reverend and charitable
Office. God prosper thee, and the whole Clergy, and all his faithful people
upon earth; who are of the same body and interest with the blessed in heaven.
Amen.

IV.
BLessed, blessed indeed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in
whose spirit there is no guile. Psalm. 32.1, 2.

Lord, now le^test thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. I
desire no more of earth, of sinful earth. I long for thee only, O God* My soul
pantet^ after thee; my departing soul is a thirst for the living God.

O gather it, I most humbly beseech thee by the love and deserts of Jesus,
clean and spotless into rest and glory everlasting. Amen.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly* Jesus receive my spirit.

I am now going to an estate perfectly new, new heavens, new time, new life and
new glories. The change is unconceivably great, amazing and unal^erable.
Nothing is like it here below, but Divine contemplations and the ardors of the
Eucharist.

Look, O look Gracious God, upon the face of thy perishing child, and make the
separation of this soul and body as calm and easy, as their union was and as
it shall be.

I pass, I pass into Eternity: O for the sake of Jesus who went through the
same shad^s, while the earth sinks down toward its earth, most merciful
Father, Sanctify, Save and Receive this soul that trusts in thee, and flees
to thee. It is finished.

HALLELVIAH.
PSALM CXXXIX.
CHAP. XXI.

Mark'st every secret and recess,

And all my thoughts, before I guess.

Through every step, at every stay:

Thy Spirit takes the words away.

Incloseth me on every part:

Beyond conceit of humane heart.

Or whither shall I from thee slay?

And hell I fear, as hell does thee.

The bound of nations and of day;

Surprise and bless me in its way.

The shadow of the earth I Will lie:

Are glass and brightness to thy eye.

Thou saw'^t me, for thou laid'st me there:

Worthy thy finger and thy care,

Secret as night and deepest mines:

Complete in all its parts and lines.

From that small embryo to this man,

Or what no artist reckon can.

Examine every valve and string:

Direct it with a lasting spring.
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS EXPOUNDED Literally, in the direct and common sense both
of Jews and Christians: As also Spiritually, and in great part from our
SAVIORS Sermon on the mount. Matt. c.5. c.6. and c.7.
CHAP. XXII. EXODUS CHAP. XX.
I.
GOd spoke these words and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have no
other gods but me.

I believe, I trust in, I adore with deepest reverence of body and mind, I
worship according to what is revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and I fear and
obey above all things One God Eternal, maker and governor of the world, and
infinitely more excellent then all his creatures.

Spiritually. I desire to behave my self in all places as one that really
believes, and daily confesses, and sincerely worships and fears one Almighty,
all-knowing, Spiritual, most excellent, most righteous and most merciful God,
author and rul^r and judge of all.

II.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in he^ven above, or in the earth benea^h, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them nor wor^hip them. For I the Lord thy
God a^ a jealous God, and ^isit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me and keep my commandments.

I will not show any sign or token of religious reverence, trust and devotion
to any idol or figure, molten or graven or painted, of the false Gods of the
heathens. I will not consult them, or pray to them, or thank and praise them,
as my protectors and benefactors: nor will I build temples or altars to them,
nor offer sacrifice and oblations to them. Nor will I make any idols for others
to worship, nor any ways confer to and meddle with the sacrifices and
superstitions of Idolaters: nor will I consult wizzards, or use any enchantment.

Moreover I will not honor any creature, angel or man or other, as as Gods, or
as representations and and signs and memorials of the on^ true God, with the
solemn worship, supplication, praises, thanksgiving, faith and relyance, self
dedication and obedience, which I in duty render to the most blessed,
incorporeal and invisible Creator of all things: but will avoid all occasions
of such superstition and profaness.

Spiritually. I put my trust and final hope and confidence in God only: not in
riches, or strength, or honor, or wisdom, nor in any creature in heaven or on
earth. To God I fly by humble prayers in all my concerns and distresses: and
upon his gracious providence I wholly rest for the direction and success of all
lawful means. I also beseech his Eternal wisdom to enlighten my understanding
with most reverend and convenient conceptions of his infinitely perfect and
glorious Majesty.

III.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

I will not dare to invoke and allege the great and reverend name of God to an
untruth, or to any light and trivial matter* Nor will I dare to blaspheme and
speak evil of Gods most holy and dreadful Majesty, his eternity, perfection,
providence and government. Nor will I swear, when lawfully called and urged to
it, but by the name of the living and omniscient God, in certain knowledge and
righteousness.

Spiritually. I will always speak and discourse with great leisure, care and
awe, concerning the power and the justice and the mercy of God. I will never
mock or jest or play with the word of God, or with any verse or phrase of it;
nor with any holy and solemn thing or person: But take all heed that my talk
within doors and without be innocent and profitable. I will also frequently
repeat my Sacramental vows, and bend my words and actions thereunto, the Lord
helping me.

IV.
Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor and
do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou nor thy son and thy daughter,
thy manservant and thy maidservant, thy cattle and the stranger that is within
thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth the sea and all that
in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh
day and hallowed it.

I will observe the rules of my religion.

Spiritually. I will take care that I and all belonging to me do sanctify the
Lords day; abstaining from wo^ldly business except for charity, and frequenting
the public prayers and sermons and sacraments, and visiting the sick, and
relieving the poor; and at home reading and meditating on the holy Scriptures.
I will also spend part of other holy days in prayers and praises of God, in
public and in private. Finally in my family I will daily use domestic prayers.

V.
Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long in the land, which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

I will obey, I will reverence outwardly by all signs of honor, and inwardly
by fear and awe of mind, all my superiors spiritual and ^emporal, my parents,
master and mistress, priest and ruler, according to their several degrees and
authorities* in all things not plainly repugnant to Gods word: and when ever
they command any thing contrary thereunto; if I may not according to law,
righteousness and honor appeal to a superior power on earth, I will patiently
submit to their censures and penalties. I will also readily pay my tithes and
taxes. I will reverence the aged, the wise, the noble, and those that are in
office. Lastly I will commend and assist, feed and maintain my parents, as they
need.

Spiritually. I will not seek undutifully or idly to withdraw my self from the
command and power of my governors: but make good my promises, oaths and
obligations to them in all things.

VI.
Thou shall do no murder.

I will not kill, nor by any means hasten the death of my self or any other
man: but rather forwarn and prevent any imminent hurt and hazard. Nor will I
revenge or retaliate or bear in mind any injury, unkindness, calumny or
reproach. Nor will I go to war, but upon an evidently righteous cause and
commission, and in the apparent danger of the public.

Spiritually. I will be grievous and troublesome to none. I will not be angry
without very just cause, nor then will I let the sun go down in my wrath. I
will hate no body in the world: but love all Gods creatures; and I will readily
forgive, pity, pray for and help both friends and enemies in their distress. I
will also use all prudence* tem^erance and lawful means to preserve my body in
health as the engine of Gods glory, till he call for it.

VII.
Thou shall not commit adultery.

I will not commit adultery or fornication, or be assisting thereunto* nor will
I use any unchaste behavior. nor will I marry any of my kindred forbidden Lev.
c. 18. Nor will I seek to be divorced, but for great and necessary causes, as
adultery etc. I will abstain from the foments of lust and cruelty, as gluttony,
strong drinks, bloud-eating etc.

Spiritually. I will endeavor by temperance or fasting, by diligence in my
calling, by prayer, by reading the pure word of God, by discreet and pious
company, and by modest apparel, and profitable discourse, to avert all unclean
thoughts and desires, and not suffer my eye to offend.

VIII.
Thou shall not steal.

I will not steal any thing or person, nor conceal any theft. I will not
deceive, cheat and overreach in my dealing any person, young or old, simple or
wise: nor will I ^alsify my word or my trust: nor waste or deny any goods,
lands, writings or pledge of another, which I have in my power. Nor will I
encroach upon, or crush and oppress any body, as by overworking the labourer,
defrauding or diminishing his wages, or by undue usury and immoderate lucre for
any lone, service, bargain or game. Nor will I by violence or out of revenge
seize any person or goods. Nor will I give mischievous counsel to any.

Spiritually. I will hurt no body* but do as I would be done to, yea do what
good I can in the world.

IX.
Thou shall not hear false witness against thy neighbor.

I will not bear false witness before a magistrate Gods ordinance. Nor will I
invent or spread abroad any slander and false report against any man. Nor for
profit, or out of fear, friendship or obedience, nor upon any account
whatsoever will I tell a lie: nor will I disclose the secrets of my friend, but
for righteousness sake.

Spiritually. I will live honestly, peaceably and courteously with all men,
without guile and hypocrisy, without censoriousness, without malice and pride,
and all their symptoms.

X.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that is his.

I will not endeavor by indirect means and contrivances, as threats* quarrels,
fraud, bribery, flattery and enticements, to procure any part of the estate,
goods or family of my neighbor. For though unjust desires and thoughts are
open and obnoxious to the Divine vengeance: yet only things done, or words
spoken are punishable by men: and such are the breaches of these Ten
Commandments in their Literal and General sense.

Spiritually. Without envy and with very good content, I thank God for my
present estate; imploring his blessing on my diligence to continue or advance
it, that I may be more charitable, useful, beloved and reputable, while I live.

Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts we beseech
thee. Amen. Hebr. c. 8.10.

FINIS.

