A TRUE TESTIMONY CONCERNING Oaths and Swearing, etc.
AS ALSO, An Answer to the subject matter contained in Twelve Arguments or
Reasons (laid down in a Sermon preached at Carliste, Aug. 17. 1664. by Allan
Smalwood, D.D. as he styles himself) to prove, That our Savior did not forbad
all Swearing.

Wherein is fully cleared, The Command of Christ and his Apostle James, Swear
not at all, Matthew. 5.34. and Iam. 5.12. from the corrupt glosses, limited sense
and meanings of the said A. S. in his said Sermon; and in his Reply to F.H. his
Book, called, Oaths no Gospel Ordinance, etc.

And also, The unsatisfactoriness and unsoundness of the aforesaid Arguments,
fully discovered; and the Command of Christ, Swear not at all, manifested, to
be an universal prohibition of all Oaths and Swearing whatsoever, to his
Disciples.

Written in the year 1668. By Ger. Benson.

Psalm. 89.49, 50. Remember (O Lord) the rebuke thy servants have, wherewith
thine enemies have blasphemed thee, and slandered the footsteps of thi^^
Anointed.

London, Printed in the Year, 1669.

To the READER.
READER,
What I have written in this little Treatise (not being after man, neither by
me received of man nor from man) I have therefore made no use of the enticing
words of man's wisdom, neither of any man's testimony, for the confirming the
same; but as the testimony therein born is for God, and the truth of his
sayings, and not for man, I have made use of no other witness than the
Scriptures of truth, which proceeded from the spirit that bears witness,
because the spirit is truth; and being so can neither deceive nor be deceived;
which spirit being of God, is greater than man, and so knows more: For the
things therein treated of, are matters of faith, and therefore stands not in
the wisdom of words or of men, but in the power of God, who shuts and no man
can open; and opens and no man can shut. Neither indeed is fallen man,
especially a swearer, a competent witness in this controversy about swearing,
no man being a competent witness in his own cause. Read then without prejudice,
own with understanding, or answer in the ground, without contending about words
to no profit; For the Kingdom of God consists not in words but in power,
neither in meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.

A true TESTIMONY, concerning Oaths and Swearing, etc.
IN the day that Almighty God created Man (before man was) in his Image and
according to his own likeness, created he him, male and female created he them;
and having finished the works of Creation, he looked upon all that he had made,
and lo it was very good: And having also made the Man of the Dust of the Earth,
He planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, where he put the Man whom he had made:
And that Man might learn Obedience, the Lord commanded him, saying; Thou shall
eat freely of every Tree of the Garden; but of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall die the death. Now in that day, there was no strife or controversy; for
what the Lord commanded, it was done, as it is written, Psalm. 33.9. For he
spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. And God was all in
all, and over all, the Lawgiver, Judge, and King. And as then there was no sin
in the World which God had made; so neither was there any controversy or
strife betwixt Man and his Maker, or amongst the Creatures of God, neither was
there any Oath or Swearing, nor any other outward or visible Sign, Shadow,
Type, or Figure, in or by which the Lord was to be worshipped, nor any need
thereof; for the Lord God who is the substance of all, was all in all, and over
all, God blessed for ever; who was worshipped not in words, but in deeds; not
with Oaths and Swearing, neither in set Forms, Shadows, Signs, or Figures; but
in Spirit and Truth, in Love and true Obedience, which was and is better than
Sacrifice, or the fat of Rams: And in that day the Law of the Spirit which is
Eternal (and nor Moral) was the rule and guide of Man in his Worship and
Service of God, with whom Man in his Spirit had unity and fellowship, in the
Light, Life and Truth that is eternal and unchangeable. And as it was in the
beginning, even so it is and shall be in the day of restoration of all things
by Jesus Christ, who is, and was, and is to come, the Almighty; Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, the true and faithful Witness, the Author of all
true witness-bearing. But Man being in honor, continued not; for the Serpent
being more subtle than any Beast of the field, deceived the Woman with his
limited sense and meaning, which he then gave to the positive Word and Command
of God (even as the spirit that now rules in all the Chileren of disobedience,
with his limited sense and commodious interpretations (as they are called) of
the Scriptures of Truth, does deceive the simple that lends an ear unto him)
and thereby brought her then (as that spirit does people now) into the
transgression of the Word and Command of God, unto which no man ought to add
any thing, neither to diminish ought therefrom, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Rev. 22. 18, 19. And
the Woman having eaten of that which in its self was good (and therefore not
intrinsically evil, mark that) gave unto her Husband with her, and he did eat;
who having eaten contrary to the Word and Command of God, sin entered into the
world, and the world into man's heart, and death by sin, the first ground or
cause of unbelief: And now in that day (the Candle of the wicked being put out)
Death and Darkness passed over the Life and Truth of God in Man; so that the
Word and Truth of God (the ground of true witness-bearing) which was and is
Eternal (not Moral) was hid from their eyes who had sinned; And now Man being
deprived of the Glory of God, and ignorant of his Righteousness, went after his
own Inventions, so that as it is written, Death reigned from Adam until Moses,
Romans 5.14. And now in that day the Lord had a Controversy with Man by reason
of his sin: and Man in his sin, was in unbelief of the Word and Truth of God,
the ground of true witness-bearing. Insomuch, as that in process of time, when
Men began to be multiplied upon Earth, the wickedness of Men waxed great, so
that they went into strife and contention one against another, until blood
touched blood: And in this estate of Man, Abimelech King of Gerar, who was in
the unbelief of the Word and Power of God, and observing that God was with
Abram, he was afraid, as it is written, The workers of Iniquity are afraid,
where no fear or cause thereof is, Psalm. 53.4 5. and having a controversy
against Abram concerning Sarah, Genesis 20.9. said unto Abram, Swear unto me here
by God, That thou will not hurt me, nor my Children; Then Abram (being afraid
of his life, Genesis 12.12. and also having a controversy at that time with
Abimelech, about a Well of water, Genesis 21.22, 23, 24, 25.) said, I will Swear.
And here was the first Oath or Swearing that is recorded in the Scriptures of
Truth, together with the original ground or cause thereof, viz. Unbelief the
fruit of sin; and this was in time before the Lord is said to have sworn, and
long before the Law was given: under which an Oath for confirmation was to be
unto them (that were under that Law) an end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. And an
Oath and Swearing was also in long time after Witness-bearing; for we read,
That Eve before the Fall, did bear witness concerning what the Lord had said,
Genesis 3.2, 3. And Sarah after the Fall (and in time before any Oath or Swearing)
did call the Lord to witness, or judge betwixt her and Abram, Genesis 16.5.
without any Oath or Swearing. So that witness-bearing was in the beginning
before the Fall, and so in time, long before any oath or swearing was in the
world. Afterward the Lord proved Abram, who obeying the Word or Command of
God, The Lord made a Promise unto Abram, That in his Seed all the Nations of
the Earth should be blessed; and to show to him, and his seed, the immutability
of his Counsel, and to the end, that he and they might have strong consolation;
The Lord by way of condescension to Man in his weakness (which by reason of
transgression all men by nature were involved in) gave a token, as he had done
to Noah, Genesis 9.12. and said, By my Self have I sworn, because thou have not
spared thine only son; therefore will I surely bless thee, and multiply thy
Seed, and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed: And so the
Lord added word to word, thereby to regain, or beget man into the belief of the
truth of his Word and Promise; and that by two immutable things, wherein it was
impossible for God to lie; man might have full assurance, that what the Lord
had promised he would perform^ yet notwithstanding, they believed not his Word,
neither put their trust in his help (whom he had chosen out of the Nations, to
place his Name among, and to be a peculiar People to himself) therefore their
days he consumed in vanity, and their years in trouble, yet he helped them for
his Namesake, and made his Power known in their Deliverance out of Egypt, and
leading them through the Deep, and in the Wilderness, and yet they sinned still
against him, and provoked the Highest in the wilderness, and tempted God in
their hearts; Wherefore the Lord, because of their transgression, and that sin
by the commandment might become exceeding sinful, and that the offense might
abound, Romans ^.20. added the Law, called, The first Covenant or Testament, Gal.
3.19. until the Seed should come, which was out of transgression (mark) to whom
the Promise was made, which Seed is Christ, Gal. 3.16. who being come, the true
and faithful Witness, the Oath and Promise of God made to Abraham was fulfilled
and performed in him, Luke 1.72, 73. whom God had appointed to finish the
transgressions, and to seal up the sins (that were under the first Covenant
which was not faultless, Heb. 8.7. for the Law made nothing perfect; but the
bringing in of a better hope did, Heb. 7.19.) and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. that they which are called, might receive the eternal
Inheritance. So Christ being come, in whom all the Promises of God are Yea and
Amen for ever; he was the end of the Law (which was added because of
transgression, until he came that was out of transgression) for Righteousness
to all that believe, by whose obedience, many were, are, and shall be made
Righteous through Faith. But the Law is not of Faith, Gal. 3.12. neither was
given for a righteous man (mark that) but to the lawless and disobedient, I
Tim. 1.9, 10. And therefore what the Law says, it faith to them that are under
it, viz. to the transgressions and disobedient, etc. But Christians in Christ
Jesus, and in the Faith of him, are new Creatures, and therefore are not under
the Law of a carnal Commandment, which was peculiar to the Jews, but under the
Law of the Spirit, and of Faith, the power of an endless life, Heb. 7.16. And
as the Law was not given for a righteous man, so neither was it given to the
Gentiles: For God showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments
unto Israel; He dealt not so with every Nation, neither had the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws, Psalm. 147.19, 20. And therefore as Allan Smalwood faith
of the Judicial Laws, as he calls them; I may say of the whole Law, written
(whether by Men called Moral, Judicial or Ceremonial) that it was never
obligatory to the Gentiles, neither to us, who by nature are no Jews, nor ever
dwelt in Canaan; And so what was never imposed, need not to be abolished as to
the Gentiles, neither to us; but Swearing was never commanded by God unto the
Gentiles as any part of his Worship and Service, therefore as to them and us,
who by Nature are no Jews, nor ever dwelt in Canaan, it was never Obligatory.
So that A.S. and all that plead for Oaths and Swearing, with all their
Arguments drawn from the authority of that which they call the Moral Law, are
overthrown, and will not avail them, to prove the lawfulness of Swearing
amongst us of these Islands, who by Nature have descended from the Gentiles and
not from the Jews: And therefore A. S. is worthy of blame, in going about to
lay a yoke (which neither the Fathers nor we were able to bear) upon them,
which from among the Gentiles are turned unto God, and are become Christians in
Christ Jesus, which the Lord never required nor laid upon them, Acts 15.10. For
what the Lord required of the Gentiles was manifest in them, for God himself
showed it unto them, Romans 1.19. So that they also who amongst the Gentiles were
unfaithful to, and in that which they knew of God, were likewise left without
excuse, as it is written, As many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish
without the Law; and as many as have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the
Law, Romans 2.12. And as to the Jews, to whom the Law was peculiarly given, and
so were under it, and therefore what the Law said, it was to them that were
under it; When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
Woman, made under the Law, that he might redeem them that were under the Law,
that they might receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.4. That so both Jews and
Gentiles, without respect of persons, might receive in Christ the blessing
promised to Abram (when he was in uncircumcision) through the righteousness of
Faith, and not through the Law which is not of Faith, Gal. 3.12. And so as its
written, The Promise is sure to all the seed, and not to that only which is of
the Law; but also to that which is of the Faith of Abraham, Romans 4.16. although
they were never under the Law of any carnal commandment, nor never dwelt in
Canaan: For all who are of Christ, they are Abraham's seed, and heirs according
to promise, Gal. 3.29. And so he is our peace, who has made both Jew and
Gentile one, and has broken down the middle Wall of Partition betwixt them,
having abolished in his flesh the enmity, the Law of Commandments, contained in
the Law written, That so both Jew and Gentile, through him, might have access
unto the Father by one Spirit (and not by Swearing, or observing any carnal
Commandment) and might worship the Father who is a Spirit, not in the oldness
of the letter, but in the newness of the Spirit, the Law and Power of the
endless Life (which was in the beginning with God, before any Oath or Swearing
was) from which Word and Power of God that is Eternal (not Moral) Man departed
when he sinned; And as Christ is our Peace, he is also our Peacemaker, by
taking away sin, and finishing transgression, the ground or cause of the
Controversy betwixt God and Man, and one man with another, and bringing into
the Heart everlasting Righteousness, he reconcileth man unto God, and one man
unto another, turning the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
disobedient, to the wisdom of the Just. And Christ Jesus coming to do the will
of God, he fulfilled the Law, which could not in any wise pass away till it was
fulfilled, Mat. 5.18. and having fulfilled the Law (not destroyed it) as he
that fulfills and performs his Covenant in every particular, he does not
destroy it; although the Covenant once fulfilled, is no longer obligatory to
him that has fulfilled it) according to the will of God who gave the Law, he
took it away, or out of the way, and disanulled the first Covenant or Testament
written in Tables of Stone, that he might establish the second, Heb. 10.9.
called the new Covenant, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the
Living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshy Tables of the Heart,
according to 2 Cor. 33. Heb. 8.10. and 10.16. And in that he says a new
Covenant, he has abrogated the old Covenant or Testament, Heb. 8.13. For being
Testaments, they were not be of force both together, the latter being in its
self a revocation of the former; and where a Testament is revoked, there every
Legacy or Gift therein contained, is also revoked and taken away, and not some
particulars only, but the whole; which Testament, or Covenant, is established
upon better Promises, That so what was impossible for the Law or first
Testament to do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh
but after the Spirit, Romans 8.2, 3. And thus Christ Jesus, according to the will
of God, having fulfilled the Law (not destroyed it) which was not of Faith, and
therefore was not to abide for ever: And the end of God in giving the Law
(which was but to continue for a time, as a Schoolmaster to bring to Christ)
being accomplished in Christ, he took away the Law or first Testament (that
made nothing perfect, Heb. 7.19.) which was not of Faith, being changeable; and
in the stead or place thereof, he established the second Testament or new
Covenant, upon better promises, which perfecteth for ever them that are
Sanctified, according to Heb. 10.9. which being the Law of Faith, is
unchangeable and abides for ever: So that Christ Jesus the Mediator of the New
Testament, the faithful dispenser of the manifold Graces of God, unto all that
believe, came not only to reform the abuses of the Scribes and Pharisees, in
Swearing, in the Temple, in the first Priesthood, and other things under the
first Covenant; but also to take away the things that were changeable which
they had so abused; and in the stead and place of them, to establish that which
is unchangeable, the New Testament, upon better promises, Heb. 8.6. And in that
he faith a New Testament, he has abrogated the Old, Heb. 8.13. And therefore
when Christ Jesus (the true and faithful Witness was come, who was to restore
all things as in the beginning) was set down on the Mountain, and his Disciples
(whom he had chosen out of the World to be his Witnesses) came to him, and he
being to make known unto them that were to bear witness of him, the true
Witness-bearing, as it was in the beginning, before any Oath or Swearing was;
amongst other his gracious words, he said unto them (who were of the Jews, and
then were come to be his Disciples) and not to the multitude, Ye are the Salt
of the Earth, ye are the Light of the World; let your Light so shine before
men, that they seeing your good Works, may glorify your heavenly Father. And
that they being Jews, might not be offended at what he was to say unto them; He
told them, He was not come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill
them: And that not one jot or tittle should pass from the Law, till it should
be fulfilled (mark that.) In which words is plainly showed, That as the Law was
fulfilled by Christ, it was to pass away, being only given by God, and added
because of transgression for a time, viz. till the Seed should come, that was
out of transgression, and so the Law being temporary, was changeable: And
having so prepared their minds, he told them among other Precepts in the Law,
That it had been said of old time, Thou shall not for swear thy self, but shall
perform thine Oaths to the Lord: But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither
by Heaven, for it is the Throne of God; neither by the Earth, etc. but let your
yea be yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil, Mat.
5.34. etc. By which words, (which are the interpreters of the heart) it is
evident that the Oaths which they were under the Law to perform unto the Lord,
and which Christ's words had reference unto, were such Oaths as were required by
the Law; and those Oaths the Law required, were by the Lord, and not by the
Creatures; for all swearing by the Creatures was by the Law forbidden: Which
being so, then the words following, But I say unto you, (who were to be Lights
of the World) Swear not at all, must needs be a prohibition of all Swearing by
the Lord. And that he added, Neither by Heaven, etc. Christ gives a reason for
the same, Mat. 23.22. where he faith, He that swears by Heaven, he swears
by the Throne of God, and by Him that sits thereon; who is the Lord: And
therefore as they were not to swear by the Lord, so neither might they swear by
Heaven, it being Gods Throne, which would amount to swearing by God, that
sits thereon: Neither by the Earth, neither by Jerusalem, neither by the
Head; which being the greatest of the Creatures, the prohibition includes also
the lesser.

Therefore it is evident ( none of Christ's words being spoken in vain) That
Christ Jesus did not only forbid all swearing by the Creatures, but also by
the true God: For if there had been any exception intended by Christ the Wisdom
of God, he doubtless would have mentioned it, as well as he did verse. 32. where
it is said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for fornication,
causes her to commit adultery, etc. For an Oath and Swearing not being in the
beginning with God, nor originally of him, (as true witness-bearing was) but
being added (because the true witness-bearing was transgressed) for a time,
viz. until Christ Jesus the true and faithful Witness, and ground of all true
witness bearing, was made manifest, to restore the true witness-bearing, as it
was at the first. Now Christ being come, and having chosen his Disciples out of
the world to be his Witnesses, and to place and restore the true
witness-bearing unto and amongst them, whom he had appointed to be Lights and
good Examples unto the World; he therefore took away Swearing, which was not of
Faith, but was added because of transgression, as before is said, and as being
more than Yea and Nay; that he might restore and place the true
witness-bearing, which is of Faith, and therefore to abide in the House, and
among the Household of God for ever. For it is evident from the words of Christ,
(where he says, Let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more than these, comes of evil) that swearing being more than yea and nay, the
original ground or cause thereof in man, came of the evil, and not of the good,
in man. And thus Christ Jesus, having forbidden all swearing whatsoever, as
aforesaid, and taken away the first ground or cause thereof, in his Disciples,
he according to the will and promise of God, in the place and stead thereof,
restored the pure Language, the Word of Faith, which is the Word of Truth that
was in the beginning; by the Light of which, every one that believes with his
Heart, comes to know the Truth, and so to do the Truth, to confess and speak
the Truth from his Heart unto his Neighbor, or before a Magistrate in
witness-bearing. And this Witness, being of God, will not lie, and is therefore
the greater Witness, which every one that believes has in himself, according
to 1 Job. 5.9, 10. And the Testimony that is born from this, and according to
this word of Truth in the heart in witness-bearing, is in Truth, in
Righteousness, and in Judgment, being from and according to a good
understanding. And as the Truth (which is in Christ, the Wisdom and Power of
God) in man's heart, is believed in, it does purify and make clean the heart,
by taking away sin and unbelief out of the heart, and so reconcileth it unto
God, and one man unto another: And now the Testimony that is born according to
the truth in the heart, is that which God has appointed to end all
Controversy and Strife amongst men; for now it is the Spirit that bears
witness, because the Spirit is Truth, 1 John 5.6. And it is the Spirit of Truth
which leads into all Truth, and so from all Oaths, Shadows, and Swearing, in
witness-bearing; which having but a shadow, and not the substance of true
witness-bearing, when the substance was come, the shadows were to pass away: So
what Christ Jesus received of his Father, that he made known to his Disciples,
as he said, Job. 17.8. I have given unto them the words which thou gave me,
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee,
and have believed that thou have sent me. Insomuch as the Apostle James, when
he writ his Epistle to the Tribes which were scattered abroad, he put them in
mind, being Jews, not Gentiles, of that Precept of Christ, where he says,
Above all things, my Brethren, swear not, etc. Iam. 5.12. Not that Swearing was
a greater offense than Murder or Adultery: But they, being Jews (and not
Gentiles) by nature, had a Command from God under the Law to swear, etc. were
apt to think they might as well swear then, as they might before. (Not at that
time being so fully informed that Christ Jesus was the end of the Law for
Righteousness to them that believe in him; and that by him all that believe are
justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, Act. 13.39.) For many among the Jews which then believed, were at that
time zealous of the Law of Moses; insomuch as there were of them, that taught
the Brethren, That except they were circumcised, and kept the Law of Moses,
they could not be saved, Act. 15. and 21.20. So that although Adultery and
Murder were as great sins as Swearing, yet the Law (which they were zealous of)
having forbidden the one, and required the other, it was more difficult to
bring them off from Swearing, than from Murder or Adultery. And therefore as
it is usual amongst men, to exhort those they are to watch over, above all
things to take heed of those evils they have been most addicted to, and of
those things they have been trained up in; even so the Apostle exhorted them,
being Jews, to remember the Command of Christ in whom they believed, Swear not
at all, etc. And although it be now concluded that Christ Jesus did intend by
those words, Swear not at all, an absolute, universal, and unlimited
prohibition of all manner of Swearing whatsoever, (as indeed it must be either
all Swearing that was formerly commanded, or else Christ in that Command forbid
nothing which was not forbidden before; nay, by those words, Swear not at all,
he made the case about Swearing more questionable, dark, and doubtful, than it
was before; which for any to affirm, were a great injury to Christ, the Wisdom
and Power of God. And yet Christ Jesus, in forbidding all manner of Swearing
whatsoever, did nothing but according to the will of his heavenly Father: Nor
did the Apostle James, in putting the Jews in mind of his Masters Command,
Swear not at all, any thing in opposition, but in obedience to the requiring of
Christ.

And now of the things before written, this is the sum, That an Oath and
Swearing was not in the beginning with God, neither was the original ground or
cause of an Oath and Swearing, of God. And therefore neither was nor is an Oath
or Swearing, any part of the Law eternal, nor of the essence of the worship and
service of God, in Spirit and Truth. But the original ground or cause of an
Oath and Swearing amongst men in the World, was the Unbelief of Man, (in God,
his Word, and Truth) of which, Transgression was the first ground or cause,
which not being any fruit of the Spirit of God, (as true witness-bearing is)
entered into the World, and the World into Man's heart, by sin and death. And
therefore an Oath and Swearing is not any part of the worship and service of
God now, under the Spirits immediate Administration. And the Law, having but a
shadow of good things then to come, therefore could never make the Comers
thereunto perfect, as the bringing in of a better Hope does: And so Christ
Jesus the true and faithful Witness, that ends the Controversy between God and
Man, being the End of the Law, (under which the Oath for confirmation was to be
unto them that were under it, an end of all controversy and strife amongst
men) for Righteousness, to all that believe; which Law, not being of Faith, was
to be taken away, or out of the way, when Faith was come; which was before the
Law (which is not of faith) was given, or any Oath or Swearing was. For as the
Love of God to Israel appeared, in giving them his Laws and Statutes,
notwithstanding they could not accomplish their eternal Peace and Happiness, by
reason of the weakness of the flesh; neither could be taken away, nor they
freed therefrom, until they were fulfilled, and the end accomplished for which
they were given; Even so the Riches of the Love of God appeared in sending
forth his Son (to effect that which the Law could not do for man, neither could
man free himself from) who being manifested in the flesh, the Oath and Covenant
of God was fulfilled in him: And to as many as received, and do receive him, by
believing in his Word, which is night in the heart, to do thereafter, the heart
comes to be purified, and made clean, and being prepared by the Lord, comes
to witness and feel the Love and Power of God, to quicken it, and enable it to
every good work: So that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart
brings forth good things, Mat. 12.35. Speaking the Truth to, and witnessing
the Truth for his Neighbor, according to and from a good understanding. And
thus the righteousness of the Law comes to be fulfilled by Christ in us, who
walk not according to the Flesh, but according to the Spirit; and the end of
God in giving the Law accomplished; according as it is written, 1 Timothy 1.5. The
end of the Law is love out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of
Faith unsained: So that the Law which required an Oath in witness-bearing, nor
any other part of the Law, by Christ, or any that are of him, is not
frustrated, neither destroyed, but the righteousness of the Law by true
witness-bearing, is fulfilled: And being fulfilled, was by Christ, according to
the will of God, disanulled, abrogated, abolished, and taken out of the way,
with all Oaths, Swearing, and Signs, that were required by it: And in the stead
and place thereof, the Law of the Spirit and of Faith, the true
witness-bearing, as it was in the beginning, before any Oath or Swearing was,
established by Christ in the House of God for ever. By which Law of Faith, the
Victory over the World, Sin, and Unbelief, comes to be witnessed, the first
ground or cause of Swearing in the World. And now the Righteousness of God
(without the Law written, which is not of Faith) is manifested (by the Light of
Christ that shines in man's heart, for to give unto man the knowledge of the
things that are immediate of the Spirit, and therefore are spiritual, not
moral) being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, according to Romans 3.21. And
is not now called the Works of the Law, but the Fruits of the Spirit; which, as
the Apostle faith, Ephesians. 5.9. is in all Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth:
And Gal. 5.22, 23. is Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. And so the Cause being removed, the Effect
cease. From all which it is evident, That true Witness-bearing was before any
Oath or Swearing was: And the Law that is Perfect and Eternal, was (though hid
from their Eyes whose Minds were alienated from the Life and Light of God,
because of the hardness of their Hearts) before the Law in the Tables of Stone,
was written: And the Lord was worshipped in Spirit and Truth, before any Oath
or Swearing was: And therefore an Oath and Swearing neither is, nor ever was,
any part of the Law eternal, nor of Faith, neither any essential part of the
Worship of God in Spirit and Truth, which is unchangeable and spiritual: So
that the laying aside, or taking away of an Oath and Swearing in
witness-bearing, is not to destroy witness-bearing, but the reducing it to its
Original Verity and Purity, as it was in the beginning, from all Oaths and
Swearing; which was added for a time, to wit, till the true Witness Christ
Jesus, and the true witness-bearing, was made manifest and restored, according
to the Prophesies that were written of and concerning Christ: And as true
witness-bearing, was in time, before any Oath or Swearing was, (and therefore
an Oath and Swearing was not, neither is, of the essence and substance of true
witness-bearing) even so the Truth was before any Lie; although the Liar is
more ancient than the Swearer.

Now these things being so, why should men professing God and Godliness, and
Christianity, go about to continue an Oath and Swearing in witness-bearing
under the Gospel, which is everlasting, and was preached to Abraham before the
Law of Oaths was, or any Swearing was commanded or required by God, Gal. 3.8.
which had its beginning and ending in time, not being of the Law of Faith, that
abides for ever; and therefore was and is changable, being of those things
that might be shaken, and so to be removed: That true witness-bearing (which
being of Faith, and therefore cannot be shaken) may remain.

Therefore, O ye called Christians, let it not seem to you a thing so grievous,
to have the Bondwoman ( Unbelief) and her Son ( Swearing) cast out; for
assuredly it must not inherit the Kingdom of God with the Son of the Freewoman,
( True Witness-bearing.)

And now these things thus premised, being a true Testimony concerning Oaths
and Swearing, etc. I proceed to answer the subject matter contained and laid
down in Twelve Arguments or Reasons, whereby Allan Smallwood has endeavored
to prove (but in vain) that our Savior did not forbid all Swearing, when he
said unto his Disciples, Swear not at all, etc. Mat. 5.34.

Arg. 1.
The first Argument (as it is stated by A. S. in his Reply to F. H. his Book
entitled, Oaths no Gospel. Ordinance, etc.) is, That the Father and the Son
are one and the same God immutable in Nature and Will, (for mutability would
argue imperfection) and consequently cannot issue forth contrary Commands, for
that would evidence a contrariety or mutability in their Will: And the Father
having commanded Swearing, the Son surely has not forbidden it.



The Argument runs thus: Whatever the Father has commanded, that the Son has
not forbidden:

But the Father has commanded Swearing, Deuteronomy. 6.13.

Therefore the Son has not forbidden it.



Answer.

And in the first place, I say, the Argument in this Case is not fairly stated.

Secondly, That there is a difference between the Law of God which was and is
eternal, and so unchangeable, as the Will of God in itself is; and the Commands
of God under the Law, which was given to the People of Israel for a time only,
and so were temporary, to wit, till the Seed came to whom the promise was made,
Gal. 3 19. to be a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, that they might be
justified by faith, Gal. 3.24. But after the says was come, they were no
longer (by Gods ordination) to be under the Schoolmaster, verse. 25. So that
when Christ the Seed, to whom the promise was made, was come, etc had fulfilled
all that was written concerning him in the Law, in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms, the Law of Commandments that was not of faith, Gal. 3.12. was to be
taken out of the way, the end for which it was given being accomplished,
according to the will of God. So that although God the Father commanded
Swearing under the Law, till Christ the true and faithful Witness was made
manifest in the flesh, and restored the true Witness-bearing, as it was in the
beginning before Swearing was, unto his Disciples, whom he had chosen out of
the World to be his Witnesses; and that Christ Jesus the Son of God in that
Precept, Swear not at all, did forbid all Swearing to his Disciples; yet there
neither was, nor is any mutability or change in the Will of God, nor
contrariety in the Will of the Son, to the Will of his Father; for what the Son
did command, it was according to the Will of, and what he received of his
Father: Now that Swearing was commanded by the Law A. S. confesses; And that
an Oath and Swearing was to pass away, or to be taken out of the way when the
true Witness and Witness-bearing (was made manifest) which was before any Oath
or Swearing was, is before fully manifested: So that the Argument in this case
truly stated, runs thus; That what God the Father did command to his People
Israel only for a time, and for such an end; the time being fully come, and the
end accomplished, the Command so given, is no longer of force, nor obligatory.
And therefore, there is in this case, no contrariety or mutability in the Will
of the Father, nor contrariety in the Will of the Son of God, to the Will of
his Father, in that Command, Swear not at all: That Command of God the Father,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. which was temporary, being according to the Will of God, first
taken out of the way, That the Command of Christ, Mat. 5.34. might be
established for ever, according to Heb. 10.9. He takes away the first, that he
might establish the second. And the Prophecy, Psalm. 108. Judah is my
Lawgiver. That so the servant, who was not by God's appointment to abide in
the house for ever, might give place to the Son, who is to abide in the house
for ever: And that God the Father did give several Commands only to be observed
and to continue for a time without any mutability in his Will, is evident from
the testimony of the Scriptures of Truth; As Genesis 22.2. where the Lord
commanded Abram to take his only son Isaac and offer him for a burnt offering,
etc. And in verse. 12. the Lord commanded him not to lay his hand upon the
Child, neither do any thing unto him: And Mat. 2.13. Joseph was commanded, to
take the Babe, and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there till (mark) I
bring thee word, etc. And in verse. 19. When Herod was dead, he was commanded to
take the Babe and his Mother, and go into the Land of Israel: And yet there was
no change or contrariety in the Will of God, although there was several and
contrary Commands, the one, To flee into Egypt; and the other, To return into
the Land of Israel: So likewise, Gal. 4.1, 2, etc. it is said, That the Heir, as
long as he is a Child, differs nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of
all; but is under Tutors and Governors, until the time appointed of the Father.
By which it is evident, That though Israel according to the Will of God was to
be under the Law, which was not of Faith, for a time as a servant; yet it was
never the Will of God their condition should always be so, but only until the
time appointed: which time being come, they were to be freed from that Law,
that they might receive the adoption of sons: For although the Lord had
forbidden Moses, and all others, to add any thing to, or diminish any thing
from what was written in the Law; yet He had not limited himself but that he
might add to, or take from what he had given in command and that without any
mutability in his Will: And if the Father at sundry times did give forth
several Commands, and that contrary one to another, without any mutability in
his Will (in that sense which A.S. does affirm) Then the Son, who does
whatsoever he sees the Father do; did not give forth that Command, Swear not
at all, contrary to, but in obedience to the Will of his Father: For although
the words of the Commands, Mat. 5.34. and Deuteronomy. 6.13. in themselves are
contrary, yet the Will of the Father, and the Son, was in perfect unity,
without any contrariety: But the contrariety is in that mind that is Carnal,
and therefore neither is, nor can be subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.7. which
being in the Spirit, is Spiritual and Eternal, and not Moral.

So that such now whose minds are alienated from the Light and Life of God, are
ignorant of the Righteousness of God, as the Jews formerly were, who had Moses
read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day (for where Moses is read, the vail
is upon the heart to this day, 2 Cor. 3.15.) so that such do not see now, no
more than the Jews did then, the end of that which is abolished: Nevertheless
now as then, all whose minds are turned to the Lord, and believe in his Light
that shines in their hearts for to give unto them the Knowledge of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, and of the Law in the Spirit, written not in tables of
stone, but in the heart; which Law was before the Law of Moses was written, or
any vail was. They in the Light Eternal see the end of the Law, which was not
of Faith; and the Law abolished, under which an Oath for confirmation was to be
unto them that were under it, an end of all controversy and strife: And also
in the Light that was before any Oath or Swearing was, they see and know the
true and faithful Witness, Christ Jesus in them, from whom all true
Witness-bearing is; and so the true Witness-bearing, as it was in the
beginning, which no Vail, Shadow, or natural Light can discern, 1 Cor. 2.14.
And thus all who do the Will of God by believing in him whom God has sent,
they come to know Christ's Doctrine, Swear not at all, to be his that sent him,
to be a Light to the Gentiles, and the Glory to his People Israel. And is it
equal, O ye sons of men, That those whose eyes God has opened, and unto whom
God has given the Light of Eternal Life, that they should be compelled to walk
by the same guide, the blind are led by, in their witness-bearing? Would it not
be a thing unreasonable, for to require him who has his perfect sight, when
the Sun shines to show him his way, to require him to have a man take him by
the hand and lead him on his way, as the natural blind are led? Has not the
Lord in all Ages put a difference betwixt them that feared his Name, and
trembled at his Word, and those that feared him not, but walked after the
stubbornness of their own hearts, and after their own inventions? And if the
Lord has so done, and so does, ought not all those who are his Ministers upon
Earth, to do the like?

But A.S. further says, That Oaths are commanded by the Moral Law, and that
the Ten Commandments are the summary of it: And does grant, That Oaths are no
Gospel Ordinance. And also says, That our Savior came not to destroy, but
fulfill the Moral Law; And therefore Swearing, being enjoined by the Moral Law,
must be now of as much force as ever it was. He also affirms, That Christ did
not abolish the Judicial and Ceremonial Law, once commanded by God; because the
one was peculiarly given to the Jews, and so concerns us not at all: And the
other was temporary, expiring at Christ's Death, etc.

Answ. The words, Law, Covenant, and Testament, are general and comprehensive
words; every of them including or comprehending in themselves, all the Words,
Sentences, Gifts, Ordinances, or Precepts, that was required, and commanded the
People of Israel by the Lord at that time; And therefore ought not to be
limited by man, or distinguished into Morals, Judicials, and Ceremonials, as
thereby to lessen the Authority of one, to set up another above it, after the
Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ; who says, He that shall break
one of the least of the Commands, and teach men so, shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.19. And it is written, Deuteronomy. 27, 26. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. And Christ came not only to fulfill, this or that
part of the Law, but the whole Law; yea, every jot and title, that then was
written, Mat. 5.18. Neither is he said to be the end of this or that part
(whether by men called Moral, Judicial, or Ceremonial; for the Spirit of the
Lord has made no such distinctions of the Law) but of the Law in general, yea
all that was written in the Law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms
concerning him, Luke 24.44. And as the Law was fulfilled, it was to pass away,
or to be taken out of the way, the end being accomplished for which it was
given: And being abolished, Ephesians. 2.15. abrogated and disanulled, Heb. 8.13. and
taken away, or out of the way, Heb. 10.9. Col. 2.14. 2 Cor. 3.7, 11. The Law or
Power of the endless Life, the Law of the Spirit and of Faith; which is not
Moral, but Spiritual and Eternal, the new Covenant or Testament which is
unchangeable, the Righteousness of God (without the Law in the letter) was and
is manifested in the heart, to do thereafter, being witnessed by the Law and
the Prophets, Romans 3.21. Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. according to the Promise of
God; That so the blessing of Abram might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, that they together with the Jews, to whom the Law in the letter was
peculiarly given, might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith, Gal.
3.14. Romans 4.16.

And whereas A. S. faith, That Christ did not abolish the Judicial and
Ceremonial Law, once commanded by God, because the one was peculiarly given to
the Jews; and the other was temporary, expiring at Christ's Death.

Answ. If Christ did not abolish the Judicial nor Ceremonial Law, as they are
called and distinguished by A. S. Then it must needs follow, and be granted;
That Christ did abolish, abrogate, disanul, take away, or out of the way, the
Law which A. S. calls Moral; or else Christ abolished no Law at all: But it is
evident from the plain testimony of the Scriptures of Truth before mentioned,
Ephesians. 2.15. Heb. 8.13. and 10.9. Col. 2.14. 2 Cor. 3.7, 11. That Jesus Christ
did abolish, abrogate, disannul, take away, or out of the way, the Law of
Commandments contained in the Law written, the old or first Covenant or
Testament, the handwriting of Ordinances, the Ministration of Death written
with letters, and engraven in stones; And therefore, If Christ (as A. S. has
affirmed) did not abolish the Judicial and Ceremonial Laws; Then, as is before
said, it must of necessity follow and be concluded, That Christ Jesus did
abolish, abrogate, disannul, take away, or out of the way that Law which A. S.
calls Moral: For the Scriptures testimony in the places before mentioned; are
either true or false. To say they are false, is blasphemy; because they were
written by Divine Inspiration, and the infallible guidance of the Spirit of
Truth: And therefore being true; Then that Law (which A. S. calls Moral, of
which he also affirms an Oath and Swearing to be a part, or required by) was
by Christ abolished, abrogated, disannulled, taken away or out out of the way:
And the Law by which Swearing was commanded being abolished, All Oaths and
Swearing commanded or required by that Law, must of necessity be abolished with
the Law. Now these things being so, All the Arguments and Distinctions, with
all the Conclusions and clouds of Witnesses that A. S. has laid down, made and
brought in, to prove the lawfulness of some Swearing now under the Gospel, from
the Authority of the Moral Law, as he calls it, are made void, and are become
of none effect. And therefore A. S. is worthy of blame, in affirming so
confidently, That if Swearing be enjoined by the Moral Law, it must be of as
much force now as ever: And it may be of concern to A. S. before he begin his
History of Oaths, that he find out some other Law of God, than that he call
Moral, to ground the lawfulness of Oaths upon, lest he build upon a sandy
Foundation; and so labor in vain; For himself acknowledges (in page 303. of
his Reply to F.H.) it was a certain truth, That Christ gave no new Command in
matters of Oaths, nor in any other, more than what was formerly enjoined in the
Moral Law. And besides, in his Epistle to the Reader, he says, That no
Orthodox man had ever said, That Oaths were ever any Gospel Ordinance, (or to
that effect) but on the contrary their Tenent is, That they are commanded in
the Moral Law; which Law being abolished (as before is proved) by Christ, and
no other Law of God being found that requires Swearing under the Gospel; but on
the contrary, a positive Law of Christ given to his Disciples, Not to swear at
all; It cannot be of any service to the Lord, or his People, to write such a
History: But rather to exhort People to mind the fear of the Lord, and to have
a regard to all his Commands, which being in the Spirit, that helps the infirm,
are not grievous; and to walk in the Light of the Lord, that they may have no
occasion of stumbling at the Command of Christ, Swear not at all. For as it
were a sin, to deny obedience to any Ordinance or Command of God in its time;
even so it is a sin also, for any to use or practice any Command of God as a
part of his worship and service, for any other end, or longer time, that it was
given for, or ordained by God. Which Error, Christians have justly condemned
in the Jews, for holding up for Ordinances and Commands of God (Circumcision,
Passover, Temple, the seventh Day Sabbath, and many other things required and
commanded by God in the Law, or first Testament, as Oaths and Swearing was
under the first Testament commanded the Jews) after that Christ Jesus was
ascended to his Father, and had sent the Spirit of Truth to lead his Disciples
into all Truth; which Truth being the substance of all Oaths, Shadows, Types,
Figures, and Signs, that were under the Law, which had but a shadow of the good
things to come, Heb. 10. 1. Which when David in the Light of the Lord, had
manifested to him (he being a Prophet) in which Light he saw Light, even the
Law, whereof the Lord had said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. He then said (having seen the end of that which was
to be abolished) that in burnt Offerings and Sacrifices the Lord took no
delight, neither had pleasure therein; Sacrifice and Offerings, thou would
not, but a body have ordained me; in Offerings and Sin Offerings thou have no
pleasure, Heb. 10.5, 6. So that although such as do not the Will of God, do not
see the end of that which is abolished, neither know Christ's Doctrine; yet all
who do believe in him, whom God has sent a Light into the World, they know the
Doctrine of Christ, Swear not at all, to be of God, and according to godliness,
Job. 7.16, 17.

But to proceed to A. S. his second Argument, which runs thus;

Arg. 2.
Whatsoever at all times, as well under the Gospel as under the Law, tends in
an especial manner to the glory of God, that is neither Ceremonial nor
forbidden by Christ.

But some Swearing at all times as well under the Gospel, as under the Law,
tends in a special manner to the glory of God.

And therefore all Swearing, is neither a Ceremonial Ordinance, nor forbidden
by Christ.

Answ. God is not now, nor ever was glorified in an especial manner by his
Creatures, but as they did and do obey his Commands, and so do the thing he
requires of them: As it is written, Obedience is better than Sacrifice, and to
do the will of God is better than the fat of Rams. And although it be granted
that some Swearing under the Law did tend to the glory of God, as done in
obedience to his requiring; yet it does not follow that now under the Gospel,
any swearing does tend in an especial manner to the glory of God; because the
Law in or by which it was commanded, as before is proved, is abolished; and
swearing now forbidden by Christ, Mat. 5.34. to all his Disciples. And again,
as has been before proved, Swearing was never any essential part of the
worship of God in Spirit and Truth, because it was not any part of the Law
Eternal, neither in the beginning with God, nor originally of him; as the true
witness-bearing was. And therefore swearing under the Gospel, not being
required, but forbidden by Christ, without whom no man can glorify God, does
not tend in an especial manner to the glory of God, as the true witness-bearing
does; so that this Argument, and the conclusion thereupon made, is of no force,
to prove any swearing to tend in an especial manner to the glory of God: But to
do truth, confess the truth, and to speak the truth in witness-bearing, or in
our communications, does not only tend to the glory of God, but also to the
benefit of our Neighbor; and is therefore acceptable unto God, and profitable
unto Men.

And so I proceed to the third Argument, which is this,

Arg. 3.
If Christ forbad Swearing, Then it was either because it was repugnant to our
duty to God, or repugnant to our duty to our Neighbor.

But some Swearing, is neither repugnant to our duty to God, (whose glory in
sundry particulars it advances) nor repugnant to our duty to our Neighbor, to
whom thereby much advantage may accrue in several respects.

And therefore Christ forbad not all Swearing.

Answ. This Argument is framed much like the question put to Christ, concerning
the man that was blind from his birth; Who did sin, this man or his Parents,
that he was born blind? To which question, Jesus answered, Neither has this
man sinned, nor his Parents; but that the work of God might be made manifest.
So I may say, What if Christ forbad swearing, neither because it was repugnant
to our duty to God, nor to our Neighbor; but that the Work, Power, and Will of
God might be made manifest in and by Christ, and to make known unto his
Disciples, That all power in Heaven and Earth was committed unto him, Mat.
28.18. And that as he had power to take away, He had also power to give, alter,
and change Laws, the Government being laid upon his shoulders, Isa. 9.6. to
whom also all Judgment was committed. But for further Answer, I say, whatever
is acted by man as an essential part of the worship and service of God, which
the Lord does not require, is repugnant to our duty to God, and so has the
Lord testified in all ages, as appears Genesis 4.5. Isa. 58. Ier. 14.11, 12, 13.
Isa. 1.10, etc. Mat. 15.8, 9. But swearing under the Gospel, the Lord has not
required, but forbidden, as before is proved: Therefore it is repugnant to our
duty to God (whom we are to obey, and our superiors in him, and for him) and
being repugnant to our duty to God, it cannot be truly advantageous to our
Neighbors, whom we are to love as our selves. Again, there is nothing of
advantage can accrue to our Neighbor by swearing, which true witness-bearing
does not fully supply where it is received: Nay, there is much more surety to
our Neighbor by true witness-bearing (than by swearing) because a true witness
will not lie.

The fourth Argument is thus formed:

Arg. 4.
That interpretation of our Saviors words, Swear not at all, which renders the
following words vain, and impertinent, is false etc.

Answ. That Christ intended what he said, I hope no Christian will deny: And
that those words, Swear not at all, were spoken by Christ, and are in
themselves a prohibition of all swearing whatsoever, is evident: And that they
were spoken by Christ (not by way of compliance with what had been said before
to them of old time) but in the contrary thereof, is apparent by the words; But
I say unto you, Swear not at all: Which words, if they signify nothing but
what was before said, Then should they not only be to no purpose, but hurtful,
by making the case of swearing more dark and questionable than it was before
under the Law: which for any man to affirm, were a great injury to Christ
Jesus, the Wisdom of God; And therefore Christ having spoken all those words,
But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. And that in the
contrary of what was said before, as the word but, (and the words) not at all,
do import: It is manifest that Christ did in that command, Swear not at all,
forbid somewhat that was not forbidden by the Law: And consequently, all
swearing whatsoever, whether by the Lord, or by the Creatures; And that Christ
added neither by Heaven, the Earth, Jerusalem, the Head, they being the
chiefest of the visible Creatures, all the other creatures being the lesser or
inferior are included, the greater comprehending the less; so that the words
following, and precedent, are all significant and useful: For being the words
of Christ, not any of them are to be rejected; but all and every word
established: And therefore it were more beseeming Christians, to give all
diligence to observe the Law, and Command of Christ; then to invent and frame
Arguments against his words, which are in themselves plain, and have no
ambiguity in them; and being so according to the rule, when in words there is
no ambiguity, there no Exposition is to be made against the words expressed:
For in doubtful speech we utter not a doubtful sense, but only that which we
mean; Therefore, he which speaks one thing, and means another, neither does
he utter that which the word signifies, because he means not so, neither
that which he means, because he speaks it not: Which for any man to affirm
of the words of Christ, Swear not at all, were, as before is said, a great
injury to Christ, the Wisdom of God, and to the Spirit of Truth, from which the
Scriptures of Truth were given forth. All which words of Christ being in
themselves prohibitions of Swearing, and no exceptions (as the words of Christ
in the case of Divorcement were, where it is said, Except for the cause of
Fornication) do the more confirm and illustrate the extent of the Command. And
being the words of Christ, the Wisdom of God, they are neither vain nor
impertinent, No more than those words in the fourth Commandment, In it thou
shall do no manner of work, nor thy Son, etc. All which were included in those
general words before-going, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: Or the
enumerating all those words written in the Tables of Stone, which were all
briefly comprehended in those few words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart; 'And thy Neighbor as thy self. And yet the Wisdom of God, which
is wiser than men, knowing whereof we, as men, have need, spoke all those words
in the Law. And where the Lawgiver has made no exception, he to whom the Law
is given ought not. And so I conclude, That the Law of Christ, Swear not at
all, is perfect, and a full prohibition of all swearing unto his Disciples; and
being perfect, no man ought to add any thing thereunto, or diminish any thing
from it. And so I proceed to the fifth Argument.

Arg. 5.
Nothing that of it self is not intrinsically evil is forbidden by Christ (and
that is proved by induction.)

But Swearing is not of it self intrinsically evil;

And therefore Christ did not forbid it.

Answ. The thing in Dispute is not, Whether Christ did ever forbid any thing
that was not of it self evil? But, whether Christ has forbidden all Swearing?
Which that Christ has forbidden all swearing, his own words (which are the
interpreters of the heart) do prove. And one single testimony of the Scriptures
of Truth, is of more strength than a thousand surmises, or mere humane
witnesses. And therefore Swearing being forbidden by Christ, Mat. 5.34. it is
the duty of Christians to apply themselves to yield obedience to his Command,
and not to frame Arguments to evade the same, or to ask a Reason wherefore he
so did: And yet we read, That God commanded Circumcision and Sacrifices, which
in themselves are not evil, and yet forbidden in the New Covenant: And we also
read, That God forbad Adam to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil;
which Tree and its Fruit of themselves, were not intrinsically evil. And the
use of several other Creatures, under the Law, was forbidden the People of
Israel. And what God the Father did forbid, it was by his Word; And Christ, the
Word and Power of God, he forbid his Disciples to go into the way of the
Gentiles, and not to enter into any of the Cities of the Samaritans, Mat. 10.5.
And he charged his Disciples they should tell the Vision to no man, until, etc.
Mat. 17. 9. And that they should call no man Master upon the Earth, Mat. 23. 9.
None of which of themselves were intrinsically evil. But that which concerns us
as Christians, and so under the Law of Christ, is not so much to enquire,
whether or no, such a thing be good in or of it self; But whether or no it be
good for us to practice, yea or nay? For, as said the Apostle, What is not of
Faith is Sin: And therefore, that is good for Christians to do, which the Lord
requires of them. But to proceed to the sixth Argument; the force whereof is
this:

Arg. 6.
Either Christ forbad not the taking of an Oath upon just occasion: or else St.
Paul (though assisted by the Holy Ghost) understood not the Text.

Or, If he understood it, he acted against it, and that not rashly, but upon
deliberation;

Because in his Epistle he calls God to witness, which is a formal Oath.

Answ. That the Apostle Paul did know the mind of Christ, in that Precept,
Swear not at all, is believed: But that he acted contrary contrary thereto,
when he said, God is my witness, or called God to witness, is denied: For as he
knew Christ had forbidden all swearing, he also knew that Christ was the true
and faithful Witness, the first and the last, and came to restore the true
witness-bearing as at the first (which was and is the Righteousness of the Law
of Oaths:) And the Apostle being an able Minister of the Spirit, not of the
Letter, he was come to see the End of that which was abolished, and preached
the everlasting Gospel, the word of Faith, which was and is the Word of Truth,
the Author of true witness-bearing, which was before any Oath or Swearing was.
And so as Christ, his Lord and Master had done before, when he said unto
Pilate, For this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that
I should bear witness unto the Truth, Joh. 18.37. He in obedience to his Lord
and Master, did bear witness to, and of the Truth: And in witness-bearing did
(as the Servants of the Lord do) call God to witness, or appeal to the witness
of God in men, concerning the truth of what he declared, without observing any
set forms of words: And as Sarai had done before, when she said unto Abram, The
Lord judge betwixt thee and me; yet did not swear at all.

But A. S. says, That calling God to witness, is a formal Oath^ because there
is an attestation of the Name of God.

Answ. That the Name of God was used in witness-bearing, before any Oath or
Swearing was, does appear Genesis 3.3. where Eve before the Fall, in
witness-bearing, used the Name of God, when she said, God has said, Ye shall
not eat, etc. yet did not swear at all. And Sarai after the Fall did use an
attestation of the Name of God in witness-bearing, when she said unto Abram,
The Lord judge betwixt thee and me, Genesis 16.5. and yet Sarai did not swear at
all in so doing. And therefore the calling of God to witness, or saying, God is
my witness, etc. without adding of somewhat more, is neither Oath nor Swearing.
For if such attestations; or mentioning the Name of God, without somewhat more,
were swearing, then it would follow, That People did swear oftentimes in their
Prayers; As when they use that expression, Oh God the Father of Heaven, etc. O
God make haste to help us, Amen, Amen, etc. which for any to affirm, were a
great injury to the People. Again, If a bare attestation of the Name of God, by
what terms soever expressed, were an Oath and Swearing, without adding of some
what more, Then would the Magistrates in Judicial proceedings in cases where an
Oath and Swearing is by the Law required, receive such Attestations of the Name
of God, without denying them for Oaths and Swearing. But such Attestations, or
the like, without adding somewhat more, is denied by the Magistrates in
Judicial proceedings, etc. Therefore they are no formal or legal Oaths without
addition of somewhat more; which somewhat more, being more than yea and nay,
comes of evil. For it must be confessed (and it is the chiefest ground, or
cause, that is alleged for the lawfulness of some swearing under the Gospel,
that it is necessary for the ending of Controversies and Strife in Judicial
proceedings, etc.) That if an Oath or Swearing were lawful in any case
whatsoever, it must be in Judicial proceedings, etc. And I do not find in the
Scriptures of Truth, That any Oath was lawful, but in such proceedings, or the
like emergent occasions: All vain, and prosane Oaths being forbidden by the
Law: And as the lawful use of Oaths under the Law, was in legal or judicial
proceedings; so the definition or determination of what was a legal Oath or
Swearing, and what was neither Oath nor Swearing, was by the Law, and the
Ministers of it, and not by private or particular men: For at this day, there
are several kinds or forms of Oaths required by the National Laws; And yet the
bare Attestation of the Name of God, without addition of somewhat more, is not
answerable to any of them, neither does fully answer the requiring of the Law,
as the daily practice of the Law in the Courts of Judicature does manifest,
which practice does declare what a legal Oath is in the judgment of the
National Laws: And for illegal Oaths, A. S. I hope will not contend. By which
Laws also it does appear, That the Law does put a difference betwixt an Oath or
Swearing, and Witness-bearing; and does not confound them together, as many men
do. As for instance in one particular, When a Party, or a Witness does appear
to answer a Libel, or to give Evidence in the Ecclesiastical Courts; upon his
Appearance in the Court, he is required to take his Oath; and then the Book
being held, the Party having laid his hand thereupon; some words being spoken
to him by the Judge of the Court, and after the Party having kissed the Book,
then is the Party said to be Sworn, or to have taken his Oath. And being so
Sworn, he is admonished to give in his Answer, or his Evidence, as the Case is,
at or before such a time; so that the Evidence after given into the Court, is
the Witness-bearing (and not the Oath): which Evidence, or Answer (as the Case
requires) if he neglect or refuse to give, he is proceeded against for refusing
to give his Evidence, or Answer: And not as one that refuses to Swear or take
an Oath, he having Sworn or taken his Oath before; which Evidence, if given, is
the Witness-bearing, and not the Oath. For if he refuse to swear, he is
proceeded against for refusing to swear, although he offer to give his Evidence
without swearing. So that the Evidence is the witness-bearing, and not the
Oath; By which it does appear, That an Oath is in, and of it self, a distinct
thing from Witness-bearing (which was before any Oaths was) and is but a Bond
or Tie for true Witness-bearing, and not the substance: For when the Evidence
is given, if what is Evidenced be false, the Oath taken before or after, does
not make it true; And if it be truth that is Evidenced, the refusing to take or
add an Oath, or give a Token, Sign, or Pledge, does not detract any thing from
it. By which it may appear to the unprejudiced in mind, That the laying aside
of an Oath and Swearing (which was added for a time under the Law in
witness-bearing, because men had transgressed or gone from the Truth of God,
which was in the beginning, before any Oath was) in witness-bearing, is not to
destroy true witness-bearing, but the reducing it to its primitive purity, as
it was in the beginning. So that the true Witness, Christ Jesus, being made
manifest, all that believe in him and receive him, to them he gives power to
become the Sons of God; and by his Spirit (which is Truth, and leads into all
Truth) he enableth them, to do the Truth, confess the Truth, and speak the
Truth from the heart unto their Neighbor, or before a Magistrate in
witness-bearing; as it is written, A good man, out of the good treasure in his
heart, he brings forth good things. So that our Neighbor, if he receive our
Testimony, being Truth, he is not damnified by us; although we may not Swear at
all, or give him any outward sign, or pledge, which cannot add any thing in
Truth to the Truth which we are willing and free to bear Witness of, and unto,
upon any just occasion; Neither can the Magistrate be more assured of the Truth
of what is Evidenced, by an Oath, than by a bare Affirmation: For as the one,
so the other may be true or false: Again, I say, That not only our Neighbor is
not prejudiced by us (because we may not add any sign, token, or pledge, to the
Truth which we bear witness of and to) but he is by true witness-bearing more
advantaged, than he is or can be by Swearing (when the Evidence born is not
true) which neither is, nor ever was of the essence of true witness-bearing;
Because true witness-bearing was before any Oath or Swearing was: For there may
be and has been many times Oaths and Swearing in Judicial Proceedings, when
the Evidence given upon such Oaths have not been true, but false; and so men
thereby have and do suffer prejudice. But when and where true witness is born
and received, although an Oath be denied, or not given; yet hereby men are
advantaged and receive benefit, and no prejudice at all; for where a true
Testimony is born, there none ever did or can thereby receive loss. Again,
Christ Jesus being come to restore and establish everlasting Righteousness in
the new Covenant that is faultless, and so unchangable; And Oaths and Searing
not being faultless, and so changeable; not being from everlasting, but added
for a time, because of transgression, as is before said: It was expedient that
all Swearing, with those things under the first Covenant, should be taken away,
that were things in themselves changable, and might be shaken; to the end, that
true witness-bearing which could not be shaken, might be established in the
House of God for ever. So that although, where Moses or the Old Testament is
read, an Oath and Swearing, as a Vail, remains to this day undone away; yet
nevertheless, all whose hearts and minds are turned to the Lord, in the Light
that was before any Avail or Oath was, they see and witness the End of that
which is abolished: for, where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom, 2
Cor. 3. And therefore the Apostle Paul (having seen and witnessed the removing
of those things which might be shaken, and knowing that when that which was
perfect was come, that which was but in part was to be done away) he in
witness-bearing said, God is my witness, I speak the Truth in Christ, I lie
not, etc. without adding any outward token, sign, or pledge; or observing any
form of words at all: So that as he himself said, He became as without Law, to
them that were without Law, 1 Cor. 9.21. yet was he subject to the Law of
Christ, and did not Swear at all. And as he did not himself swear, so neither
did he teach swearing to be lawful by way of Doctrine to the Hebrews, when he
said, That an Oath is among them for an end of all strife and controversy,
Heb. 6.18. which words he spoke, not by way of Doctrine, as a thing to be
practiced by them as Christians; but by way of repeating, what formerly had
been used amongst the Jews, under the first Covenant, and so that he might show
unto them being Jews, how that by Christ, the first Testament was taken away,
or out of the way: and the second established upon better promises: For as he
said of Swearing, he also said of the Priesthood, That every High Priest is
(not was) ordained to offer, etc. Heb. 8 3. And that after the second Vail, was
the Tabernacle, which is (not was) called the Holiest of all, Heb. 9.3. And
when Moses had spoken every Precept to the People according to the Law, he took
the blood of Calves, saying, This is (not was) the blood of the Testament which
God has appointed to you, Heb. 9.19, 20. All which his sayings do plainly
show, That what he had in those particulars mentioned, was by way of repeating
what had been in use under the first Covenant; and not by way of Doctrine, what
they were to practice then as Christians. But I proceed to the seventh
Argument, which as A. S. says in brief runs thus;

Arg. 7.
Some Swearing is enjoined, in the third Commandment, every Precept prohibitive
of vice, being necessarily so to be expounded, as implying the contrary duty;
or else it is impossible to free the Decalogue from imperfection.

And consequently, Thou shall not take the Name of God in vain, implies, Thou
shall take the Name of God (that is) Thou shall Swear when there is a just
occasion.

And therefore Christ who came not to destroy the Law, did not forbid all
Swearing.

Answ. What is impossible with man, is possible with God; and that Christ did
fulfill (not destroy) the Law, is confessed: And having fulfilled the Law, the
end for which it was for a time given, was accomplished; which being
accomplished according to the Will of God, was abolished, abrogated,
disannulled, and taken away by Christ, as before is fully proved. Now, as said
the Apostle, Romans 7.3, 4. The Woman which is in subjection to her Husband, is
bound by his Law to him as long as he lives; but if her Husband be dead, she
is delivered from his Law: So then, if while the man lives she take another
Husband, she shall be called an Adultress; but if the man be dead, she is free
from the Law, so that she is no Adultress though she take another Husband.
Wherefore, my Brethren, ye also are become dead by the Body of Christ, that ye
should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we
should bring forth fruit to God. What words more plain to prove, That
Christians in Christ Jesus, are freed from the Law of the carnal Commandment,
that they may serve God in newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the
letter, Heb. 7.10. Romans 7.6. And though it be true that Christ came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; yet that does no more prove A. S's
Conclusion inferred thereupon, viz. Therefore Christ did not forbid all
swearing, because some swearing was commanded in the Law; Then it does, where a
man is engaged by his Bond to pay so much money upon such a day; and the man
upon that day does make payment of the money according to his Bond; That the
man in so doing does destroy his Bound, or that it is after Obligatory to him,
when he has fulfilled it. For although the People of Israel, to whom the Law
was given by God, could not be freed therefrom until it was fulfilled; yet
notwithstanding when it was fulfilled, it was by the Ordination of God to pass
away, and the People freed from it, as before is proved. So that when Christ
Jesus had fulfilled the Law (not for himself) but for them that were under it,
He Redeemed them that were under the Law, and so delivered them from the Law,
Romans 7.6. Gal. 4.5. that they, together with the Gentiles, that never were
under the Law of the first Covenant, might receive in Christ the adoption of
sons. Again, That the Law was perfect (although it were denied that any
swearing was enjoined in the third Commandment) is witnessed, yea every word of
God is perfect; because in the Law was fully contained so much of the Will and
mind of God, as he was pleased to make known at that time unto his People
Israel, and as he did require obedience unto, from them* (secret things belongs
unto God, and things revealed to us and our Children) no man being capable of
knowing the whole Will and Mind of God. And yet, what man does know of the Mind
of God, by the manifestation of his Spirit, is perfect; because every measure
of the Will of God, as every Word of God, is perfect: And the Law of God being
perfect, therefore nothing is by man to be added thereto, or taken therefrom.
Insomuch, as when the Israelitish Woman's Son blasphemed the Name of God, and
cursed; and there being at that time no positive punishment appointed by God in
that case; he was put in hold, until the Lord himself showed unto Moses what
punishment was to be inflicted upon him, Levit. 24.11, 12, 13. So that Moses,
who was a Prophet, did not take upon him to give any extensive interpretation
to the Law (which being Penal to the transgressors, was not to be supplied by
man, by way of implication or intendment) neither to say of it, That the Law
before given by God was imperfect, because the whole Mind of God was not
therein revealed, concerning all things that after might fall out by reason of
Man's wickedness: Neither had the Lord, as A. S. would infer, limited himself
to what before was written, but that he might and did, as he himself thought
good, further add to what before was written, or take away from the same (and
that without any mutability in his Will) although he had forbidden Moses so to
do. And besides, the Name of God was, and may be used with reverence and godly
fear, many other ways than by Swearing; And therefore this Argument fails in
proof with the other. But to proceed to the eight Argument, viz.

Arg. 8.
That Christ never did any thing without reason.
But there was no reason why he should absolutely forbid swearing.
And therefore he did not so forbid it.
Answ. That man should require a reason wherefore the Lord does forbid or
command him to do, or not to do such a thing: or that God should give unto man
a reason for what he does, Job. 9. 12. Romans 9.20. is more than right reason
does require: But that man should obey what God commands him without asking a
reason wherefore, is reasonable and according to right reason. It being the
Lord has made us, and not we our selves. And it being asserted by A. S. That
Christ never did any thing without reason. And proved, that Christ did say unto
his Disciples, Mat. 5.34. Swear not at all. Therefore it ought to be granted,
That Christ in forbidding all Swearing, did it not without reason: For if
Christ Jesus in that Command did not forbid all Swearing whatsoever, Then it
would follow, That men under the Gospel might have liberty not only to swear by
the Creatures; but also if they should swear by the Name of God, and not
perform, they should go unpunished; because where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. For the Law in which an Oath in some cases was commanded; and
forswearing, vain and profane swearing by God and the Creatures, forbidden;
being abolished and taken away by Christ, as before is proved: Unless Christ
Jesus had forbidden all swearing whatsoever, by a Command that changes not,
men would have thought themselves at liberty, not only to Swear by the true
God, and not perform; but also to Swear by the Creatures, and that without any
sin. And indeed it may justly be feared, That such pleading as has of late
been by some, for the lawfulness of some swearing, and such interpretations of
Christ's words as have been made, thereby to prove some swearing lawful, and
that from those words of Christ, Mat. 5.34, etc. has encouraged some men in
these days to such a height of swearing, as they are now come: And therefore
Christ Jesus, the Wisdom of God, in giving forth that Command as a prohibition
of all swearing, did it not without reason: And what is before said, may be a
good reason wherefore Christ added those words, Neither by Heaven, etc. after
he had said, Swear not at all. And so the words following, are neither vain nor
impertinent. For under the Law they were to Swear by the Name of the Lord, and
not by the Creatures: And by the Law they were required to perform their Oaths
unto the Lord, which they swore by his Name, lest they should forswear
themselves; which Christ having before repeated in substance, By way of
opposition of, and not in compliance with, said, But I say unto you, Swear not
at all; neither by Heaven, etc. So that the words truly considered, are thus in
effect; But I say unto you, Swear not at all by the Name of the Lord, as
heretofore under the Law you were commanded; neither by Heaven, etc. according
to the erroneous Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees. For if Christ had not
intended absolutely to forbid all manner of Swearing; Then he by that Command,
Swear not at all, had made the case of Swearing more doubtful and questionable
than it was before; which to affirm, were a great injury to Christ, the Wisdom
of God, whom God sent into the World, to give sight to the blind, and to guide
their feet into the way of peace. Again, Christ Jesus being the Mediator of the
new Covenant, which perfecteth for ever those that are sanctified, (which being
given upon better promises than the first Covenant which made nothing perfect)
was unchangable. It was therefore according to right reason, That the first
Covenant, with all those things under it, that were changable and so might be
shaken (as being things that were not in the beginning with God, as an Oath and
Swearing was not in the beginning with God, neither originally of him, and
therefore might be shaken) should be abolished and taken out of the way; To the
end, that nothing that was changable, or in which there was a remembrance again
of sin, might remain in the new Covenant which is unchangable. And so when that
which was perfect was come; then that which was in part was abolished, 1 Cor.
13.10. For Christ being come, the true and faithful Witness, the first and the
last, Rev. 1. he restored, or the true witness-bearing was restored in him, to
all that believe, which is perfect; which being so, it was according to right
reason, that an Oath and Swearing, which was but in part, should be done away;
for true witness-bearing, though without an Oath, never did prejudice to any,
as Oaths and Swearing have done, when the witness born before or after, has
been false, as daily experience does testify. And what if some now, as
heretofore, believe not the Command of Christ, shall their unbelief make the
Faith of God of none effect? God forbid. For seeing that true saying is as much
or more than swearing; and that Christ has said, That for every idle word men
shall give an account in the day of Judgment: And that the Liar, as well as the
false Swearer, shall he shut out of the Kingdom of God: Therefore every one
that fears the Lord (for thereafter as a man fears, is Gods displeasure) is
as much bound by his Word, as by an Oath: and there being no more security to
the Magistrate by an Oath, than by true saying, or witness-bearing, neither
benefit to our Neighbor: Therefore, if the same outward punishment were
inflicted upon the Liar, as false Swearer, the difference in a short time would
not be great; because experience does evidence, That he that makes no
conscience of his words, will not matter to Swear falsely for Conscience sake to
God. And it may be believed, That one reason why strife does so much in these
days abound amongst men (notwithstanding that Oaths and Swearing abound) is,
because that the true witness-bearing, as it was before swearing was, is not
received in Judicial proceedings for want of an Oath and Swearing. Again, To
say That Christ did forbid all Swearing, because his Father would have it so;
is a better reason than any A. S. has produced to the contrary. But to proceed
to A. S. his ninth Argument, viz.

Arg. 9.
That our Savior gave no new Moral Command: And consequently did not prohibit
that Swearing, which long before had been Commanded by God.

Answ. The question in dispute is not, Whether Christ the Mediator of the new
Covenant, did give any new Moral Command; But, Whether he forbad all Swearing
to his Disciples? which that he did, his own words, Mat. 5.34. Swear not at
all, do prove. As for the word Moral, it is a word of Art, invented by the
wisdom which is from below, which is not subject to the Law of God: For it is
evident, That the Penmen of the Scriptures, did never make use of that word
Moral, when they writ and declared the Testimony of God. And therefore the
Apostles Caveat in such things is useful, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil
you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of man, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. For the Law of the new Covenant
in Christ Jesus is Spiritual and Eternal (not Moral) and according to the
Promise of God, Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. the commands thereof are by the Lord
according to his Promise, put into the mind, and written in the heart of man;
written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God; not in tables of
stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. And therefore is called,
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2. and the Law of Faith,
Romans 3.27. (and not Moral) by way of excellency above the Law of the letter, as
the Scriptures do declare, 2 Cor. 3. And Christ said unto his Disciples, If ye
love me, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15. And when he commanded them to go and
teach all Nations, etc. They were to teach them to observe (not the Law of
Moses) but all things whatsoever he had Commanded them, Mat. 28.19, 20. And in
Job. 14.26. He told them, The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father would send in his Name, he should teach them all things, and bring all
things to their remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them. And Ioh. 16.12,
13. Christ told them, He had yet many things to say unto them, but they could
not then bear them: Howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide
you into all Truth, etc. So that Christ did not send them to the Law called
Moral (for to be their guide) written in tables of stone; but promised to send
the Spirit of Truth to guide them into all Truth, and to show them things to
come. So that although Christians do, and are to practice and observe many of
those things which were commanded in the Law, as being originally of God, of
which the Law had a shadow, but not the substance, Heb. 10.1. yet they do not
observe them, because they find them to have been Commanded in the Law of
Moses, but as they are Commands of Christ in the new Covenant, written in the
heart, and put into the mind by the Spirit of the Lord, that quickneth and
gives Life and power to do thereafter, Heb. 8.10, Romans 10.8. For now the
Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed both by the
Law and the Prophets; Even the Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all that believe, Romans 3.21, 22. But the Law is
not of Faith, neither ever was any Oath or Swearing of the Law of Faith, as
true witness-bearing was and is: So that by the works of the Law which is not
of Faith, no man is or can be Justified; but by Faith without the deeds of the
Law, a man is Justified according to Romans 3.28 and 3.20. And now those things
which were commanded in the Law, which were Eternal, as the Love of God, etc.
was Eternal (not Moral) of which the Law engraven in stone had a shadow,
although they continue under the Gospel; yet as was said, They are not the
works of the Law which made nothing perfect; but the fruits of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22, 23. and therefore are perfect; as Love, Joy, Peace, long-Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; against such there is no
Law: But against Swearing there is a Law, as before is proved. So that which
was impossible to the Law, in regard of the weakness of the flesh to do, God
sending his Son for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, That the Righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit, the law and power of an endless life. For, as before is said, Swearing
was never any part of the Law Eternal or of Faith, therefore the taking of it
away was no addition to, or substraction from the Law Eternal, or of Faith. And
although the Lord had limited Moses, and in him all others from adding unto,
and taking from what was then written in the Law; yet he had not limited
himself to what he had then given in command to Israel (not to the Gentiles)
and but for a time, until the Seed should come, Gal. 3.19. and so was
temporary. And it being acknowledged by A.S. that Oaths are no Gospel
Ordinance; and before proved that Christ did abolish, abrogate, disannul, and
take away the Law; yea, that Law which A.S. calls Moral, in which, ^s he says,
Oaths are commanded. Therefore A. S. is blameworthy in asserting Swearing as an
everlasting Statute to be observed by all that obey the Lord and his Christ;
and in so doing he is found in the steps of those in the Apostles days, who
taught, That it was needful to Circumcise such as believed in Christ, and to
command them to keep the Law of Moses; insomuch as the Apostles and Elders came
together to confides of the matter; and after consideration had, declared, That
it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to them, to lay upon them, which from
among the Gentiles were turned to God, no greater burden than those necessary
things, viz. That they should abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from
blood, from things strangled, and from Fornication. But I proceed to A. S. his
tenth Argument, or Reason, as he calls it; which was,

Arg 10.
That the High Priest charged Christ our Savior to swear, and be accordingly
Answered upon Oath; and that some years after he had said, Swear not at all.

Whence it follows; That the lawful Magistrate may impose Oaths, and the People
upon whom they are imposed, may and ought by Christ's Example, to Answer upon
Oath, notwithstanding the seeming prohibition, Swear not at all.

Answ. That it was some years after that Christ said to his Disciples, Swear
not at all: That the High Priest did use that expression, unto Christ, I adjure
thee, etc. is believed: But that Christ Jesus (the true and faithful witness,
who came into the World to bear witness of the Truth, and to establish the true
witness-bearing, as it was before swearing was) when he said unto the High
Priest, Thou have said; did in so saying Swear or Answer upon Oath, is denied:
Neither has A.S. proved that Christ did swear, otherwise then by his, and
other men's conjectures and conceivings: All of which being Swearers, are not in
this case competent Witnesses. And that he says, That the High Priest adjured
Christ, and Christ answering, Thou have said (without more saying) did Swear by
the Living God, not expressed indeed by him, but by the High Priest. Answ. But
how does A. S. know that Christ before his Answer to the High Priest, did not
deny swearing or to swear, (for its written Ioh. 21.25. That there were many
things which Jesus did, which if they should be written every one, etc.) And
therefore to conclude, because it is not mentioned by the Apostle, that Christ
did not deny to swear, therefore Christ did swear: This is to ^esk a surmise to
warrant swearing, when Christ had before commanded his Disciples, Not to swear
at all. For, if to answer by way of affirming or denying that which is asked by
a Magistrate, were an Oath and Swearing, because the Magistrate does require
the Party to Swear, without addition of somewhat more: Than surely many have
suffered in these late years, as refusers to take an Oath and to Swear, when
they did Swear. But my belief is, That the Magistrates by whom such have been
f^oned and imprisoned, or otherwise censured for refusing to Swear or take an
Oath; and better know what a legal Oath is than A. S. does in this particular,
are of another judgment or opinion than A. S. is; or else it may be hoped, that
none hereafter shall suffer upon that account of refusing to Swear, when they
are willing to Answer, and do Answer to such questions as they shall be asked
or examined of by the Court, or particular Magistrate. And therefore A. S.'s
Conclosion is denied, failing in the proof of his premises. But to proceed to
his eleventh Arguments or Reason, viz.

Arg. 11.
That no Exposition of this Text, or any other, was to be admitted that put an
inconsistence betwixt the Old Testament and the New.

But that Exposition; Swear not all, that renders it a total prohibition of all
Swearing, does so; for it makes it contradict several Texts in the Old
Testament.

And therefore is not to be admitted.

Answ. The Law of Christ is Penal to the transgressors of it, Heb. 1.2, 3. and
12.25. and therefore does not admit of any supply to be made by man, who is and
ought to observe the Command without exception of persons, and not to frame
Arguments against it; and the Lord has forbidden man to add any thing, or
diminish from what is written. For the Law of God, and of Christ, being
perfect; therefore nothing ought to be added to it. Therefore to admit of any
Exposition of the Scripture, whereby to make them contradictory one to another,
or any Text of Scripture contradictory in it self, were a great evil: And
therefore all commodious Interpretations (as they are called) of that Text,
Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; etc. inducing the lawfulness
of Swearing in some cases, is denied, as being contradictory to what is
written: For if such Expositions were received for Truths, Then would an able
Orator with his School-Distinctions, and Syllogisms, make the same thing seem
either likely, or unlikely, according to his fancy. And in the end, do as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, make void the Law of God with their Traditions and
subtle Distinctions: but we have not so learned of Christ, who are taught of
him, the Truth as it is in him, unto which nothing is to be added, nor any
thing taken therefrom. And where it is said by A.S. That that Exposition of
that Scripture, Swear not at all, that renders it a total prohibition of
Swearing, does put an inconsistency betwixt the Old Testament and the New. I
Answer and do say, It does no more so, than those Texts which A.S. and others
of his judgment do own, for the change of the Seventh-day Sabbath, unto the
First day of the Week; nor thus the Apostle did, 1 Cor. 7.19. where he said,
Circumcision is nothing: and Gal. 5.2. If any man be circumcised, Christ Jesus
shall profit him nothing: nor then Christ Jesus himself did, Mat. 5-43, 44.
when he said, It has been said of old time, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and
hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you. Besides several other Texts of Scriptures that might be mentioned in the
New Testament to that purpose: So that although there has been diversities of
Dispensations, and diversities of Administrations and Commands, as there are
diversities of Gifts and Operations, yet the same Spirit, and the same Lord,
Lawgiver, Judge, and King; who at sundry times, and i^ diverse manners, spoke
in the old time to our Fathers by the Prophets, and has spoken to us in these
last days by his Son, a^ Commanded that all should hear him, and honor him,
to whom he has committed all Judgment, who says, Swear not at all: ^ that, if
Times and Dispensations were rightly discerned and distinguished, the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament do agree, for there is no contrariety
in the Spirit that gave them forth; but the contrariety is in that mind that is
carnal, and therefore is not subject to the Law of Christ, according to Romans 8,
7. But all who mind the things of the Spirit, they do the Will of God, and so
knows Christ's Doctrine to be his that sent him, when he said, Swear not at all.
And that there was a time when God was purely worshipped, and truly served,
before any Oath was; And that there was a time when Israel was commanded to
fear the Lord, and serve him, and swear by his Name; by which it is evident,
That swearing was no essential part of the Worship of God in Spirit and Truth,
and therefore was but temporary: And that there was a time when Israel was to
seek the place which the Lord should chase, to put his Name there, viz.
Jerusalem; and thither they were to come, and bring their burnt Offerings,
Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 7. Ioh. 4.20. And there was and is a time, that neither in the
Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, they should worship the Father, Ioh. 4.21. And
there was a time, that the condition of the Heir should not differ from a
Servant, etc. And there was an appointed time when he should be Lord of all,
and receive the adoption of a Son, Gal. 4.1. to 6. But the Well is deep, and
whilst People have or at the least make use of nothing to draw the Water with,
but what they have and receive from man, by man, and of man, they will receive
little refreshment or satisfaction in these things beforementioned.
Nevertheless, when they in their hearts shall turn to the Lord, the Vail shall
be done away; for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Light, and it is
the Light that God has commanded to shine in men's hearts, for to give unto
them the knowledge of the things that are of his Spirit, which the Natural man
understands not, nor can the Wisdom which is from below find out. And now I
come to A.S. his twelfth Argument, or last Reason, which was and is;

Arg. 12.
The general practice of Christendom who could not all be so ignorant as to
misunderstand the meaning of these words, Swear not at all; Or so wicked as not
only rashly but advisedly to act against them.

Answ. It is written, Thou shall not follow a Multitude to do evil. And also,
That when King Herod heard that the Holy Child Jesus was born, he was troubled
and all Jerusalem with him; and gathering together all the Chief Priests and
Scribes of the People, he asked of them, Where Christ should be born? And they
said at Bethlem, etc. Mat. 2.1, etc. And yet the Chief Priests and Elders of
the People, were so wicked, that they assembled together, and consulted how
they might take Jesus by subtilty and kill him, Mat. 26.3, 4. concerning whom
the Apostle, Acts 3.17. bore witness, That they did what they did unto him
ignorantly, because they knew him not; and therefore exhorted them to
repentance. So that it may be possible, That all those in Christendom,
mentioned by A. S. to own swearing, as men might in this case of swearing be
ignorant (the time of ignorance being winked at) And therefore this Reason
given by A.S. to prove that Christ did not forbid all swearing, when he had
said, Swear not at all; is neither sound nor satisfactory, especially the
Scriptures following well considered, Ioh. 5.34, 36. and 8.43. Mat. 11.25. to
which many others might be added: And yet my belief is, That the Lord in no Age
has left himself without witness concerning the truth and extent of the
Command of Christ aforesaid, although born by Babes and poor Fishermen, or
other persons unlearned in the many languages; and therefore little esteemed of
the world (though highly esteemed of God) but by the world hated, and their
testimony rejected as erroneous: And yet greater was he that was in them, than
he that was in the World, and so they had the greater witness: for if the
witness of men be great, the witness of God is greater, which every one that
believes has in himself, 1 Ioh. 5.9, 10. And he that keeps the commands of
Christ, he dwells in Christ and Christ in him, according to 1 Ioh. 3.23, 24.
And I also believe concerning many of them who have affirmed as their judgment,
the lawfulness of some swearing under the Gospel, That if they had lived in
these our days, wherein the Lord God out of the riches of his Love, and the
abundance of his Light, which he has commanded to shine out of darkness (after
the long night of Apostasy) in the hearts of the heirs of his Righteousness,
for to give unto them the knowledge of his Glory, and of the true
witness-bearing in the face of Jesus Christ, as it was before any Oath or
Swearing was; that they would have come to have seen, and also to have
acknowledged (as many in these days (blessed be the Name of the Lord for his
unspeakable gift) have done their mistakes in the case of swearing, and by
confessing their sins, and acknowledging their mistakes, have given glory to
the Lord, and conformed their judgments and practices to the command of Christ,
Swear not at all: And with Solomon have born their testimony, That in making
many Books there is no end; and in reading of them, much wearisomness to the
flesh; And that the end of all, is to learn to fear the Lord and keep his
Commandments, which is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.12, 13. And now having
born my testimony for the Lord concerning Oaths and Swearing, according to that
in my Conscience, and the Scriptures of Truth; and that not in a way of
opposing the Son of God against his Father, nor the Scriptures of the New
Testament against the Old, nor by making any Text of Scripture contradictory in
it self: But in and by such a way as they are established in unity one with
another; Neither with a contending or opposing spirit, against any Law or
Ordinance of man, that ought to be submitted unto for the Lords sake; But in
the spirit of love and meekness, for the clearing my Conscience, before the
Lord and his People, in yielding a Reason wherefore I, and some others may not
take any Oath or Swear at all; although we should be required thereunto by a
lawful Magistrate, I have peace; causing rather in this case to fall into the
hands of men, and by submission unto their punishment (which hitherto, blessed
be God, I and some others have found, not according to the rigor of the Law,
but with some moderation) thereby testifying my practice to be according to my
judgment, against all resistance of the powers which God has set over me; and
that not for fear of wrath, but for Conscience sake to God, who is able not
only to destroy my body, but to cast both soul and body into Hell fire:
Assuredly believing, that whilst I have a respect unto all the Commands of
Christ Jesus, I shall never be ashamed. And if in this matter concerning
Swearing, any should yet remain otherwise minded, and seem to be contentious
about words and forms; I say, we have no such custom in the Churches of
Christ. For, where glory is given to God on high, there is peace on Earth, and
good will to all men on Earth below; And all who wait in the Light of God, as
it shines in their hearts, (...) in due time shall have the same Truth
revealed unto them, (...)which I have herein born my Testimony; And I, and
others, (...)o walk in that whereunto we, through the Grace of God are come,
That so we may not be ashamed of our Testimony for the Lord, though born
through much suffering.

THE END.

