JAMES ARMINIUS.
For Learning, Mildness and for Sanctity
Few ever had with him Equality.


The Life and Death OF JAMES ARMINIVS, AND SIMON EPISCOPIVS.

Professors of Divinity in the University of Leyden in Holland.

Both of them famous Defenders of the Doctrine of Gods Universal Grace, and
Sufferers for it.

Now published in the English tongue.

The memory of the just is Blessed,

Pro. 10.7. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliff and Nath. Thompson, for Francis
Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar, 1672.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
THe Title Page of the Book presented here to thy view, does sufficiently
inform thee, what in the general thou art to expect therein. The book is so
little, and may be read over in so short a time, that it is altogether needless
to give a furthor account of its Contents. A large Preface me thinks would be
uncomely, as being unproportionable to the Building: And indeed thou had not
at all been troubled with any Proem how short soever; If I had not a few words
to speak touching my work in this English Narrative. Although I was much
persuaded and well assured in my self, that a Work of this kind might be of
great advantage to those of my Country men, who have ears for no other but
their Mother tongue, especially to them who have been abused by the Tongues or
Pens of any, that have exposed to obliq^y and reproach the venerable names of
these two reverend men, which alas! many have done, especially as to Arminius:
for the other, I mean Episcopius, has not been so generally taken notice of,
and his name was not here so publicly known, till the Doctrine, which both of
them contended and suffered for, was more commonly known and received amongst
us* Yet was it far from me to undertake of mere choice this endeavor, being
not so well conceited of mine own abilities, as to thrust my self into this
Employment, nor so destitute of work as to need this for securing and keeping
my self out of idleness; but by the importunate solicitation of some good men,
I was prevailed with, and drawn unto it. The History of Dr. Arminius is
nothing else but that Elegant Latin Oration, here turned into plain English,
which learned Bertius delivered in such an Assembly, where he could not deliver
untruths and remain undetected. I have indeed scarce pleased my self in
translating so Grammatically and verbatim the Testimonies there produced: Yet
have so done, that some might not be displeased, who deem such a translation in
such cases to be at least convenient. That which thou have here touching
Episcopius, is taken chiefly out of that excellent and large Preface, prefixed
to one of the Volumes of his Works, and written by Stephen Curcellaeus of
blessed memory. In what I have done in the whole I am not conscious to my self
of any unfaithfulness* neither am I unwilling to constitute mine Enemies judges
of the performance, in case they be fit to examine, and not resolved to be
unrighteous in judgment. Reader, I shall no longer detain thee from the
profitable exercise of reading the following Narrative, which God almighty
bless to thy use. Farewell.

J. K.

THE ORATION of Peter Bertius concerning the life and death of that Reverend
and most Famous Man Mr. James Arminius, which after his sad funeral, was
delivered in a Theological Auditory the Divinity School in the University of
Leyden.
October. 22. 1609.
Magnificent, Reverend, Most noble, Most learned Auditors,
AS heretofore I have often experienced, how hard and how difficult a thing it
is, to speak of Excellent persons in an assembly of Renouned men: So now
especially I have thereof a sensible knowledge, it being my task at present to
speak in this place concerning that Reverend man Mr. James Arminius, Dr. of
sacred Theology, and this after the sad solemnity of his Funeral. For since
that a good man is the rule and measure of things, he therefore; that would
describe to others such a person, must be careful to choose out and offer such
things to their view, by which humane life may receive advantage in the study
of virtue. Good things that lie in secret, must be brought on the stage and
made public, and those things which either Modesty has concealed, or Envy
diminished, or Calumny defamed, or which others through want of skill have not
observed, those things I say, when the curtain's drawn back and a light brought
in, must be shown openly, and declared by words, that all may behold what in
every one is most praise worthy, and what is fit for their imitation. Whence it
comes to pass, that the greater every ones virtue is, the more difficult it is
to act the Orotors part in speaking of him: for the greatest Envy keeps company
with the greatest Virtue. And since that a wise man does nothing without Reason;
and it being difficult to explicate and unfold at every turn the principles and
causes of particular actions, on which the judgment to be made of every thing
does depend; it must needs be very difficult to judge of excellent persons, all
whose life is full of diverse examples, for the well instructing of others, how
to judge, how also to live. And this also may be added, that he who takes upon
him this employment must very frequently have recourse from the law to a man's
life, and from his life to the law: for these need each the other, and as the
law gives notice what must be done: so what may be done the life shows. Now a
wise man has both these in himself; just after the example of Christ our Lord
and Savior, who first said, Learn of me: and of his Apostle who thus
admonishes, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ And as heretofore
Polycletus, not contenting himself that he had written a book, wherein he had
noted all things to be observed by him that would artificially make the image
or statue of a man, did himself afterwrrds make the statue of a man, lest he
should seem to prescribe that to others which himself hap not observed, and
this statue made public he called the Canon or Rule, commanding that the
lineaments of art should be fetched thence as from a law of direction: So a
good man, when he has admonished others what they must do, does first himself
perform, what he prescribes to others. Now it is hard, either to bring all a
wise man's actions to their proper rule and law, or in one to find the Examples
of all laws. But as for me, who am at this day to speak in this honorable
assembly of learned men, concerning the life and death of that Reverend and
Incomparable man, Doctor James Arminius, not only those difficulties, which I
have now mentioned stand in my way, but many others also. My Grief, yet fresh,
for the loss of a friend presses me; the consideration of a sad family, an
afflicted wife, nine fatherless children disturbs me; the Lamentation of the
University moves me; but I am astonished to think of the Church and Common
wealth deprived of a man so greatly useful. All which things, in a wound so
fresh, not yet skinn'd over, may easily put to a loss the most eloquent and the
wisest man whosoever he be. To what has been spoken may be added, That he
himself, whilst he lived, greatly disliked all pompous funeral solemnities: for
he knew, that the first step to the veneration and worshipping of Saints was
hence, and he deemed, that it unbecomes us to desire and use such Solemnities,
that had such hazards attending on them. But seeing our present condition seems
to be such, that we need not in the least to be afraid of this (for alas!
hitherto are we come, that henceforth it may seem needful to use diligent
care, rather to bring in devotion, than drive superstition out) And since that
it concerns all men, that examples of virtue being drawn forth should be
proposed for all to look upon, I have, according to the custom, through the
request of friends, and the Senate willing it, undertaken that difficult task,
which I could not refuse without the violation of Christian charity, and the
breach of the obligation of that friendship, which I have maintained with him
from my very youth. Which things being so, I hope there will no reprehender of
this my duty be found in this assembly of excellent orators, in which there is
no one but is able more gravely and elegantly to perform this charge, than my
self. Notwithstanding, I beseech and most humbly entreat you, Magnificent,
Reverend and most learned Auditors, to suffer the things I shall speak to be of
credit and account with you,

We have committed to the bosom of the earth the body of that Reverend man, Mr.
James Arminius (or rather the temple of the holy Ghost) which has been shaken,
worn, broken with labors, watchings, conflicts, diseases, troubles. We have
committed it, I say, in certain hope of a blessed resurrection, which he
himself, whilst he lived, believed, and unto which he directed all his
thoughts and purposes.

The place of his birth was Oldwater, a little Town long since made famous by
the interflowing river Isala, and the pleasantness with the fruitfulness of the
adjacent country, and the frugality with the industry of its Inhabitants. He in
this Town first saw the Sun in the year 1560. in which year the Conference at
Possiack in France began; in which conference our Deputies pleaded the cause of
two thousand one hundred and ninety Churches, that did humbly and earnestly
desire of the King, peace and tranquillity, and the liberty of professing their
faith. This year, this Oldwater, as another Sparta, gave Arminius, as another
Lacon, to the world: which Town notwithstanding at other times brought forth
John de Oldwater, Cornelius Valerius, and that excellent old man, whom ye here
behold, Mr. Rudolphus Snellius, the ornament, not only of his native place,
but also of this whole University, and especially of them who are of the
Senatorie rank and quality.

Arminius whilst an infant lost his father: His mother, a widow burdened with
three children, lived all her life long in a mean estate, but honestly.

There was then in that Town a certain Priest, a man honest and grave, Theodore
Aemylius by name, whose memory, by reason of his singular learning and holiness
of life, is yet blessed among the living^ He, when he had got a taste of a
better and more pure doctrine in Religion, determined with himself, that he
would not once more celebrate the abominable sacrifice of the Mass: therefore
he often changed his place of abode, and lived sometimes at Paris, sometimes at
Lovane, sometimes at Colon, sometimes at Vtrecht. He therefore took care, that
this fatherless child, James Arminius, so soon as his age was capable of
instruction, might be furnished with the first rudiments of the Latin and Greek
tongue, and with the principles of true piety and religion. And when he
perceived in him some appearances of an excellent disposition to virtue, he often
times exhorted him; that all considerations of earthly things being laid aside
and contemned, he would give up himself to follow after God and his conscience.
He told him, that the time of man's life here is but short; that there follows a
condition after this life, which should be estimated not by outward adversity
or prosperity, but by the Eternity of happiness or death. This Exhortation,
afterward confirmed by a diligent reading of the holy Scriptures, and pious
meditations, was settled upon his heart: And so he, through the hope of that
life, underwent every labor, all hazards, with a glad and cheerful mind. But
after he had for some years thus lived ot Vtrecht, an unexpected calamity did
oppress him, by means of the death of that good old Religious man, which the
merciful God did suddenly mitigate; for presently upon his death Mr. Snellius,
who long before flying the Spaniards tyranny, went to Marpurg, came as it
happened out of Hassia into that Country. He therefore carried away with him
into Hassia, in the year 1575. this his Countryman Arminius, now destitute of
all humane help and succor. He was scarce set down there, when in the Month
of August the report of his Countries desolation is brought thither; He hears
that the Town was taken by the Spaniard; that the Garrison were slain; that the
Townsmen were killed, and the Town burnt. With this report he was so much
stricken at the heart and so greatly troubled, that he spent 14 whole days, in
continual weeping and tears: Therefore as one impatient he left Hassia and went
with speed into Holland, being determined either to see the ruins of his
Country, or to loose his life.

When he was come thither, he found nothing but where the Town stood, and the
ruins of it: and understood that most of its Inhabitants were finally slain,
together with his Mother, his Sisters, his Brothers and his Kindred: He
therefore returned even on foot out of his own Country, to Marpurg in Hassia.
In the mean while this new Academy was erected and opened by the authority of
the most Illustrious Prince of Orange; which as soon as he understood, he
prepared for a journey home. He came therefore to Roterdam, to which place were
come from Amsterdam many faithful Exiles, and most of Old-waters Inhabitants,
that had escaped the sword of a cruel enemy. At that time my Father Peter
Bertius, was the Pastor of that Church: but Mr. John Taffinus was the Princ's
French Preacher and Counselor; both these were wonderfully pleased with the
young man's towardliness, readiness and wit. Now seeing it was long before my
Father was acquainted with learning (for he was 30. years old before he had any
knowledge even of the Latin tongue) he upon request of friends, took the young
man very willingly into his house. Now it was the purpose of friends to send
him to this new University; which occasion my Father thinking not good to
neglect, calls me out of England, when I was then a Student, applying my self
to learning: both of us therefore were sent together into this School: from
that time there has been always between us a very great intimacy, familiarity
and friendship: But I will not speak of the passages of that time. This one
thing I will say, that our young Scholars endeavor in learning and in the
study of wisdom, was so great, their reverence toward their Teachers so great,
their zeal and earnest affection in Religion so great, that greater could
hardly be: But in our rank Arminius was one that excelled the rest; if any thing
was to be written, if any thing to be spoken, Arminius was sought for: If then
arose any debate in learning that required a Palamon, Arminius was consulted
with. I remember when Dr. Lambert Danaeus, our Professor, did commend him
publicly for his natural endowments, and for his proficiency, and for his
virtue; and did excite us to enter on the study of Divinity with
cheerfulfulness, after his example. Why should I make mention here of his study
in Poetry, in which he excelled? Why should I speak of his study in the
Mathematics, and in the other parts of Philosophy? He touched nothing of
these, which he did not penetrate, he set upon nothing, which he did not
happily finish.

Thus we are come to the year 1582. in which year the honorable Senate of
Amsterdam sent him away to Geneva; for his more abundant proficiency in
learning. Whither when he was come, he heard that reverend old man, and of
blessed memory, Mr. Theodore Beza expounding the Epistle to the Romans, with
the great admiration of all men; for there was in Beza beyond other mortals a
flexanimous and persuasive eloquence, a prompt and ready utterance, perspicuity
of speech, pleasantness of voice, but excellent doctrine in the judgment of all
learned men. Him therefore above all others Arminius made choice of to imitate
and follow, But seeing he could not forthwith procure to himself the favor of
some Principal men in this School, and that (to speak the truth) only upon the
account of Ramus's Philosophy, which with earnestness he defended publicly,
and did also in private teach it to his auditors, he was provoked to go to
Basil. Where what great honor was conferred, on the young man, what were the
presages and divinings of men of all ranks concerning his growing virtue, they
are able to testify, who were his fellow travelers, and companions in this
his peregrination. But he so heard these judgments and acclamations, that he
never waxt proud and arrogant, but showed in very deed, that he was unwilling
to endeavor by ambition, but was willing by true virtue to come unto that,
whereto he was designed by the goodness of God.

At Basile in the harvest Festivals the more learned Students are wont out of
the ordinary course, for exercise-sake to teach something in the University,
someties publicly. This labor our Arminius willingly undertook, for this he
was praised by that reverend man, Mr. James Grinaus, who also often times
honored his lectures by his Presence. The same man also in public
disputations, if any thing more weighty than ordinary were proposed, or an
intricate matter worthy a defender, did occur, was not afraid for honors sake
to call our Arminius, sitting among a great number of Students; and (that you
may know the candor of Grinaeus) to say. Let my Hollander answer for me. At
this time Arminius was in so great favor and renown for his learning, that
when he was about to depart thence for Geneva, the Theological faculty would
have conferred on him, even at the public charge, the title of Doctor, which
he, esteeming it too great a dignity for one of his years, did at that time
modestly refuse, and gave them thanks for their grace and favor.

When he was come back to Geneva, he found the minds of his friends more
pacified toward Ramus's Philosophy; also he himself thinking it something meet
to abate somewhat of his earnestness, did so order himself, that all might
easily perceive, that gentleness conjoined with so great a wit brought no small
ornament to his age. There were at the same time in the City the Sons of the
chief of our Nobility, most of which now are in eminent and honorable places
in our Republic. When some of these were gone into Italy, others of them
called home, he seeing himself alone, and destitute of all others his
companions, excepting one, a man of very great dignity now in Holland; he also
purposed to go with speed into Italy, being inclined thereunto especially
through the fame of James Zabarella, who then at Padua professed Philosohhy,
and was greatly followed. For his sake especially he stayed at Padua, when he
instructed in Logic some noble Germans. But afterward he took a cursory view
of the rest of Italy. on which journey he spent not above eight months, and at
Rome he was never absent from that companion of his, who was to him as another
Achates: for so it was agreed on before they went from Geneva. They used the
same lodging, the same table, the same bed; they went in and out together; and
for the exercise of piety they carried with them the Greek Testament and Hebrew
Psalter.

I remember he was wont often to tell, That Italy brought to him many
commodities and discommodities. Among the commodities he placed this
especially, That he had seen at Rome the mystery of iniquity to be far more
filthy and abominable than ever he had conceived it in his mind: for he said,
that the things which are told or read concerning the Roman Court of
Antichrist, are Trifles in comparison of the things which he had seen. Among
the discommodities this; That the honorable Senate of Amsterdam was then
somewhat offended at him for that his Italian journey, some in the mean while
augmenting their their displeasure, who clearly had done better in suspending
their opinions till his return. Hence then an occasion being taken, it was
noys'd among the common people, That he had kissed the Popes, pantofle; whom he
had never seen but as other spectators did, in a great throng and crowd of
people. (And indeed that Beast is not wont to give this honor to any but Kings
and Princes.) Also, that he was accustomed to hear the Jesuits, when as he
never heard them; That he was acquainted with Bellarmin, whom he never saw;
That he had abjured the orthodox Religion* whereas he was ready to contend for
it even to the loss of his life.

Now let our Youth that are pious and devoted to the Church learn this from
another harm, That it is better never to set foot in Italy, than with so great
an hazard of their repute to know the mysteries of Antichrist. Not because it
is more dangerous for them to see Italy, than neighboring Antwerp, or
Brussels, or Brugs: for in Italy there is much more liberty, and in these
places more superstition by far. And it is safer to travel throughout all
Italy, than Brabant or Flanders: but because it is expedient to take all
occasions of evil speaking from the adversary, and all occasions of
evilsurmising from those that are unadvised and imprudent. And it is better to
prevent an occasion of offense, than to excuse it.

Being come out of Italy he stayed at Geneva, and some months after being
called home he returned to Amsterdam to his Patrons and Masters, furnished,
through the grace of Christ, with a clear testimony from them of Geneva, and
with a mind very well fitted to do office, if it might please the Lord God to
use his ministry, for his work in his Church: For these are the very words of
Mr. Beza's Epistle, the original of which I have in remembrance. At Amsterdam
he did easily, with grave and prudent men, clear himself as to his Italian
journey: but indeed the weak brethren went on inveighing against it, and in
their assemblings blaming it till he himself began to be heard in the Church,
in which as soon as he was beheld, it cannot be spoken, with how much respect
men of all ranks flocked together to hear him: For there was in him (as ye
know) a certain incredible gravity mixed with graceful pleasantness. His voice
indeed was slender, but sweet, and loud, and piercing, but he had an admirable
persuasive faculty. If any thing were to be adorned, he so did it, as not to
exceed the truth. If he were to teach any thing, he did it with clearness and
perspicuity. If he were to dispute any thing, he managed the same distinctly.
Now the Melody and altering of his voice was so fitted to things, that it
seemed to flow from them. And since he did not use a Rhetorical dress, and the
Greeks boxes of pleasant ointment: it was either because his nature did abhor
them, or because he judged it unworthy the majesty of Divine things; to use
curles, and borrowed ornaments, when as the naked truth is of its self
sufficient for its own defense: notwithstanding he so efficaciously persuaded
by force and weight of arguments, and by the pithiness of his sentences, and by
the authority of Scripture it self, that no man ever heard him, but confessed,
that his discourses much affected him. Some therefore at that time called him
the polishing life of truth; others the whetstone and sharpner of wits; others
called him the razor shaving off growing errors, and nothing in Religion, and
sacred Theology was thought to favor well, that did not relish with Arminius.
Also the Pastors and Preachers themselves of that City, men both learned and
eloquent, did reverence him for his learning, and ingeniously acknowledge
themselves to have been daily very much advantaged by his Sermons. And thus our
Arminius with spread out sails, prosperous gales, a full company of rowers,
and the good wishes of all that knew him, was carried toward fame and glory,
when it pleased God to exercise his servant even with adversity, and to make a
trial of his patience and humbleness by the cross and afflictions. Now it is a
thing worth the knowing, to understand the beginnings and success hereof.

There was carried about as it chanced in the hands of some pious men a little
Book, written by some of the brethren of the Church of Delf, against Mr. Beza,
with this Title. An answer to some arguments of Beza and Calvin out of a
Treatise concerning predestination on the 9. Chap to the Romans. This little
book was sent over to our Arminius by Mr. Martin Lidyus of blessed memory, who
had been formerly a Pastor in the Church of Amsterdam, but then was Professor
in the Friezlanders new Academy, and by him Arminius was requested to undertake
the defense of Mr. Beza against the brethren of Delf. For Arminius was verily
thought a man very fit for this business by Mr. Lidyus, who partly by report,
partly by experience knew the quickness of his wit, the sharpness of his
judgment, and what a wonderful force and power he had both in preaching and in
disputing, Neither was Arminius altogether strange from this design, being one
that newly coming out of the School of Geneva, carried about with him in his
ears the sound of Mr. Beza's lectures and arguments. He therefore betakes
himself to the work; But whilst he endeavors a refutation, whilst he weighs
the arguments on each side, whilst he confers the Scriptures, whilst he
torments and wearys himself, he was overcome by the truth. At first indeed he
followed that same opinion which he undertook to oppose, but he afterward by
the guidance of the holy Ghost was carried over to that doctrine, which he
constantly asserted even to the end of his life: Which was this; That Gods
eternal Decree in predestination, was not to elect or choose precisely and
absolutely some to salvation, whom as yet he had not purposed to create; (which
Mr. Beza would have) neither was it, precisely and absolutely to elect some to
salvation after the decree of their creation and the foresight of their fall,
but without an antecedent consideration of Jesus Christ; (which the Delfian
brethren held) Bu^ it was, To elect to salvation them of the created and
fallen, who in time to come would by true obedience of faith answer to God
calling them thereunto: Which by learned Melancthon and Nicholaus Hemingius,
and many more divines besides, has been asserted.

And although such in times past has been the liberty of our Churches, and
even now is in very many places, that in this Argument, in which no ancient
Synod has ever determined any thing, any one of the multitude, and a Teacher,
might always without offense to any one choose this or that: for to omit
others, Dr. Jo. Holmannus Secundus, who by the very grave advice of excellent
Divines, and especially of the Lords Curators was called forth, after Mr.
Pezelius and Mollenius and others were solicited in vain, taught it out of
this very place: He embraced (as we know) the opinion of Hemingius, and sharply
defended it. Not withstanding there were not those wanting at Amsterdam, that
in this matter were troublesome to Arminius, and that accused him for departing
from the common and received opinion in our Churches, but their vehemence and
fiercness was suddenly repressed and appeased by the authority of the Senate,
and the equanimity and moderation of the brethren; so that he always lived with
his Colleagues at Amsterdam quietly, yea friendly and brotherly, without any
cloud of displeasure, or hatred, or envy. And also this man of God was not only
naturally disposed to candor and gentleness, but also was moreover so formed
and fashioned thereto by the holy precepts and Spirit of Chtist, that he did
quietly bear with him that dissented from him, and did not easily despair of
any one, that was but willing to hear Christ speaking in Scriptures: which by
his divine moderation and equinimity we all knew, and have by so much the more
admired it, by how much the further we, by the testimony of our own conscience,
perceive our selves yet to be from these good things.

Now when the University, deprived of her Professors by the death of those
famous and excellent men, Dr. Junius and Dr. Luke Trelcatius the elder, sought
for an Hercules that might sustain this Orb (which in the mean while that
Reverend man Dr. Francis Gomarus, being destitute of all his Colleagues, did as
another Atlas support alone) they by the general vote, and the public consent
of their country, came to Arminius, who thinking of nothing less, was taking
care for the church of Christ at Amsterdam which he had served now fifteen
years. But when they of Amsterdam professed that they could not be without his
endeavors amongst them, because as they said, they had chiefly him, by whom
they might oppose the growing monsters of heresies, it cannot be spoken how
great then the consternation of good men was. They variously deliberate and
advise, no stone is left unturned. The Curatours of our University, viz. most
noble Dousa and Neostadius, went themselves in the public name, together with
that most honorable man, Nicholaus Zeystius the Syndick of our Commonwealth.
To the same end Mr. Jo. Vtembogardus, Pastor of the Church at the Hague, was
sent by the most illustrious Prince. and also Nicholaus Cromhousius out of the
supreme Court. All these after a diverse manner did earnestly move and persuade
the most prudent Senate of this Common wealth, and the Consistory of the
Pastors and Elders. At length by many labors, entreaties, and also the
intercession it self of most illustrious Prince, it was hardly obtained, that
he should be dismissed from Amsterdam and serve the University. Nevertheless
petty Rumors of suspicions, which most commonly are wont to subvert the best
endeavors, did withstand him, against which he set the shield of his innocence
and candor and learning; Trusting in this, he confidently expected the
blessing of God in that which was behind. This matter therefore being heard and
debated at the Hague before the Lords Curators in the presence of some grave
Divines, it was found, That those suspicions were ill supported, and that there
was no cause why any one should have an ill opinion of that faithful servant
of Christ: for they found, that he used the allowed liberty of prophesying in
the Church, had taught nothing which was contrary to the Christian religion. He
then first obtained in this University, with the good liking of God and men,
the degree of a Doctor, which in the year 1603 that reverend man Dr. Francis
Gomarus conferred on him here in this very place. Thus then James Arminius
succeeded Francis Junius, the Curators so commanding it. And that nothing might
be wanting here to his credit and authority by reason of those things that had
been given out at Amsterdam, it pleased the Ecclesiastical Presbyters to
commend him to all godly, honest and learned men, by adorning him at his
departure with a very fair testimony which foundeth thus.

The Testimony of the Church at Amsterdam.
If the reason it self of equity, in the common society of men, was willing
long since to have it established for a law, That they should be judged worthy
of a singular good commendation, and more honorable testimony of truth, who
had any where very well merited of the commonwealth: they much more are worthy
of this honor, who laboring in the word of God, have been for many years
Ministers of the holy Gospel with singular fruit and praise in the Church of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore since that Mr. Dr. James Arminius, a Reverend
brother in the Lord, has now requested this same of us, we said, that we must
by no means deny it him. Therefore we would by this writing testify to all and
every one, that the very great integrity of both the unblameable life and sound
doctrine and manners of the forenamed worthy man, and to us all a most dear
companion in the Lord, has now by long acquaintance been so well perceived and
tried by us, that there is nothing of more account with us than always to enjoy
his counsel, labor, familiarity and intimacy, and to maintain that friendship
which now for a long time has been between us. But secing the most blessed and
almighty God seems to have appointed another thing concerning him and us, we
have cause of giving very great thanks to the Lord our God for that very great
benevolence o^ his toward us and this our whole Church hitherto, through which
it has come to pass, that we can with very great delight see and perceive
fruits not to be repented of, from the study and labor of the foresaid our
very dear fellow laborer in the Vineyard of Christ, which he has with us
unweariedly and cheerfully undergone, here among ours. We all confess with a
most willing heart, that we are in all things indebted to this our dearly
beloved brother in the Lord, for his alacrity in continuing with us in the same
parts of his function, and for his very ready Council communicated to us,
whenever we desire it. Wherefore that we may briefly say all in a word
(because his very great both piety and probity, and his singular learning,
seems after a sort by their proper right to challenge it to themselves) we so
commend to all godly, virtuous, and learned men, this honorable Gentleman, and
our most reverend brother in Christ, that with greater affection and more
heartily we are not able to commend, Dated in our Consistory at Amsterdam,
September 8th 1603.

In the name of all,

John Vrsinus Minister of the Divine Word, etc. President of the Consistory.

John Hallius Preacher at Amsterdam.

John Halsbergius Pastor of the same Church.

Yea and the whole Classis gave to him their commendatorie Letters which thus
run.

The Testimono f the Classis of Amsterdam.
To all and every one that shall read or hear this our present Testimony,
Salvation and Peace through the only Mediator Christ.

Because the most accomplished and learned man Mr James Arminius has by the
illustrious and for learning most famous Lords Curators of the University of
Leyden, been called from the holy Ministry (which now for many years he has
discharged with very great commendation in the Church at Amsterdam) to the
public profession of sacred Theology, and has been inaugurated publicly
thereunto: we were willing at his departure to commend him to the same
(Curators) and to all virtuous men by this our present writing, although but
little, and to honor him by our Testimony, as the manner is We therefore the
servants of Jesus Christ, together with the Elders of the same Classis of
Amsterdam, do testify, that the foresaid Mr. Dr. Arminius has been now fifteen
years a member of our Classis, in which time he has taught with much fruit
sound Doctrine purely, administered the Sacraments according to the Lords
institution, and propagated with great zeal the true and Christian Religion,
and by his diligent presence has always adorned our Classical meeting: also by
his prudent Counsel has with others composed matters hard and of great moment,
has always readily sustained all imposed burdens that respected the Churches
Edidification, and has by honesty and goodness of life adorned to this very
day his holy calling. In a word, he has showed himself such both in his holy
Office, and in his manner of life toward all, as becomes a true servant of
Christ, that we give to him very great and immortal thanks for his benevolence
and humanity toward us, by which he has embraced every one of us. We
therefore entreat all and every one, of what order soever they be, to have,
acknowledge, embrace and favor the foresaid Mr. Dr. James Arminius, as such a
one as we have said. Also to affect him with such honor, as he, for his
eminent and singular gifts shining in him, is worthy of; and according to their
ability to help forward his holy endeavors; for the Glory of Gods name, and
the Edification of the School and Church. Unto which end we all his Colleagues
and fellow servants do heartily desire for him the manifold grace of the Holy
Ghost.

At Amsterdam, from our Classical meeting on the Calends of September, 1603.

John Halsbergius, President of the Classis.

John Hallius, Preacher at Amsterdam.

Scribe of the Classis, and in the name of the Classis.

Have the Brethren honorably and laudably enough testified of Arminius? thus
then he came into the University. From this time all his Colleagues have had
experience of him as a most Faithful friend; The Schools as a Senator,
Professor. Rector; all the Students as a most gentle Father.

Suddenly after his entrance into the University he found, that the Students of
sacred Theology, did entangle themselves in the thickets of questions, and did
follow Thorny Theormes and Problemes, the Scriptures being neglected. This
evil, after the matter had been communicated to his Colleagues, he studied to
amend, and did in a great measure effect it, for he brought back the ancient,
and masculine, and mighty kind of studying; and drew back as much as in him
lay: the wandering youth to the Fountains of Salvation (those pure and slimeless
Fountains) that out of them Religion might be sought for: not that Religion
which being satisfied with wrangling debates or bare speculation is gotten to
feed the fantasy; but that which breaths out charity, and follows the truth
which is after godliness, by which youth learn to fly youthful lusts, and
having subdued fleshly allurements, to shun the pollutions of the world, and to
do and suffer those things, that make a distinction between a Christian and an
Heathen. That saying of our Savior, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: he did repeat often to fix the same upon their memories.

In the mean while the consideration of Christians so miserably divided, and
driven asunder one from another, troubled him; he seldom spoke of it without
tears, never without deep and hearty sighs. He declared, that he wished all the
scattered members of Christ might grow together in one body, according to the
Lords Commandment. He rightly judged, that the Papal Court sought not the
things which are of Christ; but the pleasures, the honors, the lucre, the pomp
of this present world, and Tyranny over the souls as well as the bodies of men:
And therefore that no man could or ought to consult with that Harlot about
matters of Salvation, and the establishing of a common peace. He judged, that a
great part of others were conscienciously and piously affected; and were not
divided not so much through an evil intent and purpose, as through doubtful
ambages or obscurities in which many were driven from peace and concord by
ignorance, many by the authority of their Ancestors; many through pertinacy or
stiffness in those opinions which either themselves had devised or long
defended, many through shame of revoking and retracting their writings, lastly
many through prejudice and an ill opinion of their brethren. All which he
thought might be remedyed, not by killing one another, but by prayers, and by
peaceable and friendly instruction, and by the example of an holy conversation.
He therefore both exhorted all to piety, and especially took care of this, that
when thornie questions and the huge luggage of vain and empty assertions were
removed and taken away, with which the Schools make an huge confused noise;
those things might be fetched only out of the Scriptures which might be useful
to bring them to the belief of necessary things, and to lead a good and blessed
Christian life. Which endeaur of his, Satan going about to elude and frustrate
endeavored to persuade the inconsiderate, that these things were done by him
to get honor to show the strength of his wit to cause innovations, to maintain
contention and wrangling. Some thetefore through suspicion, that ill
counselor, moved again old Camarina, or were the cause of mischief to
themselves; but the Professors themselves and the Colleagues, by the prudent
advice of the Curators did quell and quash it at its first shooting up: for
credit to which matter I have thought that this Instrument out of the Acts of
the Vnoversity is fit to be produced.

The Professors of the Theological faculty, when it was related to them; That
the Classis of Dort had laid down among other this Grievance [ Seeing there is
a rumor that some controversies about the doctrine of the reformed Churches
have risen in the Church and University of Leyden, the Classis have thought it
to be necessary that the Synod deliberate concerning these Controversies, and
how they may most safely be composed, that all Schisms and offenses which
thence may arist, may seasonably be removed, and the union of the reformed
Churches to preserved against the calumny of the adversaries] did, when the
Lords Curatots and the Consuls asked, whether any controversies of this sort
were certainly known unto them, answer unanimously, after the matter had been
first privately among themselves examined and weighed, That they wished, that
the Classis of Dort had in this matter, acted better and more orderly; That
they thought that more things were disputed among the Students, than it liked
them should be; but that among themselves, that is, among the Professors of the
Theological faculty there was no difference which may appear to be in the
fundamenralls of doctrine; Also that they would endeavor that the disputations
of this sort which arose among the students might be lessened. Acted the 10th
of August, 1605.

James Arminius, Rector of the University pro tempore.

Francis Gomarus.

Luke Trelcatius, Subscribed.

The very same day, when the same thing was also proposed to D. John Kuchlinus
Regent of the Theological College, he answered; That he gave his suffrage to
those things that had been said by the Professors.

Subscribed, John Kuchlinus Regent.

And thus indeed these things passed at that time; Afterward the Senators of
the High Court, by the will of the illustrious States at the Hague, took
cognizance of those things that were reported. What their opinion of the whole
matter was, I should now relate, but that I think all here present have the
knowledge thereof.

But whilst Christ's Champion thus wrastles, he was at the length laid on his
sick bed by a disease, which by his labors; continual sitting, constant
studies and conflicts incurting without any discharge, he had at the last
contracted. Now what wonder is it, if he were moved and troubled at that, which
might expose to lose his good name, his salvation and his labors: since that
nothing is of more account to a good man than his good name; nor to a
Christian, than his salvation; nor to a Dr. of Sacred Theology than
demonstrations taken out of the Scripture. Oppression, says Solomon, makes a
wise man mad. That same brought him grief, his grief brought his disease, and
this was the cause of his death. Oh horrible evil and viperous, and raised from
the lowest part of Hell! How often have we heard him privately crying out even
with sighing, in the words of the Prophet? Woe is me my mother, that thou have
born me a man of contention to the whole earth: I have neither lent on usury,
nor any has lent to me on usury, and yet all men curse me. Notwithstanding he
himself recalled himself to the enclosures of reason and tranquillity, being
always courageous, always patient and gentle toward his brethren, for whose
sake he was ready to suffer patiently, or as it were to devour, any reproaches
whatsoever from the malevolent, and to forget or concoct them, not with a
Cato's stomach, but that which was wrought in him by the Spirit of Christ.

But his disease lurking in his bowels brake out especially on the 7th of Feb.
this year: which at that time so discovered it self, that the Physicians
forthwith judged, that there was need of a slow and cautious curation. Now
although at the beginning of his sickness he could hardly move himself:
Notwithstanding when he could, having now and then some ease and respite, he
omitted not the labors of his lectures and vocation; nor was he wanting to his
cause when need was. Therefore again and again, being called, he with speed
went to the Hague, and there published a famous profession of his faith before
many witnesses, and after that last friendly conference he with this one thing
after God and the testimony of his own conscience comforted himself, that in a
common assembly of all Holland he was patiently heard by his most gentle
Masters, to whose prudence he attributed so much, that if he should dye, he did
hope, that there would not be rhose wanting that would defend by the patronage
of their wisdom and favor the equity of that cause, which they once heard
debated. Being carried home from the Hague, he had scarce set himself to that
which his masters commanded, viz. To write out that exactly which he had
proposed in the friendly conference, but the force of disease again assaulted
him by so much the more vehemently, by how much the more it had increased by
delay and the weakness of his strength. Therefore being pressed with his
disease, he by letters written to the illustrious States modestly excused
himself, that he could not at the day appointed obey their will: saying, That
by sickness he was forct to keep his bed; that he had written a great part,
which God so willing it, he was now compelled to break off from. That he had
been at another time heard, and that the whole matter was then exhibited in
writing; that that might be as much as necessity required: Notwithstanding if
they should at all desire those same things he had written that he would take
care, that they should have them either full and perfect, if he by the grace of
Christ should be restored, or abrupt and broken, if he should die. Moreover tha
he was so far from doubting any whit of that confession he had published, that
on the contrary he did steadfastly judge, that it agreed in all things with the
holy Scriptures: Therefore that he did persist therein, That he was ready at
that very moment to appear with that same belief before the tribunal of Jesus
Christ the Son of God, the Judge of the quick and dead.

In the mean while the force of his disease daily increased, whilst the most
famous and most expert Physicians, Dr. Pavius, Dr. Sebastian Egbert, Dr. Henry
Sael, Dr. Reener Bont, resisted it as much as was possible by Art and Industry,
and pleasingly allured natures forces, but in vain; for the untamed obstinacy
of the disease scorned art it self; For it was deeper planted than to be
plucked up; it stirred up daily new Symptoms, Fevers, the cough, the extension
of the hypoconders, difficulty of fetching of breath, oppression after meat,
troublesome sleeps, an atrophie, the gout, and gave to him no intermission of
rest: Afterward came the Iliac passion, and the Colic, with an obstruction of
the left optic nerve, and an obfuscation or dimness of the same eye; In the
mean while calumny was as cruel, and abated nothing of its accustomed
fierceness; of which I shall here mention, a cruel unworthy and abominable
instance, which is fit to be recorded for after ages. When that dimness of one
of his eyes was known, there were some that durst account this among those
punishments, which God threatens to his enemies, and wicked contemners of his
name, and did affirm even from this punishment, that he was very wicked beyond
others. And that there might not be wanting a pretext and color to this so
filthy and cruel a deed, the sacred Books are consulted with, which a Christian
may not approach without reverence and prayer. A place is found in the Prophet
Zechary concerning the consumption of the eyes and the whole body, sounding
thus. And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the
people, that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh shall consume away,
while they stand upon their feet; and their eyes shall consume away in their
holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth, Zech. 14.12. And
another place; Woe to the Idol shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword shall
be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: His arm shall be clean dried up, and
his right eye shall be utterly darkened. Chap. 11.7.

This place was wrested against this holy servant of Christ, who indeed was
afflicted in body, but in his soul always happy, but now even most happy and
blessed. I tremble at the remembrance of so enormous* and detestable, and
ungodly deed. Who, art thou, oh man, that condemnest thy brother, for whom
Christ shed his blood? What do thou revile that servant of God with oracles
fetched as it were from heaven it self, whom they that shall come after us, and
shall not be ungrateful, will acknowledge to have exceeding well deserved of
the whole Church of Christ? Why do thou take unjustly to thy self a power of
condemning thy brother, whom the Lord has commanded thee to love. Hear him*
Neither this man has sinned, nor his parents, but these things are done, that
the works of God may be made manifest Hear him again; Judge not, that ye be not
judged. Hear the Apostle; It is with me a very small thing, that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgment. He that judges me is the Lord; Therefore
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
heart: And then shall every man have praise of God. Art thou so assured of what
shall happen to thy self, as to know for certain, that thou thy self shall not
be tormented with more bitter pain and dolor? And yet 'twas not his right eye
that was amiss; neither was it blindness, but only a dimness, and his arm was
not dried up, but swelled. His tongue truly even to the last moment of his life
readily discharged its office. Thus things above, things below, things on the
right hand, things on the left, things divine, things humane, wait together on
these wretched Hierophants [Expounders of divine mysteries] to serve them when
they will.

There were somes who playing on his name, devised, Vani orbis amicus: [i. e. A
friend of the vain world.] as if impiety was not sometime bold to do the same
on the sacred name of Christ. Go your ways for beetles, the unprofitable
things of the world; What will ye not attempt to do on the servant who have not
spared God himself and the Lord of life? But I return to that which I made
digression from: He although tired with all these evils, yet notwithstanding
kept a steadfast courage and quiet mind; He therefore never abated any thing of
the pleasantness, and comely gracefulness, and accustomed cheerfulness of his
countenance, and candor of heart, his most ardent prayers ascending to God for
himself and the concord of the church. How frequent, how fervent in his
sickness were his ejaculations to Jesus Christ? What joys did he promise
himself? With what perseverance of faith did he expect his last day in the
world? If the brethren did compose themselves to prayers, and he himself was
hindered by pain, he now and then desired them to stay till he should come to
himself, that he might together with them perform this brotherly office.

These few forms of prayers among many more were noted.
OH great Shepherd of the sheep, who by the blood of the everlasting covenant
wast brought again from the dead, Oh! Lord and Savior Jesus, be present with
me thy weak and afflicted sheep. Oh Lord Jesus the faithful and merciful High
priest, who wast willing to be tempted in all things like unto us, but without
sin; that thou learning by experience it self, how hard it is to obey God in
sufferings, might have compassion on us in our infirmities; have pity on me,
and succor me thy servant, who am sick an pressed with many afflictions. Oh
God of my salvation! make my soul fit for thine heavenly kingdom, and my body
for the resurrection.

Now when upon the increasing of his disease he was admonished by the
Physicians, that by reason of the doubtfullness of his life, he would set his
house in order, and that if any thing were to be given in charge by his last
will and testament, he would take care to do it; he then composed himself for
death, with such great quietness of mind, that friends standing by, who had
observed the whole manner of his life, admired at his so great and so heroic
moderation in the last act, and they took from him the last example of dying
blessedly, of whom long before they had learned many things for the well
ordering of their lives; He then perceiving that the time of his dissolution
was at hand, and not being ignorant of the Devils stratagems, took special
care, when he made his will, to give a brief Account of his designs and of his
life. This, because it contains the duty of a faithful Teacher, I shall recite
for an Example and for a Testimony.

Out of his will or Testament.
BEfore all things I commend my soul, when it shall depart out of its body,
into the hands of God its Creator and faithful Savior, before whom I witness
that I have with a good conscience, singly and sincerely walked in my charge
and calling: taking heed with much solicitousness and carefulness, not to
propose or teach any thing, which I had not found by a diligent search out of
the holy Scriptures, to agree exactly with the same Scriptures; and that I have
taught those things which might conduce to the propagation and amplification of
the truth, the Christian religion, the true worship of God, common piety, and
holy conversation among men; Lastly, to tranquillity agreeing to the Christian
profession and peace according to the word of God, excluding from among these
Papacy, with which no verity of faith, no bond of piety and Christian peace can
be kept.

These things being thus finished, some days were spent in the invocation of
Christ, and in thanksgiving and the meditation of a better life; In which time
Mr. Jo. Vtenbogardus and Mr. Hadrian Borrius did more frequently visit him then
others did; Both of them were his old and most faithful friends; But Mr.
Borrius was even always present in the daily performance of prayer with his
sick friend.

Now at length on the 19th of October, about noon, this faithful servant of
God, being discharged of his warfare, having finished his course, fought the
good fight, kept the faith, did render his soul now weary of cares, now glutted
with the miseries of this world, now desiring deliverance, now having a
fore-tast of the joys of the Saints, now seeing Christ his God and redeemer,
did I say, with his eyes lifted up to heaven, render quietly among the holy
prayers of them that were present, his soul to God the Father his creator, to
the Son his redeemer, to the Holy Ghost his sanctifier, all crying out, Let me
dye the death of the righteous.

Thus even this our Sun did set; thus that just man dyed of whom this world was
not worthy; thus the father of so many prophets was taken away; thus James
Arminius by the charet of Israel and horsemen thereof was carried from us into
heaven and now is free and delivered from miseryes, has the crown sought for
by so many labors, by so great holiness, and enjoys the heavenly Jerusalem, in
the great assembly of many thousands of Angels, and the Church of the
firstborn that are written in heaven, and he sees the Judge of all, and the
Spirit of just men made perfect, and Jesus the mediator of the new Testament,
and the blood of sprinkling speaking better then that of Abel; But he expects
that day, in which God will make his dead body, which we have laid in the
earth, to be conformable to the glorious body of his Son, according to the
power whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

But we so long as it pleases God shall be tossed with these waves, till he,
having at sometime compassion on us also, shall call us, every one in his own
order, out of this miry clay into heavenly joys; keeping in the mean while in
the church of the saints the blessed memory of Mr. James Arminius, with this
Elogy.

That he was a Hollander, whom they that knew him, could not sufficiently
esteem; Whom they that esteemed him not, did never sufficiently know.

Finally, most worthy Auditors, being desirous to exhort you to the Churches
amiable concord, I shall use no other than the words of the Apostle John.
Beloved, let us love one another, because love is of God. And whosoever loves
his brother, is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not
God; for God is love.

FINIS.
A short and Compendious History of Simon Episcopius. Professor of Divinity in
the University of LEYDEN in HOLLAND.
Candid Reader,
THat in a very great part, which learned Bertius in the preceding Oration,
has justly premised touching the difficulty of his task and Province, who was
to describe so excellent a man as Reverend Arminius, may be as justly (to say
no more) taken up by him that undertakes a description of Episcopius, a man
well nigh incomparable in all things commendable in a man, in a Christian, in a
Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

It Is one of Amsterdams chiefest Ornaments, and deserves to be recorded with
letters of Gold in the memorials of that famous City; that Simon Episcopius in
the year 1583. was born there.

His Parents, Egbert and Gertrude, are worthy remembrance, not only for their
pious Offspring, I mean their eldest son Rembert, also John, but especially the
youngest, our Simon; (for their other children, four sons and three daughters,
all died in their youth or infancy) but also for their own piety, being then
zealous professors of the truth, when extreme dangers closely attended on every
side those that followed her; Simon Episcopius, that renowned Person of whom we
are now to speak, brought with him into the world many rare natural Endowments,
which afterward by good education and much industry were greatly improved, and
were in his conversation choicely employed to the end of his days. Rembert. his
eldest brother, soon espying in him grounds of hope as to his usefulness in the
best of employments; did earnestly solicit his Parents to denote him wholly to
learning; His Parents; notwithstanding their Estate, was insufficient (by
reason of their numerous offspring) to yield him at his studies a competent
maintenance* yet, having assistance freely and privately, offered by Cornelius
Benning, a man of Consular dignity, were persuaded to dedicate their Simon to
the study of learning. He therefore was committed, as soon as possible, to the
care and discipline of Peter Vekeman, a Schoolmaster at that time famous; under
whose manuduction he in so little time made so great a progress in Latin and
Greek, that he was commended by diverse great men to the honorable Senate of
Amsterdam, which took and received him into the number of their Scholars, when
his parents by the advice of Mr. John Kuchlinus and Mr. James Arminius, and by
their persuasion, gave their consent; for at the first they were somewhat
averse thereto. When he had at Amsterdam run out his course there in the
Grammar school, the Curatours of the School did. in the year 1600, declare him
by Solemn sentence meet and worthy to be promoted to the University, that he
might there apply himself to more high and manly studies; He was therefore sent
away to the University of Leyden, into the College of the illustrious States
of Holland and West-friezland; in which College was then President that most
learned man, John Kuchlinus, who when he was minister at Amsterdam, had
contracted a firm and intimate friendship with the father of our Episcopius.
This hopeful Plant had not been long in the Academical nursery, but he lost his
most loving and beloved Parents; for Anno 1602 his father dyed, in the next
year his Mother. He though much afflicted with this adversity; yet being
thoughtfull, and desirous of his transplanting into some place of usefulness to
the Church of God, neglects not the present opportunity of furnishing himself
with things convenient and necessary thereunto. Wherefore having sukt in as
much knowledge, as was needful, of the liberal Arts, he extends his endeavors
for getting acquaintance with the secrets of Philosophy; In which having spent
about three years, he applied himself most seriously to the studys of Divinity,
and with much diligence labored therein; yet so as to have now and then a
recourse to Phylosophy^ At length, the Statutes of his College, and his own
private affairs requiring it, he sought the title of a Mr. of Arts, and was,
being after a severe examination judged worthy, adorned therewith publicly, in
the year 1606, by Dr. Rodolphus Snellius, that most renowned Professor of the
Mathematics there. After this he purposes and resolves to give himself wholly
to the study of Divinity only, in which he had already made a considerable
progress. And seeing he could not accomplish his earnest desire of visiting
foreign Universities, he continued yet two years and above at Leyden, where he
was a diligent hearer of the Divinity Professors, namely, Francis Gomarus, Luke
Trelcatius, James Arminius; and was so diligent and industrious in
disputations, and exercitatory Sermons, that he left far behind him most of his
equals for age and standing, and was thought worthy to be called to the
Ministry. But seeing afterward, especially after the death of Dr. Trelcatius,
that unhappy discension about Predestination, which afterward gave a
disturbance to all Holland, did not only secretly glow between the two
remaining Professors, but also at length break forth openly; and seeing our
Episcopius showed himself more addicted to the opinion of Arminius, he found
therefore the Pastors, who were of the other party, to be so disaffected
toward him, that they, when the honorable Consuls of Amsterdam, who had
knowledge of his singular learning and good conversation, were desirous of
promoting him to the office of a preacher, did by delays, and other their
subtle devices, frustrate and elude the good design of the Consuls. Episcopius
therefore in the year 1609, in which year Arminius dyed, left Leyden and went
to Franeker, the Friezlanders University, whither he was drawn especially by
the fame of Jo. Drusius, Professor there of the Hebrew tongue. Here Sibrandus
Lubbertus, the Professor of this University, took great offense at our
Episcopius, who was somewhat too hot and fervent in Theological disputations,
as young men of prompt and ready wits are wont to be. He therefore a few
months after departed thence, and went into France, where in a short time he
got so great acquaintance with the French tongue, that he was able not only to
understand it, but also to speak French readily and purely. In the year 1610 he
returned home, and found the Ministers of Amsterdam no better affected toward
him than before. But his virtue and learning, which could be no longer hid, and
which were commended by clear and notable testimonies from the Churches and
Universities where he lived, break through at length all obstacles, and so, that
he was, with the consent of the Classis, called by the honorable Senate of
Rotterdam to the Pastoral office at Bleyswyck, an hamlet belonging to their
jurisdiction.

After the death of Arminius, they of Calvin's persuasion, whose notions of God,
reprobating absolutely the greatest part of the world, to make known his power
in making his creatures miserable, had framed and disposed to fierceness, begrn
to endeavor the ejection of them out of their places who adhered to Arminius;
hereupon these perceiving the designs that were against them, did exhibit to
the most illustrious Stales of Holland and West-friezland a certain
Remonstrance (whence they were afterward called Remonstrants, as their
adversaries were called Contra Remonstrants, from a paper they had written in
opposition, and entitled, A Contra-Remonstrance) in which Remonstrance after
they had declared their judgment comprehended in five heads or Articles, they
humbly petition, that they in that belief and persuasion might be protected
from the violence and force of their Adversaries that much threatened them.
Afterward in the year 1611 was that famous Conference at the Hague, where by
the appointment, and in the presence of the States of Holland and
West-Friezland, Six Remonstrant, and as many Contra-Remonstrant Pastors
conferred together about the things now in controversy. For the determining of
these Controversies, the Remonstrants then declared themselves for mutual
forbearance, but their adversaries were for a Synodal Decision, as being no way
doubtful of out-voting them, in case the Remonstrants were admitted members of
the Synod, which indeed their adversaries denied them, when they had gotten a
Synod, and the arm of flesh on their side.

But the illustrious States of Holland and West-Friezland, knowing well, that
only the oppression of the contrary party was sought after, and that the
controversy was obscure and difficult, made a decree, that both parties should
live together in brotherly communion, etc. which decree had preserved them in
peace, if might had not then overcome right, in casting those peaceable
Governors out of their places, and substituting those in their rooms who would
be ready to do what the Contra-remonstrants would have.

But we must return to our Episcopius, who was one of the six Remonstrants that
managed the Conference at the Hague, whereas on a famous Theater he made
manifest his great abilities, both natural and acquired, and gave all men
occasion to conclude, that his knowledge and skill in the holy Scriptures, and
in Theological disputations, was not ordinary. After this, the fame of his
learning and eloquence spreading in the United Provinces far abroad, he was
solicited by diverse eminent Cities, chiefly Vtrecht to be their Preacher; but
seeing they of Bleyswyck would by no means be induced to give their consent for
his departure, he therefore continued in the exercise of his ministry among
them. But at length in the year 1612, when he was about 29 years old, he was
called by the Curators of the University of Leyden, to the Professorship of
Divinity there, in the place of Francis Gomarus, who voluntarily had deserted
it; Now although the modesty of this worthy man Episcopius, was so great, that
he judged himself unmeet for a work so difficult in such difficult times; yet
suffered he himself to be prevailed with* and overcome by the judgment of
others concerning him, and especially by the authority and exhortation of some
very great men in the Commonwealth and Church to accept it* In this honorable
place, worthy a man so learned and venerable, he lived friendly and peaceably
with Dr. Jo. Polyander, his Colleague, though of an opinion differing from his
in the controversy of predestination; and most painfully labored in his
Office, as even to us is apparent from his Commentaries on some parts of the
holy Scriptures, then composed, and his disputations there, which since his
death have been exposed to public view. But his Cares were so many and great,
that they far surmounted all his other labors and did much exceed them; For at
this time the Controversy about Predestination had swelled over the Academical
banks, and had filled the pulpits, whence (as usually) it spread as an
inundation among the common people threatening a devastation of the Churches
unity, and to the Commonwealth no less then ruin: For the governors
themselves, who were to have kept the peace, were divided among themselves,
designing variously for their several parties. In this evil day and contentious
time, good Episcopius, a man greatly desirous of peace, a manstudious,
laborious and solicitous for the good of others, became a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs. Now to give a few instances of this man's sufferings,
may not only he serviceable to his commendation, they being the trial and an
evident proof of his sincerity, and that which brought to light his Christian
fortitude and patience, wherein he greatly excelled; they may expect, who are
of the first in discovering errors, that have been long and more generally
embraced for truths, and for such, which men have much gloryed in, as a
treasure more peculiar to themselves than others; and also to let us know what
are the usual effects of blind zeal in matters of religion, which will appear
to be the worst of Guides, leading men to most injurious, inhumane and
barbarous practices.

We will begin with that which happened at Amsterdam, in the second year of his
Professorship; The story in brief in this, Episcopius being at a church in
Amsterdam and (as they commonly speak) standing as a witness with others at the
baptizing of his brother John's Daughter, Caspar Heydan, who then did officiate,
asked him and the other witnesses, Whether they did confess that to be the true
and perfect doctrine of salvation, which was contained in the old and new
Testament, and in the Apostles Creed, and which was taught in that church, to
wit, of Amsterdam; adding moreover these words: What say ye to these things?
Episcopius, the chief among them, answered; That he did account whatsoever was
taught there according to the word of God, and the Apostles Creed, to be the
true and saving doctrine, as the words of the usual form, out of which the
interrogation is made, do intend; Which answer, though mild and modest, so
moved the spleen of Mr. Heydan, that with contempt he called him Young Man, and
upbraided him as one very audacious and presumptuous in daring to speak so in
the Church of God. To which Episcopius again replied, saying; That he would
depart if the Preachers would not admit that limitation, comprehended in the
form of Baptism, where after mention made of the old and new Testament, and the
Apostles Creed, these words are added, and consequently is taught in the
Christian Church. But when Heydan had the second time upbraided him with
audaciousness, and Episcopius made no further reply, he at length christened
the Child. And when Episcopius was going out, he was reproachfully handled, and
called a seditious man, and a disturber of the Church, by some of the baser
sort, whom Heydans words had excited to such opprobrious speeches; and when he
was gone out of the Church, he hardly escaped beating or stoning, to which some
instigated the youth that were then present. But God out of his fatherly care
protecting him, and restraining the fury of those wicked men, brought him at
length to his friends in safety.

Not long after this it happened in the same City, That a certain Black smith,
seeing Episcopius passing by his shop, run out with a bar of Iron that he was
forging on his anvil, and called him Arminian, and a disturber of the Church,
and so pursued him, as one having a mind to murder him, which danger he
escaped by flight and the assistance of others, that hindered and restrained
this villainous Zealot.

Now if we should here insert a short but sad story of some Contra-remonstrants
Plunderers, we should not go far out of our way, nor much digress because
Arminianisme (so called) was the occasion, and Rembert, the brother of our
Episcopius was the person pillaged, and that in the time we have now under
consideration. The story thus runs; There was in the year 1617, and on the 19th
of February, a false rumor raised and spread abroad, that some Remonstrants
were met together to hear a Sermon in the house of Mr. Rembert Episcopius, who
in Amsterdam was well known to be much addicted to the Remonstrants opinions,
and was for that cause much hated by the vulgar sort, Upon this report many
hundreds of vile persons run thither, who first breaking the windows with
stones, then with a bar breaking up the gate, enter the house in an hostile
manner, and as a Company of Robbers, when they had drank up or spilled the wine
and beer in the Cellar, they seorch and sack the house, opening forcibly above
12 chests, carrying away what was portable, for they stole thence a bag of
money, wearing clothes, linen, pictures, books, household stuff, plate, etc.
and what they could not carry away tore and broke, leaving nothing there whole
and untouched, When they had emptyed the house, they begin to demolish it and
make it an heap of rubbish, which they had done, if the coming of the
Magistrate had not hindered them. The Gentleman and his wife escaped their
fury; she by flying to a neighbors house; he by hiding himself on the top of
his own house, whither he got by a ladder that he drew up after him. His loss
was estimated to be above six thousand florans. And if he had not had some
space (while those religious Felons were breaking open his doors) for the
casting of his money and some part of his better household stuff into a
neighbors house, he had in that one day been well nigh spoiled of a good
estate, and reduced to poverty, The other brother Mr. Jo. Episcopius, being
also of the Remonstrant persuasion, though he was not pillaged as his brother,
yet was he often and much reproached by the dregs of the people, a sort of
malignant Zealots But to return now to our Episcopius, who was a sufferer in
his Relations, and Christian Associates, and met with many great personal
afflictions, especially at the time of the Dort Synod, and afterward, of which
we will here take a Superficial and cursory view.

In the year 1618 began the Synod of Dort, which how unjustly it carried it
self toward the Remonstrants, the Acts and History thereof, long since
published; do, says Curcellaeus, abundantly testify. We will briefly mention
here a few things that more nearly touch our Episcopius; Although from that
which happened not long before the convening of this Synod; namely the violent
ejecting of those Magistrates that favored mutual forbearance, it was not hard
to conjecture, that no good issue would attend this Synodical meeting; yet
notwithstanding our Episcopius* being invited to it by the Letters of the
Illustrious States of Holland, and to sit there with the other Professors of
the United Provinces, did with some other Remonstrant Preachers make his
appearance at Dort soon after the beginning of the Synod; but the Synod, which
was the adverse Party, and which shamefully took to themselves a power of
judging in their own cause* permitted neither him, nor any other Remonstrants
to be present in their assembly, but as cited persons, appearing at the Synods
tribunal, and submitting to the authority of the Synod* as having power to
order them, when to speak, when to hold their peace; and also at length, by
majority of voices, to judge and censure them; Which how far from all equity it
was, let all judge that have eyes to see, and are impartial. The Remonstrants
notwithstanding* lest they should seem wanting to a good cause, did yield to a
necessity, and with a great and undaunted courage entered the Synod, and there
Episcopius with great grace and Oratorial gesture (and as our learned Hales
expresses it) recited that excellent Oration, which is to be found in the Acts
of the Synod, and in the second volume of his works. After this, when the
Remonstrants declared, that they were ready to confer with the Synod, the
Ecclesiastical President in the name of the Synod answered, That they by an
authority granted to them from the States General, were come together, not to
confer with them, but to judge them; Notwithstanding this, yet the
Remonstrants, having protested, that they could not acknowledge that Synod as a
lawful Judge in the present controversy, because the greatest part of it
consisted of their professed adversaries, who had already condemned them, and
separated from them, did address themselves freely to propound, explain and
confirm their sentence or judgment, before the Synod, so far as they could and
did judge necessary; and so to do, they were not only expressly permitted, but
also enjoined, by the Deputies of the States General in their Citatory Letters.
But when the Synod would again circumscribe that liberty by these limits, to
wit, that they should propound, explain and confirm their sentence or judgment,
as far as the Synod should judge might be sufficient and ought to be; then
could not the Remonstrants satisfy their consciences to submit to such uneqaal
and unrighteous conditions, by which they should betray their cause, and so
they were at length cast out of the Synod, as persons unworthy for the Synod
any longer to treat withal.

Concerning the manner of their ejection I shall here add something out of the
letters sent from Dort to Sir Dudly Charleton, at that time Lord Ambassador
from K. James to the States General, and written by Doctor Belcanqual, a member
of the Synod, and one of the English College there, and of a different
persuasion to the Remonstrants, and by our own renowned Countryman Mr. Hales,
then Chaplain to the said Ambassador, but for a time resident at Dort, to
observe the Synods proceedings there; The letters may be found in Hales his
Golden Remains: When the voices says (Belcanqual) only of the foreign
Divines were asked (who are not above a third part of the Synod) then were the
Remonstrants called in, and dismissed with such a powdering speech, as I doubt
not but that your Lordship has heard with grief enough. I protest (says he) I
am much afflicted, when I think of it; For if the Remonstrants should write,
that the President pronounced a sentence, which was not the sentence of the
Synod, they should not lie. The Civil Lawyers and Canon of France, who write
much about the formalities omitted in the Council of Trent, are exceptions of
less moment then these; So neither was there above a third part of the voices
asked, ex quibus sententia fieri nequit. Neither was the sentence conceived in
writ, and approved by the Synod; And the bitter words of the sentence were not
the words of any of the suffrages, unless that some of them were spoken by one
man only. So far he; There are says (Mr. Hales) some exceptions taken by the
Deputies themselves against Mr. President his rough handling the Remonstrants
at their dismission. The next day in the morning there was a private Session*
where a repetition was made of the last Synodical Acts, but when they came to
the Act of the Remonstrants dismission Ludovicus Crosius of Breme signfiyed,
that he perceived, that Mr. President in that business had been paulo
commotior, [somewhat too passionate] and had let slip Verba quaedam acerba
[some bitter words] which might well have been spared; That in so great an act
as that was, a little more advise and consideration might have been used, That
the Synod ought to have been consulted with, and a form of dismission conceived
and approved of by all, which should in the name of the Synod have been
pronounced and registered, whereas now the Synod stands indicted of all the
unnecessary roughness which then was practiced. So far our Hales.

After the ^ismission of the Remonstrants, the Synod prepared to judge them out
of their Writings. But they in the mean time, whilst the Synod was thus
occupied, did privately, by the command of the States Deputies, compose for the
confirmation of their doctrine, those accurate Writings, which rogether with
the Synodal Acts were published a little after, and deservedly obtained the
approbation of very many of the most learned men in Europe; One of chief
authority when he had seen them, said, That the Dort Synod had condemned the
Remonstrants; but they by their Writings had triumphed over the Synod.

And indeed one substantial argument is better than a thousand Synodal
suffrages. The chiefest part of these Writings ought to be ascribed to the
indefatigable industry of our Episcopius. That nervous Dissertation touching
Reprobation had for its Author, that learned and reverend father Mr. Charles
Niellius, a preacher at Amsterdam. To his memory we are indebted not only for
that piece, but for other things also in that volume; and debtours we are to
all the rest of them for that share of their labor we have in those Excellent
Writings.

At length the Synodical Sentence against the Remonstrants was pronounced, by
which they are condemned as men of a corrupt Religion and deposed and put out
of Office.

The hard usage of the Remonstrants is not much to be wondered at, the Synods
temper being considered; For although there was much candor in some of the
foreign Divines, especially our English, yet there was much want of it in the
Provincials. Not to speak any thing of the unworthy usage which some of the
foreign Divines, experienced in the Synod, and particularly they of Breme, who
were upon the point of leaving the Synod, by reason of offenses there given
them; I shall only in a word discover their ill disposition toward the
Remonstrants: Prejudice prevailed much among the Dutch Contra-remonstrants;
They are (says Belcanqual in his letter of April 17) so eager to kill the
Remonstrants, that they would make their words to have that sense which no
Grammar could find in them; We have given a remarkable Instance of the
Presidents good nature and manners. And as for Gomarus, the then visible head
of the Fatalists, of what a froward and turbulent Spirit he was, I am even loath
to exptess in the words of Belcanqual, who thus writes to the Ambassador; If
the Synod (says he) had wanted but two men, I mean Sibrandus Lubbertus [one of
the principal Contra-remonstrant leaders] and Gomarus, we had wanted a great
deal of contention* which I fear will not forsake the Synod as long as they are
in it; They have their fits of madness by course; The last fit before this came
to Gomarus his turn, and this day Sibrandus flew out with such raving and
fierceness of countenance, and such unheard bitterness against our College, as
I desire no other revenge on him, than the very speaking of the words, which
while they were in his mouth were checked by the President Politic, etc. In
another letter, thus; The Palatine Divines are the only Magistrates Doctors
next to Gomarus in all the Synod, and think every thing they speak should be
taken for Text. Let me add one passage more, wherein Gomarus is mainly
concerned; In the business of the Remonstrants of Camps, they of Breme
persuaded to a middle course in dealing with them. But Gomarus (says
Belcanqual) fell foully upon Martinus, a man very learned and very honest, who
has been so uncivily dealt with, that the Foreigners take much offense
thereat, and he and his Colleagues have been ready to leave the Synod. Because
he dislikes, as others do the Contra-remonstrants broad speeches in many
points, they use him with so much discourtesy; Though one be against the
Remonstrants in all the 5 Articles in substance; yet if he differ from them
[the Dutch Divines] but in manner of speaking, they hold him as not sound. So
far Belcanqual, I thought not indeed to meddle with this business relating to
them of Breme, but fell into it unawares, and cannot but learn from it, that if
the Contra remonstrants behaved themselves so, in such a place, against persons
who in the main were of their persuasion, then certainly the Remonstrants to
whom they were professed Adversaries, had cause to expect from them none of the
softest usage. But there is one passage more that I shall recite out of
Belcanqual concerning Gomarus. In Session 85, Gomarus in his disquisition of
the 3 and 4 Articles, delivered a speech against the Bremenses, which none I
think but a mad man would have uttered, and he delivered himself with such
sparkling of his eyes, and fierceness of pronunciation, as every man wondered
that the President did not cut him off; at last he cut off himself, I think for
want of breath, and then the President gave celeberrimo Duo Gomaro very many
thanks for that his learned, grave and accurate speech. The Exteri [the
foreign Divines] wondered at it, Martinus only said, that he was sorry he
should be so rewarded for his long journey. In another letter; All I will say
my Lord, is this; There are two men in the Synod, Sibrandus, but especially
Gomarus, who are able to set it on fire, unless they be looked to. Thus far he:
I shall say nothing of the generality of the Provincial or Dutch Divines, how
they were at the devotion of those that were chief Actors in the
Contra-remonsttatical Tragedy.

We are come now to the Execution of the Synodical Sentence against the
Remonstrants; They being thus discharged, other Pastors were put and
substituted in their places* how unwilling soever the Chuches were to receive
them; In some places these new Pastors were brought in by force of arms. Now
lest the ejected Remonstrants should teach privately, therefore the
States General propose to them a certain engagement, to abstain in the future
both directly and indirectly from all even private exercise of their Ministry.
To which when some could not in conscience subscribe, they were condemned to
perpetual banishment. Alas! who could expect such cruelly amongst Protestants,
that had condemned Papists for the like unchristian practices? He that takes a
view of our Episcopius and some others of the Remonstrants in their deportment,
when this dismal Cloud appeared, will see cause to admire their faith and
fortitude. For so dear was the truth unto them, and their zeal for it so great,
that a promise of the same wages or stipend which they formerly enjoyed, could
not induce them (though some of them had but a very mean Estate) to oblige and
bind themselves unto silence, which was commanded them; Moreover these Generous
spirits did with much boldness, after the pronouncing of the of sentence of
Banishment, defend openly to the States General their own and their associates
Innocence, appealing to God, the avenger of them that are unjustly oppressed,
who would at the last day take cognizance of their Cause, and judge, without
respect of person, as well their Judges as them.

Hereupon these Stout Champions for truth were so hastily carried away by the
States Officers out of the limits of the United Provinces, that they after
their detaining eight months at Dort, whether they were called, as they
thought, to a free Synod, had not granted to them so much as one day, in which
to bid their families farewell, and to set in order their domestic affairs,
notwithstanding they petitioned for it.

Episcopius therefore, and the rest, betook themselves to Brabant, and
inhabited at Antwerp, during the peace between the King of Spain and the
States. This place these Exiles made choice of for their abode, not to join
with the enemies of their Country in a conspiracy against it, nor to endeavor
any thing detremental to the Reformed religion, as some malevolent persons were
bold enough to suggest slanderously against them; but because that place was
near, and from which they might more commodiously, than from any place remote,
take care of their beloved Churches, and Families. How faithfully those
employed their talent, received of God, I shall here pass over in Silence,
being now to speak only of Episcopius, whose disputations with Peter Wadingus,
a Jesuit of Antwerp, and his Antidote against the Canons of the Synod of Dort,
do abundanly testify his great care and diligence; And also the Confession of
faith, which he, with the other Remonstrant Pastors there, did compose and
publish, that they might stop the mouths of them who calumniously gave forth,
that the Remonstrants cherisht in their breast, monstrous and strange opinions,
which they durst not expose to public view.

When the war was renewed between the King of Spain and the States, our
Episcopius, seeing he could no longer with safety remain in Brabant* departed
thence into France, and inhabited sometime at Rhoan, sometime at Paris. If thou
inquire how in these parts his time was spent, those Writings of his there
compiled, will give thee a worthy Account, in case thou art able to peruse his
Paraphrase and Observations on the 8, 9, 10, and 11 Chapters of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans; also his Bodecherus ineptiens; his Examen Thesium Jacobi
Capelli; his answer to to the Defense of Jo. Cameron; his Treatise of Christian
Magistracy. and that of free will, with other works of his, labored there. He
that with these considers his sollicitous Care for the Churches of his own
Country, which in this time of persecution being destitute of their ordinary
Pastors, he by diverse Writings and Epistles instructed, comforted and
encouraged to presevere in the Faith; also the many conferences he had with
learned men concerning Religion, by which he endeavored to bring them to a
more accurate search and inquiry after the truth; he, I say, that considers
these things, will be so far from thinking that he had many wast hours that he
will greatly wonder, where time was found for so many and great Atchievments.
Here Stephen Cureelleus got with him his first Acquaintance and professes that
he heard him discourse of some hard points of religion, and learned so many
things of him, that he always afterward esteemed it a singular happpiness to
him, that he had acquaintance with so worthy a man Here also Episcopius
contracted such a friendship with that most cordial man and eminent
Mathematician, Mr. Edmund Mercer, which afterward no distance of place, or
length of time, could dissolve or weaken. This was he that published this Book,
by which Camerons opinion of Grace and free will is examined, and entitled it,
Epistola viri docti; and he that was so familiar a friend with Hugo Grotius,
that Grotius, when he last left France, committed to him the most precious
Treasures he had, his Elaborate Manuscripts, that by him they might be
communicated to others.

At length Episcopius, being desirous to have a perfect Survay of France, who
as yet knew little more than the Northern part of it, went from Paris to Lions;
After that he visited Mar. seille, Nismes, Mompelier, Toulouse: Afterward
Bordeaux, Rochella, Poictiers, Angiers, Tours, Orleance, and other places. And
when he had finished his perambulation, he returned to Paris and Rhoan; where
when he had remained a while; and had heard that the fervor of the
persecution, raised in his own Country against the Remonstrants, was some what
alayed, he purposed to return thither. Leaving therefore France in the year of
our Lord 1626, and in the eighth year of his banishment, he came to Rotterdam,
that he might with other brethren lay out his abilities for the gathering of
that very numerous Church, which is there out of the dispersed Remonstrants:
And that afterward he might take care for other Churches in the United
Provinces. In the mean while by his Writings both in Latin and Dutch he
strenuously defended the truth. He published in Latin An Apology of the
Remonstrants confession; An Answer to the Essay of the Leyden Professors, with
other Books. In Dutch he wrote a Treatise of true Antiquity against the
Papists; Three Treatises against James Triglandius, then Preacher at Amsterdam,
since Professor of Divinity at Leyden; with other books,

In the second year after his return, he entered into a Matrimonial state,
(there being then hope of a more peaceable time) marrying at Rotterdam that
most choice and virtuous Gentlewoman Mrs. Mary Pesser, the widow of Mr. Henry
Niellius a Preacher of that City, and the younger brother of Mr. Charles
Niellius abovementioned. They lived together, but without issue, most piously,
peaceably and comfortably to the end of the years 1641, at which time she
finished her course.

But before this in the year 1634 He went to Amsterdam, to be President in the
Remonstrants Scholastic Nursery or College, which was erected there to be as
an University, for the instructing of Youth in Divinity, that were intended for
Ministers of the Church,

How faithfully and diligently he exercised himself here, we have an
illustrious testimony from his copious, learned and most useful Theological
Institutions; and the Answer of 64 Questions proposed to him by his Disciples;
also from his learned and eloquent Sermons to the people; also his true
Remonstrant Divine; and his Answer to the 10 Dilemma's of a certain Popish
Doctor, and other works of his.

Whilst he was thus laboring, some occasions forced him to Rotterdam, where
Anno 1639 he fell dangerously sick, and for some months kept his bed, and so
far was he gone, that there was little hope of his recovery. But at length God
restored him to health, and so strengthened him, that he returned to his charge
at Amsterdam, and as diligently labored among them as before.

After his return it seemed good to the Remonstrants to publish a plain
Catechism for the instructing of the more ignorant sort. Then Abraham Heydan,
at that time a Preacher at Leyden, afterward Professor of Divinity there,
published an Examination of this Catechism, the defense of which our Episcopius
undertook, and finished in a considerable large Volume, which came not forth
till after his death. For in the beginning of the year 1643, when he was well
nigh 60 years old, he fell mortally sick. His disease is called Ischuria, a
dangerous suppression of the Urine, which was so pertinacious and obstinate,
that for eleven days he could not make one drop of water; although some
skillful Physicians used the utmost of their art to master, or at least
somewhat to mitigate this his mercyless and stubborn enemy. This Excrement (of
which he afterward avoided but little) mixing it self with the blood of the
whole body, so corrupted the Crassis and temperature thereof, that he could not
possibly long subsist.

He lay sick two months and above, and for some weeks before his death was
deprived of sight. Which loss, whilst there was any hope of his recovery, had
been exceeding grievous unto him, had not his deep and almost continual
sleeping lessened the same; For sometimes he complained of it to his friends
that did frequently visit him; saying, that he should not be able any more to
serve the Church of Christ,

At length on the 4th of April about the 8th hour in the morning, (at which
time the moon was in the Eclipse) he peaceably fell asleep in the Lord. And the
4th day after was carried forth (a great multitude of all sorts of persons
following the hearse) unto the West-Church, and was there interred by his wife.
His death many much lamented, and many Epicedium's, or funeral Verses of his
praise and commendation, were published both in Dutch and Latin.

Caspar Barlaeus, the most renowned Poet of that time, and who lived not full
two years after him, published a most excellent Latin Epicaedium in his
commendation, which is prefixed to the first Volume of Episcopius his works.

Thus we have taken a short view of Episcopius from his birth to his death. His
life was unblameable, and illustrious for zeal to the glory of God, and man's
salvation; His Love to the Churches peace and concord added much to his
commendation. He was indeed much conversant in Controversies, not of choice,
but through necessity; He was often wont to complain of his constraint to this
kind of exercise. His patient bearing of jnjuries, and readiness to forgive,
after the example of his Master Christ, contributed not a little to his praise.
In alms-deeds he was to his power ready and cheerful; And such was his modesty
and humble temper, that his rare endowments and great Atchievments he esteemed
as nothing. On his sickbed his Speeches were gracious, full of piety toward
God, charity toward men and confidence in Christ. His name now and memory is
blessed with them especially, that without prejudice peruse his works, that in
two considerable Volumes are now public in the Latin tongue, which I could
wish that all men well understood, were it but to read Episcopius. I doubt not
but there are many, who have much improved themselves by his writings. Our
famous Hales is not doubtless without companions of whom this is reported by
Mr. Anthony Farindon, his familiar friend: that he himself often told him, that
at the well pressing of Jo. 3.16. by Episcopius, he bade Jo. Calvine
Goodnight. It would be in vain for me here to enlarge, who am speaking to
those, that through unacquaintance with Latin, are incapable to see the great
knowledge and eloquence of our Episcopius: as for those who converse honestly
with his Writings, they need not me. But I would not that any should think of
me, that I take all his sayings for gospel; No, I believe that his Writings as
well as other men's must be read with judgment: for I nothing doubt, but that
Errata's may be found in his works, not only such that are justly imputable to
the Transcriber and Printer, but such also that are the Authors, who was
subject to err, though much more free from errors than many.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Francis Smith at the Elophant and Castle without Temple Bar.
BAptism before or after Faith and Repentance largely discussed; not only in
public Disputations; Managed by many Ministers before Thousands of people, but
also Mr. Baxter, Dr. Holmes, Dr. Featly, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cook* Mr.
Cotton; Their arguments for and against truly controverted being a subject very
useful in these inquiring times, for general satisfaction in this point so much
controverted, in folio 10 s. 6. d.

Hooles Latin and English Grammar, fitted not only for the use of all Schools,
but very useful for any person desirous to Learn the Latin tongue, being a
more plain and speedy help then any yet extant Sixth Edition; 8o. price bound 2
s.

A Caution to Christians against Mistakes in their Faith, opening the nature
and difference of effectual faith that will not, and of the Dead faith that
will at last deceive men in their hopes of Justification by it; showing also
that holiness in men as well as the happiness of men is Gods aim in Contriving
the terms of their Salvation in 40, 2 s. 6 d. bound.

One thing needful, or a serious meditation on the 4 last things, Death,
Judgment, Heaven and Hell unto which is now added Eball and Gerizzim; or the
Blessing and the Curse. third Edition 12o. 6. d. bound.

The Young Scholars pocket Book containing the first Rudiments in Arithmetic,
with the Rule of 3. also the way to find the Content of Board, Glass, Land,
Timber, Stone, Globes. third Edition, 12o. 8. d. bound.

Youths Tragedy, a Poem drawn up by way of Dialogue, between Youth, the Devil,
Wisdom, the Nuncius, Time, Death, the Soul, for Caution and Direction of the
younger sort. third Edition 40. 4. d, bound.

Symptoms of growth and decay to Godliness, in 80 Signs of a living and dying
Christian, with the causes of decay and remedies for recoveries in Large 8o.
third Edition at 1. s. 6. d. bound.

A new and useful Concordance to the Holy Bible, whereunto is added beyond any
extant the chief acceptations and various significations of words contained in
the Old and new Testament, with marks to distinguish the Commands, promises and
Threatenings; also a collection of those Scripture prophesies which relate to
the Call of the Jews and the Glory that shall be in the Latter Days in 8o, at
2. s. 6. d. bound. in 120. at 2. s. bound. where it is also to be had printed
on a fine page and bound with the Bible in 80. or 12o.

FINIS.

