THE HISTORY OF The Late Revolution OF THE EMPIRE OF THE GREAT MOGOL: Together
with the most considerable Passages for 5 years following in that Empire.

To which is added, A LETTER to the Lord COLBERT, touching the Extent of
Indostan; the Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the World, to discharge it
self there; as also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same: And the
Principal Cause of the Decay of the States of Asia.

By Monsr F. BERNIER, Physician of the Faculty of Montpelier.

Englished out of French.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by M. Pit at the Angel, and S. Miller at the Star,
in St. Paul's Church yard; and J. Starkey at the Miter near Temple Bar. 1676.

An EXTRACT of a LETTER Written to Mr. H. O.
FROM Monsieur DE MONCEAUX THE YOUNGER, Giving a Character of the BOOK here
Englished, and its AUTHOR.
VIrtue sometimes is no less interessed than Affection: Both, Sir, are glad to
receive from time to time pledges mutually answering for those that have united
themselves in a close correspondence. Yours indeed should demand of me such, as
might be a security to you for the advance you have been pleased to make me of
your Friendship. But since at present I have nothing worth presenting you with;
and yet am unwilling to give you any leisure to be diffident of my realness, or
to repent for having so easily given me a share in your esteem, I here send you
a Relation of INDOSTAN, in which you will find such considerable Occurrences,
as will make you confess, I could not convey to you a more acceptable Present,
and that Monsieur Bernier, who has written it, is a very Gallant Man, and of a
mould, I wish all Travelers were made of. We ordinarily travel more out of
Unsettledness than Curiosity, with a design to see Towns and Countries rather
than to know their Inhabitants and Productions; and we stay not long enough in
a place, to inform our selves well of the Government, Policy, Interests and
Manners of its People. Monsieur Bernier, after he had benefitted himself for
the space of many years by the converse of the famous Gassendi, seen him expire
in his arms, succeeded him in his Knowledge, and inherited his Opinions and
Discoveries, embarked for Egypt, stayed above a whole year at Cairo, and then
took the occasion of some Indian Vessels, that Trade in the Ports of the Red
Sea, to pass to Suratte; and after Twelve years abode at the Court of the GREAT
MOGOL, is at last come to seek his rest in his native Country, there to give
an Account of his Observations and Discoveries, and to pour out into the bosom
of France, what he had amassed in India.

Sir, I shall say nothing to you of his Adventures, which you will find in the
Relations that are to follow hereafter, which he abandons to the greediness of
the Curious, who prefer their satisfaction to his quiet, and do already
persecure him to have the sequel of this History. Neither shall I mention to
you the hazards he did run, by being in the Neighborhood of Mecca; nor of his
prudent Conduct, which made him merit the esteem of his Generous Fazelkan, who
since is become the first Minister of that Great Empire, whom he taught the
principal Languages of Europe, after he had Translated for him the whole
Philosophy of Gassendi in Latin, and whose leave he could not obtain to go
home, 'till he had got for him a select number of our best European Books,
thereby to supply the loss he should suffer of his Person. This, at least, I
can assure you of, that never a Traveller went from home more capable to
observe, nor has written with more knowledge, candor, and integrity; that I
knew him at Constantinople, and in some Towns of Greece, of so excellent a
Conduct, that I proposed him to my self for a Pattern in the Design I then had,
to carry my Curiosity as far as the place where the Sun rises; that I have
often drowned in the sweetness of his entertainment the bitternesses, which
else I must have swallowed all alone, in such irksome and unpleasant passages,
as are those of Asia.

Sir, You will do me a pleasure to let me know the sentiment, your Illustrious
SOCIETY has of this Piece. Their Approbation begets much emulation among the
Intelligent, who all have no other Ambition than to please them. I my self must
avow to you, that if I thought I could merit so much, I should not so stiffly
oppose, as I do, the Publication of the Observations and Notes I have made in
the Levant. I should suffer my Friends to take them out of my Cabinet, where,
from the slight value I have for them, they are like to lie imprisoned, except
the KING my Master, by whose Order I undertook those Voyages, should absolutely
command me to set them at liberty, and to let them take their course in the
world. Mean time, Sir, you will oblige me, to assure those GREAT MEN, who this
day compose the most knowing Company on Earth, of the Veneration I have for the
Oracles that come from their Mouth, and that I prefer their Lyceum before that
of Athens; and lastly, that of all their Admirers there is none, that has a
greater Concern for their Glory, than

Paris, Julij 16, 1670. De MONCEAUX.

The HEADS of the Principal Contents of this HISTORY: Added by the English
Interpreter.
1. What depth of Policy and Craft was used by Aureng-Zebe, the Heroes in this
History, and the Third of the Four Sons of Chah-Jehan the Great Mogol, to
supplant all his Brothers, and to settle himself in the Throne: And how the
first Foundation thereof was laid by the Vizier of the King of Golkonda, and
the sickness of Chah-Jehan the Father of Aureng-Zebe. 2. A mixture of
Love-Intrigues, practiced by the Princess Begum-Saheb, one of the two Daughters
of the Great Mogol, Chah-Jehan. 3. How Aureng-Zebe having overcome all his
Brothers, did secure his Father, and others, whom he had cause to be jealous
of. 4. How the Neighbors of the Empire of Mogol demeaned themselves toward
the new Emperor, Aureng-Zebe; and what Embassies were dispatched to him, first
by the Usbec-Tartars (where a Description of that Country and People;) then
the Dutch of Suratte; as also from Mecca, from Arabia Felix, from Ethiopia and
Persia; together with an Account of their respective Instructions, Receptions,
Entertainments and Dismissions; particularly of that of the Hollanders,
securing and improving their Trade by this their Embassy. 5. Aureng-Zebe's
singular prudence, and indefatigable pains, in managing the Government himself;
and how he treated him that endeavored to persuade him to take his ease and
pleasure, now he was established. 6. Aureng-Zebe's distaste against his
Favourite-Sister, Rauchenara-Begum, occasioned by some Love Cabals. 7. His
great Care in appointing a Governor and Tutor to his Third Son Sultan Ekbar.
8. With what wisdom and severity* Aureng-Zebe received and treated his
Pedantick Tutor, who expected to be made a great Lord for his former service;
together with a Model for the suitable Education of a Great Prince, prescribed
by Aureng-Zebe on this occasion. 9. In what credit Judiciary Astrology is over
all Asia. 10. How the Kings of India make themselves Heirs of all the Estate of
those that dye in their service. 11. Of the Reciprocal Appearance of Kindnesses
between Aureng-Zebe and his Imprisoned Father and Sister. 12* What passed
between Aureng-Zebe and Emir-Jemla, who had laid the first Groundwork to
Aureng-Zebe's Greatness. 13. What in these Revolutions was transacted about the
Bay of Bengale and the Heathen Kingdom of Rakan. 14. How Aureng-Zebe carried
himself toward his two Eldest Sons, Sultan Mahmoud and Sultan Mahum: And how,
for a Trial of the Obedience and Courage of the latter, he commanded him to
kill a certain Lion, that did great mischief in the Country; together with the
success thereof. 15. Diverse Particulars, showing the Interest between Indostan
and Persia, supposed by this Author to be unknown, or at least not well known
hitherto. 16. How generously Aureng-Zebe recompensed those that had faithfully
served him in these Revolutions. 17. Some Account of that small Kingdom of
Kachimere, or Cassimere, represented as the Paradise of the Indies; concerning
which the Author affirms, that he has a particular History of it in the
Persian Tongue. 18. A considerable Relation of Suratte's being strangely
surpised and plundered, by a stout Rebel of Visapour; and how the English and
Dutch saved themselves and their Treasure in this bold Enterprise. 19. A
particular Account both of the former and present State of the whole Peninsule
of Indostan; the occasion of its Division into diverse Sovereignties, and the
several Arts used to maintain themselves one against another; particularly of
the present Government and State of the Kingdoms of Golkonda and Visapour, and
their Interests in reference to the Great Mogol. 20. Of the Extent of Indostan,
and the Trade which the English, Portugueses, and Hollanders, have in that
Empire; as also of the vast quantities of Gold and Silver, circulated through
the World, and conveyed into Indostan, and there swallowed up, as in an Abyss.
21. Of the many Nations, which in that vast Extent of Country cannot be well
kept in subjection by the Great Mogol. 22. Of the Great Mogol's Religion, which
is Mahumetan, of the Turkish, not Persian Sect. 23. Of his Militia, both in the
Field and about his Person; and how the same is provided for, employed,
punctually paid, and carefully distributed in several places. 24. Of the
Omrahs, that is, the Great Lords of Indostan; their several Qualities, Offices,
Attendants. 25. The Artillery of the Mogol, great and small, very considerable.
26. Of his Stables of Horses, Elephants, Camels, Mules, etc. 27. Of his
Seraglio. 28. Of his vast Revenues and Expenses. 29. What Prince may be said to
be truly Rich. 30. An important State-Question Debated, viz. Whether it be more
expedient for the Prince and People, that the Prince be the sole Proprietor of
all the Lands of the Country over which he Reigns, yea or no?
THE HISTORY OF The Late Revolution OF THE DOMINIONS OF THE GREAT MOGOL.
THE desire of seeing the World having made me Travel into Palestina and Egypt,
would not let me stop there; it put me upon a resolution to see the Red Sea
from one end to the other. I went from Grand Cairo, after I had staid there
above a year; and in two and thirty hours, going the Caravan pace, I arrived at
Suez, where I embarked in a Galley, which in seventeen days carried me, always
in sight of land, to the Port of Gidda, which is half a days journey from
Mecca. There I was constrained (contrary to my hopes, and the promise which the
Beig of the Red Sea had made me) to go a shore on that pretended Holy Land of
Mahomet, where a Christian, that is not a Slave, dares not set his foot. I
staid there four and thirty days; and then I embarked in a small Vessel, which
in fifteen days carried me along the Coast of Arabia the Happy to Moka, near
the Straight of Babel-mandel. I resolved to pass thence to the Isle of Masowa
and Arkiko, to get as far as Gouder, the Capital Town of the Country of
Alebech, or the Kingdom of Aethiopia; but I received certain information, that,
since the Portugueses had been killed there by the intrigue of the Queen
Mother, or expelled, together with the Jesuit Patriarch, whom they had brought
thither from Goa, the Roman Catholics were not safe there; a poor Capuchin
having lost his head at Suaken, for having attempted to enter into that
Kingdom: That indeed, by going under the name of a Greek or an Armenian I did
not run so great hazard, and that even the King himself, when he should know,
that I could do him service, would give me Land to Till by Slaves, which I
might buy if I had money; but that undoubtedly they would forthwith oblige me
to Marry, as they had lately done a certain Friar, who had passed there under
the name of a Greek Physician; and that they would never suffer me to come away
again.

These considerations, among others, induced me to change my resolution. I went
aboard of an Indian Vessel; I passed those Streights, and in two and twenty
days I arrived at Surratte in Indostan, the Empire of the Great Mogol, in the
Year 1655. There I found, that he who then Reigned there, was called
Chah-Jehan, that is to say, King of the World; who, according to the History of
that Country, was Son of Jehan-Guyre, which signifies Conqueror of the
World, Grandchild of Ekbar, which is Great, and that thus ascending by
Hohmayons, or the Fortunate, Father of Ekbar, and his other Predecessors, he
was the Tenth of those that were descended from that Timur-Lengue, which
signifies the Lame Prince, commonly and corruptly called Tamerlan, so renowned
for his Conquests; who Married his near Kinswoman, the only Daughter of the
Prince of the Nations of Great Tartary, called Mogols, who have left and
communicated their Name to the strangers, that now Govern Indostan, the
Country of the Indians; though those that are employed in public Charges and
Offices, and even those that are listed in the Militia, be not all of the Race
of the Mogols, but strangers, and Nations gathered out of all Countries, most
of them Persians, some Arabians, and some Turks. For, to be esteemed a Mogol,
it is enough to be a stranger white of Face, and a Mahumetan; in distinction as
well to the Indians, who are brown, and Pagans, as to the Christians of Europe,
who are called Franguis.

I found also at my arrival, that this King of the World, Chah-Jehan, of above
seventy years of Age, had four Sons and two Daughters; that, some years since,
he had made these four Sons Vice-Kings or Governors of four of his most
considerable Provinces or Kingdoms; that it was almost a year that he was
fallen into a great sickness, whence it was believed he would never recover:
Which had occasioned a great division among these four Brothers (all laying
claim to the Empire) and had kindled among them a War which lasted about five
years, and which I design here to describe, having been present at some of the
most considerable Actions, and entertained for the space of eight years at that
Court, where Fortune and the small stock of Money (left me after diverse
encounters with Robbers, and the expenses of a Voyage of six and forty days
from Suratte to Agra and Dehli, the Capital Towns of that Empire) obliged me to
take a Salary from the Grand Mogol in the quality of a Physician, and a little
while after from Danech-mend-Kan, the most knowing Man of Asia, who had been
Bakchis or Great Master of the Horse, and was one of the most powerful and the
most considerable Omrahs or Lords of that Court.

The Eldest of these four Sons of Chah-Jehan was called Dara, that is Darius.
The Second was called Sultan Sujah, that is the Valiant Prince. The Name of the
Third was Aurenge-Zebe, which signifies the Ornament of the Throne. That of the
Fourth was Morad-Bakche, as if you should say, Desire accomplished. Of the two
Daughters, the eldest was called Begum-Saheb, that is the Mistress Princess;
and the youngest Rauchenara-Begum, which is as much as Bright Princess, or the
Splendor of Princesses.

It Is the Custom of the Country, to give such Names to their Princes and
Princesses. Thus the Wife of Chah-Jehan, so renowned for her Beauty, and for
having a Tomb, which much more deserved to be reckoned among the Wonders of the
World, than those unshapen Masses, and those heaps of stones in Egypt, was
called Tage-Mehalle, that is to say, the Crown of the Seraglio; and the Wife of
Jehan-Guyre, who has so long Governed the State, whilst her Husband minded
nothing but Drinking and Divertisements, was first called Nour-Mehalle, and
afterward, Nour-Jehan-Begum, the Light of the Seraglio, the Light of the
World. The reason, why they give such kind of Names to the Great Ones, and not
Names from their Land or Dominion (as is usual in Europe) is, because all the
Land being the Kings, there are no Marquisates, Earldoms and Dutchies, of which
the Grandees might bear their Names; all consists in Pensions either of Land or
ready Money, which the King gives, increases, retrencheth, and takes away, as
seems good unto him: And it is even for this reason, that the Omrahs have also
no other but such Names; one (for example) being called Raz-Audaze-Kan, i. e. a
Thunderer; another, Safe Cheken-Kan, a Breaker of Ranks; a third,
Bare-Audaze-Kan, a Man of Lightening; others, Dianet-Kan, or Danechmend-Kan, or
Fazel-Kan, i. e. the Faithful Lord, the Intelligent, the Perfect, and the like.

Dara, the Eldest Son, wanted not good Qualities. He was Gallant in
Conversation, Witty in Reparties, exceeding Civil and Liberal, but entertained
too good an opinion of his person, esteeming himself alone capable of all, and
thinking it scarce possible that any Body was able to give him counsel;
insomuch, that he would give reproachful Names to those who pretended to advise
him in any thing; whereby it came to pass, that even those, who were most
affectionate to him, were shie to discover to him the most secret Intrigues of
his Brothers. Besides, he was apt to be transported with passion, to menace, to
injure, to affront, even the greatest Omrahs or Lords; but all passed over like
a flash of Light. Though he was a Mahumetan, and publicly expressed in the
ordinary Exercises of Religion to be so, yet, in private, he was Heathen with
the Heathen, and Christian with the Christians. He had constantly about him of
those Heathen Doctors, to whom he gave very considerable Pensions, and who (as
was said) had instilled into him Opinions contrary to the Religion of the Land;
of which I may touch something hereafter, when I shall come to speak of the
Religion of the Indians or Gentiles. He also hearkened of late very willingly
to the Reverend Father Buzee a Jesuit, and began very well to relish what he
suggested. Yet there are some who say, that at the bottom he was void of all
Religion, and that whatever he pretended in it, was only for curiosity, or, as
others say, out of policy, to make himself beloved by the Christians, who are
pretty numerous in his Artillery; but above all, to gain the Affection of the
Rajas or Sovereign Gentiles, that were Tributary to the Empire, and to make
them of his party upon occasion. Mean time, this has not mueh furthered his
Affairs, on the contrary, it will appear in the sequel of this History, that
the pretense used by Aureng-Zebe, his third Brother, to Cut off his Head, was,
that he was turned Kafer, that is to say, an Infidel, of no Religion, an
Idolater.

Sultan Sujah, the second Brother, was much of the humor of Dara, but he was
more close and more settled, and had better Conduct and Dexterity. He was fit
to manage an Intrigue well, and he made, under hand, friends by the force of
presents, which he heaped upon the great Omrahs, and principally upon the most
powerful Rajas, as Jessomseigne, and some others; but he did somewhat too much
indulge his pleasures, in entertaining an extraordinary number of Women, among
whom when he was, he spent whole days and nights in drinking, singing, and
dancing. He made them presents of very rich Apparel; and he increased or
lessened their pensions according as the fancy took him: By which kind of Life
his Affairs did languish, and the affections of many of his people cooled. He
cast himself into the Religion of the Persians, although Chah-Jehan, his
Father, and all his Brothers, were of the Turkish. It Is known that Mahumetanism
is divided into several Sects, which made that famous Check-Sady, Author of the
Goulistan, say in Verse, which is to this effect in Prose; I am a Dervich
Drinker, I seem to be without Religion, and I am known of sixty two Sects. But
of all those Sects there are two principal ones, whose Partisans are mortal
Enemies to one another. The one is that of the Turks, whom the Persians call
Osmantous, that is, Sectators of Osman; they believing that it is he that was
the true and lawful Successor of Mahomet, the Great Caliph or Sovereign Priest,
to whom alone it did appertain to interpret the Alcoran, and to decide the
Controversies to be met with in the Law. The other is that of the Persians,
whom the Turks call Chias, Rafezys, Aly-Merdans, that is, Sectaries, Heretics,
Partisans of Aly, because they believe, contrary to the belief of the Turks,
that this succession and pontifical Authority, which I just now intimated, was
due only to Aly the Son-in-law of Mahomet. It was by reason of State that
Sultan Sujah had embraced this latter Sect, considering that all the Persians
being Chias, and most of them, or their Children, having the greatest power at
the Court of Mogol, and holding the most important Places of the Empire, he had
most reason to hope, that, when occasion served, they would all take his part.

Aureng-Zebe, the third Brother, had not that Gallantry, nor surprising
Presence of Dara, he appeared more serious and melaneholy, and was indeed much
more judicious, understanding the World very well, and knowing whom to choose
for his service and purpose, and where to bestow his favor and bounty most for
his interest. He was reserved, crafty, and exceedingly versed in dissembling,
insomuch that for a long while he made profession to be Fakire, that is, Poor,
Dervich, or Devout, renouncing the World, and faining not to pretend at all to
the Crown, but to desire to pass his Life in Prayer and other Devotions. In the
mean time he failed not to make a party at Court, especially when he was made
Vice-King of Decan; but he did it with so much dexterity, art, and secrecy,
that it could hardly be perceived. He also had the skill to maintain himself in
the Affection of Chah-Jehan his Father, who although he much loved Dara, could
yet not forbear to show that he esteemed Aureng-Zebe, and judged him capable to
Reign; which caused jealousy enough in Dara, who began to find it, insomuch
that he could not hold from saying sometimes to his friends in private; Of all
my Brothers I apprehend only this Nemazi, that is, this Bigot, this great
Praying-man.

Morad-Bakche, the Youngest of all, was the least dextrous, and the least
judicious. He cared for nothing but mirth and pastime, to drink, hunt, and
shoot. Yet he had some good Qualities; for he was very civil and liberal; he
gloried in it, that he kept nothing secret; he despised Cabals; and he bragged
openly, that he trusted only in his Arm and Sword: In short, he was very Brave,
and if this Bravery had been accompanied with some Conduct, he would have
carried the Bell from all his Brothers, and been King of Indostan; as will
appear in what is to follow.

Concerning the two Daughters, the Eldest, Begum-Saheb, was very Beautiful, and
a great Wit, passionately beloved of her Father. It was even rumoured, that he
loved her to that degree as is hardly to be imagined, and that he alleged for
his excuse, that, according to the determination of his Mullahs or Doctors of
his Law, it was permitted a Man to eat of the Fruit of the Tree he had planted.
He had so great a confidence in her, that he had given her charge to watch over
his safety, and to have an Eye to all what came to his Table: And she knew
perfectly to manage his humor, and even in the most weighty Affairs to bend
him as she pleased. She was exceedingly enriched by great pensions, and by
costly presents, which she received from all parts, for such Negotiations as
she employed her self in about her Father: And she made also great expenses,
being of a very liberal and generous disposition. She stuck entirely to Dara,
her Eldest Brother, espoused cordially his part, and declared openly for him;
which contributed not a little to make the Affairs of Dara prosper, and to keep
him in the affection of his Father; for she supported him in all things, and
advertised him of all occurrences: Yet that was not so much, because he was the
Eldest Son, and she the Eldest Daughter (as the people believed) as because he
had promised her, that as soon as he should come to the Crown he would Marry
her; which is altogether extraordinary, and almost never practiced in Indostan.

I shall not scruple to relate here some of the Amors of this Princess,
although shut up in a Seraglio, and well kept, like other Women. Neither shall
I apprehend, that I may be thought to prepare Matter for a Romancer; for they
are not Amors like ours, followed by Gallant and Comical Adventures, but
attended with Events dreadful and Tragical.

Now it is reported, that this Princess found means to let a young Gallant enter
the Seraglio, who was of no great Quality, but proper, and of a good Mien. But
among such a number of jealous and envious persons, she could not carry on her
business so privily, but she was discovered. Chah-Jehan, her Father, was soon
advertised of it, and resolved to surprise her, under the pretense of giving
her a Visit, as he used to do. The Princess seeing him come unexpected, had no
more time than to hide this unfortunate Lover in one of the great Chaudrons
made to Bath in; which yet could not be so done, but that Chah-Jehan suspected
it. Mean time he quarrelled not with his Daughter, but entertained her a pretty
while, as he was wont to do; and at length told her, that he found her in a
careless and less neat posture; that it was convenient she should wash her
self, and bath oftener; commanding presently, with somewhat a stern countenance,
that forthwith a Fire should be made under that Chaudron, and he would not part
thence, before the Eunuchs had brought him word, that that unhappy Man was
dispatched. Some time after she took other measures, she chose for her
Kane-saman, that is, her Steward, a certain Persian called Nazerkan, who was a
young Omrah, the handsomest and most accomplished of the whole Court, a Man of
Courage and Ambition, the Darling of all, insomuch that Chah-Hestkan, Uncle of
Aureng-Zebe, proposed to Marry him to the Princess: But Chah-Jehan received
that proposition very ill, and besides, when he was informed of some of the
secret Intrigues that had been formed, he resolved quickly to rid himself of
Nazerkan. He therefore presented to him, as 'twere to do him honor, a Betele,
which he could not refuse to chew presently, after the Custom of the Country.
Betele is a little knot made up of very delicate leaves, and some other things,
with a little Chalk of Sea-Cockles; which makes the Mouth and Lips of a
Vermilion color, and the Breath sweet and pleasing. This young Lord thought of
nothing less than being poisoned: He went away from the Company very jocund and
content into his Paleky; but the Drug was so strong, that before he could come
to his House, he was no more alive.

Rauchenara-Begum never passed for so handsome and spiritual as Begum-Saheb,
but she was not less cheerful, and comely enough, and hated pleasures no more
than her Sister. But she addicted her self wholly to Aureng-Zebe, and
consequently declared her self an Enemy to Begum-Saheb and Dara. This was the
cause, that she had no great Riches, nor any considerable share in the Affairs
of the State: Nevertheless as she was in the Seraglio, and wanted no Wit and
Spies, she could not but discover many important Matters, of which she gave
secret advertisement to Aureng-Zebe.

Chah-Jehan, some years before the Troubles, finding himself charged with these
four Princes, all come to Age, all Married, all pretending to the Crown,
Enemies to one another, and each of them making secretly a Party, was perplexed
enough, as to what was fittest for him to do, fearing danger to his own Person,
and foreseeing what afterward befell him: For, to shut them up in Goualeor,
which is a Fortress where the Princes are ordinarily kept close, and which is
held impregnable, it being situated upon an inaccessible Rock, and having
within it self good water, and provision enough for a Garrison; that was not so
easy a thing. They were too potent already, each of them having a Princely
Train. And again, he could not handsomely remove them far off, without giving
them some Government fit for their Birth; wherein he apprehended they would
Cantonize themselves, and become little independent Kings; as actually they
afterward did. Nevertheless, fearing lest they should cut one another Throat
before his Eyes, if he kept them still at Court, he at last concluded to send
them away. And so he sent Sultan Sujah, his second Son, into the Kingdom of
Bengale; his third, Aureng-Zebe, into Decan; and the youngest, Morad-Bakche, to
Guzaratte; giving to Dara, the eldest, Cabal and Multan. The three first went
away very well content with their Government; and there they Acted each the
Sovereign, and retained all the Revenues of their respective Countries,
entertaining great Troops, under the pretense of bridling their Subjects and
Neighbors. As to Dara, because the eldest, and designed to the Crown, he
stirred not from the Court; which that he should not do, seemed also to be the
intention of Chah-Jehan, who entertained him in the hopes of succeeding him
after his Death. He even permitted then, that Orders were issued out by him,
and that he might sit in a kind of Throne, beneath his, among the Omrahs; so
that it seemed, as if there were two Kings together. But as it is very difficult
for two Sovereigns to agree, Chah-Jehan, though Dara showed him great
Observance and Affection, always harbored some diffidence, fearing above all
things the Morsel; and besides, for as much as he knew the parts of
Aureng-Zebe, and thought him more capable to Reign than any of the rest, he had
always (as they say) some particular correspondence with him.

This it is, what I thought fit to premise concerning these four Princes, and
their Father Chah-Jehan, because it is necessary for the understanding of all
that follows. I esteemed also, that I was not to forget those two Princesses,
as having been the most considerable Actors in the Tragedy; the Women in the
Indies taking very often, as well as at Constantinople and in many other
places, the best part in the most important Transactions, though Men take
seldom notice of it, and trouble their heads of seeking for other Causes.

But to deliver this History with clearness, we must rise somewhat higher, and
relate what passed, some time before the Troubles, between Aureng-Zebe, the
King of Golkonda, and his Vizier Emir-Jemla; because this will discover to us
the Character and Temper of Aureng-Zebe, who is to be the Heroes of this Piece,
and the King of the Indies. Let us then see, after what manner Emir-Jemla
proceeded, to lay the first foundation of the Royalty of Aureng-Zebe.

During the time that Aureng-Zebe was in Decan, the King of Golkonda had for
his Vizier and General of his Armies this Emir-Jemla, who was a Persian by
Nation, and very famous in the Indies. He was not a Man of great Extraction,
but beaten in Busiuess, a person of excellent parts, and a great Captain. He
had the Wit of amassing great Treasures, not only by the Administration of the
Affairs of this opulent Kingdom, but also by Navigation and Trade, sending
ships into very many parts, and causing the Diamond Mines, which he alone had
farmed under many borrowed names, to be wrought with extraordinary diligence.
So that people discoursed almost of nothing but of the Riches of Emir-Jemla,
and of the plenty of his Diamonds, which were not reckoned but by Sacks. He had
also the skill to render himself very potent and considerable, entertaining,
besides the Armies of the King, very good Troops for his particular, and above
all a very good Artillery, with abundance of Franguys or Christians to manage
it. In a word, he grew so rich, and so puissant, especially after he had found
a way to enter into the Kingdom of Karnates, and to pillage all the ancient
Churches of the Idols of that Country, that the King of Golkonda became
jealous of it, and prepared himself to unsaddle him; and that the more, because
he could not bear what was reported of him, as if he had used too great
familiarity with the Queen his Mother, that was yet beauteous. Yet he
discovered nothing of his Design to any, having patience, and waiting 'till
Emir came to the Court, for he was then in the Kingdom of Karnates with his
Army. But one day, when more particular News was brought him of what had passed
between his Mother and Him, he had not power enough to dissemble any longer,
but was transported by choler to fall to invectives and menaces: Whereof Emir
was soon made acquainted, having at the Court abundance of his Wives Kindred,
and all his nearest Relations and best Friends possessing the principal
Offices. The Kings Mother also, who did not hate him, had speedy information of
the same. Which obliged Emir, without delay, to write to his only Son, Mahmet
Emir-Kan, who then was about the King, requiring him to do the best he could to
withdraw with all speed from the Court, under some pretense of Hunting, or the
like, and to come and join with him. Mahmet Emir-Kan failed not to attempt
diverse ways; but, the King causing him to be narrowly observed, none of them
all would succeed. This very much perplexed Emir, and made him take a strange
resolution, which cast the King in great danger to lose his Crown and Life; so
true it is; that he who knows not to Dissemble, knows not how to Reign. He writ
to Aureng-Zebe, who was then in Daulet-Abad, the Capital of Decan, about
fifteen or sixteen days Journey from Golkonda, giving him to understand, that
the King of Golkonda did intend to ruin him and his Family, notwithstanding the
signal Services he had done him, as all the World knew; which was an
un-exampled Injustice and Ingratitude; that this necessitated him to take his
refuge to him, and to entreat him, that he would receive him into his
protection; that, for the rest, if he would follow his advice, and confide in
him, he would so dispose Affairs, that he would at once put into his hands both
the King and Kingdom of Golkonda. This thing he made very easy, using the
following Discourse: You need but take four or five thousand Horse, of the best
of your Army, and to March with Expedition to Golkonda, spreading a rumor by
the way, that it is an Ambassador of Chah-Jehan that goes in haste, about
considerable Matters, to speak with the King at Bag-naguer. The Dabir, who is
he that is first to be addressed unto, to make any thing known unto the King,
is allied to me, and my Creature, and altogether mine; take care of nothing but
to March with expedition, and I will so order it, that without making you
known, you shall come to the Gates of Bag-naguer; and when the King shall come
out to receive the Letters, according to custom, you may easily seize on him,
and afterward of all his Family, and do with him what shall seem good to you;
in regard that his House of Bag-naguer, where he commonly resides, is unwalled
and unfortified. He added, that he would make this Enterprise upon his own
Charges, offering him fifty thousand Roupies a day (which is about five and
twenty thousand Crowns) during the whole time of the March.

Aureng-Zebe, who looked only for some such occasion, had no mind at all to
lose so fair an one. He soon undertook the Expedition, and did so fortunately
manage his Enterprise, that he arrived at Bag-naguer, without being otherwise
known than as an Ambassador of Chah-Jehan. The King of Golkonda being
advertised of the arrival of this pretended Ambassador, came forth into a
Garden, according to custom, received him with honor, and having
unfortunately put himself into the hands of his Enemy, ten or twelve Slaves,
Gurgis, were ready to fall upon and to seize his person, as had been projected;
but that a certain Omrah, touched with tenderness, could not forbear to cry
out, though he was of the party, and a Creature of Emir, Does not your Majesty
see that this is Aureng-Zebe? Away; or you are taken. Whereat the King being
affrighted, slips away, and gets hastily on horseback, riding with all his
might to the Fortress of Golkonda, which is but a short League from thence.

Aureng-Zebe seeing he was defeated in his Design, yet was not therefore
discomposed; but seized at the same time on the Royal House, takes all the
rich and good things he finds there; yet sending to the King all his Wives
(which over all the Indies is very religiously observed;) and goes to Besiege
him in his Fortress. But as the Siege, for want of having brought along all
Necessaries, held on long, and lasted above two months, he received Order from
Chah-Jehan to raise it, and to retire into Decan again; so that, although the
Fortress was reduced to extremities, for want of Victuals and Ammunition of
War, he found himself obliged to abandon his Enterprise. He knew very well,
that it was Dara and Begum that had induced Chah-Jehan to send these Orders,
from the apprehension they entertained, that he would become too powerful; but
in the mean time he never discovered any resentment of it, saying only, that he
ought to obey the Orders of his Father. Yet he withdrew not, without causing
underhand payment to be made to him of all the Charges of his Expedition:
Besides, he Married his Son Sultan Mahmoud to the Eldest Daughter of that King,
with a promise, that he would make him his Successor, causing him also to give
him for a Dowry the Fortress and the Appurtenances of Bamguyre. He also made
the King consent, that all the Silver Money, that should be Coined for the
future in that Kingdom, should bear on one side the Arms of Chah-Jehan; and
that Emir-Jemla should withdraw with his whole Family, all his Goods, Troops,
and Artillery.

These two Great Men were not long together, but they framed great Designs: On
the way they Besieged and took Bider, one of the strongest and most important
Places of Visapour; and thence they went to Daulet-Abad, where they contracted
so intimate a Friendship together, that Aureng-Zebe could not live without
seeing Emir twice a day, nor Emir without seeing Aureng-Zebe. Their Union began
to cause a new Face in all the Affairs of those Parts, and laid the first
foundations of the Royalty of Aureng-Zebe.

This Prince having used the Art to make himself to be called to the Court
diverse times, went with great and rich presents to Agra to Chah-Jehan,
presenting him his Service, and inducing him to make War against the King of
Golkonda, and him of Visapour, and against the Portugals. At first he presented
to him that great Diamond, which is esteemed matchless; giving him to
understand, that the precious stones of Golkonda were quite other things, than
those Rocks of Kandahar; that there it was, where the War ought to be made, to
get the possession thereof, and to go as far as Cape Comory. Chah-Jehan,
whether it were that he was dazzled by the Diamonds of Emir, or whether he
thought it fit, as some believe he did, to have an Army in the Field, somewhat
to restrain Dara, whom he found active in making himself potent, and who with
insolence had ill treated the Vizier Sadullah-Kan (whom Chah-Jehan passionately
loved, and considered as the greatest Statesman that had been in the Indies)
causing him even to be made away with poison, as a Man not of his party, but
inclined to Sultan Sujah; or rather, because he found him too powerful, and in
a condition to be the Umpire of the Crown, if Chah-Jehan should decease; or
lastly, because being neither Persian, nor of Persian Extraction, but an
Indian, there were not wanting envious persons, who spread abroad, that he
entertained in diverse places numerous Troops of Patans, very Gallant Men, and
well paid, with a design to make himself King, or his Son; or at least to expel
the Mogols, and to restore to the Throne the Nation of the Patans, of whom he
had taken his Wife. However it be, Chah-Jehan resolved to send an Army toward
Decan under the Conduct of Emir-Jemla.

Dara, who saw the consequence of this Affair, and that the sending of Troops
for those parts, was to give strength to Aureng-Zebe, opposed it exceedingly,
and did what he could to hinder it. Nevertheless, when he saw that Chah-Jehan
was resolute for it, he at last thought it best to consent; but with this
condition, that Aureng-Zebe should keep in Daulet-Abad, as Governor only of
the Country, without meddling at all in the War, or pretending to Govern the
Army; that Emir should be the absolute General, who for a pledge of his
Fidelity was to leave his whole Family at the Court. Emir struggled enough
within himself, whether he should agree to this last condition, but when
Chah-Jehan desired him to give that satisfaction to Dara, and promised him,
that after a little while he would send him back his Wife and Children, he
consented, and Marched into Decan toward Aureng-Zebe with a very Gallant Army,
and without any stop entered into Visapour, where he Besieged a strong place
called Kaliane.

The Affairs of Indostan were in that condition, as I have been relating, when
Chah-Jehan fell dangerously sick. I shall not speak here of his sickness, much
less relate the particulars of it. I shall only say this, that it was little
suitable to a Man of above seventy years of Age, who should rather think on
preserving his strength, than to ruin it, as he did. This sickness did soon
allarm and trouble all Indostan. Mighty Armies were levied in Dehly and Agra,
the Capitals of the Empire. Sultan Sujah did the like in Bengale; and
Aureng-Zebe in Decan; and Mord-Bakche in Guzaratte: All four assembled to
themselves their Allies and Friends; all four write, promise, and form diverse
Intrigues. Dara having surprised some of their Letters, showed them to
Chah-Jehan, and made great noise about them; and his Sister Begum failed not to
make use of this occasion, to animate the King against them. But Chah-Jehan was
diffident of Dara, and fearing to be poisoned, gave order, that particular care
should be had of what was brought to his Table. 'Twas also said, that he wrote
to Aureng-Zebe; and that Dara being advertised thereof, could not forbear to
menace, and to break into very passionate expressions. In the mean time the
Distemper of Chah-Jehan lingered, and 'twas bruited every where, that he was
dead. Whereupon the whole Court was disordered, the whole Town alarmed, the
Shops for many days shut up; and the four Sons of the King made openly great
Preparations, each for himself: And to say truth, it was not without reason,
that they all made ready for War; for they all very well knew, that there was
no hopes of quarter, that there was no other way, than to vanquish or dye, to
be King or undone, and that he that should be Conqueror would rid himself of
all the rest, as formerly Chah-Jehan had done of his Brothers.

Sultan Sujah, who had heaped up great Treasures in that rich Kingdom of
Bengale, ruining some of the Rajas or petty Kings that are in those parts, and
drawing great Sums from others, took the Field first of all with a puissant
Army, and in the confidence he had of all the Persian Omrahs, for the Sect of
whom he had declared himself, he boldly Marched toward Agra, giving out openly
that Chah-Jehan was dead, that Dara had poisoned him, that he would revenge the
death of his Father, and in a word, that he would be King. Dara desired
Chah-Jehan to write himself to him, and to forbid him to advance further; which
he did, assuring him, that his sickness was not at all dangerous, and that he
was already much better. But he having Friends at Court, who assured him that
the sickness of Chah-Jehan was mortal, he dissembled, and ceased not to
advance, saying still, that he knew very well Chah-Jehan was dead; and if he
should be alive, he was desirous to come and kiss his feet, and to receive his
Commands.

Aureng-Zebe immediately after, if not at the same time, takes the Field also
in Decan, makes a great noise, and prepares to March toward Agra. The same
prohibition was made to him also, as well from Chah-Jehan, as from Dara, who
threatened him. But he dissembleth, for the same reason that Sultan Sujah had
done, and gives the like answer. Mean time, finding that his Treasure was low,
and his Soldiery very inconsiderable, he devised two artifices, which
succeeded admirably well; the one, in regard of Morad-Bakche; the other, in
respect of Emir-Jemla. To Morad-Bakche he writes with speed a very fair Letter,
importing, that he had always been his true and intimate Friend; that, as for
himself, he laid no claim at all to the Crown; that he might remember, he had
all his Life time made profession of a Fakire, but that Dara was a person
incapable to Govern a Kingdom; that he was a Kafer, an Idolater, and hated of
all the greatest Omrahs; that Sultan Sujah was a Rafezy, an Heretic, and by
consequence an Enemy to Indostan, and unworthy of the Crown: So that, in a
word, there was none but he (Morad-Bakche) that could reasonably pretend to the
Succession; that the Crown did expect him; that the whole Court, which was not
ignorant of his Valor, would be for him; and that for his particular, if he
would promise him, that being King, he would give him leave to live quietly in
some Corner or other of his Empire, there to serve God the remainder of his
days, he was ready to make a conjunction with him, to assist him with his
Counsel and Friends, and to put into his hands his whole Army, to fight Dara
and Sultan Sujah; that in the mean time he sent him an hundred thousand Rupies
(which make about fifty thousand Crowns of our Money) and prayed him to accept
thereof as a pledge of his friendship; and that he would advise him to come
with all possible speed to seize on the Castle of Suratte, where he knew to be
the Treasure of the Land.

Morad-Bakche, who was neither too rich nor too powerful, received with much
joy this proposition of Aureng-Zebe, and the hundred thousand Rupies sent by
him; and showed Aureng-Zebe's Letter to every body, thereby to oblige the
Flower of that Country to take up Arms for him, and the substantial Merchants
to lend him the more willingly such Sums of Money as he demanded of them. He
began in good earnest to Act the King, made large promises to all, and, in
short, did so well, that he set a good Army on foot; of whom he singled out
some three thousand, who, under the Conduct of Chah-Abas, one of his Eunuchs,
but a Valiant Man, should go to Besiege Suratte.

Aureng-Zebe sent his Eldest Son, Sultan Mahmoud, (him whom he had Married to
the Daughter of the King of Golkonda) to Emir-Jemla, who was yet employed in
the Siege of Kaliane, to persuade him to come to him to Daulet-Abad, pretending
to have matter of the greatest importance to communicate to him. Emir, who soon
suspected his intentions, excused himself, saying openly that Chah-Jehan was
not dead, that he had fresh News of his being alive, and that besides, all his
Family being at Agra in the hands of Dara, he could by no means assist
Aureng-Zebe, nor declare himself for him. Whereupon Sultan Mahmoud returned to
Daulet-Abad, without effecting any thing, and very much dissatisfied with Emir.
But Aureng-Zebe lost no courage for all that, but sent the second time to Emir,
yet not Sultan Mahmoud, but Sultan Mazum his Second Son, who presented to him
his Fathers Letter, and handled him with that dexterity, sweetness, and
protestation of friendship, that it was not possible to resist him. Emir
therefore pressed the Siege of Kaliane, forced the Besieged to Surrender upon
Composition, took the choice of his Army, and with all diligence went away with
Sultan Mazum. At his arrival, Aureng-Zebe courted him in the highest degree,
treating him no otherwise than with the Name of Baba and Babagy, that is,
Father, Lord-Father; and after an hundred embraces, he took him somewhat aside,
and told him (according to what I could learn from persons who knew of it) That
it was not just, that having his Family at the Court, he should adventure to do
any thing in his behalf that might come to be known; but that, after all, there
was nothing so difficult but an expedient might be found. Give me leave
therefore, said he, to propose to you a Design, which at first will possibly
surprise you; but, since you apprehend the danger of your Wife and Children
that are in Hostage, the best way of providing for their security would be, to
suffer me to seize on your person, and to put you in prison. It is out of
doubt, that all the World will believe it done in earnest: For who would
imagine, that such a person as you would be content to let your self be laid in
prison? In the interim, I could make use of part of your Army, and of your
Artillery, as you shall judge most proper and convenient: You also could
furnish me with a Sum of Money, as you have frequently offered it; and besides,
methinks I might tempt Fortune further, and we might together take our
measures, to see in what manner I had best to demean my self; if you would also
permit, that I might cause you to be transported into the Fortress of
Daulet-Abad, where you should be Master; and that there I might have you kept
by my own Son, Sultan Mazum, or Sultan Mahmoud; this would yet better palliate
the matter, and I see not, what Dara could justly say of it, nor how he could
reasonably treat your Wife and Children ill.

Emir, whether it were by reason of the Friendship he had sworn to Aureng-Zebe,
or for the great promises made to him, or the apprehension he had, of seeing
near him Sultan Mazum, who stood by, very pensive and well armed, and Sultan
Mahmoud, who looked grim upon him for his coming away at the solicitation of
his Brother, not at that of his, and had at his very entrance lift up his Foot
as if he would have hit him; whatever of these considerations might induce him,
consented to all what Aureng-Zebe desired, and approved of the Expedient to
suffer himself to be imprisoned; so that Aureng-Zebe being no sooner gone, but
the Great Master of the Artillery was seen to approach with some fierceness to
Emir, and to command him in the Name of Aureng-Zebe to follow him, locking him
up in a Chamber, and there giving him very good words, whilst all the
Soldiery, that Aureng-Zebe had thereabout, went to their Arms. The report of
the detention of Emir-Jemla was no sooner spread, but a great tumult arose; and
those, whom he had brought along with him, although astonished, yet put
themselves into a posture of rescuing him, and with their Swords drawn ran to
force the Guards, and the Gate of his Prison; which was easy for them to do:
For Aureng-Zebe had not with him sufficient Troops to make good so bold an
Enterprise; the only Name of Emir-Jemla made all tremble. But the whole matter
being altogether counterfeited, all these Commotions were presently calmed by
the intimations that were given to the Chief Officers of Emir's Army, and by
the presence of Aureng-Zebe, who there appeared very resolute with his two
Sons, and spoke now to one, then to another; and at last by promises and
presents, liberally bestowed on those that were concerned. So that all the
Troops of Emir, and even most of those of Chah-Jehan, seeing things troubled,
and being without their General, and believing Chah-Jehan to be dead, or, at
best, desperately sick; considering also the ample promises made to them of
augmenting their Stipend, and of giving them at that very time three months
advance, soon listed themselves under Aureng-Zebe; who having seized on all the
Equipage of Emir, even his very Camels and Tents, took the Field, resolved to
March to the Siege of Suratte, and to hasten the taking it in; where
Morad-Bakche was exceedingly embarrassed, because that his best Troops were
employed there, and that he found more resistance in that place than he
imagined. But Aureng-Zebe, after some days March, was informed, that the
Governor had surrendered the Place; for which he sent Congratulations to
Morad-Bakche, acquainting him withal of his Transactions with Emir-Jemla, and
assuring him, that he had Forces and Money enough, and very good Intelligence
at the Court; that nothing was wanting; that he was directly going to Brampour
and Agra; that he had expected him on the way, and therefore desired him to
join with him.

It Is true, that Morad-Bakche found not so much Money in the Fortress of
Suratte as he had imagined, whether it were that really there was not so much
as was reported, or whether the Governor had diverted a part of it, as some
believed: Yet notwithstanding that little he found there was useful to him, to
pay the Soldiers that had listed themselves in hopes of the advantages, they
should make of the imagined vast Treasure of Suratte. It Is not less true, that
he had no greater reason to boast of the taking of this Place, in regard there
was not any Regular Fortification about it; and yet his Army had lain before it
above a month, and would never have reduced it without the Hollanders, who
furnished them with the Invention of Springing a Mine, which ruining a great
side of the Wall, cast the Besieged into such a consternation, that it made
them immediately surrender. The reduction of this Town did much advance his
Design, Fame proclaiming immediately throughout these Countries, that
Morad-Bakche had taken Suratte; that he had sprung a Mine, which sounded very
big among the Indians, who as yet do little understand that practice; and that
there he had found a vast Treasure. Notwithstanding this great noise, and all
the first advantages, joined to all those frequent Letters and great Promises
of Aureng-Zebe, the Eunuch Chah-Abas, a Man of good Sense, of a great Heart,
and exceedingly affectionate to the Service of his Master, was not of opinion,
that Morad-Bakche should so much tie himself in interest to Aureng-Zebe, or
precipitate his conjunction with him, but advised, that he should amuse him
with words, and let him advance alone toward Agra; that in the mean time there
would come certain News of the sickness of Chah-Jehan; that he should first
see, what Channel Affairs would run in; that he should Fortify Suratte, as a
very good Post, able to render him Master of a very large and rich Country;
and that perhaps in time he might seize Brampour, which is a very considerable
Passage of a River, and as 'twere a Bar of Decan. But the continual Letters and
Protestations of Aureng-Zebe, joined to the small Forces, Artillery, and
Treasure of Morad-Bakche, blinded with an excessive ambition to Reign, made him
regardless of all other considerations; so that he went away from Amadevad,
abandoned Guzaratte, and took his way through the Woods and Mountains, with all
expedition, to be at the Rendevouz, where Aureng-Zebe had looked for him these
two or three days.

Great Solemnities of Joy were made at the conjunction of the two Armies, the
Princes visited one another, Aureng-Zebe made a hundred protestations and no
less promises to Morad-Backche, assured him afresh, and solemnly, of his not
caring for the Crown, as also of his being there for no other end than to
assist him against Dara, their Common Enemy, and to place him in the Throne,
which expected him.

Upon this Enterview, and confirmation of Friendship, both Armies Marched
together, Aureng-Zebe continuing always, during the March, in the protestations
of Friendship, and in his Courtship to Morad-Bakche, treating him never
otherwise, whether in public or private, but with the Title of Hazaret, that
is, King and Majesty: So that Morad-Bakche was fully persuaded, that
Aureng-Zebe meant sincerely, from an excess of affection toward him; whence he
even willingly, and without ceremony, suffered the submissions and respects he
showed him; instead of remembering what had lately passed at Golkonda, and of
considering, that he, who had thus hazarded himself with so much boldness to
usurp a Kingdon, was not of a temper to live and dye a Fakire-

These two Armies thus joined made a Body considerable enough; which begot a
great noise at Court, and gave cause of thoughtfulness, not only to Dara, but
to Chah-Jehan himself, who knew the great parts and subtle Conduct of
Aureng-Zebe, and the Courage of Morad-Bakche; and who foresaw very well, that a
Fire was a kindling, which would be very hard to quench. It was to no purpose
to write Letters upon Letters, signifying that he was well, and giving Order
that they should turn back to their respective Governments, and expressing
also, that he would forget all that had passed hitherto. All his Letters were
not able to hinder their advance; and as the sickness of Chah-Jehan did still
pass for mortal, there being no persons wanting to bring and spread such News,
they still continued to dissemble, giving out, that they were Letters
counterfeited by Dara; that Chah-Jehan was dead indeed; but that, in case he
were alive, they would go to kiss his Feet, and deliver him from the hands of
Dara.

What then should Chah-Jehan, this unfortunate King, do, who sees, that his
Sons have no regard to his Orders; who is informed at all hours, that they
march apace toward Agra in the head of their Armies, and who in this
conjuncture finds himself sick to boot in the hands of Dara, that is, of a man
who breaths nothing but War; who prepares for it with all imaginable
earnestness, and with all the marks of an enraged resentment against his
Brothers? But what could he do in this extremity? He is constrained to abandon
to them his Treasures, and to leave them to their disposal. He is forced to
send for his old and most trusty Captains, whom he knows for the most part to
be not very affectionate to Dara; he must command them to fight for Dara,
against his own Blood, his own Children, and those, for whom he has more
esteem than for Dara; he is obliged forthwith to send an Army against Sultan
Sujah, because it is he that is most advanced; and he is to send another against
Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, who no less are marching toward him.

Soliman Chekouh, the eldest Son of Dara, a young Prince of about Five and
twenty years of Age, very proper of Body, and of good Parts and Conduct,
generous, liberal, and universally beloved, especially of Chah-Jehan, who had
already enriched him, and who considered him rather for his Successor than
Dara, was he, that was made General of this Army against Sujah. Nevertheless
Chah-Jehan, who wished much rather, that Sujah were returned to Bengale, than
that the matter should be tried by a bloody Combat, which could not be but very
Tragical, and wherein he run the hazard of losing one or other of his Sons,
gave him for Companion an Ancient Raja, called Jesseigne, who is at present one
of the powerfullest and richest Rajas of all Indostan, and one the ablest in
the whole Kingdom, with a secret Order not to fight, except it were altogether
unavoidable; as also to endeavor by all means to induce Sujah to retire, and
to reserve his Forces for a better occasion; that is to say, after they should
have seen the event of the sickness of Chah-Jehan and the success of
Aureng-Zebe, and of Morad-Bache. But this young Prince, Soliman Chekouh, full
of heat and courage, breathing after nothing but to signalize himself by some
great action, and Sultan Sujah fearing lest Aureng-Zebe gaining a Battle should
first make himself Master of the Capital Towns of the Empire, Agra and Dehly;
it was impossible for the Raja Jesseigne to keep them from a Combat. The two
Armies are no sooner in sight of one another, but they prepare to fall on, and
they were not long from giving some Vollies of Cannon. I shall not relate the
particulars of this Fight, for, besides that the narration of it would be too
long and tedious, in the sequel of this History we shall be obliged to describe
more considerable ones, by which the Reader will be able to judge of this. It Is
sufficient to know in general, that the first onset was very sharp and
obstinate on both sides, but that at length Soliman Chekouh did urge Sujah with
that force and vigor, that he disordered him, and made him fly: So that if
Jesseigne, and the Patan Delil-kan, who was one of the first Captains and a
valiant Man, but an intimate Friend of the Raja, and did not act but being
moved by him, had seconded him in good earnest, it is thought that the whole
Army of Sujah would have been defeated, and himself in danger of being taken:
But that was not the Design of the Raja to destroy him, no more than it was
that of Chah-Jehan, who had given him order to the contrary. Thus then had
Sujah time to retreat, and that without losing any considerable number of his
Men; yet because Soliman Chekouh kept the field, and brought away some pieces
of Artillery, it was presently bruited at Court, Sujah had been totally
overthrown. This Defeat purchased great reputation to Soliman Chekouh, lessened
much the esteem of Sultan Sujah, and cooled exceedingly all the Persians that
had an inclination for him.

After that some days were spent in the pursuit of Sujah, the Prince Soliman
Chekouh, who every day received News from the Court, and who learned, that
Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche did approach with great resolution, well knowing,
that his Father Dara had no great stock of prudence, but good store of secret
Enemies, resolved to quit the pursuit of Sultan Sujah, and with all speed to
return to Agra, where in all appearance Dara was to give Battle against
Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche. This was the best counsel he could take, for no
man doubts, that if he could have been there in good time, Aureng-Zebe would
not have had the advantage; and it is even believed, he would never have
hazarded the Combat, the party being too unequal; but the bad fortune of Dara
did not permit it.

Whilst all that was thus transacted toward Elabas, which is the place where
the Gemna is joined to Ganges; the Scene was very different on the side of
Agra. At the Court they were much surprised to hear, that Aureng-Zebe had
passed the River of Brampour, and all the other passages that were most
difficult between the Mountains; so that with all haste they sent away some
Troops to dispute with him the passage of the River Eugenes, whilst the whole
Army was making ready. For which purpose, there were chosen two of the most
considerable and the most powerful of the Kingdom to command it; the one was
Kasem-Kan, a renowned Captain and very affectionate to Chah-Jehan, but one that
had no great inclination to Dara, and who went not but to oblige Chah-Jehan,
whom he saw in the hands of Dara: The other was Jessomseigne, a potent Raja,
not inferior to Jesseigne, and Son-in-law to that Raja Rana, who was at the
time of Ekbar so puissant, as if he had been the Emperor of the Raja's. Dara
at their farewell expressed to them great kindness, and presented them nobly;
but Chah Jehan took his time, before their departure, to charge them in secret,
as he had done the Raja Jesseigne, when he went away in the Expedition against
Sultan Suiah with Soliman Chekouh. Neither were they wanting, in their March,
to send several times to Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, to persuade them to turn
back: But this was in vain; their Envoys came not again, and the Army advanced
with that diligence, that they saw it much sooner than they thought upon a
rising ground, not far remote from the River.

It being then Summer, and the season of the greatest heats, the River was
fordable; which was the cause, that at the same time Kasem-Kan and the Raja
prepared themselves to give Battle; besides that, they soon knew the resolution
of Aureng-Zebe, that he would force them, since that, although his Army was not
all come up, he gave them some Vollies of Cannon; his design being to amuse
them, fearing lest they themselves should pass the River, not only to prevent
his passage, but also to hinder his Army from reposing, and from taking an
advantageous post; which was indeed in great disorder, and so tired by their
March, and so faint by the heat, that if at the very first it had been
assaulted, and kept from passing the Water, it would doubtless have been routed
without much resistance. [I was not by in this first Encounter, but thus it was
generally discoursed of, and it agrees with the after-relation of many of our
Frenchmen, who served Aureng-Zebe in the Artillery.] But they were content to
stay at the Riverside, to keep Aureng-Zebe from passing it, according to the
Order they had received.

After that Aureng-Zebe had let his Army rest two or three days, and by amusing
the Enemy, had fitted it to pass the River, he made his whole Artillery play,
which was very well placed; and he commanded, that under the favor of the
Cannon they should pass the River. Kasem-Kan and the Raja, on their part,
discharged theirs also, and did what they could to repulse the Enemy, and to
keep him from passing. The Combat was sharp enough at first, and very
obstinately maintained by the extraordinary Valor of Jessomseigne. For as to
Kasem-Kan, although a great Captain, and a stout Man, he gave no great proof of
his Valor in this occasion; yea, some accuse him of Treachery, charging him
that he had in the night caused the Bullets and Powder to be hid under the
Sand, there being no more of them to be found after two or three discharges.
However it be, the Combat for all that was, as I said, very resolutely carried
on, and the passage long disputed. There were Rocks in the Bed of the River,
which did much embarass, and the Banks in many places were very high and
difficult to climb up. But at last, Morad-Bakche cast himself into the water
with so much resolution and force, and showed so much valor and boldness, that
there was no resisting of him. He passed over, and with him a good part of the
Army, which made Kasem-Kan to give back, and cast Jessomseigne into great
danger of his person. For by and by he found the whole Body of the Enemy upon
him, and without the extraordinary resolution of his Ragipous, who almost all
were killed about him, he had been a dead man. One may judge of the great
danger he was in upon this occasion, by this, that after he had disengaged
himself as well as he could, and was come back to his own, not daring to return
to Agra, because of the great loss he had suffered, of seven or eight thousand
Ragipous he had but five or six hundred of them remaining.

These Ragipous, who take their name from the Rajas, that is to say, the
Children of the Rajas, are from Father to Son such Men as make the Sword their
Profession. The Rajas, whose Subjects they are, do assign them Lands for their
subsistence, on condition to be always ready to go to War when summoned. So
that one might say, that they were a sort of Pagan Nobles, if the Rajas gave
them their Lands in propriety for them and their Children. They are great
takers of Opium; and I have sometimes wondered at the quantity I have seen them
take: They accustom themselves to it from their youth. On the day of Battle
they double the Dose, this Drug animating, or rather inebriating them, and
making them insensible of danger; insomuch that they cast themselves into the
Combat like so many furious Beasts, not knowing what it is to run away, but
dying at the feet of their Raja, when he stands to it. They want nothing but
Order, Resolution they have enough. It Is a pleasure thus to see them, with the
fume of Opium in their head, to embrace one another, when the Battle is to
begin, and to give their mutual Farewels, as Men resolved to dye. And that they
do for this reason; that the Great Mogol, though a Mahumetan, and by
consequence an Enemy of the Heathen, yet for all that entertains always a good
number of Rajas in his service, whom he considers as his other Omrahs, and
imploys in his Armies as if they were Mahumetans.

I cannot forbear to relate here the fierce reception, which the Daughter of
the Rana gave to her Husband Jessomseigne, after his defeat and flight. When
she heard that he was nigh, and had understood what had passed in the Battle;
that he had fought with all possible courage, that he had but four or five
hundred Men left; and that at last, not being able to resist any longer the
Enemy, he had been obliged to retreat: She, in stead of sending one to receive
him, and to console him in his misfortunes, commanded in a dry mood to shut the
Gates of the Castle, and not to let this infamous Man enter; that he was not
her Husband; that she would never see him; that the Son-in-law of the Great
Rana, could not have so low a Soul; that he was to remember, that being grafted
into so Illustrious an House, he was to imitate the Virtue of it; and, in a
word, that he was either to vanquish or to dye. A moment after she was of
another humor; she commands a Pile of Wood to be laid, that she might burn her
self, that they abused her; that her Husband must needs be dead; that it could
not be otherwise. And a little while after this, she was seen to change her
countenance, to fall into passion, and to break out into a thousand reproaches
against him. In short, she remained thus transported eight or nine days,
without being able to resolve to see her Husband, 'till at last her Mother
coming in, brought her in some degree to her self, and comforted her, assuring
her, that as soon as the Raja had but a little refreshed himself, he would
raise another Army, to fight Aureng-Zebe, and repair his Honor at any rate.

By which story one may see a pattern of the Courage of the Women in that
Country: To which I could add something I have seen some of them do, who
burned themselves alive after the death of their Husbands; but we must reserve
this Discourse for another place, where I shall also show, that there is
nothing which opinion, prepossession, custom, hope, and the point of honor,
etc. may not make Men do or suffer.

Dara having understood what had passed at Eugenes, fell into that choler
against Kasem-Kan, that it was thought he would have cut off his Head, if he
had been upon the place. He was also transported against Emir-Jemla, as the
Person that was the first and principal Cause of the Misfortune, and who had
furnished Aureng-Zebe with Men, Money, and Cannon. He is ready to kill his Son
Mahmet Emir-Kan, and will send his Wife and Daughter to Basar, or the
Marketplace of prostituted Women; and it is past doubt, that he would have done
some such thing, if Chah-Jehan, with much art and prudence, had not moderated
the excess of his passion, in remonstrating to him, that Emir-Jemla had not so
little conduct, nor so great a Friendship for Aureng-Zebe, as to hazard, and in
a manner to sacrifice his Family, for the advancing of his Interest; that
Aureng-Zebe must needs have gulled and ensnared him, by his usual artifice and
cunning.

As for Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, the happy success of this first Encounter
did so swell their hearts, and gave such Courage to their whole Army, that
henceforth they believed themselves invincible, and capable to compass any
thing. Besides, Aureng-Zebe, the more to animate his Soldiers, bragged openly,
that he had Thirty thousand Mogols at his devotion in the Army of Dara; and
there was something in it, as appeared by the sequel. Morad-Bakche was for
nothing but fighting, and would march with all diligence. But Aureng-Zebe
represented to him, that it was necessary the Army should refresh themselves
for some time upon the Banks of this sweet River; that in the mean time he
would write to all his Friends, and get a full and certain information of the
state of the Court, and of the condition of all Affairs. So that he marched not
toward Agra, 'till he had rested some days, and after that he marched but
slowly, to inform himself of all, and to take his time and measures.

Concerning Chah-Jehan, when he plainly saw the resolution of Aureng-Zebe and
Morad-Bakche, and that there was no hope left to make them turn back, he was in
such a perplexity, that he knew not what to resolve, and foreseeing some great
calamity, he would fain have hindered the last decisive Battle, for which he saw
Dara preparing himself with great eagerness. But what could he do to oppose it?
He was yet too weak of his sickness, and saw himself still in the hands of
Dara, whom, as I have said, he trusted not much: So that he found himself
obliged to acquiesce in his Will, and to commit to him all the Forces of the
Empire, and to command all Captains to obey him. Immediately all was in Arms: I
know not, whether there was ever a more gallant Army seen in Indostan. It Is
said, that there were little less than an hundred thousand Horse, and twenty
thousand Foot, with four thousand pieces of Cannon, without reckoning the
incredible number of Servants, Followers, Victuallers, whom Historians me
thinks do often put into the number of the Combatants, when they speak of those
formidable Armies of three or four hundred thousand Men, of which their Books
are full. Though this Army was very brave, and strong enough to cut in pieces
two or three of such as Aureng-Zebe had, in which there were no more than
thirty five or forty thousand Men in all, and these tired and harassed by a
very long and irksom March, during the height of the Heats; and but a small
number of Cannon, in respect of that of Dara. Mean time (which seems hard to
believe) there was scarce any Body that presaged well for Dara, all knowing,
that most of the chief Omrahs had no affection for him, and that all the good
Soldiers that were for him, and whom he might confide in, were in the Army of
Soliman Chekouh, his Son. And 'twas for this reason, that the most prudent and
the most faithful of his Friends, and Chah-Jehan himself, counseled him, not
to hazard a Battle: Chah-Jehan offering, as infirm as he was, that he would go
into the Field himself, and be carried before Aureng-Zebe, to interpose; which
was looked upon as a very good Expedient for Peace, and for accomodating the
Affairs of Chah-Jehan. For it is certain, that Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche,
would never have had the boldness to fight against their own Father; and if
they should have attempted it, they would have smarted for it, because, besides
that the match was not equal, and all the great Omrahs were so affectionate to
Chah-Jehan, that they would not have failed to fight resolutely, if they had
seen him in the head of the Army; besides this, I say, the Captains themselves
of Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche, bore great affection and respect to this
Prince, whose Creatures they most were; and the whole Army, in a manner, was
his. So that in all appearance, not one of them would have presumed to draw his
Sword against him, nor he been at the pains of drawing his.

Then they advised Dara, that if he would not hearken to this Expedient, he
should at least not precipitate the business, but delay, 'till Soliman Chekouh,
who made all haste to join, were come in. Which was also very good counsel, in
regard that that Prince was beloved of all, and was lately come home
victorious, and had the most faithful and the bravest Soldiers with him. But
Dara would never hearken to any proposition that could be made to him, and he
thought on nothing else but to give Battle presently, and to go against
Aureng-Zebe in person. And possibly he did not amiss, as to his own Honor and
particular Interest, if he could have commanded Fortune, and made things
succeed as he contrived them. For the Considerations he had (as he could not
forbear now and then to discover) were some such as these:

He looked upon himself as Master of the Person of Chah-Jehan; that he could
dispose of him as he pleased; that he was also Possessor of all the Treasures
and Forces of the Empire; that Sultan Sujah was half ruined; that his two other
Brothers, with a weak and tired Army, were come to cast themselves into his
hands; that, if he gained the Battle, they could not escape him; that he should
all at once be absolute Master, and at the end of all his troubles, and at the
height of his wishes, so as no body could contradict him in any thing, or
dispute the Crown with him. Whereas if Chah-Jehan should take the Field, all
Affairs would be accommodated, his Brothers would return to their Governments,
Chah-Jehan, who began to recover his health, would resume the Government as
before, and all things would return into their first channel: That, if he
should stay for Soliman Chekouh, his Son, Chah-Jehan might take some Design to
his disadvantage, or contrive something with Aureng-Zebe; that whatever he
could do for gaining the Victory, the Reputation, which Soliman Chekouh had
purchased, would still give him all the honor of it. And after that, what
would not he be capable to undertake, swelled with so much glory and success,
and especially being supported, as he was, by the favor and affection of
Chah-Jehan, and of the greatest part of the Omrahs? What did he know, whether
he would keep any modesty, or any respect for him, and whether his Ambition
might not carry him?

These Considerations made Dara resolve to stand out against the counsel of
all, and to pursue his point. And for that purpose, he commanded immediately
the whole Army to take the Field, and thereupon came to take leave of
Chah-Jehan, who was in the Fortress of Agra. This good old Man was ready to
melt in tears, when he embraced him; but withal failed not to represent to
him, with a very grave countenance: Well, Dara, since thou art resolved to
follow thine own will, go, God bless thee, but remember well these few words;
If thou losest the Battle, take heed of ever coming into my Presence. But this
made no great impression upon him; he goes forth briskly, takes horse, and
seizes on the Passage of the River Tchembel, which is about Twenty Miles from
Agra; where he fortified himself, expecting his Enemy. But the subtle and
crafty Fakire, who wanted no good Spies, and people that gave him intelligence
of all, and who knew that the Passage was there very difficult, took good heed
to attempt the forcing it. He came to encamp himself near it, so that from the
Camp of Dara one might discover his Tents. But what does he in the mean time?
He inveagles a certain Rebel of Raja, called Chempet, presents him richly, and
promises him a thousand fine things, if he would let him pass thorough his
Territories, that so he might go with speed to gain a certain place, where he
knew that the River might be passed on foot with ease. Chempet agrees, and
offers of his own accord, that he would himself attend him, and show him the
way through the Woods and Hills of his Country. Aureng-Zebe raised his Camp
the same night, without any noise, leaving some of his Tents to amuse Dara, and
marching night and day, made such haste, that he was almost as soon on the
other side of the River, as Dara could have notice of it. Which obliged Dara to
abandon the River there, and to leave all his Fortifications, and to follow his
Enemy* who, he was told, did advance with great diligence toward Agra, to gain
the River of Gemna, and there without trouble, and at his ease, to enjoy the
water, to fortify, and to fix himself well, and so to expect Dara. The place
where he encamped is but five leagues from Agra, it was formerly called
Samonguer, and now Fateabad, which is to say, Place of Victory. A little while
after, Dara also came to encamp there, nigh the Bank of the same River, between
Agra and the Army of Aureng-Zebe,

The two Armies were there between three and four days in sight of one another,
without fighting. Mean time Chah-Jehan wrote several Letters to Dara, that
Soliman Chekouh was not far off; that he should not precipitate; that he should
come near Agra, and choose an advantageous place to fortify himself 'till he
came. But Dara answered, that before three days were passed, he would bring to
him Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche tied hand and foot, to do with them what he
should think fit. And without expecting any longer, he began at that very hour
to put his Army in Battle array.

He placed in the Front all his Cannon, causing them to be tied the one to the
other with Chains, to shut the passage to the Cavalry. Behind these Pieces of
Cannon, he placed also front-wise a great number of light Camels, on the
forepart of the Bodies whereof they fasten a small Piece, of the bigness of a
double Musket; a Man sitting on the hind-part of the Camel, being able to
charge and discharge without lighting. Behind these Camels stood the greatest
part of the Musketeers. Of the rest of the Army, which chiefly consisted in
Cavalry, furnished with Bows and Arrows, (as ordinarily are the Mogols, that
is, at present, white Men, Mahumetans, strangers, as Persians, Turks, Arabians,
and Usbecks;) or with a Sword, and a kind of Half-pike, as commonly are the
Ragipous: Of all these, I say, there were made three different Bodies. The
right Wing was committed to Calil-ullah-Kan, with Thirty Thousand Mogols under
his Command; for he was made Great Bakchis, that is, Great Master of the
Cavalry, in the place of Danechmend-Kan, that was afterward my Agah, who
voluntarily resigned this Office, seeing that he was not well beloved of Dara,
for having always highly maintained against him the Interest and Authority of
Chah-Jehan. The left Wing was given to Rustam-Kan Dakny, a very renowned and
very valiant Captain, together with the Raja Chatresale, and the Raja Ramseigne
Routle.

On the other side, Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche put also their Army almost
into the same Order; except that in the midst of the Troops of some Omrahs,
they had hid some small Field-Peeces, which was, as was said, after the way and
Art of Emir-Jemla, and with no ill effect.

They hardly made use of any more Art, than what has been now related; only
they placed here and there some Men casting Bannes, which is a kind of Granado
fastened to a stick, that may be cast very far through the Cavalry, and which
extremely terrifieth Horses, and even hurts and kills sometimes.

All this Cavalry turns about very easily, and they draw their Arrows with
mavelous swiftness; one Man being able to draw six of them, before a
Musqueteer can twice discharge his Musket. The same Cavalry keeps also very
close in several Troops under their respective Officers, especially when they
are going to fight hand to hand. But after all, I see not, that this way of
putting an Army in array, is any great matter, in comparison of our Armies,
when in good order.

All things being thus disposed, the Artillery began to play on both sides; for
it is always the Cannon that makes the prelude amongst them; and the Arrows were
now seen to fly through the Air, when unexpectedly there happened to fall a
Storm of Rain, so violent, that it interrupted the Combat. The Rain ceasing,
the Cannon began afresh to roar; and then it was that Dara appeared, who being
mounted upon a proud Elephant of Ceilau, commanded that an Onset should be made
on all sides; and himself advanced into the midst of the Body of the Cavalry,
directly toward the Enemies Artillery, who received him warmly, killed store
of Men about him, and put into disorder, not only the Main Body which he
commanded, but also the other Bodies of the Cavalry that followed him. Yet
notwithstanding, because he was seen to keep firm upon his Elephant, without
any appearance of giving back, and was observed to look every where about him
with an undaunted look, and to make signs with his hands to advance and to
follow him, this disorder soon ceased, every one resuming his Rank, and
advancing in the same pace with Dara. But he could not reach the Enemy, without
receiving another Volley of Cannon-shot, which caused a second and great
disorder in his Men, and made a good part of them recoyl; yet he, without any
change in his countenance, stood to it, encouraging his Troops, and gave still
signs, that they should follow him, and advance with speed without any loss of
time. Thus pressing vigorously forward, he forced the Enemies Artillery, broke
the Chains, entered into their Camp, and made a Rout in their Camels and
Infantry, and in every thing he met with on that side; opening also a good
passage to the Cavalry that followed him. Then it was, that the Enemies Cavalry
facing him, a sore Combat began. A shower of Arrows filled the Air from both
sides, Dara himself putting his hand to that work: But, to say truth, these
Arrows do but little execution; more of them are lost in the Air, or broken on
the ground, than hit. The first Discharges of Arrows being made, they fought
hand to hand with their Sables, pesle mesle, and the Combat was stoutly
maintained on both sides. Dara is still seen to continue firm on his Elephant,
encouraging, making a noise, and giving signs on all sides; and at last
advancing with so much resolution and force, against all that opposed him in
his March, that he overthrew the Cavalry, and made them to retire and run away.

Aureng-Zebe, who was not far from thence, and mounted also on an Elephant,
seeing this great disorder, was in great trouble, and labored with all his
might to remedy it; but to no purpose. He made the Main Body of his best
Cavalry advance, to try whether he could make head against Dara; but it was not
long before this Body also was forced to give back, and to retreat in great
disorder, whatever Aureng-Zebe could say or do to hinder it. Mean time let us
take notice of his courage and resolution: He saw that almost the whole Body of
his Army was disordered, and in a flying posture, in so much that he had not a
thousand Men about him that kept their standing; (some told me, that there were
scarce five hundred:) He saw, that Dara, notwithstanding the difficulty of the
way, which was uneven, and full of holes in diverse places, made as if he would
rush in upon him: Yet, for all this, he lost no courage, and was so far from
being struck with fear, or from retreating, that he stood firmly to it, and
called by name most of his Captains that were about him, crying out to them,
Delirane Kodahe, (these are his own words,) that is, Courage my old Friends,
God is: What hope is there in flying? Know you not, where is our Decan? Kodahe,
Kodahe, God is, God is. And that none might doubt of his being undaunted, and
that he thought on nothing less than running away, he commanded before them all
(oh strange extremity!) that forthwith Chains should be fastened to the feet of
his Elephant; and was going to fasten them in good earnest, but that they all
declared their courage and resolution, to live and dye with him.

Dara in the interim endeavored to advance upon Aureng-Zebe, though he was yet
at a good distance from him, and though the difficulty of the way embarassed
and retarded him much; he meeting also with some resistance, even from those
disordered Horse of the Enemy, that covered all high and low places where he
was to March. And this Encounter with Aureng-Zebe was looked upon as the thing,
that was to assure Dara of the Victory, and to decide the Battle. And
doubtless, he would have overcome all these difficulties, and Aureng-Zebe, with
the small number left him, would not have been able to bid head to this
victorious Army, if Dara had known how to profit of the prise he had in his
hands. But here he failed; of which I shall now show the occasion, and how
thereby the Scale was turned to Aureng-Zebe's advantage.

Dara perceived that his left Wing was in great disorder, and he was informed,
that Rustam-Kan and Chatresale were killed; that Ramseigne Routle had too far
advanced, that he had indeed forced the Enemy, and made way through the midst
of them; but that now he was surrounded every way, and in very great danger.
This it was, which made Dara desist from his design of making directly toward
Aureng-Zebe, that he might go to succor his left Wing. There at first the
Battle was also very sharp, but Dara at last carried it, forcing and routing
all, yet so, as that there still remained something that resisted and stopped
him. Mean time, Ramseigne Routle fought with so much courage and vigor as was
possible. He wounded Morad-Bakche, and came so near him, that he began to cut
the Girdles of his Elephant, to make him fall down; but the valor and good
fortune of Morad-Bakche gave not time enough for it. In short, never any Man
fought and defended himself more bravely, than Morad-Bakche did on this
occasion: All wounded as he was, and pressed by the Ragipous of Ramseigne
Routle, who were round about him* he was not daunted, nor gave way in the
least, but knew so well to take his time, that, although he was, besides
defending himself, to cover with his Shield a Son of his, but of seven or eight
years of Age, who was sitting on his side, he made an Arrow shot so luckily at
Ramseigne Routle, that it made him fall dead to the ground.

Dara soon heard the sad News of this Accident; but at the same time he
understood also, that Morad-Bakche was in very great danger; the Ragipous
fighting furiously, and like Lions, to revenge the death of their Master. And
though he saw, on that side the way was very difficult, and that he still found
some small Body opposing and retarding him; yet he was determined to rush
through to Morad-Bakche: And doubtless this was the best he could do, and that,
which was capable to repair the fault he had committed in not doing his
business thoroughly with Aureng-Zebe. But his bad fortune kept him from it, or
rather, one of the blackest Treacheries that ever was imagined, and the
greatest oversight that was ever committed, did cause the entire loss and ruin
of Dara.

Calil-ullah-Kan (he that commanded the Thirty Thousand Mogols, which made the
right Wing, and were alone able to defeat the whole Army of Aureng-Zebe) did,
whilst Dara and his left Wing fought with so much courage and success, keep
off, as idle as if he were not concerned in the fray, not permitting any one of
his Horsemen to shoot an Arrow, with a pretense, that they were for a Reserve,
and that he had express order not to fight but in the last extremity. But the
true cause was, that he reserved in his breast the rancour of an old Affront,
done him by Dara, when he commanded him to be struck. But after all, this
Treachery would have done no great mischief, if this infamous Man had contented
himself with this first Effect of his Resentment: Behold, how far he carried
his rage, and revengefulness! He cut himself off from his Main Body, and taking
only a few Men with him, rid with all possible speed toward Dara, at the same
time when he was turning to fall on Morad-Bakche, and being come so near as to
make himself be heard, cried out with all his force; Mohbareck-bad, Hazaret,
Salamet, Elhamd-ul-ellah; God save your Majesty, you have obtained the Victory;
what will you do any longer upon your Elephant? Is it not enough, that you have
exposed your self so long? If the least of those shots, that have been made
into your Dais, had reached your Person, what would have become of us Are there
Traitors wanting in this Army? In the Name of God come down quickly and take
Horse. What remains more to be done, than to pursue those Run-aways* Let us do
so, nor let us suffer, that they should escape our hands!

If Dara had had wit enough to discover the cheat, and to consider upon a
sudden the consequences of his not appearing any more upon the Elephant, and
being no more seen by the whole Army, always eying him, or rather, if he had
presently commanded to cut off the Head of this Parasitical Traitor, he had
been Master of all. But the good Prince suffered himself to be blinded by these
sweet words: He hearkened to this advice, as if it had been very true and very
sincere; he descended from his Elephant, and took Horse. But I know not,
whether there passed one quarter of an hour, but he perceived the Treachery of
Calil-ullah-Kan, and repented himself extremely of the great fault he had
committed. He looks about him, he seeks, he asks where he is; he says, he
is a Traitor, he will kill him. But the perfidious Villain is by this time at a
good distance; the occasion is lost. Would it be believed, that as soon as the
Army perceived Dara to be no more upon the Elephant, they imagined that there
was Treason, that Dara was killed; and all were struck with such a terror,
that every one thought on nothing, but how to escape the hands of Aureng-Zebe,
and to save himself. What shall I say? All the Army disbands and flies. A
sudden and strange revolution! He that saw himself just now victorious, finds
himself in a few moments vanquished, abandoned, and obliged to sly himself to
save his life, Aureng-Zebe, by holding out firm a quarter of an hour upon his
Elephant, sees the Crown of Indostan upon his Head; and Dara, for having come
down a little too soon, sees himself precipitated from the Throne, and the
most unfortunate Prince of the World. Thus Fortune takes pleasure, to make the
gain or loss of a Battle, and the decision of a great Empire, depend upon a
nothing.

These great and prodigious Armies, it is true, do sometimes great things; but
when once terror seizes, and disorder comes among them, what means of
stopping the Commotion? It Is like a great River broke through its Dams; it must
overrun all, without a Remedy. Whence it is, that as often as I consider the
condition of sueh Armies, destitute of good order, and marching like flocks of
sheep, I persuade my self, that, if in these parts one might see an Army of
five and twenty thousand Men, of those old Troops of Flandres, under the
conduct of Monsieur le Prince, or of Monsieur de Turenne, I doubt not at all,
but they would trample under foot all those Armies, how numerous soever they
were. And this it is, that now makes me not find it any longer strange or
incredible, what we are told of ten thousand Greeks; and of fifty thousand Men
of Alexander, overcoming six or seven hundred thousand Men of Darius; (if it be
true, that there were so many, and that the Historian did not reckon the
Servants, and all those Numbers of Men, which were to follow the Army, to
furnish it with Forage, Cattle, Corn, and all other necessaries.) Bear only the
first brunt, which would be no very difficult thing for us to do; and behold,
they are all astonished: Or, do like Alexander, set vigorously upon one place,
if that hold not out, (which will be very hard of them to do) you may be sure
the work is done; all the rest presently take fright and flight together.

Aureng-Zebe, encouraged by such a wonderful success, is not wanting to turn
every stone, to employ skill, dexterity, subtilty, craft, courage, to profit by
all the advantages, which so favorable an occasion puts into his hands.
Calil-ullah-Kan is presently with him, offering him his service, and all the
Troops he could be Master of. He, on his side, wants not words of thanks and
acknowledgments, nor a thousand fair promises: But he was very cautious to
receive him in his own name; he carried him presently and presented him to
Morad-Bakche, who, as we may easily think, received him with open arms;
Aureng-Zebe in the mean time congratulating and praising Morad-Bakche, for
having fought so valiantly, and ascribing to him all the honor of the Victory;
treating him with the Title of King and Majesty before Calil-uttah-Kan, giving
him uncommon respect, and doing submissions to him becoming a Subject and
Servant. In the interim, he labors night and day for himself, he writes round
about to all the Omrahs, making sure to day of one, and next day of another.
Chah-hest-Kan, his Uncle, the great and old Enemy of Dara, by reason of an
Affront he had received from him, did the same for him on his part; and as he
is the Person who writes best and subtillest of the Empire of Indostan, so he
contributed not a little by his Cabals to the advancement of the Affairs of
Aureng-Zebe, making strong Parties every where against Dara.

In the mean time let us still observe the artifice and dissimulation of
Aureng-Zebe: Nothing of what he does, treats, promises, is for himself, or
in his own Name; he has still (forsooth) the design of living as a Fakire: All
is for Morad-Bakche, it is he that commands; Aureng-Zebe does nothing; it is
Morad-Bakche that does all, it is he that is designed to be King.

As for the unhappy Dara, he comes with all speed to Agra, in a desperate
condition, and not daring to go see Chah-Jehan, remembering, doubtless, those
severe words which he let fall, when he took leave of him before the Battle,
viz. That he should remember not to come before him, if he were overcome. Yet,
for all that, the good old Father sent secretly a trusty Eunuch to him, to
comfort him, to assure him of the continuance of his affection, to declare to
him his trouble for his misfortune, and to remonstrate to him, that the Case
was not yet desperate, considering that there was a good Army with Soliman
Chekouh, his Son, that he should go to Dehli, where he should find a thousand
Horse in the Royal Stables; and that the Governor of the Fortress had order to
furnish him with Money and Elephants; for the rest, that he should not go
further than he needs must; that he would often write to him: And lastly, that
he very well knew how to find out and chastise Aureng-Zebe.

I have been informed, that Dara was then in such a confusion, and sunk so low,
that he had not the power to answer a word to the Eunuch, nor the courage to
send any one to Chah-Jehan; but that, after having sent several times to
Begum-Saheb, his Sister* he went away at midnight, taking with him his Wife,
his Daughters, and his Grandchild Sepe-Chekouh; and that (which is almost
incredible) he was attended with not above three or four hundred persons. Let
us leave him in his Voyage to Dehli, and stay at Agra, to consider the
dexterity and craft, wherewith Aureng-Zebe proceeded to manage Affairs.

He well knew, that Dara, and those of his Party, could yet place some hopes in
the victorious Army of Soliman Chekouh, and therefore he resolved to take it
from him, or to make it useless to him. To this end, he wrote Letters upon
Letters to the Raja Jesseigne, and to Delil-Kan, who were the chief Heads of
the Army of Soliman Chekouh, telling them, that there was no hope left for Dara
and his Party* that he had lost the Battle; that his whole Army had submitted
to him; that all had abandoned him; that he was fled alone toward Dehli; that
he could never escape him, and that Orders were distributed every where to
seize on him. And as for Chah-Jehan, that he was in a condition hopeless of
recovery; that they should take good care of what they had to do; and if they
were Men of understanding, and would follow his fortune, and be his Friends,
they should seize on Soliman Chekouh, and bring him to him.

Jesseigne found himself perplexed enough, what he should do, still much
apprehending Chah-Jehan and Dara, and more, to lay hands upon a Royal Person,
well knowing, that some mischief might therefore fall on him, sooner or later,
even from Aureng-Zebe himself. Besides, he knew that Soliman Chekouh had too
much courage to let himself be taken after that manner, and that he would
rather dye in defending himself. Behold therefore, what he at last resolved!
After having taken counsel with Delil-Kan, his great Friend, and after they had
renewed to one another the Oath of mutual Fidelity, he went directly to the
Tent of Soliman Chekouh, who with great impatience expected him, (for he also
had heard the News of the Defeat of Dara his Father) and had already diverse
times sent for him. To him he frankly discovered all things, showed him the
Letter of Aureng-Zebe, told him what course was best for him to take,
represented to him the danger he was in; that there was no reason he should
trust in Delil-Kan, or in Daoud-Kan, or in the rest of his Army; but that, as
soon as he could, he should gain the Mountains of Serenaguer; that that was the
best Expedient he could take; that the Raja of that Country being in
unaccessible places, and not apprehending Aureng-Zebe, would doubtless receive
him gladly; and, for the rest, he would soon see how things would go, and be
always in a condition to come down from the Mountains, when he should think
good.

The young Prince understood well enough by this kind of discourse, that there
was no ground to trust henceforth in this Raja, and that there was no more
safety for his Person; and that the rather, because he knew that Delil-Kan was
altogether devoted to him, and he saw well enough, that there was a necessity
to take this course suggested. Whereupon he soon commanded, that his Baggage
should be put up to march toward the Mountains. Some of his most affectionate
Friends, as a good number of Manseb-Dars, of Sajeds, and others, put themselves
in order to attend him; the rest of the Army, altogether astonished, remained
with the Raja. But that, which was very mean for a great Raja, and a very
sordid barbarousness, was, that he and Delil-Kan sent under hand some to fall
upon his Baggage, who also took other things, and among them an Elephant laden
with Rupies of Gold, which caused a great disorder among those small Troops
that followed him; and which was an occasion, that many of them returned and
abandoned him; and invited also the Countrey-people to set upon his Men,
pillaging them, and even killing some of them* Yet he made a shift to gain the
Mountains, with his Wife and Children, where the Raja of Serenaguer received
him with all the honor and civilities he could desire, assuring him, that he
was in safety, as much as if he were King of that Country, and that he would
protect and assist him with all his Forces. In the mean time, behold what
happened on Agra's side.

Three or four days after the Battle of Samonguer, the Victorious Aureng-Zebe,
together with Morad-Bakche, came directly to the Gate of the Town into a
Garden, which may be a little League distant from the Fortress, and sent from
thence an able Eunuch, and one of those whom he most confided in, to
Chah-Jehan, to salute him with a thousand fair protestations of his affection
and submission; that he was exceedingly sorry for what had passed, and for
having been obliged, by reason of the ambition and evil designs of Dara, to
proceed to all those extremities; that, for the rest, he rejoiced extremely to
hear, that he began to find himself better, and that he was come thither for no
other end than to receive his Commands. Chah-Jehan was not wanting to express
to the Eunuch much satisfaction, as to the proceedings of Aureng-Zebe, and to
receive the submissions of this Son with all possible appearances of joy;
though he saw very well, that matters had been carried too far, and
sufficiently knew the reserved and crafty humor of Aureng-Zebe, and his secret
passion for Reigning; and that therefore he was not much to be trusted, for all
his fair words. And yet notwithstanding he suffers himself to be circumvented,
and in stead of playing the surest Chart, by using his utmost power, by
stirring, by appearing, by causing himself to be carried through the Town, and
by assembling all his Omrahs, (for it was yet time to do all this) he goes
about to out-wit Aureng-Zebe, him that was his Crafts-Master, and attempts to
draw him into a snare, wherein he will be found taken himself. He then sends
also an Eunuch to this Son, to let him know, that he well understood the ill
conduct, and even the incapacity of Dara; that he could not but call to mind
the particular inclination he always had and expressed toward him, that he
could not doubt of his affection; and lastly, that he should come to see him,
and to advise with him what was fit to be done in these disorders; and that he
passionately wished to embrace him.

Aureng-Zebe, on his side, saw also well enough, that he was not to trust too
much to the words of Chah-Jehan, knowing especially, that Begum-Saheb, his
Enemy as well as Sister, was night and day about him, and that 'twas very
probable, he acted nothing but by her motion. And he apprehended, that if he
should come into the Fortress, he might be seized on, and ill treated; as it
was said, that the resolution was indeed taken to do so, and several of those
lusty Tartarian Women, which serve in the Seraglio, were armed to set upon him
as soon as he should enter. Whatever it be, he would never hazard himself, and
yet spread a rumor abroad, that the next day he would go to see his Father
Chah-Jehan. But when the day was come, he put it off 'till another, and so he
delayed it from day to day, without ever making the Visit. In the mean time he
continued his secret Negotiations and Cabals, and sounded the mind of all the
greatest Omrahs, so far, that at last, after he had well and closely laid his
Design, and politickly disposed all things for the success thereof, all were
amazed to see, that one day, when he had sent Sultan Mahmoud, his eldest Son,
to the Fortress, under a pretense of seeing Chah-Jehan in his name; this young
Prince, bold and undertaking, falls presently upon the Guards that were at the
Gate, and vigorously drives all before him, whilst a great number of Men
appointed, who were there all ready, did enter with fury, and made themselves
Masters of the Walls.

If ever a Man was astonished, Chah-Jehan was, seeing that he was fallen the
snare which he had prepared for others, that himself was imprisoned and
Aureng-Zebe Master of the Fortress. It Is said, that he presently sent to sound
the mind of Sultan Mahmoud, promising him upon his Crown and upon the Alcoran,
that if he would be faithful to him, and serve him in this conjuncture, he
would make him King; that he should come presently to see him within, and not
lose this occasion: Besides, that it would be an action that would accumulate
on him the blessings of Heaven, and an immortal Glory; in regard it would be
said forever, that Sultan Mahmoud had delivered Chah-Jehan his Grandfather out
of Prison.

And certainly, if Sultan Mahmoud had been resolute enough to give this stroke,
and Chah-Jehan could have come abroad to show himself to the Town, and to take
the Field, no man doubts, but all his great Omrahs would have followed him; nor
would Aureng-Zebe himself have had the boldness nor the savageness to sight
against his own Father in person, especially since he must have apprehended,
that all the world would have abandoned him, and possibly Morad-Bakche himself.
And it is indeed the great fault which Chah-Jehan is observed to have committed
after the Battle, and the flight of Dara, not to have come out of the Fortress.
But yet I have conversed with many, who maintained, that Chah-Jehan did
prudently in it. For this has been a question much agitated among the
Politicians, and there are no Reasons wanting to countenance the Sentiment of
the latter sort; who also add, that Men almost always judge of things by the
Event; that often very foolish Enterprises have been observed to succeed, and
which therefore are approved by all; that if Chah-Jehan had prosper'd in his
Design, he would have been esteemed the most prudent and the most able Man in
the World; but now being taken, he was nothing but a good old Man, that
suffered himself to be led by a Woman, his Daughter Begum, which was blinded by
her passion, and had the vanity to believe, that Aureng-Zebe would come to see
her that the Bird of it self would fly into the Cage, or at least, that he
would never be so bold as to attempt the seizure of the Fortress, nor have the
power to do so. These same Reasoners maintaining also ftifly, that the greatest
fault that Sultan Mahmoud could possibly commit, was, that he knew not how to
take the occasion to assure himself of the Crown, by the rarest and the most
generous Action that ever was, to put his Grandfather at liberty, and thus to
do himself Right and Justice, as the Sovereign Umpire of Affairs; whereas, as
things now stand, he must one day go and dye in Goualeor. But Sultan Mahmoud
(whether it was that he feared his Grandfather would not keep his word with
him, or that he should be himself detained within, or that he durst not play
tricks with his Father Aureng-Zebe) would never hearken to any thing, nor enter
into the Apartment of Chah-Jehan, answering very closely, that he had no order
from his Father to go and see him, but that he was by him commanded not to
return, without bringing him the Keys of all the Gates of the Fortress, that so
he might come with all safety to kiss the Feet of his Majesty. There passed
almost two whole days before he could resolve to surrender the Keys; during
which time, Sultan Mahmoud staid there, unalterable in his resolutions, keeping
himself upon his Guard night and day, with all his Troops about him; 'till at
length Chah-Jehan, seeing that all his People that were upon the Guard at the
little Gate, little by little disbanded, and that there was no more safety on
his side, gave him the Keys, with an order to tell Aureng-Zebe, that he should
come presently if he were wise, and that he had most important things to
discourse with him about. But Aureng-Zebe was too cunning to commit so gross a
fault: On the contrary, he made his Eunuch Etbarkan Governor of the Fortress,
who presently shut up Chah-Jehan, together with Begum-Saheb, and all his Women;
causing diverse Gates to be walled up, that so he might not be able to write or
speak to any body, nor go forth out of his Apartment without permission.

Aureng-Zebe in the mean time writ to him a little Note, which he showed to
every body before he sealed it; in which, among other things, he told him with
dry expressions, that he knew from good hands, that notwithstanding those great
protestations of esteem and affection he made to him, and of contempt he made
of Dara, he had, for all that, sent to Dara two Elephants charged with Rupies
of Gold, to raise him again, and to recommence the War; and that therefore, in
truth, it was not he that imprisoned him, but Dara, and that he might thank him
for it, as the cause of all these misfortunes; and if it had not been for him,
he would have come the very first day to him, and paid him all the most dutiful
respects he could have looked for from a good Son: That, for the rest, he
begged his pardon, and a little patience; as soon as he should have disenabled
Dara from executing his evil Designs, he would come himself and open the Gates
to him.

I have heard it said concerning this Note, that Chah-Jehan in very deed, the
same night that Dara departed, had sent to him these Elephants laden with
Rupies of Gold, and that it was Rauchenara-Begum that found a way to discover
it to Aureng-Zebe; as she also had detected to him that Plot which was laid
against him with those Tartarian Women; and that Aureng-Zebe himself had
intercepted some Letters of Chah-Jehan to Dara.

I have conversed with others, that maintain there is no such thing, and that
this Writing, which Aureng-Zebe showed to all, was only to cast Sand into the
Eyes of the People, and to labor, in some degree, to justify himself in so
strange an action, and to devolve the Cause of it upon Chah-Jehan and Dara, as
if he had been forced to such proceedings. They are things, which are difficult
enough well to discover. However it be, as soon as Chah-Jehan was shut up,
almost all the Omrahs were in a manner necessitated to go and make their Court
to Aureng-Zebe and Morad-Bakche; and (which is almost incredible) there was not
one that had the courage to stir, or to attempt the least in the behalf of his
King, and for him that had made them what they were, and raised them from the
dust, and perhaps from slavery it self (which is ordinary enough in that Court)
to advance them to Riches and Honor. Yet some few there are, as
Danechmend-Kan, and some others, that took no side; but all the rest declared
for Aureng-Zebe.

It Is notwithstanding to be noted what I said, that they were necessitated to
do what they did. For it is not in the Indies, as in France, or other States of
Christendom, where the Grandees and Nobles have large Possessions of Land, and
great Revenues, which enables them for a while to subsist of themselves. There
they have nothing but Pensions (as I have already touched above) which the King
can take away from them at all hours, and thus ruin them in an instant; so that
they shall be considered no more than if they never had been, nor have any
credit to borrow a farthing.

Aureng-Zebe therefore having thus assured himself of Chah-Jehan, and of all
the Omrahs, took what Sums of Money he thought fit out of the Treasury; and
then having left Chah-hest-Kan, his Uncle, Governor of the Town, he went away
with Morad-Bakche to pursue Dara.

The day that the Army was to march out of Agra, the particular Friends of
Morad-Bakche, especially his Eunuch Chah-Abas, who knew, that the excess of
civility and respect is ordinarily a sign of imposture, counseled him, that
since he was King, and every body treated him with the Title of Majesty, and
Aureng-Zebe himself acknowledged him for such, he should let him go to pursue
Dara, and stay himself with his Troops about Agra and Dehli. If he had followed
this counsel, it is certain, that he would have embarassed Aureng-Zebe not a
little; but 'twas fatal, that he should neglect so good advice: Aureng-Zebe is
too fortunate; Morad-Bakche entirely confideth in his promises, and in the
Oaths of Fidelity they had sworn to one another upon the Alcoran. They went
away together, and went with the same pace toward Dehli.

When they were come to Maturas, three or four small days Journeys from Agra,
the Friends of Morad-Bakche, who perceived something, endeavored again to
persuade him, that he should beware; assuring him, that Aureng-Zebe had evil
designs, and that beyond all doubt some mischief was upon the Anvil; that they
had notice of it from all parts, and that by no means, for that day at least,
he should go to see him; that it would be much better to prevent the stroke the
soonest it might be; that he was only to forbear going to visit him that day,
excusing himself with some indisposition. But whatsoever could be said to him,
he believed nothing of it, his Ears were stopped to all the good advice that
was given him, and as if he had been enchanted by the Friendship of
Aureng-Zebe, he could not hold to go to him that very night, and to stay at
Supper with him. As soon as he was come, Aureng-Zebe, who expected him, and had
already prepared all things with Mirkan, and three or four of his most intimate
Captains, was not wanting in embracements, and in redoubling his Courtship,
civilities and submissions, in so much as gently to pass his handkerchief over
his face, and to wipe off his sweat and dust, treating him still with the Title
of King and Majesty. In the mean time, the Table is served, they sup, the
conversation grows warm, they discourse of various things as they use to do*
and at last there is brought a huge Bottle of excellent Chiras Wine, and some
other Bottles of Caboul Wine, for a Debauch. Then Aureng-Zebe, as a grave
serious Man, and one that would appear a great Mahumetan, and very regular,
nimbly rises from Table, and having with much kindness invited Morad-Bakche,
who loved a Glass of Wine very well, and who relished the Wine that was served,
scrupled not to drink of it to excess. In a word, he made himself drunk, and
fell asleep. This was the thing that was wished; for presently some Servants of
his that were there, were commanded away, under a pretense, to let him sleep
without making any noise; and then his Zable and Poniard were taken from about
him: But Aureng-Zebe was not long, but came himself and wakened him. He entered
into the Chamber, and roughly hit him with his foot, and when he began to open
a little his Eyes, he made to him this short and surprising Reprimand: What
means this, said he, What shame and what ignominy is this, that such a King as
you are, should have so little temper, as thus to make himself drunk? What will
be said both of you and me? Take this infamous Man, this Drunkard, tie him hand
and foot, and throw him into that room to sleep out his Wine. No sooner said,
but it was executed; notwithstanding all his appeal and outcry, five or six
persons fall upon him, and fetter his hands and feet. The things could not be
done, but some of his Men that were thereabout had news of it. They made some
noise, and would enter forcibly; but Allah-Couly, one of his chief Officers,
and the Master of his Artillery, that had been gained long before, threatened
them, and made them draw back. Without any delay, Men were sent through the
whole Army to calm this first Commotion, which also might have proved
dangerous; they made them believe it was nothing, they having been present,
that Morad-Bakche was only drunk, that in that condition he had railed at every
body, and Aureng-Zebe himself, in so much that there had been a necessity,
seeing him drunk and furious, to keep him apart; that the next day they would
see him abroad, after he had digested his Wine. In the mean time, the Presents
walked about all night amongst the chief Officers of the Army, their Pay was
forthwith increased, they had great Promises made them; and as there was none,
that had not long since apprehended some such thing, there was no great wonder
to see almost all things quieted the next morning; so that the very next night
this poor Prince was shut up in a little close house, such an one as is wont to
be placed on Elephants to carry Women, and he was carried directly to Dehli
into Slimager, which is a little old Fortress in the midst of the River.

After that all was thus appeased, except the Eunuch Chah-Abas, who caused
difficulty enough, Aureng-Zebe received the whole Army of Morad-Bakche into his
Service, and went after Dara, who marched apace toward Lahor, with an
intention well to fortify himself in that place, and thither to draw his
Friends. But Aureng-Zebe followed him with so much speed, that he had not time
to do any great matter, finding himself necessitated to retreat, and to take
the way of Multan, where also he could do nothing considerable, because that
Aureng-Zebe, notwithstanding the great heat, marched night and day; in so much,
that to encourage all to make haste, he sometimes advanced almost all alone two
or three leagues before the whole Army, finding himself often obliged to drink
ill water like others, to be content with a crust of dry bread, and to sleep
under a Tree, staying for his Army in the midst of the highway, laying his
Head on his Shield like a common Soldier. So that Dara found himself
constrained to abandon Multan also, that he might avoid being near Aureng-Zebe,
whom he was not able to encounter. Here it is that the Statesmen of this Country
have reasoned very diversely: For it is said, that if Dara, when he went out of
Lahor, had cast himself into the Kingdom of Caboul, as he was advised, he would
there have found above ten thousand warlike Men, designed against the Augans,
the Persians, and the Usbecs, and for a Guard to that Country, the Governor
whereof was Mohabet-Kan, one of the most potent and the most ancient of
Indostan, and that had never been Aureng-Zebe's Friend; that, besides, he would
have been there at the Gate of Persia and Usbec; that it was likely, that there
being no want of Money, all that Militia, and Mohabet-Kan himself, would have
embraced his Party, and that further he might have drawn assistance, not only
from Usbec, but also from Persia, as well as from Houmayon, whom the Persians
had restored to his Country against Zaher-Kan, King of the Patans, who had
driven him thence. But Dara was too unfortunate to follow so good advice.
Instead of that he went toward Scimdy, to cast himself into the Fortress of
Tatabakar, that strong and famous place, seated in the midst of the River Indus.

Aureng-Zebe seeing him take this way, found it not fit to follow him further
off, being extremely glad that he had not taken the way to Caboul. He contented
himself to send after him seven or eight thousand Men, under the Conduct of
Mir-baba, his Foster-brother, and turned back with the same expedition to the
place whence he was come, much apprehending left any thing should fall out
about Agra; lest some or other of those potent Raja's, as Jesseigne, or
Jessomseigne, should make an attempt in his absence, to free Chah-Jehan out of
Prison; or lest Soliman Chekouh, together with the Raja of Serenaguer, should
descend from the Hills; or lest also Sultan Sujah should approach too near
Agra. Behold a little accident, which one day befell him, for too great
precipitation.

When he thus returned from Multan toward Lahor, and marched his ordinary
swift pace, he saw the Raja Jesseigne come against him, accompanied with four
or five thousand of his Ragipous, in a very good equipage; Aureng-Zebe, who had
left his Army behind, and who also knew that this Raja was very affectionate to
Chah-Jehan, was sufficiently surprised, as may easily be imagined, fearing left
this Raja should make use of this occasion, and do a Masterpiece of State, by
seizing on him, to draw Chah-Jehan out of Prison, which at that time was very
easy to do. Neither is it known, whether this Raja had not some such design;
for he had marched with extraordinary speed, in so much that Aureng-Zebe had no
news of it, believing him yet to be at Dehli. But what may not resolution and
presence of mind do? Aureng-Zebe, without any alteration of his countenance,
marched directly toward the Raja, and as far off as he could see him, makes
signs to him with his hands, importing that he should make have to a nearer
approach, crying out to him with a loud voice, Salamed Bached Rajagi, Salamed
Bached Babagi, treating him with the Titles of Lord Raja and Lord Father. When
the Raja was come to him; I expected you, said he, with great impatience; the
Work is done, Dara is lost, he is all alone; I have sent Mir-baba after him,
from whom he cannot escape: And for an excess of kindness to him, he took off
his Necklace of Pearls, and put it about the Neck of this Raja: And the sooner
to rid himself handsomely of him, (for he wished him far enough) Go, says he,
with all the expedition you can to Lahor, my Army is somewhat tired; go quickly
to attend me there; I apprehend that else something sinister might fall out
there; I make you Governor of that place, and put all things into your hands.
For the rest, I am exceedingly obliged to you for what you have done with
Soliman Chekouh: Where have you left Delil-Kan? I shall find my revenge of him.
Make all possible dispatch, Salamed Bached, Farewell.

Dara being arrived at Tata-bakar, made Governor of that place a very
understanding, gallant, and generous Eunuch, with a very good Garrison of
Patans and Sayeds; and for Cannoneers, a good number of Franguis, Portugals,
English, French, and Germans, who had followed him out of great hopes he had
given them, (for, if his Affairs had prospered, and he were become King, we
must all have resolved to be Omrahs, as many Franguis as we were.) He there
left also the greatest part of his Treasure; he wanted as yet no Gold nor
Silver; and staying there but a very few days, he marched away with two or
three thousand Men only, descending along the River Indus toward Scindy, and
from thence crossing with an incredible celerity all those Territories of the
Raja Katche, he arrived in Guzaratte, and came to the Gates of Amadevat. The
Father-in-law of Aureng-Zebe, called Chah-Navaze-Kan, was Governor there, with
a very good Garrison, able to resist. Yet notwithstanding, whether it was that
he was surprised, or that he wanted courage, (for although he was of those
ancient Princes of Machate, yet he was no great Soldier, though a Man of a
very obliging and civil conversation) he did not oppose Dara, but rather
received him very honorably, and even managed him afterward with so much
dexterity, that Dara was so simple as to trust himself with him, and to
communicate to him his Designs; in so much as that he showed him the Letters
which he received from the Raja Jessomseigne, and of many other of his Friends,
which prepared themselves to come to him; although it proved too true, what
every body told him, and his Friends confirmed by Letters, that certainly this
Chah-Navaze-Kan would betray him.

Never was any Man more surprised than Aureng-Zebe, when he heard that Dara was
in Amadevat: For he well knew, that he*wanted no Money, and that all his
Friends, and all the discontented Party, which was numerous, would not fail to
betake themselves by little and little to him: And on the other side, he found
it not safe to go and find him out himself in that place, by removing himself
so far from Agra and Chah-Jehan, to go and embarass himself in all those
Countries of the Raja's, Jesseigne, Jessomseigne, and others, that are in those
Provinces. Besides he apprehended, lest Sultan Sujah should advance with a
strong Army, which was already about Elabas, and lest the Raja of Serenaguer
should descend from the Hills with Soliman Chekouh: So that he was sufficiently
perplexed and troubled, not knowing which way to turn. At last he believed it
best, to leave Dara for a time quiet where he was, and to go thither where his
presence and Army was most necessary, which was toward Sultan Sujah, who had
already passed the River Ganges at Elabas.

This Sultan Sujah was come to encamp in a little Village called Kadjoue, and
had conveniently seized himself of a great Talab, or Reservatory of Water,
which is there in the way; and Aureng-Zebe came to place himself on the side of
a small Torrent, at the distance of a mile and an half from thence, on Agra's
side. Between both was a very fair Campaign, very proper for a Battle.
Aureng-Zebe was no sooner arrived, but being impatient to end this War, at
break of day he went to face Sujah, leaving his Baggage on the other side of
the Torrent. He fell upon Sujah with an effort unimaginable. Emir-Jemla,
Prisoner of of Decan, and who arrived just on the day of the Combat, fearing
Dara no more, because his Family was more in safety, did there also lay out all
his force, courage, and dexterity. But seeing that Sultan Sujah had well
fortified himself, and was accompanied with a very good Artillery,
advantagiously placed, it was not possible for Aureng-Zebe to force him, nor to
make him retreat from thence, so as to make him lose those Waters. On the
contrary, he was obliged himself to draw back several times, so vigorously was
he repulsed, in so much that he found himself in great perplexity. Sultan Sujah
not being willing to advance too far into the Campaign, nor to remove from that
advantageous place where he was, pretending only to defend himself; which was
very prudently done. For he foresaw, that Aureng-Zebe could not stay there
long, and that in that hot season he would be absolutely obliged to turn back
toward the Torrent for the Water; and that, when he should do so, he would
fall upon his Rear. Aureng-Zebe also foresaw well enough the same thing, and
that was the reason why he was so forward and pressing; but behold another more
troublesome accident.

In this very time he receives intelligence, that the Raja Jessomseigne, who
in appearance had accommodated himself with him, was fallen upon his Rear, and
plundered his Baggage and Treasure. This News astonished him much, and the
more, because he perceived that his Army which had heard of it was thereby
frighted, and fallen into disorder. Yet he loses not his judgment for all this;
and being well aware, that to turn back was to hazard all, he resolved, as in
the Battle of Dara, to bear up the best he could, and to expect with a steady
foot all Events. In the mean time, the disorder grew worse and worse in his
Army: Sujah, who was resolved to profit of the occasion, takes his time, and
presses him vigorously. He that led Aureng-Zebe's Elephant is killed with the
shot of an Arrow; he leads the Beast as well as he can himself, 'till another
could be had in that Leaders place. Arrows rain upon him; he returns many
himself, his Elephant begins to be frighted, and to go back. Behold him now in
great extremity, and brought to that point, that one foot of his was out of the
seat, as if he meant to cast himself to the ground; and no Man knows what in
that trouble he had not done, if Emir-Jemla, being nigh, and performing, like a
Great Man as he was, beyond imagination, called to him, in holding up his hand,
Decan-kou, Decan-kou, where is Decan? This seems to have been the greatest
extremity, to which Aureng-Zebe could be reduced. One would have said, 'twas
now and here that Fortune had abandoned him, and there is almost no appearance
of a possibility to escape. But his good Fortune is stronger than all that:
Sultan Sujah must be routed, and take flight, like Dara, to save his life:
Aureng-Zebe must remain victorious, carry away the Bell, and be King of the
Indies.

We are to remember the Battle of Samonguer, and that, in appearance, slight
accident which ruined Dara: It Is the same oversight, or rather the same
Treason, which is now destroying Sultan Sujah. One of his chief Captains,
Allah-verdi-Kan, who (as some say) had been gained, uses the same Artifice
that Calil-ullah-Kan had employed toward Dara; though there were some who
believed, that there was no malice in the case, and that it was a mere piece of
flattery. For seeing that the whole Army of Aureng-Zebe was in disorder, he ran
toward Sultan Sujah, telling him the same thing, that Calil-ullah-Kan did to
Dara, and begging of him with folded hands, that he would stay no longer in so
great danger upon his Elephant. Come down, said he, in the Name of God, mount
on Horseback, God has made you Sovereign of the Indies, let us pursue those
Fugitives, let not Aureng-Zebe escape us.

But not to stay long from declaring the strange Fortune of Aureng-Zebe, and
the incredible conjuncture that recovers his desperate condition; Sultan Sujah,
not more considerate than Dara, commits the same Fault; and he was no sooner
come down from his Elephant, but his Army seeing him no more, was struck with a
terror, believing there was Treason, and that he was either taken or slain.
Whereupon they disbanded without any more ado, as Dara's Army did in the Battle
of Samonguer; and the Defeat was so great, that the Sultan was fortunate in
that he could save himself.

Jessomseigne hearing this unexpected news, and perceiving it was not very safe
for him to tarry there, contented himself with the Spoil he had got, and with
all diligence marched straight to Agra, thence to pass to his Country. The
noise was already in Agra, that Aureng-Zebe had lost the Battle, that he was
taken, together with Emir-Jemla, and that Sultan Sujah brought them both
Prisoners. In so much, that Chah-hest-Kan, who was Governor of the Town, and
Uncle to Aureng-Zebe, seeing Jessomseigne, whose Treachery he had heard of, at
the Gates, and despairing of his Life, had taken into his hand a Cup of Poison
to make himself away, and had, as they say, in very deed swallowed it, if his
Women had not fallen upon him and hindered him: So that it is thought, if
Jessomseigne had had the wit and courage to stay longer in Agra, if he had
threatened boldly, and promised and acted vigorously for the freedom of
Chah-Jehan, he might have drawn him out of prison; so much the more easily,
because all Agra was for two whole days in that belief, that Aureng-Zebe was
overcome. But Jessomseigne, who knew how all things went, and who durst not
long stay there, nor attempt any thing, did nothing but pass, returning with
all speed homewards.

Aureng-Zebe, who apprehended mischief from Agra, and feared left Jessomseigne
should undertake something for Chah-Jehan, was not long in the pursuit after
Sultan Sujah; he turned short for Agra with his whole Army, where he staid a
good while, giving order for all things. Mean time he received intelligence,
that Sultan Sujah had not lost many Men in his being routed, for want of
farther pursuit; that also from the Lands of the Raja's, which are in those
quarters, on the right and left of Ganges, he raised great Forces, upon the
score of the reputation he had of being very rich, and very liberal, and that
he fortified himself in Elabas, that important and famous Passage of Ganges,
which with its Fortress is the first Inlet into Bengale. And then he
considered also, that he had about him two Persons, which indeed were very
capable to serve him, Sultan Mahmoud his Eldest Son, and Emir-Jemla; but he
well knew, that those who have done good service to their Prince, grow often
insolent, in the belief, that all is due to them, and that they cannot be
recompensed enough. He perceived already, that the former of them began very
much to emancipate himself, and that every day he became more arrogant, for
having seized on the Fortress of Agra, and by that means had broken all the
Designs which Chah-Jehan could have formed. And as to the Latter, he knew
indeed the force of his Understanding, his Conduct, and Valor; but that was
the very thing which made him apprehend him the more: For knowing that he was
very rich, that his reputation was great, that he passed for the First Mover in
Affairs, and for the ablest Man in all the Indies, he doubted not, but that
after the Example of Sultan Mahmoud, he entertained himself with big hopes. All
this certainly would have been able to perplex an ordinary Spirit, but
Aureng-Zebe found a Remedy to all. He knew to remove them both with so much
prudence, and even with so much handsomness, that neither of them found any
cause to complain of it. He sent them both against Sultan Sujah with a puissant
Army, letting Emir secretly know, that the Government of Bengale, which is the
best quarter of Indostan, was designed for him, to hold it during his life, and
for his Son after his decease; and that thereby he would begin to express to
him his acknowledgments for the great Services he had done him; and that
therefore it belonged only to him to defeat Sujah, and that as soon as he
should have compassed it, he would make him Mir-ul Omrahs, which is the first
and the most honorable place of Indostan, and no less than the Prince of the
Omrahs.

To Sultan Mahmoud, his Son, he said only these few words: Remember that thou
art the Eldest of my Children, that it is for thy self thou go forth to
fight; that thou have done much, but yet nothing, if thou overcomest not Sujah,
who is our greatest and powerfullest Enemy; I hope, God assisting me, to be
soon Master of the rest.

With these words he dismissed them both, with ordinary honors, that is, with
rich Vests, some Horses and Elephants gallantly harnessed; making in the mean
time Emir-Jemla to consent, that his only Son, Mahmet-Emir-Kan, should stay
with him for a good Education, or rather for a Pledge of his Fidelity; and
Sultan Mahmoud, that his Wife should remain in Agra (which was the Daughter of
the abovementioned King of Golkonda) as too troublesome a thing in an Army,
and in such an Expedition.

Sultan Sujah, who was always in the apprehension, lest the Raja's of the lower
Bengale, which he had ill treated, should be raised against him, and who feared
nothing more than to have to do with Emir-Jemla, had no sooner received this
News, but apprehending that the passage to Bengale would be obstructed, and
that Emir would pass in some other place the River Ganges, either lower or
higher than Elabas, raised his Camp, and went down to Benares and Patna, whence
he betook himself to Mogiere, a small Town seated upon the Ganges, a place
commonly called the Key of the Kingdom of Bengale, being a kind of Straight
between the Mountains and the Woods, which are not far from thence. He thought
fit to stay in that place, and there to fortify himself; and for greater
safety, he caused a great Trench to be made, which I have seen, passing that
way some years after, from the Town and River unto the Mountain, being well
resolved there to attend Emir-Jemla, and to dispute that passage with him. But
he was sufficiently astonished, when he was told, that the Troops of Emir,
which slowly descended along the River Ganges, were certainly for nothing but
to amuse him; that himself was not there; that he had gained the Raja's of
those Mountains, which are on the right hand of the River; and that he and
Sultan Mahmoud marched apace over their Lands with all the Flower of the Army,
drawing straight to Rage-Mehalle, to intercept him: So that he was constrained
to quit, as soon as he could, his Fortifications; yet notwithstanding he made
so much haste, that though he was obliged to follow those windings, which the
River Ganges on that side makes toward the left hand, he prevented Emir by
some days, and arrived first at Rage-Mehalle, where he had time to fortify
himself; because Emir having heard this News, took his March to the left hand
toward Ganges, through very ill ways, there to expect his Troops, which came
down with the Body of the Artillery and the Baggage along the River. As soon as
all was come, he went to attaque Sultan Sujah, who defended himself very well
for five or six days; but seeing that the Artillery of Emir, which played
incessantly, ruined all his Fortifications, which were made but of sandy Earth
and Faggots, and that he could not but with much difficulty make resistance in
that place, besides that the Season of the Rain began, he retired himself, at
the favor of the night, leaving behind two great Pieces of Cannon. Emir durst
not follow him in the night, for fear of some Ambush, putting off the pursuit
'till the next morning: But Sujah had the good luck, that at the break of day
there began to fall a Rain, which lasted above three days; so that Emir could
not only not stir out of Rage-Mehalle, but saw himself obliged to pass the
Winter there, by reason of the excessive Rains in that Country, which render
the ways so troublesome for more than four months, viz. July, August,
September, and October, that the Armies cannot possibly march. And hereby
Sultan Sujah had the means to retire himself, and to choose what place he would,
having time enough to fortify his Army, and to send out of the inferior
Bengale for many Pieces of Cannon, and a good number of Portugals, that were
retired thither, because of the great fertility of the Country: For he much
courted all those Portugal Fathers, Missionaries, that are in that Province,
promising them no less than that he would make them all rich, and build
Churches for them wheresoever they would. And they were indeed capable to serve
him, it being certain, that in the Kingdom of Bengale there are to be found no
less than eight or nine thousand Families of Franguis, Portugals, and these
either Natives or Mesticks.

But Sultan Mahmoud, who for the reason abovementioned was grown fierce, and
aspired perhaps to greater things than at that time he ought, did pretend to
command the Army absolutely, and that Emir-Jemla should follow his Orders,
letting also from time to time fall insolent words in reference to his Father
Aureng-Zebe, as if he were obliged to him for the Crown, and uttering
Expressions of contempt and threat against Emir-Jemla; which caused great
coldness betwixt them two, which lasted a pretty while, until Sultan Mahmoud
understood, that his Father was very much dissatisfied with his conduct: And
apprehending, lest Emir had order to seize on his person, he went away to
Sultan Sujah, accompanied with a very small number, and to him he made great
promises, and swore fidelity. But Sujah, who feared Aureng-Zebe and
Emir-Jemla's snares, could not trust him, having always an Eye upon his
Actions, without giving him any considerable Command; which he so disgusted,
that some months after, not knowing what would become of him, he left Sultan
Sujah, and returned to Emir, who received him well enough, assuring him, that
he would write in his behalf to Aureng-Zebe, and do his utmost to make him
forget that fault.

I think fit here to take notice, on the by, of what many have told me, viz.
That this Escape of Sultan Mahmoud was altogether made by the Artifices of
Aureng-Zebe, who cared not much to hazard this Son of his to try to destroy
Sujah, and who was glad enough, that whatever the Event were, he might have a
specious pretense to put him in a place of surety. However it be, he afterward
showed himself much dissatisfied with him, and wrote to him a severe Letter, in
which he enjoined him to return to Dehli, but giving order in the mean time,
that he should not come so far: For he no sooner had passed the River Ganges,
but he met with Troops that stopped him, and put him up in a small Chair, (as
was done to Morad-Bakche) and carried him to Goualeor, whence it is thought he
will never be set at liberty: Aureng-Zebe by this means freeing himself from
great perplexity; who then also let his second Son, Sultan Mazum, know, that
the point of Reigning is so delicate a thing, that Kings must be jealous even
of their own shadow; adding, that if he be not discreet, the like may befall
him what had befallen his Brother, and that he ought to think Aureng-Zebe was
not a Man, that would suffer that to be done to himself, what Chah-Jehan did to
his Father Jehan-Guyre, and what he had also lately seen done to Chah-Jehan.

And indeed we may on this occasion say, that if this Son continue to behave
himself as he has done hitherto, Aureng-Zebe will have no cause to suspect
him, and to be dissatisfied with him: For no Slave can be more tractable, and
Aureng-Zebe himself never appeared more careless of Greatness, nor more given
to Devotion than he: Yet I have known Men of Parts, who believed, that he is
not so in good earnest, but by superlative policy and craft, like that of his
Father, which we may have the proof of in time.

Whilst all these things were thus transacted in Bengale, and that Sultan Sujah
resisted the best he could the Forces of Emir-Jemla, passing now on one side of
the River Ganges, of a Channel, or some other River, (for that Country is full
of them) then on the other; Aureng-Zebe kept himself about Agra, going to and
fro; and at length, after he had also sent Morad-Bakche to Goualeor, he came to
Dehli, where in good earnest he took upon him publicly to act the King, giving
order for all Affairs of the Kingdom, and especially thinking on means to catch
Dara, and to get him out of Guzaratte, which was a very hard thing, for the
Reasons already mentioned. But the great good Fortune, and the singular
dexterity of Aureng-Zebe soon drew him thence; which now follows next to be
related.

Jessomseigne, who had retired himself to his Country, and made the best of
what he had taken in the Battle of Kadjoue, raised a strong Army, and wrote to
Dara, that he should come to Agra as soon as he could, and that he would join
with his Forces. Dara, who had by this time set on foot a pretty numerous Army
(though it consisted, for the most part, but of gathered people) and who hoped,
that approaching to Agra, many of his old Friends, seeing him with
Jessomseigne, would not fail to join with him also, immediately leaves
Amadevad, and marches with great speed to Asmire, seven or eight days journey
from Agra. But Jessomseigne kept not his word with him: The Raja Jesseigne
interposed to make his peace with Aureng-Zebe, and to fasten him to his Party;
or, at least, to hinder his Design, which was capable to ruin himself, and to
make all the Raja's rise; and wrote to him several Letters, giving him to
understand the great danger he went to expose himself to, by espousing a Party
in that extremity, as that of Dara's was; that he should well consider what he
was going to do; that he went about wholly to destroy himself, and all his
whole Family; that Aureng-Zebe would never forgive him; that he was a Raja as
himself; that he should think on sparing the blood of the Ragipous; that if he
thought to draw the Raja's to his Party, he would find those that would hinder
him from it. In a word, that it was a business which concerned all the Gentry
of Indostan, and exposed them to danger, if way were given to kindle a Fire,
which would not be extinguished at pleasure. And lastly, if he would leave Dara
to himself, Aureng-Zebe would forget all that had passed, and present him with
all he had taken, and give him that very instant the Government of Guzaratte,
which would be very convenient for him, that Country being near his Lands;
that he could be there in full liberty and safety, and as long as he pleased,
and that himself would be Caution for all. In a word, this Raja acted his part
so well, that he made Jessomseigne return to his Land, whilst Aureng-Zebe
approached with his whole Army to Asmire, and encamped in the sight of that of
Dara.

And now what could this poor Prince Dara do? He sees himself abandoned, and
frustrated of his hopes. He considers, that to turn back safe to Amadevad was
impossible, in regard that it was a March of thirty and five days; that it was
in the heart of Summer; that water would fail him; that they were all the Lands
of Raja's, Friends or Allies of Jesseigne or Jessomseigne; that the Army of
Aureng-Zebe, which was not harassed like his, would not fail to follow him.
It Is as good, says he, to perish here; and although the Match be altogether
unequal, let us venture all, and give Battle once more. But alas! what does he
mean to do? He is not only abandoned by all, but he has yet with him
Chab-Navaze-Kan, whom he trusts, and who betrays him, and discovers all his
Designs to Aureng-Zebe. It Is true, that Chah-Navaze-Kan was punished for his
perfidiousness, and killed in the Battle, whether it was by the hands of Dara
himself, as many told me, or (which is more probable) by some of Aureng-Zebe's
Army, who being secret Partisans of Dara, found means to get to him, and to
dispatch him, fearing lest he should discover them, and have some knowledge of
the Letters they had written to Dara. But what did it benefit him at that time,
that Chah-Navaze-Kan was dead? Dara should have sooner followed the advice of
his Friends, and never have confided in him.

The Fight began between Nine and Ten of the Clock in the morning* Dara's
Artillery, which was very well placed on a little eminency, was loud enough;
but, as was said, most of the Pieces without Bullets; so was he betrayed by
all! It Is needless to relate the other particulars of this Battle; it was
properly not a Battle, but a Rout. I shall only say, that hardly the Onset was
begun, but Jesseigna was near and in sight of Dara, to whom he sent word, that
he should fly presently, unless he would be taken. So that this poor Prince,
being altogether surprised, was constrained to run away instantly, and with so
much disorder and precipitation, that he had not leisure to put up his Baggage.
It was no small matter, that he was able to get away with his Wife, and the
rest of his Family. And it is eertain, that if the Raja Jesseigne would have
done what he could, he could never have escaped; but he always had a respect to
the Royal Family; or rather, he was too crafty and politic, and had too great
forecast, to venture to lay hands on a Prince of the Blood.

This unfortunate Prince, deserted by almost all, and finding himself
accompanied but of two thousand Men at most, was forced in the hottest of
Summer to cross, without Tents or Baggage, all those Countries of the Raja's,
that are almost from Asmire to Amadevad. Mean time the Koullis, which are the
Country People, and the worst of all the Indies, and the greatest Robbers,
follow him night and day, rifle and kill his Soldiers, with so much cruelty,
that no Man could stay two hundred paces behind the Body, but he was presently
stripped naked, or butchered upon the least resistance. Yet notwithstanding,
Dara made shift to get near Amadevad, when he hoped, that the next day, or soon
after, he should enter into the Town to refresh himself, and to try once more
to gather again some Forces: But all things fall out contrary to vanquished and
unfortunate Men.

The Governor, whom he had left in the Castle of Amadevad, had already
received both menacing and promising Letters from Aureng-Zebe, which made him
lose courage, and incline to that side; in so much that he wrote to Dara,
forbidding him to come nearer, if he did, he would find the Gates shut, and all
in Arms.

Three days before I met this unhappy Prince, by a strange accident, when he
obliged me to follow him; having no Physician about him; and the night before
that he received this News from the Governor of Amadevad, he did me the favor
to make me come into the Karavan-Serrak where he was, fearing lest the Koullis
should assassinate me; And (what is hard enough to believe in Indostan, where
the Crandees especially are so jealous of their Wives) I was so near to the
Wife of this Prince, that the Cords of the Kanates, or Wind-screen, which
enclosed them (for they had not so much as a poor Tent) were fastened to the
Wheels of my Chariot. I relate this circumstance by the by only, to show the
extremity Dara was reduced to.

When these Women heard this sad news (which was at the break of day, as I well
remember) they broke out upon a sudden into such strange cries and
lamentations, that they forced tears from ones Eyes. And now behold all was in
an unexpressible confusion: Every one looks upon his neighbor, and no body
knows what to do, or what will become of him. Soon after we saw Dara come
forth, half dead, now speaking to one, then another, even to the meanest
Soldiers. He sees all astonished, and ready to abandon him. What counsel?
whither can be go? he must be gone instantly. You may judge of the extremity he
must needs be in, by this small accident I am going to mention. Of three great
Oxen of Guzaratte, which I had for my Chariot, one died the night before,
another was dying, and the third was tired out (for we had been forced to march
for three days together, almost night and day, in an intolerable heat and
dust:) Whatever Dara could say or command, whether he alleged it was for
himself, or for one of his Women that was hurt in her Leg, or for me; he could
not possibly procure for me, whether Ox, or Camel, or Horse: So that he was
obliged, to my good fortune, to leave me there. I saw him march away, and that
with tears in his Eyes, accompanied with four or five hundred Cavaliers at
most, and with two Elephants, that were said to be laden with Gold and Silver;
and I heard them say, that they were to take their march toward Tatabakar; for
he had no other Game to play, though even that seemed in a manner impossible,
considering the small number of people left him, and the great sandy Deserts to
be waded through in the hottest season, most of them without water fit to
drink. And indeed most of those that followed him, and even diverse of his
Women, did there perish, either of drought, or the nnwholesome waters, or the
tiresome ways and ill food, or lastly, because stripped by the Koullis
abovementioned. Yet notwithstanding all this, Dara made hard shift to get to
the Raja Katche; unhappy even herein, that he perished not himself in this
March.

This Raja at first gave him a very good reception, even so far as to promise
him assistance with all his Forces, provided he would give his Daughter in
Marriage to his Son. But Jesseigne soon wrought as much with this Raja, as he
had done with ^essomseigne. So that Dara one day seeing the kindness of this
Barbarian cooled upon a sudden, and that consequently his Person was in danger
there, he betakes himself to the pursuit of his Expedition to Tatabakar.

To relate how I got away from those Robbers, the Koullis, in what manner I
moved them to compassion, how I saved the best part of my small Treasure, how
we became good friends by the means of my profession of Physic, my Servants
(perplexed as well as my self) swearing that I was the greatest Physician of
the World, and that the People of Dara, at their going away, had ill treated
me, and taken from me all my best things: How, after having kept me with them
seven or eight days, they had so much kindness and generosity, as to lend me an
Ox, and to conduct me so far, that I was in sight of Amadevad: And lastly, how
from thence after some days I returned to Dehli, having lighted on an occasion
to go with a certain Omrah passing thither; in which Journey I met from time to
time, on the way, with Carcasses of Men, Elephants, Oxen, Horses, and Camels,
the remainder of that unfortunate Army of Dara. These are things, I say, I must
not insist upon to describe them.

Whilst Dara advanced toward Tatabakar, the War continues in Bengale, and much
longer than was believed, Sultan Sujah putting forth his utmost, and playing
his last Game against Emir-Jemla: Yet this did not much trouble Aureng-Zebe,
who knew 'twas a great way between Bengale and Agra, and was sufficiently
convinced of the prudence and valor of Emir-Jemla. That which disquieted him
much more was, that he saw Soliman Chekouh so near (for from Agra to the
Mountains it is but eight days journey) whom he could not master, and who
perpetually allarmd him by the rumors that went continually about, as if he
were coming down the Mountains with the Raja. It Is certainly very hard to draw
him thence: But behold how he manages the matter to compass it.

He makes the Raja Jesseigne write one Letter after another to the Raja of
Serenaguer, promising him very great things, if he would surrender Soliman
Chekouh to him, and menacing War at the same time, if he should obstinately
keep him. The Raja answers, that he would rather lose his Estate, than do so
unworthy an action. And Aureng-Zebe, seeing his resolution, takes the Field,
and marches directly to the foot of the Hills, and with an infinite number of
Pike-men causes the Rocks to be cut, and the passage to be widen'd. But the
Raja laughs at all that; neither has he much cause to fear on that side.
Aureng-Zebe may cut long enough, they are Mountains inaccessible to an Army,
and stones would be sufficient to stop the Forces of four Indostans; so that he
was constrained to turn back again.

Dara in the mean time approaches to the Fortress of Tatabakar, and when he
was but two or three days journey off, he received News, that Mir-baba, who had
long held it besieged, had at length reduced it to extremity: As I afterward
learned of our French, and other Franguis that were there, a pound of Rice and
Meat having cost there above a Crown, and so of other Victuals in proportion:
Yet the Governor held out; made Sallies, which extremely incommoded the Enemy;
and showed all possible prudence, courage, and fidelity; deriding the
endeavors of the General, Mir-baba, and all the menaces and promises of
Aureng-Zebe.

And this also I learned afterward of my Contrymen, the French, and of all
those other Franguis that were with him; who added, that when he heard that
Dara was not far off, he redoubled his liberalities, and knew so well to gain
the hearts of all his Soldiers, and to encourage them to do bravely, that
there was not one of them, that was not resolved to sally out upon the Enemy,
and to hazard all to raise the Siege, and to make Dara enter; and that he also
knew so well to cast fear and terror into the Camp of Mir-baba, by sending
Spies about very cunningly to assure, that they had seen Dara approach with
great resolution, and very good Forces; that if he had come, as was believed he
would do every moment, the Army of the Enemy was for disbanding upon his
appearance, and even in part to go over to him. But he is still too
unfortunate, to undertake any thing prosperously. Believing therefore, that to
raise the Siege with such an handful of Men as he had was impossible, he did
deliberate to pass the River Indus, and to endeavor to get into Persia;
although that also would have had mighty difficulties and inconveniences, by
reason of the Deserts, and the small quantity of good waters in those parts;
besides, that upon those Frontiers there are but mean Rajas and Patans, who
acknowledge neither the Persian nor the Mogol. But his Wife did very much
diswade him from it, for this weak reason, that he must, if he did so, expect
to see his Wife and Daughter Slaves of the King of Persia; that that was a
thing altogether unworthy of the Grandeur of his Family, and 'twas better to
dye, than to undergo this infamy.

Dara, being in great perplexity, remembered, that there was thereabout a
certain Patan, powerful enough, called Gion-Kan, whose Life he had formerly
saved twice, when Chah-Jehan had commanded he should be cast under the feet of
an Elephant, for having rebelled diverse times: He resolved to go to him, hoping
that he could give him sufficient Succors to raise the Siege of Tatabakar;
making account, that thence he would take his Treasure, and that going from
thence, and gaining Kandahar, he could cast himself into the Kingdom of Caboul,
having great hopes of Mohabet-Kan, who was Governor of it, because he was both
potent and valiant, well beloved of his Country, and had obtained this
Government by his (Dara's) favor. But his Grandchild, Sepe-Chekouh, yet but
very young, seeing his design, cast himself at his Feet, entreating him for
God's sake, not to enter into the Country of that Patan. His Wife and Daughter
did the same, remonstrating to him, that he was a Robber, a revolted Governor,
that he would infallibly betray him; that he ought not to stand upon the
raising of the Siege, but rather endeavor to gain Caboul, that the thing was
not impossible, forasmuch as Mir-baba was not like to quit the Siege to follow
him, and to hinder him from getting thither.

Dara, being carried headlong by the force of his unhappy Destiny, rejected
this counsel, and would hearken to nothing of what was proposed to him, saying,
as was true, that the March would be very difficult, and very dangerous; and
maintaining always, that Gion-Kan would not be so mean, as to betray him, after
all the good he had done him. He departed, notwithstanding all that could be
said to him, and went to prove, at the price of his Life, That no trust is to
be given to a wicked Man.

This Robber, who at first believed that he had numerous Troops following him,
gave him the fairest reception that could be, and entertained him with very
great kindness and civility in appearance, placing his Soldiers here and there
among his Subjects, with a strict order to treat them well, and to give them
what refreshments the Country afforded: But when he found that he had not
above two or three hundred Men in all, he quickly showed what he was. It is not
known, whether he had not received some Letters from Aureng Zebe, or whether
his avarice had not been tempted by some Mules said to be laden with Gold;
which was all that could be saved hitherto, as well from the hands of Robbers,
as of those that conveyed it. Whatever it be, on a certain morning, when no
body looked for any such thing, all being taken up with the care of refreshing
themselves, and believing all to be safe; behold this Traitor, who had
bestirred himself all night to get armed Men from all parts, fell upon Dara and
Sepe-Chekouh, killed some of their Men that stood up to defend themselves;
forgot not to seize on the loads of the Mules, and of all the Jewels of the
Women; made Dara to be tied fast upon an Elephant, commanding the Executioner
to sit behind, and to cut off his head upon the least sign given, in case he
should be seen to resist, or that any one should attempt to deliver him. And in
this strange posture he was carried to the Army before Tatabakar, where he put
him into the hands of Mir-baba, the General, who caused him to be conducted in
the company of this same Traitor to Lahor, and thence to Dehli.

When he was at the Gates of Dehli, it was deliberated by Aureng-Zebe, whether
he should be made to pass through the midst of the City, or no, to carry him
thence to Goualeor. Many did advise, that that was by no means to be done; that
some disorder might arise; that some might come to save him; and besides, that
it would be a great dishonor to the Family Royal. Others maintained the
contrary, viz. That it was absolutely necessary he should pass through the
Town, to astonish the World, and to show the absolute Power of Aureng-Zebe, and
to disabuse the People, that might still doubt, whether it were himself, as
indeed many Omrahs did doubt; and to take away all hopes from those, who still
preserved some affection for him. The Opinion of these last was followed; he
was put on an Elephant, his Grandchild, Sepe-Chekouh, at his side; and behind
them was placed Bhadur-Kan, as an Executioner. This was none of those brave
Elephants of Ceilan or Pegu, which he was wont to ride on, with gilt Harness
and embroidered Covers, and Seats with Canopies very handsomely painted and
gilt, to defend themselves from the Sun: It was an old Caitiff Animal, very
dirty and nasty, with an old torn Cover, and a pitiful Seat, all open. There
was no more seen about him, that Necklace of big Pearls, which those Princes
are wont to wear, nor those rich Turbants and Vests embroidered. All his Dress
was a Vest of course Linen, all dirty, and a Turbant of the same, with a
wretched Scarf of Kachimere over his head, like a Varlet; his Grandson,
Sepe-Chekouh, being in the same equipage. In this miserable posture he was made
to enter into the Town, and to pass through the greatest Merchant-streets, to
the end that all the People might see him, and entertain no doubt any more
whether it was he.

As for me, I fancied we went to see some strange Massacre, and was astonished
at the boldness of making him thus pass through the Town; and that the more,
because I knew that he was very ill guarded, neither was I ignorant, that he
was very much beloved by the lower sort of people, who at that time exclaimed
highly against the cruelty and tyranny of Aureng-Zebe, as one that kept his
Father in prison, as also his own Son Sultan Mahmoud, and his Brother
Morad-Bakche. I was well prepared for it, and with a good Horse and two good
Men I went, together with two others of my Friends, to place my self in the
greatest street, where he was to pass. But not one Man had the boldness to draw
his Sword, only there were some of the Fakires, and with them some poor people,
who seeing that infamous Gion-Kan ride by his side, began to rail and throw
stones at him, and to call him Traitor. All the shops were ready to break for
the crowd of Spectators, that wept bitterly; and there was heard nothing but
loud Outcryes and Lamentations, Invectives, and Curses, heaped on Gion-Kan. In
a word, Men and Women, great and small (such is the tenderness of the hearts of
the Indians) were ready to melt into tears for compassion; but not one there
was that durst stir to rescue him. Now after he had thus passed through the
Town, he was put into a Garden called Heider-Abad.

There were not wanting to tell Aureng-Zebe, how the People at this sight had
lamented Dara, and cursed the Patan, that had delivered him* and how the same
was in danger to have been stoned to death, as also that there had been a great
apprehension of some sedition and mischief. Hereupon another Council was held,
whether he should indeed be carried to Goualeor, as had been concluded before;
or whether it were not more expedient to put him to death, without more ado?
Some were of opinion, that he should go to Goualeor with a strong Guard, that
that would be enough; Danechmend-Kan, though Dara's old Enemy, insisting much
upon that. But Rauchenara-Begum, in pursuance of her hatred against this
Brother of hers, pushed Aureng-Zebe to make him away, without running the
danger there was in sending him to Goualeor; as also did all his old Enemies,
Calilullah-Kan, and Chah-hest-Kan, and especially a certain Flatterer, a
Physician, who was fled out of Persia, first called Hakim-Daoud, and afterward
being become a great Omrah named Takarrub-Kan: This Villain boldly rose up in a
full Assembly, and cried out, that it was expedient for the safety of the State
to put him to death immediately, and that the rather, because he was no
Mussulman; that long since he was turned Kafire, Idolater, without Religion,
and that he would charge the Sin of it upon his own head: Of which imprecation
he soon after felt the smart; for within a short time he fell into disgrace,
and was treated like an infamous Fellow, and dyed miserably. But Aureng-Zebe,
carried away by these instances and motives, commanded that he should be put to
death, and that Sepe-Chekouh, his Grandchild, should be sent to Goualeor.

The Charge of this Tragical Execution was given to a certain Slave, called
Nazer, that had been bred by Chah-Jehan, and was known to have been formerly
ill treated by Dara. This Executioner, accompanied with three or four
Parricides more, went to Dara, who was then himself dressing some Lentils with
Sepe-Chekouh his Grandchild. He no sooner saw Nazer, but cried out to
Sepe-Chekouh, My dear Son, behold those that come to kill us! laying hold at
the same time of a small Knife, which was all the Arms that were left him. One
of these Butchers immediately fell upon Sepe-Chekouh; the others, upon the arms
and legs of Dara, throwing him to the ground, and holding him under, 'till
Nazer cut his throat. His Head was forthwith carried to the Fortress to
Aureng-Zebe, who presently commanded it to be put in a dish, and that water
should be fetched; which when brought, he wiped it off with an Handkerchief,
and after he had caused the Face to be washed clean, and the blood done away,
and was fully satisfied that it was the very head of Dara, he fell a weeping,
and said these words; Ah Bed-bakt! Ah unfortunate Man! Take it away, and bury
it in the Sepulcher of Houmayon.

At night, the Daughter of Dara was brought into the Seraglio, but afterward
sent to Chah-Jehan, and Begum-Saheb, who asked her of Aureng-Zebe. Concerning
Dara's Wife, she had ended her days before at Lahor: She had poisoned her self,
foreseeing the extremities she was falling into, together with her Husband.
Sepe-Chekouh was sent to Goualeor. And after a few days, Gion-kan was sent for,
to come before Aureng-Zebe in the Assembly: To him were given some Presents,
and so he was sent away; but being near his Lands, he was rewarded according to
his desert, being killed in a Wood. This barbarous Man not knowing, or not
considering, that if Kings do sometimes permit such Actions for their Interest,
yet they abhor them, and sooner or later revenge them.

In the mean time, the Governor of Tatabakar, by the same Orders that had been
required of Dara, was obliged to surrender the Fortress. It was indeed upon
such a composition as he would have, but it was also with an intention not to
keep word with him. For the poor Eunuch, arriving at Lahor, was cut in pieces,
together with those few Men he had then with him, by Kalil-ullah-kan, who was
Governor thereof. But the reason of the non-observance of the Capitulation
was, that there was come intelligence, that he secretly prepared himself to go
directly to Soliman-Chekouh, sparing no Gold, which underhand he conveyed into
the hands of our Franguis, and to all those that were come with him out of the
Fortress to follow him, under pretext of accompanying him as far as Dehli to
Aureng-Zebe, who had often said, that he should be very glad to see so gallant
a Man, and who had so valiantly defended himself.

There remained therefore none of the Family of Dara, but Soliman-Chekouh, who
could not easily be drawn away from Serenaguer, if the Raja had been steady to
his first Declarations. But the secret practices of the Raja Jesseigne, the
promises and threats of Aureng-Zebe, the death of Dara, and the other Rajas his
Neighbors that had been gained, and were prepared by the Orders, and at the
cost of Aureng-Zebe, to make War against him, did at last shake the Faith of
this perfidious Protector, and made him consent to their demands. Sepe-Chekouh,
who was advertised of it, fled through the midst of those horrid Countries and
fearful Deserts, toward the great Tibet. But the Son of the Raja, soon
pursuing and overtaking him, caused him to be assaulted with stones. The poor
Prince was hurt, seized, and carried to Dehli, where he was imprisoned in
Serenguer, that little Fortress, where at first they had put Morad-Bakche.

Aureng-Zebe, to observe what he had practiced toward Dara, and that no body
might doubt it was Soliman-Chekouh himself, commanded him to be brought before
him in the presence of all the Grandees of the Court. At the entry of the Gate,
the Chains were taken from his feet, leaving those he had about his hands,
which seemed gilt. When this proper young Man, so handsome and gallant, was
seen to enter, there was a good number of Omrahs that could not hold their
tears; and, as I was informed, all the great Ladies of the Court, that had
leave to see him come in, fell a weeping. Aureng-Zebe, who appeared himself to
be touched at his misfortunes, began to speak very kindly to him, and to
comfort him; telling him amongst other things, that he should fear nothing,
that no hurt should be done to him; on the contrary, that he should be well
treated, and therefore be of good courage; that he had caused his Father to be
put to death for no other reason, than that he was turned Kafer, and a Man
without Religion. Whereupon this young Prince returned him the Salem, and
blessed him, abasing his hands to the earth, and lifting them, as well as he
could, up to his head, after the custom of the Country; and told him with
resolution enough, That if he were to drink the Poust, he entreated him that he
might dye presently, being very willing to submit to his Fate. But Aureng-Zebe
promised him publicly, that he should drink none of it; that he should rest
satisfied as to that, and not entertain any sad thoughts about it. This being
said, he once more repeated the Salem: And after they had asked him several
Questions, in the Name of Aureng-Zebe, touching that Elephant which was charged
with Roupies of Gold, taken from him when he went to Serenaguer, he was sent to
Goualeor to the rest. This Poust is nothing else but Poppy expressed, and
infused a night in water. And it is that potion, which those that are kept at
Goualeor, are commonly made to drink; I mean those Princes, whose heads they
think not fit to cut off: This is the first thing that is brought them in the
morning, and they have nothing given them to eat 'till they have drunk a great
cup full of it; they would rather let them starve. This emaciates them
exceedingly, and makes them dye insensibly, they losing little by little their
strength and understanding, and growing torpid and senseless. And by this very
means it is said, that Sepe-Chekouh, and the Grandchild of Morad-Bakche, and
Soliman-Chekouh, were dispach'd.

As to Morad-Bakche, he was made away by a more violent death. For Aureng-Zebe
seeing, that though he was in prison, yet the generality had an inclination to
him, and that many Verses were spread in the praise of his Valor and Courage,
thought himself not safe enough by putting him to death in private, by giving
him Poust like others; apprehending, that his Death would be still doubted of,
and that that might one time or other occasion some commotion, and therefore
devised the following Charge against him.

The Children of a certain Said, very rich, whom he had caused to be put to
death in Amadevad, to get his Estate, when he there made his preparations for
War, and borrowed or took by force great Sums of Money from all the rich
Merchants, appeared in full Assembly, making their complaints, and demanding
Justice, and the Head of Morad-Bakche, for the Blood of their Father. Not one
of the Omrahs durst contradict it, both because he was a Said, that is, one of
Mahomet's Kindred, to whom great Veneration was paid; and that every body
sufficiently understood the design of Aureng-Zebe, taking this for a pretense
to rid himself openly of Morad-Bakche, under a show of Justice. So that the
Head of him, that had killed the Father of the Plaintiffs, was granted them
without any other form of Process. Whereupon they went, with necessary Orders
issued out for that purpose, to cut it off in Goualeor.

There remained no other Thorn in the Foot of Aureng-Zebe but Sultan Sujah, who
kept himself still in Bengale; but he also was forced to yield at last to the
power and fortune of Aureng-Zebe. There were sent so many Troops of all sorts
to Emir-Femla, that at last he was encompassed on all sides, both on this and
that side of the River Ganges; so that he was necessitated to fly to Dake,
which is the last Town of Bengale on the Sea side; and here comes the
conclusion of this whole Tragedy.

This Prince being destitute of Ships to put to Sea, and not knowing whither to
fly, sent his eldest Son, Sultan Banque, to the King of Racan or Moy, a
Heathen or Idolatrous King, to know whether he would give him leave to make his
Country his place of refuge only for some time, and do him the favor, when
the Mousons or the Season-winds should come, to furnish him with a Vessel for
Mecha, from thence to pass into some part of Turkey or Persia. That King sent
answer, that he should be very welcome, and have all possible assistance. So
Sultan Banque returned to Dake with some Galeasses, manned with Franguis (I
mean, with those fugitive Portugals, and other straggling Christians, that had
put themselves in service to that King, driving no other Trade than to ravage
all this lower Bengale;) upon which Sultan Sujah embarked, with his whole
Family, viz. his Wife, his three Sons, and Daughters. They were well enough
received; whatever was necessary for their subsistence, such as that Country
would afford, was provided for them, in the name of that King. Some months
pass, the Season of the favorable Winds come in, but not a word of the Vessel,
though he demanded it no otherwise than for his Money; for as yet he wanted not
Rupies of Gold, nor Silver, nor Gems: He had too great a plenty of them; his
Riches were, in all appearance, the cause of his ruin, or at least contributed
much to it. Those barbarous Kings have no true generosity, and are not much
refrained by the Faith they have given, regarding nothing but their present
Interests, without so much as considering the mischiefs that may befall them
for their perfidiousness and brutality. To get out of their hands, one must
either be the stronger, or have nothing that may tempt their avarice. Sultan
Sujah may long enough solicit for a Vessel; all is in vain, he effects
nothing: On the contrary, the King begins to show much coldness, and to
complain of his not coming to see him. I know not, whether Sultan Sujah thought
it unworthy of himself, and too mean a thing to give him a Visit; or rather,
whether he feared, that being in the Kings House he might not there be seized
on, to take away all his Treasure, and then be delivered into the hands of
Emir-Jemla, who for that purpose promised, in the name of Aureng-Zebe, great
Sums of Money, and many other considerable advantages. Whatever the matter was,
he would not go thither himself, but sent his Son Sultan Banque, who being near
the Kings House, began to show liberality to the people, throwing out to them a
good quantity of half Rupies, and whole Rupies, of Gold and Silver. And being
come before the King, he presented him with store of Embroideries, and of rare
pieces of Goldsmiths-work, set with precious Stones of great value, excusing
his Father, Sultan Sujah, as being indisposed, and beseeching him in his name,
that he would remember the Vessel, and the promise made to him thereof. But all
that did not advance his business; on the contrary, five or six days after,
this King sent to Sultan Sujah, to ask of him one of his Daughters in Marriage;
which he could never resolve to grant him, whereat this barbarous Prince was
highly offended. What then could he do in this case? The Season passes away.
What shall become of him? What other resolution can he take, but to do a
desperate Action? Behold a strange undertaking, which may give a great Example
of what Despair can do!

Although this King of Racan be an Heathen, yet there is in his Dominions store
of Mahumetans mingled with the people, that are retired thither, or have been,
for the most part, taken Slaves, here and there, by those Franguis
abovementioned. Sultan Sujah did underhand gain these Mahumetans; and with
two or three hundred Men, whom he yet had remaining of those that had followed
him from Bengale, he resolved, one day to fall unexpectedly upon the House of
this Barbarian, to kill all, and to make himself proclaimed King of Racan. This
was a very bold Enterprise, and such a one, as had more of a Desperado in it,
than of a prudent Man. Yet notwithstanding, as I was informed, and by what I
could learn from many Mahumetans, and Portugals, and Hollanders, that then were
there present, the thing was feasible enough. But the day before the stroke was
to be given, the Design was discovered; which did altogether overthrow the
Affairs of Sultan Sujah, and was soon after the cause of his ruin. For not
finding hereafter any way more to recover himself, he attempted to fly toward
Pegu; which was a thing in a manner impossible, by reason of the vast Mountains
and Forests to be passed. Besides, he was immediately pursued so close, that
he was overtaken the same day he fled. It may well be thought, that he defended
himself with as much courage as was possible. He killed so many of those
Barbarians, that it will scarce be believed, but he was so overpow'red by the
multitude of pursuers, that he was obliged to quit the Combat. Sultan Banque,
who was not so far advanced as his Father, defended himself also like a Lion;
but at length, being all bloody of the wounds, by stones poured upon him from
all sides, he was seized on, and carried away, with his two little Brothers,
his Sisters, and Mother.

As to the Person of Sultan Sujah himself, all what could be learnt of it, is
this: That he, with one Woman, one Eunuch, and two other persons, got up to the
Top of the Mountain; that he received a wound in his Head by a stone, which
struck him down, but yet he rose again, the Eunuch having wound his Head about
with his Turbant, and that they escaped through the midst of the Woods.

I have heard the Relation three or four other manner of ways, even by those
persons that were upon the place. Some did assure, that he had been found among
the dead, but was not well known: And I have seen a Letter of the Chief of the
Dutch Factory, confirming this. So that it is difficult enough to know aright
what is become of him. And this it is, which has administered ground to those
so frequent Allarms, given us afterward at Dehli: For at one time it was
rumored, that he was arrived at Maslipatan, to join with the Kings of Golkonda
and Visapour; another time it was related for certain, that he had passed in
sight of Suratte with two Ships, bearing the Red Colors, which the King of
Pegu or the King of Siam had given him; by and by, that he was in Persia, and
had been seen in Chiras, and soon after in Kandahar, ready to enter into the
Kingdom of Caboul it self. Aureng-Zebe one day said smiling, that Sultan Sujah
was at last become an Agy or Pilgrim. And at this very day there are abundance
of petsons who maintain, that he is in Persia, returned from Constantinople,
whence he is said to have brought with him much Money. But that which confirms
more than enough, that there is no ground for any of these reports, is that
Letter of the Hollanders; and that an Eunuch of his, with whom I traveled from
Bengale to Maslipatan, as also the Great Master of his Artillery, whom I saw in
the Service of the King of Golkonda, have assured me, that he is no more in
being, though they made difficulty to say any more concerning him; as also,
that our French Merchants, that lately came out of Persia and from Hispahan,
when I was yet at Dehli, had in those parts heard no news at all of him;
besides that, I have heard that a while after his Defeat, his Sword and Poynard
had been found: So that it is credible, that if he was not killed upon the
place, he soon dyed afterward, and was the prey of some Robbers, or Tigers, or
Elephants, of which the Forests of that Country are full. However it be,
after this last Action his whole Family was put in Prison, Wives and Children,
where they were treated rudely enough; yet some time after they were set at
more liberty, and they received a milder entertainment: And then the King
called for the eldest Daughter, whom he married.

Whilst this was doing, some Servants of Sultan Banque, joined with diverse of
those Mahumetans which I have mentioned, went to plot another Conspiracy like
the first. But the day appointed for it being come, one of the Conspirators,
being half drunk, began too soon to break out. Concerning this also I have
heard forty different relations, so that it is very hard to know the truth of
it. That which is undoubted is this, that the King was at length so exasperated
against this unfortunate Family of Sujah, that he commanded it should be quite
rooted out. Neither did there remain any one of it, that was not put to death,
save that Daughter which the King had made his Wife. Sultan Banque, and his
Brothers, had their Heads cut off with blunt Axes; and the Women were mured up,
where they dyed of hunger and misery.

And thus ends this War, which the lust of Reigning had kindled among those
four Brothers, after it had lasted five or six years, from 1655, or thereabout,
to 1660 or 1661; which left Aureng-Zebe in the peaceable possession of this
puissant Empire.

The End of the FIRST TOME.
PARTICULAR EVENTS: OR, The most considerable Passages after the War, of 5
years, or thereabout, IN THE EMPIRE OF THE GREAT MOGOL.

Together with a LETTER CONCERNING The Extent of INDOSTAN, the Circulation of
the Gold and Silver at last swallowed up there; the Riches, Forces, Justice,
and the Principal Cause of the Decay of the STATES of ASIA.

TOM. II.

London, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit. 1676.

PARTICULAR EVENTS: OR, The most considerable Passages after the War for Five
Years, or thereabout, in the Empire of the GREAT MOGOL.
THe War being ended, the Tartars of Usbec entertained thoughts of sending
Ambassadors to Aureng-Zebe. They had seen him fight in their Country, when he
was yet a young Prince; Chah-Jehan having sent him to command the Succors,
which the Kan of Samarkand had desired of him against the Kan of Balk. They had
experienced his Conduct and Valor on many occasions, and they considered with
themselves, that he could not but remember the Affront they did him, when he
was just taking Balk, the Capital Town of the Enemy: For the two Kans agreed
together, and obliged him to retreat, alleging, that they apprehended he might
render himself Master of their whole State, just as Ekbar had formerly done of
the Kingdom of Kachimere. Besides, they had certain intelligence of all he had
done in Indostan, of his Battles, Fortune, and Advantages; whence they might
sufficiently estimate, that though Chah-Jehan was yet living, yet Aureng-Zebe
was Master, and the only Person that was to be owned King of the Indies.
Whether then they feared his just resentments, or whether it was, that their
inbred avarice and sordidness made them hope for some considerable Present, the
two Kans sent to him their Ambassadors to offer him their Service, and to
congratulate him upon the happy beginning of his Reign. Aureng-Zebe saw very
well, that the War being at an end, this offer was out of season, and that it
was nothing but fear or hope, as we said, that had brought them. Yet for all
this, he received them honorably; and, since I was present at their Audience,
I can relate the particulars of it with certainty.

They made their reverence at a considerable distance from him, after the
Indian custom, putting thrice their hands upon their heads, and as often
letting them down to the ground. Then they approached so near, that Aureng-Zebe
himself might very well have taken their Letters immediately from their hands;
but yet it was an Omrah that took and opened them, and gave them to him. He
forthwith read them with a very grave countenance; and afterward commanded,
there should be given to each of them an embroidered Vest, a Turbant, and a
Girdle of Silk in Embroidery, which is that which they call Ser-apah, that is,
an Habit from head to foot. After this, their Presents were called for, which
consisted in some Boxes of choice Lapis Lazulus, diverse Camels with long hair,
several gallant Horses, some Camelloads of fresh Fruit, as Apples, Pears,
Raisins and Melons; (for it is chiefly Usbec that furnishes these sorts of
Fruit, eaten at Dehli all the Winter long;) and in many loads of dry Fruit, as
Prunes of Bokara, Aprecocks, Raisins without any stones that appeared, and two
other sorts of Raisins, black and white, very large and very good.

Aureng-Zebe was not wanting to declare, how much he was satisfied with the
Generosity of the Kans, and much commended the beauty and rarity of the Fruit,
Horses, and Camels; and after he had a little entertained them of the state of
the Academy of Samarkand, and of the Fertility of their Country, abounding in
so many rare and excellent things, he desired them to go and repose themselves,
intimating withal, that he should be very glad to see them often.

They came away from their Audience full of contentment and joy, not being much
troubled, that they had been obliged to make their reverence after the Indian
custom, though it have something of slavish in it; nor much resenting it, that
the King had not taken their Letters from their own hands. I believe if they
had been required to kiss the ground, and even to do something of a lower
nature, they would have complied with it. It Is true, it would have been in
vain, if they had desired to make no other salute, but that of their own
Country, and to deliver to the King their Letters with their own hands; for
that belongs only to the Ambassadors of Persia, nor have these this favor
granted them, but with much difficulty.

They stayed above four months at Dehli, what diligence soever they could use
to be dispatched, which did incommode them very much; for they fell almost all
sick, and even some of them dyed, because they were not accustomed to such
heats as are in Indostan, or rather because they were sordid, and kept a very
ill Diet. I know not whether there be a more avaricious and uncleanly Nation
than they are. They laid up the Money, which the King had appointed them for
their maintenance, and lived a very miserable life, altogether unworthy of
Ambassadors: Yet they were dismissed with great honor: The King, in the
presence of all the Omrahs, presented each of them with two rich Ser-apahs, and
gave order, that eight thousand Rupies should be carried to their Lodgings,
which amounted to near two thousand Crowns each. He also gave them, for
Presents to the Kans their Masters, very handsome Serapahs, store of the richest
and best wrought Embroideries, a good quantity of fine Cloth, and silk Stuffs,
wrought with Gold and Silver, and some Tapestries, and two Poynards set about
with precious stones.

During their stay, I went thrice to see them, being presented to them as a
Physician by one of my Friends, that was Son of an Usbec, that had made his
Fortune in that Court. I had a design to have learned something in particular
of their Country, but I found them so ignorant, that they knew not so much as
the Confines of their State, much less could they inform me of any thing
concerning the Tartars that have conquered China of late years: In short, they
told me nothing that I knew not before. I had once the curiosity to Dine with
them, which liberty I obtained easily enough. They are not Men of much
ceremony; it was a very extraordinary Meal for such a one as I, it being mere
Horseflesh; yet for all this I got my Dinner with them; there was a certain
Ragou, which I thought passable: And I was obliged to express a liking of so
exquisit a dish, which they so much lust after. During Dinner there was a
strange silence; they were very busy in carrying in with their whole hands,
for they know not what a Spoon is; but after that this Horseflesh had wrought
in their stomachs, they began to talk, and then they would persuade me, they
were the most dextrous at Bows and Arrows, and the strongest Men in the World.
They called for Bows, which are much bigger than those of Indostan, and would
lay a wager, to pierce an Ox or my Horse through and through. Then they
proceeded to commend the strength and valor of their Women, which they
described to me quite otherwise than the Amazons; telling me very wonderful
stories of them, especially one, which would be admirable indeed, if I could
relate it with a Tartarian Eloquence, as they did: They told me, that at the
time when Aureng-Zebe made War in their Country, a Party of Twenty five or
Thirty Indian Horsemen came to fall upon a small Village; whilst they plundered,
and tied all those whom they met with to make them Slaves, an old Woman said to
them: Children, be not so mischievous, my Daughter is not far off, she will be
here very shortly, retreat if you be wise, you are undone if she light upon
you. They laughed at the old Woman, and her advice, and continued to load, to
tie, and to carry away her self; but they were not gone half a Mile, but this
old Woman, looking often backward, made a great outcry of joy, perceiving her
Daughter coming after her on Horseback; and presently this generous She-
Tartar, mounted on a furious Horse, her Bow and Arrows hanging at her side,
called to them at a distance, that she was yet willing to give them their
Lives, if they would carry back to the Village all they had taken, and then
withdraw without any noise. The advice of this young Woman affected them as
little as that of her old Mother; but they were soon astonished, when they
found her let fly at them in a moment three or four great Arrows, which struck
as many of their Men to the ground, which forced them to fall to their Quivers
also. But she kept her self at that distance from them, that none of them could
reach her. She laughed at all their effort, and at all their Arrows, knowing
how to attack them at the length of her Bow, and to take her measure from the
strength of her Arm, which was of another temper than theirs: So that after she
had killed half of them with her Arrows, and put them into disorder, she came
and fell upon the rest with the Zable in her hand, and cut them all in pieces.

The Ambassadors of Tartary were not yet gone away from Dehli, when Aureng-Zebe
fell exceeding sick; a violent and continued Fever made him sometimes lose his
understanding: His tongue was seized with such a Palsy, that he lost almost
his speech, and the Physicians despaired of his recovery; nothing was heard for
the time, than that he was gone, and that his Sister Rauchenara-Begum concealed
his death out of design. It was already bruited, that the Raja Jessomseigne,
Governor of Guzaratte, was on the way to deliver Chah-Jehan; that Mohabet-Kan
(who had at length obeyed the Orders of Aureng-Zebe) quitting the Government of
Caboul, and being already on this side Lahor to come back, made have also with
three or four thousand Horse for the same end; and that the Eunuch Etbar-kan,
who kept Chah-Jehan in the Fortress of Agra, would have the honor of his
delivery. On one side we see Sultan Mazum bestir himself exceedingly with
bribes, endeavoring by promises to assure himself of the Omrahs, so far as
that one night he went disguized to the Raja Jesseigne, entreating him with
expressions of deep respect, that he would engage himself for his interest.

We knew from other hands, that Rauchenara-Begum, together with Teday-kan, the
Great Master of Artillery, and many Omrahs, declared for the young Prince
Sultan Ekbar, the third Son of Aureng-Zebe, though he was but seven or eight
years old; both parties in the mean time pretending, they had no other design
than to deliver Chah-Jehan: So that the people believed, that now he was going
to be set at liberty, though none of the Grandees had any such thing in their
thoughts, spreading this rumor only to gain credit and concourse, and because
they feared, least by the means of Etbar-kan, or some other secret intrigue, he
should one day appear in the Field. And indeed of all the parties, there was
not one that had reason to wish for his liberty and restoration to the Throne,
except Jessomseigne, Mohabet-kan, and some others, that as yet had done no
great matter to his disadvantage. The rest had been all against him, at least
they had vilely abandoned him. They knew very well he would be like an
unchain'd Lion, if he came abroad: Who then could trust him? And what could
Etbar-kan hope for, who had kept him up so close? I know not, if by some
adventure or other, he should have come out of prison, whether he would not
have stood single, and been alone of his party.

But though Aureng-Zebe was very sick, yet for all this he gave order for all
things, and particularly for the sure custody of Chah-Jehan his Father; and
though he had advised Sultan Mazum to go and open the Gates to Chah-Jehan, in
case he should die, yet he omitted not to have Etbar-kan incessantly writ to.
And the fifth day, in the height of his sickness, he caused himself to be
carried into the Assembly of the Omrahs to show himself, and to disabuse those
who might believe him to be dead, and to obviate popular tumults, or such
accident as might have caused Chah-Jehan to be set at liberty. The seventh,
ninth, and tenth day, he made himself to be carried again into the said
Assembly for the same reason; and, what is almost incredible, the thirteenth,
after he had recollected himself from a fit of swounding, which accasioned a
rumor through the whole Town of his being dead, he called for two or three of
the greatest Omrahs, and the Raja Jesseigne, to let them see that he was alive;
made himself to be raised in his bed, called for Ink and Paper to write to
Etbar-kan, and sent for the Great Seal; which he had trusted with
Rauchenara-Bagum, and commonly enclosed in a small bag, sealed with a Seal he
always wore about his arm, fearing lest she had already made use of it for her
designs. I was nigh my Agah, when all this news was told him, and I understood,
that lifting up his hands to Heaven he said, What a Soul is this? A matchless
fortitude and courage of spirit! God preserve thee Aureng-Zebe, for greater
things; certainly he will not that thou should yet die. And indeed after
this fit he recovered by little and little.

He had no sooner recovered his health, but he sought to get out of the hands
of Chah-Jehan, and Begum-Saheb, the Daughter of Dara, to secure the marriage of
Sultan-Ekbar, his third Son, with this Princess; on purpose thereby to gain him
Authority, and to give him the greater right to the Empire; For he it is, who
is thought to be by him designed for it. He is yet very young, but he has many
near and powerful Relations at the Court, and is born of the Daughter of
Chah-Navaze-kan, and consequently of the Blood of the Ancient Sovereigns of
Machate; whereas Sultan Mahmoud and Sultan Mazum are only Sons of Ragipontnis,
or Daughters of Raja's. These Kings, though Mahumetans, do, for all that, marry
of the Daughters of the Heathen, either for State-interest, or for
extraordinary Beauty. But Aureng-Zebe, was disappointed in this design; It will
hardly be believed, with what height and fierceness of spirit Chah-Jehan and
Begum rejected the Proposition, and the Young Princess her self, who in the
fear of being carried away, was for some days desperate, and protested she
would rather kill her self an hundred times over, if it were possible, than to
marry the Son of him that had murdered her Father.

He had no better satisfaction from Chah-Jehan about certain Jewels which he
asked of him, in order to finish a piece of work which he caused to be added to
a famous Throne, which is so highly esteemed. For he fiercely answered, that
Aureng-Zebe should take no other care but to rule better then he did; that he
should let his Throne alone; that he was weary to hear of these Jewels, and
that the Hammers were ready to beat them to dust the first time he should be
importuned again about them.

The Hollanders would not be the last in doing reverence to Aureng-Zebe* they
had thoughts of sending an Ambassador to him. They pitched upon Monsieur
Adrican, the Commander of their Factory at Suratte; and being a right honest
man, and of good sense and judgment, not neglecting to take the counsel of his
friends, he well acquitted himself of this employment. Aureng-Zebe, though he
carries it very high, and affects to appear a zealous Mahumetan, and
consequently to despise the Franguis or Christians, yet thought fit to receive
them with much respect and civility. He even was desirous, that this Ambassador
should complement him in the mode of the Franguis, after he had been made to do
it the Indian way. It Is true, he received his Letters by the hand of an Omrah;
but that was not to be taken for any contempt, he having showed no more honor
to the Ambassadors of Usbec. After this, he intimated to him, that he might
produce his Present; and at the same time he caused him, and some of his Train,
to be dressed with a Ser-Apah embroidered. The Present ^osisted of store of
very fine Scarlet, some large Looking-glasses, and diverse excellent pieces of
Chinese and Japonese work, among which there was a Paleky, and a Tackravan, or
a Field-Throne of admirable workmanship.

This Ambassador was not so soon dispatched as he wished, it being the custom
of the Kings of Mogol to detain Ambassodours as long as they well can, from a
belief they have, that it is the interest of their Greatness, to oblige
Strangers to give long attendance at their Court; yet he was not kept so long
as the Ambassadors of Usbec. Mean time he had the misfortune, that his
Secretary died there, and the rest of his Retinue began to grow sick. When the
King dismissed him, he gave him such another Ser-Apah embroidered, as the first
was for himself; and another, a very rich one, for the General of Batavia,
together with a Poynard, set about with Jewels, all accompanied with a very
obliging Letter.

The chief aim of the Hollanders in this Embassy was, to make themselves
immediately known to the King, thereby to gain credit, and to intimidate the
Governors of the Seaports, and other places, where they have their Factories;
that so they may not attempt, when they please, to insult over them, or to
trouble them in their Trade; thereby letting them know, that they had to do
with a potent Nation, and that has a door open to address themselves, and to
complain immediately to the King. Their end also was, to make it appear, what
interest the King had in their Commerce; and therefore they showed long Rolls
of Commodities, bought up by them through the whole Kingdom, and Lists of
considerable sums of Gold and Silver, every year brought thither by them; but
saying not a word of those which they draw thence, from the Copper, Lead,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Muscadin, Pepper, Wood of Aloes, Elephants, and other
Commodities which they vend there.

About this time, one of the most considerable Omrah's of Aureng-Zebe addressed
himself to him, and represented, that this multitude and variety of perplexing
affairs, and this perpetual attention of mind in him, might soon cause a great
alteration in his temper, and a dangerous inconvenience in his health. But
Aureng-Zebe, seeming to take almost no notice of what that Omrah said, turned
himself another way, and approaching to another of the prime Omrah's of the
Court, a person of great knowledge and judgment, spoke to him in this purpose
(as I was informed by the Son of this Lord, who was my friend.)

You other Sages, are you not all of the mind, that there are times and
conjunctions so urgent, that a King ought to hazard his life for his Subjects,
and sacrifice himself for their Defense with Arms in his hands? And yet this
Effeminate Man would dissuade me from taking pains, and dehort me from watching
and solicitude for the Public; and carry me by pretenses of Health, to the
thoughts of an easy life, by abandoning the Government of my People, and the
management of affairs, to some Visir or other. Does he not know, that
Providence having given me a Royal Extraction, and raised me to the Crown of
Indostan, has not made me for my self alone, but for the good and safety of
the Public, and for the procurement of tranquillity and happiness to my
Subjects, as far as that nay be obtained by Justice and Power? He sees not the
consequence of his Counsels, and what mischiefs do attend Visirships. Does he
think it to be without reason what out Grand Sady has so generously
pronounced; O Kings, cease, cease to be Kings, or govern your Kingdoms your
selves? Go tell thy Countryman, that I shall well like of the care he is
constantly to take of the faithful discharge of his Place; but advise him also,
not any more to run out himself so far as he has done. We have natural
inclination enough to a long, easy, and careless life, and there need no
Counselors to shake off business and trouble. Our Wives, that lie in our
bosom, do too often, besides our own genius, incline us that way.

At the same time there happened an accident, that made a great noise at Dehli,
especially in the Seraglio, and disabused a great many, that could as hardly
believe as my self, that Eunuchs, though they had their Genitals quite cut
away, could become amorous as other men. Didar-kan, one of the chief Eunuchs of
the Seraglio, who had built an house, where he came often to divert himself,
fell in love with a very beautiful Woman, the Sister of a Neighbor of his,
that was an Heathen Scrivener.

These Amors lasted a good while before any body blamed them, since it was but
an Eunuch that made them, which sort of men have the privilege to go where
they please; but the familiarity grew so great, and so extraordinary betwixt
the two Lovers, that the Neighbors began to suspect something, and to rally
the Scrivener, which did so touch him, that he threatened both his Sisters and
the Eunuch to kill them if they should continue their commerce. And soon after,
finding them in the night lying together, he stabbed the Eunuch outright, and
left his Sister for dead. The whole Seraglio, Women and Eunuchs, made a league
together against him to make him away; but Aureng-Zebe dissipated all these
machinations, and was content to have him turn Mahumetan. Mean time it is
thought, he cannot long avoid the malice and power of the Eunuchs; for it is
not, as is the common saying, with Men as with Bruits; these latter become
gentler and more tractable when they are castrated; but men more vicious, and
commonly very insolent, though sometimes it turns to an admirable fidelity
and gallantry.

It was also about the same time, that Aureng-Zebe was somewhat discontented
with Rauchenara-Begum, because she was suspected to have given access to two
Young Gallants into the Seraglio, who were discovered and brought before
Aureng-Zebe. Yet this being but a suspicion, he expressed to her no great
resentment of it; nor did he make use of so great rigor and cruelty against
those poor men, as Chah-Jehan had done against the person above spoken of. The
matter was related to me by an old Portuguese Woman (that had a long while been
slave to the Seraglio, and went out and in at pleasure) as follows: She told
me that Rauchenara-Begum, after she had drawn from a young man, hidden by her,
all his abillty, delivered him to some Women to convey him away in the night
thorough some Gardens, and so to save him: But whether they were discovered, or
whether they feared they should be so, or what else might be the cause, they
fled, and left him there wandering in the midst of those Gardens, not knowing
which way to get out: And being at last met with, and brought before
Aureng-Zebe, who examined him strictly, but could draw nothing else from him,
than that he was come in over the walls, he was commanded to get out the same
way by which he entered: But it seems, the Eunuchs did more than Aureng-Zebe had
given order for, for they cast him down from the top of the walls to the
bottom. As for the other Young Gallant, this same Woman assured me, that he was
found wandering in the Garden like the first, and having confessed that he was
come in by the Gate, Aureng-Zebe commanded likewise, that he also should pass
away again by the same Gate; yet reserving to himself a severe chastisement for
the Eunuchs, since not only the honor of the Royal House, but also the safety
of the Kings person is herein concerned.

Some months after, there arrived at Dehli several Ambassadors, almost at the
same time. The first was Xerif of Meccha, whose Present did consist in some
Arabian Horses: The second and third Ambassador were, he of the King of Hyeman,
or Happy Arabia, and he of the Prince of Bassora, who likewise presented
Arabian horses. The two remaining Ambassadors were sent from the King of
Ethiopia. To the three first no great regard was given; they appeared in so
miserable and confused an Equipage, that it was perceived they came only to get
some money by the means of their Present, and of the many Horses and other
Merchandise, which under the pretense of Ambassadors, entered without paying any
duty into the Kingdom, there to be sold, and to buy for the money a quantity of
Indian Stuffs, and so to return without paying likewise any Impost at all.

But as to the Ethiopian Embassy, that deserves to be otherwise taken notice
of; the King of Ethiopia having received the news of the Revolution of the
Indies, had a design to spread his Name in those parts, and there to make known
his Grandeur and Magnificence by a splendid Embassy; or, as malice will have
it, or rather as the very truth is, to reap some advantage by a present as well
as the rest. Behold therefore this great Embassy! He chose for his Ambassadors
two persons, that one would think were the most considerable in his Court, and
the most capable to make such a design prosper. And who were they? the one was
a Mahumetan Merchant, whom I had seen some years ago at Moka, when I passed
there coming out of Egypt over the Red Sea, where he was to sell some Slaves
for that Prince, and to buy of the money, raised thence, some Indian
Commodities. And this is the fine Trade of that Great Christian King of Africa.
The other was a Christian Merchant of Armenia, born and married in Aleppo,
known in Ethiopia by the name of Murat. I had seen him also at Moka, where he
had accomodated me with the half of his Chamber, and assisted me with very good
advice, whereof I have spoken in the beginning of this History, as a thing
taking me off from passing into Ethiopia, according to my first design. He also
came every year to that place, in that Kings Name, for the same end that the
Mahumetan did, and brought the Present which the King made every year, to the
Gentlemen of the English and Dutch Company of the East Indies, and carried away
theirs. Now the King of Ethiopia, sutably to his design, and the desire he had
of making his Ambassadors appear with great splendor, put himself to great
expenses for this Embassy: He gave them thirty two young Slaves, of both
Sexes, to sell them at Moka, and thence to make a sum of Money to bear their
Charges. A wonderful largess! Slaves are commonly sold there for twenty five or
thirty Crowns a piece, one with another. A considerable sum. Besides, he gave
them for a Present to the Great Mogol five and twenty choice Slaves, among
which there were nine or ten very young, proper to make Eunuchs of. A very
worthy Present for a King, and he a Christian, to a Mahumetan Prince! It seems
the Christianity of the Ethiopians is very different from ours. He added to
that Present, twelve Horses, esteemed as much as those of Arabia, and a kind of
little Mule, of which I saw the Skin, which was a very great Rarity, there
being no Tiger so handsomely speckled, nor Silken Stuff of India so finely, so
variously, and so orderly streaked, as that was. Moreover, there were for a
part of the Present, two Elephants Teeth, so prodigious, that they assured it
was all that a very able-bodied man could do to lift up one of them from the
ground. Lastly, an Horn of an Ox full of Civett, and so big, that the aperture
of it being measured by me, when it came to Dehli, it had a Diameter of half a
Foot, and somewhat better. All things being thus prepared, the Ambassadors
depart from Gondez, the Capital of Ethiopia, situated in the Province of
Dambea, and came through a very troublesome Country to Beiloul, which is a
dispeopled Seaport over against Moka, nigh to Babel-mandel, not daring to come
(for reasons elsewhere to be alleged) the ordinary way of the Caravans, which
is made with ease in forty days to Arkiko, and thence to pass to the Isle of
Masoua. During their stay at Beiloul, and expecting a Bark of Moka, to waft
over the Red Sea, there died some of their Slaves, because the Vessel tarried,
and they found not in that place those refreshments that were necessary for
them. When they came to Moka, they soon sold their Merchandise to raise a stock
of Money according to order, But they had this ill luck, that that year the
Slaves were very cheap; because the Market was glutted by many other Merchants;
yet they raised a sum to pursue their Voyage: They embarked upon an Indian
Vessel to pass to Suratte: Their passage was pretty good; they were not above
five and twenty days at Sea; but whether it was that they had made no good
provision, for want of stock, or what else the cause might be, many of their
Slaves and Horses, as also the Mule, whereof they saved the Skin, died. They
were no sooner arrived at Suratte, but a certain Rebel of Visapour, called
Seva-Gi, came and ranscked and burned the Town, and in it their house, so that
they could save nothing but their Letters, some Slaves that were sick, or which
Seva-Gi could not light on, their Ethiopian Habits which he cared not for, and
the Mules Skin, and the Oxes Horn, which was already emptied of the Civett.
They did very much exaggerate their misfortune; but those malicious Indians
that had seen them arrive in such a wretched condition, without provisions,
without habits, without money, or Bills of Exchange, said, that they were very
happy, and should reckon the Plunder of Suratte for a piece of their best
Fortune, forasmuch as Seva-Gi had saved them the labor of bringing their
miserable Present to Dehli, and had furnished them with a very specious pretense
for their beggarly condition, and for the sale they had made of their Civet and
of some of their Slaves, and for demanding of the Governor of Suratte
provisions for their subsistence; as also some Money and Chariots to continue
their voyage to Dehli. Monsieur Adrican, chief of the Dutch Factory, my friend,
had given to the Armenian Murat a Letter of recommendation to me, which he
delivered himself at Dehli, not remembering that I had been his Host at Moka. It
was a very pleasant meeting when we came to know one another, after the space
of five or six years. I embraced him affectionately, and promised him that I
would serve him in whatever I could; but that, though I had acquaintance at the
Court, it was impossible for me to do them any considerable good office there:
For since they had not brought with them any valuable Present, but only the
Mules Skin, and the empty Oxes Horn, and that they were seen going upon the
streets without any Paleky or Horses, save that of our Father Missionary, and
mine (which they had almost killed) clothed like Beggars, and followed with
seven or eight Slaves, bare-headed and barefoot, having nothing but an ugly
Sharse tied between their Legs* with a ragged Cloth over their left Shoulder,
passing under their left Arm like a Summer-Cloak; since, I said, they were in
such a posture, whatever I could say for them was insignificant; they were
taken for Beggars, and no body took other notice of them. Yet notwithstanding I
said so much of the Grandeur of their King to my Agah Danechmendkan, who had
cause to hearken to me, as managing all foreign affairs there, that
Aureng-Zebe gave them Audience, received their Letters, presented them each
with an embroidered Vest, a silken embroidered Girdle, and a Turbant of the
same, gave order for their entertainment, and dispatched them in a little time,
and that with more honor than there was ground to expect: For in dismissing
them, he presented them each with an other such Vest, and with 6000 Rupies for
them all, which amounts to about 3000 Crowns, of which the Mahumetan had four
thousand, and Murat, because a Christian, but two thousand. He also gave them
for a Present to their Master a very rich Ser-apah or Vest, two great silver
and guilt Trumpets, two silver Tymbals, a Poynard covered with Jewels, and the
value of about twenty thousand Francs in Golden and Silver Rupies, to let their
King see Money coined, as a Rarity he had not in his Country: But Aureng-Zebe
knew very well that these Rupies would not go out of the Kingdom, and that they
were like to buy commodities for them: And it fell out so; for they laid them
out, partly in fine Cotton Cloth, to make shirts of for their King, Queen, and
their only lawful Son that is to be the Successor; partly in filken stuffs
streaked with Gold or Silver, to make Vests and Summer-Drawers of; partly in
English Scarlet, to make two Arabian Vests of for their King also; and lastly,
in Spices, and in store of courser Cloth, for diverse Ladies of his Seraglio,
and for the children he had by them; all without paying any duty.

For all my friendship with Murat, there were three things that made me almost
repent to have served them. The first, because Murat having promised me to
leave with me for 50 Rupies, a little Son of his, that was very pretty, of a
delicate Black, and without such a swelled Nose, or such thick Lips as commonly
the Ethiopians have, broke his word with me, and let me know, that he should
take no less for him than 300 Rupies. For all this, I had thoughts of Buying
him, for rarities sake, and that I might say, a Father had sold me his Son. The
second, because I found, that Murat, as well as the Mahumetan, had obliged
themselves to Aureng-Zebe, that they would employ their interest with their
King, that he might permit in Ethiopia to rebuild an old Mosquee ruined in the
time of the Portugals, and which had been Built for a Tomb of a great Dervich,
which went from Mecha into Ethiopia for the propagation of Mahumetanism, and
there made great progress. They received of Aureng-Zebe two thousand Rupies for
this engagement. This Mosquee had been pulled down by the Portugals, when they
came with their succors into Ethiopia, which the then King, who turned
Catholic, had asked of them against a Mahumetan Prince, Invading his Kingdom.
The third, because they desired Aureng-Zebe, in the name of their King, to give
them an Alcoran, and eight other Books, which I well remember, were of the most
reputed in the Mahumetan Religion: Which proceeding seemed to me very unworthy
of a Christian Ambassador, and Christian King, and confirmed to me what I had
been told at Moka, that the Christianity of Ethiopia must needs be some odd
thing; that it savours much of Mahumetanisme, and that the Mahumetans increase
exceedingly in that Empire, especially since the Portugals, that came in there
for the reason lately expressed, were either killed, upon the death of the
King, by the Cabal of the Queen Mother, or expelled together, with the
Patriarch Jesuit, whom they had brought along from Goa.

During the time that the Ambassadors were at Dehli, my Agah, who is more than
ordinary curious, made them often come to him, when I was present, to inform
himself of the State and Government of their Country, and principally to learn
something of the source of the Nile, which they call Ababile, of which they
discoursed to us as a thing so well known, that no body doubted of it. Murat
himself, and a Mogol, who was returned out of Ethiopia with him, had been
there, and told us very near the same particulars with those I had received of
it at Moka; viz. That the Nile had its Origin in the Country of Agaus; that it
issued out of the Earth by two Springs bubling up, near to one another, which
did form a little Lake of about thirty or forty paces long; that coming out of
this Lake, it did make a considerable River: and that from space to space it
received small Rivers increasing it. They added, that it went on circling, and
making as 'twere a great Isle; and that afterward it tumbled down from steep
Rocks into a great Lake, in which there were diverse fruitfuls Isles, store of
Crocodiles, and (which would be remarkable enough, if true) abundance of
Sea-calves, that have no other vent for their Excrements than that, by which
they take in their food; this Lake being in the Country of Dambea, three small
days journey from Gondar, and four or five days journey from the source of
the Nile: And lastly, that this River did break out of this Lake, being
augmented with many River-waters, and with several Torrents falling into it,
especially in the Rainy Season (which do regularly begin there, as in the
Indies about July, which is very considerable and convincing for the inundation
of the Nile) and so runs away through Sonnar, the capital City of the King of
Fungi, Tributary to the King of Ethiopia, and from thence passes to the Plains
of Mesre, which is Egypt.

The Ambassadors were not wanting to say more than was liked on the subject of
their Kings Greatness, and of the strength of his Army; but the Mogolian did
not overmuch agree with them in it; and in their absence represented to us
this Army, which he had seen twice in the field, with the Ethiopian King on the
head of it, as the most wretched thing in the World.

They also related to us diverse particulars of that Country, which I have put
in my Journal, one day perhaps to be digested and copied: In the mean time I
shall insert here three or four things which Murat told me, because I esteem
them very extravagant for a Christian Kingdom. He said then, that there were
few men in Ethiopia, who besides their lawful Wife, had not many others, and
himself owned that he had two, without reckoning her which he had left at
Aleppo: That the Ethiopian Women did not so hide themselves, as they do in the
Indies among the Mahumetans, nor even as among the Gentiles: That those of the
meaner sort of People* Maids or Married Women, Slaves or Free, were often
together pell-mell, night and day, in the same Chamber* without those
jealousies so common in other Countries: That the Women of Lords did not stick
much to go into the House of a simple Cavalier, whom they knew to be a man of
Execution: That if I had gone into Ethiopia, they would soon have obliged me to
Marry, as they had done, a few years since, to a certain European, who named
himself a Greek Physician: That an ancient man, of about fourscore years of
age, did one day present to the King fourscore Sons, all of age, and able to
bear Arms; and that the King asked him, Whether he had no more but them? To
whom having answered, No, but only some Daughters, the King sent him away with
this reproach; Begone, thou Calf, and be ashamed for having no more Children at
that age, as if Women were wanting in my Dominions! That the King himself had
at least fourscore Sons and Daughters running about pell-mell in the Seraglio,
for whom he had caused to be made a number of round vernished sticks, made like
a little maze; those Children being fond of having that in their hand like a
Scepter, distinguishing them from those that were Children of Slaves, or from
others living in that place.

Aureng-Zebe sent also twice for these Ambassadors, for the same reason that my
Agah did, and especially to enquire after the state of Mahumetanisns in that
Country. He had also the curiosity of Viewing the skin of the Mule, which
remained, I know not how, in the Fortress amongst the Officers; which was to me
a great mortification, because they had designed it for me for the good
services I had done them. I made account to have one day presented it to some
very curious person in Europe. I urged often, that together with the Mules
skin, they should carry the great Horn to Aureng-Zebe, to show it him; but they
feared, least he should make a question, which would have perplexed them; viz.
how it came to pass, that they had saved the Horn from the plunder of Suratte,
and lost the Civet?

Whilst these Ambassadors of Ethiopia were at Dehli, it came to pass that
Aureng-Zebe called together his Privy Council, and the most learned persons of
his Court, to choose a new Master for his third Son, Sultan Eckbar, whom he
designed for his Successor. In this Council he showed the passion he has to
have this young Prince well Educated, and to make him a great Man. Aureng-Zebe
is not ignorant of what importance it is, and how much it is to be wished, that
as much as Kings surmount others in greatness, they may also exceed them in
Virtue and Knowledge. He also well knows, that one of the principal sources of
the Misery, of the mis-Goverment, of the un-Peopling, and the decay of the
Empires of Asia proceeds from thence, that the children of the Kings thereof
are brought up only by Women and Eunuchs, which often are no other than
wrecthed Slaves of Russia, Circassia, Mingrelia, Gurgistan and Ethiopia; mean
and servile, ignorant and insolent souls. These Prince become Kings, when they
are of age, without being instructed, and without knowing what it is to be a
King; amazed when they begin to come abroad out of the Seraglio, as persons
coming out of another World, or let out of some subterraneous Cave, where they
had lived all their life time; wondering at every thing they meet, like so many
Innocents; believing all, and fearing all, like Children, or nothing at all, as
if they were stupid: And all this, according to their Nature, and suitable to
the first Images imprinted upon them; commonly high and proud, and seemingly
grave, but of that kind of pride and gravity, which is so flat and distasteful,
and so unbecoming them, that one may plainly see, it is noehing but brutality or
barbarousness, and the effect of some ill-studied and ill-digested Documents;
or else they fall into some childish civilities, yet more unsavory; or into
such cruelties, as are blind and brutal; or into that mean and gross vice of
drunkenness, or into an excessive and altogether unreasonable Luxury, either
ruining their bodies and understandings with their Concubines, or altogether
abandoning themselves to the pleasures of Hunting, like some carniverous
Animals, preferring a pack of Dogs before the life of so many poor people, whom
they force to follow them in the pursuit of their Game, and suffer to perish of
hunger, heat, cold, and misery. In a word, they always run into some extreme
or other, being altogether irrational and extravagant, according as they are
carried by their natural temper, or by the first impressions that are given
them; thus remaining, almost all, in a strange ignorance of what concerns the
state of the Kingdom; the reins of the Government being abandoned to some
Visir, who entertains them in their ignorance and in their passions, which are
the two strongest supports he can have to rule always according to his own
mind, with most assurance, and the least contradiction; and given over also to
those Slaves their Mothers, and to their Eunuchs, who often know nothing but to
continue plots of cruelty, whereby they strangle and banish one another, and
sometimes the Visirs, and even the Grand Signors themselves; so that no man
whatsoever, that has any Estate, can be in safety of his life.

But to return; after all these Ambassadors, which we have spoken of, there
came at last news, that the Ambassador of Persia was upon the frontiers. The
Persian Omrah's, that are at the service of the Mogol, spread a rumor that he
came for affairs of great importance; though intelligent persons much doubted
of a Commission of that nature, considering that the time of great conjunctures
was passed, and that those Omrahs, and the other Persians did what they did,
rather to make a show, than for any thing else. Mean time, on the day of the
Entry, this Ambassador was received with all possible respect: The Bazars,
through which he passed, were all new-painted, and the Cavalry attending on the
way for above the length of a whole League. Many Omrah's accompanied him with
Music, Tymbals and Trumpets, and when he entered into the Fortress, or the
Palace of the King, the Guns went off. Aureng-Zebe received him with much
civility, and was content he should make his Address to him after the Persian
mode, receiving also, without any scruple, immediately from his hands the
Letters of his King; which, out of respect, he lifted up even to his head, and
afterward read them with a grave and serious countenance: Which done, he
caused an embroidered Vest to be brought, together with a rich. Turbant and
Girdle, commanding it to be put on him in his presence. A little after, it was
intimated to him, that he might order his Present to be brought in, which
consisted of five and twenty as handsome Horses as ever I saw, led, and covered
with embroidered trappings; and of twenty very stately and lusty Camels, as big
as Elephants: Moreover, of a good number of Boxes, said to be full of most
excellent Rosewater; and of a certain distilled water, very precious, and
esteemed highly cordial; besides, there were displayed five or six very rich
and very large Tapisseries, and some embroidered pieces exceeding Noble,
wrought in small flowers, so fine and delicate, that I know not whether in all
Europe any such can be met with. To all this were added four Damaskin'd Swords,
with as many Poynards, all covered with Jewels; as also five or six Harnasses
of Horses, which were much esteemed, being also very fine and rich, the stuff
being raised with rich Embroidery set with small Pearls, and very fair
Turcoises of the old Rock.

It was observed, that Aureng-Zebe beheld this Present very attentively; that
he admired the beanty and rarity of every piece, and that several times he
extolled the Generosity of the King of Persia; assigning to the Ambassador a
place among his chief Omrahs. And after he had entertained him a while with a
discourse about the inconveniences and hardships of his Voyage, he dismissed
him, and made instance, that he should come every day to see him.

During the four or five Months that the Ambassador staid at Dehli, he was
always splendidly treated at Aureng-Zebe's charge; and the greatest Omrahs
presented him one after another; and at last he was very honorably dismissed:
For Aureng-Zebe had him apparelled with another rich Serapah or Vest, to which
he added considerable presents for himself, reserving those he intended for his
King, 'till he should send an Ambassador expressly; which sometime after he did.

Notwithstanding all these testimonies of honor and respect which Aureng-Zebe
had showed to this Ambassador, the same Persians, abovespoken of, gave out,
that their King had sensibly reproached him in his Letters, with the Death of
Dara, and the imprisonment of Chah-Jehan, as actions unworthy of a Brother, and
a Son, and a Musulman; and that he had also hit him with the word A^m-Guire, or
Conqueror of the World, which Aureng-Zebe had caused to be engraven on his
Coin. But it is hard to believe, that the King of Persia should do any such
thing to provoke such a Victorious Prince, since Persia is not in a condition
to enter into a War with Indostan; I am rather apt to believe, that Persia has
work enough to keep Kandahar on the side of Indostan, and the Frontiers on the
side of Turkey: Its Forces and Riches are known; it produces not always such
great Kings as the Chah-Abbas, Valiant, Intelligent, and Politic, knowing to
make use of every thing, and to do much with small expenses. If it were in a
condition of undertaking any thing against Indostan, or really sensible of
Piety and the Musal-Man Faith, why was it that in these last troubles and Civil
Wars, which continued so long in Indostan, the Persians sat still and looked
on, when Dara, Chan-Jehan, Sultan Sujah, and perhaps the Governor of Caboul
desired their assistance; and they might with no very great Army, nor great
expenses have seized on the fairest part of India, beginning from the Kingdom
of Caboul, unto the River Indus, and beyond it, and so made themselves Umpires
of all things? yet notwithstanding there must needs have been some offensive
expressions in those Persian Letters, or else the Ambassador must have done or
said something that displeased Aureng-Zebe; because two or three days after he
had dismissed him, he made a rumor to be spread-abroad, that the Ambassador
had caused the Ham-strings of the presented Horses to be Cut; And the
Ambassador being yet upon the Frontiers, he made him return all the Indian
Slaves which he carried along with him, of which he had a prodigious number.

Mean while, Aureng-Zebe was not so much concerned, nor troubled himself so
much with this Ambassador, as Chah-Jehan, upon a like occasion, did with him,
that was sent to him from the Great Chah-Abbas. When the Persians are in the
humor of Rallying against the Indians, they relate these three or four little
Stories of them: They say, that Chah-Jehan seeing that the Courtship and
promises made to their Ambassador were not able to prevail with him, so as to
make him perform his salute after the Indian Mode, he devised this artifice; he
commanded to shut the great Gate of the Court of the Amkas, where he was to
receive him, and to leave only open the Wicket, through which one man could not
pass but very difficultly, by stooping and holding down his Head, as the
fashion is when one makes an Indian Reverence, to the end that it might be
said, he had made the Ambassador put himself in a posture which was something
lower than the Indian Salam or Salute; but that that Ambassador being aware of
this trick, came in with his Back fore-most: And that Chah-Jehan, out of
indignation to see himself caught, told him, Eh-Bed-bakt, Thou Wretch, do
thou think thou come into a Stable of Asses, such as thou art? And that the
Ambassador, without any alteration, answered; Who would not think so, seeing
such a little Door?

Another story is this; That at a certain time Chah-Jehan taking ill some
course and fierce answers returned to him by the Persian Ambassador, could not
hold to tell him; What, has Chah-Abbas no other men at his Court, that he must
send to me such a Fool as thy self? And that the Ambassador answered; He has
many better and wiser men than me, but to such a King, such an Ambassador: They
add, that on a certain day Chah-Jehan, who had made the Ambassador to Dine in
his Presence, and sought some occasion to affront him, seeing that he was busy
in picking and gnawing of Bones, asked him smiling, Eh Eltchy-Gi, My Lord
Ambassador, What shall the Dogs eat? And that he answered readily, Kichery,
that is, a dish of Pulse, which is the Food of the meaner sort of People, and
which he saw Chah-Jehan eat, because he loved it.

They say also, that Chah-Jehan once asked him, What he thought of his new
Dehli (which he was building) in comparison of Hispahan? and that he answered
aloud, and with an oath, Billah, Billah, Hispahan does not come near the dust
of Dehli; which Chah-Jehan took for a high commendation, though the Ambassador
mocked him, because the dust is so troublesome at Dehli.

Lastly, they relate that Chah-Jehan one day pressing him to tell him, What he
thought of the Grandeur of the Kings of Indostan, compared to that of the Kings
of Persia? He answered, That, in his opinion, one could not better compare the
Kings of India than to a large Moon of 15 or 16 days old, and those of Persia,
to a small Moon of 2 or 3 days. And that this answer did at first please
Chah-Jehan; but that soon after he perceived, that that comparison did him but
little honor, the Ambassadors sense being, that the Kings of Indostan were
decreasing, and those of Persia increasing.

Whether these points are so commendable, and such marks of wit, every one is
free to judge, as he sees cause. My opinion is, that a discreet and respectful
gravity is much more becoming Ambassadors, than rallery and roughness,
especially, when they have to do with Kings, who will not be rallied with,
witness an accident that befell this very Ambassador; for Chah-Jehan was at
length so weary of him, and his freedom, that he called him no otherwise than
Fool; and one day gave secret order, that when he should enter into a pretty
long and narrow Stree, that is near the Fortress, to come to the Hall of the
Assembly, they should let loose upon him an ill-conditioned and fierce
Elephant; and certainly, if the Ambassador had not nimbly lept out of his
Paleky, and, together with his dextrous attendants, shot some Arrows into the
Trump of the Elephant, which forced him to turn back, he had been utterly
spoiled.

It was at this time, upon the departure of the Persian Ambassador, that
Aureng-Zebe received with that admirable wisdom his Tutor Mallah-Sale, the
History of which is rare and considerable. This old man, who long since had
retired himself toward Caboul, and settled himself on some Lands, which
Chah-Jehan had given him, had no sooner heard of the great fortune of
Aureng-Zebe his Discipline, who had overcome Dara and all his other Brothers,
and was now King of Indostan, but he came in have to the Court, swelled with
hopes of being presently advanced to no less than the dignity of an Omrah. He
makes his Court, and endeavors to engage all his friends, and
Rauchenara-Begum, the Kings Sister employs her self for him. But yet there pass
three whole Months, that Aureng-Zebe does not so much as seem to look upon him;
till at length wearied to have him always at his Elbow, and before his Face, he
sent for him to a plaee apart, where there was no body but Hakim-lul-Mouluk,
Danech-mend-kan, and three or four of those Omr ahs, that pretend to Science,
and then spoke to him to this effect (as I was informed by my Agah.)

What is it you would have of me Doctor? Can you reasonably desire I should
make you one of the chief Omrahs of my Court? Let me tell you, if you had
instructed me as you should have done, nothing would be more just: For I am of
this persuasion, that a Child well educated and instructed, is as much, at
least, obliged to his Master as to his Father: But where are those good
Documents you have given me? In the first place you have taught me, that all
that Frangistan (so it seems they call Europe) was nothing, but I know not what
little Island, of which the greatest King was he of Portugal, and next to him
he of Holland, and after him he of England; and as to the other Kings, as those
of France and Andalusia, you have represented them to me as our petty Raja's;
telling me, that the Kings of Indostan were far above them all together, and
that they were the true and only Houmajons, the Ekbars, the Jehan-Guyres, the
Chah-Jehans, the Fortunate ones, the Great ones, the Conquerors and Kings of
the World; and that Persia and Usbec, Kach-guer, Tatar and Catay, Pegu, China,
and Matchina did tremble at the name of the Kings of Indostan: Admirable
Geography! You should rather have taught me exactly to distinguish all those
different States of the World, and well to understand their strength, their way
of fighting, their Customs, Religions, Governments and Interests; and by the
perusal of solid History, to observe their Rise, Progress, Decay, and whence,
how, and by what accidents and errors, those great Changes and Revolutions of
Empires and Kingdoms have happened. I have scarce learnt of you the name of my
Grandsires, the famous Founders of this Empire; so far were you from having
taught me the History of their Life, and what course they took to make such
great Conquests. You had a mind to teach me the Arabian Tongue, to read and to
write, I am much obliged to you (forsooth) for baving made me lose so much time
upon a Language, that requires ten or twelve years to attaein to its
perfection; as if the Son of a King should think it to be an honor to him, to
be a Grammarian or some Doctor of the Law, and to learn other Languages than
those of his Neighbors, when he cannot well be without them; he, to whom Time
is so precious for so many weighty tbings, which he ought by times to learn. As
if there were any spirit that did not with some reluctance, and even with a
kind of debasement, employ it self in so sad and dry an exercise, so longsom
and tedious, as is that of learning Words.

Thus did Aureng-Zebe resent the pedantick Instructions of his Tutor; to which
it is affirmed in that Court, that after some entertainment which he had with
others, he further added the following reproof.

Know you not, that Childhood well governed, being a state which is ordinarily
accompanied with an happy memory, is capable of thousands of good Preceps and
Instructions, which remain deeply impressed the whole remainder of a man's life,
and keep the mind always raised for great actions? The Law, Prayers, and
Sciences, may they not as well be learned in our Mother Tongue, as in Arabic?
You told my Father Chah-Jehan, that you would teach me Philosophy. It Is true, I
remember very well, that you have entertained me for many years with airy
Questions, of things that afford no satisfaction at all to the mind, and are of
no use in humane society, empty Notions, and mere Phancies, that have only this
in them, that they are very hard to understand, and very easy to forget, which
are only capable to tire and spoil a good understanding, and to breed an
Opinion that is insupportable. I still remember, that after you had thus amused
me, I know not how long, with your fine Philosophy, all I retained of it, was a
multitude of barbarous and dark words, proper to bewilder, perplex, and tire
out the best wits, and only invented, the better to cover the vanity and
ignorance of men like your self, that would make us believe, that they know all
and that under those obscure and ambiguous words, are hid great mysteries,
which they alone are capable to understand: If you had seasoned me with that
Philosophy, which forms the mind to ratiocination, and insensibly accustoms
it to be satisfied with nothing but solid reasons; if you had given me those
excellent precepts and doctrines, which raise the Soul above the assaults of
Fortune, and reduce her to an unshakeable and always equal temper, and permit
her not to be lifted up by prosperity, nor debased by adversity; if you had
taken care to give me the knowledge of what we are, and what are the first
principles of things; and had assisted me in forming in my mind a fit Idea of
the greatness of the Universe, and of the admirable order and motion of the
parts thereof; if, I say, you had instilled into me this kind of Philosophy, I
should think my self incomparably more obliged to you than Alexander was to his
Aristotle; and believe it my duty to recompense you otherwise, than he did him.
Should not you, instead of your flattery, have taught me somewhat of that point
so important to a King, which is, what the reciprocal duties are of a Sovereign
to his Subjects, and those of Subjects, to their Sovereign? And ought not you
to have considered, that one day I should be obliged with the Sword to dispute
my Life and the Crown with my Brothers? Is not that the destiny almost of all
the Sons of Indostan? Have you ever taken any care to make me learn, what it is
to besiege a Town, or to set an Army in array? For these things I am obliged to
others, not at all to you. Go, and retire to the Village, whence you are come,
and let `no body know who you are, or what `is become of you.

At that time there arose a kind of Tempest against Astrologers, which did not
displeaie me. Most people of Asia are so infatuated by Judiciary Astrology,
that they believe there is nothing done here below, but it is written above (for
so they speak.) In all their undertakings therefore they consult Astrologers.
When two Armies are ready to give Battle, they beware of falling on, till the
Astrologer has taken and determined the moment he fancies propitious for the
beginning of the Combat. And so, when the matter is about electing a
Captain General of an Army, of dispatching an Ambassador, of concluding a
Marriage, of beginning a Voyage, and of doing any other thing, as buying a
Slave, putting on new Apparel, etc. nothing of all that is done without the
sentence of Mr. Star-Gazer; which is an incredible vexation, and a custom
drawing after it such important consequences, that I know not how it can
subsist so long. For the Astrologer must needs have knowledge of all that
passes, and of all that is undertaken from the greatest Affairs to the least.

But behold, it happened, that the Prime Astrologer of the King was drowned,
which occasioned a great noise at Court, and was a great discredit to
Astrology: For he being the person that determined the moments of all
enterprises and actions for the King, and the Omrahs, every one wondered, how a
man so experienced, and that for so long time had dispensed good adventures to
others, could not foresee his own misfortune. There were not wanting those, who
pretended to be wiser than others, and said, that in Frangistan, where Sciences
did flourish, the Grandees do suspect all such kind of people, and that some
hold them even no better than Mountebanks, that it is much doubted, whether this
Knowledge is grounded upon good and solid reasons, and that it may very well be
some fancy of Astrologers, or rather an artifice to make themselves necessary
to the Great ones, and to make them in some measure to depend on them.

All these discourses very much displeased the Astrologers; but nothing angered
them so much as this Story, become very famous, viz. That the Great Chah-Abas
King of Persia, commanded to be dug and prepared a little place in his
Seraglio to make a Garden; that the young Trees were all ready, and that the
Gardner made account to plant them the next day. Mean time the Astrologer
taking upon him, said, that a good nick of time was to be observed for planting
them, to make them prosper. Chah-Abas being content it should be so, the
Star-gazer took his Instruments, turned over his Books, made his Calculation,
and concluded, that by reason of such and such a Conjunction and Aspect of the
Planets, it was necessary they should be set presently. The Master-Gardner, who
minded nothing less than this Astrologer, was not then at hand; yet for all
that, they fell to work immediately, making holes, and planting the Trees,
Chah-Abas himself setting them, that it might be said, that they were Trees set
with Chah-Abas's own hands. The Gardner returning at night, was sufficiently
amazed when he saw the work done; and finding that the right place and order
designed by him, was not taken; that, for example, an Apricock-tree stood where
an Apple Tree should stand, and a Pear Tree where all Almond-tree; being
heartily angry with the Astrologer, caused all the Trees to be plucked up
again* and laid them down, with some Earth about them, for next morning, the
time chosen by himself. The news hereof came soon to the Ears of the
Astrologer, who presently told Chah-Abas of it: He forthwith sent for the
Gardner, and with some indignation asked him; What had made him so bold as to
pull up those Young Trees he had planted with his own hand; that the time had
been so exactly taken for them, that so good an one would never be had again*
and that so he had marred all. The rude Gardner, who had a Cup of Chiras-wine
in his head, looked aside upon the Astrologer, and grumbling and swearing, said
to him these words, Billah, Billah, that must needs be an admirable point of
time which thou have taken for these Trees; unhappy Astrologer! They were
planted this day Noon, and this Evening they have been plucked up again. When
Chah-Abas heard this, he fell a laughing, turned his back upon the Astrologer,
and went away.

I shall here add two particulars, though happened in the time of Chah-Jehan,
because such things fall out often enough, and do withal give occasion to
observe that ancient and barbarous custom, which makes the Kings of India Heirs
of the goods of those that die in their service: The first was of Ne^knamkan,
one of the most ancient Omrahs of the Court, and who for the space of 40 or 50
years, wherein had always been employed in confiderable Offices, had heaped up
great store of Gold and Silver. This Lord seeing himself near his end, and
thinking upon this unreasonable custom, which often renders the Wife of a great
man, upon his decease, poor and miserable in an instant, and necessitates her
to present a Petition begging some small pension for her subsistence and for
that of her Children, who are constrained to list themselves for common
Soldiers under some Omrah; who, I say, considering this with himself, secretly
distributed all his Treasure to indigent Knights and poor Widows, filled his
Trunks with old pieces of Iron, old shoes, rags and bones, and locked and
sealed them, telling every body that they were goods belonging to Chah-Jehan
the King. These Trunks, after his Death, were brought before Chah-Jehan, when
he was in the Assembly, and by his command instantly opened in the presence of
all the Omrahs, that saw all this fine Stuff, which so provoand discomposed
Chah-Jehan, that he rose in great fury, and went away.

The other is only a piece of Gallantry. A rich Banean, or Heathen Merchant,
being a great Usurer (as most of them are) who had always been in employment,
and in the pay of the King, came to die. Some years after his death, his Son
did extremely importune the Widow, his Mother, to let him have some Money: She
finding him to be a prodigal and debauched Youth, gave him as little as she
could. This young Fool, by the persuasion of others like himself, made his
Complaints to Chah-Jehan, and was so silly, as to discover to him all the goods
his Father had left, which amounted to two hundred thousand Crowns. Chah-Jehan,
who soon got an itch for this treasure, sent for the Widow, and commanded her
in the open Assembly to send him an hundred thousand Rupies, and to give fifty
thousand to her Son, giving order at the same time to put her away. The old
Woman, though surprised at this Command, and perplexed enough, that she was so
suddenly thrust out, without the liberty of speaking yet lost not her judgment,
but with a loud voice gave out, that the had something of moment to discover to
his Majesty: Whereupon being brought in again, she said, God save your Majesty;
I find that my Son has some reason to demand of me the Goods of his Father, as
being of his and my flesh and blood, and therefore our Heir; but I would gladly
know, what Kindred your Majesty is to my deceased Husband* to be his Heir. When
Chah-Jehan heard so plain a piece of rallery, and a discourse of Parentage of
the King of the Indies with a she-Banian or Idolatrous she-Merchant, he could
not hold laughing, and commanded she should be gone, and that nothing should be
asked of her.

But to return, I shall not relate all the other considerable things that have
happened since the end of the War, that is, since 1660, unto my departure,
which was above six years after; though doubtless that would tend much to the
design I had in relating the other particulars, which is, to make known the
Genius and Temper of the Mogols and Indians. This I may do in another place:
Here I shall only give an account of five of six particulars, which those that
shall have read this Relation, will doubtless be curious of.

The first, that though Aureng-Zebe made Chah-Jehan his Father, to be kept in
the Fortress of Agra with all imaginable care and caution; yet notwithstanding
he still left him in his old Apartment with Begum-Saheb, his Eldest Daughter,
his other Women, Singers, Dancers, Cooks, and others; nothing of that kind was
wanting to him. There were also certain Mullahs, that were permitted to come
and to read the Alceran to him (for he was become very devout.) And when he
thought fit, there were brought before him brave Horses, and tamed Gazelles
(which is a kind of Goat) to make them fight with one another; as also diverse
sorts of Birds of prey, and several other rare Animals, to divert him as
formerly. Aureng-Zebe himself used an art to overcome at last his fierceness
and obstinacy, which he had hitherto kept, though a prisoner. And this was the
effect of the obliging Letters, full of respect and submission, which he often
wrote to his Father, consulting him often as his Oracle, and expressing a
thousand cares for him; sending him also uncessantly some pretty Present or
other; whereby Chah-Jehan was so much gained, that he also wrote very often to
Aureng-Zebe touching the Government and State Affairs, and of his own accord
sent him some of those Jewels, which before he had told him of, that Hummers
were ready to beat them to powder the first time he should again ask for them.
Besides, he consented that the Daughter of Dara, which he had so peremptorily
denied, should be delivered to him; and granted him at length that pardon and
paternal blessing which he had so often desired without obtaining it. Yet,
under all this, Aureng-Zebe did not always flatter him; on the contrary, he
sometimes returned sharp answers, when he met with strains in his Fathers
Letters that were pregnant, or expressed something of his former height and
authority. Of this we may judge by the Letter, which I know from a very good
hand was once written to him by Aureng-Zebe, to this effect:

Sir, You would have me indispensably follow those ancient Customs, and make my
self Heir to all those that are in my pay with the wonted rigor: An Omrah, and
even a Merchant can no sooner die, and sometimes even before his death, but we
seal up his Trunks, and seize on his goods, and make a strict enquiry into his
Estate, imprisoning and ill-treating the Officers of the House to discover to
us all he has, even to the least Jewels. I will believe that there is some
policy in doing so, but it cannot be denied, that it is very rigorous, and
sometimes very unjust; and to speak the very truth, we may deserve well enough,
that the same should befall us every day, what happened to you from your Neikman
kan, and from the Widow of your rich Indian Merchant. Moreover (said he) it
seems, I am by you reputed proud and haughty now I am King: As if you knew not
by the experience of more than forty years of your Reign, how heavy an Ornament
a Crown is, and how many sad and restless nights it passes through: as if I
could forget that excellent passage of Mir-Timur (commonly called Tamberlan)
which is so seriously delivered to us by that Great Granfather of ours, Ekbar,
to the end that we might the more weigh the importance and value of it, and
consider, whether we have cause to pride our selves so much in a Crown. You
well know, that he said, that the same day when Timur took Bajazet, he made him
come before him, and having fixed his eyes on him, fell a laughing; at which
Bajazet being highly offended, fiercely said to him, Laugh not at my Fortune,
Timur; know that it is God that is the Dispenser of Kingdoms and Empires; and
that the same can befall you to morrow, that has befallen me to day. Whereupon
Timur made this serious and brave Answer; I know as well as you, Bajazet, that
it is God that distributeth Kingdoms and Empires; I laugh not at your ill
Fortune; God forbid I should do so: But beholding your face, I smiled, and had
this thought, That certainly these Kingdoms and Empires must in themselves be
very little and contemptible things in the eyes of God, since he gives them to
persons so ill made as You and I both are; a deformed one-eyed man, as you; and
a lame wretch, as my self. You require also, that abandoning all my other
employments, which I believe very necessary for the establishment and happiness
of this State, I should think on nothing but Conquests, and the enlargement of
the Empire. I must confess that this is indeed the business of a great Monarch,
and of a Soul truly Royal, and that I should not deserve to be of the Blood of
the Great Timur, if I were not of that mind, and had not such inclinations.
Mean time, I think I sit not idle, and my Armies are not useless in the
Kingdoms of Decan and Bengale: But we must also aver, that the greatest
Conquerors are not always the greatest Kings; that we too often see a
Barbarian making Conquests, and that those great Bodies of Conquests do
ordinarily fall of themselves, and by their own weight. He is a great King,
that knows to acquit himself worthily of that Great and August Employment and
Charge of Kings, which is to dispense Justice to their Subjects, etc.

The rest is not come to my hands.

The second is in regard of the Emir-Jemla. It were to injure this great Man,
to pass by with silence his deportment to Aureng-Zebe after the War, and the
manner of ending his days. This eminent person after he had dispatched the
Affair of Bengala, with Sultan-Sujah (the second of these four Brothers) not
like Gionkan, that infamous Patan with Dara; nor like the Raja of Serenaguer
with Soliman-Chekouh; but like a Great Captain and dextrous Politician,
pursuing him as far as the Seaside, and necessitating him to fly and to escape
out of his hands; after, I say, he had done these things, he sent an Eunuch to
Aureng-Zebe, entreating him, that he would give him leave to transport his
Family to Bengale; that now that the War was at an end and he broken with Age,
he hoped he would grant him the advantage of ending his life in the company of
his Wife and Children.

But Aureng-Zebe is too sharp-sighted, not to pierce into the designs of Emir.
He sees him triumphing over Sujah; he knows his great credit and reputation,
and that he has the esteem of a very wise, undertaking, valiant and rich man;
and that the Kingdom of Bengale is not only the best of all Indostan, but
strong of it self, and further, that this Emir is in the head of a well
disciplined Army, which both honors and fears him. Besides, he is not ignorant
of his ambition, and foreseeth well enough, that if he should have with him his
Son Mahmet-Emirkan, he would aspire to the Crown, and at least take full
possession of Bengale, if he should not be able to advance vance things
further. At the same time he is also well aware, that there is danger in
refusing him, and that he may possibly prove such a man, as in case of denial,
may run into some dangerous extreme, as he had done in Golkonda. How then,
think ye, did he carry himself in this conjuncture? He sends to him his Wife
and Daughter, and all the Children of his Son: He makes the Emir a Mir-Ul
Omrah, which is in that Empire the greatest degree of honor that a Favorite
can be raised to: And as to Mahmet-Emir-kan, he makes him the Great Bakchis,
which is a dignity and charge like that of our Great Master of the Horse, the
second or third Office in the State, but such an one as absolutely obliges the
possessor of it to be always at the Court, not suffering him, but very
difficultly, to be absent from the person of the King.

The Emir soon perceived, that Aureng-Zebe had skilfully put by the stroke,
that it would be in vain the second time to ask of him his Son; that he could
not do it without offending him; and that therefore the safest way would be to
rest contented with all the testimonies of Friendship, and with all the
Honors, together with the Government of Bengale; being in the mean time
always upon his guard, and in such a posture, that since he could attempt
nothing against Aureng-Zebe, Aureng-Zebe should not be able to attempt any
thing against him.

Thus have we seen these two Great Men carry themselves to one another: And in
this condition did affairs remain for almost a year; till Aureng-Zebe, too well
knowing that a great Captain cannot be long at rest, and that, if he be not
employed in a Foreign War, he will at length raise a Domestic one; proposed
to him to make War upon that rich and potent Raja of Acham, whose Territories
are on the North of Dake, upon the Gulf of Bengale. The Emir, who in all
appearance had already designed this same thing of himself, and who believed,
that the Conquest of this Country, would make way for his Immortal Honor, and
be an occasion of carrying his Arms as far as China, declared himself ready for
this Enterprise. He embarked at Dake with a puissant Army, upon a River which
comes from those parts; upon which having gone about an hundred Leagues
North-Eastward, he arrived at a Castle called Azo, which the Raja of Acham had
usurped from the Kingdom of Bengale, and possessed for many years. He attacked
this place, and took it by force in less than fifteen days; thence marching
over Land toward Chamdara, which is the Inlet into the Country of that Raja;
he entered into it after 26 days journey, still Northward: There a Battle was
fought, in which the Raja of Acham was worsted, and obliged to retreat to
Guerguon, the Metropolis of his Kingdom, four miles distant from Chamdara. The
Emir pursued him so close, that he gave him no time to fortify himself in
Guerguon: For he arrived in sight of that Town in five days, which constrained
the Raja, seeing the Emir's Army, to fly toward the Mountains of the Kingdom
of Lassa, and to abandon Guerguon, which was pillaged, as had been Chamdara.
They found there vast riches, it being a great, very fair and Merchant-like
Town, and where the Women are extraordinarily beautiful. Mean time, the season
of the Rains came in sooner than usually; and they being excessive in those
parts, and overflowing all the Country, except such Villages as stand on
raised ground, the Emir was much embarassed. For the Raja made his people of
the Mountains come down from all parts thereabout, and to carry away all the
provisions of the Field; whereby the Emir's Army (as rich as 'twas) before the
end of the rains fell into great streights, without being able to go forward or
backward. It could not advance, by reason of the Mountains very difficult to
pass, and continually pestered with great Rains; nor retreat, because of the
like Rains and deep ways; the Raja also having caused the way to be dug up
as far as to Chamdara: So that the Emir was forced to remain in that wretched
condition during the whole time of the Rain; after which, when he found his
Army distasted, tired out, and half starved, he was necessitated to give over
the Design he had of advancing, and to return the same way he was come. But
this Retreat was made with so much pains, and so great inconveniences, by
reason of the dirt, the want of victuals, and the pursuit of the Raja falling
on the Rear, that every body (but he) that had not known how to remedy the
disorder of such a March, nor had the patience to be sometimes five or six
hours at one passage to make the Soldiery get over it withont confusion, would
have utterly perished, himself, Army, and all; yet he, notwithstanding all
these difficulties and obstacles, made a shift to come back with great honor
and vast riches. He designed to return thither again the next year, and to
pursue his undertaking, supposing that Azo, which he had fortified, and where
he left a strong Garrison, would be able to hold out the rest of the year
against the Raja. But he was no sooner arrived there, but Fluxes began to rage
in his Army: Neither had himself a body of Steel more than the rest; he fell
sick and died, whereby Fortune ended the just apprehensions of Aureng-Zebe. I
say, the Just apprehensions; for there was none of those that knew this great
man, and the state of the affairs of Indostan, who did not say, It Is this day
that Aureng-Zebe is King of Bengale. And himself could not forbear to express
some such thing; for he publicly said to Mahmet-Emir-kan; You have lost your
Father, and I the greatest and the most dangerous Friend I had; yet
notwithstanding he comforted this Son, and withal assured him, that he would
ever be a Father to him. And whereas 'twas thought, that he would at least cut
off his Salary, and make Inquisition into his Treasury, he confirmed him in his
Office of Bakehis, augmented his Pension to a thousand Rupies a month, and
left him Heir of all the Estate of his Father, although the Custom of the
Country empowred him to seize on all.

The third is concerning Chah-hest-kan, whom Aureng-Zebe made first Governor
of Agra, when he went out to the Battle of Kadjoue against Sultan Sujah; and
afterward, Governor and General of the Army in Decan; and at last, after the
death of Emir-Jemla, Governor and General of the Army in Bengale* together
with the charge of Mirul*Omrah which Emir-jemla had possessed. This
Chah-hest-kan is he, whom in our History we have mentioned as Uncle to
Aureng-Zebe, and one that has so much contributed to his happiness by his
eloquent and skilful pen, as well as by his intrigues and counsels. It would be
injurious to his Renown also, to be silent of the important enterprise, which
he undertook presently when he entered upon his Government; and that the rather,
because Emir-jemla, whether out of policy, or for another cause, had no mind to
tempt him; as also, because the particularities, which I am going to relate,
will show not only the passed and present state of the Kingdoms of Bengale and
Rakan, which hitherto has not been well described to us by any; but also some
other things that are worth knowing.

To the end therefore that the importance of Chah-hest-kan's attempt may be
well understood, and a good Idea be had of what passes about the Gulf of
Bengale, we are to know, that the e many years there have always been in the
Kingdom of Rakan or Moy, some Portugueses, and with them a great number of
their Christian Slaves, and other Franguis, gathered from all parts. That was
the refuge of the Run-aways from Goa, Ceilan, Cochin, Malague, and all those
other places, which the Portugueses formerly held in the Indies; and they were
such as had abandoned their Monasteries, men that had been twice or thrice
Married, Murderers: In a word, such as had deserved the Rope, were most
welcome and most esteemed there, leading in that Country a life that was very
detestable, and altogether unworthy of Christians, insomuch that they impunely
butchered and poisoned one another, and assassinated their own Priests, who
sometimes were not better than themselves. The King of Rakan in the
apprehension he has ever had of the Mogol, kept them for a guard of his
Frontiers, in a Port-Town called Chategon, giving them Land, and liberty to
live as they pleased. Their ordinary Trade was Robbery and Piracy. With some
small and light Galleys they did nothing but coast about that Sea, and entering
into all Rivers thereabout, and into the Channels and Arms of Ganges, and
between all those Isles of the lower Bengale, and often penetrating even so far
as forty or fifty leagues up into the Country, surprised and carried away
whole Towns, Assemblies, Markets, Feasts and Weddings of the poor Gentiles, and
others of that Country, making Women Slaves, great and small, with strange
cruelty; and burning all they could not carry away. And thence it is, that at
present there are seen in the mouth of Ganges so many fine Isles quite
deserted, which were formerly well peopled, and where no other Inhabitants are
found but wild Beasts, and especially Tigers.

This great number of Slaves, which thus they took from all quarters, behold
what use they made of. They had boldness and impudence enough, to come and sell
to that very Country the old people, which they knew not what to do with; where
it so fell out, that those who had escaped the danger by flight, and by hiding
themselves in the Woods, labored to redeem to day their Fathers and Mothers,
that had been taken yesterday. The rest they kept for their service to make
Rowers of them; and such Christians as they were themselves, bringing them up
to robbing and killing; or else they sold them to the Portugueses of Goa,
Ceilan, St. Thomas, and others; and even to those that were remaining in
Bengale at Ogouli, who were come thither to settle themselves there by the
favor of Jehan-Guyre, the Grandfather of Aureng-Zebe, who suffered them there
upon the account of Traffic, and of his having no aversion to Christians, as
also because they promised him to keep the Bay of Bengale clear from all
Pirates. And it was toward the Isle of Galls, near the Cape of Palms, where
this fine Trade was. These Pirates lay there in wait at the passage for the
Portugueses, who filled their Ships with them at a very easy rate; this
infamous Rabble impudently bragging, that they made more Christians in one
year, then all the Missionaries of the Indies in ten; which would be a strange
way of enlarging Christianity.

These were the Pirates that made Chah-Jehan, who was a more zealous Mahumetan
than his Father Jehan-Guyre, to express at last his passion, not only against
the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits, Missionaries of Agra, in that he caused to
be pulled down the best part of a very fair and large Church that had been
built, as well as that of Lahor, by the favor of Jehan-Guyre, who, as I said,
did not hate Christianity; and upon which there stood a great Steeple with a
great Bell in it, whose sound might be heard over all the Town; not only, I
say, against those Jesuits, but also against the Christians of Ogouli: For
being impatient to see them connive at the Pirates, to make the name of the
Franguis formidable, and to fill their houses with Slaves that were his own
Subjects, he wasted and utterly ruined them, after he had both with fair words
and menaces drawn from them as much money as he could: And because they were
indiscreetly obstinate, in refusing what he demanded of them, he besieged them,
and caused them all to be brought to Agra, even their very Children, their
Priests and Friars. This was a misery and a desolation not to be paralleled; a
kind of Babilonian transmigration. There they were all made Slaves: The handsome
Women were shut up in the Seraglio; the old Women and others, were distributed
among diverse Omrahs. The young Lads were circumcised, and made Pages; and men
of age renounced for the most part their Faith, either terrified by the
threatenings they heard daily, that they should be trampled upon by Elephants,
or drawn away by fair Promises. It Is true, that there were some of those
Friars, who persisted, and that the Missionaries of Agra, who notwithstanding
all this unhappiness, remained in their houses, found means afterward, partly
by Friends, partly by Money, to get many of them away, and to have them
conveyed to Goa, and to other places belonging to the Portugueses.

They were also the same Pirates, who some time before the desolation of
Ogouli, offered to the Viceroy of Goa to put the whole Kingdom of Rakan into
their hands for the King of Portugal; but he refused, they say, this offer, out
of arrogance and jealousy, and would not send the succors, which for that end
was demanded of him by a certain Bastian Consalve, who had made himself head of
those people, and was become so potent and considerable, that he married one of
the Kings Daughters; being unwilling that it should be said, that a man of so
mean Extraction as this Bastian was, had done such a Masterpiece. But it may
be said on this occasion, that this is not much to be wondered at, considering
that the Portugueses in the Indies by such a conduct have diverse times been
faulty on the like occasions, in Japan, in Pegu, in Ethiopia, and other places;
not to mention, that by this way, and that perhaps by a just Divine
chastisement (as they all frankly confess themselves) they are become a prey to
their Enemies, and fallen so low in the Indies, that I know not whether they
will ever recover there; whereas formerly, before they were corrupted by vice,
and degenerated through pleasure, they made all others tremble in those parts;
forasmuch as then they were brave and generous men, zealous for the Christian
Religion, considerable for gallant exploits and for riches; all the Indian
Kings seeking their friendship.

Besides this, the same Pirates seized at that time on the Isle of ^ondiva, an
advantageous Post to command a part of the Mouth of Ganges: In which Isle a
cettain Augustine Friar, a very famous man, acted the King for many years,
having taken a course, God knows how, to rid himself of the Commander of that
place.

Moreover, the same Robbers took Sultan-Sujah at Daka, to carry him away in
their Galeasses to Rakan, as we related above, and found means to open his
Coffers, and to rob him of good store of Jewels, which afterward were
secretly, and at a very cheap rate, sold in Rakan, most of them being fallen
into the hands of people that had no skill in them, and afterward into the
hands of the Hollanders, and others, who knew how to buy them up quickly,
making those fellows believe, that they were soft Diamonds, and that they would
pay them according to the degrees of their hardness.

Lastly, They are they that for many years have given exercise to the Great
Mogol in Bengale; having obliged him there to keep always Garrisons every
where upon the Passes, and a great Militia, and a Fleet also of Galeasses to
oppose their courses, and who, notwithstanding all this, have made shift to
make strange devastations, and often to enter far into the Country, and to
laugh at all the Soldiery of the Mogols; in regard they were become so bold,
and so dextrous at their Weapons, and so skilful in piloting their Galeasses,
that four or five of them stuck not to set upon fourteen or fifteen Mogolians,
which they* also actually worsted, and took, or run aground. And upon these
Pirates Chah-hest-kan cast his eyes as soon as he came into Bengale, taking a
resolution to deliver the Country of this plague of people, that had so long
wasted it; and designing afterward to pass on, and to attack the King of
Rakan, according to the order of Aureng-Zebe, who at any price had a mind to
revenge the blood of Sultan-Sujah, and all his Family, that had been so cruelly
handled, and to teach that Barbarian, how the Blood Royal was to be regarded
and esteemed on any occasion whatsoever, Behold now with what dexterity
Chahhest-kan carries on his design!

Knowing that it is impossible to pass any Cavalry by Land, no not so much as
any Infantry, from Bengale into Rakan, because of the many channels and rivers
upon the Frontiers; and also that on the other side, those Pirates of Chatigon,
whom we just now were speaking of, would be powerful enough to hinder him from
transporting them by Sea; he thought upon this experiment, viz. to engage the
Hollanders in his design. He therefore sent a kind of Ambassador to Batavia,
empowering him to treat upon certain Conditions, with the General of that
Company, jointly to subdue the whole Kingdom of Rakan; as formerly Chah-Abbas
subdued that of Ormus, in conjunction with the English. The General of Batavia
seeing the thing to be possible, and that it was a means more and more to break
the Portugueses in the Indies, and that it would turn to a very good account to
the Company, dispatched away two Men of War for Bengale, to favor the
transportation of the Mogolian Troops in spite of those Pirates. But observe
what Chah-hest-kan did before these Men of War arrived: He equipped a great
number of Galeasses, and many large Vessels to transport the Army; threatened
the Pirates, utterly to spoil and ruin them; acquainted them with the design
of Aureng-Zebe upon Rakan; that a potent Army of the Dutch was near; that they
should think on themselves and their families, if they were wise; and in a
word, if they would abandon the service of the King of Rakan and take that of
Aureng-Zebe, he would procure very good conditions for them, distribute amongst
them as much Land in Bengale as they desired, and pay them the double of what
they had now.

It Is doubtful, whether these Menaces and Promises made impression upon them,
or whether it was not an accident that moved them; they having about that time
assassinated one of the chief Officers of the King of Rakan, and apprehending a
punishment for that crime: However it be, they were caught, and they were one
day struck with such a panick terror, that they shipped themselves all at once
in forty or fifty of their Galeasses, and wafted over to Bengale to
Chah-hest-kan, and that with so much precipitation, that they hardly took time
to embark their Wives and Children, and what else was most precious to them.
Chah-hest-kan received them with open arms, courted them exceedingly, gave them
very considerable pay, and without letting them cool, made them, jointly with
his whole Army, to attack and take the Isle of Sondiva, which was fallen into
the hands of the King of Rakan; and thence to pass with all his Horse and Foot
to Chatigon. About this time the two Holland-Vessels arrived; but
Chah-hest-kan, who thought that henceforth it would be easy for him to compass
his design, thanked them. I saw these Ships in Bengale, and their Commanders,
who were but little contented with such thanks and liberalities of
Chah-hest-kan. As to the Pirates, since now he holds them fast, and hopeless of
ever returning to Chatigon, and has no more need of them, he makes nothing of
all those large promises he made them, and treats them not as he should, but as
they deserve, leaving them whole months without pay, and not looking upon them
otherwise than Traitors and infamous men, unfit to be trusted, after they have
so vilely deserted him, whose Salt they had eaten so many years. After this
manner did Chah-hest-kan put an end to this Rabble, which, as I said, have
ruined and dispoiled all the lower Bengale. Time will show whether he will be
as happy in the remainder of his Enterprise against the King of Rakan.

The fourth particular is concerning the two Sons of Aureng-Zebe, viz. Sultan
Mahmoud, and Sultan Mazum. He still keeps the first of them in Goualeor, but
(if one may believe the common report) without making him take the Poust, which
is the ordinary Drink of those that are put into that place. As to the other,
though he has always been a pattern of reservedness and moderation, yet one
knows not whether he was not too forward in making a party, when his Father was
so extremely sick; or whether Aureng-Zebe have not upon other occasions
perceived something that might give him cause of jealousy; or whether he had
not a mind to make an authentic proof of both his Obedience and Courage.
However it be, one day he commanded him in an unconcerned manner, in a full
Assembly of the Omrahs, to go and kill a Lion, that was come down the
Mountains, and had made great havoc and waste in the Country; and this he did
without giving order to furnish him with those strong and large Nets, which
they are wont to employ in this dangerous kind of hunting in a real mood;
telling the great Hunting-Master, who presently called for those Nets, that
when he was Prince, he did not look for such Formalities. It was the good
fortune of Sultan Mazum, that he prosper'd in this attempt, not losing any more
than two or three men, and some horses that were wounded, although, on the
other hand, the matter went not off so pleasantly, the wounded Lion having
leapt up to the head of the Sultan's Elephant. Since that time, Aureng-Zebe
has not been backward to express much affection to him; he has given him even
the Government of Decan, though with so little power and treasure, that there
is no great cause to apprehend any thing upon that account.

The fifth thing touches Mohabet-kan, the Governor of Kaboul, whom
Aureng-Zebe took from his Government, and generously pardoned; not willing, as
he said, to lose so brave a Captain, and that had stuck so close to his
Benefactor Chah-Jehan. He made him even Governor of Guzuratte, in the place of
^essemseignue, whom he sent to make War in Decan. It may very well be, that
some considerable Presents he made to Rauchenara-Begum, and a good number of
excellent Persian Horse and Camels, wherewith he presented Aureng-Zebe,
together with fifteen or sixteen thousand Rupies of Gold, did contribute to
make his peace.

On this occasion of mentioning the Government of Kaboul, which borders upon
the Kingdom of Kandahar, which is now in the hands of the Persians, I shall
here briefly add some particulars, that serve to this History, and will still
more discover that Country, and declare the Interests between Indostan and
Persia, which no body, that I know of, has explained hitherto.

Kandahar, that strong and important place, which is the Capital and the
swaying City of this Noble and Rich Kingdom of the same Name, has in these
latter Ages been the subject of grievous Wars between the Mogols and Persians,
each of them pretending a right thereto. Ekbar, that great King of the Indies,
took it by force from the Persians, and kept it during his life. And
Chah-Abbas, that famous King of Persia, retook it from Jean-Guyre, the Son of
Ekbar. Afterward it returned to Chah-Jehan, Son of John Guyre, not by the
Sword, but by the means of the Governor Aly-Merdan-kan, who surrendered it to
him, and went over to live at his Court, apprehending the Artifices of his
Enemies, who had brought him into disfavour with the King of Persia, that sent
for him to make him give an account, and to deliver up his Government. The same
City was besieged and retaken afterward by the Son of Chah-Abbas, and since
that besieged twice again, yet without being taken, by Chah-Jehan. The first
time it was saved from being taken by the ill understanding and jealousy
between the Persian Omrahs, that are Pensioners of the Great Mogol, and the
most powerful of his Court, as also by the respect they bear to their Natural
King: For they all behaved themselves very effeminately in the Siege, and would
not follow the Raja Roup, who had already planted his Standards upon the Wall
on the side of the Mountain. The second time it was saved by the jealousy of
Aureng-Zebe, who would not fall into the breach of the Wall, that our Franguis,
the English, Portugueses, Germans, and French had made by their Canon, though
it was a large one; being unwilling to have it said, that in the time of Dara,
who was in a manner the first mover of that Enterprise, and was then in the
City of Caboul, with his Father Chah-Jehan, the Fortress of Kandahar was taken.
Chah-Jehan, some years before the late trouble, was also ready to besiege it
the third time, had not Emir-Jemla diverted him from it, advising him to turn
his Forces toward Decan, (as has been said;) with whom Aly-Merdan-kan himself
concurred, who was so earnest in his dissuading him from it, as to say to him
these words, which I shall punctually relate, as having something extravagant
in them:

Your Majesty will never take Kandahar, unless you had such a Traitor there as
my self; except you were resolved never to bring a Persian into it, and to make
the Bazars or Markets wholly free, that is, to lay no Impost on those that
furnish the Army with provision.

At length, Aureng-Zebe, like the others, had prepared himself in these latter
years to besiege it also; whether it was that he was offended at the tart
Letters, written to him by the King of Persia, or by reason of the affronts and
ill treatment which he had offered to Tarbiet-kan his Ambassador; that hearing
of the King of Persia's death, he turned back, saying, (which yet is not very
credible) that he would not meddle with a Child, a new King; although
Chah-Soliman, who has succeeded his Father, is, in my opinion, about 25 years
of age.

The sixth particular we purposed to speak of, concerns those that have
faithfully served Aureng-Z be. Those he has almost all raised to great places.
For first, as we have already related, he made Chah-hest-kan, his Uncle,
Governor and General of the Army of Decan, and afterward, Governor of
Bengale. Next, he made Mir-kan Governor of Kaboul; Then Kalilullah-kan, of
Lahor; and Mirhaba, of Elubas; and Lasker-kan, of Patna. The Son of that
Allah-Verdi-kan of Sultan Sujah, he appointed Governor of Scimdy; and
Fazel-kan, who had considerably served him both by his counsels and dexterity,
he made Kane-saman, that is, Great Steward of the House Royal: And
Danechmend-kan, Governor of Dehli, with this particular grace and privilege,
that since he is perpetually employed in studies and foreign affairs, he so
dispenses with him for not coming twice a day (after the ancient custom) to
wait on the King in the Assembly, as not to retrench any thing of his pension
for his absence, as he does to the other Omrahs, if they fail. He has given to
Dianet-kan the Government of Kachmire (alias Cassimere) that little, and in a
manner inaccessible Kingdom, which Ekbar seized on by craft, that Earthly
Paradise of the Indies; which has its Histories written in its peculiar
Language; whereof I have an abridgement in the Persian Tongue, made by the
command of Jehan Guyre, containing a large Catalogue of many very ancient
Kings, that often were so powerful, that they subdued the Indies as far as
China.

It Is true, that Aureng-Zebe dismissed Nejabat-kan, who did very well in the
two Battles of Samonguer and Kadjoue, but then it is not fit at all, that a
Subject should ever reproach his King, as he did, with the services done him.

As to those infamous men, Gionkan and Nazer, it is known, that the former has
been recompensed as he deserved; but the other no man knows what is become of
him.

What concerns Jessomseigne and Jesseigne, there is something as to them that
is intricate, which I shall endeavor to unfold. There is a certain Heathen
revolted from the King of Visapour, who knew how to possess himself of many
important Fortresses, and of some Seaports of that King. His name is Seva-Gi,
that is, Lord Seva. He is a stout man, vigilant, bold, and undertaking in the
highest degree, who gave Chah-hest-kan more work and trouble in Decan, than the
King of Visapour with all his forces, and all his Raja's joined with him for
their common defense: Insomuch that having designed to take away Chah-hest-kan
and his Treasures out of the midst of his Army and of the Town Aurenge-Abad, he
carried on his design so far, that he had effected it, if he had not been
discovered a little too soon; for one night, accompanied with a number of
resolute Fellows he has about him, he was got into the very apartment of
Chah-hest-kan, where his Son, who was forward in the defense, was killed, and
himself grievously wounded; Seva-Gi in the mean time getting away as well as he
came: Who for all this was so far from being daunted, that he undertook another
very bold and very dangerous enterprise, which succeeded much better. He took
two or three Thousand chosen men of his Army, with whom he took the Field
without noise, spreading a report by the way, that it was a Raja going to the
Court. When he was near Suratte, that Famous and Rich Port of the Indies,
instead of Marching further (as he made the Great Provost of that Country, whom
he met, believe) he fell into that Town, where he staid about three Days,
cutting off the Arms and Legs of the Inhabitants, to make them confess where
were the treasures; searching, digging, and loading away, or burning what he
could not carry with him. Which done, he returned, none opposing his return,
laden with millions of Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silken Stuffs, Fine Linen, and
other rich Merchandise. Jessomseigne was suspected to have had since
intelligence with this seva-Gi, which was the cause that Aureng Zebe called him
away from Decan; but he, instead of going to Dehli, went to his own Territory.

I forgot to mention, that in the plunder of Suratte, that Ringleader Seva-Gi,
like a Saint, had so much respect to the House of the Reverend Father Ambrose,
a Missionary Capucian, that he gave order it should not be plundered; because,
said he, I know that the Fathers Franguis are good men. He had also regard to
the House of the Deceased De Lale, because he understood that he had been Great
Almoner. He also considered the Houses of the English and Dutch, not from
Devotino, as he did the former, but because they were in a good posture of
defense; especially the English, who having had time to send for assistance
from some of their ships that lay near the Town, behaved themselves gallantly,
and saved, besides their own, several other houses near them. But a certain Jew
of Constantinople, who had brought Rubies of a very great value, to sell them
to Aureng-Zebe, carried away the Bell from all, by saving himself from the
hands of Seva-Gi; for, rather than to confess that he had any Jewels, he was
brought thrice upon his knees, and the knife held up to cut his throat: But it
became none save a Jew, hardened in avarice, to escape in such a manner.

Touching Jesseigne, King Aureng-Zebe made him content to go General of the
Army in Decan, sending Sultan-Mazum with him, without any power. He presently
and vigorously besieged the principal Fortress of Seva-Gi, and knowing more
than all the rest in matter of Negotiation and Treaty, he so ordered the
business, that Seva-Gi surrendered rendered before it came to extremity; and then
he drew him to Aureng-Zebe's party against Visapour, King Aureng-Zebe declaring
him a Raja, taking him under his protection, and giving the pension of a very
considerable Omrah to his Son. Some time after, Aureng-Zebe designing to make
War against Persia, wrote to Seva-Gi such obliging Letters touching his
Generosity, Ability and Conduct, that he made him resolve, upon the faith of
Jesseigne, to come to him to Dehli. There a kinswoman of Aureng-Zebe, the Wife
of Chah-hest-kan (who was then at Court) by the influence she had upon the
spirit of Aureng-Zebe, persuaded him to arrest him that had murdered her Son,
wounded her Husband, and sacked Suratte: So that one evening Seva-Gi saw his
Pavilions beset with three or four Omrahs; but he made shift to get away in the
night. This escape made a great noise at Court, every one accusing the Eldest
Son of the Raja Jesseigne to have assisted him in it. Jesseigne, who presently
had news that Aureng-Zebe was very angry with him and his Son, and was advised
no more to go to the Court, was day and night upon his guard, apprehending lest
Aureng-Zebe should take this for a pretense to fall upon his Lands, and possess
himself of them. Whereupon he also soon left Decan to secure his Estate; but
when he was at Brampour, he died. Yet notwithstanding Aureng-Zebe was so far
from expressing any coldness or resentment to the Son of Jesseigne, that he
sent to condole with him for the Death of his Father, and continued to him his
Pension; which confirms what many say, that it was by the consent of
Aureng-Zebe himself, that Seva-Gi escaped, forasmuch as he could retain him no
longer at Court, because all the Women there had too great a spleen against
him, and looked upon him as a man that had embroiled his hands in the blood of
his Kinsmen.

But to return to Decan, we are to consider, that that is a Kingdom, which
these forty years has constantly been the Theater of War, and upon the score
whereof the Mogol has much to do with the Kings of Golkonda, and of Visapour,
and diverse little Sovereigns; which is not to be understood, unless it be
known, what considerable things have passed in those parts, and the condition
of the Princes that govern them.

All this great Peninsule of Indostan, cutting it from the Bay of Cambaja unto
that of Bengale, near Jaganrate, and passing thence to Cape Comori, was searce
two hundred years since entirely (some mountanous parts excepted) under the
Dominion of one only Prince, who consequently was a very great and very potent
Monarch: But now it is divided among many different Sovereigns, that are also
of different Religions. The cause of this division was, that the King Ramras,
the last of those that have possessed this mighty State entirely, did
imprudently raise three Slaves, Gurgis, he had about him too high, so as to
make them all three Governors of places: The first, of the greatest part of
those Countries, which at present are possessed by the Mogol in Decan, about
Daulet-Abad, from Bider, Paranda, Suratte, unto Narbadar: The second, of all
the other Lands, now comprehended under the Kingdom of Visapour: And the third,
of all that is contained under the Kingdom of Golkonda. These three Slaves grew
very rich, and found themselves supported by a good number of the Mogols, that
were in the service of Ramras, because they were all three Mahumetans, of the
Sect Chyas, like the Persians. And at length they all revolted together with
one accord, killed King Ramras, and returned to their Government, each taking
upon him the Title of Chah or King. The Issue of Ramras, not finding themselves
strong enough for them, were content to keep themselves in a Corner, viz. in
that Country which is commonly called Karnatek, in our Maps, Bisnaguer, where
they are still Raja's to this very day. All the rest of the State was also at
the same time divided into all those Rajas Naiques and petty Kings, such as we
see there* These three Slaves and their posterity have always defended
themselves very well in their Kingdoms, whilst they kept a good mutual
correspondence, and assisted one another in their grievous wars against the
Mogols. But when they once came to think every one to defend their Lands apart,
they soon found the effects of their division. For the Mogol so well knew to
take his time upon that occasion (which is now about thirty five or forty years
since) that he possessed himself within a little time of all the Country of
Nejam-Chah, or King Nejam, the fifth or sixth of the family of the first Slave,
and at last took him prisoner in Daulet-Abud, the Capital, where he died.

After that time, the Kings of Golkonda have maintained themselves well enough;
not as if they could compare with the power of the Mogol, but because the Mogol
has always been employed against the two others; from whom he was to take
Amber, Paranda, Bider, and some other places, before he could conveniently
march toward Golkonda. And because they have always been so politic, being
very opulent, as to furnish under hand the King of Visapour with Money, and
thereby to help him to maintain a War against the Mogol: Besides that, they
ever have a considerable Army on foot, which is always ready, and never fails
to take the Field, and to approach to the Frontiers, at the time when there is
news that that of the Mogol marches against Visapour; to let the Mogol see, not
only that they are always ready to defend themselves, but also that they could
easily assist the King of Visapour, in case he should be reduced to any
extremity. Next, which is very considerable, they know also how to convey Money
under hand to the Chieftains of the Mogolian Army; who thereupon advise the
Court, that it is more to purpose to attack Visapour, as being nearer to
Daulet-Abad. Further, they send every year very considerable Presents to the
Great Mogol, by way of Tribute; which consist partly in some rare manufactures
of the Country; partly in Elephants, which they send for from Pegu, Siam, and
Ceilan, partly in fair ready money. Lastly, the Mogol considers that Kingdom as
his own, not only because he looks upon the King thereof as his Tributary, but
chiefly since that agreement heretofore spoken of, which the present King made
with Aureng-Zebe, when he besieged Golkonda; and there being also no place able
to resist, even from Daulet-Abad unto Golkonda, he judges, that when he shall
think fit to push for it, he may take in the whole Kingdom in one Campaign;
which in my opinion, he would certainly have done, if he did not apprehend,
lest sending his Forces toward Golkonda, the King of Visapour should enter
into Decan; as, no doubt, he would do, knowing it to be very important to his
conservation, that that Kingdom may always subsist as now it is.

From all which, something may be understood of the Interests and Government of
the King of Golkonda with the Mogol, and what way he takes to support himself
against him. Yet notwithstanding all this, I find this state much shaken, in
regard that the King that now is, since that unhappy affair of Aureng-Zebe and
Emir-Jemla, seems to have lost heart, and as 'twere abandoned the reins of the
Kingdom, not daring any more to go forth of this Fortress of Golkonda, nor so
much as appear in public to give Audience to his People, and to render Justice
according to the custom of the Country: Which discomposeth things very much,
and occasions the Grandees to tyrannize over the meaner sort of People, and to
lose even their respect to the King, often slighting his Commands, and
considering him no more than a Woman; and the People, weary of the injustice
and ill treatment, breathing after nothing but Aureng-Zebe. It Is easy to judge
of the streights this poor King is in, by four or five particulars I am about
to relate.

The first, that An. 1667. when I was at Golkonda, King Aureng-Zebe having sent
an Ambassador Extraordinary to declare War to that King, unless he would
furnish him with 10000 Horse against Visapour, he did extraordinary honor, and
give excessive presents to that Ambassador, as well for him in particular, as
for Aureng-Zebe, and made an agreement with him, to send him, not 10000 Horse,
but as much Money as is necessary to maintain so many; which was all that
Aureng-Zebe looked for.

The second is, that Aureng-Zebe's Ambassador in Ordinary, that is constantly
at Golkonda, commands, threatens, strikes, gives Pass-ports, and says and
does whatsoever he will, no man daring with the least word to cross him.

The third is, that Mahmet-Emir-kan, the Son of Emir-Jemla, though he be no
more than a simple Omrah of Aureng-Zebe, is yet so much respected through that
whole Kingdom, and especially in Maslipatan, that the Taptata, his
Commissioner, is as 'twere Master thereof, buying and selling, bringing in and
sending abroad his Merchants Ships, no body daring to contradict him in any
thing, not to demand any Customs. So great was once the power of Emir-Jemla his
Father in this Kingdom, which time has not yet been able to root out.

The fourth is, that the Hollanders scruple not to threaten him sometimes, to
lay an Embargo upon all the Merchants Ships of the Country that are in that
Port, and not to let them go out, until their demands be granted; as also to
put in protestations against him: which I have seen actually done, upon the
account of an English Vessel, which they had a mind to take by force in the
Port of Maslipatan it self, the Governor having hindered it, by arming the
whole Town against them, and threatening to put fire to their Factory, and to
put them all to death.

A fifth is, that the Portugueses, as poor, and miserable, and decayed as they
are in the Indies, yet stick not to threaten that King also with War; and that
they will come and sack Maslipatan, and all that Coast, if he will not render
them that place of St. Thomas, which some years ago they chose to put into his
hands, rather than to be constrained to yield it up to the Dutch.

Yet for all this, I have been informed in Golkonda, by very intelligent
persons, that this King is a Prince of very great judgment, and that whatever
he so does and suffers, is only in policy, to the end to provoke no body, and
principally to remove all suspicion from Aureng-Zebe, and to give him to
understand, that he has in a manner no share any more in the Kingdom: But that
in the mean time a Son of his, that is kept hid, grows up, the Father watching
for a fit time to declare him King, and so to laugh at the agreement made with
Aureng-Zebe. Of this, time will show us more; in the mean time, let us consider
somewhat of the Interests of Visapour.

The Kingdom of Visapour has also not been wanting to support it self, though
the Mogol do almost continually make war against it; not so much as if he of
Visapour were able to bid head to the Mogolian Forces, but because there is
never any great effort used against him. For it is not very frequent there, no
more than it is elsewhere, for Generals of Armies to desire the end of a War;
there being nothing so charming, as to be in the head of an Army, commanding
like little Kings, remote from the Court. It is also grown to a Proverb, that
Decan is the Bread and Life of the Soldiers of Indostan. Besides, the Country
of Visapour is on the side of the Mogol's Dominions of a very difficult access,
upon the account of the searcity of good Waters, Forage, and Victuals; and
because Visapour, the Capital City, is very strong, and situate in a dry and
steril Country, there being almost no good Water but in the Town. And lastly,
because there are many Fortresses in that Country, seated on Hills hard to
climb.

Yet notwithstanding all this, that State is much shaken, if considering that
the Mogol has taken Paranda, the Key, as 'twere, of that Kingdom; as also that
fair and strong Town Bider, and some other very important places: But
principally because the last King of Visapour died without Heirs Males, and he
that now calls himself King, is a Youth, whom the Queen, Sister of the King of
Golkonda, has raised, and taken for her Son (a favor for which he has made
an ill return, having showed no esteem for this Queen after her return from
Mecca, under the pretext of some ill demeanor in her on a Dutch Vessel that
carried her to Moka:) Lastly, because that in the disorders of that Kingdom,
the Heathen Rebel, Seva-Gi, above discoursed of, found means to seize on many
strong Holds, mostly seated on steep Mountains, where he now acts the King,
laughing at the Visapour and the Mogol, and ravaging the Country every where,
from Suratte even to the gates of Goa. This notwithstanding, if he wrongs
Visapour one way, he helps to support it another, forasmuch as he is resolutely
bent against the Mogol, preparing always some Ambush, and cutting so much work
for his Army, that there is no discourse, no apprehension but of Seva-Gi;
insomuch that he has come and sacked Suratte, and pillaged the Isle of Burdes,
which belongs to the Portuguese, and is near the Gates of Goa.

The seventh particular, which I learned at Golkonda, when I was come away from
Dehli, is the death of Chah-Jehan; and that Aureng-Zebe had been exceedingly
affected therewith, having discovered all the marks of grief, that a Son can
express for the loss of his Father: That at the very hour of receiving that
news, he went toward Agra; that Begum-Saheb caused the Mosquee, and a certain
place, where he was at first to stop, before he entered the Fortress, to be hung
with richly embroidered Tapisseries: That at his entering into the Seraglio, she
presented him with a great Golden Basin, wherein were all her Jewels, and all
those of Chah-Jehan; and in short, that she knew to receive him with so much
Magnificence, and to entertain him with that dexterity and craft, that she
obtained his pardon, gained his favor, and grew very confident with him.

To conclude, I doubt not, but most of those, who shall have read my History,
will judge the ways taken by Aureng-Zebe, for getting the Empire, very violent
and horrid. I pretend not at all to plead for him, but desire only, that before
he be altogether condemned, reflection be made on that unhappy custom of this
State, which leaving the succession of the Crown undecided, for want of good
Laws, settling it, as amongst us, upon the eldest Son, exposes it to the Con
quest of the strongest, and the most fortunate, subjecting at the same time all
the Princes born in the Royal Family, by the condition of their Birth, to the
cruel necessity either to overcome, or to reign, by destroying all the rest,
for the assurance of their power and life, or to perish themselves, for the
security of that of others: For I am apt to believe, that upon this
consideration the Reader will not find Aureng-Zebe's conduct so strange as at
first it appeared. However I am persuaded, that those who shall a little weigh
this whole History, will not take Aureng-Zebe for a Barbarian, but for a great
and rare Genius, a Great Statesman, and a Great King.

A Letter to the Lord COLBERT, of the Extent of Indostan; the Circulation of
Gold and Silver, coming at length to be swallowed up, there, as in an Abyss;
the Riches, Forces, Justice, and the principal Cause of the decay of the States
of Asia.
My Lord,
SInce it is the custom of Asia, never to approach Great Persons with empty
hands, when I had the honor to kiss the Vest of the Great Mogol Aureng-Zebe, I
presented him with eight Roupies A Roupy is about half a Crown,
as an expression of respect; and the illustrious Fazel-kan, the prime Minister
of State, and he that was to establish my Pension as Physician, with a Case of
Knives garnished with Amber. My Lord, though I intend not to introduce new
customs in France, yet I cannot forget this upon my return from those parts;
being persuaded, that I ought not to appear before the King, for whom I have a
far deeper veneration than for Aureng-Zebe, nor before You, My Lord, for whom I
have a much higher esteem than for Fazel-kan, without some little Present to
both, which is rare, at least for its novelty, though it be not so upon the
account of the presenting hand. The Revolution of Indostan by reason of its
extraordinary occurrences and events, has to me seemed worthy of the Greatness
of our Monarch, and this Discourse, for the quality of the matters therein
contained, suitable to the rank you hold in his Counsels; to that Conduct, which
at my return appeared to me so admirable in the Order, which I found settled in
so many things, that I thought incapable of it; and to the passion you
entertain to make it known to the ends of the Earth, what a Monarch we have,
and that the French are fit to undertake, and with honor to atchieve,
whatsoever you shall have designed for their honor and advantage.

It Is in the Indies, My Lord (whence I am lately returned after twelve years
absence) where I learned the felicity of France, and how much this Kingdom is
obliged to your cares; and where your Name is so diffused, and so well known.
This were a fair Theme for me to enlarge upon; but my Design being no other
than to discourse of things New, I must forbear to speak of those that are
already so notorious to all the world. I shall doubtless please you better, by
endeavoring to give you some Idea of the state of the Indies, which I have
engaged my self to give you an account of.

My Lord, you may have seen before this, by the Maps of Asia, how great every
way is the extent of the Empire of the Great Mogol, which is commonly called
India or Indostan. I have not measured it Mathematically; but to speak of it
according to the ordinary journeys of the Country, after the rate of three
whole Months March, traversing from the Frontiers of the Kingdom of Golkonda,
as far as beyond Kazni near Kandahar, which is the first Town of Persia, I
cannot persuade my self otherwise, but that it is at least five times as far as
from Paris to Lions, that is, about five hundred common Leagues.

Next, you may please to take notice, that of that vast extent of Land, there
are large Countries that are very fertile, and some of them to that degree (for
example, that whole great Kingdom of Bengale) that they exceed those of Egypt,
not only upon the account of the abundance of Rice, Corn, and all other things
necessary for life, but also upon the score of all those Commodities so
considerable, which Egypt is destitute of, as Silks, Cottons, Indigo, and so
many others, sufficiently related by Authors.

Moreover, that of these same Countries there are many that are well enough
peopled and cultivated, and where Tradesmen, though naturally very lazy there,
are not wanting, either from necessity or other Causes, to apply themselves to
work, as to Tapisseries, Embroideries, Cloth of Gold and Silver, and to all
those kinds of Silk and Cotton Manufactures, that are used in the Country, or
transported to other parts.

You may further observe, how that Gold and Silver circulating as it were upon
the Earth, comes at last in part to be swallowed up in this Indostan. For of
that which comes out of America, and is dispersed through the several Kingdoms
of our Europe, we know, that one part is carried into Turkey many ways, for the
Commodities drawn thence; and that another part is conveyed into Persia, by the
way of Smyrna, for the Silks afforded there: That all Turkey generally needs
Coffee, which comes out of Hyeman or Happy Arabia, and is the common Drink of
the Turks: That the same Turkey as well as Hyeman and Persia cannot be without
the Commodities of India; and that thus all those Countries are obliged to
carry to Moka over the Red Sea, near Babelmandel; and to Bassora the utmost
part of the Persian-Gulf; and to Bandar-Abbasi, or Gomoron near to Ormus, a
part of that Gold and Silver, that had been brought into their Country, to be
thence transported into Indostan, in Vessels, that yearly, in the season of the
Mounsons, come purposely to those three famous parts: That on the other hand,
all those Ships of India, whether they be Indian ones, or Dutch, or English, or
Portuguese, that every year Transport Merchandise out of Indostan to Pegu,
Tanasseri, Siam, Ceilan, Achem, Macasser, the Maldives, Mosambic, and other
places, bring back also much Gold and Silver from all those Countries, which
meets with the same Destiny, that the other does: That of that quantity of Gold
and Silver which the Hollanders draw from Japan (which is stored with Mines) a
part also comes to be at length discharged in this Indostan; And that lastly
what is carried thither directly by Sea, whether from Portugal, England, or
France, seldom comes back from thence but in Merchandise, the rest remaining
there, as the former.

I very well know, that it may be said, that this Indostan needs Copper,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Elephants, and sundry other things, which the
Hollanders carry thither from Japan, the Molucques, Ceilan, and Europe; as also
that it has occasion for Lead, which in part, it is furnished with out of
England; likewise for Scarlet, which it has from France; Moreover, that it
stands in need of a good number of Horses, it being certain, that from the side
of Usbec it receives yearly more than 2500. That out of Persia also it is
furnished with abundance of the same; as also out of Ethiopia, Arabia, the
Ports of Moka, Bassora, and Bander-abbasy: Besides that it needs that store of
fresh Fruit, which comes thither from Samarkand, Ball-bocara, and Persia, as
Melons, Apples, Pears, and Grapes, that are spent at Dehli, and bought at great
Rates, almost all the Winter long; as well as dry Fruit, which are had there
all the year long, and come from the same Countries, as Almonds, Pistaches,
Nuts, Prunes, Abricots, Raisins, and the like: And that lastly, it wants those
little sea-cockles of the Maldives, which serve for common Coin in Bengale, and
in some other places; as also Ambergriece, carried thither from the said
Maldives and Mosambic, Rhinoceroshorns, Elephants-teeth, Musk, China-dishes,
Pearls of Baharen, and Tutucoury near Ceilan; and, I know not of how many other
things of this kind.

But all this makes not the Gold and Silver to go out of that Empire, because
the Merchants at their return freight their ships with the Commodities of the
Country, finding a better account by so doing, than if they should bring back
Money, so that that hinders not, but that Indostan proves, as we have said, a
kind of abyss for a great part of the Gold and Silver of the World, which finds
many ways to enter there, and almost none to issue thence.

In a word, you may take notice, that this Great Mogol makes himself heir of
the Omrahs or Lords, and of the Manseb-dars, or petty Lords, that are in his
Pay; and (which is of very great consequence) that all the Lands of that Expire
are his propriety, excepting some Houses and Gardens, which he gives leave to
his Subjects to sell, divide, or buy amongst them, as they shall think fit.

These are the things, which sufficiently show, both that there must needs be a
very great store of Gold and Silver in Indostan, though there be no Mines; and
also that the Great Mogol, the Sovereign of the same, at least, of the best
part of it, has immense Revenues and Riches.

But on the other hand, there are also many things to be observed, which are a
poise to these Riches. The first, that among those vast tracts of Land there is
much, which is nothing but sand and sterill Mountains, little Tilled or
Peopled: That even of those that would be fertile, there is much, that is not
used for want of Workmen, some of which have perished by the too evil treatment
of the Governors, who often take from them their necessary livelihood, and
sometimes their very Children whom they make slaves when they are not able, or
are unwilling to pay: Others have abandoned the Field for the same reason, and
desponding out of the consideration that they labored only for others, have
cast themselves into Towns or into Armies, to serve there for Porters, or
waiting men, and many have fled to the lands of the Rajas, because there they
found less tyranny, and more kindness.

The second is, That in this same extent of Country there are sundry Nations,
which the Mogol is not full Master of, most of them retaining yet their
particular Sovereigns and Lords, that obey him not, nor pay him tribute but
from constraint; many, that do little; some that do nothing at all; and some
also, that receive tribute from him, as we shall see anon. Such are those petty
Sovereigns, that are seated on the Frontiers of Persia, who almost never pay
him any thing, no more than they do to the King of Persia: As also the
Balouches and Augans, and other Mountineers, of whom also the greatest part pay
him but a small matter, and even care but very little for him: witness the
affront they did him, when they stopped his whole Army by cutting off the
Water, which they kept back within the Mountains, when he passed from Atek on
the River Indus to Caboul, to lay siege to Kandahar; not suffering the Water to
run down into the Fields, where was the Highway, 'till they had received
presents, although they asked them by way of Alms. Such are also the Patans, a
Mahumetan People, issued from the side of the River Ganges toward Bengale; who
before the Invasion of the Mogols in India, had taken their time to make
themselves potent in many places, and chiefly at Dehli, and to render many
Rajas thereabout their Tributaries. These Patans are fierce and warlike, and
even the meanest of them, though they be waiting men and porters, are still of
a very high spirit, being often heard to say by way of swearing; Let me never
be King of Dehli, if it be not so: A People that despise the Indians, Heathen,
and Mogols, and mortally hate the last, still remembering what they were
formerly, before they were by them driven away from their large Principalities,
and constrained to retire hither and thither, far from Dehli, and Agra, into
the Mountains, where now they are settled, and where some of them have made
themselves petty Sovereigns, like Rajas, but of small strength.

Such an one also is the King of Visapour, who pays to the Magol nothing, and
is always in War with him; maintaining himself in his Country, partly by his
own forces, partly because he is very remote from Agra and Dehli, the ordinary
places of Residence of the Great Mogol; partly also because his Capital City
Visapour is strong and of difficult access to an Army, by reason of the ill
Waters and the want of Forage on the way; and partly because many Rajas join
with him for their common defense, as did the famous Seva-gi, who not long
since came pillaging and burning that rich Seaport, Suratte, and who sometimes
will pay little or no Tribute.

Such is likewise that potent and rich King of Golkonda, who underhand gives
Money to the King of Visapour, and has always an Army ready on the Frontiers
for his own defense, and for the assistance of Visapour, in case he find him
too much pressed.

Of the like sort are more than an hundred Rajas, or considerable Heathen
Sovereigns, dispersed through the whole Empire, some near to, others remote
from Agra and Dehli: amongst whom there are about fifteen or sixteen that are
very rich and puissant; such as is Rana (who formerly was, as 'twere, Emperor
of the Rajas; and who is said to be of the Progeny of King Porus;) Jesseignae
and Jessom seignae, which are so great and powerful, that if they three alone
should combine, they would hold him tack; each of them being able, in a very
short time to raise and bring into the Field Twenty five thousand Horse, better
Troops than the Mogols. These Caveliers are called Ragipouts, or the Children
of Rajas. They are men, who, as I have elsewhere said, carry Swords from Father
to Son, and to whom the Rajas allot Land, on condition to be always ready to
appear on Horseback, when the Raja commands. They can endure much hardship, and
they want nothing to make them good Soldiers, but good Order and Discipline.

The third thing to be noted is, that the Mogol is a Mahumetan, not of the Sect
called Chias, who follow Aly and his offspring, (such as the Persians are, and
consequently the greatest part of his Court;) but of that, which follows Osman,
and thence are called Osmanlys, such as the Turks are. Besides, that he is a
stranger, being of the Race of Tamerlan, who was the head of those Mogols, that
about the year 1401, overran India; where they made themselves Masters: so
that he is in a Country, almost all hostile; and that the more, because not
only for one Mogol, but in general, for one Mahumetan, there are hundreds of
Gentiles or Heathen; which obliges him, constantly to entertain (for his
defense among so many Domestic and Potent Enemies, and against the Persians
and Usbecks, his Neighbors) very great Armies, whether in time of Peace or
War, as well about his Person as in the Field; as well of the People of the
Country, (Rajas and Patans,) as chiefly Mogolians, or at least esteemed such
because they are White, and Mahumetans; which suffices at present; his Court
being no more now as 'twas at first, consisting altogether of true Mogols; but
a mixture of all sorts of strangers, Usbecks, Persians, Arabians, and Turks, or
their Children; but with this distinction, that the Children of the third or
fourth generation, and that have taken the Brown color, and the soft humor of
the Country, are not so much esteemed as the new comers; being also seldom
raised to public Offices; but counting themselves happy, if they may serve as
simple Horsemen or Foot.

Of these Armies I am now going to give you some description, that thereby
knowing the great expenses, which the Grand Mogol is obliged to be at, you may
the better judge of his true Riches; let us first take a view of the Field
Militia, he is necessitated to maintain.

The chief thereof are the Rajas, such as Jesseignae, Jessomseignae, and many
others, to whom he allows very great pensions to have them always ready with a
certain number of Ragipouts, esteeming them like Omrahs, that is, like other
Strangers, and Mahumetan Lords; both in the Army, that is always about his
person, and in those also, that are in the Field. These Rajas are generally
obliged to the same things, that the Omrahs are, even to the point of keeping
guard; yet with this distinction, that they keep not the guard within the
Fortress, as those, but without, under their Tents; they not liking to be shut
up twenty four hours in a Fortress, nor so much as ever to go thither but well
attended with Men resolute to be cut in pieces for their service; as has
appeared, when they have been ill dealt withal.

The Mogol is obliged to keep these Rajas in his service for sundry reasons.
The first, because the Militia of the Rajas is very good (as was said above,)
and because there are Rajas, (as was intimated also) one of whom can bring into
the Field above 25000 men. The Second, the better to bridle the other Rajas,
and to reduce them to reason, when they cantonize, or when they refuse to pay
tribute, or when out of fear or other cause they will not go out of their
Country to the Army, when the Mogol requires it. The third, the better to
nourish jealousies and keenness amongst them, by Favoring and Caressing the
one more than the other, which is done to that degree, that they proceed to
fight with one another very frequently.

The fourth, to employ them against the Patans, or against his own Omrahs and
Governors, in case any of them should rise.

The fifth, to employ them against the King of Golkonda, when he refuses to
pay his tribute, or when he will defend the King of Visapour, or some Rajas his
neighbors, which the Mogol has a mind of rifle, or to make his tributaries;
the Mogol in the those cases not daring to trust his Omrahs overmuch, who most
are Persians, and not of the same Religion with him, but Chias, like the Kings
of Persia and Golkonda.

The sixth, and the most considerable of all, is, to employ them against the
Persians upon occasion; not daring then also to confide in his Omrahs, who for
the greatest part, as was just now said, are Persians, and consequently have no
stomach to Fight against their natural King; and the less, because they believe
him to be their Imam, their Caliph or high Priest, descended from Aly, and
against whom therefore they believe they cannot make War without a crime or a
great sin.

The Mogol is farther obliged to entertain some Patans for the same, or
somewhat like reasons, that he does the Rajas.

At last he must entertain that stranger Militia of the Mogols, that we have
taken notice of: And as this is the main strength of his State, and which
obliges him to incredible charges, me thinks it will not be amiss to describe
to you, of what nature it is, though I should be somewhat long in doing it.

Let us therefore consider, if you please, this stranger Militia, both Cavalry
and Infantry, as divided into two; the one being always near the Mogol's
Person; the other, dispersed up and down in the several Provinces. And in the
Cavalry that is about his Person, let us first take notice of the Omrahs; then,
of the Mansebdars; next, of the Rousindars; last of all, of the simple
Horsemen. From thence let us proceed to the Infantry, in which we shall
consider the Musketeers, and all those men on foot that attend the Ordnance;
where something will occur to be said of their Artillery.

It is not to be thought, that the Omrahs or Lords of the Mogol's Court are
Sons of great Families, as in France; All the Lands of that Empire being the
Mogol's propriety, it follows, that there are neither Dutchies, nor Marquisats,
nor any Family Rich in Land, and subsisting of its own income and patrimony.
And often enough they are not so much as Omrahs Sons, because the King being
Heir of all their Estates, it is consequent that the Houses cannot subsist long
in their greatness; on the contrary, they often fall and that on a sudden,
insomuch that the Sons, or at least the Grandsons of a Potent Omrah are
frequently, after the death of their Father, reduced in a manner to Beggary,
and obliged to list themselves under some Omrah for simple Horsemen. It Is true,
that ordinarily the Mogol leaves some small pension to the Widow, and often
also to the Children; or, if the Father lives too long, he may by particular
favor advance them sooner, especially if they be proper men, white of Face,
having as yet not too much of the Indian Complexion and temper, and so passing
yet for true Mogols: Though this advancement by favor do always proceed in a
slow pace; it being almost a general custom, that a man must pass from small
Pays and small Places to great ones. These Omrahs then are commonly but
Adventurers and Strangers of all sorts of Nations, such as I have said; which
draw one another to this Court; men of a mean descent, some of them slaves;
most of them without instruction, which the Mogol thus raises to dignities as
he thinks good, and degrades them again, as he pleases.

Amongst these Omrahs, some are Hazary, others Dou Hazary, others Penge, Hecht,
and Deh Hazary, and even (such as was the the Kings eldest Son) Dovazdeh
Hazary, that is to say, Lord of a thousand Horse, of two thousand, five
thousand, seven, ten, and tweive thousand; their pay being less or more in
proportion to the number of Horses; I say, of Horses, because they are not paid
in respect of the Horsemen, but of the Horse; the Omrahs having power to
entertain Horsemen of two Horses a man, to be the better able to serve in the
hot Countries, where it is a common saying, that the Horseman that has but one
Horse, is more than half a Footman. Yet we must not think, that they are
obliged to entertain, or that the King effectively pays so many Horse, as these
great names of Dovazdeh or Hecht Hazary do impart, that is, 12000 or 8000
Horse. These are specious Names, to amuse and attract Strangers; the King
determines the number of Horses in actual service, which they are bound to
entertain, pays them according to this number; and besides that, he pays them
a certain number which they are not bound to entertain; and this is that which
ordinarily makes the principal part of their pensions; not to speak of what
they finger out of the pay of every Horseman, and of the number of the Horses;
which certainly amounts to very considerable Pensions; especially if they can
obtain good Jah-ghirs, that is, good Lands for their Pension. For I saw, that
the Lord, under whom I was, that was a Penge-hazary, or one of five thousand
Horse, and who was only obliged to entertain five hundred in effect, had, after
all his Cavalry was paid, remaining for his Pension near five thousand Crowns a
Month; though he was Nagdy, that is, paid in Money drawn out of the Treasury,
as all those are, that have not Lands. Yet notwithstanding all these great
Pensions, I see none but very few that are rich, but many that are uneasy and
indebted: Not that they are ruined by keeping too plentiful Tables, as
elsewhere great Lords frequently are; but that which exhausteth them, are the
great Presents which they are obliged to make to the King at certain Festivals
of the year, every one after the rate of his pay; next, the vast expenses they
must be at for entertaining their Wives, Servants, Camels, and many Horses of
great value, which they keep in their particular Stables.

The number of the Omrahs, as well of those, that are in the Field in the
Provinces and Armies, as of those that are at the Court, is very great. I I
never could precifely learn it; nor is it determined: But I have never seen
less of them at Court, than twenty five or thirty, that are thus Pensionaries
according to a greater or lesser number of Horses to be entertained by them,
from 12000 downward to 1000. These are the Omrahs, that arrive to the
Governments and principal Offices of the Court and Armies; that are, as they
speak, the Pillars of the Empire, and that keep up the splendour of the Court;
never going abroad, but richly decked, sometimes riding on Elephants, sometimes
on Horseback, sometimes carried in a Paleky or Chair, commonly attended by a
good number of Horsemen, to wit, of those that have the guard at that time, as
also by many Footmen, marching before and on his sides, to make way, to drive
away the Flies, to take off the dust with Peacocks-tails, to carry water for
drink, and sometimes Books of Accounts, or other Papers.

All those that are at Court, are obliged, under a considerable penalty, to
come twice every day to salute the King in the Assembly, once about ten or
eleven a Clock in the morning, when he renders Justice; and the second time,
about six hours at night. They are also obliged by turns to keep the guard in
the Castle once a week, during twenty four hours. Thither they carry at that
time their Beds, Tapisseries and other Movables, the King furnishing them with
nothing but provisions of Meat and Drink, which they receive with great
reverence; making a treble obeisance, with their face turned to his Apartment,
their hands down to the ground, and then lifted up upon their heads. Besides,
they are obliged on horseback to follow the King whithersoever he marches in
any weather, rainy or dusty, whether he be carried in his Chair, or on an
Elephant, or a Field-Throne, which last is done by eight men carrying him on
their shoulders, eight others marching on his side, to relieve the others;
himself being in all Marches well covered from the inconveniences of the
weather, whether he go to war, or to hunt, or to exercise his Soldiery. And
this attendance those Omrahs are to give, except some of them be exempted by
the Mogol because of their peculiar Offices, or upon the account of sickness or
old age, or to avoid embarasment, as commonly it is practiced, when he goes
only to some neighboring Town to hunt, or to some house of pleasure, or to the
Mosquee, there being then seldom any about him but those that keep the Guard
that day.

Mansebdars are Cavaliers of Manseb, which is particular and honorable pay;
not so great indeed as that of the Omrahs, but much greater than that of the
others; they being esteemed as little Omrahs, and of the rank of those, that
are raised to that dignity.

These acknowledge also none for their Head but the King, and they are
generally obliged to whatever we have said the Omrahs are. In a word, they
would be true Omrahs, if they had, as diverse heretofore have had, some Horsemen
under them; whereas they have ordinarily but two, four, or six Horses having
the Kings mark, and their pay goes no higher than from 200, to 600 or 700
Roupies a Month. Their number also is not fixed, but much exceeds that of the
Omrahs, there being of them at the Court always two or three hundred, besides
those that are in the Provinces and Armies.

Rouzindars are also a sort of Cavaliers, but such as have their pay by the
day, (as the word it self imports) which yet sometimes is greater than that of
many Mansebdars, but not so honorable; but then they are not bound, as the
Mansebdars, to take at a set price (which someties is not too reasonable) of
those Tapisseries and other Household-stuff, that has served for the Kings
Palace. Their number is very great; they enter into the meaner Offices, many
of them being Clerks, under-Clerks, Signet-men, and the like.

Simple Cavaliers, are those, that are under the Omrahs; amongst whom the most
considerable and having most Pay are those, that have two Horses marked on the
Leg with the mark of their Omrah. Their Pay is not absolutely fixed, but
depends chiefly from the generosity of the Omrah, who may favor whom he
pleases. Yet the Mogol's intention is, that the Pay of a simple Cavalier or
Horseman be no less than twenty five Roupies or thereabout a Month, stating his
accound with the Omrahs upon that Foot.

The pay of the Foot is the least; and their Musketeers are pitiful men,
unless they discharge when their Musket leans on that small wooden fork
hanging to it; yet even then they are afraid of singeing their great Beards,
and of burning their Eyes, but most of all, least some Dgen or evil spirit
burst their Musket. Some of these have 20 Roupies a Month, some 15, some 10.
But yet there are some Gunners, that have great Pay, especially those of the
Franguis or Christians, as Portugueses, English, Dutch, Germans, French, that
retire thither from Goa, flying from English and Dutch Companies. Heretofore
when the Mogols did not yet know how to manage Artillery, their Pay was very
great. And there are yet some of that time, who have 200 Roupies a Month; but
now they will recieve none for more than thirty two.

Their Artillery is of two sorts; the one is the great and heavy Artillery; the
other the light. As for the former, I remember, that when the King after his
Sickness went with his whole Army abroad into the Country, diverting himself
every day in Hunting, sometimes of Cranes, sometimes of the gray Oxen (a kind
of Elks) sometimes of Gazels, Leopards and Lions, and making his progress
toward Lahor and Kachemire (that little paradise of India) there to pass the
Summer, the Army had seventy pieces of Cannon, most of them cast, not counting
the two* or three hundred Camels, carrying each a small Field-piece of the
bigness of a good double Musket, fastened to those Animals. The other light
Artillery is very brave and well ordered, consisting of fifty or sixty small
Fieldpieces all of Brass, each mounted on a little Chariot, very fine and well
painted, with a small Coffer before and behind for the Powder, drawn by two
very fair Horses, driven by a Coachman like a Caleche, adorned with a number of
small red Streamers, each having a third Horse, led by the Chariot for relief.

The great Artillery could not always follow the King, who often left the
Highway, and turned sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left hand,
crossing the fields, to find the true places for Game, and to follow the course
of the Rivers. That therefore was to keep the High way to go the more easily,
and to avoid the embarasments, which it would have met with in the ill
passages, especially in those Boat-Bridges made to pass Rivers. The light
Artillery is inseparable from the person of the King, it marches away in the
morning, when the King comes out of his Tent, and whereas he commonly goes a
little aside into the places for game, this Artillery passes on straight with
all possible speed, to be in time at the Rendez-vous, and there to appear
before the Kings Tent, which is there made ready the day before; as are also
the Tents of the great Omrahs: And this whole Artillery gives a volley just
when the Kihg enters into his Tent, thereby to give notice to the Army of his
arrival.

The Militia of the Field is not different from that which is about the King:
There are every where Omrahs, Mansebdars, Rousindars, simple Horsemen, and Foot
and Artillery wherever any War is made. The difference is only in the number,
which is much greater in the Field-Army, than in the other. For that Army
alone, which the Mogol is constrained perpetually to maintain in Decan, to
bridle the potent King of Golkonda, and to make War upon the King of Visapour,
and upon all the Raja's that join with him, must consist at least of twenty or
twenty five thousand Horse, sometimes of thirty.

The Kingdom of Kaboul, for its ordinary Guard against the Persians, Augans,
Balouches, and I know not how many Mounteniers, requires at least fifteen
thousand. The Kingdom of Kachmire, more than four thousand; and the Kingdom of
Bengale, much more; not counting those that are employed in the War, which must
almost always be maintained on that side; nor those which the Governors of the
several Provinces do need for their defense, according to the particular extent
and situation of their Governments; which makes an incredible number.

Not to mention the Infantry (which is inconsiderable) I am apt to believe with
many others, well informed of these matters, that the number of the Horse in
actual service about the Kings person, comprehending the Cavalry of the Raja's
and Patans, mounteth to thirty five or forty thousand; and that this number,
joined to those that is abroad in the Field, may make two hundred thousand, and
better.

I say, that the Infantry is inconsiderable; for I can hardly believe, that in
the Army which is about the King, comprising the Musketeers, and all the
Gunners and their Mates, and whatever serves in this Artillery, can amount to
much more than fifteen thousand; whence you may make a near guess, what the
number of the Foot must be in the Field. So that I know not whence to take that
prodigious number of Foot, which some do reckon in the Armies of the Great
Mogol, unless it be, that with this true Soldiery they confound all the
Serving-men and Victualers, that follow the Army; for in that sense I should
easily believe, that they had reason to reckon two or three hundred thousand
men in that Army alone which is with the King, and sometimes more; especially
when it is certain, that he is to be long absent from the Capital City: which
will not seem so strange to him, that considers the multitude and confusion of
Tents, Kitchens, Baggage, Women, Elephants, Camels, Oxen, Horses, Waiting-men,
Porters, Forragers, Victualers, Merchants of all sorts, that must follow the
Army; nor to him, that knows the State and particular Government of that
Country, wherein the King is the sole proprietor of all the Lands of the
Kingdom; whence it necessarily follows, that a whole Metropolitan City, such as
Dehly and Agra, lives of almost nothing but of the Soldiery, and is
consequently obliged to follow the King when he takes the Field; those Towns
being nothing less than Paris, but indeed no otherwise governed than a Camp of
Armies a little better and more conveniently lodged than in the open Field.

Besides all these things, you may also consider, if you please, that generally
all this Militia, which I have been representing to you, from the greatest
Omrah, to the meanest Soldier, is indispensably paid every two months; the
Kings pay being its sole refuge and relief; nor can its pay be deferred there,
as it is sometimes with us* where, when there are pressing occasions of the
State, a Gentleman, an Officer, and even a simple Cavalier, can stay a while,
and maintain himself of his own Stock, Rents and the Incomes of his Land. But
in the Mogol's Country, all must be paid at the time prefixed, or all disbands
and starves, after they have sold that little they have; as I saw in this last
War, that many were going to do, if it had not soon ceased. And this the more,
because that in all this Militia there is almost no Soldier that has not wife
and children, servants and slaves, that look for this pay, and have no other
hope of relief. And hence it is, that many wonder, considering the huge number
of persons living of pay (which amounts to millions) whence such vast Revenues
can be had for such excessive Charges: Although this need not to be so much
wondered at, considering the Riches of the Empire, the peculiar Government of
the State, and the said universal propriety of the Sovereign.

You may add to all this, that the Grand Mogol keeps nigh him at Dehly and
Agra, and thereabout, two or three thousand brave Horses, to be always ready
upon occasion; as also eight or nine hundred Elephants, and a vast number of
Mules, Horses, and Porters, to carry all the great Tents and their Cabinets, to
carry his Wives, Kitchens, Household Stuff, Ganges-Water, and all the other
Necessaries for the Field, which he has always about him as if he were at
home; things not absolutely necessary in our Kingdoms.

To this may be added those incredible Expenses upon the Seraglio, more
indispensable than will be easily believed; that vast store of fine Linen,
Cloth of Gold, Embroideries, Silks, Musk, Amber, Pearls, sweet Essences, etc.
consumed there.

All these Charges being put together, and compared with the Revenues the Mogol
may be thought to have, it will be easy to judge, whether he be indeed so very
rich, as he is made to be. As for me, I very well know, that it cannot be
denied, that he has very great Revenues; I believe, he has more alone than
the Grand Seignior and the King of Persia both together: But then, to believe
all those extravagant Stories made of the vastness of his Revenues, is a thing
I could never do: And if I should believe the best part of them, yet should I
not believe him in effect and truly so rich, as the World rings of him; unless
a man would say, that a Treasurer, who receives great sums of Money from one
hand at the same time when he is obliged to disburse them to another, were
therefore truly rich. For my part, I should count that King rich indeed, who,
without oppressing and impoverishing his People too much, should have a Revenue
sufficient to keep a Great and Gallant Court (after the manner of that of ours,
or otherwise) and a Militia sufficient both to guard his Kingdom, and to make
an important War for diverse years against his Neighbors; as also to show
liberality, to build some Royal Edifices, and to make those other Expenses
which Kings are wont to make according to their particular Inclinations; and
who, besides all this, should be able to put up in his Treasury, for a Reserve,
Sums big enough to undertake and maintain a good War for some years. Now I am
apt enough to believe, that the Great Mogol enjoys very near these
Advantages, but I cannot persuade my self, that he has them in that excess, as
is thought and pretended. Those vast and unevitable Expenses, that I have taken
notice of, will certainly incline you to my opinion without any other
consideration; but you will doubtless be altogether of my mind, when I shall
have represented to you these two things, which I am very well informed of.

The one is, that the Great Mogol, now reigning, about the end of this last
Revolution, though the Kingdom was every where in peace (except in Bengale,
where Sultan-Sujah yet held out) was much perplexed where to find means for the
subsistence of his Armies, though they were not so well paid as at other times,
and the War lasted no longer than five years or thereabout, and though also he
had laid hold of a good part of the Treasury of his Father Chah-Jehan.

The other is, That all this Treasure of Chah-jehan, who was very frugal, and
had Reigned above forty Years without considerable Wars, never mounted to six
Kourours of Roupies. A Roupy is about twenty nine pence. An hundred thousand of
them make a Lecque, and an hundred Lecques make one Kourour. So that the six
Kourours would make about seven Millions and an half English Money.
It Is true, I do not comprehend in this great Treasure that great abundance of
Goldsmiths work, so variously wrought in Gold and Silver; nor that vast store
of precious Stones and Pearls of a very high value. I doubt, whether there be
any King in the World that has more. The Throne alone, covered with them, is
valued at least three Kourours, if I remember aright; But then, it is to be
considered also, that they are the spoils of those ancient Princes, the Patans
and Rajas, gathered and piled up from Immemorial times, and still increasing
from one King to another, by the Presents which the Omrahs are obliged yearly
at certain Festival-days to make him; and which are esteemed to be the Jewels
of the Crown, which it would be criminal to touch, and upon which a King of
Mogol in case of necessity would find it very hard to procure the least Sum.

But before I conclude, I shall take notice, whence it may proceed, that though
this Empire of Mogol be thus an Abyss of Gold and Silver, (as has been said,)
yet notwithstanding there appears no more of it among the People, than
elsewhere; yea, rather that the People is there less Monied than in other
places.

The first reason is, that much of it is consumed in melting over and over all
those Nose and Earrings, Chains, Finger-rings, Bracelets of Hands and Feet,
which the Women wear, but chiefly in that incredible quantity of Manufactures,
wherein so much is spent, which is lost, as in all those Embroideries,
Silk-stuffs, interwoven with Gold and Silver, Cloth, Scarf, Turbants, etc. of
the same: For generally all that Militia loves to be guided from the Omrahs to
the meanest Soldiers with their Wives and Children, though they should starve
at home.

The second, That all the Lands of the Kingdom being the Kings propriety, they
are given either as Benefices, which they call Jah-ghirs, or, as in Turkey,
Timars, to men of the Militia for their Pay or Pension (as the word Jah-ghir
imports:) Or else they are given to the Governors for their Pension, and the
entertainment of their Troops, on condition that of the surplus of those
Land-revenues they give yearly a certain sum to the King, as Farmers; Or,
lastly, the King reserveth them for himself as a particular Domaine of his
House, which never or very seldom are given as Jah-ghirs, and upon which he
keeps Farmers, who also must give him a yearly sum; which is to say, that the
Timariots, Governors and Farmers have an absolute Authority over the
Countrymen, and even a very great one over the Tradesmen and Merchants of the
Towns, Boroughs, and Villages, depending from them: so that in those parts
there are neither great Lords nor Parliaments, nor Presidial Courts, as amongst
us, to keep these People in awe; nor Kadis or Judges powerful enough to hinder
and repress their violence; Nor, in a word, any person; to whom a Countryman,
Tradesman, or Merchant, can make his complaints to, in cases of extortion and
tyranny, often practiced upon them, by the Soldiery and Governors, who every
where do impunely abuse the Authority Royal, which they have in hand, unless it
be perhaps a little in those places that are near to Capital Cities, as Dehly
and Agra, and in great Towns, and considerable Seaports of the Provinces,
whence they know that the complaints can be more easily conveyed to the Court.
Whence it is, that all and every one stand in continual fear of these People,
especially of the Governors more than any Slave does of his Master: that
ordinarily they affect to appear poor and Money-less, very mean in their
Apparel, Lodging, Household Stuff, and yet more in Meat and Drink; that often
they apprehend even to meddle with Trade, lest they should be thought Rich, and
so fall into the danger of being ruined: So that at last they find no other
remedy to secure their Wealth, than to hide and dig their Money deep under
Ground, thus getting out of the ordinary commerce of Men, and so Dying, neither
the King nor the State having any benefit by it. Which is a thing not only
happens among the Peasants and Artizans, but (which is far more considerable)
amongst all sorts of Merchants, whether Mahumetans or Heathens, except some
that are in the Kings, or some Omrahs Pay, or that have some particular Patron
and support in power: But principally among the Heathen, which are almost the
only Masters of the Trade and Money, infatuated with the belief, that the Gold
and Silver, which they hide in their lifetime, shall serve them after death.
And this, in my opinion, is the true reason, why there appears so little Money
in Trade among the People.

But thence arises a Question very considerable, viz. Whether it were not more
expedient, not only for the Subjects, but for the State it self, and for the
Sovereign, not to have the Prince such a Proprietor of the Lands of the
Kingdom, as to take away the Meum and Tuum amongst private persons; as it is
with us? For my part, after a strict comparing the State of our Kingdoms, where
that Meum and Tuum holds, with that of those other Kingdoms, where it is not, I
am thoroughly persuaded, that it is much better and more beneficial for the
Sovereign himself, to have it so as it is in our parts. Because that in those
parts where it is otherwise, the Gold and Silver is lost, as I was just now
observing: There is almost no person secure from the violences of those
Timariots, Governors, and Farmers: The Kings, how well soever they be disposed
toward their people, are never almost in a condition (as I lately noted) to get
Justice administered to them, and to hinder tyrannies; especially in those great
Dominions, and in the Provinces remote from the Capital Towns; Which yet ought
to be, as doubtless it is, one of the chief employments and considerarations of
a King. Besides, this tyranny often grows to that excess, that it takes away
what is necessary to the life of a Peasant or Tradesman, who is starved for
hunger and misery, who gets no Children, or if he does, sees them die young for
want of food; or that abandons his Land, and turns some Cavalier's man, or
flies whither he may to his neighbors, in hopes of finding a better condition.
In a word, the Land is not tilled but almost by force, and consequently very
ill, and much of it is quite spoiled and ruined, there being none to be found,
that can or will be at the charge of entertaining the ditches and channels for
the course of waters to be conveyed to necessary places; nor any body that care
to build Houses, or to repair those that are ruinous; the Peasant reasoning
thus with himself: Why should I toil so much for a Tyrant that may come to
morrow to take all away from me, or at least all the best of what I have, and
not leave, if the fancy takes him, so much as to sustain my life even very
poorly? And the Timariot, the Governor and the Farmer, will reason thus with
himself; Why should I bestow Money and take pains of bettering or maintaining
this Land, since I must every hour expect to have it taken from me, or
exchanged for another? I labor neither for my self nor for my Children; and
that place which I have this year, I may perhaps have no more the next. Let us
draw from it what we can, whilst we possess it, though the Peasant should break
or starve, though the Land should become a desert, when I am gone!

And for this very reason it is, that we see those vast Estates in Asia go so
wretchedly and palpably to ruin. Thence it is, that throughout those parts we
see almost no other Towns but made up of earth and dirt; nothing but ruined and
deserted Towns and Villages, or such as are going to ruin. Even thence it is,
that we see (for Example) those Mesopotamia's, Anatolia's, Palestina's, those
admirable plains of Antioch, and so many other Lands, anciently so well tilled,
so fertile, and so well peopled, at the present half deserted, untilled, and
bandon'd, or become pestilent and uninhabitable bogs. Thence it is also, that
of those incomparable Lands of Egypt it is observed, that within less than
four-score years, more than the tenth part of it is lost, no people being to be
found, that will expend what is necessary to maintain all the Channels, and to
restrain the River Nile from violently overflowing on one hand, and so drowning
too much the low Lands, or from covering them with Sand, which cannot be
removed from thence but with great pains and charges. From the same root it
comes, that Arts are languishing in those Countries, or at least flourish much
less than else they would do, or do with Us. For what heart and spirit can an
Artizan have to study well, and to apply his mind to his work, when he sees,
that among the people, which is for the most part beggarly or will appear so,
there is none that considers the goodness and neatness of his Work, every body
looking for what is cheap? and that the Grandees pay them but very ill and when
they please? The poor Tradesmen often thinking himself happy, that he can get
clear from them without the Korrah, which is that terrible whip, that hangs
nigh the gate of the Omrahs: Further, when he sees that there is no help at
all ever to come to any thing, as to buy an Office, or some Land for himself
and Children, and that even he dares not appear to have a penny in cash, or to
wear good clothes, or to eat a good meal, for fear he should be thought rich.
And indeed the beauty and exactness of Arts had been quite lost in those parts
long ago, if it were not that the Kings and Grandees there did give wages to
certain Workmen, that work in their Houses, and there teach their Children, and
endeavor to make themselves able in order to be a little more considered, and
to escape the Korrah; and if also it were not, that those great and rich
Merchants of Towns, who are protected by good and powerful Patrons, paid those
workmen a little better: I say, a little Better; for, what fine stuffs soever
we see come from those Countries, we must not imagine, that the workman is
there in any honor, or comes to any thing; it is nothing but mere necessity or
the cudgel, that makes him work, he never grows rich; it is no small matter,
when he has wherewith to live and to cloth himself narrowly. If their be any
Money to gain of the work, that is not for him, but for those great Merchants
of Towns, I was just now speaking of; and even these themselves find it often
difficult enough to maintain themselves, and to prevent extorsion.

It Is from the same cause also, that a gross and profound ignorance reigns in
those States. For how is it possible, there should be Academies and Colleges
well founded, where are such Founders to be met with? And if there were any,
whence were the Scholars to be had? Where are those that have means sufficient
to maintain their Children in Colleges? And if there were, who would appear to
be so rich? And if they would, where are those Benefices, Preferments and
Dignities that require knowledge and abilities, and that may animate young men
to study?

Thence it is likewise, that Traffic languishes in all that Country, in
comparison of ours. For how many are there, that care to take pains, to run up
and down, to write much, and to run danger for another, for a Governor, that
shall extort, if he be not in league with some considerable sword-man, whose
slave he in a manner is, and that makes his own conditions with him?

It is not there, that the Kings find for their service, Princes, Lords,
Gentlemen, sons of rich and good Families, Officers, Citizens, Merchants and
even Tradesmen well-born, well-educated, and well-instructed; men of courage,
that have a true affection and respect for their King, that often live a great
while at the Court and in the Army at their own expenses, entertaining
themselves with good hopes, and content with the favorable aspect of the
Prince; and who upon occasion fight manfully, covetous to uphold the honor of
their Ancestors and Families. Those Kings, I say, never see about them but men
of nothing, Slaves, Ignorants, Brutes, and such Courtizans as are raised from
the dust to dignities, and that for want of good education and instruction
almost always retain somewhat of their offspring, of the temper of beggars,
enriched, proud, unsufferable, heartless, insensible of honor, dis-ingenuous,
and void of affection and regard for the honor of their King and Country.
Here it is, where those Kings must ruin all, to find means to defray all those
prodigious Charges, which they cannot avoid for entertaining their great Court,
which has no other source to subsist but their Coffers and Treasure, and for
maintaining constantly the vast number of Soldiers, necessary for them to keep
the People in subjection, to prevent their running away, to make them work, and
to get what is exacted from them, they being so many Desperado's, for being
perpetually under hatches, and for laboring only for others.

Thence it is also, that in an important War that may happen (which may be
almost at all times) they must almost of necessity sell the Government for
ready Money and immense Sums; whence chiefly that ruin and desolation comes to
pass which we see. For the Governor, which is the Buyer, must not he be
re-imbursed of all those great Sums of Money, which he has taken up, perhaps
the third or fourth part, at high interest? Must not a Governor also, whether
he have bought the Government or not, find means as well as a Timariot and a
Farmer, to make every year great Presents to a Visir, an Eunuch, a Lady of the
Seraglio, and to those other persons, that support him at Court? Must he not
pay to the King his usual Tributes, and withal enrich himself, that wretched
Slave, half famished and deeply indebted when he first appeared, without Goods,
Lands, and revenues of his House; such as they all are? Do not they ruin all,
and lay all waste; I mean those, that in the Provinces are like so many small
Tyrants with a boundless and unmeasured Authority, there being no body there,
as has been already said, that can restrain them, or to whom a Subject can
have refuge, to save himself from their tyranny and to obtain justice?

It Is true, that in the Empire of the Mogol the Vakea-nevis, that is, those
Persons, whom he sends into the Provinces to write to him whatever passes
there, do a little keep the Officers in awe, provided they do not collude
together (as it almost always happens) to devour all; as also that the
Governments are not there so often sold, nor so openly as in Turkey; I say, not
so openly (for those great Presents, they are from time to time obliged to
make, are almost equivalent to Sales) and that the Governors ordinarily remain
longer in their Governments; which makes them not so hungry, so beggarly, and
so deep in debt, as those new Comers, and that consequently they do not always
tyrannize over the people with so much cruelty; even apprehending, lest they
should run away to the Raja's; which yet falls out very often.

It Is also true, that in Persia the Governments are not so frequently nor so
publicly sold as in Turkey; the Sons of the Governors also succeding often
enough to their Fathers; which is also the cause, that the people there is
often not so ill treated as in Turkey, and occasions withal, that there is more
politeness, and that even some there are that addict themselves to study. But
all that is really but a slight matter; those three States of Turkey, Persia and
Indostan, forasmuch as they have all three taken away the Meum and Tuum as to
Land and Propriety of possessions (which is the foundation of whatever is good
and regular in the world) cannot but very near resemble one another: they have
the same defect, they must at last, sooner or later, needs fall into the same
inconveniences, which are the necessary consequences of it, viz, Tyranny,
Ruin, and Desolation.

Far be it therefore, that our Monarchs of Europe should thus be proprietors of
all the Lands which their Subjects possess. Their Kingdoms would be very far
from being so well cultivated and peopled, so well built, so rich, so polite
and flourishing as we see them. Our Kings are otherwise rich and powerful; and
we must avow that we are much better and more royally served. There would be
Kings of Deserts and Solitudes, of Beggars and Barbarians, such as those are
whom I have been representing; who, because they will have all, at last lose
all; and who, because they will make themselves too rich, at length find
themselves without riches, or, at least, very far from that which they covet
after, out of their blind ambition and passion of being more absolute than the
Laws of God and Nature do permit. For, where would be those Princes, those
Prelates, those Nobles, those rich Citizens and great Merchants, and those
famous Artizans, those Towns of Paris, Lions, Thoulouse, Rouen, London, and so
many others? Where would be that infinite number of Buroughs and Villages, all
those fair Countreyhouses, and Fields, and Hillocks tilled and maintained with
so much industry, care and labor? And where would consequently be all those
vast Revenues drawn thence, which at last enrich the Subjects and the Sovereign
both? We should find the great Cities, and the great Buroughs rendered
inhabitable because of the ill Air, and to fall to ruin without any bodies
taking care of repairing them; the hillocks abandoned, and the fields overspred
with the bushes, or filled with Pestilential Marshes, as has been already
intimated.

A word to our dear and experienced Travelers: They would not find those fair
conveniences of traveling; they would be obliged to carry all things with
them, like the Bohemians; and all those good Inns, for example, that are found
between Paris and Lions, would be like ten or twelve wretched Caravans-serrahs,
that is, great Barns, raised and paved, such as our Pont-neuf is, where
hundreds of men are found pel-mel together with their Horses, Mules and Camels,
where one is stifled with heat in Summer, and starved of cold in Winter, if it
were not for the breathing of those Animals, that warm the place a little.

But it will be said, we see some States, where the Meum and Tuum is not (as
for example, that of the Grand Seignor, which we know better than any, without
going so far as the Indies) that do not only subsist, but are also very
powerful, and increase daily.

It Is true, that that State of the Grand Seignor, of such a prodigious extent
as it is, having so vast a quantity of Lands, the Soil of which is so
excellent, that it cannot be destroyed but very difficultly, and in a long
time, is yet rich and populous; but it is certain also, that if it were
cultivated and peopled proportionably to ours (which it would be, if there were
propriety among the Subjects throughout) it would be a quite different thing;
it would have people enough to raise such prodigious Armies as in old times,
and rich enough to maintain them. We have traveled through almost all the
parts of it; we have seen how strangely it is ruined and unpeopled; and how in
the Capital City there now need three whole Months to raise five or six
thousand men. We know also, what it would have come to ere this, if it had not
been for the great number of Christian Slaves, that are brought into it from
all parts. And no doubt but that, if the same Government were continued there
for a number of years, that State would destroy it self, and at last, fall by
its own weakness, as it seems that already it is hardly maintained but only by
that means, I mean, by the frequent change of Governors; there being not one
Governor, nor any one man in the whole Empire, that has a penny to enable him
to maintain the least thing, or that can almost find any men, if he had Money.
A strange manner to make States to subsist! There would need no more for making
an end of the Seditions, than a Brama of Pegu, who killed the half of the
Kingdom with hunger, and turned it into Forests, hindering for some years the
Lands from being tilled, though yet he has not succeeded in his Design, and
the State have afterward been divided, and that even lately Ava, the Capital
Town, was upon the point of being taken by an handful of China-fugitives. Mean
time we must confess, that we are not like to see in our days that total ruin
and destruction of this Empire we are speaking of (if so be we see not
something worse) because it has Neighbors, that are so far from being able to
undertake any thing against him, that they are not so much as in a condition to
resist him, unless it be by those succors of strangers, which the remoteness
and jealousy would make slow, small, and suspect.

But it might be yet further objected, that it appears not, why such States as
these might not have good Laws, and why the people in the Provinces might not
be enabled to come and make their complaints to a Grand Visir, or to the King
himself. It Is true, that they are not altogether destitute of good Laws, and
that, if those which are amongst them were observed, there would be as good
living there, as in any part of the world. But what are those Laws good for, if
they be not observed, and if there be no means to make them to be executed? Is
it not the Grand Visir, or the King that appoints for the people such beggarly
Tyrants, and that has no others to set over them? Is it not He that sells
those governments? Has a poor Peasant or Tradesman means to make great
journeys, and to come and seek for Justice in the Capital City, remote perhaps
150 or 200 Leagues from the place of his abode? Will not the Governor cause
him to be made away in his journey (as it has often happened) or catch him
sooner or later? And will he not provide his Friends at Court, to support him
there, and to represent things quite otherwise than they are? In a word, this
Governor, hungry as well as the Timariots and Farmers (that are all men for
drawing Oil out of Sand, as the Persian speaks, and for ruining a world, with
their heap of Women-harpies, Children and Slaves) this Governor, I say, is he
not the absolute Master, the Super-intendant of Justice, the Parliament, the
Receiver, and all?

It may perhaps be added, that the Lands, which our Kings hold in Domaine, are
no less well tilled and peopled, than other Land. But there is a great
difference between the having in propriety some Lands here and there in a great
Kingdom (which changes not the Constitution of the State and Government) and
the having them all in propriety, which would alter it altogether. And then we
in these parts have Laws so rational, which our Kings are willing to be the
first to observe, and according to which they will that their particular Lands
shall be governed as those of their Subjects are, so as to give way, that
Actions of Law may be laid against their own Farmers and Officers, so that a
Peasant or Tradesman may have means to obtain Justice, and to find remedy
against the unjust violence of those that would oppress him: Whereas in those
parts of Asia, I see almost not any refuge for those poor people; the Cudgel
and the Hammer of the Governor being in a manner the only Law that rules, and
decides all Controversies there.

Lastly, It may be said, that it is at least certain, that in such States there
is not such a multitude of long-lasting suits of Law, as in these parts, nor so
many Lawyers of all sorts, as amongst us. It is in my opinion, very true, that
one cannot too much applaud that old Persian Saing, Na-hac Kouta Beter-Ez hac
Deraz, that is, Short Injustice is better than long Justice; and that the
length of Law-Sutes is unsufferable in a State, and that it is the
indispensable duty of the Sovereign, by all good means to endeavor a remedy
against them. And it is certain, that by taking away this Meum and Tuum, the
root would be cut of an infinite number of Law-processes, and especially of
almost all those, that are of importance, and long and perplexed; and
consequently there would not need so great a number of Magistrates, which our
Sovereigns do employ to administer Justice to their Subjects, nor that swarm of
men, which subsist only by that way. But it is also manifest, that the remedy
would be an hundred times worse than the Disease, considering those great
inconveniences that would follow thereupon, and that in all probability the
Magistrates would become such as those of the Asiatick States, who deserve not
that Name; for in a word, our Kings have yet cause to glory upon the account of
good Magistracy under them. In those parts, some Merchants excepted, Justice is
only among the meanest sort of people, that are poor and of an unequal
condition, who have not the means of corrupting the Judges, and to buy false
Witnesses, that are there in great numbers, and very cheap, and never punished.
And this I have learned every where by the experience of many years, and by my
solicitous enquiries made among the people of the Country, and our old
Merchants that are in those parts, as also of Ambassadors, Consuls and
Interpreters; whatever our common Travelers may say, who, upon their having
seen by chance, when they passed by, two or Porters, or others of the like
Gang, about a Kady, quickly dispatching one or other of the parties, and
sometimes both, with some lashes under the sole of their feet, or with a
Maybale Baba, some mild words, when there is no wool to sheer; who, I say, upon
sight of this, come hither, and cry out, O the good and short Justice! O what
honest Judges are those in respect of ours! Not considering in the mean time,
that if one of those wretches, that is in the wrong, had a couple of Crowns to
corrupt the Kady, or his Clerks, and as much to buy two false witnesses, he
might either win his process, or prolong it as long as he pleased.

In conclusion, to be short, I say, that the taking away this Propriety of
Lands among private men, would be infallibly to intoduce at the same time
Tyranny, Slavery, Injustice, Beggary, Barbarism, Desolation, and to open a high
way for the ruin and destruction of Mankind, and even of Kings and States: And
that on the contrary; this Meum and Tuum, accompanied with the hopes that every
one shall keep, what he works and labors for, for himself and his Children, as
his own, is the main foundation of whatever is regular and good in the World:
Insomuch that whosoever shall cast his eyes upon the different Countries and
Kingdoms, and takes good notice of what follows upon this Propriety of
Sovereigns, or that of the People, will soon find the true source and chief
cause of that great difference we see in the several States and Empires of the
world, and avow, that this is in a manner that which changes and diversifieth
the Face of the whole Earth.

FINIS.
THe Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marseilles, by the French King's Order, 1666. To Muley Arxid, King of
Tafiletta, etc. For the establishment of a Commerce in the Kingdom of Fez, and
all his other Conquests: With a Letter in Answer to diverse curious Questions
concerning the Religion, Manners and Customs of his Countries: Also their
Trading to Tombutum for Gold, and diverse other Particulars; by one who lived
five and twenty years in the Kingdom of Sus and Morocco. Printed at Paris,
1670. Englished, 1671. 8*, Price 1 s 6 d. Sold by M. Pit, at the Angel near
the Little North-Door of St Paul.


