THE CATECHISM OF THE KINGDOM OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ: IN THE Thousand Years.

Showing by Scripture, That the Great Articles of the Redemption, the
Resurrection, the Mystery of the Saints not Dying but Changed, the Judgment,
the Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All, cannot be Explained at Full
Dimensions without it.

Luke 1. 4. That thou may know the Certainty of the Things wherein Thou have
been Catechized, or Instructed. London, Printed for the Author, 1690.

To the Bishops Assembled in Parliament.
And to the Evangelical Episcopacy, throughout the Protestant Acts 2^. 28. 1
Pet. 5. 2.
Churches of Christ in these Nations, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the
Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by the Eternal Spirit.
I Have heretofore Represented to you the Majesty, and Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that shall Seven Times hence after the Expiration of the
Apostasy (now Ecclipsing it) be Daily more, and more Visible; Till it shine
out in perfect Glory. This I have done according to the Sure Word of Prophecy,
which is of no private Interpretation, but being Scripture, must be searched
even as All other Scripture, and so be, as All other Scripture, Profitable; and
it has this Excellency above other Scripture; That It particularly shines, as
a Light in a Dark place, viz. In this Time of Eclipse, or, as the Pole Star in
the Night, that we may know, whereabout we are in Time, and State.

Yet because the General Prepossession of Men, Caring for none of these Things,
would not have Prophetic Scripture Searched; that I might make Acceptable this
Great Truth every way; I have now Represented it, as It is Carved, and Wreathed
into the whole Analogy of Faith, the Great Articles, and Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, according to the most Instructive Scriptures, viz. the
Redemption, the Resurrection, the Eternal Judgment, the Saints not Dying, but
Changed, the Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All; which cannot be
without the Kingdom of Christ Explained at full Dimensions.

Now I call the Following Treaty hereof, a Catechism, as an Intimation of the
Plain manner of Handling for the benefit of All; and of the necessity of
Consideration, and Repeated Application of our Minds to it; and also to show;
The Kingdom of Christ, though it yet lie Hid in its Roots the Fore-nam'd
Articles, is still a Fundamental Truth; and so though Catechism may seem below
your Orb, yet This of the Kingdom of Christ, even as All Catecheticall Truths,
deserves the Gravest and most Awful Judgments to Try and Recommend Them.

I do Acknowledge my self the unworthiest of the Servants of Christ, in the
most Abased Circumstances; and lay my self at the Feet of the Church of Christ
with most Penitential Confessions and Acknowledgments; Yet I must be Bold in
our God to say, He has been pleased to Reveal to me, of an Infant
Understanding in Compare; and the Chief of Sinners; what He has not so fully
Revealed to the more Holy and Prudent; Even so Father, For so It seemed Good in
thy sight.

I most Humbly therefore Beseech, and do even Adjure you by the Coming of our
Lord Jesus, and by our Gathering together to Him in the General Assembly of his
Kingdom, That You would either show by Scripture; These Things cannot be so; or
Receive this Ministry, as the Oracles of God, and Testify your Regard to it,
that now makes in your Ears the cry of the Bridegrooms Coming in his Kingdom,
That none of us may be among the Slumbring, though Wise Virgins, much less
among the Foolish.

And You, to whom This Address will first Come, ought to be the more Watchful,
because the Worldly Splendour of Your Sphere not so well Agrees with the present
Eclipse of Christian Glory, with the Tribulation and Patience of the Kingdom
of Christ; and that Sackcloth, and Fasting state for the Bride-grooms Absence;
You should then surmount that Disagreement by more Eminent Services to this
Kingdom, least There should seem Any Surrogation in the Reformation to the Feet
of Clay; the Papacy, the Cardinalism, the Roman Hicrarchy; who as the most
Diametral opposites to the Kingdom of Christ Receive the First Stroke of the
Stone Cut out of the Mountains without Hands; and so You Receive the Dishonor
of any part in their Fall, at least of Lukewarmness for that Glory of Christ;
Or least, as They by a False Glory, as if 'twere the Glory of Christ,
Glittering in this worldly Glory, Rob the True Light, and are Effaced by that
True Light Appearing, or its Epiphany, You should at all share in that
Effacement.

That we may be therefore All Guided by the Father of Lights, with whom is no
Variation, nor Shadow of Turning, to Try the Spirit of this Doctrine; and not
to Call the Light of it Darkness; but to Come perfectly out of the present
Ecclips; to Go on to Perfection in the Doctrine of Christ is, and shall be the
most zealous Prayer of

Your most Humble most Affectionate Servant in the Gospel of the Kingdom. Tho.
Beverley.

The General PREFACE To all Christians.
I Know it will be said with Plausibleness against this Following Catechism; We
had rather Preach, and Hear of the Plain, Safe, Fundamental Points of Faith,
and Repentance, of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment, in
the Ordinary way of Discourse; The Old Wine we have Tasted is Better; We will
not, as it were, Ask a Sign, and Tempt God in Isay. c. 7.
seeking to understand Prophecies, and Mysteries.

But is it not enough for you to weary Men, but will ye weary my God also, who
has given you Prophecy to search it, and the Strong meat of Scripture, and not
only the Milk, as to Children unskillfull in the word of Righteousness? He has
commanded you to leave (not by way of Forsaking) the Word of the Beginning of
Christ, but to Go on to perfection; not dishonourably staying in Foundations
without a Superstructure; He has given you the Example of steady Resolution
herein; This we Heb. c. 5. 11. c. 6. 1.
will do, if God permit. He has in a Figure Represented to you the Primitive
Christian Church, not doing thus, though it was so plentiful a Partaker of
mighty effusions of Wonderful Gifts.
the Holy Spirit, had a Liberal Taste of the Good word of God; They Tasted of
the Miracles.
mighty Powers of the World to come, viz The Kingdom of Christ; Yet through
Resting in Principles, not Loving Truth, not Going on to Perfection, They
Dwindled away, and fell into the Antichristian Apostasy, and came to Crucify in
that Spiritual Sodom, and Egypt (even Rome, Called Catholic Church now, where
also Our Lord was Crucified, viz. under its Dominion) the Son of God afresh in
his Witnesses, and have put him to an open Shame; And through the Impossibility
of Repentance, as such an Antichristian Church, as we see Rev. 16. 9. It cannot
be Renewed; But under all the Droppings of the Reformation upon it, it is a
Ground overgrown with Briars and Thorns, and is very nigh now to a Curse,
whose End is to be Burned, Rev. 18. But of Reformed Churches, and Christians we
Hope Better Things, and Things, that have Hold of that Great Salvation of the
Kingdom, though we thus speak; The Lord therefore shall give you a Sign, a
Mahar-Schalal-Hash-Baz, a Sign of his making Isay c. 6. c. 9. 9.
haste to the Prey. For as soon as the Child now Born shall by a seven years
Age know to choose the Good, and Refuse the Evil; That Great City shall be
Forsaken of its Ten Kings, who have so long given their Kingdom to the Beast;
and so its Tenth shall Fall, and the Witnesses shall Rise; And this, as it
were, New Song, shall be Sung, and the Everlasting Gospel Rev. 14. 1.
Preached, and we shall be as New Bottles filled with the New Wine of the
Kingdom: And these Truths shall be no longer called Novelties, Whimsies, and
Intoxications; nor men say any longer; We like the Old Wine Better. For
Christians shall be (...), Pursuers of Truth in Love, Ephesians. 4. 13. etc. as of
perfect Age, Growing up to the Fullness of Christ; and Strong Meat shall belong
to them, as Having Senses exercised to discern Good and Evil. For then the
Apostasy shall go off, and the mighty Gifts that were but Tasted at first as to
length of Time, shall Reeurn with Miraculous Powers of the World to come.
Because it shall then be drawn near, and it shall never End; Now the mistake is
Great, that These miraculous Powers ceased, because the Canon of Scripture was
sufficiently Sealed; The Mystery of Iniquity growing up to the Apostasy caused
the Cessation; when That Ends, These shall Return. Let us therefore in our
Earnestest Going on to Perfection, wait upon Christ till be Rises upon this
Glorious mount of Prey, in the Succession of his Kingdom, when the Light of one
Day then, shall be as the Light of seven now. Even the Sun shall be ashamed,
and the Moon Confounded, when He Comes to Reign before his Ancients Gloriously.
And now His going forth is Prepared as the Morning, we shall know, if we Follow
on to know the Lord. But if Any will be Ignorant, It must be so; If Any one
Aggrieved, Scripture is open, Let him Implead what is Written; I stand on the
Justification by Divine Help.

THE CATECHISM OF THE KINGDOM OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ.
Question. WHere is the Doctrine of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to be found?

Ans. It is especially to be found in the opening of Prophetical Scripture,
being the Mystery spoken of by all the Prophets. Revel. 10. 7. Acts 3. 21.

Quest. What is the Rule of the True Explication of Prophecy.

Ans. That of the Apostle; He that Prophesies, let Him Prophecy according to
the Analogy or proportion of Faith. Romans 12. 6.

Quest. What is the Analogy, or proportion of Faith.

Ans. It is the Form of sound words according to the whole Scripture, which is
a Table so exactly square, nothing can without plain Injury be Added to it, or
Taken from it.

Quest. Is the Kingdom of Christ to be thus explained?

Ans. I Trust, we shall Find it so by Searching All Scripture with Noble Minds,
whether those Things are so or not; and thereby giving heed to that most Sure
word of Prophecy, that we shall do well to take heed to, as to a Light that
shines to us in a dark place; So we shall Find it no Cunningly devised Fable,
Acts 17. 11. 2 Pet. 1. 16. 19.

Quest. What then is to be understood by the Kingdom of Jesus Christ?

A. The Kingdom of Jesus Christ is the Glorious, and Visible Appearance of
Christ Himself with all Saints, who have died in Him, and whom He will bring
with Him; who shall dwell with Him in the New Heaven, he has promised in the
Region of the Air above; And for the Full Glory of this Kingdom, There shall be
a Generation of Saints in the New Earth below; who are the Living, the
Remaining; Both sorts Rescued from the common Fire for the Perdition of ungodly
Men. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. to the end, 2 Pet. 2. 9. c. 3. 7. 13.

Q. Is it not enough, that there be a Day of Judgment, and a State of Glory,
and Happiness to Christ, and his Saints in the Highest Heaven, and of
punishment to the wicked in the Lowest Hell?

A. God has in his word declared to us, That is not enough; but There shall be
upon Greatest Reasons given us therein, a New Heaven, and a New Earth, and a
State of Saints in both, and of the Enemies of Christ being made his Footstool;
that there may be a most visible Appearance of the Glory of the one, and of the
Contemptible, dishonorable and condemned State of the other. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. to
v. 11. with Dan. 12. 1. 2 Rev. 19. 14. 15. to the end. c. 20. 4. 6.

Q. What shall be the Highest Spirit, and Constitution of this State?

A. It is an Economy, or dispensation, wherein there is a most exalted State
of Holiness and Purity, in the enjoyment of God, and of Jesus in his
Redemption, Rev. 5. 9. and c. 4. 5. of the Communion of his Spirit; Free from
Sensuality, and Impurity, and in perfect Happiness, and Security from all Toil,
Grief, Pain, Death, and Curse; so that all the Saints are Priests of God, and
of Christ, and Reign with Him, Rev. 20. 6. c. 21. c. 22. v. 1. to v. 7.

Q. What do you mean by an Economy, or Dispensation?

A. It is the free dispose of Things, after the Counsel of Gods own Will, for
the Manifestation of his Wisdom to Angels, and Men in this, or that way, as the
Master of the Great Family of All Things. Ephesians. 3. 9. 10.

Q. But has not this doctrine been generally charged with Carnality, and
sensual Inclination?

A. This has been the Art of Satan, and of Antichrist, to Bring out of Repute
so Great a Doctrine of Christ, that It is peculiarly called the Everlasting
Gospel; that the Antichristian Kingdom of this World, as a Dead Child might be
put in its place.

Q. What then is the State of the Saints dead in Christ, whom He Brings with
Him, and who shall be in the New Heaven?

A. They, who are Accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection
from the Dead, neither Marry, nor are Given Luke 20. 35. 36. Romans 8. 23. 1 Cor.
5. 3.
in Marriage; Neither can They Dye any more, being the Children of God, and of
the Resurrection; and The Adoption. But They Sit on Thrones, and Judge Angels,
and the World with Christ; and Reign with Him a Thousand Years, not upon, but
over the Earth; They see the Face of God, and of the Lamb, and Rev. c. 20. c.
21. c. 22.
his Throne is in the midst of Them, as His Servants They serve Him, and his
Name is in their Foreheads; He is their Light, and their Temple; They Eat of
the Tree of Life, and Drink of the Water of Life; and over Them the second
death can have no power.

Q. But it seems, They only, who have been Martyrs; and especially; They who
would not Receive the mark, and Name of that Antichristian, Idolatrous Power,
which the Revelation calls the Beast, are They, who thus Rise, and enjoy that
State a Thousand Years. Rev. 20. 4.

A. They are indeed the principal there named, to Answer the Table, or
Representation of Things in that Prophecy of the Revelation; But it is
subjoined immediately, v. 6. Blessed and Holy is He, that has part in the
first Resurrection, though they are not the principals Beheaded for Christ; And
the Apostle Paul assures us, All who have died in Christ, will God bring with
Him; That none should Mourn without hope for Dead Friends, as if They should
loose that Glory; For none of the Saints can be perfected the one without the
other; The Living Saints cannot prevent the Dead, and the We of the Living
Saints are Joined in that Glory with the Dead Raised. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. and Heb.
11. last. Called, we All as making up the whole.

Q. What then shall be the State of the Saints Living, and Remaining at the
Coming of the Lord?

A. They also are, as was said, Partakers of the First Resurrection, so that
the Second Death shall have no Power over Them; For the Blessed, and the Holy
is only He, who is so Partaker. And it is expressly said; These shall not dye,
but be Changed, and caught up to meet the Lord in the Clouds, and be for ever
with the Lord; So they cannot fall into the Lake of the Second Death; The
Leaves of the Tree of Life are therefore for the Healing these saved of the
Nations; And the River of Life from the Throne runs down to them; and the Trees
of Life are for their Food, and Medicine, and the Healing Waters from the
Sanctuary; so that whatever does Live shall Live. Rev. 22. 2. Ezekiel. 47. 11.
They shall be as Adam, had he continued in Paradise, served with the whole
Variety of the Creation for Use, and Delight; without Lust, or Sensuality;
without Labor, Sorrow, Curse or Death, till They are so changed; and they
shall propagate a Holy Seed, Psalm. 110. 3. in such abundance, as to recompense
with a much more to the Glory of the Second Adam (Romans 5. 12. to the end) for
the few that are saved within the World of the First Adam.

Q. What Intercourse shall there be betwixt the Saints of the New Heaven above,
and the Saints of the New Earth beneath?

A. Such as betwixt the Lights of Heaven, and the Firmament, and our Selves now
on Earth; For the Nations of the Saved shall walk in the Light of the New
Jerusalem above, shining as the Sun and Stars down to them; And as All Glory on
Earth is referred to the Light of the Sun and the Heaven over us; So the Saints,
the Kings on Earth shall bring their Glory to the New Jerusalem above;
especially, They shall give their Glory, and walk in the Light and Enjoyment of
God and of Christ. And Angels and Saints above, Angels Equals shall Ascend and
Descend on that Jacobs Ladder, whose Foot being on Earth, its Top reached to
Heaven, and God and the Lamb are on the Top of it; and by Ezekiel's steps
enlarging, and winding still upward, shall All below Ascend upward, Genesis 28.
12, 13. Ezeck. 41. 7.

Q. Give yet a fuller Account of the State of the wicked in this Kingdom of
Christ.

A. The Scripture is not so full, nor so clear in setting out the State of the
Wicked under this Kingdom; yet so that It is most certain, that They who have
lived before it, are raised to Illustrate the Glory of it; and to bear the
Shame, and Dishonor of their wickedness under the Just and Righteous
Condemnation of Christ; called a being slain with the Sword of his Mouth; Shame
and Contempt shall be poured upon Them, as a Just Recompense of all the Scorn,
They have cast upon Christ, his ways, and Servants; and They shall be seen in a
State of Punishment, Destruction, and Death; under a sharp sense of it in
Themselves, and so that They shall be seen, as Carcasses, whose Worm dies not,
and their Fire is not quenched, so that They are an Abhoring of all Flesh. And
this is a Just, and Righteous Recompense of all the Cruelties, They have
exercised upon the Servants of God, and their Disobedience to God, and to
Christ, and their so obstinate prefering the present World, before, and above
the World to Come. Lastly, in what ever State Any of them can be supposed to
be, They are certainly so under Christ and his Saints, That They are made his
Footstool. Dan. 12. 2. John 5. 29. Esaias 66. ult. 2 These. 1. 9. Psalm. 110. 1.

Q. When does the Kingdom of Christ begin?

A. It begins at the Coming, and Appearance of Christ, and at the Resurrection
of his Saints at that his Coming, and Appearance; a Resurrection to Life,
Honor, and Immortality, and to a visible Glorious Appearance with Christ, and
Reigning with Him.

Q. Is there not a Resurrection of the Wicked at the same Tme? And if so, How
then does their Resurrection stand in Relation to the Happy Resurrection?

A. There is their Resurrection, as was last declared; but because It is a
Resurrection to Punishment, and Dishonor; It is called Death; and They are
called the dead, though i^ a visible Appearance; The Scripture therefore but
seldom names the Resurrection of the wicked, as a Resurrection; and when it
speaks of the Resurrection at any Time absolutely, It means the Happy, and
blessed Resurrection, as Luc. 20. 35, 36. 1 Cor. 15. throughout. Rev. 20. 4. 6.
And therefore there can be no other Respect had to them in the Kingdom of
Christ, and the Resurrection proper to it, but as They add to the Triumph of
the Kingdom, and are in a State of Deprivation of its Glory.

Q. What proof can you give of the Kingdom of Christ at his Coming and
Appearance?

A. The whole Stream of the New Testament Joins his Coming, and his Appearance,
and his Kingdom One with Another. The Son of Man coming in his Kingdom, Mat.
16. last. When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and All the Holy Angels
with him; Then shall He sit on the Throne of his Glory, Mat. 25. 31. Remember
me when Thou Come in, (not into) thy Kingdom, Luke 23. 42. Because They
thought the Kingdom of God should immediately Appear, He spoke a Parable unto
Them of a Nobleman, going into a Far Country to Receive a Kingdom, and to
Return; and Having Received a Kingdom, He Returned in it, Luke 19. 13, 15. When
we made known unto You the Power and Coming of Christ, and were Eye Witnesses
of his Majesty; (to wit) in the Transfiguration, that Great Fore-Appearance of
his Kingdom. Behold, He who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth comes in
the Clouds, and Every Eye shall see Him, Revel. 1.5.7. And his Appearance, and
his Kingdom are Joined, 2 Timothy 4. 1. He shall Judge the Quick, and the Dead at
his Kingdom, and at his Appearance.

Q. Give a proof of the Kingdom at his Resurrection?

A. The Apostle plainly declares it; For he says, Every one shall Rise in his
own Order; Christ the First Fruits, and They, which are Christ's at his Coming:
And without Any other Mention of his Kingdom, He says, He must Reign, till he
has put All his Enemies under his Feet: Now when did this Reigning Begin, but
at his Coming? Or where did the Apostle Give any Intimation of his Reigning,
but at his Coming according to all the Forementioned Scriptures? And when He
Comes and Descends, and no Longer Sits at the Right Hand of God, Then God first
makes his Enemies his Footstool, not when he Sits, but when He Comes, and then
He Begins to Reign; and He Reigns Till all his Enemies are his Footstool. And
when He Descends, and Comes, and Reigns, The Dead in Christ Rise. and then He
Brings Them with Him; His Kingdom, and the Resurrection of his Saints Begin
together.

Q. What Place then has the Day of Judgment?

A. The Day of Judgment is the same with the Kingdom of Christ, and with the
Resurrection, All Begin, Continue, and End Together with this Difference: The
Judiciary Sentence is at the Beginning, Rev. 19 last. and at the End, c. 20.
13. 14. 15. and between, a Righteous and Holy Government; which Government the
Scripture often calls Judgment, Psalm. 72. 4. And All Men, whether They Rise to
Life or to Condemnation, are before, and as it were about the Tribunal, or
Judgment Seat, which is also the Throne of Christ, and Receiving according to
what They have done in the Body, whether it be Good or Evil, during the whole
space of the Resurrection, Kingdom, and Judgment of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

Q. How long then does the Kingdom of Christ, the Appearance in the
Resurrection, and the Day of Judgment last?

A. The Grand, and the most Definitive Time, in which Christ shall Reign with
his Saints, is, while Satan is Bound, and That is a Thousand Years; And the
Apostle Peter having named the Day of Judgment, Immediately, as it were Adjures
Christians, not to be Ignorant, that One day (as if He should say, That One Day
of Judgment) is with the Lord as a Thousand Years; and the several, viz. Six
Thousand Years before it, but as each, one day; so making that Day of Judgment
a Sabbatical Day, or Sabbatism. Rev. 20. v. 2. to 8. 2 Pet. 3. 8.

Q. But seeing, as has been said; The Living Remaining Saints have a State in
this Kingdam of Christ in the New Earth, even as the Saints dead in Christ,
have in the New Heavens; How can so long a space, as of the Thousand Years
consist with the Apostles Doctrine, 1 Cor. 15. 52. that speaks, as of a close
Connection betwixt the Dead being Raised, and the We of the Saints being
Changed. For says He, Behold, I show you a Mystery, We shall not All dye, but
we shall All be changed in a moment, in the Twinkling of an Eye at the last
Trumpet, (For the Trumpet shall sound) and the Dead shall be Raised
Incorruptible, and we shall be changed. All as it were in one moment?

A. The Apostle shows the suddenness, and Immediate effect of the Power of
Christ in both Raising the Dead, and Changing the Living; but the so close
Connection betwixt the Raising and the Changing does not thence Follow: For
within the Time of John's Seventh, and last Trumpet, when the Kingdom of Christ
Begins its Succession, and which contains all from that Kingdom of Christ so
beginning, and its being Delivered up; The Dead shall be Raised, and the Living
changed, but at several distances of Time; Forth Apostle says, the Dead in the
Third person shall be ^a^^'d. To show, the We of Saints of the first person
are of a different State, and order of Time in being Changed from the Dead in
Christ, that shall be Raised.

Q. But it does not seem, that this change of persons can bear the weight of so
Great a point of doctrine?

A. I allow it, if there were not that Great Consenting Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
17. where the Apostle puts the same (...), or afterward, betwixt the Saints
dead in Christ, at the Coming of Christ Rising first; and the Living Changed,
or which is the same, Caught up; that He had put betwixt the Resurrection of
Christ, and his Saints Rising at his Coming; which has made as great a
distance, as 1700 Years already; For says the Apostle, the Lord Himself shall
descend with a shout, with the Voice of the Arch Angel, with the Trumpet of
God, and the Dead in Christ shall Rise First; Then we which are Alive, and
Remain, shall be caught up, viz. without Dying; Now the word which is here
Translated, [Then] was, 1 Cor. 15. 27. Translated [Afterward] and may therefore
very well allow the distance of above a 1000 Years in one, as in the other;
which distance the Translators knowing betwixt Christ's Resurrection, and of
his Saints at his Coming, Translated [Afterwards] a word of distance in our
English; But not understanding so well that distance betwixt the Raising, and
Changing the Saints, they render the same word (...), 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. [Then]
which signifies often with us the same moment; but this varies not the Truth of
Things, and of Scripture.

Q. How is the State of the Kingdom of Christ bounded at the Period or End of
it?

A. By the Saints Living, and Remaining being Caught up to Christ in the Air,
by the Subduing the last Enemy Death, and by the Delivering up the Kingdom to
God All in All; So that the Coming of Christ and his Appearance in and at his
Kingdom, the Dead in Christ Rising, His Saints, the We left Living, and the
Judiciary sentence on his Enemies to be his Footstool at the beginning; and
these Great Pillars at the end bound at each Point this Greatest Economy of
the Fullness of Times; and not only distinguish, but exalt it far above all
other Time; And herewith Admirably Agrees the whole State of Things in the last
Trumpet of the Prophecy of the Revelation, wherein we have several Expressions
of the Kingdom of Christ, or his Taking to Him his Great Power, and Reigning:
The Heavens open to Him with his many Crowns, and the Title or Name on his
Vesture, and on his Thigh, King of Kings, Lord of Lords; His Reigning, and his
Throne in the New Jerusalem; The Time of the Dead being Judged, and Rewards
Given to All that Feared his Name, Great, and Small, and the destroying them
that destroyed the Earth; A voice Commands to write the Blessedness of All the
Dead in the Lord, and their Sabbatism; Yea, from henceforth or Immediately;
Christ with a Crown, and on a White Cloud, Giving down it, Dew, as the Dew of
Herbs, that the Earth may disclose its dead, etc. and Reaps his Wheat with his
own Hand, and gathers by his Angels the clusters of the Wicked, to cast Them
into the Wine Press of the Wrath of God; which He coming in his Kingdom Treads;
and Slays, or Condemns with the word of his Mouth All the wicked, Small and
Great; Chains, and Seals up Satan into the Bottomless-pit, the making all his
Enemies his Footstool; while at the same Time there are the Nations of Them
that are saved, viz. of the Living Remaining; And this Kingdom lasts, till the
Living Remaining are caught up to sit with Christ on his Throne; as he sat
Down on His Fathers Throne; and the Devil, the Dead, Death, and Hell are Cast
into the Lake of the Second Death; which is the Subduing the Last Enemy, Death;
at which Heaven and Earth fly away from that white Throne of Pure and Liquid
Eternity, and the Kingdom Delivered up to God All in All, Esaias 26. 19. Mat. 13.
30. Rev. 11. 15. etc. c. 14. 13. to the End, c. 19. c. 20. all along. All which
are Admirable Correspondencies with all the Former Scriptures, and their High
Importance already given. And Thus the Kingdom of Christ is from the First
Resurrection, the First, because at the Beginning of the Kingdom of Christ; and
the Second Death the Second, because at the End of the Kingdom of Christ: For
the First Resurrection has properly no Second, but is All One Resurrection,
from the First Rising of the Dead in Christ to the Living Remaining Saints
caught into the Partakership of it; And the Second Death has no First, but is
All one Death, from the Having no Part in the First Resurrection, in the Holy
City, and no Right to the Tree of Life, to the Casting into the Lake of the
Second Death: So the First Resurrection, and Second Death are only Opposed, As
First, and Second.

Q. Is there Any other Scripture Representation of this State of the Kingdom of
Christ, that may Evidence it to be such a peculiar Dispensation, that has
never yet been, and that shall be yet, before the Giving up the Kingdom to God
All in All?

A. There is that Great One; The Time of the Restitution of All Things, viz. Of
the whole Creation Delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious
Liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8. 21. which is at the same Time with the
Re-Livening (which we Translate Acts 3. 19. Times of Refreshing) the Dead in
Christ; or as the Apostle John, Rev. 20. 4. calls it, the Souls Living, And
This must be what never has yet been; For it must be, when Jesus before
Preached, and whom the Heavens must Receive, till He be Sent; Come; which we
All Acknowledge has not been yet; and yet must be before the Kingdom Delivered
up: For then the Restitution shall be Delivered up also. There is also the New
Jerusalem, which according to the Compare of Ezekiel in the Israelitish
Description of Things proper to the Old Testament, and John's, proper to the New
Testament, Assure, There must be such a State of Things, as never has yet
been; And in Regard of a Higher State, where the Throne of God and the Lamb
are; and Those who Immediately, as being in their presence, Eat of the Tree of
Life, and drink of the Water of Life; and in Regard of the Nations Saved, and
Healed; must be a State above, and below; and so before the Kingdom Delivered
up to God and the Father, when he is All in All.

Q. This being a very Great Point, and so Differently Expounding those
Fundamental Points of the Resurrection, and of the Day of Judgment, as in the
Kingdom of Christ; There need besides the given Proofs of Scripture; which are
generally Explained so, as to Reach no further then the Common Exposition of
these Doctrines; Great Accounts of Scripture Reason drawn from the most
Intimate Sense of it, to Establish such an Exposition?

A. There are Exceeding High Accounts from Scripture-Reason of the Manifold
Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice of God in this Grand Economy, or Dispensation.

Q. Give Account of the First, and Fundamental, and most Immediate Reason of
such a Dispensation?

A. That there might be a State of Visible Appearance of the Glory of Christ,
and of his Saints; and of the Contempt, Dishonor, and Retributions of Justice
on Wicked Men; For that These Things should Appear, be set in open View, in a
Full and Clear Light is every where made Known in Stripture. First as a
Recompense to the Deep Humiliation of Jesus Christ Himself, and to his Saints
who have been all along, but especially since the Delay of his Kingdom at his
Resurrection in a Low, Scorned, and Persecuted State; Tortured by Cruelties,
and Forced out of the World by Violent Deaths; who have therefore from the
Truth of God been Armed, and Encouraged in their Obedience, and against these
Sufferings, by the Assurance of a Visible Appearance in Glory, and Reign with
Christ; and of the Visible Shame, and Confusion of their Enemies, and of all
Wicked and Unholy Men, who have so obstainately preferred the Present before a
Future State, Esaias, 65. 13, 14, and to the End. Mic. 7. 17. and Dan. 12. 1, 2.
Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Heb. 11. 35. with many more Scriptures.

Q. But can there be no Appearance of this Glory, and of that Contempt, but in
such a state of the Kingdom of Christ?

A. No: Not in this World; because however some Appearances may be of these
Things on each side in some Instances: Yet in General All is so in Confusion
and Disorder here, and this is the very Cross-Handed State of Evil to the
Servants of God, and of the Prosperity of Wicked Men, that no Man Knows Love or
Hatred by All that is before him; Not in the State of Spirits in Heaven above,
or in Prison below: For All Scripture Reason makes it most Evident, There can
be no Appearance without a Resurrection; Not in the State of Eternity: For then
God All in All, as the Highest Glory Swallows up the Less; when God is All in
All, The Son is subject; There must be therefore a Distance of the Rainbow
(the Emblem of Christ's Kingdom) from the Sun, that its Beauties may be seen; so
the Glory of Christ in his Humane Nature, and of his Saints in visible Glory,
must be seen at a Distance from God All in All: Not in the Day of Judgment, or
the Resurrection, as a short Transitory Space: For that could be no Kingdom,
nor any Appearance worthy so Great a Cause, that had only a moment; But it must
be a settled Economy, or State of Duration; the Fullness of Times, as it own
proper Times, and not short Time ononly; When the Great Potentate gives a Show,
it shall be of a thousand years Duration: Eccles. 9. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 28. Ephesians.
1. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev. 20. 6.

Q. How may This be also Set in Agreement with the State of the Wicked?

A. Very exactly; For here They very generally appear in Prosperity; And the
State of the Second Death is a State Given, as Removed from all Appearance:
Psalm. 73. all along, Rev. 20. last. So that there must be such a peculiar State
of Appearance under Wrath, according to all Scripture.

Q. Is not This a Curiosity only of Speculation, or of what Practical Force is
it?

A. Surely of very Great; seeing nothing is so suited to moving to Repentance,
and to persuade us to Holiness as this Terror of the Lord, that is so suited to
men Knowing, and understanding Themselves, as here in Bodies: And which is so
written in Nature, that Any Instances of it in this World, either of Gods
Crowning Holy Persons and their Actions with Honor; or his Judgments on wicked
Men made Examples here, do above All other Things exceedingly Affect us, 2 Cor.
5. 10. 11. Psalm. 64. 7. 8. 9. And the Contrary is by Solomon Accounted the
Great Cause of Impenitency. Eccles. 8. 11.

Q. How comes it then to pass, the Resurrection has been no more thus
Explained and pressed?

A. Because the darkness of the Apostasy, and Love of this present World, as
if the Glory of it were Given to Antichrist, as the Vicar of Christ, is that
Word, which the Apostle says, has Eaten as it were a Gangrene; as if the
Resurrection were now already; or as if there were no Resurrection in such a
State of Glory, and of Visible Appearance in contempt, but a sudden Translation
into Eternity with God, or in the Lake, 1 Cor. 15. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 17. 18.

Q. Give Account of a Second Scripture Ground of this Visible Glory, and
Kingdom of Christ, and of the Subjection of his Enemies?

A. Without such a State of the Kingdom of Christ in the Creation restored, or
in a Restitution of All Things, the Redemption of Christ were not Perfect and
Complete; For whatever the First Adam desolated, the Second Adam was to
Restore, and to Bring again into order; There must be therefore a Deliverance
of the Creature from the Bondage of Corruption, and from all their mutual
Enmities; So that the Wolf and the Lamb may dwell together, etc. And on this
very Account There must be a Generation of Saints below, as Adam and his Seed
should have been in Paradise; and the Saints dead in Christ, in a Restored
State in the Heaven above, (which Evil Spirits now Inhabit,) and from thence
They behold the Glory, and Happiness of the Humane nature in the Remaining
Saints here below; and the whole Creation of God, as Renewed and Restored by
the Mediator, and by Him set out in Glory; according to Psalm. 8. which is by
Heb. 2. 5. etc. Applied to the World to come, whereof we speak, and to Jesus
Christ Adoninu or Lord in our Nature, or the Second Adam.

Q. But is there any proof, that this State of Restitution pertains not only to
the Glory, but to the essential perfection of the Redemption?

A. I Account the Apostle has given us the proof of this in the Resurrection,
the greatest Instance of the Restitution; So that by a Parallel with that, the
whole Restitution will be proved also to pertain to the essential Perfection of
this Redemption.

Q. What is that proof?

A. It is 1 Cor. 15. 12. and so forward.

Q. How do you draw out the proof of what you are upon, according to that
Scripture?

A. In these Four Things.

1. That whatever Adam lost, and whatever was a Part of the Death, Threatened
upon Adam's Fall, must be Restored by the Second Adam, the Mediator. For so
says the Apostle, v. 21. 22. and he Brings it in by way of Argument; For since
by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead; And as in
Adam All Dye, so in Christ shall All be made Alive: By Agreement of Reason,
since by Man came the Curse on the Creation of God, by Man came also the
Restitution, and if there be Argument in one, It must be also in the other.

2. A Future State of Happy Spirits, might be supposed. without a Resurrection,
as well as a State of Spirits in misery without a Resurrection; Now the Apostle
supposes a State of Spirits in Misery, though there be no Resurrection of the
Dead. For Those words; v. 17. You are yet in your Sins, suppose a State of
Future Misery of Spirits without a Resurrection; Therefore There might be a
State of Christ in the Glory of Spirits, and so of his Saints, though no
Resurrection; But this according to the Apostle's Argument will not suffice the
very essential perfection of the Redemption without a Resurrection;
Proportionably the Curse upon the Creation, being a part of Adam's Death, as
appears, Genesis 3. 18. 19. That must be taken off, as necessary to the essential
Perfection of the Redemption; And a Happy State of Eternity in a dissolved
Creation, can no more suffice, then a Happy State of Spirits without a
Resurrection.

3. The Unjust Arise, and are yet in Their Sins, for They Rise to Condemnation;
So that a Resurrection without a State of this Restitution, wherein that
Resurrection shall be Happy, is a Death, and not a Resurrection in general
Scripture Account; Therefore Resurrection is to Glory all along this Chapter.

4. To the Completing of this parallel betwixt the First Adam's death, and the
Second Adams Life; There must be a We of Saints, who shall not dye, but be
Changed, making up the All, the Full number of Saints, viz. Those who are Dead
in Christ, and Those who are Changed; For in the State of Restitution; There
can be no Death to the Seed of the Second Adam: And if It be in this World, It
must be a World in a State of Restitution. And because such a State on Earth
had been, if Adam had not sinned, It must be now by the Second Adam.

Q. Is there yet any Further Account of the Kingdom of Christ from Scripture
Reason?

A. There is yet the Highest Scripture Reason for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ;
that is, that His Saints may be Fitted to be delivered up, with the Kingdom to
God, and to the Father, that He may be All in All; which is the ultimate End,
and Last Result of All Things; The Apostle therefore discourses of the Kingdom
of Christ, as in an Immediate Conjunction with, and Subordination to that
Eternal Kingdom of the Father, God All in All. 1 Cor. 15. 28.

Q. Why do you call this the Highest Scripture Account of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ?

A. Because, That which is the Highest, and last means to the Highest and Last
End (which Highest and Last end, gives value and Reason to All means) Receives
the Highest Reason, and the most Absolute necessity for it self from that Last
End; now It is most evident, and certain from the Apostles discourse, The
Kingdom of Christ is the Highest, and Last means to the Last, and Highest End;
It is the Highest, because It Alone is thought worthy to Touch, and Attain that
End, And It is the Last; because no other comes between it, and that End; For
when in this Kingdom Christ has Fully declared God's Name to the Saints, and
put down all Rule Authority, and Power in order to God's being All in All; Then
in the Highest, and last Act of Subduing, or Casting Death and Hell into the
Lake, and also in the Highest Act of declaring the Name of God, It delivers up
it self, and is subject, that God may be All in All. John 17. 26. 1 Cor. 15.
28. 54. etc. Revel. 20. last.

Q. If the Kingdom delivered up to God and the Father, be the Last End, It must
be an End before all Economy, or Dispensation of means, For the End must be
before all means; How do you state this?

A. It must needs be so, even before Creation it self, and therefore we Read so
often of the Purpose of God before, or from the Foundation of the World, Ephesians.
1. c. 3. And It Contain these Two Things, as not of Free Dispensation, but of
Absolute necessity.

1. That the Eternal Rest of All Created Beings, can be only in Union to the
Father, the Word, the Spirit, who are One, and who Inhabit Eternity; Creatures
therefore below being capable of this Union, as All, which have not
Understanding, are Annihilated; And Creatures of Understanding, Angels and Men
can be no other, then miserable in the loss of this Union; Hell therefore the
lowest Lake, lies in departing from God. Mat. 25. 45. 46.

2. The Eternal Union, if there be such an Union, (which is of Free Grace only)
can be only by God to God, and so must be by the Eternal word, through the
Eternal Spirit to the Father: Now among All the Varieties of Dispensations,
wherein These Grand Ends, which upon the supposition of Creatures Eternally
Happy are Absolutely necessary, are brought to pass by Infinite Wisdom, and
Power, The Kingdom of Christ is Supreme in the order of means, or
Dispensations, as is evident in that, It is the Last, and so Supreme.

Q. If the Kingdom of Christ be the Supreme Dispensation, and means, It must
then be in the Eye of God, before any other Means or Dispensation; And if
Creation be but Dispensation in order to the Supreme End of God, being All in
All; the Kingdom of Christ must be in the Eye of God before Creation it self,
either of Angels or Men?

A. And so the Scripture always Represents it; The Lamb had the Book of Life
for his Kingdom before the Foundation of the World, and His Purpose in Christ
is an Eternal Purpose; And Angels and Men, even All Things were Created by Him
and for Him, and by Him They Consist. Ephesians. 3. 11. Col. 1. 15. to 21.

Q. But are not These Things to be understood of Christ, as He is the Eternal
Word, and not as in our Nature?

A. They are All proper to the Eternal Word, not by way of Free Dispensation,
but Absolutely, and Eternally; and to the Eternal word in our Nature, by way of
Free Divine Dispensation in order to the union of all Created Beings of
Understanding to God All in All.

Q. Wherein then stands this Dispensation?

A. In that, the Eternal word far above Angels, Principalities, Powers Became
lower then the Angels, by Becoming Man; and so Comprehended the whole Created
Intellectual Nature, that he might be the Head of the whole in their Union to
God; And that in Him, They might All be Reconciled to God with the whole
Inferior Creation; (which Having served the Glory of the Creator by Jesus
Christ, They Fly back into their Former State of Nothing in themselves, but
indeed are Returned into the Divine Immensity,) and Angels and Men be United to
God for ever, Ephesians. 1. 10. Col. 1. 20.

Q. What need could the Angels, who never sinned, have of a Mediator, by whom
They should be United to God, or what Sign is there in Scripture of any such
thing?

A. In that even Purest Created Nature is not Clean in his sight; that is,
Compared with the Infinite Holiness of God, and that there is Folly in it; The
Angels, that Stand, Stand by their Election, and Cover their Faces before God,
and Christ, in an Humble, Thankful, and Reverential Acknowledgment hereof;
Learn by the Church the Great Mysteries of the Gospel, Adore and Worship the
First Begotten, Coming into his Great World to Come, and Converse in
Innumerable Companies with his Saints above, and below in his Kingdom, even as
they Serve, as Ministering Spirits now for the Heirs of that Kingdom, Job. 4.
18. c. 15. 15. 1 Timothy 5. 21. Isa. 6 2. Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12.

Q. How did Christ Appear in this Dispensation for Man before his Fall?

A. If God Charges even the Holy Angels with Folly, so that the Heavens were
not Clean in his Sight; How much less Men, whose Houses are of Clay, and whose
Foundation is in the Dust? There must be therefore a prospect in the Divine Eye
of their State in a Mediator, and as in Glorious Bodies, Job 4. 19. Phil. 3. 21.

Q. What Types, or Fore-Appearances were there hereof?

A. Adam Himself, as Comprehending Humane Nature in his State of Holiness, and
Blessedness, even before his Fall was, but a Type of Him, that was to Come, and
who did indeed so Comprehend all his Seed. The First Sabbath was but a Type of
the Great Sabbatism of the Second Adam, that Remains to the People of God in
the World to Come; For This Sabbatism then Remained; Although the Works were
Finished from the Foundation of the World; and That Paradise was but a Type of
the Paradise of God, Romans 5. 14. Heb. 4. 3, 4. Rev. 2. 7.

Q. But how does the State of the Kingdom of Christ Agree with the Redemption
of Fallen Man by Christ?

A. Admirably it Agrees, and in a much Fuller and Clearer View; For His Saints,
as in Highest Representation of his Redemption are every single Person, in
Robes washed white in his Blood; They are Priests of God, and of Christ, as to
their Justified State; And as to their Sanctification, the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb, are in the midst of Them, They see his Face, as his Servants they
serve Him, His Name is in their Foreheads: They are, as the Pillars of his
Temple, and Go out no more from Him; And there can in no wise Enter into that
State Any Thing that defiles, so that every one must be Holy. As to their
Happiness, and Glory, They Reign with Christ for ever; Thus in the particulars;
Consider them together as in the General Assembly, and Church of the First born
written in Heaven; And so They are the New Jerusalem, the Bride or Lambs wife,
to whom It is Given in Regard of Justification to be Clothed with Linen,
White, and Clean, which is the Righteousness of the Saints; As to Holiness, It
is Clear, as a most Precious Jasper, and Walled High, and Guarded by Watch of
Angels from all Defilement; As to Happiness and Eternal security; The Lord God,
and the Lamb are the Light thereof, and the Glory of God Enlightens it, that it
can see in no other Light; God and the Lamb are the Temple of it, that cannot
be defiled; The City has the Tree of Life, Bearing Twelve several kinds of
Fruit, viz. an universality and perfection of Life; and a River of Life, Clear
as Crystal, Proceeding from the Throne. Heb. 12. 25. Rev. c. 20. c. 21. c. 22.

Q. But how does so Great a State, and the so High Expressions of it, work as
to the Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All, and to Christ as the Bond
of union?

A. These Two ways, First, That the State of Delivery up of the Kingdom to God
All in All, cannot be better expounded to us, then in those so divine words of
our Lord in his Mediatory Prayer. John 17. 21. That They All may be one, as
Thou Father art in me, And I in Thee, That They also may be one in us, that the
World may Believe, that Thou have sent me; And the Glory which Thou gave me,
Have I given Them, that They may be one as we are one; I in Them, and Thou in
me, That they may be made perfect in one, and that the World may Believe, that
Thou have sent me, and have loved Them, as Thou have loved me; Father, I will
that Those which Thou have given me, may be with me, where I am, and may Behold
my Glory, which Thou have given me; For Thou loved'st me before the Foundation
of the World; Oh! Righteous Father, The World has not known Thee, But I have
known Thee; And These have known that Thou have sent me; And I have declared to
them Thy Name and will declare it, that the Love wherewith Thou have loved me,
may be in Them, and I in Them.

Q What Arises from these words to our present purpose?

A. First, That so High Expressions can fit no State, but of God All in All,
even as He was before the Foundation of the World All in All; and to which
State, Our Lord's words so much Refer; when All the Saints are thus one with
God in Christ, then is He thus All in All, as before the World began. Secondly,
That as this State Requires the Highest Purification; of which the Purification
of the Virgins, for the Royal Bed of Ahasuerus is but a dark Emblem; so no
Expressions of such a preparatory Purification, but as before Represented in
the New Jerusalem, and Kingdom of Christ, can be parallel to such a
Purification; But They Reach it, and Admirably Reach it; The present State of
Sanctification is much too Low for it; The Purity of the Bride, the Lambs Wife,
and of the Saints in this Kingdom Rises to it. Thirdly, All this Preparation,
and this Eternal Union is in the Eternal word, who was with the Father, and One
with him, and whom the Father loved before the Foundation of the World; And He
thus prepares his Saints not only in this State, (though here also) but in his
Kingdom most Highly, Completely, Perfectly, and therefore especially. John 17.
24. 26.

Q. Give me the second way, how so Great a State, and so High Expressions of it
work, to the Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All?

A. In that, although this Kingdom of Christ be so Holy, so Heavenly, so Pure,
so much of God in it, and so Happy, and Blessed in Christ, and in his Saints;
yet because It is the Kingdom of the Man Christ Jesus, and of his Saints in a
visible Created Glory, and not the Highest Union to God All in All, Christ
Gives this Last Declaration of the Name, that is of the Nature, and Glory of
God; He freely Delivers up this his Kingdom, and the Son, as in humane Nature,
suffers most willingly that Glory of Himself, and of his Saints, to be
Swallowed up by God All in All, and unites them with Himself to the Father, as
He is the Eternal word; and so They are with Him for ever, Beholding the Glory
He had with the Father, before the World was; which is the Highest Instance of
self-denial of all Created Glory, and Giving up All to God All in All, that
could be given. John 17. 5.

Q. What Signs are there of such a Preparation in the Kingdom of Christ for God
All in All?

A. In Token of this, this State is called a Sabbatism, a Paradise; There is a
Tree of Life, and a River of Life; All which Point to the Higher Perfection of
Union with God All in All, then was even in that Kingdom of Christ; Even as
Priesthood, and a Temple-State do; For though God, and the Lamb be the Temple;
Yet God being our Temple, is not so High, as our Union to God All in All.

Q. How does the State of the wicked Agree with this so High State of the
Kingdom of Christ in preparation to their being cast into the Lake, when God is
All in All?

A. Their being in a Visible State, and beholding the Glory of Christ, and of
his Saints in a Visible State, gives them that Conviction; that the Father sent
Christ, that He Loved the Saints, as He Loved Christ, that They are Forced to
Know and to Believe it; For this They could not see here, but would be Highly
persuaded of the Contrary; And when the Saints are Delivered up to God All in
All, and They in the Lake; It is not then to be seen by Them; In this Kingdom,
then It must be seen; And yet in this very State, they being Irreconcilable to
the Divine Kingdom; They are even with the Comfort of the Saints, Beholding
their Abhorred State, and way, Cast into the Lake, that They might be no more
Annoyance to the Divine Kingdom, but at an utter Separation from it, Remembered
no more, cut off for ever from the Hand of God in a Land of Silence,
Forgetfulness, and Utter Darkness, Ezekiel. 14. 22. Rev. 20. last.

Q. But how are the Saints below Fitted then for this State of being Delivered
up to God All in All?

A. They having their part in all the Privileges of the Saints above, and
being Caught up to Christ before the Delivery up of the Kingdom, are thereby
fitted to be Delivered up with All Saints, and to be united to God All in All.

Q. But seeing the Saints of Christ have been also All Sinners, and many of
Them very Great Sinners, and some not brought home to Christ till Death;
Whereas many of the Lost have been of Fair and Innocent Lives; how can such a
difference in this Visible State of the Resurrection, consist with the Glory of
Justice, then to be manifested?

A. The Infinite Richness of Grace having made in All the Saints, the Great
difference of Union to Christ, in the Glory of whose Righteousness They Appear,
and thereby in the Participation of the Divine Nature, Their Sins are so
Blotted out through the Blood of the Lamb, in this State of Re-enlivening, as
though, They are sought for, They cannot be found; And even the Works of the
Few Moments of Holy Action, as of Converts, how near Death soever Follow Them,
and are so enlarged by the Obedience of Christ, the Linen white and clean,
which is the Righteousness of the Saints, that It Invests Them; All which makes
the difference betwixt the Saints, and the Reprobate Inconceivable; For the
Talents, that the Reprobate might have here by General Grace to Adorn Them, are
Taken from them, and All their Sins find them out, and are as the Garment that
covers them, and the Girdle, wherewith They are Girded continually; Allowing
yet the differences of Punishment betwixt the more, and less Malicious Sinners.
Jerem. 50. 20. Luke 23. 40. etc. Mat. 25. 28.

Q. But the Kingdom of Christ seems a State of Purgation for that last State of
Delivering up the Kingdom to God All in All; Why may not therefore some, that
have not Repented here, Find place in that State for Repentance, especially
when some are Converts so near Death; and so many dye Infants, and are Saved,
who had no space of serving God in this World?

A. In the deep, and wise dispose of God (besides that Standard of Glorifying
God here on Earth,) the Spirits unreconciled to God in Christ, and unsanctified
in the very moment, wherein They leave the Body, become Devilish, James 3. 15.
and so can be no more changed after, then Devils; and the Bodies being laid
down without any Seeds of the Divine Life, not the Temples of the Holy Spirit,
are Taken up in the very same State, and can never be changed, because the
Spirit to Inhabit them, cannot: And so thus as the Spirits of Holy Men, are
Pledges of Happiness to the whole Man, so the Spirits of Unholy Men in Prison
are Hostages for the whole man to Justice under Wrath; and hereby there is in
each order of Spirits, having in themselves a sense of their Future Condition,
a Preparation for the Kingdom of Christ in Glory, or in Dishonor; For thus
there is no discontinuance in the Sense, and Knowledge, Each have in the
Reasons of the Future State, as there would be if the Spirits of Men, st^pt in
the dust, as their Bodies do, till the Resurrection and that Visible Appearance
in the Judgment and Kingdom of Christ; But They are Spirits in Prison, or with
Christ. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Philip. 1. 23.

Q. But there seems to be some Greater Refinement of Saints, in the Kingdom of
Christ for Union to God All in All?

A. The Spirits of Saints having been with Christ from their Leaving the Body,
and in the very beginning of the Kingdom of Christ, the whole Just Men, not
Spirits, made perfect.
Man being made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. They are for 1000 years Confirmed in that
most perfect State, and with Angels They Behold in this Great Economy, the
utmost God is pleased to have seen in a Created State, in order to Union with
God All in All, and so are Delivered up with the Kingdom; the Just Contrary to
which is in every particular to Wicked Men for their being Cast into the Lake.

Q. Has not the Eternal Word in Humane Nature a Kingdom throughout Eternity?

A. The Eternal Word in Humane Nature has a Kingdom throughout Eternity; but
not as the Son of Man, but as the Eternal Word; The Glory in which then Christ
is seen by his Saints, being the Glory he had with the Father before the World
Began, of the same Nature wherein He is now at the Right Hand of God, till He
appears; and the Union in that Eternal State is by God to God, by the Word to
the Father; so the Son as Man is Subject and God All in All, John 17. 5, 24.

Q. Is God excluded in the Kingdom of the Son?

A. No; He is Excepted, says the Apostle, who put All Things under Christ; The
Throne of God, even as of the Lamb is in the New Jerusalem, It is Gods Kingdom;
He Appoints sitting at the Right and Left Hand of Christ; But the Divinity
pleases so to Oeconomize its own Glory, that the Son may be seen to Reign in
Glory, 1 Cor. 15. 27. Revel. 22. 3. Mat. 20, 23. Phil. 2. 11.

Q. But it seems by the High Expression of God, who is purest Spirit, being All
in All; and by the Lake of the Second Death, and even the New Heaven, and New
Earth after the 1000 Years Flying away, Revel. 20. 11. there is no Bodily or
Material Nature Continued, no not of the Son's Glorious Body, who is then
Subject, nor of his Saints?

A. Scripture having Declared no such Thing, No such Thing can be suppos*d, but
that Christ and his Saints shall be in Bodies; But it is certain; There shall
be Highest Spirituality in Conformity to the Divine Nature, that He may be All
in All, and in Union to Christ, most Spiritual Bodies; Even as in the Lake, All
the Damned become Spiritual Wickednesses to the Highest Degree; All which
Confirms the Nature, and State of the Resurrection to stand in Visibility, and
Appearance for the thousand Years. Phil. 3. 21. Ephesians. 6. 12.

Q. What kind of State must that be of the Beast, and of the False Prophet, who
are Cast Living into the Lake, even before, the Devil, the Dead, Death, and
Hell are Cast into it? Rev. 19. 20. c. 20. 10. etc.

A. The finding out the meaning of that State is the more necessary, because it
will much clear that Last Issue, or Casting of the Devil, Death, and Hell, into
the Lake: 1. The Casting into the Lake therefore signifies Final, and most
utter Cessation of Action; so that the Casting the Beast, and the False Prophet
into the Lake Imports to us, that the Antichristian State, of which the Beast,
and the False Prophet were the Supreme Constituents, or Parts, being the
Counterfeit, and Undermine of the True Kingdom of Christ, shall, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 These. 2.8. be utterly Consumed, and Abolished by it. 2. In that it is
a Lake Burning with Fire and Brimstone; It speaks severest Punishment, and
Torment by the True Kingdom of Christ shining upon the Beast, and False
Prophet, and as it were in their very Faces. 3. In that the Beast, and the
False Prophet are Cast Alive into the Lake; It Declares; that the Full
Abolition of the Antichristian Kingdom shall be in the very Beginning of the
Kingdom of Christ; and that the Punishment of the Antichristian Kingdom as the
Counterfeit, and Undermine of the Kingdom of Christ shall be the most
Conspicuous, and Illustrious of all the Punishing Part of Christ's Kingdom; So
that All other Enemies of Christ's Kingdom shall be only as Dead Men, Slain with
the Sword of Christ's Mouth, in Comparison; But the Severity upon the
Antichristian Kingdom shall be like Burning Alive, as it were in Just
Recompense of their Vivi-Comburia, or Burning Those Servants of Christ They
called Heretics, Alive; upon the Beast his False Prophet, and all their
Worshippers, and their Babylon; And the Smoke of their Torment Ascends for
ever and ever; and Wicked Men have their part first, but are not cast till the
very End into the Lake. Rev. 19. 3. 21. c. 21. 8.

Q. How is This to be Applied to the Casting the Devil, Hell, and Death, with
all their Dead into the Lake, just before Christ Delivers up the Kingdom?

A. Hence it Appears, That the Action of the Devil in Deceiving is only Chained
up, but not utterly Abolished in the thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: For He
is Loosed out of Prison for a Little Space after the Thousand Years, and He
Deceives the Nations again; But Fire comes down suddenly from Heaven on those
Nations in the very Attempt; and then an utter end is put to Satan's whole
Action; For He is Cast into the Lake, and so notwithstanding the Victory over
Death in the First Resurrection of Dead Saints, and the Living Remaining Saints
not Dying, but being Changed; Yet till They are all Actually Changed, so that
Mortality or Possibility of Dying Puts on Immortality, and Corruption puts
Incorruption, and so Mortality is swallowed up of Life in the Living Remaining
Saints Caught up, even as in the Dead in Christ Rising first, who cannot Dye
any more, being in perfect Immortality, Luc. 20. 36. Death and Hell, with all
their own Subjects, the Dead are not Cast into the Lake, so as to be utterly
Abolished from any possible place in the Kingdom of God. Then They are; and
when this Last Enemy Death is thus subdued, Christ (...) Then, so Long after
his First Beginning to Reign, Delivers up the Kingdom, having Done all to be
Done, as the Second Adam, and God is All in All: But still and for ever, even
Eternally, That Lake Burns with Fire and Brimstone; For the Kingdom of Life
shines in the Face of it with Everlasting Torment while it is not yet able to
Return one of its Sulphur Steams in Revenge, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 55, 56. Revel. 20.
10. to the end. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

Q. Have we any Accounts of Time kept in Scripture from the First Creation to
the Times of Restitution, or of the Kingdom of Christ?

A. There has been for the sake of it kept a Constant Account of Time, from
one Point to the other.

Q. What Reason have you to think so?

A. Because as the First Coming of Christ in the Flesh is said to be in the
Fullness of Time, viz. of that Time; Because it was in be in the Fullness of
Time, viz. of that Time; Because it was in the Just Time according to Daniels
seventy Weeks and according to the Agreement of all Christians; So this Time of
the Heading of All Things under Christ in his Kingdom, is called the Fullness,
not of Time, as of one Time, but of Times as of all Times, Issuing according to
Just Account into it: And further it is called the Economy, or the wise Order
of All Times in Relation to it by the Supreme, and wise Pater-Familias, or
Governor of the World; who as the Great Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords Giving the whole Family of Angels, and Men a Show of and for his Glory,
would have it at this Fullness of Times, for a Thousand Years; and These are
called Gods, or Christ's Proper Times, and the Times of Refreshment, and the
Times of Restitution, as in the Just Place of that Time: All which speaks, that
there was a Strict Calculation of Time for it, and to it; Gal. 4. 4. Ephesians. 1.
10. Acts 3. 21. 1 Timothy 6. 15.

Q. Where is This Account of Time to be Found?

A. It is to be found all along Holy Scripture in this manner; In the First
Roll of Patriarchs from the Creation to Shem, the Head of the New World after
the Flood, 1658 years. Genesis 5. c. 11. 10.

From Shem to Abraham, Receiving the Promises by the Second Roll of Patriarchs,
425 Y. Genesis 11. to c. 12.

From thence to the Going out of Egypt, immediately before the Tabernacle of
Testimony set up, 430 Y. Exodus 12. 40. c. 40.

From thence to Solomon's Temple, Begun in his Fourth Year, and so to his
Death, 516 Y. 1 Kings c. 6. 1. c. 11. 42.

From thence to Ezekiel's Divine Temple and City, drawn by his Bearing the Sin
of Israel, divided from Judah so many Days for Years, according to the Reign of
Israel's Kings, to their Captivity, and then by the Kings of Judah, to 14 years
after the City Jerusalem smitten, and the Temple Burnt, 390 Y. Ezekiel. c. 4. 4.
5. c. 40. 1. etc.

From thence to the End of Judah's Captivity, drawn by the Forty days for Years
of Ezekiel, Bearing the Sin of Judah, as from that vision of the City and
Temple, to Cyrus his First year, 40 Y. Ezekiel. c. 4. 4. 5. c 40. 1. Ezra 1. 1.

From thence by the Sanctuary, that then lay Trodden under Foot to the
Sanctuary of the Universal Church Cleans'd; drawn in the 2300 Evens. Morns.
according to the Prophetical Cipher before named, and established for after
Times of a Day for a Year, 2300 Y. Dan. 8. 13. 14.

Q. Can we know whereabout we are in nearness to the Kingdom of Christ, by so
long a Line of Time?

A. If we would be diligent in Searching, and Comparing Scripture, we might
find this Line divided into 75 Years before Daniel's 70 Weeks began, for the
Word going forth to Restore, and Build Jerusalem; Into 490 by those 70 Weeks,
for the Death and Resurrection of Messiah, and the first Apostolical Preaching
to the Jews; Into 1260 of the Roman Papal Apostasy; Into 30 and 45. after that
Apostasy, making first the 1260 1290, then the 1290 1335. The first 75 in
preparation to the Litteral Jerusalem, and Temple Restored after Litteral
Babylon falling, and the last 75 preparing to the New Jerusalem, after Mystical
Babylon falling, exactly Answer One after Another; and by all these Sums laid
together, we certainly know There must be 400 between the Weeks ended, and that
Apostasy began: From whence It Follows, we must be in the 2218 Even. Morn.
just 7 Years before the Fall of Mystical Babylon, Dan. 9. 24. c. 12. 11. 12.

Q. Is there any other way of knowing the Time?

A. There is, even plainly Running into ordinary Observation; For there are
Time, Times, Half a Time, plainly given to the Beast, the last Part of the
Roman Fourth Monarchy in Daniel, c. 7. 25. and Sworn to Him for Scattering the
Holy People, c. 12. 7. and the Church is Accordingly said to be in the
Wilderness for those Times, in the Revelation; Rev. 12. 14. Now at the
Reformation, There was such a Retrenchment of the Papal Power, as could not be
till the Morning of the Half Time,, with the Truth of Prophecy; Then there
might, even as Christ might Rise at the Morning of the Third day, though
according to Prophecy, He was to be Three days and Three nights in the Heart of
the Earth: The Reformation therefore Beginning at 1517, by Luther, as all
Agree, and the Half Time being an 180 Years, as being the Half of 360 a Time;
It must needs be There can be but 7 Years to the End of the 1260, and so to the
Kingdom of Christ, preparing to Cleanse his Sanctuary, for his Kingdom 1772; So
we must be in the 2218 Even. Morn.

Q. Why then did not the Papacy wholly Fall at the Reformation?

A. That there might be as punctual a performance of the Full Time of the Three
Times, and a Half to the Papacy, as could consist with the Kingdom of Christ,
to which some Appearance was at that Time due.

Q. Can the Reformation then be perfect?

A. No, For the Thunders that opened to it, were Sealed; and There are They of
the Synagogue of Satan, that stay the Glory of it, till the Philadelphian
State come; And then even They shall worship at Philadelphia's Feet, Rev. 3. 9.
c. 10. 4.

Q. When shall that be?

A. At the very same Time, when the Popacy falls; For They of the Synagogue
stand by that Title, and then Bow; For Christ makes them by Grace so to
Worship, that is, to Bow.

Q. How can such a Computation consist with No One Knowing of that Day and
Hour, not the Angels, nor the Son, but the Father only Mark 13. 32.

A. God is said therefore, as on purpose to Give the Revelation to Jesus
Christ, to show to his Servants, what before was only in the Father's
Cognizance; And then Blessed is He that Reads, or Expounds, and They who Hear
or understand what is so Revealed by God to Christ. Revel. 1. 1. 3.

Q. But Christ further says, Watch, for you Know not the Day nor the Hour when
your Lord comes? Mark 13. 35.

A. That Watch is a Spiritual Watch, without which, though a Man Knew the day, or
Hour never so precisely, Yet He would not Know the day, and Hour of his Lords
coming, but It would be to Him, as of a Theif in the Night; and as a man dics
in that Watch, or the neglect of it; So Christ comes upon Him, though many
Hundred Years after Death; if It were not such a Watch, the Apostle had
discharged the Thessalonians of it, by Adjuring them not to expect the day of
Christ, till after the Apostasy; and in Them all Christians after, till that
Apostasy expire. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1.

Q. Are the Thousand Years of Christ's Kingdom, Literally, or Mystically to be
understood?

A. They are both ways to be understood, Literally, Adding so many Years to
the Time Allotted to the Visible Creation, till All be Delivered up to God
Himself; Mystically, as a Thousand Years are a Cube of Time, signifying the
perfection of Time, which none of the Patriarchs after Adams Fall could Attain,
how near soever They came to it. Genesis 5.

Q. Is it no Impeachment to the Kingdom of Christ never ending, that Satan is
loosed at the end of the 1000 Years, and Deceives the Nations to a new Attempt?

A. No, For It only gives Just occasion to Christ, to magnify his Power,
Judiciary Authority, Justice, and the Final Putting down All Rule and Power,
and Subduing the Last Enemies, the Devil, the Dead, and Death, and Hell; And
having Quickly drawn up all the Living Saints to his Own. Throne first,
according to 1 Cor. 15. 24. 51. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Rev. c. 3. 21. Rev. 20. and so
Giving up the Kingdom, every way perfectly prepared to God All in All, the
Glory of having Faithfully managed, and happily Atcheiv'd All Things is for
ever due to Him. John 17. 24.

Q. Are the Worship, and Ordinances of the New Testament any way Prefigurative
of this Kingdom of Christ?

A. Very Fully, For the Gospel is the Gospel, and word of this Kingdom; The
Prayer, we style The Lords Prayer, is the Prayer of this Kingdom Taught to all
his Disciples; The Lords Day is the Type, and Pledge of that Sabbatism; Baptism
is the Figure of being Saved, 1 Pet. 3. 21. from that Deluge of Fire; The Lords
Supper, is the showing forth his Death till He Come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Then that
Passover is fullfill'd, and that Fruit of the Vine drunk New, Luc. 22. 16. 18.
Nor can any of the Old Testament Types, Prophecies, and Promises be Fully Drawn
out, but in that Kingdom, and Appearance; So that in Sum it is the Everlasting
Gospel, God has always been Gospelizing throughout the Old, and New Testament,
Rev. 10. 7.

Q. But if These Truths are of this Great Weight, Can the Churches of the
Saints be so unacquainted with Them?

A. Even, as the Jewish Saints, and the very Apostles were Ignorant of the
Sacrifice, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession of Christ, so Fundamental
Points; till the Pouring down the Spirit for Preaching the Gospel then; Even
so, and much more may the Saints of Gospel Times, even now, till the Second
Pouring down the Spirit for the Preaching the Everlasting Gospel be, and have
been Ignorant of the Full Dimensions of the Redemption of Christ Fulfilled in
his Kingdom; of the Glory of that Economy to the Highest Glory of God the
Father in his Creation and Love of Man; of the Resurrection, as such a visible
Appearance of the Just and Unjust for a Thousand Years, the Dead in Christ
Rising first; Of the Mystery of the Saints Remaining, and Living on Earth,
making up the Full Number of all Saints, and not Dying but being Changed; of
the necessity, according to this Economy of the Infinitely Holy and Wise
Being, of such a Preparation for the Saints, as Priests of God and Christ a
Thousand Years, to be United to God All in All: And notwithstanding this
Ignorance, They may be True Churches of Saints; but the nearer the Time
Approaches, the Slowness of Heart to Know, and Believe these Things, will Argue
a greater Lukewarmness for the Kingdom, Glory, and Coming of Christ, and It
has been all along a dark Shade of the Apostasy upon the Churches.

Q. What Spirit are we then to be of, with Relation to the coming of Christ in
this his Kingdom?

A. Of the Vehement, and even Passionate Spirit of the Bride, which says, Come;
Make have my beloved to the Mountain of Spices, Anointed for thy Kingdom with
that Precious Ointment (that Antichrist now Counterfeits to his Death) as the
Great Prince Messiah, the Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, and
thy Saints, as Kings, and Priests with Thee in that Great Day of thy Nuptials
in thy Kingdom: Rev. 22. 17. Cantic. 8. 14. Exodus 30. 33. Psalm. 110. 4. Rev.
20. 2.

Q. You seem to have forgotten this Marriage, so great an Emblem of the
Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ in Scripture?

A. I Reserved it as the Best Wine for the Last; For it is indeed most often so
made use of in Holy Writing; by Solomon in that most Prophetic, Nuptial Song
of his, of the Kingdom: by Esaias. c. 62. 5. by Christ often; and He makes his
Coming to be on purpose ((...)) [ for] the sake of the Wedding, and not as we
Translate, [ from] it, Luc. 12. 36. By the Apostle Paul Calling it (as the
Kingdom is Called) Mystery, Ephesians. 5. 25. 32. By the Apostle John in the
Prophecy of the Kingdom just Appearing, Rev. 19. 7. c. 21. 2. c. 22. 17. And it
Carries Great Argument and Instruciton.

Q. What is the Argument?

A. That the Kingdom, which is this Wedding every where in Scripture, is not
yet; For the Bridegroom is now Taken from us, as Christ Foretold, He would be,
Luc 5. 35. Nor can it be at the Kingdom Delivered up; For the Second Adam (of
which the First Adam's, and Eves Marriage was the Type) who is the Bridegroom,
is then the Bridegroom no longer; But He Unites Himself with the Bride to the
Father All in All: John 17. 21. etc.

Q. What is the Instruction?

A. In Three Things. 1. That even the Wise Virgins not Bearing this New Wine in
their Old Bottles, slumber, even as the Foolish, though with Oil in their
Vessels, Grace in their Hearts which the Foolish not Having, were shut out,
Mat. 25. 1. etc. And 2. That we ought to be in Fasting and Sackcloth, as the
Children of the Bride-chamber, all these Days of the Bridegrooms being Taken
from us, Luc 5. 35. 3. That we should Hearing with an Ear to Hear and Thirsting
most Affectionately to the Bridegrooms Saying; Behold I come Quickly; Resound,
Even so come Lord Jesus; That He may say to us in Grace; Come Then Also, and
with me Drink the Water of Life Freely; And that we may do Thus; The Grace of
the Lord Jesus be with us All. Amen. Rev. 22. 17. to the End.

FINIS.

