Ludlow no Liar, Or a Detection of Dr. HOLLINGWORTH'S Disingenuity IN HIS
Second DEFENSE OF King Charles I. AND A further Vindication of the Parliament
of the 3 d of November. 1640.

With Exact Copies of the Pope's Letter to K. Charles the First, and of his
Answer to the Pope.

In a Letter from General Ludlow, to Dr Hollingworth.

TOGETHER With a Reply to the false and malicious Assertions in the Doctor's
lewd P^mphlet, Entitled His Defense of the King's Holy Divine BOOK, against
the rude and undutiful Assaults of the late Dr. Walker of Essex.

AMSTERDAM, Printed 1692.

To Mr. Luke Milbourn Minister of Great-Yarmouth, and Assistant to Dr.
Hollingworth in his mighty Undertakings.
SIR,
I Must Confess, that when the Act of Parliament Enjoined the Clergy to take an
Oath of Fidelity to our unquestionably Lawful Sovereigns, Their Sacred
Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY; my self and your other Fellow-bowlers
upon Yarmouth-Green, were under a Jealousy, that you would, by refusal of that
Oath, have spoiled the old Proverb, and parted the honest Man from the good
Bowler; but seeing that the Biass of your Interest wrought your Conscience to
Compliance in that point, it has been an amazement to your Friends, that you
having left us near a Year since, with promise to come back within a very few
weeks, any such Rub could come in your way, as to stop your return to us; and
that we never received any Letter from you, nor knew how to direct to you, till
now; that yours which I received this day Sennight tells us, that you have
constantly Lodged at Dr. Hollingworth's, and had been engaged with him in a
business of a Close and Comfortable Importance, of which we should be farther
informed by the return of our next Carrier; Now we all remembered that
Comfortable Importance, according to your Admired Dr. Sam. Parker's refined way
of expressing it, meant a Mistress; but when we do daily see here, your
virtuous and well-deserving Wife, and hopeful Children, we were utterly at a
loss how to understand you, till the Carrier brought us this last Tuesday, the
Two Books, Entitled, Dr. Hollingworth's Defense of King Charles the First
against Ludlow, and of his Holy and Divine Book against Dr. Walker 's rude and
undutiful Assaults; to the Compileing whereof, you say you had not a little
Contributed.

In truth (Sr,) till now, at some times I suspected that you had repented (as
other frail Clergymen have done before you) of the only good Deed you ever
did, I mean your having Sworn to their Majesty's, and had unsworn your Oath,
and were Caballing with your endeared Friends, the Iacobites; At other times it
ran in my head, that you and the Dr. having been long in most inward
Conversation with them, you had redintigrated your selves, and insinuated into
those your old Associates, the present Plotters; with purpose to search out,
and discover their horrid design against the invaluable Lives of Their
Majesty's, against our Church and Nation; but your Books have put me out of
doubt in the Point; and as you requested, I have given them a reading, and had
now presented you with some Transient Remarks upon them both, but to my great
Content I find that Ludlow by a Letter to the Dr. (a Copy whereof was sent to a
Friend here) has in great part prevented me, however I shall make some general
Observations upon both these famous Tracts, and then speak more particularly to
that which rudely traduces the Memory of the most pious Dr. Wa^ker.

The Arrogance which runs through both these Books is insupportable, the Author
boasting proudly of himself, vilifying and censuring others to such a degree,
that nothing is more like it than the Mountebanks, who after a deal of Scaffold
Pageantry to draw Audience, entertain them by decrying all others, with a
Panegyric of their own Balsam: All his Arguing is frivolous and trivial, and
tho he knows or should know that the Rhetoric of Barking, never moved any man,
he writes as tho he had engrossed all the Ammunition of Railing; he appears as
serious as a madman, and answers demonstration with the Lie; it is surely the
highest indecorum for a Divine to write in such a style as this, and methinks
if our Author had any spark of virtue unextinguished, he should upon
considering these things retire to his Closet and there lament and pine away
for his desperate folly, for the eternal shame to which he has hereby condemned
his own Memory. His Friends should give him good Counsel before his
understanding be quite unsettled; or if there be none nere, the Neighbors
should be called in, and a Parson sent for, to persuade him in time, and not
let it run on thus, till he is fit for no place but Bedlam: nothing will serve
him but he must be a Madman in Print, and write in Defense of a King, and that
at such a rate, that if he were alive he would be out of love with himself; he
has, like those frightful Looking-Glasses made for sport, represented his
Idolized Saint in such bloated Lineaments, (as I am confident) if he could see
his face in it, he would break the Glass. But to pretermit his defense against
Ludlow, I descend to make a few brief Animadversions upon his Treatise against
Dr. Walker, wherein I discern all along the footsteps of a most inveterate and
implacable Malice. However, I am obliged to handle it with the more tenderness,
in respect to the venerable License the Title Page shows in these words,
Imprimatur Carol. Alston, R P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

In the discharge of my Undertaking, I shall in the first place take leave to
recount the heads of some of those proofs, offered by Dr. Walker, to
demonstrate that Dr. Gauden, and not King Charles was the Author of the
Idolized Book, called Eicon Basilice.

This good Man in his Introduction says, that Dr. Hollingworth did put him
upon that unwelcome labor by falsely accusing him of telling a false story,
without consulting him by word or letter before he did it, and that he was
constrained by unavoidable necessity (unless that Doctor expected that as a
Felo de se, he should by silence give consent to his unjust Calumnies) to
vindicate himself; And he declares his resolution to keep that modest temper,
which becomes one who designs no personal Quarrel; nor writes for Victory but
Truth, The search and discovery of which needs no Tricks, no little Arts, no
big Words; but is best attained by sedate proceedings and plain and open
dealing. And he solemnly Appeals to the Searcher of Hearts, Avenger of
Falsehood, and Revealer of Secrets, that he will write nothing of the Truth of
which he is not thoroughly persuaded.

1. He Asserts (page 4 th) that Dr. Gauden, some time before the Book was
finished, acquainted him with his design, and showed him the heads of diverse
Chapters, and some of the discourses written of hem; and asked his Opinion
concerning it; who told him he supposed it would be much for the King's
Reputation, Honor and Safety; but added he st^ck at the lawfulness of it, and
asked him how he satisfied himself so to impose upon the World? To which Dr.
Gauden so readily replied, that he concluded he had thought of it before; look
on the Title, it is the Portra^cture etc. and no man draws his own Picture.

2. That some good time after, Dr. Walker being with Dr. Gauden in London, he
went with him to Dr. Duppa Bishop of Salisbury, and in the way thither, Dr.
Gauden told him that he was going to the Bishop (whom he had acquainted with
his design) to fetch what he had left with him to be perused; or to show him
what he had farther written; that the Bishop had some private Discourse with
Dr. Gauden, who, in their return told Dr. W. that the Bish. said there were two
Subjects more, which he wished he had thought on, and propounded them to him,
viz. The Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book, and the denying his Majesty
the Attendance of his Chaplains; (which are now the 16th and 24th Chapters in
the Printed Book) and desired Dr. Gauden to write two Chapters upon them, which
he said he promised he would, but before they parted, the Bishop recalled that
request, and said, pray go you on, to finish what remains, and leave these two
to me, I will prepare two Chapters upon them; which he accordingly did, as Dr.
Gauden owned to Dr. Walker, and others whom he had made privy to the whole, and
never pretended to have written these, as he did to have done all the rest.

3. That Dr. Gauden some time after the King was Murdered, upon Dr. Walker's
asking him, whether the King had ever seen the Book, answered, that he did not
certainly know; but he used his best endeavors that he might, for he delivered
a Copy of it to the Marquess of Hertford, when he went to the Treaty at the
Isle of Wight, and entreated him to deliver it to his Majesty, and humbly
desire to know his pleasure concerning it: But the Violence which threatened the
King hastening so fast, he ventured to Print it, and never knew what was the
Issue of sending it; for when the thing was done, he judged it not prudent to
make farther noise about it by enquiry.

4. That Dr. Walker asked Dr. Gauden, whether King Charles the Second knew that
he wrote it; he answered, I cannot positively and certainly say he does,
because he was never pleased to take express notice of it to me, But I take it
for granted he does, for I am sure the Duke of York does, for he has spoken of
it to me, and owned it as a seasonable and acceptable Service; and he knowing
it, I question not but the King also does.

5. That Dr. Gauden's Wife, some others, and Dr. Walker, believed it as much as
they could believe any thing; and when they spoke of it in his presence, or in
his absence, did it without the least doubt of his having writ it; being as
much assured of it, as it was possible they could be of any matter of Fact; And
there is no shadow of Appearance, why he should put so gross a cheat upon them
all; for 'twas before it was finished, and a good while before 'twas Printed,
they so believed; and therefore he had not the Temptation to steal the Applause
it met with when made public.

6. That Dr. Gauden delivered to Dr. Walker, with his own hand, what was last
sent up, (after part was Printed, or at least in Mr. Royston's hands to be
Printed) and after he had showed it him, and Sealed it up, gave him strict
Caution with what Wariness to carry and deliver it, and according to his
direction he delivered it, Saturday 23 d of December 1648 in the Evening to one
Peacock, who was instructed by what hands he should transmit it to Mr. Royston;
and in the same method a few days after, the Impression was finished, and Dr
Walker received six Books, by the hand of Peacock, as an acknowledgment of the
little he had Contributed to that Service; one of which he affirmed he had
still by him, at the time of his writeing this Account.

To these reasons Dr. Walker adds (page 7.) that he meets with Expressions in
the devotional part, very frequently used by Dr. Gauden in his Prayers (for he
used Conceived Prayer both in his Family and in Public) which he never heard
from any other man.

Now Sr. you are not to take these things which I have transcribed, to be the
Sum total of what Dr. Walker offers to evince, that Dr. Gauden was the Author
of the Book we are talking of; he lays down many other Arguments of mighty
weight in the point, to which I must refer you, and shall only tell you that
he concludes his modest Account of this matter, in these words, These are the
Reasons why I believe as I do, the Affirmative part of the Question, that Dr.
Gauden was the Author, and as I believe I have also spoken. And if any Man can
produce stronger Reasons for the Negative part, I do not say only I will, but
that I must believe that contrary part; for no Man who Considers, can believe
as he lists, but the weightiest Arguments will turn the Scale.

And if any Man will be so Charitable as to reclaim me from an Error, he
supposes I am in; I even beseech him to write nothing for the Truth, of which
he does not make the like Appeals to God which I have done; for if he attempts
it by Railery, or Railing, by feeble Conjectures or Stories inconsistent with
themselves, or contradicting one another, he may with more discretion spare his
pains; for, as no wise man will be influenced farther by such Tools, than to
pity them who use them, or make themselvrs merry, so I confess I am so tired
with examining such Ware, and so cloyed with such Quelk-chose, I shall have no
stomach to such Fare, or think my self concerned to take notice of it.

I come now Sr. to Consider Dr. Hollingworth's Answer to Dr. Walker, and before
I enter upon his Arguments, I desire you to smell to a Nose-gay of Flowers,
which I have gathered out of the Garden of Their Majesty's Chaplain at
Ald-gate. His Title Page terms the Reverend Dr. Walker's Assertions, Rude and
undutiful Assaults. He Affirms in his Preface, That in his Answer to Dr.
Walker's Book, he has omitted many Inconsistencies therein, because he resolved
to dwell on matter of Fact; and has forborne returning those Scurrilities and
Scorns he had loaded him withal, upon himself; because he was dead. (p. 3. of
his Pamphlet) The Ald-gate Doctor says, that if God the Avenger of the injured
and oppressed, had not called the Essex Dr. to an Account before his Book was
published, he should have been so bold as to have given, and that by undeniable
Proofs, such Instances of the Man, as would have inva^idated his whole
Testimony, and made him and his Book too, a Scorn to the World; but being dead,
he will as much as he ought in this Case, forbear him. (p. 4) he doubts, nay
scorns to believe that Dr. Gauden made the Book called the King's, and told Dr.
Walker so; and the more, because he Asserts it; who, was he not dead, the
Chaplain would give Reasons sufficient to satisfy any Man why he does not
believe it, upon his Authority -- Dr. Walker's Book says he, is an
unseasonable, false and undutiful Book, which gratifies none but the great
Enemies of Monarchy and Episcopacy. It Is a Forgery, and to D^. Hollingworth's
knowledge, has Amazed and Grieved a great part of the Subjects of the Kingdom;
-- The Sum total of the thing is, to serve the Lusts of a party of Men against
Monarchy and Episcopacy -- That Good, that Pious Man Dr. Walker* does Assert
that Dr. Gauden said he Composed the Book; and his words weigh more with us,
say the Commonwealths men than a Thousand Witnesses to the Contrary. -- The
Essex Dr. is a bold man, an audacious Slanderer, -- True Church of England men,
scorn to carry on their designs by Lies and Forgeries, by Tricks and Devises.
-- I was personally Acquainted with Dr. Walker and know he was an Encourager
of, and Comrade with those who had no kindness for the Church at all, -- Well
done Dr. Walker, if thou had a man alone with thee, undoubtedly he was always
on thy side, and tho^ were always in the right, and when the Man was dead
would (...) the Confidence to Print it. -- The Common wealths-men say, it
look very hard upon the Memory of such a Man as famous Dr. Walker, t^ give him
the Lie. -- The Essex Doctor's talk is vain and rash false and undutiful -- His
Book is vain, shuffling, proud, an^ inconsistent, -- I hope I have made good
what I Ass^rted, and prov'^ Dr. Walker's Say soes, but mere Fictions of his own
-- I wis^ he had resisted Temptations to Revenge, and Vain glory: Revenge
against a Church to which he was never true, so he was an Enemy within our
Gates; and then I am sure the Worl^ would not have been pestered with a Book,
stuffed with so many noto^rious falsehoods.

Thus, Sir, has your Host at Aldgate, (whose Mouth wants scowring) unloaded
his Lay-stall; and how justly these vile Calumnies might be retorted upon him
who utters them, let the World judge. But I shall not rake further in this
Dunghill; it is most certain, that an ill Man cannot by praising, confer Honor,
nor by reproaching, fix an Ignominy. The late Dr. Walker had such a Stock of
solid and deserving Reputation, that it is more than a wild rambling Slanderer
can spoil or deface, by all his Revilings; he was such a judicious,
conscientious, learned and sincere Protestant, so true a Son of the Church of
England, that had this hotheaded Turn-coat had any Modesty, he would have
blushed to reproach and load him with Contempt, Malice and Obloquy: but vile
and insolent Language costs him nothing, and therefore he has laid it on so
prodigally.

I am now to look a little farther into the Aldgate Doctor's Defense of that
which he will call the King's Book, against the Essex Doctor's Assaults, that I
may show you how he has left Matters standing between him and his Adversary.

He says, (page 2.) It was for his Holy and Divine Book, that that great King
was so highly venerated, so deservedly applauded; and indeed upon the score of
which the greatest part of his Actions were vindicated; and therefore this Book
must be considered and weighted in a just and proper Ballanse, (indeed so it
ought.)

Page 5. he tells us, and who may question it? that what Dr. Walker asserts of
Dr. Gauden's writing the Book, is all Sham; and that if he had dared to have
told such a Falsehood, he must have sat down contented with his Living at
Barking, without any Expectation from the Court; without either being Bishop of
Exeter, or living in hopes of the Bishopric of Winchester.

Now who will doubt Dr. Gauden's having possessed the fat Living of Barking?
But it is all Sham, he was no more Incumbent there, than Dr. Hollingworth was in
the Sea of Canterbury, in the Reign of Charles the First. How then should it
happen that he talks of Barking? I was thinking that he pitched upon it, in
regard of its near resemblance to Railing, which has sometimes proved a good
Living to an Ecclesiastical Wrangler. But upon second Thoughts I consider, that
the Town of Barking is but seven Miles from London, and contiguous to the small
Vicarage of West-Ham, which the Aldgate Doctor once possessed; and learning
there, that Barking was a plump Parsonage of four or five hundred Pounds a
Year, his Ambition might lead him to set his Heart upon it; and his Brain being
now cracked at the Disappoinment, he talks of it at the rate, which we have
seen a distracted Lover in Bedlam speaking of his hard-hearted Mistress. But it
seems one Falsehood would have dashed all Dr. Gauden's Hopes of Preferment; I
say then, Alas poor Dr. Hollingworth! you must sit down contented with your
Chaplainship at Aldgate of 8 l. per Annum, without any expectation of Barking,
(though it is in their Majesty's Gift) or of any other Promotion from the
Court; for before I have done, I shall demonstrate, that your whole Book is but
one huge Lie, 27 Pages long.

Page 6. the Doctor repeats his old Story of a worthy Person, Sir John
Brattle's informing him, That in the Year 1647, the King having drawn up the
most considerable part of this Book in loose Papers, desired Bishop Iuxon to
get some trusty Friend to look it over, and put it into exact Method. And the
Bishop pitched upon Sir John's Father; who undertaking the Task, was assisted
by this his Son, who sat up some Nights with his Father to assist him in
methodizing these Papers, all writ with the King's own Hand.

You shall see what Dr. Walker said in this Point; I make no Judgment (says
he, page 19.) prejudicial, or of disadvantage to the Character here given of
Sir John Brattle; but with due respect to him, I would ask the Doctor of few
Questions.

1. May it not be possible, without any diminution of Sir John's Veracity, that
in more than 40 Years, there may be some mistake of other Papers for these, or
some other lapse of Memory, about a Matter in which he was concerned but once
or twice, and that but transiently, and on the bye? Or was Sir John, who must
be then a young Man, and, it is likely, but in a private Capacity, so well
acquainted with the King's Hand, which it is probable he had seldom or never
seen? I believe few Country Youths, or young Gentlemen, are so very well used
to their Sovereign's Handwriting, as to make a critical Judgment of it, and to
be able with assurance to distinguish it from the Writing of all other Men.

Further; supposing, but by no means granting, that the King desired Bishop
Iuxon, as is said, to desire a trusty Friend to do it: Why another rather than
the Bishop himself? Had the King any Friend more trusty than Bishop Iuxon? Or
was he too good, or above doing such Service for his Master, who had not a
Servant who loved or honored him more? Or was he too busy to attend it, when
he was wholly out of all Employment, and enjoyed the most undisturbed Privacy
and Quiet of any Man that had served the King in any eminent Degree? Or was
Bishop Iuxon less sit and able than a private Man, when the Book consists of
Policy and Piety? And who a sitter Judge of what concerned the first, than one
who had so long been a Privy-Counsellor, and Lord-High-Treasurer of England?
And for the second, he was one on whom the King relied, as much or more than on
any Man, for the conduct of his Conscience, as appeared by his singling him
out, to be with him in his preparations for Death. And why must Bishop Iuxon
desire another Man to do that Work, for which (had there been any such Work to
be done) he was the fittest Man alive, for Fidelity, for Ability, for
Inclination to his Master's Service, and for vacancy and leisure?

Let Us so now what Answers their Majesty's Chaplain at Aldgate makes to these
plain Questions, for we find him vaunting, ( page 22.) That he has made out
Matter of Fact against Dr. Walker 's Assertions, in his vain, shuffling, proud
and inconsistent Book. Why all that the Aldgate Doctor says hereunto is, (
page 9.) He (Dr. Walker) questions Sir John's Memory, and talks of his Youth,
to invalidate the Story; but that is so great an Affront to all the young
Gentlemen and Apprentices in London, who at the Age of Nineteen, are so very
much employed and trusted in their Master's Books and Accounts, that I leave
them to vindicate Sir John, upon the score of helping his Father in a thing of
such a Nature as this was, at such an Age.

What ridiculous Stuff is this? It Is such an inexcusable Affront to the London
Apprentices, to say, That though they understand their Master's Account-Books,
they have not at Nineteen, the necessary qualifications of Statesmen and
Divines, that they must be instigated to draw up an Abhorrence against it; and
it may be this Doctor, who would cokes them to fall upon Dr. Walker as their
common Enemy, designs them a Venison Feast this Season; but (should he do it) I
advise you, as his Friend, to caution him to appoint it at some other place
than Merchant-Taylors Hall, in regard Dr. Meriton lives opposite to it; and it
may be some diminution to his Credit, if that Reverend Divine should take the
opportunity to cross the Street, and tell him, in the midst of his Jollity with
the Lads, that he has twice belied him in his malicious Scriblings against Dr.
Walker.

The Aldgate Doctor ( page 9.) dismisses Sir John Brattle, saying, And this is
all I have to say as to Sir John Brattle; and that he told me this, I will
depose upon Oath, whenever I am lawfully RECALLED.

I have heard of Re-ordaining, Recanting, and Re-recanting; and it is more than
probable, that this Learned Gentleman understands the meaning of these words;
but it is beyond my Capacity to make sense of Recalling in this place, and he
will oblige me in telling me his meaning therein: And to requite the Courtesy,
you may tell him, that I will produce good Evidence upon Oath, when REquired,
(there is a Re for his Re) that Sir John Brattle, who I agree is a very worthy
Person, does declare, That he never told Dr. Hollingworth, or any other Person,
that the Papers he spoke of were writ with the King's own Hand. Their Majesty's
Chaplain may not take it ill, or think that his Veracity is called into
Question, by enquiring of Sir John about this Matter, for we had his leave to
do it, when he asserted the thing, and said, Thanks be to God, Sir John is yet
alive, and is ready to give the same Account to any Man that asks him.

The Aldgate Doctor affirms, ( page 10.) That the Reverend Dr. Meriton dining
the latter end of the last Year with the Lord Mayor, Sir Thomas Pilkington,
happened to meet with Dr. Walker at the same Table; where Dr. Walker was
pleased with his usual Confidence, to assert Dr. Gauden the Author of the
King's Book: Upon which Dr. Meriton turned upon him with the Story of Mr.
Simmonds communicating the whole thing to Dr. Gauden, upon which he was so
confounded, that he had nothing to say for himself, and though if none but Dr.
Meriton himself had declared to me (quoth he) the Issue of their Debate, it
would have satisfied me: yet the further satisfaction I had from my worthy
Friend Mr. Marriot, then Chaplain to the Lord Mayor, and Minister of the Parish
Church in Rood-Lane, who stood by and heard the whole Discourse, and withal the
silence he put Dr. Walker to; which he professed to my self, gave me so full a
satisfaction, that upon that account I ventured to give the World an Account of
it in print.

Now it had been much better either to have let this Story quite alone, or to
have given a true Relation of it; but our Author trusts to Falsehoods more than
to the Truth of the Cause; he says in his Preface, If any Man questions the
Truth of these Living Evidences I have quoted, if he pleases to come to me, I
will wait upon him to them, and he shall have satisfaction from themselves of
the truth of what I have writ. I should tell him now, if I did not know him,
that he might be ashamed to prevaricate as he does; but he has cast off all
Shame; he exclaims thus upon Dr. Walker (page 20.) Well done Dr. Walker, if
thou ever had a Man alone with thee, undoubtedly he was always on thy side,
and thou were always in the right; and when the Man was dead, would assume
the confidence to print it.

In what words now shall I bespeak Dr. Hollingworth? he offers to wait upon any
Man who is doubtful in the Matter, to the Persons he names; and yet I am at a
certainty that he has assumed the confidence to put these reverend Divines,
Dr. Meriton and Mr. Marriot (whom he terms his Worthy Friends) in print,
(whilst living) without their Privity or Consent, or consulting them of the
truth of what he relates; and I am as sure that they will not averr what he
asserts they told him; for without putting the Doctor to the trouble of waiting
upon him, I engaged a Friend to enquire of these Reverend Persons of the truth
of what he writes relating to them; and Dr. Meriton says, that Dr.
Hollingworth has committed two Mistakes (to give it no harder Name) in the
Story; for whereas he affirms that Dr. Walker, with his usual Confidence, began
the Discourse at my Lord-Mayor's Table, Dr. Meriton declares, that there was no
such Discourse at the Table, but that after Dinner he himself began the
Discourse, taking Dr. Walker into a Corner of the Room, and Mr. Marriot is
pleased to declare, that he did not much observe the Discourse, not charge his
Memory with the Particulars thereof, but believes that Dr. Meriton began it;
and that Dr. Walker did assert, in reply to him, that Dr. Gauden was the Author
of the Book. Yet we are to believe, if we please, that poor Dr. Walker was
confounded and put to silence: but I am sure the Aldgate Doctor ought to be so,
whose very asserting a thing ought to carry in in self an Argument of
Credibility; and from henceforth surely he will be for ever banished from the
Society of Learned and Honest Men.

Where are we next? Dr. Hollingworth says, ( page 9.) The next thing I shall
discourse upon, is the Story of Mr. Simmonds. Is it so? come then, let me hear
it; A reverend Friend, the Vicar of Witham acquainted him where the Widow of
Mr. Simmonds lived; The Doctor went to her, and enquired whether she knew any
thing of the King's Book, and how far her Husband was concerned in it? she
presently answered the Doctor, that going into her Husband's Study, she saw
upon the Table a Book in writing, which she knew was not her Husband's Hand,
and therefore asked him whose it was; but he turned her off, with bidding her
mind her own Business.

A doughty Story upon my word; and such a Command as this ( to mind his own
Business) from my Lord Bishop of London to our Doctor, might have prevented the
blotting of abundance of Paper; but seeing it is tumbled out, and that with the
License of his Lordship's Chaplain, with a vain imagination that it serves the
Cause; I will take the liberty to say, That a Friend of mine, without
consulting either the Vicar of Witham, or the Vicar of Gotham sound, that Mris.
Simmonds lived with Mr. Span in Creed-lane near Blackfriars; and he assures
me, that upon discourse with her, she appeared to be a very discreet and good
Woman, (as in earnest I am assured her Reverend Husband was) and did acknowledge
that Dr. Hollingworth had been with her; which without further examination of
the abovementioned Story, (it deserving no Remark) I will allow to justify the
Doctor therein. But (quoth he, page 11.) she told me, her Husband never joyed
himself after the King's Murder, but fell sick and died the 29th of March
following. So she told my Friend, but with this difference (as the Doctor
knows, but he seems resolved never to tell the Truth, the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth) that his Sickness whereof he died was the Smallpox.

The Doctor's next living Witness is your honest Namesake Mr. Milbourn the
Printer; he told the Aldgate Chaplain (if a Man may take his word That in 1648
he was Apprentice to Mr. Grisman a Printer; at which time Mr. Simmonds, by Mr.
Royston, sent the King's Book to be Printed, and that his Master did Print it;
and that Mr. Simmonds always had the Name of sending it to the Press, and that
it came to them as from the King.

Now though it seems as improbable that a Printer's Apprentice should know the
Author of a Book which comes to his Master, through several Hands (as it is in
this Relation) to be Printed with the greatest privacy, as that those London
Apprentices who understand the keeping their Master's Accounts, are therefore
capable of being Ministers of State: Yet I will not contend this matter with
Mr. Milbourn, but be it as he says.

In the next place ( page 13.) I find a Certificate under the Hand of Mr.
Clifford, who assisted Mr. Milbourn in Composing and Correcting the Book; which
backs his Story, with this Addition, that great part of the Book was seized in
Mr. Simmond's Lodgings; and he, though in a Shepherd's Habit, was so far
discovered, as that he was pursued into Great Carter-Lane, by the Rebels; where
he took Refuge, and the bloody Villains fired two Pistols at him, which
frighted him up Stairs, and out of the Garret-window he made his escape over
the Houses. And he further says, That he never heard, nay, that he is sure Dr.
Gauden never was concerned in that Book, by which Mr. Milbourn and himself
printed it.

This Certificate, I find, Sir, is attested by your self and Margaret
Hollingworth: And one of your and my Neighbors, was inquisitive, upon the
reading it, to know whether this Jewel, for so they say Margaret is in the
Greek, be the Doctor's Wife or Daughter? but I could not resolve it.

Now had Dr. Walker been alive, and had Clifford made Oath of what he here
asserts, I know not but he might have been indicted for Perjury, for saying;
That he is sure Dr. Gauden was never concerned in the Book. And then Dr.
Hollingworth, who confesses that he procured and penned this Certificate, might
have been in some danger of an Indictment for Subornation.

But pray let us compare the Relation of Mr. Clifford with that of good Mrs.
Simmonds; She says, That she lodged with her Husband in Carter-Lane; and that
their Lodgings being discovered, a Soldier shot a Pistol to mark the Door,
(the very Expression used by Dr. Walker in his Relation of the Story, page
30.) but she and her Husband were at that time at Dinner with a Major of the
King's, at one Mr. Chibar's a Minister about Old Fish-street; and had notice
brought thither, that Soldiers had been at their Lodgings; whereupon her
Husband went away, bidding her go home: And the Soldiers coming soon after to
Mr. Chibars his House, the Major made his escape at a Garret-Window, before the
Door of the House was unlocked. And she further told my Friend, That till he
read it to her out of Dr. Hollingworth's Book, She never heard of her Husband's
going in a Shepherd's Habit. But when this Matter comes to be scrutiniz'd, I
foresee that our Doctor will affirm, That by a Shepherd's Habit, he only meant
a Gown and Cassock.

The next material thing which occurs is, ( page 17.) If he (the Essex Doctor)
had writ nothing but Truth, a Nut-shell would have held it all.

There are more Brains in a Walnut, than in the Aldgate Doctor's dry Skull, and
their Shells are alike thin and brittle; he is equally a Stranger to Wit and
Manners, but a quart Pot will scarce contain the Falsehoods which he has writ.

Page 19. Our Author inserts the Transcripts of two Letters from one Tom. Long
of Exeter, as he affirms; which say, That Dr. Gauden told him, that he was
fully convinced that the Eicon Basilice was entirely the King's Work. This
famous Story, I observe, is esteemed by their Majesty's Aldgate Chaplain, as a
stabbing Evidence; for before he came at it, we were threatened with it all
along in his Book: Page 6. he said, By and by I will prove, under the Hand of a
more credible Man than ever Dr. Walker was, that Dr. Gauden had another Opinion
of the Author of the Book. Page 17. We have the same thing over again in these
words; I say, and will prove it by a better Evidence than Dr. Walker can be
supposed to be, that Dr. Gauden, after he was Bishop of Exeter, did justify it
to be the King's Book. Page 18. this celebrated Witness is produced; and our
Doctor tells us, It Is Mr. Long, Prebendary, as he takes it, of Exeter. And,
page 20. he thus characterizes him; I must tell the Reader, that he is an
ancient, grave, Reverend Divine, well known for his Truth and Honesty; one, who
as he is a professed Member of the Church of England, so he has always been
true to the Doctrine and Discipline of it, in his Preaching and Practice; and
not like my Adversary, who I know (for I was personally acquainted with him)
was an Encourager of, and Comrade, principally with those who had no kindness
for the Church at all.

I must, with your leave Sir, a little remark upon this most extraordinary and
remarkable Man. Dr. Hollingworth is, no doubt, sure of the truth of what he
says; we are bound to believe him, though he is not at a certainty what this
Long is; for he tells us, that he is Prebendary of Exeter, as he takes it. He
has always been true to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England.
That Is indeed something, and makes the Prebendary a much more valuable Man than
our Chaplain; for he, once upon a time declared, that be thanked God, he had
vomited up all his Calvinistical Principles. Whereupon a Person of true Worth,
and of high Desert, replied thus to him; Then the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and St. Paul 's Epistles have spewed you out for an Apostate; and so
farewell to you for a Knave.

But I may not let the Prebendary thus slide out of my hands: I have found
there is something more than ordinary in the Man, which recommends him to the
Doctor's Favor, and I will not withhold it from you. There Is a kind of
Sympathy in the natures of these two might^ Church man; our Doctor proposed,
page 50. of his second Defense, That every Parish of England should buy the
famous ^icon Basilice (with the other Works of King Charles) and chain it up,
to inform the Minds of all good Men: and the Prebendary has a Cr^chet of
reading some Portions out of it, in the Church, for the further enlightening our
^nderstanding. Behold how they pis^ in a Qui^^; and for ought I know, the next
proposal from these Men may be, to read the Arca^^an Prayer in the same Book,
for the furthering of our Devotion.

I proceed to give you something more of Long's ^ust Character, and leave it to
you to judge how much you find of Hollingworth therein. He has an aching Tooth
at Lectures and Sermons too; and a mighty Spleen at Free-Prayer; he would have
all the public Ministrations to consist in reading Liturgies and Homilies. But
his virulent Book, called Vox Cleri, or the Sense of the Clergy, concerning the
making of Alterations in the established Liturgy, published in the Year 1690,
does most truly speak the Man's Principles, and discover what sort of Men, are,
in our Doctor's esteem, the True Church of England Men; and upon what s^ore he
terms the pious Dr. Walker an Adversary to the Church.

This Book is Libel upon that great and excellent Person, his Grace my Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury that now is, and several others of the highly
deserving Bishops and Clergy of the Church of England, who were found
inclinable to the much longed-for Union of Protestants in the late Convocation.

He glories that the Clergy opposed and overthr^w a Bill for Comprehension,
contrived by Bishop Wilkins, Sir Orlando (...), and Judge Hales* because they
thought (...) the Church would prove more hur^ful than a Schism without it,
etc. He rejoice^punc; that Dr. Jane was chosen Pro^^cutor of the Conv^c^tion,
in opposition to Dr. (...), and says, that it is looked upon as a good Omen of
success in their Proceedings for the good of the Church; and throughout the
whole Book he puts a^ high value upon Dr. Jane for opposing any alteration in
the liturgy or Ceremonies, with a Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare, and at the same
time casts leering Reflections upon the Friends of Union and Peace, under the
name of Latitudinarians. He often extols and magnifies the Non-swearing Bishops,
and calls their deserved Deprivation for their Obstinacy, a dealing with them
as the Bishops were dealt with in 1642, by the Scottish and Dissenters Malice.
He expressly declares himself against parting with any thing for the Dissenters
satisfaction; and persuades to the enforcing them to Uniformity by strict
Discipline. But I may not dwell upon his envenomed Invective; in short both
Hollingworth and Long appear to be Fiery Zealots, Violent Bigots, who stand at
an irreconcilable distance with dissenting Protestants, and will run bot^ ^ut
of the Church, and their Wits too, if the Parliament should think sit to let
the Dissenters in, upon an honorable Accommodation of our Differences. And
'twould be strange indeed, if a Man of Dr. Walker's healing Spirit, should have
any Credit with such Men as these: but it is his Honor to be traduced by them.

But now he falls with a Witness upon poor Dr. Walker, saying, ( page 22.) I
have a Commission from the present Bishop of Gloucester, Dr. Fowler, to present
the World with this Narrative attested by himself, which has a great deal in
it, considering the former Testimonies.

The former Testimonies, indeed considered (which have nothing in them but
Falsehood, and empty or angry Words) I must allow that there is something in
this, though not to the Doctor's Purpose: We have here a Certificate attested
by my Lord Bishop of Gloucester, which fills almost three Pages, with most
undoubted Truth; and this must be esteemed something, and it is a rare thing
too; for (this Relation excepted) a Man may aver that there is scarce a
Paragraph in their Majesty's Chaplain's seven and twenty Pages without a
Falsehood. It behooves then that we look into this Narrative: The Sum of it is
this.

About 28 Years since Mrs. ^eighly, a very Religious and Pious Gentlewoman,
told Dr. Fowler, that a Captain of the Parliament Army told her, that being
appointed to stand every Morning at his Majesty's Bedchamber Door, when he was
a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, he observed, for several days, that he went
into his Closet, and there staid a considerable time, and then went into the
Garden: And the Captain perceiving that he still left the Key in the Closet
Door, he went in, and found that the King had been penning most Devout and
Pious Meditations and Prayers, which the Captain read for several Mornings
together. And Mrs. ^eighley said, That he gave such an Account of these
Meditations and Prayers, that she was confident they were printed in Eicon
Basilice, after she came to read the same.

And I am very inclinable to be of good Mrs. Keighley's Mind; and yet this
Relation does more serve Dr. Walker than Dr. Hollingworth. It must be remembered
that the Essex Doctor asserts that Dr. Gauden sent a Copy of the Book by the
Marquess of H^rtford to the King, when a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, and
that he believes it was corrected by his Majesty. The Design of the Book was,
ad Captandum Populum; and this King was no Fool I assure you: He spent some
time every Morning in perusing and making such Alterations and Emendations as
he thought fit in the Papers, and then took his walk, leaving the Key in his
Closet-Door, and the Devout Papers upon the Table, as a Bait to catch the
Captain; for though, as the Aldgate Chaplain most wittily expressed himself,
Some Birds are not to be caught with Chaff, yet some may: And so I think the
Mystery is unriddled.

And now, that I may take a full revenge upon the Doctor, I fall upon him with
the But-end of another Bishop; it is Dr. Nicholson who was Bishop of Gloucester
at the time when the Widow of Dr. Gauden, after her Husband's Death, resided in
that City: This Bishop understanding that Mrs. Gauden did declare that her
Husband wrote the King's Book, and desiring to be fully satisfied in that
Point, did put the Question to her, upon her receiving the Sacrament; and she
then affirmed, that it was wrote by her Husband. For the Truth of this, I can
appeal to Persons of undoubted Credit now living in Gloucester; and I am under
no doubt but my Lord Bishop of Gloucester that now is, will acknowledge that
those Persons have related this Matter to him, as I have now told it. And I do
as certainly know that there is a Person of Quality and clear Reputation, who
was Mrs. Gauden's Brother, now living, that will affirm that his Sister did
constantly in her Conversation with him, declare that her Husband was the
Author of that Book: And the same thing is well known to several of her
Relations now in being.

I shall now hasten to an end, when I have related a Story which agrees with
the Earl of Anglesey's Memorandum, and with Dr. Gauden's telling Dr. Walker,
(as he asserts) that the Duke of York knew that he was the Author of that Book,
and owned it as a seasonable and acceptable Service. There is now in being a
Person of Quality, in whose hearing the late King James was highly commending
the excellent Language of the present Bishop of Rochester's Book, called, The
Rye-House Conspiracy. Whereupon this Person took occasion to say, That his
Majesty's Father's Book was wrote in an excellent Style. To which the King
replied, My Father did not write that Book, it was wrote by Bishop Gauden. It Is
very indecent to publish Names without Permission; but I will adventure to say,
that the Person I mean, either is at present, or lately was one of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty.

I observe that Dr. Hollingworth never writes a Pamphlet without a Postscript:
in that against Dr. Walker, he tells an idle Story, That Mrs. Simmonds
acquainted him, that being at Dinner some Years since at a Citizens House, he,
like one of the Faction, and greedy to lessen Monarchy by aspersing King
Charles, told her, if she would confess the Truth, that her Husband made the
Book called the King's, there were some hundreds of Pounds at her Service:
which she scorned, and told him, She was not to be bribed by never so much to
so great a Lie.

'Twould be a very seasonable and good Work, to set some body to bribe this
prevaricating and forging Doctor to speak Truth. For Mrs. Simmonds, who is a
conscientious Woman, denies that she told the Doctor that any Body attempted to
bribe her to a Lie, or said to her that there were some hundred Pounds, or any
Sum at her Service; but she declares she told him, That quickly after the King
's Murder, one Mr. Robinson, who lived about Thredneedle-street, invited her to
Dinner, and talked with her about her Husband's writing the King's Book, and
said, it might be some hundred Pounds in her way, if she would acknowledge the
Truth; and that if she would not, she might come into great trouble; and she
says that she never saw him after.

And now after all this wrangling; for Peace sake, and half a Crown to be spent
at the Pye-Tavern at Aldgate, I will (so far as I am interessed in the Matter)
give that diminutive and inconsiderable thing, the Aldgate Chaplain, his
saying: The Book was, without further debate about it, wrote by King Charles,
and he Lies that gain-says i^^ But then I must be allowed to observe, that it
begins with Falsehood, and (...): So that as Dr. Holling^^orth told him, (1 st
(...), p. 37.) If the Essex (...) Friend Dr. Gauden, (...) for he was a learn^d
and grive Divine, and would (...) Colou^^, by (...) ^la^le Tyranny, with the
(...) ^eauty of (...).

The King begin^ (...), saying, That (...) all knowing Men so apparently not
true, that a more (...) have come into his Mind. He never loved, never
fulfilled, never (...) End of Parliaments: But having first tried in vain all
und^e Way. (...) his Army beaten by the Scots, the Lords Petitioning, and the
general (...) the People, almost hissing him and his ill-acted Regality off the
(...), compelled at length both by his own Wants and Fears, upon mere Extremity
he summoned this last Parliament.

And as to what we find in the end of this Book, his (...) of Captivity. Who
would have imagined so little fear in him of the All-seeing Deity; so little
care of Truth in his Words, or Honor to himself or to his Friends, or sense of
his Afflictions, as immediately before his Death to pop into the Hands of that
grave Bishop, Doctor Iaxon, who attended him, as a special Relick of his
Saint-like Exercises, a Prayer stolen, word for word, from the Mouth of a
Heathen Woman praying to a Heathen God, and that not in a serious, but a vain
Ama^orious Book, Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia; a Book* how full so ever of Wit,
not worthy to be ^amed among Religious Thoughts and Duties: Not to be re^d at
any time without good Caution, much less in time of Trou^le and Affliction to
be a Christian's Prayer Book. It Is worthy of rem^rk, that he who had acted over
us so Tragically, should leave the World at last with such a ridiculous Exit,
as to bequeath, among his deifying Friends, such a piece of Mockery to be
published by them, as must needs cover both his and their Heads with shame and
confusion. And sure it was the Hand of God that let them fall, and be taken in
such a foolish Trap, as has exposed them to all Derition; is for nothing else,
to throw Contempt and Disgrace, in the sight of all Men, upon this his idolized
Book, and the whole Rosary of his Prayers.

To conclude, if any Man censures me for using too much (...) in any of my
Expression; let him take notice, that Dr. Walker told your (...) That (...)

I am, yours, IOS. WILSON.
(...), June 10. 1692. I^^^nis Veritas (...)
Doctoribus (...).


LUDLOW no Liar, etc. In a Letter to Dr. Hollingsworth.
IT IS common, Sir, to such despicable and malicious Brawlers as you are, to
rail at those things most, that are most praiseworthy: I should therefore
esteem it scandalous to the Glorious Cause and Noble Performances of the most
worthy Parliament of November 1640, which I have endeavored to vi^dicate, to
be commended, and account it a praise to be evil spoken of by you: And it would
provoke a Man to laughter to behold you betaking your self to Slanders and
Calumnies, to see nothing but Dirt and Filth issuing from your Mouth, when you
find your Arguments will little avail.

I should not give my self the trouble to animadvert upon your Follies and
Frenzies, but that I hear you are swollen with Pride and Conceit to an
incredible degree.

I shall therefore show, that with a great deal of toil you have done just
nothing at all; and that you are fallen under a most prodigious degree of
Stupidity and Madness, to take so much pains to make your Folly visible to the
World, which till now, you, in some measure, have concealed; to be so
industrious to heap Disgrace upon your self. What Offense does Heaven punish
you for, in making you undertake the Defense of so forlorn and desperate a
Cause as that of K. Charles the First, and that with so much confidence and
indiscretion; and instead of defending it, to betray it by your Ignorance?

It was as truly as ingenuously observed by the Learned Bishop Burnet, in his
Sermon before the House of Commons, Jan. 31. 1688. That if one were to make a
Panegyric on Tyranny, he ought to turn over all the common Places of Wit, all
the Stores of Invention, and the liveliest Figures with which his Fancy would
furnish him, to make so odious a thing look but tolerably; and by sacrificing
Truth to Interest, and varnishing it over with Wit and Eloquence, he might show
how gracefully he could plead a very ill Cause. And it is certain that most
Writers used some endeavor to carry on their Discourses by a Stream of Sense
and Reason; but you, Sir, have done it by a Course of Reviling and Railing; and
it may be truly said, That if the dirty and Tinker-like Names, the scurrilous
and foul-mouthed Expressions, the spiteful and false Accusations, (I gather
these Expressions from your Book) were taken out of your Pamphlet, it would
appear but a poor and shrunken thing, unpleasing to your self when you look
upon it, and of small power to work upon others that read it. You seem rather
to bawl and hoot at, than to answer my Letter; and your Book is the best
Commonplace for Billingsgate that I have lately seen: But it is well known,
that a Mountebank can neither draw, nor keep a Crowd about his Stage, without
the help of a witty, or foul-mouthed Buffoon. And the gay Fancy, the cutting
Sarcasms, wherewith your Tract is all-bespatter'd, do adorn and render it
highly entertaining to some Persons. And I must confess, that I find some
subtilty in your first setting out, for you begin cunningly, and like an old
Cavalier, you place the Right Reverend and pious Bishop Kidder in the Front of
the Battle, just as King Charles the First did the Roundheads, whom he had
taken Prisoners at the Battle of Edghil; these (as we find the Relation in
Husband's Exact Collections, page 758.) he set pinioned in the Front of his
Men, when he engaged the Parliament-Forces at Braintford, to be a Breast-work
to receive the Bullets that came from the Brownists and Anabaptists, (of such
the King affirmed the Parliament Army to consist) that the Cavaliers might
escape them. However, the good Bishop, I plainly foresee will come off, as
every of them did; he may be shot through the Clothes, but no way hurt. For
your Quotations out of the Sermons of this good Man, and of that great and
well-studied Divine Dr. Sherlock, do only endeavor to aggravate the Iniquity
of this Martyr's Murder; whereas there is not one Syllable in either of my
Letters relating to it. I only endeavored to evince, That the King intended to
bow or break us, to persuade or force us to Slavery; and that the Parliament,
when he was enflamed to take Arms against them, and to put all into a common
Combustion, did, in one hand, present their humble Supplications, most
earnestly begging to enjoy the English Liberties in Peace; and held in the
other hand, the Sword of just and innocent Defense, against the Oppression and
Violence of the Enemies of the King's true Honor, and of the Kingdom's Peace.
And I am yet to learn, that by any Law of God or Nations, this could be judged
to be Rebellion: And I cannot see but Dr. Sherlock is of my Opinion; for in his
Sermon upon this last 30 th of January 1691, page 6. he says, He shall not
dispute the lawfulness of resisting the King's Authority; whether it were
lawful for the Parliament to take Arms against the King, to defend the Laws and
Liberties of their Country. He supposes, that in a limited Monarchy, the
Estates of the Realm have Authority to maintain the Laws and Liberties of their
Country, against the illegal Encroachments and Usurpations of their King. Now I
go no greater length, and I think this comes up to the great Lord Russel's
Position, which you had in my Letter, page 20. That a free Nation, like this,
may defend their Religion and Liberties, when invaded and taken from them, tho
under pretense and color of Law.

Your next step, Sir, is, ( page 6.) to my Quotation out of a Sermon of Bishop
Burnet's, Ian. 30. 1680. which you say you will transcribe, to let the World
see what a Cheat I am. Well, seeing you did so, I will also transcribe it, that
the World may judge whether you or I be the Knave in this Matter; the words are
these, I acknowledge it were better if we could have Job's Wish, that this Day
should perish, and the shadow of Death should cover it, that it should not see
the dawning of the Day, nor should the Light shine upon it; it were better to
strike it out of the Calendar, and make our January terminate at the 29 th, and
add these remaining days to February.

These words (say you) are wrested by Ludlow, and they appear at first sight,
only a Rhetorical Flight, whereby that Right Reverend Person would express the
detestableness and horridness of the Fact, which he bewailed that day. Now,
because I ever was against judging any thing upon the first sight, I have twice
read the Sermon of this Learned, wise and highly meriting Bishop; and must tell
you, that I did not wrest his words, but that he was of Opinion, that the
observation of that Day had been too long continued, and that in regard of the
great abuse thereof by some hotheaded Ecclesiastical Make-bates, 'twas time to
leave it off; and I cannot but think that every Man will conclude as I do, even
upon the reading of his Text, Zech. 8.19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, The
Fast of the fourth Month, and the Fast of the Fifth, and the Fast of the
Seventh, and the Fast of the Tenth, shall be to the House of Judah Joy and
Gladness, and cheerful Feasts; therefore LOVE THE TRVTH AND PEACE. And I must
say, that I am strengthened in this Belief, when I remember, that about that
Time, and indeed upon the very Day when this Sermon was preached, viz. Ian. 30.
1680. some of the Clergy (I know their Names, but will spare them) did in their
Pulpits deliver up our Laws and Liberties to the King's Will; and according to
their Doctrine, we were to hold all at his Pleasure; and in the three or four
succeeding Years, upon that and suchlike Occasions, these Beautefeux did raise
Despotick Power to that dangerous height, that England became too hot for Dr.
Burnet, as well as for many other good Men; and he and I might with equal
safety have returned together. But to put it beyond doubt, what my Lord Bishop
of Salisbury's meaning was, in that Expression, It were better if we could have
Job 's Wish, etc. which you insinuate that I wrest; I shall lay before you some
Expressions in that Sermon: you may read, page 4. these words; Upon their
loving Truth and Peace, those black and mournful Days should be converted to
Days of Gladness. Page 5. It might have been expected, that our 29 th of May
should have worn out the remembrance of the 30 th of January; and now at the
end of two and thirty Years, it may be reasonably asked, should we still
continue to fast and mourn? Page 28. [If we come to love the Truth and Peace]
to live in Love and Peace one with another, then our Days of Fasting shall be
turned into solemn and cheerful Feasts: Then should our 29 th of May swallow up
the remembrance of the 30 th of January: Or perhaps, as the Prophet foretold,
such happy Deliverances should come to the Jews, as should make even that out
of Egypt to be forgotten; so we might hope for such days, as should outshine
and darken the very 29 th of May* -- If we come to love Truth and Peace, then
shall even this Fast of the 10 th Month, according to the Jewish Account (which
according to Archbishop Usher, is exactly our 30 th of January) be to us, Joy
and Gladness.

I can now scarce withold my self from saying, That it is most evident the
Doctor at Aldgate does appear to be the Person who would wrest Bishop Burnet 's
well-intended Words, to his own malicious Design. A Design to keep up
Animosity, Wrath and Feuds in the Kingdom; a Person who shows himself estranged
from Truth and Peace, in contending to perpetuate the observation of this Day.
And seeing we have happily lived to behold the wonderful Deliverances which my
Lord Bishop of Salisbury did not only hope for, but seem to foretell: Seeing we
have our glorious 5 th of November rendered famous to all succeeding Ages, by
our late repeated happy and miraculous Deliverance from Popery, and its
inseparable Companion, Tyranny: Seeing we behold our thrice happy 30th of April
and 4th of November, the Birth-Days of those matchless Princes, our most
deservedly admired and beloved Sovereigns, King William and Queen Mary,
out-shining and darkening even the 29th of May; I would hope, that I may live
to see the time, when his Lordship will make a Motion in Parliament, for the
annulling the Law which enjoins the Observation of the 30th of January; and
that, I am sure, would be highly acceptable to the sincere Lovers of Truth and
Peace. But,

I already see an Objection against it; You (Doctor) say, Page 2. An Act of
State has appointed this Day to be FOREVER observed, to bewail the Sin of the
Murder of the King. However, I am sure my Lord Bishop of Salisbury does well
remember, that in Times bypast, other Days have been appointed to be observed
by Acts of State, upon such like Occasions; and one in particular, to declaim
against Gowry's detestable Conspiracy, which is now forgot: His Lordship also
knows, that in Numb. 21. when, for the Peoples speaking against God and Moses,
the Lord sent Fiery Serpents, which destroyed many of them. Upon their
Confession of their Sin, Moses at their Entreaty prayed for them; and (as it is
in the 8th and 9th Verses) The Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery Serpent,
and set it upon a Pole; and it shall come to pass, that every one that is
bitten, when he looks upon it, shall live: And Moses made a Serpent of Brass,
and put it upon a Pole; and it came to pass, that if a Serpent had bitten any
Man, when he beheld the Serpent of Brass, he lived. You see, Sir, this was
God's own Institution; and that, I hope, was at least as good as your Act of
State. Let us see now what became of this brazen Serpent; 2 Kings 18. The good
King Hezekiah, (and there were very few good ones in those days) who did that
which was right in the Sight of the Lord, broke in pieces the brazen Serpent
that Moses had made [ for unto those days the Children of Israel did burn
Incense to it] and he called it, Nehushtan. And that God highly approved this
Act of this glorious Reformer, is evident from the very next Verse, which
records, that after him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any
that were before him.

And now, Sir, to dismiss this Black-Day; allow me to observe, that there is
not one Syllable in either of my Letters, reflecting on the Act of State, which
ordained the Observation of the 30 th of January; but I term it a Madding-Day,
because our Parasitical Court-Priests would not keep the Peace, but on that Day
did set the Nation on Madding, by infusing Principles of Slavery into her
Freeborn People.

( Page 7.) You pick a Quarrel with me about my Epistle Dedicatory, and upbraid
me for courting the Populace, and Dedicating to the sincere Lovers of
Old-England, in Aldgate- Parish; and say, Sure the King and Queen, or else the
Lords of the Council, might have been made the Patrons of a Work that pretends
to what Ludlow 's does. But, whatever you think of your self, or the World of
you, methinks 'twas something saucy, even in you, to prefix their Majesty's
Sacred Names to so silly a Book, as was your first Defense; and it is as
arrogant, to entitle, the Most Reverend and Right Reverend the Archbishops and
Bishops, the Nobility, Gentry, etc. to this Second; and to begin as if seated
on the Throne, MY LORDS and GENTLEMEN. And it seems most impudent, to tell
them, that upon the Reputation or Dishonor of King Charles the First, and the
Principles which maintain the one, or those that propagate the other, (as much
as if you had said, upon my Scriblings) depend the Being and Well-being of our
present Church and State; and consequently the Life and Preservation of our
present King and Queen. But, whatever you may do, it is not for the mean Shrubs
of the Laity, to soar so high as you presume; and I took mine to be a modest
and inoffensive Dedication, and do yet think it ought to be esteemed such,
though you snarl, and in your gay or angry Humor, make Distinctions, if not a
Schism, and that in your own Parish; and very prodigally throw out to Ludlow a
good number of your old Benefactors, because they do not believe that they were
the only good Men, who took part with the King against the Parliament; who, you
say, only did their Duties in standing by their Prince according to the Laws of
the Land, and the Oaths they had taken. Now, if this be not an inconsiderate
and weak Way of arguing, why did not you and your Brethren do your Duty; and
(as the Iacobites query) stand by King James, to whom you were sworn? And as to
your Old Englishmen, whom you cull out and set by for your self, under the
Notion of Lovers of the Government, by King, Lords, and Commons; I doubt not
but there are of your Acquaintance, a great many Pretenders thereto; and yet,
if a Man could stand behind the Hangings, at your Club at the Pie Tavern, he
might hear many of 'em keck at the Healths of King William and Queen Mary; and
yet be the first who will propose and urge the drinking the King's Health:
which every Boy understands, is, in their meaning, King James's.

To proceed, Page 9. you tell me, that I begin my Epistle with a profane piece
of Wit; namely, THE CHVRCH, THE CLERGY; but the best of it is but borrowed. Now
I hope we of the Laity, may without committing the Sin of Sacrilege, borrow and
lend this Commodity amongst our selves; and were all Clergymen as dull as your
self, Doctor, 'twould be as great a Sin to borrow of them, as to rob a Spittle:
The piece of Wit which you here term profane, was only a seasonable
Exhortation to you, to show a little regard to Sense, Truth and Christianity,
in your future Writings; and this your last Book demonstrates, that of all the
Scriblers of the Age, you ought to have attended to this Caution. But this was
profane Wit: ay, no doubt of it; there is no Salvation, can there be any Wit
out of the Church? Wit is ever profaned, say these Borderers upon it, if any
Man touches it but themselves. However, I will adventure to borrow again, from
my Old Lay-Friend, the most ingenious Mr. Andrew Marvel. Albeit (says he) Wit
be not inconsistent and incompatible with a Clergyman; yet neither is it
inseparable from them: So that it is of concernment to my Lords the Bishops,
henceforward to repress those of 'em who have no Wit, from Writing; and to take
care that even those that have it, do husband it better, as not knowing to what
Exigency they may be reduced.

You say, Page 10. I shall betake my self, with all the brevity I can, to
consider your various Charges, you so impudently draw up against the King and
Queen's Grandfather, both in your Epistle and in your Book it self. And Page
11. you fall thus to work, In your Epistle you tell us of a Letter which the
Prince wrote to the Pope, which from the beginning to the end savours of
Popery; and you mention your Particulars to prove it.

First, You tell us, that he professes nothing could affect him so much, as an
Alliance with a Prince that had the same apprehensions of true Religion with
himself. You are in the right, I did say so; and if I cannot make it out, you
deservedly style me a foul-mouthed, scandalous and le^d Miscreant: And a Man
would think that you should not doubt your having caught me, when you bespeak
me in these confident Words; For God's sake, Sir, read over the Letter again,
and tell (...) where there is such a word, or any thing like it; I have the
Letter now before me, as it is in Rushworth, and I assure you, upon reading it
again and again, I find nothing like it; and I hope I am not so dull, but I
understand common Sense; and if it was not for the unmannerliness of the
Expression, I would, I am justly provoked to say, leave your L --.

I must confess, Sir, this your Expostulation struck me with no small
astonishment, and your bold and confident Assertion would, if possible, have
made me ready to suspect my self (as you represent me* for one of the vilest
Impostors that ever appeared in the World; for I never doubted but your Mother
instructed you in the reading of English, and he who has attain^d thereto,
should not mistake in such a case as this. But,

Upon my second reading you; I observed, that you say, I have the Letter now
before me. AS IT IS IN RUSHWORTH; this raised a Suspicion in me, that you were
conscious that it was elsewhere to be found; why else should you say, AS IT IS
IN RUSHWORTH? Turning to Rushworth, which you were poring upon when you wrote
your Defense, I was confirmed in my Opinion; for in the Margin to that Letter,
in Page 82. I read, and you will see when you put on Impartial Specta^les, this
honest Intimation, There is another Copy of the Prince's Letter to the Pope,
published by several Hands, somewhat different from this. Well, though you
affirm that you find nothing like what I charge; I can see, (as you presently
shall) even in Rushworth, several Things as like it, as I have found a Doctor
to be like a Dunce.

Indeed this Letter to the Pope is not found in Dr. Gauden's Famous Book
called, Eicon Basilice, nor in the Works of King Charles, neither is it in
Pembrook's Arcadia, in Heylin, or in Nalson: But you, good Doctor, may see it
in a Book which you have in your Library, for you quote it in your 13th Page;
it is entitled, Cabala, Mysteries of State (in Quarto) Page 214. The Royal
Words there, which you could not, or rather would not find, are these; I shall
never be so extremely affectionate to any thing in the World, as to endeavor
Alliance with a Prince that has the same apprehension of the true Religion
with my self. The same thing is expressed by Mr. Rushworth, in these Words;
Your Holiness's Conjecture of our Desire to contract an Alliance and Marriage
with a Catholic Family and Princess, is agreeable both to your Wisdom and
Charity; for we would never desire so vehemently to be joined in a strict and
indissoluble Bond with any Mortal whatsoever, whose Religion we hated.

You proceed in the Examination, or rather, as you affirm, Derection of
Ludlow's Lying, in the Particulars excerpted from the King's Letter to the Pope.

2 dly, Quoth you, What, Sir, you say, That he calls Popery the Catholic,
Apostolic, Roman Religion; all others, Novelty and Faction? In what part of
the Letter find you this? Sir, I tell you it is false, there is not one Syllable
of this nature throughout the whole; and I challenge the whole World of Malice
to show me any thing like it in the Letter: And now again, Sir, who ought to
leave their L --? Why, Sir, to deal honestly with you, I did say as you charge
me; but I must also tell you, that I see it is not false; for toward the end of
the Letter, I find these Syllables; I entreat your Holiness to believe, that I
have been always very far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a Partisan of
any Faction, against the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion. And in answer to
your Question, Who ought to leave their L --? I say, they should who are
convicted thereof. Now go on to act your part.

3 dly, You say, That he protested, he did not esteem it a matter of greater
Honor to be descended from great Princes, than to imitate them in the Zeal of
their Piety, who had so often exposed their Estates and Lives in the exaltation
of the Holy Cross: And pray where is the Fault in this? I hope any Man that
knows what the Holy Cross means in its proper sense, which is nothing else but
the Christian Religion, purchased upon the Cross by the Blood of Jesus, will
say, that this Protestation is so far from blackning this great Prince, that it
redounds to his Credit and Honor. These are your Words, are they not, Doctor?

This Passage is indeed a little diverting: Ludlow, I observe, is no Liar here.
You admit this Passage to be in the Letter; and imagining you can justify it,
do not answer this, with thou lie, for that, in your Canonical way of
Arguing, appertains only to things unanswerable. But now, upon reading the
Letter, it will seem to some as though I had played the Wag in this Point, and
laid a Trap for you, as some Body did for me, who gave me to understand that
you were once a Presbyterian, with which you make your self very merry, as I
see page 50. For if you will please to look into the King's Letter, it is there
HOLY CHAIR, though indeed it is Holy Cross in mine; and I am sure, such a
Protestation to expose Estate and Life in the exaltation of the Holy Chair,
does not redound to the Honor of a Protestant King; for we all know that the
Holy Chair, (mean the Cross what it will) in its plain proper sense means
nothing but downright Popery. But you, Doctor, know a ready way to bring your
self off with Honor; and if I had not put a Trick upon you, in writing Cross
for Chair, your Answer would have run thus; For God's sake, Sir, read over the
Letter again, and tell me where there is any Protestation about imitating the
Zeal of his Ancestor's Piety, in exposing his Estate and Life in the Exaltation
of the Holy Chair, or any thing like it: I am not so dull, but I understand
common Sense; and this indeed (had it been in the Letter) savours of Popery,
and would have blackned this great Prince; but you Bold-face are past all
manner of Shame; and a Man would think you are possessed, for there is not one
word like this in the Letter; and I am justly provoked to say, Leave your L --.

Your next Cavil runs thus, ( page 12.) You say that he solemnly engaged to the
Pope to spare nothing in the World, even to the hazarding his Life and Estate,
to settle a thing so pleasing to God, as Unity with Rome. Surely, Sir, you are
past all manner of shame; and a Man would think you were possessed, for there
is not one word of this in the Letter; and none but a Person who cares not what
Falsities he obtrudes upon the World, in order to deceive the silly and
credulous part of Mankind [THE LAITY] would have so boldly printed such a
notorious Falsehood as this is; and who ought to leave his L --, Sir?

Why now, Doctor, you are in the right again, and put down my very Words; and
as sure as you do so, so sure it is, that I charge nothing but the Truth: And to
show you that the King's Letter has many of the Words, I do here transcribe
them; I will ( says the King) employ my self, for the time to come, to have
but one Religion, and one Faith. -- Having resolved in my self to spare nothing
in the World, and to suffer all manner of Discommodities, even to the hazarding
of my Estate and Life, for a Thing so pleasing to God. And who now ought to
leave his Lying, let the World judge.

Having thus, Sir, offered what occurs for the right placing the before-charged
Lies, allow me to make a Parallel-observation upon you. You insert into your
Title Page this Expression; Let the lying Lips be put to silence; which
cruelly, disdainfully and despitefully speak against the Righteous, Psalm. 31.
Now at the rate of your talking, I might well say, For God's sake turn to your
Bible again, and tell me where you find these words. The Text which I find in
my Bible, Psalm. 31.18. runs thus; Let the lying Lips be put to silence; which
speak grievous things, proudly and contemptuously against the Righteous. But
then you will reply, This is the wonted Custom of your Party; these
Presbyterians have their constant recourse to the Bible, to oppose the Liturgy;
but we Laudean Churchmen never cite the Bible, when we can make the
Common Prayer to serve the turn; and the pestilent Letter-writter must know,
that I took my Quotation out of the Psalter, not Psalms; and there in the 31 st
and 20 th Verse, (tho it be the 18 th in the Bible) are the very words which I
put down. It Is true, Sir, I do find it thus; but how had I been intrapp'd, if I
had never seen, or had not had the Common Prayer Book by me, and found that you
had an Authentic Author for what you put down? What a Nest of Ecclesiastical
Wasps should I have brought about my Ears, had I said, Leave your L --, it is
false, it is not so in my Bible? And, pray, why may not I, (there being neither
Statute nor Canon Law prohibiting it) take the liberty to quote the Bible and
Cabala, when I quarrel not you for reading the Common Prayer Book and Rushworth?

To return to what you were upon; the last thing you said, was, And who ought
to leave his Lying? You then say, ( page 12.) And as for his [the King's] Reply
to the Pope's Nuncio, which you mention; after these Falsehoods, pray tell me
in what Authentic Author I may find it? for I assure you, you have put so many
false things together before, that you have so much lost your Credit with me,
that I will believe nothing of your bare Assertion; and I do not doubt but
every body that reads both, will be of my mind.

Your Conclusion here, Sir, looks something fair, you seem content that every
body should read both, and speak as he finds. I think they ought to do it; and
I address you, in all humility, to be so ingenuous, as to get Allowance that
the Press may be open to both Sides for what shall be hereafter published in
this Controversy; for it is unreasonable that you should rail for what you idely
call the Church of England, without control, and under the public License and
Protection; and it is not only inconvenient to print at Amsterdam, but in regard
there are so many Tories and Iacobites employed in the Custom-House, it is no
small Risque that every Man runs, who would bring over any thing which is wrote
for the Service of Old-England, I mean, the Government of England, by King
William and Queen Mary, with Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; and
that you agree to be Old-England indeed. But I have too long digress'd.

You were telling me, that I have so much lost my Credit with you, that you
will believe nothing of my bare Assertion. Upon this you must allow me to say,
that you are laid so flat by the Reverend and pious Dr. Walker, in relation to
the idle Story of Sir John Brattle, about Dr. Gauden's Book, commonly called
the King's, (and which they say Sir John does deny) and you have put down so
many things in your Defense of the Martyr, which are incredible, that your
Credit is so much impaired with me, that I cannot believe every thing you
assert: I therefore desire, that for the future you would give your Authorities
(as I shall) for what you write, so that our Readers may know how to make a
true Judgment of Things: And I must tell you, that you being deficient in this
Point, in your First Defense of King Charles, I rather played than argued with
you in my former Letter. But I will now tell you, that I had the King's Reply
to the Nuncio, upon his delivering the Pope's Letter to him, from Cabala,
Mysteries of State, page 214. where you may read it in these words.

I kiss his Holiness Feet, for the Favor and Honor he does me, so much the
more esteemed, by how much the less deserved of me hitherto; and his Holiness
shall see what I do hereafter. [And so did England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
whole World; his Bishops and Chaplains pressed Popish Innovations, and preached
Doctrines of gross Popery.] And I think my Father will do the like; so that his
Holiness shall not repent him of what he has done.

Now, Sir, Cabala is a Book of clear Credit, and not to be gain-say'd by you,
for you unluckily quote the same Book in the very same Paragraph, wherein you
raise your Huy and Cry after my Authentic Author.

And now, for the further illustration of the Matters which I have too long
dwelt upon, I shall here transcribe, not only that Letter we have been talking
of, but that of the Pope's to the King, which he answered in so highly obliging
terms; and for your better Satisfaction, you may compare them with Cabala, p.
212, etc.

Pope Gregory the 15th's Letter to the Prince of Wales; afterward K. Charles
the First.
Most Noble Prince, Health and Light of Divine Grace, etc.
GReat Britain abounding with worthy Men, and fertile Virtues, so that the
whole Earth is full of the Glory of her Renown, induces many times the
Thoughts of the great Shepherd to the consideration of her Praises. In regard,
that presently in the Infancy of his Church, the King of Kings vouchsased to
choose her with so great Affection for his Inheritance, that almost it seems
there entered into her at the same time the Eagles of the Roman Standard, and
the Ensigns of the Cross. And not few of her Kings indoctrinated in the true
Knowledge of Salvation, gave example of Christian Piety to other Nations, and
after-Ages, preferring the Cross to the Scepter, and the Defense of Religion to
the Desire of Command. So that meriting Heaven thereby (the Crown of eternal
Bliss) they obtained likewise upon Earth the Luster, and glorious Ornaments of
Sanctity. But in this time of the Britanick Church, how much is the case
altered? yet we see that to this day the English Court is fenced and guarded
with moral Virtues, which were sufficient Motives to induce us to love this
Nation, it being some Ornament to the Christian Name, if it were likewise a
Defense and Sanctuary of Catholic Virtues.

Wherefore the more the Glory of your most Serene Father, and the Property of
your natural Disposition delights us, the more ardently we desire, that the
Gates of Heaven should be opened unto you, and that you should purchase the
universal Love of the Church. For whereas that Bishop, Gregory the Great of
most pious Memory, introduced amongst the English People, and taught their
Kings the Gospel, and a Reverence to the Apostolical Authority; We much
inferior to him in Virtue and Sanctity, as equal in Name, and height of
Dignity, it is reason we should follow his most holy Steps, and procure the
Salvation of those Kingdoms, especially (most Serene Prince) there being great
hopes offered to us at this time of some successful Issue of your Determination.

Wherefore you having come to Spain and the Court of the Catholic King, with
desire to match with the House of Austria, it seemed good to us most
affectionately to commend this your Intent, and to give clear testimony, that
at this time your Person is the most principal Care that our Church has. For
seeing you pretend to match with a Catholic Damosel, it may easily be
presumed, that the ancient Seed of Christian Piety, which so happily flourished
in the Minds of British Kings, may by God's Grace, reverberate in your Breast.
For it is not probable, that he, that desires such a Wife, should abhor the
Catholic Religion, and rejoice at the overthrow of the holy Roman Church. To
which purpose, we have caused continual Prayers to be made, and most vigilant
Orisons to the Father of Lights for you (fair Flower of the Christian World,
and only Hope of Great Britain) that he would bring you to the Possession of
that most noble Inheritance, which your Ancestors got you by the Defense of the
Apostolic Authority, and Destruction of Monsters of Heresies. Puritans.
Call to memory the times of old; ask your Forefathers, and they will show you
what way leads to Heaven, and perceiving what Path mortal Princes pass to the
heavenly Kingdom, behold the Gates of Heaven open. Those most holy Kings of
England, which parting from Rome accompanied with Angels, most piously
reverenced the Lord of Lords, and the Prince of the Apostles in his Chair.
Their Works and Examples are Mouths wherewith God speaks, and warns you, that
you should imitate their Customs, in whose Kingdoms you succeed.

Can you suffer that they be called Heretics, and condemned for wicked Men,
when the Faith of the Church testifies, that they reign with Christ in Heaven,
and are exalted above all the Princes of the Earth, and that they at this time
reached you their hands from that most blessed Country, and brought you safely
to the Court of the Catholic King, and desire to turn you to the Womb of the
Roman Church; wherein praying most humbly with most unspeakable Groans to the
God of Mercy for your Salvation, to reach you the Arms of Apostolical Charity
to embrace most lovingly your Children, so often desired, These Desires of the
Pope, were seconded with continual Endeavors of Swarms of Jesuits and Priests
permitted to reside amongst us.
and to point out as it were with a Finger the blessed Hopes of Heaven. And
truly you could do no Act of greater Comfort to all Nations of Christendom,
than to return the Possession of those most noble Isles to the Prince of the
Apostles, whose Authority for so many Ages, was held in England for the defense
of the Kingdom, and divine Oracle, which will not be uneasy to do if you open
your Breast (upon which depends the Prosperity of those Kingdoms) to God, who
is knocking. And we have so great desire of the Honor and Exaltation of your
Royal Name, that we wish, that you should be called through the whole World
(together with your most Serene Father, The Pope well knew that his Design of
destroying the Northern Heresy, had been considerably advanced in K. James 's
time.
the Freer of Great Britain, and Restorer of her ancient Religion. Whereof we
will not lose all hopes, putting them in mind in whose hands the Hearts of
Kings lie, and he that rules all Nations of the World, by whose Grace The Roman
Strumpet is very industrious to corrupt the Earth with her Fornications, Rev.
19.2.
we will with all possible Diligence, labor to effect it. And you cannot
choose but acknowledge in these Letters the Care of our Apostolical Charity to
procure your Happiness, which it will never repent us to have written, if the
Reading thereof shall at leastwise stir some Sparks of Catholic Religion in
the Heart of so great a Prince, who we desire may enjoy Eternal Comforts, and
flourish with the Glory of all Virtues.

Given in Rome in the Palace of St. Peter the 20 th of April, 1623. In the
third of our Pontificado.

The Prince of Wales his Reply to the Pope's Letter.
Most Holy Father,
I Received the Dispatch from your Holiness with great Content, and with that
Respect which the Piety and Care wherewith your Holiness writes, does require:
It was an unspeakable Pleasure to me to read the generous Exploits of the Kings
my Predecessors, in whose Memory, Posterity has not given those Praises and
Elogies of Honor as were due to them: I do believe that your Holiness has set
their Examples before my Eyes, to the end I might imitate them in all my
Actions, for in truth they have often exposed their Estates and Lives for the
Exaltation of the Holy Chair; and the Courage with which they have assaulted
the Enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ, has not been less than the Care and
Thought which I have, to the end that the Peace and Intelligence which has
hitherto been wanting in Christendom, might be bound with a true and strong
Concord: For The I^terests of Popery and Tyranny were always found (...) well
to agree* and this Prince was lastly persuaded that his Crown, and the Pope's
Chair had common Friends and common Enemies.
as the common Enemy of the Peace watches always to put Hatred and Dissension
amongst Christian Princes; so I believe that the Glory of God requires that we
should endeavor to unite them: And I do not esteem it a greater Honor to be
descended from so great Princes, than to imitate them in the Zeal of their
Piety. In which it helps me very much to have known the Mind and Will of our
thrice honored Lord and Father, and the holy Intentions of his Catholic
Majesty to give a happy Concurrence to so laudable a Design: for it grieves him
exceedingly to see the great Evils that grow from the Division of Christian
Princes, which the Wisdom of your Holiness foresaw, The Pope prepared a strange
Wife for him, which according to Scripture-truth, is a dangerous Preparative
for a strange God; surely they will turn away your Heart after their Gods, 1
King. 11.2.
when it judged the Marriage which you pleased to design between the Infanta of
Spain and my self, to be necessary to procure so great a Good; for it is very
certain, that I shall never be so extremely affectionate to any thing in the
World, as to endeavor Alliance with a Prince that has the same Apprehension
of the true Religion with my self: Therefore I entreat your Holiness to
believe, that I have been always very far from Novelties, or to be a Partisan
of any Faction against the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion: But on the
contrary, I have sought all Occasions to take away the Suspicion that might
rest upon me, and that I will employ my self for the time to come, to have but
one Religion and one Faith, seeing that we all believe in one Jesus Christ.
Having resolved in my self, to spare nothing that I have in the World, and to
suffer all manner of Discommodities, even to the hazarding of my Estate and
Life, for a thing so pleasing unto God: It rests only that I thank your
Holiness for the Permission you have been pleased to afford me, and I pray God
to give you a blessed Health and his Glory, after so much pains which your
Holiness takes in his Church.

This Letter to the Pope was presently printed in Spain, in several Languages.
And I can show it you in many Authors of Credit; it is found recorded by Andrew
de Chesne, Chronographer to the French King, in his History of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, Lib. 22. The French Mercury (a never controlled Author)
has it also, as I here give it you, in Tom. 9. p. 509, 510. printed Anno 1623.
Mr. James Howel, an Attendant upon the King in the Spanish Expedition, (and who
ever remained firm to him, being imprisoned by the Parliament for a Malignant
in the time of the War) does also point at it in his Dodonas Grove, or Vocal
Forest, printed Anno 1640. he says there, page 128. That the Pope was a great
Friend to the intended Alliance with Spain, and wrote to the Prince. This
Letter is also printed in Pryn's Popish Royal Favorite, p. 40. in French, and
likewise in English, agreeing exactly with the Copy in Cabala: And Mr. Pryn
says, That he has seen another Copy of this Letter long since in English,
being somewhat different from the French in some Expressions, though not in
Substance, and perchance he wrote two of this Nature; but it appears that such
Letters really passed between the King and the Pope, by diverse ancient printed
Copies of them in sundry Languages. Thus speaks Mr. Pryn himself, and you will
credit him, because you tell me he was a Convert, and rectified many of his
Errors; yet he never retracted or acknowledged this to be one.

And now, Sir, to expostulate this Matter with you; Is it credible, that a Man
of common Honesty, nay a D. D. who styles himself their Majesty's Chaplain, and
dedicates to them, that a pretender to Learning and good Manners, who had
notice from Rushworth, that there was another Copy of the King's Letter to the
Pope, published by several Hands, different from his; that he, who by his own
Confession has Cabala, and uses it to serve his Purpose, should treat a Person
who writes Truth out of the same Author, with the unbecoming Expression, and
that three times over in one Leaf, of Leave your L --; that such a Man as you,
in such a Case as this, should say, It Is false, you are past all manner of
shame, and one would think that you are possessed? But let us see what follows,
my honest Tell-troth.

Page 14. you fall upon Dr. Leighton's Case, and calls the most barbarous and
diabolical Sentence, which Bishop Laud procured to be pronounced, and most
cruelly executed upon him, his Punishment; and say, That you are something of
the mind that he met with hard Fate, and such, as had you been one of his
Judges, [with your present sense of things] you should not have consented to.
So that it seems you cannot be confident but you might have been as wicked as
Laud himself. And by the discovery which you indiscreetly make of your self a
little after, (of which more presently) I have reason to suspect that you would
have made the worst Bishop of the two; and then I am sure you had been a very
wicked Bishop indeed. You say, Let me tell you, Sir, Dr. Leighton was a great
Transgressor, and deserved a severe Punishment. -- Must it be Persecution, to
call such a foul-mouthed Person to an Account, and to punish him? But you, of
all Men, Dr. Brazen-face, ought to be very tender to justifying the severe
punishment of a foul Mouth, lest a Jury of your Neighbors (should you be
called to an account, if for nothing more than your malicious slandering of
that Reverend Divine Dr. Walker) should find you to be a foul-mouthed Person;
for in such a case [according to your present sense of things] I am something
of the mind, you would esteem it hard Fate, to have your Ears cut, your Nose
slit; to be branded in the Face, stand in the Pillory, pay ten thousand Pounds
Fine, and be perpetually imprisoned.

You proceed next ( page 15.) saying, I have looked into the Case of Pryn,
Burton, and Bastwick. -- [I do, upon a full consideration of the whole, wish
from my Heart their Punishment had been some other way]; I do not think that
the way of punishing these Persons was at all Politic or Prudent, [because not
for the Interest, as things then stood, either of the King or the Church]. And
if Bishop Laud had kept in his Study at that time, and not appeared at all,
either to hear the Trial, or assist in the Sentence, it had been better for
him, and [those Designs of Uniformity he had so much set his Heart upon.]

Whoever weighs this last Paragraph, must agree in what I but now hinted, that
you, even you Doctor, would have been a worse Bishop than Laud. You well
approve the punishing of these three Persons; but the way was not Politic or
Prudent, because not for the Interest [ as things then stood] of King or
Church. Let you (subtle Doctor) alone for Mischief, though you have a very
unhappy Talent at writing in Defense thereof; you would have done it as
effectually, but in a more cunning manner; you would have been found as Arch
and Crafty, but a more close Youth; like the Persecutors in Ancient Times,
whose Practices are most ingenuously expressed by Mr. Marvel in these words; In
Persecution, the Clergy as yet, wisely interposed the Magistrate betwixt
themselves and the People, not caring, so their End were attained, how odious
they rendered him: And you may observe, that for the most part hitherto, they
stood crouching, and shot either over the Emperor's Back, or under his Belly:
But in process of Time they became bolder and open-fac'd, and persecuted before
the Sun at Midday; Bishops grew worse, but Bishoprics every day better and
better.

You, Politic Doctor, in your great Wisdom, would have taken a more prudent
course than Bishop Laud, you would, in your Study, have laid such a Scheme as
this; A Iefferies or a Wright should have been made Lord Chief Justice; a
Graham and a Burton should have packed a Jury of London Tories, to give such a
Verdict as they should have directed: Hereby these Gentlemen should have been
Whipped, Pilloried, Stigmatized, and what else Bishop Hollingworth pleased, and
all by the Hands of the Laity, and that according to Law; the Bishop, good Man,
neither assisting at Trial, nor Sentence, but close at his Book, as innocent as
a wild Boar, and as harmless as a Tiger.

Well, it had been better for Laud, and those Designs of Uniformity which he
had so much set his Heart upon.

And pray, tell me Sir, in all Love, what Uniformity was this which thus run in
Laud's Head, and which you seem so much to approve? It must certainly be the
honest Design of coming to a due Temper, to a uniting of Protestants: No, no,
nothing like it. Mr. Whitlock was a good Man; and you say, page 14. That you do
not in the least question the Truth of what he writes. Take then his Account of
this Monster, rather than Martyr, and you will see which way his Head turned.
Whitl. Mem. page 97. In Archbishop Laud's Diary, under his Hand, (produced in
Evidence against him at his Trial) are Passages of his being offered to be made
a Cardinal; which he said, that he could not suffer till Rome were other than
it is.

[He wickedly and traitorously designed, that upon the Pope's yielding, in some
few Points, as the Common Prayers to be continued in English, and such other
Tri^les, he would deliver over the possession of these most noble Isles to the
Prince of the Apostles.]

Whitl. page 92. It was proved against him, that he should say, The Pope was
not Antichrist, but the Head of the Church; and that the Protestant Religion,
and Romish Religion were all one; and if the one was false, so was the other.

He chid Dr. Hall (as in Whitlock, p. 91.) for giving the Holy Father the
Epithets of Antichristian, etc. He held the Pope to be Metropolitan Bishop of
the World.

He furnished the King's Chapel, (they are Mr. Whitlock's own words, p. 85.)
'that Seminary Priests would come thither for their Devotion and Adoration; and
some of them were instanced, ( this was at his Trial still) who said, they knew
no difference between their Churches and this Chapel, and some other of our
Churches, as they were ordered.

To this I shall subjoin a few Words out of Rushworth's Third Collection, Vol.
2. page 818. Archbishop Laud endeavored to advance the Power of the
Council Table, the Canons of the Church, and the King's Prerogative, above the
Laws of the Land* and said, that as long as he sat at the Council Board, they
should know, that an Order of that Board should be of equal Force with an Act
of Parliament. And at another time said, That he would crush them to pieces
that would not yield to the King's Power. He styled the Parliament Puritans,
and commended the Papists for harmless and peaceable Subjects. He said, That
there must be a Blow given to the Church, such as had not been given, before it
could be brought to Conformity.

Was not this a rare Head of the Church of England? Why may not a Man for once,
and not practice it, borrow your Words, (dear Doctor) page 53. and say, I
cannot think Laud would have talked thus, unless he had been acted by seven
Devils worse thau himself, and then I am sure they must be Devils indeed?

But no more of Laud in this place; I return to you, Mr. Chaplain at Aldgate.
Though you do not commend the doing of the Business of Pryn, Burton, and
Bastwick, in Laud's imprudent way, and that for a weighty Reason, because you
would have done it better. You proceed, page 16. saying, The Justice of the
Nation ought not to be afraid of accounting with such bold Men, as they showed
themselves. -- Mr. Burton speaking of the Bishops; instead of Pillars, calls
them Caterpillars; instead of Fathers, Step-fathers. O horrid! is this true?
Why, this was almost as bad as his laying open the Innovations in Doctrine,
Worship, and Ceremonies, which had lately crept into the Church, and wishing
the People to beware of them: which I mention to be charged upon him; and I
question whether his Ears, and 5000 l. Fine would have paid the Reckoning, if
Hollingworth had been in Laud's place.

But, what then would have atoned for Dr. Bastwick's Transgression? He (say
you) in his Answer to the Information against him, inserted these words; That
the Prelates are Invaders of the King's Prerogative; Contemners and Despisers
of the Holy Scripture; Advancers of Popery and Superstition* Idolatry and
Profaneness: Also they abuse the King's Authority, to the Oppression of his
Loyal Subjects; and therein exercise great Cruelty, Tyranny and Injustice; and
in Execution of those impious Performances, they show neither Wit, Honesty nor
Temperance; nor are they either Servants of God, or of the King, but of the
Devil: being Enemies to God, and of every living Thing that is good: And
concluded, that he the said Dr. Bastwick is ready to maintain these things thus
put down.

Now, seeing that they cut off his Ears, for these Expressions, without
bringing the Point to trial; I will put my self in his place, and stake mine
against yours, that I will make good every Syllable in this Charge against that
Caterpiller Laud, and some of his Brethren; when I see you take it to pieces,
and say in your Rhetorical Flights, This is false; That Is a Lie. And I will
give it under my hand into the Bargain, that I will prove that these Bishops
were a Generation of Vipers, which on any terms, would have eaten their way to
Preferment, through the Intrails of either Church or State; you may make your
best on it Doctor.

In your 17 th Page, you affirm, That these three Men suffered for Libelling
the Government, and putting Indignities and Affronts upon the then legal
Administrators. I have shown you the heinous Transgressions of Dr. Bastwick and
Mr. Burton; but you leave us in the dark as to Mr. Pryn's; therefore pray let
this put you in mind, when you write next, to tell the World what those
Indignities and Affronts were, for which Mr. Pryn suffered; because I have been
told, 'twas for publishing a Book, which Dr. Buckner, Chaplain to the
Archbishop (I do not mean the Villain Laud, but that excellent Pattern for
Bishops, Dr. Abbot) did approve and license to be printed.

Having finished your Vindication of the Punishment of these Persons, you
dismiss it thus, page 17. And so much by way of Answer so that part of your
Book, by which you have endeavored to blacken the good King's Reign, and to
run down the Reputation of Bishop Laud; and to express your Indignation against
me, for saying otherways he was a very good Man. [I see a Man cannot for his
Heart prevail upon this Hare-brain'd Doctor, to let Laud alone; but whether we
will or not, he will go on to murder the Reputation of this his Martyr:] You
run on thus, (without Fear, Wit or Honesty) I say still he was a good Man, and
have a very good Man to back me, Judge Whitlock, a Man of a clear Credit and
sound Judgment; who, as his Son tells me in his Memoirs; said of him, that he
had too much Fire, but was a just and good Man. [This is to purpose, if it has
the necessary Ingredient of Truth:] But I observe now, that when you have a
sure Second, one upon whom you can depend, you constantly quote the Page as
well as Author; but you left me here very unkindly, to turn over a large Folio;
to find Judge Whitlock's Character of Laud; and at length I pitched upon it in
the Mem. page 32. in these very words; Laud was more busy in Temporal Affairs
and Matters of State, than his Predecessors of late times had been: Judge
Whitlock, who was anciently and thoroughly acquainted with him, and his
Disposition, would say, he was too full of Fire, though a just and good Man;
and that his want of Experience in State-Matters, and his too much Zeal for the
Church, and Heat, if he proceeded in the way he was then in, would set this
Nation on fire. But this you intended to conceal: And now I think that the Judge
did not only speak like a very good Man, but like a Prophet; and I wish you
much Joy of Mr. Whitlock's Authority; whom some will tell you, you had much
better have let alone.

Well; that I may once for all rid my hands of this troublesome Bishop, such
you make him to this day, I will give you his Character from another very good
Man, a Person of clear Credit and sound Judgment, we all know, that is, Sir
Harbottle Grimston; it is in his Speech upon the Archbishops Impeachment, in
1641, which you will find printed in the Continuation of Rushworth's
Collections, now published.

We are (says he) fallen upon the great Man, the Archbishop of Canterbury;
look upon him as he is in his Highness, and he is the Sty of all pestilent
Filth, that has infected the State, and Government of the Church and
Commonwealth; look upon him in his Dependencies, and he is the Man, the only
Man that has raised and advanced all those (that together with himself) have
been the Authors and Causers of all the Ruins, Miseries and Calamities we now
groan under.

Who is it but he only, that brought in the Earl of Strafford, a fit Instrument
and Spirit to act and execute all his wicked and bloody Designs in these
Kingdoms?

Who is it but he only, that brought in Secretary Windebank, the very Broker
and Pander to the Whore of Babylon?

Who is it but he only, that has advanced Bishop Manwaring, the Bishop of Bath
and Wells, the Bishop of Oxford, and Bishop When; the least of all but the most
unclean one?

These are Men that should have fed Christ's Flock, but they are the Wolves
that devoured them: It was the Happiness of our Church, when the Zeal of God's
House did eat up the Bishops; glorious and brave Martyrs, that went to the
Stake in the defense of the Protestant Religion; but the Zeal of these Bishops,
has been to eat up and persecute the Church. He has been and is the common
Enemy to all Goodness, and good Men. So much for this, otherways good Man. What
have we next?

You say, Page 18. I come now to make some Reflections upon your Scotch^ Story,
which you have told with so much Venom and Partiality, that you have every ways
acted like your malicious and ungodly self. -- You begin with a Relation of
Bishop Laud 's (what more of Laud still?) composing a Common Prayer Book for
them; and tell us how the Mutinies and Disturbances in Scotland sprung from
thence, which truly I am very sorry for.

It Is well, we are agreed in this point, that from the imposing this Liturgy,
the Scottish Troubles did arise; so that hitherto, there is no Ungodliness in my
Story. But (you proceed) I am sure it had been better for them, and [the
Christian Religion] professed amongst them, if they had submitted to the Usage
of that Book, and continued it ever since.

This, in truth, Sir, is ungodly and malicious all over; you are sure it had
been better for the Christian Religion, etc. Why not Protestant Religion?
CHRISTIAN RELIGION is indeed in its true and genuine Sense, so good an
Expression, that a better cannot be found for the only true Religion: but these
Laudean Churchmen, the Papists in disguise, must be narrowly watched; for it is
notoriously known, that they hold the Roman-Church to be a true Church, though
we know it is idolatrous. We must hold them to the Shiboleth, [PROTESTANT] when
they pretend to tell us what is best for the Christian Religion: Laud himself
spoke at the rate which you (crafty Turn-Goat) here do; his Letters expressed
his fear of delay in bringing in the Common Prayer Book, for the great good
(not of the Church of Scotland, but) of the Church.

My Lord Bishop of Salisbury may surely be allowed to be a more competent Judge,
in this matter, than you: He says Page 30. of his Memoires; The Liturgy had
some Alterations from the English, which made it more invidious, and less
satisfactory. -- The imposing it, really varied from their former Practices and
Constitutions. --. Page 33. The Lords petitioned, complaining against the
Liturgy, and Book of Canons; offering, under the highest Penalties, to prove
they contained things both contrary to Religion and the Laws of the Land. Page
36. The Earls of Traquaire and Roxburgh, by Letter to the King, advised him to
secure the People of that which they so much apprehended, the fear of
Innovation of Religion; saying, that they found few or none well satisfied. --
Page 33. The Earl of Trequaire went to Court, and gave account that all the
Troubles were occasioned by the introducing the Liturgy: with which, scarce a
Member of Council (except Bishops) was well satisfied; neither were all these
cordially for it, for the Archbishop of St. Andrews from the beginning had
withstood these Designs; and the Archbishop of Glasgow was worse pleased.

See now what the Scottish Nation offered against this Liturgy, which you,
Doctor, are sure, it had been better for them and the Christian Religion, if
they had received and used it; Their Commissioners in their Charge against Laud
(exhibited in our Parliament in 1641) say, ( Page 11, etc.) This Book inverteth
the Order of the Communion in the Book of England; of the diverse secret Reasons
of this change, we mention one only: In joining the Spiritual Praise and
Thanksgiving, which is in the Book of England, pertinently after the Communion,
with the Prayer of Consecration before the Communion; and that under the Name
of Memorial or Oblation, for no other end, but that the Memorial and Sacrifice
of Praise, mentioned in it, may be understood according to the Popish Meaning;
Bellar. de Missa, lib. 2. cap. 21. Not of the Spiritual Sacrifice, but of the
Oblation of the Body of the Lord.

The corporal Presence of Christ's Body, is also to be found here; for the
words of the Mass Book, serving to this purpose, which are not to be found in
the Book of England, are taken in here; Almighty God is incall'd, that of his
Almighty Goodness he may vouchsafe so to bless and sanctify with his Word and
Spirit, these Gifts of Bread and Wine, that they be unto us the Body and Blood
of Christ. -- On the other part, the Expressions of the Book of England, at the
delivery of the Elements; Of feeding on Christ by Faith, and of eating and
drinking in remembrance that Christ died for thee, are utterly deleted.

Now one would think, that if such a whissling Doctor as you are, were not past
all shame, (as you affirm me to be) it would make you blush, (but we may sooner
expect to see you burst) that you, who appeared but now very tender of passing
a Judgment upon the Actions of the accused Star Chamber, should be found so
pragmatical, so arrogant, as to censure King, Charles the First, (who damned
this very Book by Act of Parliament) and the Kingdom and Church of Scotland in
this Point; and declare, That you are sure it had been better for them, and the
Christian Religion, if they had submitted to the Usage of this Babylonish Book,
and continued it ever since. But you are so inflexible, that there is little
hope of reconciling you to that Nation, (I had almost said to the King and
Queen) unless this well-approved Liturgy be sent down once more and entertained
there. For then (you say, page 18.) the Worship of God would be performed with
[Order and Decency], and in a way suitable to his Divine Nature and
Perfections: And consequently could not have been nauseous to the soberly, wise
and seriously devout part of that Kingdom, [as now it is] by reason of those
rude and undigested Addresses, those ex-tempore and unpremeditated
Expostulations with God; those bold and saucy Applications, that for want of a
good Book, or a well-framed Form of Prayer, [of their own beforehand, and
committed to memory] are so commonly made use of in their Pulpits; too many of
the accounts of which we have lately, since the great Turn in Scotland,
received from very good Hands, and undeniable Testimonies.

This is, I am sure, a nauseating, if not an ungodly and profane way of
Talking: You, poor weak Man as you are, run away with a gross Mistake; that
because there were Bishops in Scotland till the great Turn, (as you term the
legal Settlement of that Church by their present Majesty's) they had also a
Common Prayer Book: but believe me, or let it alone, as you please, they had no
such thing, it was detested, even by many of their Episcopal Clergy. I shall
not pretend to remark upon your most unbecoming and malicious Representation of
the praying of the present Ministers of that Kingdom; but it is well known that
their Divines are of good Ability, and every way well qualified for the
discharge of the Ministerial Function. And whereas you pretend to recommend a
well-framed Form of Prayer of their own beforehand, and committed to Memory,
for the prevention of rude and undigested Addresses, bold and saucy
Applications; I would fain know of you what Canon allows a Minister of the
Church of England to frame his own Prayer, and to mutter out a good part of it,
so as no body can tell what he says: And then to rise constantly in his Voice,
when he comes to the Ox -- and the Ass --.

But to talk seriously of this most serious Matter; pray see what the Devout
and Learned Bishop of Salisbury says of such Doctors as your self, in his
Sermon Ian. 30. 1680. page 9. Many weak Persons, who by the Heat of their
Tempers are inclined to entertain Prejudices, hold, that Addressing to God in
Prayer, and the being gaided by the inward Motions of Grace, and God's Holy
Spirit, are but illusions of Fancy, if not the Contrivances of designing Men.

Page 10. Earnestness in Prayer, and depending on the inward Assistances of
God's Holy Spirit: How have Men, who know or value these things little
themselves, taken occasion to disparage them with much Impudence and Scorn?

Now, Sir, upon the whole Matter, I do think it might tend to the Public
Peace, if my Lord Bishop of London would please to suspend such a dry and
insipid Doctor as you are, from publishing even ex-tempore and unpremeditated
Defenses, and to injoin you a well-framed Form of Defending, so that it may be
performed with Order and Decency, and not be exposed to Contempt and Scorn, by
reason of any rude and undigested Addresses, bold and saucy Applications to
their most Sacred Majesty's, the Most Reverend and Right Reverend, the
Archbishops and Bishops, etc. For I persuade my self, that the Ex-tempore
Rhimes of some Antic Iack-Pudding, may deserve Printing better than your empty
and nonsensical Pamphlets; and that it had been better to have set some
Ballad-Singer to have bewailed the King's Misfortunes, than so ridiculous an
Orator as you are found to be, who are so insipid, that there is not the least
Spirit in any thing you say.

Where are you now, Sir? I, but this Bold face says, This Liturgy [ for
Scotland] was not only composed by Bishop Laud, but sent by him to the Pope and
Cardinals for their Approbation, and this Story I must not dare to deny. But
with your leave, Mr. Modesty, I will venture upon that piece of Confidence, as
to tell you, I do not believe it, and that because you assert it. Now I do
agree that I did say so; and I am indeed a Bold-face, if I have not good
Authority for what ^ thus charge upon Archbishop Laud; for no Man's bare
Assertion may pass in such a Case as this. But there is more in this Matter,
than the Short-sighted Chaplain at Aldgate is aware of.

You may find the Story of Laud's sending, the Scots Common Prayer, to be
approved by the Pope and Cardinals (as I told it) in a Book of good Credit,
entitled, A new Survey of the West Indies, wrote by a Reverend Divine of the
Church of England, Mr. Thomas Gage, Minister of Deal in Kent, it is in Page 280,
in the Folio Impression; He there tells you, That being a Friar, he went to
Rome with Letters of Recommendation to Cardinal Barbarini, the Pope's Nephew,
entitled, The Protector of England: That coming acquainted with Father
Fitz-Herbert, Rector of the English College of jesuits, he highly praised
Archbishop Laud, and said, That he not long since sent a Common Prayer Book,
(which he had composed for the Church of Scotland) to be first viewed and
approved by the Pope and Cardinals; and that they liked it very well for
Protestants to be trained up in a Form of Prayer and Service; yet the Cardinals
(first giving him Thanks for his Respect) sent him word, that they thought it
was not fitting for Scotland. That Father Fitz-Herbert told him, he was Witness
of all this, being sent for by the Cardinal to give them his Opinion about it,
and of the Temper of the Scots. And that Laud hearing the Censure of the
Cardinals concerning his Intention and Form of Prayer, to ingratiate himself
the more in their Favor, corrected some things in it, and made it more harsh
and unreasonable for that Nation.

This good Man, Mr. Gage, after he had there related the Matter as above,
expresses himself thus; This most true Relation of Archbishop Laud, I have often
spoke of in private Discourse, and publicly in Preaching; and I could not in
Conscience omit it here, both to vindicate the just Censure of Death, which the
Parliament gave against him, and to reprove the ungrounded Opinion and Error of
some ignorant Spirits, who have since his Death highly exalted and cried him up
for a Martyr.

You may also find something like this of Mr. Gage in Bishop Burnet's Memoirs,
page 83. he relates, That in the Year 1638, one Abernethy, who from a Jesuit
turned a zealous Presbyterian, spread a Story in Scotland, which took
wonderfully, of the Liturgy of that Kingdom, being sent to Rome to some
Cardinals to be revised by them; and that Signior Con (the Popes Nuncio to the
Court of England) had showed it to Abernethy at Rome. Indeed the Bishop adds,
'That the Marquess of Hamilton wrote to Con about it; but he protested
seriously, he never so much as had heard of a Liturgy designed for Scotland,
till he came last to England; that he had never seen Abernethy at Rome but
once; and finding him lightheaded, had never again taken notice of him.

Now it takes not much from the Credit of Abernethy's Relation, that Con denied
it, for it must be noted, that he was a Jesuit; and according to the Tenets of
the Romish Church, 'twas lawful, if not his Duty, to lie for Holy Church.

You come next, with a most convincing Argument, to show the Falsehood of my
last Assertion: What! (say you, page 19.) Bishop Laud send to the Pope and
Cardinals for their Approbation of a Liturgy almost the same with ours? I think
this vexatious Ghost will never be laid; I thought we had done with Laud, but
here he appears again: What! Laud send to the Pope to approve a Liturgy almost
the same with ours? Ay, Laud, the most likely Bishop in England to do it! You
say, That his Heart was set upon Designs of Uniformity: And was not this the
most probable Course to accomplish them? Mr. Whitlock (whom you will credit)
shows (as I but now told you) that Laud declared, That the Protestant Religion,
and Romish Religion, were all one; and if the one was false, so was the other.
That he brought the Romish and English Churches (I think I must say
Steeple Houses to be rightly understood) to such a Uniformity, that the Popish
Priests knew no difference between theirs and ours. Why then may we not
believe, that in pursuit of that Plot of Uniformity his Heart was so much set
upon, he sought the Pope's Approbation of the Liturgy; whom (as Mr. Whitlock
himself declares) he held to be the Metropolitan Bishop of the World; so that
Laud was to him, as that Traitor Turner, late Bishop of Ely, to Sancrost, but a
younger Brother?

Proceeding to argue the Point, you say; Sure, Sir, you have forgot the Bull of
the Pope, in the 10 th of Queen Elizabeth, which commands all his pretended
Catholic Children, not to attend upon the public Liturgical Devotions of our
Church; and you have forgot that [the Papists upon that account, and by virtue
of the Authority of that Bull, have declined our Public Service ever since];
and therefore it is very likely Bishop Laud should send a Liturgy to Rome for
its Approbation. Most likely, for this very reason, and one who did not well
know you to be a Hare-brain'd Blunderbuss, would be ready to conclude with that
ingenious Iacobite of the Lacedemonian Society; who inveighing against my
Letter, told a Friend of mine, it must be answered by a better Pen, for the
Doctor writes, said he, as though he played booty. I appeal to any Man of
common Understanding, whether a better Reason can be invented, to persuade the
World of the Probability of Laud's sending the Common Prayer Book to be
approved at Rome, than you here assigned: The Point is already settled, that
his Head was set upon Designs of Uniformity; the Pope was his elder Brother;
the Papists came to the Common Prayers of our Church for the first 10 years of
Q. Elizabeth; and by consequence, might have so done to this day, had not Pope
Pius the 5 th prohibited them. Let any Man show me a more probable way to
obtain a Repeal of that Bull, which has made the Papists ever since decline
our Liturgical Church-Devotions, and to bring them to Church again, or rather
to bring us to go to Church with them, than by introducing a Liturgy allowed
and approved by his Holiness; a Liturgy in which (as I said, and you do not
deny) all the material Parts of the Mass Book seminally were; and wherein
Transubstantiation was rather allowed, than denied. But that empty Head of
yours, is carried round, that you do not know what is fit to be said. What have
we next?

Page 20. Well, Sir, you say, If [the Common-Prayer-Book] was sent into
Scotland; pray let me ask you one Question; In whose Name, and by whose
Authority was it sent?

The Answer is as obvious as short, and you needed not to have sent to
Switzerland to have a Resolution in the point; 'twas sent in the name of one,
who had not Authority to impose it upon the Scots according to their Laws.

You go on, saying, Why, if they did not like it, did they not first
submissively petition their lawful King, and let him know how disgustful the
Liturgy was to many of his Subjects in that Kingdom?

Why, it is most evident from all the Historians of that time, that they did in
the very beginning, petition in the most submissive manner against the imposing
this Liturgy; and that thereupon, after the first reading it in the great
Church of Edinburgh, upon the 23 d of July, 1637, the Council of Scotland
yielded that it should not be further urged by the Bishops, till his Majesty's
Pleasure were known. Upon which, the Petitioners returned satisfied to their
Habitations. But upon the 18 th of October, there being a great conflux of
People at Edinburgh, to hear the King's Determinations, a Proclamation was
published, commanding them upon pain of Rebellion to depart the City; and
shortly after, the King commanded the Privy Council to receive no more
Petitions against the Common Prayer Book. Nevertheless you confidently demand,
Why, if they did not like it, did they not first submissively petition? But the
Scots shall here answer for themselves; take their own words in their Charge
exhibited in Parliament against Laud; Our Supplications (say they) were many
against this Book, but Canterbury procured them to be answered with terrible
Proclamations: we were constrained to use the remedy of Protestation; but for
our Protestations, Canterbury procured us to be declared Rebels and Traitors in
all the Parish-Kirks of England. When we were seeking to possess our Religion
in Peace, against these Devices and Novations, Canterbury kindled War against
us. -- Our Scottish Prelates petitioned that something might be abated of the
English Ceremonies, as the Cross in Baptism, etc. but he would not only have
these kept, but others super-added; which was nothing else but the adding Fuel
to the Fire.

Read also their Expostulation in their Remonstrance, 1639, Page 4. Certainly
Posterity will hardly believe (as we who have seen it cannot but wonder) how it
has come to pass that we should have so long petitioned our Native Prince to
do us Justice, whereof he is Debtor to his People; and to hear our just
Complaints against the Usurpation of a few Men, who were undermining the
professed Religion and the Government of the State, and to suffer us to live
according to our Laws, and yet could never be heard nor answered in the point
of our just Desires; far less will they guess what has been the ground of that
merit and trust of one domineering Prelate, in the Affection of the King, that
it should be more forcible to diswade, than all the Supplications and
Intercessions of so ancient and faithful a Nation, should have power to move.

Well, what say you next, Mr. Tittle-tattle? The Scots took a Covenant against
Compliance with the Church of England.

Against Compliance with the Church of England; Ay, now it is out, there is the
ground of the Quarrel; the Scots traitorously refused to comply with Bp. Laud:
But they shall speak for themselves; they answer you thus, Doctor. We are free
of the heavy Censures of Rebellion and Treason, which are so ordinarily
thundered out, that they are become the less formidable to us. We are supported
with this inward Testimony, that we fear God, and still honor the King;
although our Adversaries will not be pleased, except we will follow their
Rules, which are not unlike those of the Jesuits sound at Padua, when they were
expelled the Territory of Venice: One of them was, [ that Men should take heed,
that they press or inculcate not too much the Grace of God:] Another was, [
that Men must believe the Hierarchical Church, although it tells us, that that
is black which our Eye judges to be white] Unto which we may add the third,
invented by Ignatius Loyola, [of blind Obedience,] which we have no mind to
practice. To move forward.

Page 22. We find (say you,) their Seditious, Remonstrances, Declarations and
Pamphlets were dispersed. --

Now I cannot find that Mr. Whitlock, whom you quote, informs you, that their
Remonstrances, etc. were seditious: this is maliciously foisted in by you, and
if you were in Scotland, you would, as you deserve, be severely punished (which
you would call Persecution) upon the Statute against Leising-makers.

Mr. Whitlock, in Page 28. which you cite, gives this Relation; About the year
1560, the Earl of Murray, with Knox, Buchanan, and others, gave such a shock to
Popery, as made every thing (and by consequence Episcopacy) which stood near
it, to reel. He then shows how Episcopacy and Presbytery took their turns of
Government; and giving an Account of the King's Resolution to enforce the
Common Prayer Book; and by an Army to bring the Scots to obedience, (or as you
phrase it, to compliance with the Church of England); he says, That because
this was the Bishop's War, it was held fit that they should contribute largely
toward the Preservation of their own Hierarchy; and accordingly, the Clergy
were assembled by the Bishops, in their Diocesses, and invited to a liberal Aid.

I shall now, (Sir,) in a short Digression, show you from Mr. Whitlock, how
this was growing up, from being the Bishop's, to be a Popish War; he relates,
Page 31. That the Queen employed Sir Kenelm Digby, and Mr. Walter Mountague
(who at that very time, as we have it in Gage's Survey of the West Indies, p.
209, stood Candidates at Rome for a Cardinal's-Cap;) to labor the Papists for
a liberal Contribution, which they gained; and Sir Basil Brooks, a Person
afterward very active in the Irish Rebellion, was appointed Treasurer for the
Moneys, thus raised by the Queen's Solicitation for this War against the Scots:
hereupon some styled the Forces raised against the Scots, in the beginning of
the year 1640, THE POPISH ARMY. But to return to what I intended; I will show
you the Heads of the Scotch Declaration, which Mr. Whitlock puts down upon the
Page you mention; and that I may not be accused of Partiality, take first the
King's Declaration; His Majesty says, he sets it forth to inform his Subjects
of the seditious Practices of some in Scotland, seeking the overthrow of Regal
Power, under false pretext of Religion, etc. He takes God to witness, he is
constrained by their Treasons, to take Arms for the safety of that and this
Kingdom. He resolves to maintain Episcopacy there, etc.

The Scots answer; That though the Secrets of God's Ways cannot be sounded, yet
considering his Providence in their personal Affairs, the Lord is about some
great Work on Earth; for the Cup of Affliction propined to other Reformed Kirks
is now presented to them: -- That instead of a gracious return to their humble
Petitions, from time to time, the return is a late Declaration libelled against
them; though the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against their Cause, and the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ now in question. Which Declaration proceeds from the
Unchristian Prelates and their Party. They conclude, setting forth their long
suffering of the Prelates Insolency, etc. and fearing Popery to be introduced.
And they say, for doing any harm to England, cursed be their Breasts, if they
harbor any such Thought, etc.

Your next Accusation, Doctor, against the Scots, is, Page 23. The King
consents to a Treaty: Commissioners were appointed on both sides; and they came
to a Conclusion, agreeing upon seven Articles; The King justly performed the
Articles on his side, notwithstanding the first Article agreed upon, was to
disband the Forces of Scotland within 24 hours, yet these perfidious Persons
kept part of their Forces in a body; and all their Officers in pay, and kept up
their Fortisications at Leith. And now let the Reader judge by this, how
deserving these Men are of such Commendations, as this pestilent and bold
Letter-Writer gives them.

Take a full Answer to this Slander, from the Representation of the Proceedings
of the Kingdom of Scotland, since the late Pacification by the Estates of the
Kingdom, page 35. We within the space of forty eight hours, the time appointed
by his Majesty, dissolved our Army. Concerning the Officers, we were careful,
both to observe that Article of the Pacification to his Majesty, and also to
keep promise to them; which did bind us not to hold them in Military Pay, but
to vouchsafe them Entertainment, till they should be restored to their own, or
called to other Service; which ought not to be taken for any Breach, Contempt,
or Disobedience, but for an observation of the Law of Nature, and common
Equity, they being our own Natives, and having forsaken their Places and Means,
for Defense of Us and their Native Country; less than this neither could they
expect, nor we perform, although the Peace had been most firmly settled.

All Forts and Castles were speedily restored, although they be now used for a
Terror and Invasion against us. Some part of the Fortifications at Leith was
demolished, for his Majesty's Satisfaction; and the whole remitted by his
Majesty to the Town of Edinburgh, as having right to the same.

See further what they say in Refutation of this vile Calumny, in their
Remonstrance concerning the present Troubles, page 7. We delivered all Places
into his Majesty's Hands, which were desired, in testimony of our Obedience;
and although they might have been in our Hands, Pledges of Assurance for
performance of those Articles that were agreed to be granted in the following
Assembly and Parliament; and now, contrary to our Expectation, are turned for
Engines of Terror, and Fetters of Slavery, to frustrate us from obtaining the
benefit of that Capitulation.

Now to put you, Doctor, to eternal silence, I shall subjoin an unconquerable
Evidence against your bold Assertion; The Pacification was made upon the 18 th
of June 1639. And upon the 24 th the Marquess of Hamilton received possession
of the Castle of Edinburgh for the King. This is in Bishop Burnet's Memoirs of
the two Hamiltons, page 144. it is a Book you have heard of, though I doubt
never seen, (you shall presently see why I say so*) If this Treatise be
partial, it must incline to the King against the Scots, because the Marquess
was deeply engaged in the Royal Cause: This was not only wrote by the Bishop
when he was a Chaplain to King Charles the Second, from the Marquesses own
Memoirs, but is dedicated to the King, and was published with his Royal
Testimonial, that he had seen and approved it. And is there room now for any
Man to believe, that if the Scots had not acted with the highest Simplicity and
Integrity in this Treaty, they would have instantly and voluntarily quitted the
best Strength in that Kingdom to his Majesty? And now let the Reader judge by
this, whether one word that such a paltry Doctor as you utter, out of your
Pulpit, ^e to be credited?

Well, what comes next? e'ne what lies uppermost, page 23. And whereas this
scandalizing Person has the confidence to assert, that the King, when he came
home, burnt, by the common Hangman, the Pacification he had made: I must tell
him, he talks, as he has done all along throughout his Letter, falsely, and
[against his own Reading and Knowledg]: and for this I appeal to Bishop Burnet
in his Memoirs of the two Hamiltons, where, page 782. he acquaints us, That the
Scots published a false and scandalous Paper, entitled, Some of his Majesty's
Treaties with his Subjects of Scotland; so Untrue and Seditious, that it was
burnt by the Hands of the Common Hangman. And are not you a base Person then,
to oberude such a Lie upon the World as you have done? But it is no wonder, the
Father, whose Cause you have served in this rude and seditions Libel, is the
Father of Lies.

Why, now most unhappy Doctor, you are caught again; and whereas you say that
I talk falsely against my reading, it will be found that you talk at random for
want of reading. I told you that I suspected you had never seen Bishop Burnet's
Alemoirs, you shall now see my reason for it; You quote page 782. and there are
but 436 Pages in that Book, and 47 in the Appendix. And for my part, I have
read it some Years since, and now turned it over, but cannot find therein the
Story for which you vouch him: I am apt to think, (as you told me page 50.)
That some crafty Knave, finding you ready to pick up any Story, whereby you
might serve your Cause, had a mind to put a Trick upon you, and to expose the
Truth of the rest of your Book, by telling you, that Bishop Burnet 's Evidence
against the Scots, would outweigh a thousand Witnesses; and that he had
declared what false Loons they were, in a certain Book called his Memoirs. But
is not he a Blockhead then that will be so imposed upon?

Nevertheless, to deal openly, and without reserve in this Matter; I find these
Memoirs speaking thus, ( page 143.) When the Scotch Commissioners came back to
the Camp, they gave an account of their Negotiation; and besides Articles of
Treaty, they produced another Paper, [ which passed among all for the
Conditions of Agreement]; it was a Note containing some Points which were
alleged to have been agreed to at Berwick, verbally, though not set down in
the written Treaty; which was made up of some downright Mistakes, [this Term
comes something short of False, Scandalous, Untrue and Seditious, which are
your Ep^thets]; and of other things which the King in discourse had indeed
said, but not positively, nor as a Determination on which he had concluded. --

It were now worth the knowing, what, in particular, these downright Mistakes,
and these other things, were; but this History leaving us in the dark therein,
I shall show you what was the main thing which gave distaste, in that Paper
which Bishop Burnet says, passed among all for the Conditions of the
Agreement; and how the Estates of Scotland justified that Paper from the
Imputation of Mistakes. The Paper is entitled, Some Conditions of his
Majesty's Treaty with his Subjects of Scotland, before the English Nobility.

It is there remembered, that it being with all Instancy and Humility pressed,
Saturday, June 15. that his Majesty would satisfy that main Desire of his
Subjects, by declaring, that he would quit Episcopacy; did answer, That it was
not sought in our Desires. And when it was replied, That our first Desire to
have the Acts of the General Assembly ratified, imported the same: His Majesty
acknowledged it to be so, and averred, that he did not refuse it, but would
advise till Monday the 17 th. At which time his Majesty being pressed to give
some Signification of his quitting Episcopacy: And it being plainly shown to
his Majesty, That if he would labor to maintain Episcopacy, it would breed a
miserable Schism in this Kirk, and make such a Rapture and Division in this
Kingdom, as would prove uncurable: And if his Majesty would let the Kirk and
Country be freed of them, his Majesty would receive as hearty and dutiful
Obedience as ever Prince received of a People: His Majesty answered, that he
could not prelimit and forestal his Voice, but had appointed a Free Assembly,
which might judge of all Ecclesiastical Matters; the Constitutions whereof he
promised to ratify in the ensuing Parliament.

See now what the Estates of Scotland said, in vindication of themselves in
this Matter; you will find them thus expressing it, in their Representation of
the Proceedings of the Kingdom, page 15.

After much Agitation, and many Consultations, his Majesty's Declaration,
touching the intended Pacification was read to our Commissioners; who, upon
their Dislike and Exceptions taken both at Matter and Expressions, as contrary
to our Minds, and prejudicial to our Cause, did humbly remonstrate, that the
Declaration, as it was conceived, could not give Satisfaction to us from whom
they were sent. His Majesty was graciously pleased to command some words to be
deleted, other words to be changed; and many parts thereof were, by verbal
Promises and Interpretation, from his Majesty's own Mouth, mitigated: Which in
our Estimation, were equal to that which was written, some of the Counselors
of England, assuring our Commissioners, that what was spoken and promised
before Men of Honor, and in the Face of two Armies, was no less certain, and
would (no doubt) be as really performed, as if it had been written in Capital
Letters; which therefore were diligently observed, carefully remembered, and
punctually related by our Commissioners, at their delivering of his Majesty's
Declaration to us: And without which, we nor could nor would have condescended
and consented to the Articles of the Declaration, more than we could or would,
against the Light of our Minds and Consciences, have sinned against God, and
condemned our own Deed. Thus way was made to the Pacification, and for
preoccupying all Mistakes, whether wilful possibly by some, or through weakness
of Memory by others. These vocal Interpretations and Expressions, were
collected, kept by our selves, and in Papers delivered to some of the
Commissioners of England.

It may now be observed, upon the whole Matter, that this Paper contained
nothing contrary to the Articles, or the Pacification, but was a mollifying of
his Majesty's Declaration, that it might be the more readily received by the
People. And it had been more than imaginable Impudence, to put into the Hands
of the Nobility of England, a Paper professing what was openly spoken but just
before in their own hearing; and yet containing Untruths and seditious
Positions, contrary to all that was done for Peace.

The Truth of the Case is this; The King had promised them a General Assembly,
to be holden the 6 th of August, and a Parliament upon the 20 th, to ratify
what should be decreed in the Assembly: But he was reprimanded by the Queen and
the Bishops, who vilified the Pacification, and upbraided him, that he had
brought home a dishonorable Peace. Whereupon he altered his Mind, declaring,
that what had been agreed, would be unprofitable for the Kirk, because he well
knew that nothing short of the extirpation of Prolacy could satisfy that
People. He therefore, about a Month after the Pacification, set himself to pick
a Quarrel with them; and upon the 18 th of July, 1639, he charged them with no
less than Eighteen Criminal Articles; whereof they denied some, and made full
Answers to the rest. I shall touch upon two of them, because they refer to your
Discourse which we are now examining.

The third Article was, Forces not dismissed; and in particular, Monro's
Regiment yet kept on foot.

The Answer was this;

Since his Majesty will have that Regiment disbanded, the same shall be done
presently: But we humbly beg, that his Majesty would be pleased to dismiss the
Garrisons in Berwick, Carlisle, and the rest of the Borders.

The 18 th Article was; The Paper divulged; and if they avow the same?

Which had this modest Answer:

As we are most unwilling to fall upon any Question which may seem to import
the least Contradiction with his Majesty; so if it had not been the Trust which
we gave to the Relation of our Commissioners, the written Declaration would not
have been acceptable, nor the Castle of Edinburgh Rendered, except for the
Trust we reposed in their Relation, and Con^idence in his Majesty's Royal Word,
which we believe they did not forget: which Paper was only written for that
cause, left his Majesty, or his Subjects should aver, that they spoke any thing
without Warrant.

But having fully shown that this Paper suffered innocently, I detain you no
longer upon this Head.

In the next place, page 24. you exhibit a most heinous Article, not only
against the Scots, but the English also; They sent (you say) NEW COMMISSIONERS
to the King. They did so; but I question whether you understand the reason why
they were called New Commissioners; and therefore this may inform you, that
they sent Commissioners not long before to supplicate for Peace; but they were
denied access to the King's Presence, and commanded to return Home. You go on,
saying, that Mr. Whitlock informs you, page 31. they had great resort to them,
and many secret Counsels held with them by the discontented English, especially
those who favored Presbytery, and were no Friends to Bishops. Having consulted
Mr. Whitlock, I find you are so far right; but you break off in the middle of
the Sentence, and omit these words, [ or had suffered in the late Censures in
the Star Chamber, Exchequer, High Commission, and other Iudicatories]; and I
would fain know what you infer from this Tale, and what harm you see in it. Mr.
Whitlock gave you the Names of some Honorable and never to be forgotten
Patriots, who resorted to these Comm^ssi^ners, to whose Names you ought to pay
more deference, than to make a ma^i^ious R^presentation of their Visits and
Conversation; the Earls of ^ssex, Bedford, Holland, the Lord Say, Mr. Hambd^n,
Mr. Pym, etc. were Men, who with sad Hearts beheld the Innovati^n in Religion,
and the infringing of Fundamental Laws and Libe^ties in both Kingdoms. Surely
then, Doctor, without your license, such Men as these, may lawfully consult
what means are proper to support the ^abrick, when they see Religion and
Justice, which are the Pillars of the Government, to be undermined.

But, say you, The Scots implored Aid from the French King, by a Letter under
the Hands of many of their principal Actors. You then put in an Appeal ( page
25.) to your Reader, Whether his Majesty had not just Reason, after such
Discoveries as these were, to clap some of them in Prison; and whether he had
been to blame, if for such traitorous Correspondencies with a Popish Prince, he
had chopped off some of their Heads?

I have a word or two which might be offered for stay of Execution of this hard
Sentence, and desire to be heard, or rather that the whole Kingdom of Scotland
may be p^rmitted to speak in this case. This is that French Letter ^s^ith that
Parliament) so much insisted upon, as to open a Gate to let in Foreign Power to
rule over England and our selves; which, by what Consequence it can be
inferred, we would fain know? When a People is sore distressed by Sea and Land,
i^ it unlawful, by the Law of God and Man, to call for Help from God and Man?
Is th^re no Help nor Assistance by Intercession, by Supply of Money, etc? Is
all Assistance by the Sword, and by Men? We love not Shrouds nor Disguisements,
we speak the plain Truth, and fear nothing so much as that Truth be not known.
Great Forces by Sea and Land were coming upon us: Informations went abroad in
other Nations, to the prejudice of Us and our Cause. This made us resolve to
write unto the French King, apprehending that upon sinister Relation, his Power
might be used against Us. Aid and Assistance has been given in former Times.
If we have called now upon Denmark, Holland, Sweden, Poland, or other Nations
for Help, are we therefore inviting them all to a Sovereignty over Us? And when
all is said or done, the Letter was but an Embrio, forsaken in the Birth, as
containing some unfit Expressions, and not agreeable to our Instructions, and
therefore slighted by the Subscribers, but caught by this treacherous and
secret Accuser of the Kingdom. Another Letter was formed consonant to the
Instructions, and signed by many Hands; but neither was this sent from us,
because we conceived that Mediation from France would be but late to avert the
Danger which was so near. -- It is universally known, that it was written in
May 1639. and therefore ought to have been buried in the Pacification. -- We
love not to harp upon Subscribing, or sending of Letters to other Princes, and
to the Pope himself, from Ex^mples of Old, and of Late, which are not hid from
the Eyes o^ the World. It is sufficient to us to have justified our selves, and
to show how innocently the Lord Lowdon suffers, for putting his Hand to such
a Letter, the Guiltiness or Innocence, not being personal or proper to the Lord
London, but national and common to us all. And although it had been a Fault,
and his alone, yet whatsoever it was, it did in time, and for a long time, go
before his C^mmission and Employment; and therefor ought not to have been
challenged till he had returned to his Country, uncloathed himself of his
Commission, and turned again to be what he was, a private Nobleman; The Dignity
and Safety of Nations, Kingdoms, Estates, and Republics, are much interessed
in their Commissioners and Legates, (whether they be sent from one Prince to
another, or from a Kingdom, Province or Republic to their own Prince.) Their
Dignity; for what is done to the Legate, is interpreted to be done to them that
sent him. Their Safety; because if Legates be wronged, there can be no more
composing of Differences, nor possibility of Reconciliation. -- Moreover, his
Majesty's own Royal and inviolable Warrant for the coming of our Commissioners
to his Presence at this time, is enough for their safe Conduct and Security. If
they have committed any thing at home against their King, Country, or any
particular Subject; the fundamental Liberties and Independency of the Kingdom,
do require, that they be tried and judged at Home, and in a legal way, by the
ordinary Judicatories of the Land. -- We earnestly entreat for their Liberty
and Safety, who are to us as our selves.

Methinks, now, if the King, according to the rash Advice of you their
Majesty's frantic Chaplain at Aldgate, should have chopped off the Head of my
Lord of Lowdon, one of the Scotch Commissioners, it would have offered Violence
to the Peace and Quiet of his Mind all the days of his Life. But I must think
again, his Lordship was a Presbyterian, a Heretic, who would not comply with
the Church of England; that considered, you could do it with the greatest
Complacency, and 'twould (I am satisfied) be highly to your content, that that
People had but one Neck, so that you might do their business at a blow.

I remember that you told me, upon the occasion of my talking of Laud's sending
the Scotch Common Prayer Book to be approved at Rome, that you thought I had
got a Secret. Whether I then had or not, you bring one into my Remembrance, by
your enquiry whether the King had been to blame, if he had chopped off some of
the Scotch Commissioners Heads; and you shall have it.

I have heard, and do believe, that the King having, against all Justice,
imprisoned the Earl of Lowdon (one of the Commissioners from the Scotch
Parliament) in the Tower; he about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, sent
his own Letter to Sir William Balfour, Lieutenant of the Tower, commanding him
to see my Lord of Lowdon 's Head struck off within the Tower, before nine the
next Morning: Upon the Receipt of this Command, the Lieutenant of the Tower,
that his Lordship might prepare for Death, gave him notice of it: He being
surprised, as well he might, prevailed with Sir William to find out the
Marquess of Hamilton (then in great favor with the King, and Master of the
Horse) and to tell him, that he esteemed him to be engaged in Honor, to
interpose in this matter. The Letter being thereupon carried and shown to the
Marquess, it struck him with Astonishment; and with no small difficulty, he
made his way to the King, being then in Bed, and humbly enquired whether his
Majesty had given such a Command for beheading the Earl of Lowdon? the King
answered* Yes, and I will be obeyed therein, he shall die. The Marquess finding
him inexorable, told his Majesty, that he would kiss his Hand, and instantly
take his Horse and be gone; for he would not stay to see his Majesty massacred,
as most certainly he would; for before the next Night, the whole City would
come upon him. Hereby the King was wrought upon to hold his Hand, and
countermand the fatal Warrant.

This is so incredible a piece of Tyranny, that I cannot expect you should
believe it upon my bare Assertion: I shall therefore show you, that it seems to
be pointed at in Bishop Burne^'s Memoirs, Page 161. in these words; There were
some ill Instruments about the King [ Bishops no doubt on'^] who advised him to
proceed capitally against Lowdon; which is believed went very far: But the
Marquess of Hamilton opposed this vigorous^y; assuring the King, that if that
were done, Scotland was for ever lost.

Now, if Curiosity shall lead you to enquire further into this matter, you may
do well to learn what is meant by the obscure Expression, [ which is believed
went very far:] and if that do not open the whole business to you, you will not
fail of Satisfaction, if you can, by any Friend, make way to the Original
Papers, from which my Lord Bishop of Salisbury took his Memoirs, and which now
are in the Hands of his Grace my Lord Duke of Hamilton.

A word or two more about Scotland, and we will cast an Eye on your Impeachment
against our own Nation: you very often term the Actions of that Kingdom,
factious, seditious, rebellious, traitorous: Now let me show you how the Scotch
Parliament defined Treason; We entreat our Adversaries ( say they) to show us
in good earnest, and not by way of Railing, in what sense we have incurred the
Censure of Rebellion and Treason; We cannot be moved to think, but the Mitre of
a usurping Prelate, by the Authority of a National Council, may be thrown to
the ground without the Violation or smallest Touch of the Crown or Scepter of
Imperial Majesty: To dethrone a Prelate, and to overturn Prelacy, we judge it no
Treason against the King. -- Traitors to God and their Country, must be
Traitors to the King; and such as are faithful to God and their Country, must
be the King's best Subjects: The Right of his Majesty's Crown, and the Acts of
Parliament, command all the Subjects to rise with the King, and to assist him,
when he rises for God and the Country; but no Law, nor Act of Parliament,
forbids to stand for God and the Country, in the case of public Invasion.

Take now from Bp. Burnet's Memoirs, a true Account of these Scotch Troubles,
which have now been so troublesome to you and me, and I Will return to Old
England: The Lord's of the Council (says he,) Page 31, (not 782.) laid the
greatest blame upon Bishops, which appears from the Earl of Traquaire's Letter
to the Marquess of Hamilton, date 27. Aug. 1631. viz.

At the meeting of the Council, 23 d Instant, we found so much appearance of
Trouble and Stir like to be, amongst People of all Qualities and Degrees, upon
the urging of this New-Service-Book, that we durst no longer forbear to
acquaint his Majesty therewith. -- Some of the leading Men of the Clergy are so
violent, and many times without ground or true judgment; that their want of
right Understanding how to compass business of this nature and weight, does
often breed as many Difficulties; and their rash and foolish Expressions and
Attempts, have bred such a Fear and Jealousy in the Hearts of many, that if his
Majesty were rightly informed thereof, he would blame them, and justly think
that from them arises the ground of many Mistakes amongst us. -- [This
Business, in good Faith is, by the Folly and Misgovernment of some of our
Clergy, come to that height, that the like has not been seen in this Kingdom of
a long time.]

No more of Scotland. Let Us see what is next. You declare your Resolution, to
apply your self to the Defense of what you had formerly said in behalf of King
Charles; and proceed thus ( Page 26.) You say, That those Gracious Acts which I
mention, were bought of him, and what then? What has been more usual ever
since Parliaments had a being in England? Pray look into the Statute-Book, and
tell me what Gracious Favors can you find bestowed by the several Kings of
this Realm, upon their People, that those People have not made their
acknowledgments for them, by presenting their Sovereigns with great Sums of
Money?

What ridiculous Stuff is this? Gracious Acts, Gracious Favors, etc. It has
been heretofore well observed, that some who call themselves Churchmen, have
left their Station to become ignorant and unhappy Statesmen, who have made the
Church, and the Tenets thereof, an Instrument of Bondage to the Subject. These
Men tell us that Parliaments are not assembled to ease the Grievances of the
Subject, but to fill the Coffers of the Prince: These Men teach Princes that
all the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and the maintenance of them, are
Doals of Grace, and Gifts of mere Favor, proceeding from the Prince, (and not
the true Birthright of the Subject, which they may truly challenge) which are
to be continued or changed as Princes shall think fit. But pray let us see what
these Gracious Acts, these Gracious Favors, were, which we bought, as in your
Opinion we ought: They were Acts to declare the levying Money by way of forced
Loan, Ship Money, Coat and Conduct-Money, to be illegal, and against the
undoubted Liberty of the Subject; to suppress the most accursed and tyrannical
Courts called the Star Chamber and High Commission; to bring a Traitor to
Justice; to secure us of the sitting of a Parliament once in three Years, when
the ancient Laws gave us a right to Annual Parliaments, and when he had, to the
high violation of those Laws, kept us without a Parliament for about eleven
Years. These Acts, say you (their Majesty's Malapert Chaplain at Aldgate) are
such Gracious Favors, that if we will have them, we ought in all Conscience to
buy them. But our English Parliaments have always been of another Mind; and Sir
Robert Cotton tells us in the Life of King Henry the Third, That that King was
told in full Parliament, that they would not pay his Debts, nor give him a
Groat, postquam coepit esse dilapidator Regni, so long as he continued to
destroy the Kingdom. And pray now turn to your Bible, and tell me what Text
there, does warrant this your wild Opinion. Where are we now?

But buy these Acts did they? Pray who had the disposal of the Money? how was
it laid out? was it given to the King to do what he listed withal? No, you know
a great part of it was bestowed on the Scots, for the good Service they did in
rebelling against their King, and putting two Kingdoms into a Flame.

I did observe (in my Letter to you) that the King had out of the Subjects
Purse in the first Year of the Parliament, Nov. 1640. one Million and an half
of Money. I also remember that the King upon the Conclusion of the Treaty at
Rippon, agreed to allow the Scots 850 l. per diem; and in answer to your
question, I say, the King had the disposal of the Money; and as to what part of
it the Scots received, the King paid it to them, for his having done against
all Law and Reason what he listed. And I will show you from the Demand of that
Nation, who ought to have paid the Reckoning. They say, We were constrained to
take Arms for our Defense; The War on our part was Defensive, and all Men do
acknowledge, that in common Equity, the Defendant should not be suffered to
perish in his just and necessary Defense; but that the Pursuer ought to bear
the Charges of the Defendant. The prevalent Faction of Prelates and Papists
have moved every Stone against us, and used all sorts of Means, not only their
Counsels, Subsidies and Forces, but their Church-Canons and Prayers, for our
utter Ruin, which make them obnoxious to our just Accusations, and guilty of
all the Losses and Wrongs which we have sustained. And therefore we may now
with the greater Reason and Confidence press our Demand, that the Parliament,
the Kingdom, and the King himself may see us repaired in our Losses, at the
Cost of that Faction, by whose Means we have sustained so much damage. We will
never doubt but the Parliament in their Wisdom and Justice, will provide that a
proportionable part of the Cost and Charges be born by the Delinquents. We wish
the Justice of the Parliament may be declared in making the Burden more
sensible to the Prelates and Papists, than to others who never have wronged us,
which will conduce much to the Honor of the King and Parliament.

Page 27. You take notice of my Charge; that the King demurred to pass the
Bills for taking away the S^ar-Chamber and High Commission Courts, at the time
when he passed the Poll-Bill, though presented together to him for the Royal
Assent; and demand whether he ought to have passed them, without a Why or a
Wherefore?

No, by no means, you talk now like a Rational Creature: We are then to look
for the Why's and Wherefore's. You acknowledge in your first Defense, that these
Courts were Grievances to the Nation; and I said, and by many sad Instances
proved, that they were Arbitrary and Tyrannical Courts, Forges of Misery,
Oppression and Violence: There Is then a Why, for you Doctor. The Parliament
agreed with the King, to give him the Poll-Bill to remove these accursed Courts
of Oppression and Tyranny; There Is also a Wherefore. Nevertheless, though the
Parliament voted that he should pass all the three Bills, or none at all; he
snatching up their Money, runs away, and delays to pass the Bills for
abrogating the Star Chamber and High Commission Courts; and yet you affirmed,
That HE READILY passed whats^ever Bills the Parliament offered to him for
redress of the Nations Grievances: And whether he did or not, was the point in
Controversy between you and me.

The next thing in course, is, ( Page 28.) the unhappy Earl of Strafford's
Case, in relation whereunto you, most learned Doctor, whose Head is swelled
like any Bladder with Wind and Vapor, do ^hus impeach the Lords and Commons;
Do not you know they were so little satisfied with the Legality of their
Proceedings, that they in the very Bill [for his Attainder] inserted a Clause,
that this should not be made use of, as a Precedent for the time to come. This
is well enough urged for a D. D. and is passable, the Man who utters it being
considered: But I must tell you, Sir, what I have heard as wife a Man as you
say about this Clause, of not bringing it into Precedent; that in such Cases it
could not be otherwise, without leaving the same Power to the Judges in
Westminster Hall, which by the Statute of Edward the Third, is entrusted only
with the Parliament; for that Statute, ennumerating all Treason cognizable by
the Judges, reserves to the Parliament declarative Treason; as that which they
might be safely entrusted with: though it could not be so in the Hands of any
other Jurisdiction. And that this is the reason of that Clause, I am told no
Lawyer, though never so much a Tory, will deny.

Allow me now, Sir, seeing we are talking of Strafford, to lay before you a
pleasant Dialogue, which I find in Whitlock's Memoirs, page 41. between your
three Martyrs, the King, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of
Strafford, together with the Lord Cottington, a Papist; and that upon the 5th
of May 1640. the very Day upon which the Parliament was dissolved for their
refusing to furnish Money to carry on the wicked War then resolved upon against
Scotland; the Paper is entitled,

No Danger of a War with Scotland; if Offensive, not Defensive.

K. Charles. How can we undertake Offensive War, if we have no Money?

E. of Strafford. Borrow of the City 100000 l. go on vigorously to levy
Ship Money; your Majesty having tried the Affection of your People, you are
absolved and loose from all Rule of Government, and to do what Power will
admit: Your Majesty having tried all ways, and being refused, shall be
acquitted before God and Man. And you have an Army in Ireland, that you may
employ to reduce this Kingdom to Obedience: For I am confident the Scots cannot
hold out five Months.

Archbishop. You have tried all ways, and have always been denied; IT IS NOW
LAWFVL TO TAKE IT BY FORCE.

Lord Cottington. Leagues abroad there may be made for the Defense of the
Kingdom; the Lower House are weary of the King and Church: [The Enemies of
Popery, were even in that Day Commonwealths-men.] All Ways shall be just to
raise Money by, in this inevitable Necessity, and are to be used, being lawful.

Archbishop. For an Offensive, not a Defensive War.

Strafford. The Town is full of Lords, put the Commission of Array on Foot; and
if any of them stir, We will make 'em smart.

Now you will readily agree that this is no Sham, in regard it comes from Mr.
Whitlock, whom you quote four or five times. Besides, I assure you that it was
given in Evidence upon Oath at the Earl of Strafford's Trial; and which further
evinces the Truth thereof, the King instantly required the Loan of the City of
London, as here advised, and for refusal to comply therein, Ludlow tells you
page 17. he imprisoned Sir Stephen Soame, Sir Nicholas Rainton, and other
eminent Citizens. And were not these Halcion Days? were not these a rare Set of
blessed Saints?

Page 32. You lash me for my Relation of the King's tampering with the Army, to
^urb the Parliament and subdue them to his Will, and say, that I tell a Story
of Piercy and Goring, etc. such a one as the Faction was wont to make use of
upon all occasions to amuse and heat the People* but the best of it is, there
are so many incredible Things (you say) in the Account, that I must tell you it
has not gained upon my belief at all; amongst the rest, you tell us that two
of the Parties concerned, confess that all the French that were about the Town
were to be mounted: but that which is the Nicker, is, that the Clergy would
raise 1000 Horse to assist them, and yet this Conspiracy was under an Oath of
Secrecy: And VERY LIKELY INDEED WHEN SO MANY CLERGYMEN MVST BE ACQVAINTED WITH
IT. Surely, Sir, you have a mighty Opinion of your self. --

Surely, Sir, you have a very bad Opinion of your Brethren of the Cassock, or
else a most weak way of arguing; and the more you say, the more you discover
your Rashness and want of Judgment: The Clergy will not con you Thanks for
representing them to the World as Blabs of their Tongues, to the pr^judice of
the Cause of Mother Church; as an Order of Men, who may not be trusted with a
Secret, committed to them under a strict Oath. But this Story (you say) has not
gained upon your Belief: who can help it? Our Savior converted many of diverse
States and Conditions to the Faith, but we do not find that ever he converted a
Priest: That the King did tamper with the Army to bring them against the
Parliament, as I relate it, appears most evidently in Whitlock's Memoirs, Page
44. and also by the several Informations, Examinations and Confessions upon
Oath, (before a Committee of the House of Lords) of the Parties engaged in it,
most of them Men of Quality, and highly in Favor with the King. You may read
them at large in Husband's exact Collections (a Book in esteem with you)
beginning at Page 220. I there find that the two Parties who confessed that the
French about the Town were to be mounted, and that the Clergy were to find 1000
Horse, were Lieutenant Colonel Ballard and Captain Chudleigh. But in regard you
have taken the Pains to relate what his Majesty's Declaration said to this
Point; I shall, for the setting the matter in its true Light, transcribe a
brief Account thereof from the Declaration of the Parliament, (which you most
rudely call the Faction) as you will find it in Husband's Collections, Page
200. There, speaking of the intended Force upon the Parliament, they declare
themselves thus. Certainly we have been more tender of his Majesty's Honor in
this point, than he, whosoever he was, that did write his Majesty's
Declaration; where he calls God to witness he never had any such Thought, or
knew of any such Resolution of bringing up the Army; which truly will seem
strange to those who shall read the Depositions of Mr. Goring, Information of
Mr. Piercy, the Examination of Mr. Wilmot, Mr. Pollard and others; with the
other Examination of Capt. Leg, Sir Jacob Ashley, and Sir John Conyers: and
consider the Condition and Nature of the Petition, which was sent unto Sir
Jacob Ashley, under the Approbation of C. R. which his Majesty does now
acknowledge to be his own Hand; and being full of Scandal to the Parliament,
might have proved dangerous to the whole Kingdom, if the Army should have
interposed betwixt the King and them as was desired.

You tell me, page 43. That I have been so bold in my Assertion about the
Tumults, that I give the Lie to almost all the Historians that have writ the
Transactions of those Times; and you refer me to the Votes of the Common
Council, Dec. 31. 1641. Now, because you are short in the Relation of that
Matter, I shall give you it as it is in Husband's Collection, page 30. The Lord
Newburgh, upon Dec. 31. 1641, delivered a Message from his Majesty to the
Common Council, to this effect; There having been of late many tumultuary
Assemblies about Whitehal and Westminster, the King recommended to their Care
the preventing the like Tumults; and declared, That he was so well assured of
the good Affections of the City, that he could in no wise understand it to have
any share in the Fault of these Tumults, but that they proceed merely from the
mean and unruly People of the Suburbs, etc.

Hereupon the Common Council returned Answer, That they had no hand in these
tumultuous Proceedings, and disavowed the same; and promised their best
Endeavors to prevent and suppress, in time to come, all such tumultuous
Assemblies, and all mutinous rebellious Persons: And they humbly desired, that
all the Delinquents, and Causers of Tumults, being apprehended, may receive
condign Punishment. And,

They ordered every Member of the Common Council to make it known, That if any
Person should neglect his Duty of Watch and Ward, etc. and not do his best
Endeavor to suppress or prevent Tumults, he shall receive condign Punishment.

Now, Sir, I appeal to all Mankind, whether this does any way serve your
Purpose? You refer to the Votes of the Common Council, and would thence argue,
that the King was necessitated, by reason of the Tumults, to leave Whitehal.
But the contrary is most evident, from the King's Message, and the Answer and
Resolutions of the City. The King declares, That he was well assured of the
good Affections of the City, and that they had not any share in the Fault of
the Tumults, but that they proceeded merely from the mean and unruly People of
the Suburbs. The Common Council promises to prevent and suppress all Tumults,
and command strict Watch and Ward to be kept to that purpose. And might not the
King have been hereby persuaded, that he was in no danger from Tumults? Were
not these Votes a full Security against Fear, from such Disorders for the
future? No doubt but they were; but the King had other Designs than those of
Peace in his Head. I told you of his Majesty's fortifying Whitehal, and that
armed Men sallied out thence, reviling, menacing, and wounding many Citizens
passing by with Petitions to the Parliament; and that when the Parliament and
People complained of those Assaults, the King justified the Authors thereof; so
that I must needs conclude (as I did before) that the Tumults were made at
Whitehal by the King's own People; that all his fear of Tumults, was but a mere
Pretense and Occasion taken, of his resolved Absence from the Parliament, that
he might turn his flashing at the Court-Gate, to slaughtering in the Field.

Page 44. you tell me, that another Calumny wherewith I reproach the Memory of
King Charles, is his unwillingness to issue out his Proclamations against the
Irish Rebels; and when he did, commanded but 40 to be printed. You then say,
The truth of it is, was this Story true, it '^would be an inexcusable Fault in
the King; but to Rufute me, you transcribe his Majesty's own Vindication of
himself, which says, that he was in Scotland when the Rebellion broke forth,
that he immediately recommended the care of that business to the Parliament
here; --. That if no Proclamation issued sooner (of which for the present he
was not certain, but thinks that others were issued out before) it was because
the Lords Justices of Ireland, desired them no sooner, and when they did, the
number they desired was but twenty.

Now in Truth Sir, this does little mend the matter; it is most strange that the
King should publish to all the World in Print, that he thinks other
Proclamations were issued before; he might without doubt have easily been at a
certainty in this point, for had there been any such thing, his Council Books,
his Secretary of State, his Clerks of the Council, would have remembered him
thereof; but to this day, no such thing has appeared nor ever will: And it is a
poor excuse to say, that the Proclamation was no sooner issued, because not
sooner desired. We of this Age, do remember in what manner our Late Princes
(Fathers 'nown Sons) have pursued the least suspicion of Rebellion: You know
that King Charles the Second, upon the pretense of a Plot, in the year 1683 was
so far from deferring by the space of three Months, to issue a Proclamation
against his own Son, the Duke of Monmouth; that we had it in three days, and I
do think there were rather forty Thousand than forty Printed; for after we had
it by it self, for the better spreading thereof, it was published in the
Gazette; the like course you well know, was taken by the Late King James; First
in the case of the Duke of Monmouth, and then in that of the Prince of Orange.
But I will show you what the Parliament said in this case of the Irish Rebels
in a Declaration in 1642.

That when the Lords and Commons, had upon the first breaking out of the Irish
Rebellion, immediately sent over 20000 l. and engaged themselves for the
reduceing of the Rebels, yet the King after his Return from Scotland, was not
pleased to take notice of it, until after some in the House of Commons, had
truly observed how forward his mischievous Counselors were, to incite him
against his Protestant Subjects of Scotland, and how slow to resent the
proceedings of his Papist Traitors in Ireland.

That although the Rebels had most impudently styled themselves, The Queen's Army,
and professed that the Cause of their Rising was, to maintain the King's
prerogative, and the Queen's Religion, against the Puritan Parliament of
England; and that thereupon the Parliament advised his Majesty to wipe away
this dangerous scandal by proclaiming them Rebels; which then would have
weakened the Conspirators in the beginning, and have encouraged both the
Parliament here, and good people there, the more vigorously to have opposed
their proceedings; yet no Proclamation was set forth to that purpose, till
almost three Months after the breaking out of this Rebellion, and then Command
given, that but forty should be Printed, nor they published, till further
directions should be given by his Majesty.

That the Parliament and Adventurers, had long since designed 5000 Foot and 500
Horse for the Relief of Munster, to be sent under the Command of the Lord
Wharton; but no Commission for his Lordship could be obtained from his Majesty,
whereby Lymerick was wholly lost.

That when diverse well affected persons had prepared twelve Ships and Six
Pinnaces, with more than 1000 Land Forces, at their own charge, for the service
of Ireland, and desired nothing but a Commission from his Majesty to enable
them thereunto; That Commission, after twice sending to York for the same, was
likewise denied.

That although the Lords Justices of Ireland, have three Months since earnestly
desired to have two pieces of Battery sent over for that Service, yet such
Commands are given to the Officers of the Tower, that none of his Majesty's
Ordnance must be sent to save his Majesty's Kingdom.

That the Kings Soldiers took away at one time, Six hundred Suits of Clothes;
and at another time Three hundred Suits; which were sent by the Parliament for
the poor Soldiers in Ireland.

That the Rebels did lately send a Petition to his Majesty, Institu^ing
themselves his Majesty's Catholic Subjects of Ireland, complaining of the
Puritan Parliament of England, and desiring, that since his Majesty comes not
thither, according to their expectation, that they may ^^me into England to his
Majesty.

You come (page 46) to Examine who were the first Beginners of the War, and
say, The Parliament did really, and indeed first draw the Sword, and found the
Trumpet to Battle -- Whereas the King set up his Standard at Nottingham in
August, did not the Lords and Commons in June before, make an Order for
bringing in of Money, or Plate, to maintain Horses, Horsemen and Arms?

And did not the King long before, in the beginning of the year 1642. when all
things were in perfect Peace, send over the Crown Jewels, to buy Arms and
Ammunition in Holland? did not he at that time, write to the King of Denmark,
complaining of the Parliament, and asking Supplies from him, ad propulsandos
Hosts, to subdue h^s Enemies? You were told of these things before, but you
will not touch them, I shall not therefore trifle away more time with you, upon
this point of the first beginning of the War; only I will mind you that the
King upon the 4 th. of July 1642. Rendezvoused an Army at Beverly in
Yorkshire, tho the Parliament did not Vote the Raising of an Army till the
12th. And which is more, I will give you the Name of the first Martyr who fell
in that War in defense of the Laws and Liberties of his Country; 'twas one
Percival of Kirkman Shalme in Lancashire; he was Murdered the 15th. of July
1642. near Manchester, by the Kings Forces, under the Command of the Lord
Strange, Son to the Earl of Derby; for which that Lord was impeached in
Parliament; you may see a particular Account of this, in May's History of the
War, pa. 109. in Husbands Collections 611. and in Rushworth's Collections 3d.
Part. Vol. 1st. pa. 680.

Well, I see to my Comfort that we shall soon draw to a Conclusion; you say p.
49. I have Answered your Grand Impeachments and Accusations of this great and
Excellent Prince: As for the other things, with which you stuffed your Libell, I
say, alas Sr. you must not think to catch some Birds, (and there are thanks be
to God, great numbers of them in the Kingdom) with such Chafe as this.

There are indeed in England a great many kinds of Birds and of Beasts also,
and a great many of every kind, and before we part we will a little recreate
our selves with some of them: you must not think to catch such Birds with
Chafe: A witty Conceit upon my word; and had your dull fancy chopped upon this
other flight, neither must Chicken think to feed Capons, it would have made you
as proud as a Peacock, and you would have clapped your Wings and crow'd like any
fighting Cock, at the wit of the Expression; But (begging pardon of your
Gravity) I will tell you that it has been observed, that of all Creatures in
the Creation, the Owl of Birds, and the Ass of Beasts are the most grave, and
Sr. William Temple in his Memoires of what past in Christendom from 1672, to
1679, page 57, says, that Old Prince Maurice of Nassau when he was about 76
years of Age (having ever passed for an honest and pious man) informed him,
that when he was Governor of Brafil, he heard of a Parrot, that spoke, and
asked, and answered common questions like a reasonable Creature, and tho he
believed nothing of it, his curiosity lead him to send for it; That when it
came first into the Room where the Prince was, with a great many Dutch men
about him, it said presently, What a Company of White Men are here? they asked
it, what he thought that Man was? pointing to the Prince, it answered, Some
General or other; the Prince asked it, whence came you? it answered, from
Marinnan; the Prince, to whom do you belong? the Parrot, to a Portugez; Prince,
what do you do here? Parrot, I look after the Chickens; the Prince laughed and
said, you, look after the Chickens? the Parrot answered, yes I, and I know well
enough how to do it, and made the Chuck four or five times, that People use to
make to Chickens when they call them.

Now one would hope that this pretty Bird which discoursed so rationally, might
put a braying Beast to silence, if any thing but pulling out the Asses. Tongue
could do it: you see Doctor, that this Understanding Parrot could distinguish
White from Black, knew its own Capacity, and undertook no other Task than it
could well perform, crying Chuck, Chuck, Chuck, to the Chickens very
pertinently, which is more than you do to your Birds; that this ingenious fair
dealing Parrot, when it talked with the Prince (not thinking it would pass for
an answer to have told him, you must not think to catch such Birds as me with
Chafe) came close to the point, and gave direct and sensible Answers to plain
and honest Questions, whereas you prevaricate in a most shameful manner, and
prate, as tho you were only fit for the Conversation of a Flock of Magpies,
Iackdaws, Wood-cocks, Owls, and Buz^ods. It Is evident that your itch of Vain
glory, and unparalleld Confidence, makes you affirm that you have answered me,
and you would be thought to have said all that can be said, when you hardly say
any thing, but bl^^e what you know nothing of; you have heaped up (...) many
(...), abundance of Rubbish and Trifles, but treated of nothing with Solidity
and Judgment, nor so much as touched the Tenth part of the matters charged in
my Letter, but in your natural levity, skipping them over, would persuade the
Birds of your Feather, (I gave you their names but now) that as Chafe, you
make them to vanish with a puff of your mouth: But indeed, when I consider how
miserable a Wretch of an Answerer you do here render your self, and yet how you
persist still in your huffing and strutting, and do more and more revile and
rail, I cannot (especially seeing it relates to one of your own Birds) but
present you with another piece of Mr. Marvel's profane Wit, as you will call
it; I have seen (says he) with some pleasure, the Hawking at the Magpye; the
poor Bird understands very well the terrible pounces of that Vulture, but
therefore she chatters amain most rufully, and spreads and cocks her tail, so
that one that first saw and heard the sport, would think that she insulted over
the Hawk in that Chatter, and huffed her Train in token of Courage and Victory;
when, alas! it is all from her fear, and another way of crying the Hawke mercy;
and to the end that the Hawke finding nothing but Tail and Feather to strike
at, she may so perhaps shelter her Body. I have been too long trifling at this
Boys Play of Bird-catching; I return now to a more manly Recreation, and
having already dispatched the Wild Bear, the (...) Tygre, dull Ass, I pass by
the Monkey, the Ape, the Baboon, and that great Herd of the many other
despicable Animals, and will a little hunt the barking Woolf.

Quoth you Doctor, (page 5^) I am ready to take my leave of you, but before we
part, I must needs reckon with you upon the (...) of a Reflection you have made
upon myself, you are pleased to say, you understand I was a Presbyterian
Minister in Essex, which words have almost forced me to a smile.

Now, if I were mistaken as to your being a Presbyterian Minister in Essex, you
are not to make your self too merry with it, nor may you deny your having
changed your Opinion from what it formerly was; for you know there are many of
your Contemporaries in the University of Cambridge, who knew you to be a
Presbyterian there and I could name you an honest Gentleman now in being, who
you know has reason to be acquainted with all the steps you have taken from
your youth and by says that you left the Univesity upon a (...) of the
Ceremonies, and pers^sed in that dislike, (...) Preferment to be got but by
Conformity; so that I may with truth say, you are one of Dr. Wild's Changlings,
and that he gave us your exact Marks, when he thus described you in his Poem
called, The Recantation of a Penitent Proteus, or the Changling.

The Doctor says P. 51. of 2 d Defense, I took time to Consider the Nature
and Terms of Conformity, which by my former Education I was wholly a Stranger
to.
My Conscience first, like Balaam's Ass was shy,
Boggl'd and Winc'd, which when I did espy,
I cudgel'd her and spurred her on each side,
Until the Jade her Paces all could ride.
When first I mounted on her tender Back,
She would not leave the Protestant Dull Rack,
Till in her Mouth the Covenant Bit I got,
And made her learn the Presbyterian Trot.
'Twas an hard Trot, and fretted her (alas)
The Independent Amble easier was;
I taught her that, and out of that to fall
To the (...) of Prelatical,
Now with a Snaffle, or a twined Thread,
To any Government she will turn her head:
I have so broke her, She will never slaet,
And that is the meaning of my Broken heart.
Cambridge I left with grief, and great disgrace,
To seek my Fortune in some other place,
And that I might the better save my stake,
I took an Order, and did Orders take
Amongst Conformists I my self did list,
A Son o'th Church as good as ever pist;
But tho I bowed, and cring'd, and crossed and all,
I only got a The Vicaridge of Westhom in Essex
Vicaridge very small.
Oh! I am almost mad, 'twould make one so,
To see which way Preferment's-game does go,
I ever thought I had her in the Wind,
And yet I Am cast above three years behind.
Three times already I have turned my Coat,
Three times already I have changed my Note;
I Will make it Four, and four and Twenty more,
And turn the Compass round e're I Will give over.
Ambition, my great Goddess and my Muse,
Inspire thy Prophets all such Arts to use,
As may exalt; betwixt this and my Grave,
A Mitre, or a Halter I must have.
Tell me Ambition! prithee tell me why,
So many Dunces, Doctors, and not I?
A Scarlet Gown I must and will obtain.
I cannot else Commence a Priest in Grain.
If this Poets Ecclesiastical Pencil has not drawn you to the Life, you shall
see that Lay Prose comes pretty nea^ you, Mr. Marvel (whom I choose always to
ply you with, above all other Authors) describes you thus,

He was sent to Cambridge to be bred up to the Ministry; There in a short time,
he entered himself into the Company of some young Students, who were used to
Fast and Pray weekly together; he picked Acquaintance with the Brotherhood, and
trained himself up in attending upon their Sermons and Prayers, till he had
gained such Proficience, that he too, began to Exercise in the Meetings, and by
Preaching Mr. Baxter's Sermons, he got the Reputation of one of the Preciousest
young Men in the University: But when thus after se^^ral years Approbation, he
was even ready to have taken the Charge, not of an Admiring Drove, or Herd, as
he now calls them, but of a F^ock upon him; by great misfortune to him, the
King came in, nevertheless he broke not off yet from his former habitudes; he
persisted, as far as in him was (that is by Praying, Caballing, and (...)) to
obstruct the Restoring! of the Episcopal Government, Revenues and Authority;
insomuch that being discountenanced, he went away from the University without
his Degree, scrupling forsooth, the Subscription then required: From thence he
came to London, where he spent a considerable time in creeping into all Corners
and Companies, horoscoping up and down concerning the duration of the
Government, not considering any thing as best, but as most lasting and
profitable; and after having many times cast a Figure, he at last satisfied
himself, that the Episcopal Government would endure as long as he lived; and
from thence forward cast about how to be admitted into the Church of England,
and find the Highway to her Preferments; In order to this, he daily enlarged
not only his Conversation, but his Conscience, and was made free of some of the
Town-Vices; imagining, like Muleasses King of Tu^^s, that by hiding himself
among the Onions, he should escape being traced by his perfumes: Ignorant and
mistaken Man! that thought it necessary to part with any Virtue to get a
Living; or that the Church of England did not require and encourage more
sobriety than he could ever be guilty of: But neither was this yet in his
opinion sufficient, and therefore he resolved to try a shorter Path, which some
few men have trod not unsuccessfully; that is, to Print a Book; if that would
not do, a Second, if not that, a Third, and so forward, to give Experience of a
keen style, and a ductile Judgment: After this, he was ready to leap over the
Moon; No scruple of Conscience could stand in his way, and no Preferment
seemed too high for his Ambition.

In the next place D^ctor, you spit your Venom, and that even against their
Majesty's, page 51, you say, Since the late Persecution in Scotland by that
Party of Men [the Presbyterians] it is a greater scandal to be called a
Presbyterian than it was before.

I here observe, with what Reverence and Duty you speak of your Superiors and
their Actions, when they are not so happy as to please you; this last thing is
uttered most scandalously, and with a leering reflection upon the Government;
and it is a dangerous thing I perceive for their Majesty's to lose your favor.
When you talk page 15. of the Accursed Court of Star Chamber, you do it with
great Modesty and Manners saying, If it be lawful for a private Person as I am,
to pass a Judgment upon the public Actions of a then Legal Court; But here the
King and Queen seeming to be fallen into disgrace with you, you assume the
impudence to call their establishing Presbytery by Act of Parliament; A
Persecution; So that what the Scots said in the year 1640, they may well repeat
at this day; All means (said they) are used to disgrace this Kirk, Books,
Pasquils, honoring of our Cursed Bishops, advancing of our deposed Ministers,
etc.

'Twas it should seem scandalous in some measure, to be a persecuted
Presbyterian, in the two Bypast Reigns; but (in your Opinion Doctor,) it is so
in a much higher degree, to be a Presbyterian, now that Presbytery has the
Royal Favor and is settled by Act of Parliament, and yet you Sr, did
heretofore esteem it no longer scandalous to be of the Church of England, than
till she obtained a legal Establishment, and I can tell you the exact day when
it became a scandal to you to be called a Presbyterian; 'twas Bartholomew day
1662. the day when the Act of Uniformity took place, and would a man take the
liberty which you do, I should say when the Bishops Persecution was revived in
England.

Well, It Is a Scandal to be a Presbyterian, and it will puzzle a man to find
out what you are, for you seem to esteem it a Persecution, that you may not
compel all men to be of the Church of England, and yet you say p. 52. It is
true Sr. I have always been kind to Dissenters, and when the great Storm [in
plain English Persecution] Eight and Nine years ago, fell upon, the Dissenters,
I preserved my own Parish from Charge and Trouble, to the great endangering of
my self. Alas! good Man, did you so, and yet do they abuse you? pray was all
this kindness for naught? did not you interlope with Dr. Pinf^^^? I have been
told that you ought to have said that what you did in that day, was to the
great enriching of your self, and that you had your Why's and your Wherefore's
for your kindness to the Dissenters; that you received a constant Contribution
from such of them as you preserved from Doctors Commons; and I know it may be
made out, that at your own entreaty, a Collection was made amongst them, by Mr.
Ogden and Mr. H^bster, to raise the Money for to defray your Charges of
Commencing Doctor; and is it not an Act of foolish Prodigality in you, to throw
off such generous Benefactors as these?

Having thus Examined your Second Defense, I shall now Sir recount the Heads of
some things which you asserted in your First, and which being answered by me,
you pass over in silence.

You affirmed page 7th. of your first Defense, that the Parliament in their
Remonstrance Dec. 1641. made Reflections upon the King's former Government,
unmanner's and false; and that the King answered it and vindicated himself from
those horrid aspersions, wherewith they Loaded him: Now, pa. 35. I denied the
falsehood thereof, and said, that the King only answered it, in saying, We
shall in few words pass over that part of the Narrative wherein the misfortunes
of this Kingdom, from our first entering to the Crown, to the beginning of this
Parliament, are remembered in so sensible expressions.

You asserted pa 12. that the King could by good Evidence prove, the Lord
Mandevile, Mr. Holles, Sir Arthur Hasterig, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Pym and Mr.
Strode, Members of the House of Commons Guilty of Treason; Page 37, etc. I gave
you the full History of that matter, and showed that the King retracted that
rash accusation, which I see is more than you will do, tho good manners one
would think should oblige you thereto, and to beg pardon especially of the
right Honorable, the present Earl of Manchester, as he is a Peer of the Realm;
and of the right Honorable and most eminently deserving Patriot Mr. Hambden,
as he is Chancellor of the their Majesty's Exchequer and one of their most
Honorable Privy Council, for such a horrid slander brought upon their highly
deserving Families; but you find it a grievous thing to forgo a falsehood that
is serviceable to your great undertaking.

You affirm pa. 26. first defense, that the Scots sold the King to the English
Parliament. I denied it pa. 67. and showed that the Scots might, with the
consent of the Parliament, have taken him home to his Native Country; but that
they refused it, fearing he might raise new Commotions there, and you have not
thought fit to contradict me in this neither.

You, amongst other gracious concessions of the King's, wherein you glory,
speak, pa. 11. 1st. Defense; of his consenting to a Treaty at Vxbridge. I (page
61) mentioned many things relating to that Treaty; and to show the King's
insincerity in his pretensions of Peace, gave a Relation how that at the very
instant of that Treaty, he used all imaginable means to bring not only 10000
Lorrainers, but the Irish Cutthroats against the Parliament; That he declared
himself resolved to adhere not only to the Bishops, but also to the Papists,
etc. These are Reproaches which you ought to wipe off, if you would defend this
King to any purpose, but you touch them not.

View now I beseech you, the Heads of many of the Articles of misgovernment
which I recounted, and which you have overlookt, only saying in relation to
them, that some Birds are not to be caught with such Chasse, and I have done.

I. King Charles I. favored Popery; by his Marriage Articles he agreed that
Papists should not be molested; he put above a hundred Popish Lords and
Gentlemen into great Trusts.

II. His Bishops were unsound in their principles; in particular Land allowed
Books which favored Popery, but refused to License Books written against it.
His Chaplains endeavored to reconcile England to Rome, and got preferment by
it.

III. He Lent Ships to the French King to destroy the Protestants of Rochel,
which as the French boasted mowed the Heretics down like Grass.

IV. He Raised an Army, and required the Country to furnish Coat and Conduct
Money; and Levied Money by way of Loan, and the Refusers of the meaner Rank (Men
of Quality being imprisoned) were compelled to go for Soldiers, or to serve at
Sea.

V. He Suspended and Confined the Archbishop of Canterbury (not Land, but Dr.
Abbot) because he refused to make that good by Divinity, which the King had
done against the Laws. He imprisoned Dr. Williams Bishop of Lincoln, for
speaking against the Loan and not prosecuting Puritans.

VI. He turned out the Lord Chief Justice Crew for opposing the Loan.

VII. He remitted 30000l. to Holland for the Levying Horse and Men there, to
serve his Arbitrary purposes.

VIII. He violated the Petition of Right, so soon as it was passed into a Law.

IX. He confined the Earl of Bristol near two years, without any Accusation;
and he Imprisoned the Earl of Arundel in the time of Parliament, without
expressing any Cause of his Commitment.

X. He sheltered the Duke of Buckingham when he was Prosecuted in Parliament,
as the Patron of a Popish Faction; and he Dissolved Parliaments when they were
intent upon the Duke's Prosecution, and charged him in effect with the Murder
of King James; In Relation whereunto, Sir Edward Peyton who was a Member of
Parliament in that time, does thus express himself in a Treatise called the
Divine Catastrophe; The Duke of Buckingham rewarded King James by Poison, as
appeared plainly in Parliament by the Evidence of diverse Physicians, especially
Dr. Ramsey; and King Charles, to save the Duke, dissolved the Parliament when
he was Impeached for it, and never after had the Truth Tried, to clear himself
from Confederacy, or the Duke from so heinous a scandal.

XI. He imprisoned Members of Parliament in the time of Parliament, for
refusing to Answer out of the Parliament, what was said and done there, etc.

XII. He threatened the House of Commons, that if they did not give him
Supplies, he would betake himself to New Counsels; he asserted, that
Parliaments were altogether in his Power, and therefore as they humored him,
were to continue or not to be.

You may here see Sir, to your shame (had you any) what a small advance you
have made, in the defense of that Cause which you so briskly engaged in; and
how much of your Work you have devolved upon your better Pens. Before I take my
leave of you, I shall observe how little you, the mighty defender of Princes,
are to be relied upon; for tho you tell their Majesty's in the Dedication of
your first Defense, that you wrote it to secure them from Danger; and the most
Reverend, Right Reverend etc. had your word for it, in your Dedication of this
Second Pamphlet, that you had nothing more in your aim, in putting it out, than
to preserve the present Government in Church and State; (A most commendable and
highly meriting Undertaking upon my word) yet, (which is a melancholy
consideration) you their Majesty's great Preserver, who so bravely engaged
never to drop the Cause as long as you could hold a Pen; do now flinch and give
ground, and as vanquished by a grey-headed Man with one foot in the Grave (as
you Confess me to be) you say page 13. that you will not give your self the
trouble of Answering me [a decrepit, crazy Adversary] but will spare your self
the labor because you understand it is recommended to a better hand. It is
astonishingly strange that you, this vaunting Goliath, who came out strutting in
a gigantick garb of Pace and Language, and with a terrible look, to Act a piece
of Ecclesiastical Knight Errantry: That you, who in an unpresidented manner,
huff'd and threatened the World with that vast magazine of stuff, which you had
amassed to annoy the Man that should be found in your way; that you, whom
nothing must atone, but a pray Master forgive me and I Will do so no more; That
such a Doctor such a Champion as you, should on the sudden be crying out for
the aid of better Hands, of better Pens than your own; and that in a quarrel of
your own picking; upon the success whereof you vainly conceit the Being and
Well-being of their Majesty's and of every thing that is worth the preserving
depends. But I see you Inferior Clergymen do often stand in need of Guides, and
let who will come to your assistance, tho I am decrepit, this good old Cause I
rest assured, will abide firm and unshaken, against all the attempts of such
Assailants as you can list and draw up against it: I mean the true Government
of old England, by King, Lords, and Commons.

No more at present (dear Doctor) only I acquaint you at parting, that I am
sensible I have not paid you the Tithe of what I owe you, but it lies ready for
you, when you shall draw a Bill upon

Your Debtor, Edmund Ludlow.
Geneva, May 29. 1692. ALLatres licet usque nos and usque,
Et gannitibus improbis lacessas;
Ignotus pereas Miser, Necesse est.
Non deerunt tamen hac in Urbe forsan
Unus, vel duo, tresve, quatuorve,
Pellem rodere qui velint Caninam;
Nos hac a scabie tenemus ungues.
Rail on, poor feeble Scribler, speak of me,
In as base Terms as the World speaks of thee;
Sit swelling in thy Hole like a vexed Toad,
And full of Malice spit thy spleen abroad;
Thou can blast no man's Fame with thy ill word,
Thy Pen is just as harmless as thy Sword.


FINIS.

