AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE LIFE OF S. FRANCIS XAVERIVS OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS NEW
APOSTLE OF INDIA AND JAPONY.

Together with some few of the innumerable Authentical Miracles wrought by him
of late years. By W. B.

Rabbi, we know that you are a master come from God, for no body can do these
signs which you do, unless God be with him. John. 3. v. 2.

PRINTED At S. OMERS, by THOMAS GEVBELS, 1667.

With License.

S. FRANCIS XAVERIUS his manner of exercising acts of the love of God.
Translated out of his own handwriting.

O God! I love thee.
Nor do I love thee, to the end that thou should save me:
Or, because thou do punish with eternal fire
Those who do not love thee.
Thou, Thou, my JESUS; did embrace
All me upon the Cross.
Thou sufferedst nayls, a spear,
And many an ignominy,
Innumerable Dolors,
Sweats, and Anguishes,
And Death. And this for me:
Yea for me a sinner!
Why then should I not Jove thee
O most loving JESUS?
Not to the end that thou should save me in heaven:
Or, least thou should eternaly damn me:
Nor out of hope of any reward.
But, as Thou have loved me,
So I love, and will love thee.
Only, because thou art my King:
And only, because thou art God. Amen.
S. FRANCIS XAVERIVS of the Society of JESUS Apostle of the Indies and Iapony.
A PRAYER IN HIS HONOR.


O God, who (...) pleased to gather to thy church the nations of the Indies by
the preaching and miracles of S. FRANCIS: Vouch^afe mercifully to grant, that
we who reverence his glorious merits, may also imitate the examples of his
Virtues, through our Lord Jesus Christ. etc.

This picture has touched his holy Relickes, and by such like pictures many
have received diverse favors. 1666.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE life of S. Francis Xauerius.
S. FRANCIS XAVERIVS by Gods grace new Apostle of the Indies and Iapony, had
for the place of his Nativity the Castle of Xauier in the Kingdom of Na^ar; for
his extraction, he was descended from noble Ancesters; for his education, his
Parents no less Pious then Honorable, taught him from his childhood to fear
God, and keep himself pure from sin; when he was mature for studies, they sent
him to the Famous University of Paris where he was first a scholar, and
afterward a Master of Philosophy, but leaving those profaner sciences, he
betook himself to the sacred and more certain studies of Divinity in the same
Academy. Here he happily fell in to the Company and acquaintance of S,
Ignatius, who by his holy prayer and other Pious endeavors drew him to a more
strict and perfect Kind of life, and made him one of his first Companions in
Founding the Society of Jesus Being now entered into the strait way which leads
unto life, he most severely mortified his body according to the example of the
ancient holy Fathers For by a severe Interdict he denied himself the use not
only of flesh and wine, but also of wheaten bread, contenting himself with
course and l^ss sauory meats, and these also in a very sparing quantity Morouer
oftentimes he wholly abstained from all Kind of food, sometimes for two,
otherwhiles for three days together: this for his diet: his sleep also was
very sparing and shorr, and this other upon the ground or a poor bed which was
little better. Not wanted he other inventions to aflict his poor body,
oftentimes making it all on a go^t blood with cruel iron whips. To omit the
holy revenge he took upon himself for the leuity of his youth, girding about
his thighs so strait, with certain little cords as the flesh yielding to them
and growing over them, they could not be loosed but by an evident miracle, Thus
he treated his own body; but he was not more severe to himself then he was good
and charitable to others. The common hospital was his ordinary lodging
wheresoever he came; in which he assisted both the so^^ and bodies of those
infirm people with such cheerfulnes an^ alacrity, as those humble charitable
services were comonl^ called his delights, with such mortification and triumph
ou^ nature, as he oftentimes drunck up that filthy water, with which he had
washed horrid and incurable ulcers: nay his story testifies how, that he might
overcome that horro^ which nature has of poor Lazars, laying his mouth to ^
fetid ulcer, he greedily sucked out the purulent matter. This glorious victory
over himself, God Almighty rewarded with a strange delight, which he ever after
took in those humble offices of charity. Morouer, he performed these offices of
corporal and spiritual charity with such diligence and constancy, as no weakness
or sickness of his own body could make him interrupt them. Hence, at Bolonia,
when he was become a very picture of death, by the hardship he endured,
continual labors, and a quartan ague, he would not for all this give over his
public preaching, cate chizing of children, visiting of prisons and
Hospirals,; nay when he was tied to his bed in the Hospital at Mozambico, by a
malignant dangerous fever, he made shift to scramble out of it, to assist a
poor frantic mariner who lay rauing upon the ground, first carrying him to his
own bed, and then restoring him to his ^enses, and afterward to the grace of
God by administering him the holy Sacraments. Nor was his piety to God himself
less admirable and notorious, then was his charity to the poor of God for Gods
sake. Such was his union with almighty God, and such the seruor of his spirit
in holy prayer, as he spent whole nights in it; nor, when he was upon the sea,
were eminent dangers of death and most terrible tempests able to make him break
it off, or in the least to disturb the quiet of his holy soul: and sometimes he
was seized upon by such a sacred ecstasy, as with his eyes fixed upon heaven he
was lifted up by divine force from the earth, with his face so enflamed, as he
lively represented the burning charity of the Angels; nor being able to bear
the hea^ of divine love, oftentimes he exclamed, satis est Domine, satis est,
It is enough Blessed Lord, it is enough. Nor had the holy Saint God Almighty in
his heart and mouth, only wh^^ ^^ was awake, but also while he slept he was
often heard ^^th rauishing sweetness to cry out: O my good Jesus! ^ whom my soul
loves! O my Creator! my Lord! But perhaps honors and dignities would make him
chan^e these his pious, and humbly charitable manners; no such matter. For John
the third King of Portugal of worthy memory, demanding some of S. Ignatius his
companions, for the propagating of the Gospel in the vast regions of the East
Indies, Francis Xauerius by the advice of S. Ignatius, was pitched upon by his
Holiness Paul the third, who endowed him with most ample power, and dignity of
Apostolical legate which not withstanding, he would not accept either of a
servant to assist him, or money, or any thing else but a poor coat, and a few
books which he thought, he should not find in the Indies; Professing, that he
had made a vow of poverty, and he was resolved to keep it, hoping that our Lord
would provide him what was necessary for his service, and that he had no need
of a servant so long as our Lord preserved his hands and feet, as for going to
the Kitchen and accommodating his Chamber he did not think it would diminish
his Religious Authority, so long as he did not hereby offend God. The governor
of India with whom he embarked, could not persuade him to sit at his table,
the allowance of other passengers he accepted of, but without eating any thing
of it, he distributed it amongst the necessitous; as for himself, he lived upon
what he begged in the ship, with an unwearied charity serving the fick night
and day in the most abject offices: his bed, as atla^d it was ordinarily the
ground, so at sea it was the cable of the ship. Being arrived in India he
immediately betook himself with a feruor of spirit truly Apostolical to preach
the Gospel, and with such fruit, God Almighty cooperating by his holy grace and
evident miracles, as that he not only reformed the depraved manners of the
Christians he found there, but also regenerated to God many hundred thousands
of the Infidels by the sacred waters of Baptism. For not only amongst the
Indians, Brachmans, and Malauarians, Aposto^ical preaching, which lorg ago had
flourished there, but by the fraud of the enemy of mankind was now quite
aboli^hed, by Xauerius was revived, but also he first preached the Gospel of
Christ to the Parauians, Malaians, Iaians, ^^nians, Malacensians and Iaponians
and brought many King and great Princes of those nations to submit their ^e^^
to the sweet yoke of Christ. In order to these great conu^rsions, he was
miraculously endowed with the perfect knowledge of different languages:
sometimes when he spoke onl^ in one language, diverse people of different
languages understood him at the same time what he suffered for the name o^
Christ in his Apostolical labors is incredible. For in thos^ vast Regious, he
went through diverse Kingdoms, alwaie^ asoot, and very often barefoot, and also
through score hi^ Sands, he was oftentimes persecuted with contumelies,
reproaches and scoffs, nay with blows and stones, he often suffered
shipwreck, he endured wa^chings, cold and nakedness, hunger and thirst,
contracting by his continual and unsupportable labors, most grievous
sicknesses: but with the great Apostle he contemned his life, that he might
consummate his course and ministry of the Gospel, which he had received. And
which is not a little admirable, amidst these and his other singular virtues,
and great things which he did and suffered for God, he was so humble, that he
always wrote unto his Superior S, Ignatius upon his knees: and as if he had
been the unworthiest of all, he would be exercising himself in the most abject
offices of the house: he wore such poor and patched cloths, as the boys in the
street, laughed at him. But he did not more contemn himself then God Almighty
honored him both alive and dead; mercifully renewing by his servant Xauerius,
the miracles and prodigies he heretofore wrought to confirm the Doctrine of his
first Apostles. Besides his miraculous speaking of diverse languages, the Acts
of his Canonization (to omit many other evident miracles there recorded) make
mention of five and twenty raised by him from death to life. One of which was
resu^citated in the manner folloving, At the promon^ory of Comorino, as this
servant of God was upon a time preaching in a certain Church to the Infidels,
and by reason of the hardness of their hearts, without effect: having first
prayed to Almighty God, he commanded a grave to be opened, in which was buried
one that dyed the day before, signifying (...) ^^uld again come to life, to
confirm the truth of the Chri^^^n Faith, the dead corpse then being taken up,
and the sheet ^^^ned in which it was wrapped, having again made his p^^ier to
God, he commanded the dead man to live, who presentely to the amazement of all,
tose up alive. By which ^^ notorious a miracle not only those who were present,
^^t also many others were moue^ to believe in God. If this ^^ ^rue, as is most
certain, then no man, can upon good grounds believe the Christian Faith, but he
must also believe the Roman-Catholik Christian Faith for the Roman-Catholik
Christian Faith, was the Faith which S. Francis Xauerius preached to those
Infidels, and which God Almighty by this and many other evident miracles
confirmed. Nor did Christ our Lord endow this his new Apostle, only with the
grace of working miracles but also with the gift of Prophesy. Frequent eue^^s
which he foretold proved him a Prophet. At length, after he had undergone
innumerable and extraordinary labors, after he had to^ firmed the
Roman Catholic Faith by miracles of all Kind, wrought by him, and after he had
left the world many rare examples of Apostolical virtues, he went from Sanciano
an Island of China to heaven, upon the second of December, on a Friday, in the
year, 1552. His Feast not with^tanding is Kept upon the third of December He
lived fif^y five years, twelve of them as a Religious of the Socie^y of Jesus,
ten and seven months of those twelve as Apostle of the Indies His body after
his death was twice o^ many months buried in quick lime, yet notwithstanding
remains in corrupt to this very year 1666: and is Kept ^ith great veneration at
Goa the Metropolis of the East In^ies, ^t being brought to Malaca did
immediately free that (...) from a most terrible plague. God Almighty through
(...) intercession of this his servant has wrought diverse mirales of late
years, which have been approved by Seven P^e^ates in their particular
Diocesses. The Bishop of ^alaca r^^k^neth eight hundred wrought in his Diocese
^^e. Pot^mo a town of Calabria recounts two hun^^ed forty two wrought in one
year, towit in the year ^6^2, And yet nerer us, Flanders rings of the late
miraculous favors obtained by the (...) our days. He has cured madness, witch
craft, blindness, d^^es, fore eyes, necks, arms, breasts, legs, and other parts
man's body; women in childbearing, and such as were danger at sea have found him
propitious; other, he ^^ freed from ruptures, palsy, and gout, he has driven
away ^ kinds of feauers and deadly di^eases, as the sole refuge ^ the sick and
aflicted. God grant that our poor Country ^ England also, may glory in his
protection, and supernatur^ graces: and no doubt but she will, if she be not
wanting i^ making her addresses to him, Amen,

To the greater glory of God and S. Francis Xauerius.
Ex Bull. Canon. and vit.
Imprimatur

I. C. de Longueual.

A MIRACLE Wrought at Naples, upon R. F. Marcellus Mastrilli of the Society of
JESUS.
ABOUT the end of the year 1633. my Lord the Count of Mount Royal, An. Dom. 1634
then viceroy of Naples, having designed to celebrate, in his own Palace, a
magnificent Solemnity, in honor of our Blessed Lady, upon the Sunday within the
Octaue of her Immaculate Conception; he ordained amongst other preparations,
that four Altars should be erected, at the four corners of the Court of his
Palace; and to the end that nothing should be wanting at them, he assigned the
care of adorning of them, to four of the chief Nobility of the City. One of
which having the relation, both of a Kinsman, and also of a familiar friend, to
R. Father Marcellus Mastrilli, he entreated the said Father to assist him, in
the erection of the Altar committed to his charge; who most willingly yielded
to his request; such was his desire to concur, in any manner, to the
advancement of the honor, of the ever Blessed Virgin; and all things succeeded
very happily. Only at night, the solemnity being now over, as they were taking
down the ornaments of the Altar, Father Marcellus from below, giving
directions, to one that was loosning the hangings above, by I know not what
chance, he above let fall a hammer, of about two pound weight, from a loft
thirty palms high, upon the head of the Father, which so wounded him in the
right temple, that he fell down half dead upon the ground. Being perceived to
be dangerously wounded he was immediately carried home, and the wound instantly
searched, but more exactly the day following, by the surgeons, who judged him
to be in evident danger of his life. For besides the grieuousnes of the wound,
upon the fourth day, he was seized upon by a violent fever, accompanied with a
defluxion upon his right eye, and certain other distempers, for the most part,
mortal. In such sort, that after diverse consults, and applications of most
soueraign remidies, but all in vain, upon the one and twentieth day of his
distemper, which was looked upon as a critical day, both the Physicians and
surgeons, gave him over for a dead man. For that all upon the sudden, upon the
beginning of this day, which was the first day of the New year, he began to
faint, and to feel certain grievous pains in his stomach, and was not able to
eat any thing, no nor even to open his mouth, but a very little, to receive any
nourriture, for that the nerves of his jaws and muscles, were become
unserviceable. Other signs of present death did also discover themselves.
Wherefore many Physicians of chief account, professed openly, again and again,
which afterward also they attested upon oath, that Marcellus was not curable
by any human power. So that his friends desired of them, that if they could not
save his life, that at least they would prolong it for some hours, by thrusting
some little bits of meat in to his mouth by force. But his mouth was shut so
close, as that the surgeon upon the second of January, very hardly, by little
and little, opened it with two Spoons; and yet notwithstanding, nether art nor
force, nor counsel or command of superiors, was able to make the despaired
patient, to swallow down, even some few drops of liquid sustenance, much less to
eat any thing, which was solid. Besides what has been said, such a vehement
cold and chilness seized upon his whole body, as they were not able to expel
or mitigate it, by any somentations, nor even by the application of fire it
self. Wherefore Marcellus, given over by the Doctors, and despaired of by all
human art, exspects death every hour.

In the time of this his sickness, he was often visited by one, who appeared
unto him in a white soldiers-coat, with a cross upon his breast; who often
asked him, whether he had rather die, or live? whether there were any thing, he
desired he should ask for him of heaven? whether he desired a wax-taper, or a
Pilgrims staff, both which he brought in his hand? Marcellus always answered,
he was indifferent to any thing, might he but more sincerely serve the Divine
Majesty. Upon another day, F. Marcellus took the freedom, to ask the warrior,
whether death, or a journey, [for those were the things, which were signified
by the Taper and Pilgrims staff] were decreed for him in heaven? The warrior
answered him, he would consult the Divine Majesty, and in due time, and that
very shortly, let him know; but at present, he said it was not lawful for him,
to reueal those secrets.

Marcellus being now, as was said, despaired of, the same warrior appeared to
him again, but attended by a troop of very many others: concerning whom, the
Sick person asking, who they were, and particularly, whether they were not
Iaponian Martyrs, nothing more was at present answered him, but that they were
his friends, and those who would earnestly commend him to almighty God. The
same together with the same attendants, appeared to him immediately before the
three days, in which he was prodigiously cured; and Marcellus demanding,
whether perhaps they were not souls, that were in Purgatory? the warrior
answered him again, that they were his dear frinds, and those which were very
solicitous for all his affairs; but with all told him, that the souls in
Purgatory were not a little sorry for his sickness, by reason whereof, they
wanted his help and suffrages. Wherefore, replied the Father, methinks it were
fitting, I should procure some Masses and Prayers, to be said for their relief
by others. By all mea^s, subjoyned the warrior, it were very good to do so, nor
will they be wanting to return your Charity, and so disappeared. And F.
Marcellus procured, many holy sacrifices and prayers, of his friends, for the
faithful departed. Who this was, which appeared in a soldiers habit, is not
known, but out of a letter of F. Marcellus, to his friend M. Antony Tellez, in
which, he wishes that his beloved Father, S. Francis Xauerius, would vouchsafe,
also to visit him, in a white garment, with a Cross upon his breast, with a
taper and pilgrims staff in his hands, attended by his Royal Train, according
to his wonted manner. And indeed S. Xauerius at this time, often and familarly
appeard unto him, sometimes by night, otherwhiles by day, now as he was a
praying, and then as he was conuersing with others, sometimes sitting by his
bedside comforting of him, bidding him be of good courage, and in fine filling
his soul with a heavenly sweetness.

But now when there was no expectation of any thing but death, S. Francis
Xauerius signified to a noble matron, that Marcellus would not die of that
sickness, but was destind to do great things and charged her, immediately to
acquaint her Confessarius hereof, that he might afterward be a witness of the
prediction.

F. Marcellus prepares himself for death, and rather to satisfy his devotion,
then that he had any hopes or desire of life, with leave of superiors, makes a
vow of going into the Indies for the help of souls, in case he should recover;
for now he desired nothing of almighty God, but either Death, or the Indies.
After this, toward night, was administered him the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction: the divine Viaticum of the Holy Eucharist, he was not able to receive,
by reason of the hard and close compression of his jaws. Wherefore he desired,
a picture of his patron S. Francis Xaue^ius, should be brought into his
chamber, and immediately one was brought out of the next room, which
represented the Saint in the habit of a pilgrim. The sick person earnestly
besought him, ever and anon applying his holy Relics to his throat, that he
would not permit him to depart out of this life, without receiving the Divine
Sacrament In the morning, assured that his prayers were heard, he called for
the holy Eucharist, which he swallowed down without any difficulty. This day,
which was the third of the New year, he spent betwixt life and death.
Notwithstanding, that very night, he told two Fathers, he must say Mass the
next day, and they asking him where, whether perhaps in heaven, for they
imagind him to be out of himself, he answered, where he knew not, but that he
should celebrate the next day, he affirmed again, and with such confidence, as
if it had been reueald to him from heaven. Nay, that very night, be treated
with F. Vincent Carrafa, then Rector of the College, and afterward General of
the whole Society, concerning his going into the Indies, as if he had been
certain of it.

And now it was about eight a clock at night, when Marcellus himself thought
that he had not a quarter of an hour to live, and all things were ready for his
funerals. Many of his brethren of the Society were about him, part of the^
praying, others by pious speeches comforting of him, as the time required.
Amongst others, there sat by his bed side, on his right hand, F. Julius Caesar
Recupitus, to whom with a small and weak voice, he spoke in this manner. I seem
to my self to be in a certain valley, and to see a little ray of light a great
way off. And a while after he spoke again, and said that he saw as it were a
globe or ball descending from heaven, and in it S. Francis Xauerius in a most
resplendent glory, and with so pleasant and amiable an aspect, as that in a
moment he had driven away all grief from his heart, and infused into his soul,
such, and so lasting a sweetness, as he could not though he never so much
desired it, as he afterward testified, excite in himself, any sense of grief
and sorrow; which he most earnestly endeauored to do, when all alone he was
carried in the same coach with the corpse of his dead mother, of which we shall
speak afterward, insomuch, that the memory of S. Xauerius his gracious and
sweet countenance recurring, in stead of grief and tears, he was compelled
against his will to laugh. F. Recupitus interpreting those his words, as if he
had received some spiritual consolation in his soul, endeauored to excite him
to a firm hope of eternal happiness. Then F. Marcellus said some body called him
by his name, but with a low voice: Marcellus, Marcellus; and admiring at it,
exclamed; Alas! I do not hear well, and stretching out his hand, gave a sign
to those which were present to be silent. Then shutting his eyes, he remained
quiet as it were musing or harkning for a little space, until being called again,
he cried out; Hinc, Hinc vocor, I am called hence, I am called hence. And
instantly he that but even now was not able to stir himself, turned his body
and face to that side of the bed whence the voice came. Those which were about
him, astonished hereat, fix their eyes more steadfastly upon him, and they hear
him speak with a low voice, and give answers as if he were discoursing with
some body, but can hear no body speak to him. They interrupt him calling upon
him, but he takes no notice of what they say; insomuch, that of those which
were present, some thought he was visited by some body from heaven, others that
out of himself he talked idly. F. Marius Fontanorosa prefect of the Infirmary,
that he might better hear and see, what Marcellus said and did, put himself
betwixt his bed and the wall. The brother who had care of the sick following
him, hindered by an invisible power, was not permitted to go on by S. Xauerius
who stood in his way. Father Marius understood all that F. Marcellus said,
clearly and distinctly. F. Marcellus having turned himself toward the picture,
of S Francis Xauerius in the habit of a Pilgrim, seeming to himself to be
wholly abstracted out of the sight of the chamber where he was and all things
else, he saw S. Xauerius standing betwixt himself and the picture, in his full
proportion, and in habit very like the manner of his representation in the said
picture, his countenance gloriously resplendent, and far surpassing all human
features in grace and ^miablenes. To him, S. Xauerius with a pleasant
countenance, Thus. Marcellus, what do we do? Had you rather die or go into the
Indies? Marcellus made answer, That liked him best, which was most pleasing to
Almighty God. The Saint goes on. Do you remember, that yesterday in the
presence of your Prouincial you made a vow to go into the Indies, in case you
recouerd? I do temember it, answered Marcellus. Go to then, said S. Xauerius;
say after me: and immediately the Saint recited the Formula of the Vows made by
all of the Society of JESUS in the end of their Nouiship, interposing certain
clauses, which are noted in a different caracter: all which words as they were
repeated by Marcellus, were heard by F. Marius; nay, F. Marcellus not hearing
perfectly some of the words recited by S. Xauerius, the Saint smiling repeated
them again. The words by which S. Xauerius, incited F. Marcellus to deuote
himself to Almighty God, were these following.

Almighty and everlasting God, I Marcellus Mastrilli, though every way most
unworthy of thy divine sight, yet co^fiding in thy goodness and infinite mercy,
and moved with a desire to serve thee, do vow before the most sacred Virgin
Mary, and thee Holy Father Francis Xauerius, and the whole court of heaven, to
thy Divine Majesty, Poverty, Chastity, and Perpetual obedience in the Society
of JESUS; and especialy the Apostolical mission of the Indies, which I also
vowed yersterday before my Father Prouincial: and I promise to enter into the
same Society, with intention to spend my whole life in it, understanding all
according to the constitutions of the same Society, and the Decrees made by
Holy Father Francis Xauerius concerning the Indian expedition. Wherefore I
humbly beseech thee of thy immens bounty and clemency, by the blood of JESUS
CHRIST, and merits of holy Father Francis Xauerius, that thou would be
pleased to admit as an odor of sweetness this holocaust, and vow made by me
though most unworthy; and as thou have given me to desire, offer, and ^ow this,
so thou would also give me abundant grace to fulfill it, and to ^hed my blood
for thy love.

This being don, the Holy Father told him he was cured; and commanded him in
thanks giving for the favor received, to kiss the wounds of Christ crucified,
whom he held in his hands. Which he having devoutly, and affectuously don; the
Saint asked him if he had any of his Relics. Have you my Relics? Marcellus
answering that he had, and taking them from under his pillow where they lay, S.
Xauerius subioyned; Let them be dear to you. Have you not also Relics of the
Holy Cross? Marcellus answering that he had. Go to then, said the Saint, apply
them to the part affected. Marcellus instantly applied them to his temple which
was wounded. But S. Xauerius making a sign with his head, that that was not
the place, changing his staff out of his right hand into his left, ^ad laying
his hand upon the hinder part of ^is head, he signified that there lay the
force of his distemper, and to that the Reliquary was to be applied, which the
sick man having don, the Saint forthwith, bad him repeat after him, what he
should say. Which was as follows. All hail wood of the cross; All hail most
pre^ious cross; I dedicate my self wholly to thee for ever: And I humbly
beseech thee, that thou would wouchsafe to grant me, though most unworthy,
the grace and favor to shed my blood for thee, which the Apostle of the Indies
did not deserve to obtain after all his labors. And a little after.

I renounce my parents, family, friends, Italy, and whatsoever may retard my
mission into the Indies: and wholly consecrate my self to the saving of souls
in India, in the presence of Holy Father Francis Xauerius, my, my Father, Which
two last words, Marcellus added of himself; and the Saint smiling approved of
them, and pleasantly subjoynd: Be of good courage, and be merry for the future;
and repeat these acts every day: and so vanished, Marcellus his sickness
vanishing with him. For their discourse being ended Marcellus was sound and
whole, and absolutely restored to perfect health, without fever, without palsy,
without defluxions, without wound, without faintnes, weakness, palenes,
meagernes, yea sound, whole, strong lusty. Then with a cheerful countenance to
the prefect of the Infirmary, thus: Dear Father I am hungry, give me some thing
to eat. Whilst meat was provided, he desired those which were present, to
recite alowd the solem^ prayer of S. Francis Xauerius, and would hau^ this
versiele, Ora pro nobis Sancte Francisce Xaueri, S. Francis Xauerius pray for
us, repeate^ thrice, and he answered, Vt dignus efficiar pr^missionibus tuis,
That I may be made worthy of the promises. This being done and meat brought
those about him, were in the beginning at ^ stand, what they should best do:
and wen^ about to cut his meat into little bitts, tha^ he might more easily get
it down. But he wit^ a cheerful countenance smiled at their vai^ fear, and
sitting upright in his bed, wit^ out any thing at his back, fell upon some o^
the more solid meat: finally he professed tha^ by the help of S. Francis
Xauerius he was perfectly well, and so strong that he was able to to rise out
of bed, and that the next day he would celebrate Holy Mass as soon as the
morning would permit, wherefore those which were present, assured of his
recovery, began to cry out, a miracle, a miracle, a prodigious miracle. The
noise of it was soon spread all over the College, and the whole co^munity
instantly was gatherd together, to congratulate Marcellus his happy recovery:
and upon their knee^ before the picture of S. Francis Xauerius, his restorer to
sound and perfect health, they recited the Te Deum laudamus, together with
Marcellus, who by this time was risen out of bed, and had put on his clothes,
after he had repaired his decayed forces by eating and drinking with a very
good stomach, it being now four days since he had taken any thing. After ^^is
he took off the clothes and plasters from about his wound, which was so
perfectly cured, that there remained no scar, or mark of it nay the very
hairs, which had been shaued off for the commodious applying of salues, were
grown again. The next day, which was the fourth of January, he said Mass in the
Church, at the Altar of S. Francis Xauerius. And, which is not a little to be
admired, instead of being enfeebled by his past pains and distempers, he had
sufficient force, that very night, to set down in writing this prodigious
miracle, with all the particulars of it, and to recount it, all the next day,
in a manner without any intermission, to diverse persons; and above all was able
to assist five whole hours at a Iuridical enquiry, which was made in the
evening, by the Auditor of his Eminency the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples.
Moreover, from this day forward, strong and lusty, he exercised the functions
of the Society. And a little after for eight days together, night and day,
without ever putting off his clothes, he attended his dying mother, until he
had happily closed her eyes: then more free and expedite for his Apostolical
travels into the Indies.

Now if any one desire to know what became of this happy Father, raised in a
manner from death to life by S. Francis Xauerius; Going into the Indies,
according to his holy vow, there to propagate the Ghospel of Christ, he first
gave signal testimonys of his Heroical virtues at Goa; and finally in Iapony,
in the year 1637. according to the presignification of S. Xauerius unto him, he
died for Christ at Nanga^ach^ having his head cut off with a cimeter upon the
17 of October, after he had with an incredibl^ constancy endured the cruel
torments of water, and the pit, which those Barbarians are won^ to exercise
upon Christians. Ex R. P. Philip. Alegam. Mort. Illust.

I add* out of the R. Fathers of the Society of JESUS at Mechlin in their
collectio^ of certain miraculous favors obtained by the Invocation of S.
Francis Xauerius at his Relick^ there, for the direction of the clients of thi^
Great Saint in their Devotions to him; that the Saint himself in an apparition,
testified to R. F. Marcellus Mastrilly; that nothing wa^ more grateful to him,
nothing more powerful to obtain his assistance, then the Devotion of a Nouena
or nine days before his Canonization, that is, from the fourth of March to the
twelfth, which was the day upon which he was canonized for a Saint by his
Holiness Gregory the XIII. This Devotion, at F. Mastril^is persuasion, was much
in vogue in Italy, and many have found great comfort by it, particularly in the
year 1658. Alexander Philipuccius of the Society of JESUS, who suddenly
recovered of a dangerous sickness upon the last day of a like Nouena. So They.
And no wonder, that Christ our Lord should at that time give special power to
his Saints, to bestow singular favors upon their Clients, when by his Vicar
upon earth, he proposes them as special Patrons, to the Public veneration of
his Church.

Two Miraculous cures approved for such by the most Illustrious Archbishop of
Mechlin.
The I. Cure of madness.
John Gommarts, son of John Gommarts An. Dom. 1659. December. 30.
Butcher and of Sara Disson, being eighteen years old, was aflicted with ^
strange and Frenetick malady in the week of All Saints, which lasted till
Christmas, except that for the space of eight days he was a little better, but
yet so as he did not return to himself, and recover the use of his senses.
After these eight days, the young man was transported with such a furious
madness, that two or three strong and lusty men were not able to hold him, so
that his mother was constraind to ty him to his bed hands and feet, with cords
and chains of iron. As he was thus straightly tied, he oftentimes cried out so
hideously, and sufferd such strange conuulsions, that all were moved to pity
and compassion, who saw him in this sad condition without being able to afford
him any kind of succor. His mother deeply afflicted hereat, used the utmost
of her endeavors, and sought all means imaginable to assuage, or in some manner
to lenify the cruel malady of her son, but all remedies were to no purpose. In
these sad circumstances the Physician seeing himself not able to help the poor
miserable creature, counseld his mother to implore the aid of heaven, which she
did diverse times, but without any appearance of amendment, as also by the
counsel o^ another person, she caused, but without succes^ the sick party to be
exorcised by Mr. Andrew Berckmans, and Mr. Ambrose Lache both of them Priests,
the later whereof counseld her to inuoke the assistance of S. Xauerius, and
with confidence to adress herself to his Relics, which are kept in the Church
of the Fathers of the Society of JESUS, whereupon she made a vow to
communicate, for her life, upon the Saint's-day, and promisd to procure a mass
to be said the next day, and to burn a candle in his honor. In pursuit then of
her promis she came to the Church of the Fathers of the Society, and entering
into the chapel of our Lady, she instantly cast her eyes upon a picture, which
hangs near the place where the Relics of S. Xauerius are kept, and lifting up
her heart to this great Saint, and fixing her thoughts upon him, she conceived
at the same time a confident hope, that he who had wrought so many miracles
represented in the Table before her, would also have pity upon her, and her
son. A little after this she procured a Mass to be said by a Secular Priest in
honor of the Saint, hoping to obtain of him by this means some signal favor,
and some comfort for her sick son. In time of the Holy sacrifice, she felt
interiourly an extraordinary tranquillity and an unwonted joy, and said within
her heart, O Blessed Lord, will my son be cured then, seeing that I find my self
at such ease and quiet? And her hope, which deserved not to be frustrated, ^^d
immediately its effect; for after Mass re^^rning home, she was no sooner
entered into ^r house, but she found there her son, but ^^en now despaired of,
in perfect health, and ^holly cured of his madness, who said unto ^^er as she
came in, Dear mother, I pray give me ^^me thing to eat for I am almost pined,
whereupon ^holly transported with joy she gave him some ^roth together with a
wing of the hen with which it was made, which he are with a good ^ppetit,
whereat she was much astonished, for that during his infirmity he had eaten as
good ^s nothing, and in very deed for five or six ^aies he had not so much as
tasted any kind ^f food. Moreover after he had well eaten, he ^esought his
mother that she would be plea^ed to loose him, for that, as he said, he was ^ot
able to endure that torment, and that he should die if they did not vnty his
hands and ^eet, which was instantly done, and half an hour after he clothed
himself without any one to help him, and sat him down by the fireside, where he
are again, and discoursed with his mother without any sign or token of frensy,
and afterward at night he went to bed and slept quietly without ever waking,
from seven and a half at night, until six and a half next morning.

Behold how John Gommarts in the time of a Mass recovered his health and the
use of reason, to the astonishment of all his neighbors, and particularly of
the Physician, who left him in the morning in a sad condition, and found him
after dinner perfectly cured, in such sort, that the second day after his cure,
pe^fectly restored to his senses, he went to Church to give thanks to God for
the great benefit and signal favors, which he had received from his merciful
goodness through the intercession of Saint Xauerius.

The second cure of blindness.
ANNE van Bael, native of Anwerp, An. Dom. 1660. March. 11.
being seuenteen year^ old; she had been aflicted for the space of ten years,
with a defluxion which fell upon her left eye, the evil whereof growing every
day worse and worse, after three year^ she wholly lost the use of her eye. This
first accident was accompanied with another yet more dangerous, for so much as
that her right eye was covered with two whites, in such sort, that having lost
the sight of her left eye, and not being able with her right to endure the
light, she became hereby wholly blind. Her aunt Mary Bernaerts moved with
compassion toward her, used the utmost of her power to find out some means to
remedy and cure her niece, but finding none in the art of Physicians, she put
all her confidence in the profuse bounty of S. Xauerius: for when she had
understood at Anwerp of her Aunt Elizabeth Bernaerts, that he was greatly
honored in the Church of the Society of JESUS at Mechlin, and that through his
assistance many were freed from long and troublesome diseases, ^he persuaded her
Niece to go thither. So that ^t her persuasion she forthwith went thither, and
lodged at her aunt Elizabeth's house, that ^he might more commodiously honor and
visit ^he Relics of the Saint: and to the end that ^he might obtain her sight
by his merits, she promised after her cure to get a solemn Mass to be sung, and
to burn three wax-candels, moreover she made a purpose to hear Mass nine days
together in his honor, beginning from the fourth of March and continuing to the
twelfth. Upon the fourth day of her Devotion she actually experienced, that her
confidence in the merits of the glorious Xauerius was not in vain, for as much
as that then she began with her left eye to see the beams of the sun, and in
the nine days, the two whites which obscured her right eye, so loosed
themselves that she was able to see all kinds of objects. According to the
measure of her recovery she redoubled her confidence, and the feruor of her
Devotions, in effect, she added to her first Nouena a second, during which her
sight was so perfectly restored, that she was able to make bone-lace, and to
read any print though never so small.

The Approbation of my Lord the most Illustrious Archbishop.
ANDREW by the grace of God and of the Sea Apostolic Archbishop of Mechlin
etc. To all those who shall read these presents health in our Lord. For as much
as we have approved a while ago the Relics of the right arm of S. Francis
Xauerius, and have judged it expedient that they should be publickl^ exposed,
to the end that they might be honored by all the world, and the service of Go^
might be increased by the glory of his Saints and seeing that after this legal
and solemn exposition had been made in the Church of the Reverend fathers of
the Society of JESUS of the College and Nouitiate at Mechlin these Relics have
been so very much honored, as well by the Burgers of this City, as by the
inhabitants round about, that the divine goodness which has manifested the glory
of his servant in diverse parts of the world by an infinity of miracles, has
made appear, by diverse sudden cures and recoueries, that this devotion of the
faithful was very pleasing to him, we seeking nothing more earnestly then the
honor of God in his Saints, his true models, we designed of our Canonical
Chapter our Reverend brethren Dismas Corten and Francis Vanden Driessche
Archpriest, Licentiates in the law, and Canons, to inform themselves exactly,
according to custom and the ordinations of the Holy Council of Trent, of all
that had been reported concerning certain miraculous cures, which having been
well examined, and tried by Physicians and lawful witnesses, observing the form
of proceeding in like occasions and Approbation of miracles: It is assuredly
true that John Gommarts of eighteen years of age, was sundenly and perfectly
cured of a dangerous and cruel Frensy, whilst that his mother Sara Disson made
her supplication and prayers for the health of her son before the Relics of S.
Fr^ncis Xauerius.

Also that Anne van Bael of seuenteen years of age, whilst she performed her
Devotions before the same Relics, was so absolutely cured of a certain malady
in her eyes, that she has perfectly recovered the use of them, whereas for
three years before she had been blind of her left eye, and her right was
dimmed by two white spots: we, with the Counsel and Approbation of certain
honorable persons, have declared in the name of God, that these two cures, of
John Gommarts, and of Anne van Bael, as appeared by the precedent informations,
were supernatural and miraculous, and that they may be attributed to the
intercession of S. Francis Xauerius, and we have also declared at this very
instant, that we our selves have had three stones happily cut from us, the
success whereof we had recommended with great confidence to this glorious
Saint, and we approve the same by these presents, exhorting all the faithful to
reverence these Relics, to the end that by the mediation of S. Francis
Xauerius they may be worthy to be cured of all sorts of infirmities both of
body and mind.

Given at Bruxelles in our Archiepiscopal Palace, under our sign and seal,
the tenth of May, 1660. Was subscribed ANDREW Archbishop of Mechlin.
And sealed with his own Great seal with red wax, as appears by the Original.
The approbation or confirmation of a miraculous favor obtained by innocating
S. Francis Xauerius before his Holy Relics in the Church of the Society of
JESUS at Bruges, by the most Illustrious Robertus de Haynin Bishop of Bruges.
RObertus De Haynin by the grace of God, and of the Sea Apostolic An. Dom.
1660.
Bishop of Bruges and hereditary Chancellor of Flanders; To all those who shall
see, read, or hear read this present Approbation, Greeting in our Lord.

The great God, who is worthy of all praise in his Saints, is most of all to be
honored in those, by whom upon earth he works wonderful miracles, clear
demonstrations of their sanctity, and an attestation of their supereminent
prerogatives in heaven. One of which is the most Holy Apostle of India and
Iapony, Priest of the Society of JESUS, and unwearied promulger of that holy
Name, S. Franci^ Xauerius, a most true, yea a continual Thaumaturg of this our
age. Whom, besides the remotest Indies, Italy highly co^mends, Spayn honores,
Germany praises, Bohemia prays to, and serves, France extolls, the whole
Netherlands experiment as such; and of late Flanders one of the prime Provinces
of the Netherlands, and Bruges one of her fairest towns, and in the same town
Mary Pulynck daughter to Henry Pulyuck and Mary Brouckmans his wife, very
honorable Burgers of Bruges, and wife to Leo^ard Narissien, has actually
experienced the same: who, by a particular, and truly wonderful favor, as she
was calling upon this Saint, was by God almighty miraculously and suddenly
cured of a grievous infirmity, so that she seems to have been born to increase
the glory of S. Xauerius. As she was 21. years old [she is now eight and
thirty] and in the wintertime was going along the streets, an untoward boy hit
her with a hard-frozen snow-ball upon her right breast, a very tender part in
women, so that through the greatness of the pain she was forced to go to bed,
and began to be very ill upon it. But the Doctors and surgeons being strait
called to her, the pain was a little and for a short time diminished, but the
evil was not expelled. For the blow of the snow-ball entering further then they
imagined, breeding corruption, and taking deeper and deeper rooting; many years
in the wintertime, especially when the air was inclined to snow, she suffered
a new intolerable pain, mixed with pricking and cold, in such sort that the
miserable woman sometimes got one infirmity, other whiles another, and passed
over day and night without sleeping or resting. Yea the sore breast swelling
sometimes as bigg as two, became unfit to be sucked by the two children, which
she bare during this evil, seeing that the same breast gave sometimes abundance
of filthy matter instead of milk. Nay at last, as the end will show, it came to
a true and putrefying cancker, an evil most an end incurable. For the expelling
whereof diverse Doctors of Physic were called together to a consult. Nor
content her^ with, they sought the advice of diverse Doctors more remote, and
called them on purpose to her; by whose counsel having used diuer^ plasters,
especially to lenify and soften it, the pain and also the above mentioned
swelling as to any thing that was to be seen without, wholly vanished. The evil
notwithstanding in very deed spreading it self within, and tormenting the
infirm person with sharp prickings and and shootings, there broke forth after
some months another swelling, accompanied with many and greiuous pains, that
for the space of six weeks it wholly took away her sleep, and consequently
almost her reason, and in like manner all hope from Doctros of being able to
cure her: seeing that, as they said, the cancker was now fast to the ribbs, for
which reason this great evil was not curable even by the cutting off of the
breast, a wonted but notwithstanding a dangerous remedy even as to the life of
the patient. Whereupon they judged that nothing more was to be don to her, only
some comfortable remedies were to be applied, to prolong her life for a time.

Afterward in the same breast there bread a little vlcerous sore, which being
opened was the forerunner of two and twenty more. Out of which there coming
nothing but a purulent moisture, upon new advice they applied to it leeches,
which sucked out of the same breast well nigh forty ounces of blood. When then
all these things had been made proof of to no purpose and without effect by the
Doctors and skilfullest surgeons, they unanimously ^udged, that the wit of man
had no more to do here, but that the matter must wholly be committed to God; and
admonished the sick party to receive the most Holy Sacraments of the Holy
Church, which are necessary for those who are in danger of death, quietly and
contentedly to enter in to the way which leads to eternity, and for good and
all to set her house in order. But when the good woman saw that her health was
despaired of, and that no human help could succor her, she resolved with
herself to make her address to Almighty God; and with a lively confidence, and
strong faith looking upon a Picture hard by her of S. Francis Xauerius, she
said within herself: This Saint, who is the friend of Almighty God, and my
protector in all my indigencyes; and who has made himself great by the wonders
which he daily works: and who by his merits, and prompt charity is wont to aid,
and help the miserable, will pray for me and my health to the supreme God: and
by his intercession, will obtain for me of the Author of nature, that which
surpasses all human power. But in the mean time her sickness daily increasing
and growing wors, and together a true love to S. Xauerius also increasing in
her, at last she resolved, provided her strength would permit, together with
her husband upon the twentieth of May 1660. to visit the famous Church of the
Fathers of the Society of JESUS, dedicated to S. Xauerius, in the town of
Bruges, and there to cleanse her soul by the Holy Sacrament of Confession, and
to add new strength to the same by the most wholesome food of the Divine bread:
and thus by the hands of the Saint, to offer up to the good and great God both
the Sacraments, besides the prayers of others who had taken upon them to do the
same at another Altar renowned for the invocation of S. Xauerius, and hereby to
expect a most certain remedy of her evil.

So then the day appointed being now come, all her pains and achings, which
were much increased, seemed as if they would oppose her good resolutions: but
she notwithstanding not much heeding them, goes very early in the morning to
the Church, desirous to accomplish the promise of her good will: she goes to
confession, and afterward to Holy Communion. Then being risen up from the
Communion banck; commending all her affairs from the bottom of her heart to
God, and S. Xauerius, and begging of him her health with fervent prayers, she
fell into a sownd before his picture at the first pillar of the body of the
Church, against which she leaned as she sat upon her knees. But being now after
a little time come again to herself, and perceiving also in her self a sudden
change: to wit that the swelling of her breast was fallen, and that she was
freed from all pains and achings, with which notwithstanding heretofore, yea
upon that very day, she had been sorely tormented; she rises up amazed, and
leapes for joy, and with an extraordinary gladness of heart she greatly blesses
the good God, the author of all good things; and his great friend S. Xauerius,
her protector and trusty helper in the her miseries, and praises them with a
thousand thanks.

All these things being don, she returned toward home very jocond and
ouerjoyed, recounting the wonders of God wrought in her by S. Francis Xauerius,
to her husband not a little astonished at this so sudden a change; assuring him
that there was nothing of the pain, nothing of the smart remaining, which but a
few hours agon was so great and grievous; showed him also her breast so fallen
of its swelling, that her clothes which before were too strait, were now much
too wide, in fine that she felt herself perfectly cured.

Being come home, her breast was searched in the presence of her husband:
instantly the surgeons were sent for, her friends called in: who all
unanimously Confessed, that this so inueterate an evil, now was wholly
vanished: that the breast was now cured, and the cancker gone, but Divinely,
miraculously, and above all human power: attributing the cure to the Divine
mercy alone, moved hereunto by the merits, and invocation of S. Francis
Xauerius. The sores which remained were within a few days dried up, and
hardened, no matter more coming out of them, all the swelling that remained
vanished, and the before sick, but now well parties appetite returned to her
again: the meat, which before was prohibited her, and in such like sicknesses
is deadly, she now eats freely and without any prejudice to her health: so
that of so great an evil she retains nothing but the bare memory, and to
refresh the memory of it, to the end she may continually thank God for so great
a benefit, a scarr or hardness, but very little, proceeding from the drying up of
the veyns of the breast, without the remaining within of any root, or seed of
the foregoing infirmity, yea or any danger of falling into it again.

After all these things with the declaration of many honorable Persons, as also
with the informatio^s or examen, and instructions hereabout, legally and duly
taken before our coming to the Episcopal Seat of Bruges, according to the
wonted order and rules of the law, had been represented unto us; and after we
had understood and attentively observed all; having moreover in our Person
heard the most experienced Doctors of Physic, and the surgeons, who with their
own eyes had seen the same, confirming with oath that the aboue-related cure
must needs be miraculous, and above the power of nature; and now at last having
also asked the Counsel of many, who were versed in the studies of Divinity, and
in the Laws, and of spiritual persons in Ecclesiastical dignities; and now
having maturely considered all things hereabout; having also inuocated the name
of God, we have judged and declared, as by these presents we judge and declare,
to the greater glory of God and S. Francis Xauerius, that the cure of the right
breast of the before named Mary Pulynck, which for so long a time as has been
said, was grieved with a true and putrefying cancker, and suddenly and
instantly became whole, is miraculous and above the power of nature. Exhor^ing
all Christian belieuers, which shall come to know and understand this matter,
eternally to praise and magnify the most High and most merciful God, and to
bless him before all the living, for that he has showed mercy to his handmaid;
and moreover we acknowledge that we in these afflicted times of the Christian
commonwealth [in which we most of all need the intercessions of the Saints] not
without Gods particular providence do enjoy S. Francis Xauerius for so great a
helper of the faithful, who may truly be called a Helper in miseries, and
necessities, and is to be worshipped with all feruor, and to be inuocated with
most profound devotion, and to be exalted with all praise and honor.

We also, who in this place, in which God has placed us, though unworthy, as
Pastor, have a particular care of our flock of Bruges; do praise and thank his
mercy to us, that he has kept the fulfilling of such a work for our first
coming to this Bishopric; and we humbly beseech him by the merits of S Francis
Xauerius, that he would be pleased to defend with his Divine protection, and
filled with heavenly benedictions to keep sound and in perfect health, us and
the sheep committed to our charge, who have such a Devotion to so great a
Patron.

Given at Bruges in our Episcopal Palace upon the seventeenth of October 1662.
was subscribed ROB. DE HAYNIN Bishop of Bruges.
Under, hung the Episcopal Seal in red wax.
The cure of a Pestilent Fever, and the miraculous restoring of natural
strength and forces, obtained by honoring a little picture, which had touched
the Relics of S. Francis Xauerius at Mechlin, approved for a miracle by the
most Reverend the Vicar General of the vacant Bishopric of Bolduke.
I Vdocus Houbraken Canon of the Cathedral An Dom 1662.
Church of Anwerp, and Vicar General of the vacant Diocese of Bolduke, To all
that shall see these, Health in our Lord.

Amongst the undoubted signs of the true Church are miracles, which are
sometimes wont to be wrought, as well for the conversion of Infidels to the
faith, as also for the confirmation of the faithful in the same faith: for
these miracles was singularly famous, both in his life, and after his death, S.
Francis Xauerius of the Society of JESUS, the glorious Apostle of India and
Iapony, who, as we have understood, has extended to our subjects his miraculous
and benefical arm, [a little piece whereof is exposed to public veneration at
Mechlin in the Church of the Society of JESUS.] Which that it may more
manifestly appear, by these our present letters we testify, that we have
particularly examined, and caused to be examined the cure of a malignant fever,
and the sudden restoring of strength and forces, which by his means a certain
young woman in our Diocese of Bolduke obtained in the manner following.

When in the year 1662. the plague was at Breda, N. N. a farmers wife of the
territory of Bolduke assisted her brother who was there sick of it: she being
returned home fell sick of a contagious fever, and infected her husband, two
sons, and her daugter Catharin being two and twenty years old. First of all the
mother, and afterward the father being taken away by this pestilential malady,
and the two brothers also infested with the same, Catharin, from the six and
twentieth of July to the three and twentieth of August, was so exhausted with the
continual burnings of the same pest, as that she lost at length not only her
natural forces, but also her understanding, in such sort as there being no
remedy for her in human art, a skilful surgeon avouched that there was no hopes
of her life, who amongst diverse others, both with his hand and oath confirmed
this our narration. Their friends and neighbors undoubtedly persuaded
themselves that this house was infected with the plague; whereupon there was
none who would afford comfort and necessary assistance to the sick parties.
Notwithstanding their good Pastor, confiding through the merits and
intercession of S. Francis Xauerius both to be preserved himself from
infection, and also to free the sick from their infirmity, did not desert those
who were deserted by all their friends. Having therefore late in the evening
administered to Catharin the Holy Sacrament of Extreme Unction, returning again
the same evening, he brought with him a picture of S. Francis Xauerius, which
had touched his Holy Relics famous for miracles at Mechlin, and presenting it
to Catharin, who was in a manner just a dying, by the hands of her brother, he
incited them all to put their confidence in the intercession of that Blessed
Saint to God for them. Catharin had now layne four or five days, without being
able to move herself: the picture being offered her, she took it and kissed it
with a great confidence, the Pastor having exhorted her to contiue that her
Devotion all night, he returned home. The next day early in the morning,
without any bodies help or knowledge, Catharin rose out of her bed, and put on
her clothes herself, and walked about the house: nay even that very day, she
would have gone out into the field to get forage for the cattle, had not her
brothers hindered her. The day after she indeed went abroad, when in the mean
time, the Pastor being come to visit her, expecting to find her in her bed,
either dead or dying, he sees her come in at the door loaded with a great
basket of forage, which she had gathered in the field. The good man was wholly
astonished at this unexpected miraculous change, but withal reprehended her
imprudence, for so rashly exposing herself to the open air, and danger of a
relapse, being but immediately recovered of so dangerous a malady. The maid
having heard him with respect due to his person, confidently replied, Sir, be
not solicitous for me, I am out of danger, the Saint has perfectly cured me,
and restored me my strength ever since yesterday morning.

All these things having been declared to us by a legal Instrument, to which,
the Reverend Pastor, Catharin herself, and the surgeon, her two brothers, and
others of her kindred and neighbors had subscribed with oath, we first approved
a Commissary in those parts, an honest and understanding man, who after he had
examined all things in our name, and had again, interposing the fidelity of an
oath, received knowledge of the same things from Catharin, confirmed all with
his own seal. Afterward we our selves, here at Anwerp, examined the foresaid
Catharin, in the presence of her Pastor conscious of all that had passed, and
we found under the same Religion of an oath, that all had so happened. Which
things being manifest, moreover, there having been sent unto us in writing, the
judgments of most skilful Physicians, who had been consulted about this
matter, to wit of Tungers, and Brussels, and especially of two famous
Professors and Doctors of Physic, and also of two others of the famous
university of Louain, who unanimously agreed, that this restoration of forces
and strength in so short a space of time could not be obtained by any power of
nature; to the end that we might do nothing but legally, and according to the
Decrees of the Council of Trent, we have consulted learned men and skilful
Divines, and have again in presence and with them heard the foresaid Catharin,
and finally all things having been maturely, and as in the presence of God
considered, after a long and often repeated examination, we thought it was
fitting that we should decree, and by these presents we have decreed, that the
cure of the said Catharin may be esteemed and published as miraculous, and
wrought by God, and obtained through the merits of S. Francis Xauerius, and we
do publish it, and testify, that we esteem it as such: beseeching God the
Author of all things, that as he has been pleased to gather to his Church the
nations of the Indies, by the preaching and miracles of S. Francis Xauerius
while he lived, so he would now vouchsafe in these parts, by the miracles and
intercession of the same Saint, to conserve and confirm his faithful people in
the same Church, and graciously to gather those unto her, who are by any error
whatsoever separated from her. In confirmation of all these things, I have
subscribed these presents with my own hand, and ordered them to be signed with
the seal of our vicarship, upon the 19. of the Month of March, in the year of
our Lord 1664.

JVDOCVS HOVBRAKEN.
The place of the Seal.
The Relation of a Miracle, wrought through the intercession of the glorious
Apostle of the Indies, S. Francis Xauerius, at Palermo in Sicily, the second of
September 1662. approved by the most Illustrious Archbishop of the same place.
MAdam Mary Castelli had for her father Don Lancelot Castelli Marquess of
Capizzi, Prince of Castle Ferrato, at present one of the three masters of the
chamber of Counts who carry the sword, and President with a like number of the
Robe at the administration of the Royal patrimony; and for her mother she had
the Lady Hippolyta Lareara of the house of the Counts of S. Charles. This
honorable Gentlewoman, after she had attained to sufficient age to delibera^e
of a state of life, contemning all worldly hopes, well founded as well upon the
promising qualifications of her own person, as upon her family, it being one of
the most flourishing and richest in all Palermo, consecrated herself to God by
a perfect Holocaust, by taking the name of Hippolyta Lancelotta, and the habit
of S. Basil in an ancient Monastery, called Del Saluatore: where she had a
little before, amongst those exemplar Religious, spent the first years of her
tender age, in an education as well noble, as holy.

The king of Virgins did not delay, to testify, with what particular
satisfaction he accepted the generous oblation of this his new Spouse; and he
did it by bestowing upon her one of those favors, with which he is wont
ordinarily to grace those whom he loves most tenderly; that is by a very
strange, and very troublesome infirmity. Which began upon the first of June, in
the year one thousand six hundred sixty one, with a little Catarr accompanied
with a cough: which as then was not very troublesome unto her, and also no great
matter was made of it, but afterward it did so extremely increase, that having
surmounted the force of all human remedies, it reduced the patient to such a
condition, as she had no hopes to recover, whilst that, before she was brought
if not to dy^, at least to desire death, she felt in her self the effects of
death, according to the proportion of the frequency of the symptoms of death
which did assault her, and according to the measure of the experiments, which
the Physicians made of their art upon her person, endeavoring to cure her. Upon
the sixth of August in the same year, this malignant humor discovered it self
to be of another nature, then before it was apprehended to be: for it tormented
sister Hippolyta for some hours together without one moments respit, with a
most violent cough. From henceforward, as in case of open and proclaimed war,
she was forced every day to suffer the same assault of the said cough, which
did cruelly shake her and ceased not to torment her for six hours together in
the afternoon. Her pains were increased by new accidents in the month of
January. Her cough, after a short truce of a few days, having recovered its
forces, returned again with more violence; and sometimes the shaking was so
violent, the impetuosity so great, and the straining to cough so frequent, that
every body wondered, how so delicate and feeble a young maid was able to endure
it, and not to die of it. But that which gave greatest cause of fear, was the
falling of some drops of this pestilential catarr into her throat, where
stopping the passage, it brought her to the very point of expiring. Wherefore
fearing least some time or other she should be stifled herewith, and so die
suddenly, without further delay they gave her the most sacred Viaticum or last
Communion, and commended her soul to God. This slimy and biting distillation at
length came out; and just as a torrent, makes the most hideous noise when it
breaks its bounds, so the Violence, which was necessary to cast out of the
throat, this dangerous dam or stopping, was accompanied with so vehement a
cough, as it resembled the bellowing of an ox, and all the monastery rung of
it. Nor must any one wonder at this, or hold it for less credible, for it is
not yet six years, since that at Macerata, the noise, with which the air round
about rung, by a cough of a young Father of the Society of JESUS, was so strong
and loud, as that it was heard half a mile off. The horrible noise of this
cough and painful shaking of her whole body, was followed with most sharp
head-achs with a great defection of her strength and forces, with languishings,
faintings and sownings. She remained without strength, without speech, without
motion, and was for a good space of time, sometimes for a quarter of an hour,
with her mouth ghastly open, without being able to speak one syllable, or even
to move her lips. Nor did the strange effects of this obstinat rheum stay here,
but brought the patient, after an extreme weakness, to an extreme contortio^ or
gathering up of her body; so as she was not able to ly along in her bed, but
was forced to sit up in it. Then just as Watermen managing their oar, at every
stroke, move all their limbs back wards and forward, so she seized upon by a
cruel conuulsion, throwing herself with her arms and breast, now to the feet,
and then again to the head of the bed, she tossed her self up and down with
great pain and torment. Four of the strongest of the Religious, to the end that
they might somewhat assuage her dolors, endeauored to hold her as still as they
could, but at length being not able any longer to endure the toil, nor all four
of them able to master the force of only one, and she sick too, they set
besides her certain little chairs, to the end that she laying hold of those, and
throwing the^ about, might find wherein to weary herself, and by that means
abate the force of her strange frensy, which remaining in its vigor more
grievously tormented her. Palpitations and oppressions of heart, frequent
necessity of breathing now on this side, then on that, an extreme difficulty of
drawing her breath, conuulsions, sownings, were the symptoms which followed one
in the neck of the other, with so violent an agitation of the sick party, that
many of the Religious, who were more tenderly affected toward her, forbore to
visit her, to the end they might not see her in this pitiful condition. In the
fifteen months, in which the malady continued in this violence, many consults
of Doctors were made with great expenses. Besides abundance of Medecins of
Iulips and Quintessences, they applied the burning heat of red hot irons twice,
and cupping-glasses eight times or more, but all without doing her any good.
Moreover, if we will believe Galen, there is no remedy on earth for this
malady, which for its contumacious and insuperable fiercenes is called
Distillatio Ferina. But while sister Hippolyta, her strength and forces
exhausted, given over by the Doctors, who despaired of saving her life, having
lost her speech, at the end of a three days violent agony, wholly resigned to
the Divine will, was expecting the last mercy of God, the recompense of her
patience with the end of all her dolors; behold, beyond all human hopes, she is
rewarded with the gift of her lost health, to the end that she might multiply
the crowns of her virtues by her faithful services of her bountiful spouse. She
remembered herself, how that Father Thomas Buscemy of the Society of JESUS,
having entered into the Monastery some few days before to hear her Confession,
had recounted unto her a miracle, wrought in the City of Macerata upon a Father
of the same Society who being aflicted with the same malady, with very
semblable symptoms of oppression of the heart, a violent cough, and those other
rude paroxisms, which I have above related, by taking for his Advocate the Holy
Apostle of the East, was by the Saint immediately and perfectly cured: she
remembered also that the said Father, bringing to her a Relick, had exhorted her
to make use of a like recours to the Saint, for the recovery of her health:
moreover that the Father being returned to the College, had received a letter,
by which sister Hippolyta demanded of him permission to pray to God and S.
Francis Xauerius, not to prolong her life, but to hasten at least her death;
but he persisting in his first Counsel, had answered her, that she should for
the present quit that her desire of happiness, and with a due indifferency pray
to God to restore her health, if it were to his greater glory, to the end that
she might employ it to the service of his Divine Majesty, and of her Religion,
and that she should repeat this prayer three times. She then being now gasping
for life, remembered that she had not been so punctually obedient to her
spiritual Father, for which she was a little troubled, and had some scruple of
it, and so whether in recompense of her obedience, or as a disposition to the
merit of that grace which was prepared for her, she felt her heart encouraged
and strengthened by a great faith, such as she had not experimented either in her
first, or second prayer: by means whereof, without delay, she repeats her prayer
in thought [being not able to do it by words] and beseeches God the third time
in the form prescribed by her Confessarius, that through the intercession of
his faithful servant, and Apostle of the East S. Francis Xauerius, he would
deliver her from this mortal infirmity. No sooner had she don this, but the
torment of her agony being changed into a sweet repose, she fell into a quiet
sleep: In her sleep she seemed to herself to hear an interior voice, which said
unto her, that she was now perfectly cured: and for that surprised, between
astonishment and joy, she did not yet believe it, and demanded how this was don
so suddenly, and why she should receive so great a reward for so small an act
of obedience? Not so, replied to her clearly the same voice, but S. Francis
Xauerius, whom you have taken for your advocate, has interposed his prayers for
you to God; wherefore take his Relick, and lay it upon your heart, for it is
this Saint who has obtaind you this grace. And she had no need of any thing else
quite to free her of her malady, but immediately seized on by a sublime
rauishment of spirit, what return, said she, shall I be able to make to my
deliverer, that I may acquit my self worthily of so considerable a favor?
Nothing else [replied again the divine inspiration, whick spoke to her in her
heart without the noise of words] but that first you communicate every Friday
in honor of S. Francis, offering to the sovereign Lord the most adorable
Eucharist, the abridgment of all graces. Secondly that you banish from you that
day all other thoughts, and spend it in a Devout recollection, keeping silence
exactly. Thirdly that by particular acts you employ your self in the exercise
of some virtue and advance your self in the acquiring of it. At this very
moment she raises her self up, and having with a great Devotion applied to her
breast the Holy Relick, the true remedy of her incurable distillation and all
other infirmity, she cried out with a loud and clear voice: I am well, S.
Francis Xauerius has cured me, give me my Habit, for I will go immediately to
the Quire, to give thanks to God and the Saint for my recovery. The mothers,
who in a great number kept her company in this extremity, looked upon these
words, as the rauings of one that was out of herself; but presently after
acknowledging them to be what they were indeed, an undoubted testimony of the
very truth, they were greatly astonished at them, which amazeme^t soon changed
it self into a hearty joy, and praises of the Divine bounty and the Holy
Apostle: and without exspecting any further, they went all in a modest and
Devout Order to the Quire with the sick person, who was then perfectly
recovered: and sung the Te Deum laudamus in a sweet and harmonious consort with
the applause and unspeakable joy of the whole Monastery. After which, they
immediately gave notice of all that had passed to my Lord the Archbishop: by
whose ordination, necessary informations having been taken, and a process
juridically formed, this present relation in an authentical form was drawn out
of it. From the day on which the sick person was miraculously cured, unto this
present that we write this narration, are passed ten months: during which time
she has constantly enjoyed the grace of as perfect health as at the first
moment in which she received it, except that when through forgetfulness, or some
unexpected accident, she has sometimes failed exactly to fulfill the duties
ordained her by the Saint: for then she found her self to be seized on by
certain symptoms of the same evil, but which were sent her only as an
aduertisment, in such sort, that acknowledging her defect, and not deferring to
correct it, the grudgings of her distemper strait vanished, and she was as free
from them as before. Amongst others, for that having upon one day of the Octaue
of the Holy Apostle, lighted certain candels to honor his memory, she resolved
afterward, out of I know not what human respects, to put them out again, she
was immediately assailed with those furious conuulsions, which we have above
recounted, together with loss of her speech, and was nether able to recover the
use of her tongue, nor to free herself from those contorsions, until she had
again lighted the candels. In like manner another time, her voice failing her
in the Quire, in such sort that she could not sing one syllable of the divine
office; and all remedies which were used to make her voice return, serving to
no purpose, she remembered that she had not paid to her liberal benefactor, the
small tribute of a lamp, which was to burn before his picture. Wherefore she
ran to it immediately: and at that very instant, she was freed from the
stopping of a watery humor, which was fallen down into her throat. I could here
recount a multitude of such like amiable passages betwixt the Saint and his
dear Deuote, but content your selves with these, which were alleged and
authentically proved in the aboue-mentioned process.

There is only one thing, which although it discover it self, notwithstanding,
methinks I may not omit particularly to advertise those of it, who shall read
or hear this Relation: and it is for the spiritual comfort of the Deuotes of the
Holy Apostle, who by the obligation he imposed in recognizance of a favor don
by him, does undoubtedly assure us all, how greatly he is delighted in the
exercises of that christian Piety, which the Devotion of the faithful has
begun, to honor Friday in a special manner, the day on which this Saint,
departing out of this life in the Isle of Sanciano near China, in an
unspeakable destitution of all human comfort, and consequently very like to
that of our Lord, received from his Divine Majesty an abundant recompense of
his infinite and Apostolical labors, which he had undergone for ten years in the
East, to the great advantage of souls, and glory of the faith.

Let us pray unto him then, that from above he would please to kindle in us
also a desire of meriting by good works, the effect of his protection and
patronage in this happy spouse of JESUS CHRIST.

A sudden cure of a Rupture of nine years, wrought upon an old man of
threescore and fifteen years of age, upon a vow made by another person to S.
Francis Xauerius: approved for a Miracle by my Lord the most Illustrious and
most Reverend Archbishop of Mechlin.
ANDREW by the grace of God and An. Dom. 1662.
of the Sea Apostolic Archbishop of Mechlin, to all those who shall see these
presents, health in our Lord.

As amongst diverse places which give singular marks of their zeal toward the
miraculous Relics of S. Francis Xauerius, the City of Mechlin Metropolis of
our Diocese in the low countries, does signally continue her Devotion with an
extraordinary feruor, where that sacred Depositum was first of all exposed with
our approbation to the veneration of the people in the Church of the Society of
JESUS, so also the Divine hand there opens it self largely, daily to distribute
more considerable favors by the miraculous and benefical arm of his faithful
servant. For besides the favors and miracles which we have leasurly examined
and duly approved hitherto, as also other Prelates of the Church have don, we
understand that this great Apostle of the Indies, has lately made again appear
the indeed prodigious power of his arm. To confirm this verity, we do declare
by these presents, that we have commanded with all possible exactnes to search
out the truth of a sudden cure of a rupture of nine years, which a certain
inhabitant of Mechlin has obtained by the intercession of this glorious Saint,
and which to this day he still perfectly enjoyes, as will appear by this
authentical narration, which was sent to us.

William Plougart being threescore and fifteen years old, was grievously
tormented with the extreme pains of a Rupture, the swelling whereof fell down
sometimes in such sort, as it was as bigg as the head of a child. Margaret de
Hoogh his wife was eyewitnes of it, and also Lewis van Dael felt it with his
hand a few days before he was cured, when he found him lying upon the rampairs
without force and strength, not being able to move himself for the vehemence of
his pains, which he has often confirmed by oath, and avouched that diverse
times, for these five last years that he wrought with him, he observed he was
so weak and feeble, that he was forced to leave off his daily labor. The
violence of this infirmity had from the beginning so oppressed the poor old
man, that his sufferings growing every day to be more violent then other, they
made him wholly unfit for labor. The falling of his malady did so torment him
in the nightime upon the eleventh of December 1662. that he verily persuaded
himself he should die of it, protesting amidst the violence of his pains, that
he should esteem himself extremely happy, might he but die, and that by a death
never so violent. Amongst others of his neighbors who were awaked by the
doleful noise of his sad groans, a certain young woman moved with compassion
toward him, at one a clock in the night, made a vow in his behalf to S.
Francis Xauerius, and promised to perform it at his miraculous Relics at
Mechlin: no sooner had she made her vow, but the complaints and sighs of the
infirm person ceased. Early in the morning she went to see him, and demanding
how he did, his daughter Magdalen made her answer, that he had slept queitly
ever since one a clock in the night. Vertly, then replied the good maid, I made
a vow at the same time to the great Apostle of the Indies, S. Francis Xauerius,
for the case of your father, and I will forthwith accomplish it, with as much
fidelity as speed. Upon the making and performance of this promise, the said
William was perfectly Cured, and has not suffered any inconvenience from his
infirmity, for the space of two years now past. He has walked up and down,
traveled, and don his ordinary labor, with as great case and alacrity, as if
he had never known what meant the torments of a troublesome rupture; and which
is more to be wondered at in an old man of his age, six months after his cure,
upon the first day of May, he went from Mechlin to Anwerp, Twelve miles.
and returned again the same day on foot, and this loaded with a heavy pack. A
while after in the most vehement heats of the summer, he went from Mechlin to
Bruxels, Twelve miles.
and came back again the same day strong and lusty. Moreover he protests that
since his recovery of his health, for these two years, he has performed without
any pain his accustomed functions, although hard and laborious, [for that he is
a gardener by occupation] that he has dug, sowed, and oftentimes in the cold
and most dangerous moist seasons, bowed ^o the ground, plucked up herbs by the
roots in his garden; and in fine, that he has don other labors, which
experience testifies to be wholly contrary and pernicious to ruptures; that he
has planted and transplanted trees; and that in the summer last past, being
upon a tree of a moderate height he fell down off it to the ground, without any
hurt, or resentment of his malady, although that heretofore, during the nine
years he was tormented with it, it fretted and swelled with cutting pains,
according as the air grew cold or moist, or if that in laboring he used any
violence.

The News of this cure having been brought us by many persons of credit, The
Reverend John Baptista Bernaerts curate and canon of our Metropolitan Church,
and Antony Vermeulen Licentiat in Divinity, authorized to this purpose, took by
our command the informations with their usual forms, which the said William,
his wife, his daugher, and Lewis van Dael subscribed with oath, as also the
worshipful commissaries, who sent them us signed with their own seal. In
confirmation whereof, many other testimonies were added of the most famous
Physicians of Mechlin. Anwerp, and Bruxels, and of the two prime professors and
Doctors of Physic in the famous university of Louain, who unanimously assure
us, that so sudden and perfect a cure of a rupture of nine years, wrought upon
a man of threescore and fifteen years old, was above the power of nature, which
we having vnderst^^d, and considered in the presence of God, as also having
required the judgments herein of diverse Divines, and other personages of great
ability and Integrity, according to the Decree made by the Council of Trent
concerning the approbation of New miracles, conforming our selves to the
faithful report of the Reverend Commissaries, who have most diligently and
maturely examined, and considered the matter, we judged it fitting, as we do
also by these presents judge it fitting, that this cure of William Plougart,
both may and ought to be held and published for supernatural and miraculous,
wrought and obtained of the Divine goodness, by the intercession of S. Francis
Xauerius, and for such we publish and decree it. In credit whereof we have
commanded our Secretary to dispatch these presents, signed with our hand and
sealed with our seal, humbly beseeching the good God, who glorifies those which
glorify him, and is honored in the honors of his Saints [as we acknowledge,
from our own experience and with all kind of submission the glorious merits and
signal favors of the blessed S. Francis Xauerius] that we may hereafter more
frequently experiment the effects of his favorable protection.

Given at Bruxels the 28. of November 1664. It was signed ANDREW Archbishop of
Mechlin.
And a little lower By order of my Lord the most Illustrious and most Reverend
Archbishop. F. Despaute Secretary.
The place of the Seal
A Miraculous cure of Lamenes obtained upon the Seventh of April 1662. through
the intercession of S. Francis Xauerius; approved by the most Illustrious
Ambrosius Capello Bishop of Anwerp, the 23. of November 1663.
FR: Ambrosius Capello by the Grace of God, and of the Holy Apostolic seat of
Rome, Bishop of Anwerp, to all the faithful Christians of this Bishopric,
Health in our Lord.

The constant Devotion of the people of Anwerp to S. Francis Xauerius, in his
Holy Relics, kept in the Church of the Professed House there of the Society of
JESUS, excites the merciful God, who is always wonderful in his Saints, now
and then, by certain super^atural favors to signify, how pleasing unto him the
honor is, which we, here upon earth, show to his friends in heaven; letting as
it were descend certain rays of that glory, which they there eternally
poss^ss, to the increasing of that honor and temporal glory, which he does also
even here upon earth to those his same friends: and so it has appeared to us
now the third time, in the Person of Margarit Crick a devout woman, of about
eight and thirty years of age, born at Aelost of Peter Crick a merchant there
in his life time, and Susan Vander Straten. This woman in the year of our Lord
1656. having fallen into a grievous sickness, and palsy in the right side of her
body, although she in some measure recovered of it, yet notwithstanding she
retained, in all her right side, such a weakness, that she was ever after
miserable, and wholly unfit for any work which required any force and strength,
and she got moreover such a sudden contraction of the nerves or sinews, that
her right leg became remarkably shorter then her left: in such sort that she
was forced, to make one of her shoes, at least about half a thumb higher then
the other, and besides, was necessitated, by reason of her great weakness, to
make use of a Crutch to go with all.

This lamenes in the manner related, together with a general weakness of the
right side of her body, stuck by her the space of six years. During the first
two years, to wit from the year 1656. to the year 1658. she applied diverse
ointments to her lame leg, but finding not the least benefit or betternes by
them, for the future she laid them all aside, and past over the four
next-following years [the three last whereof she lived at Anwerp] without using
any human remedies, medecins, or oyntings; bearing with patience this little
cross, which God had sent her. Until at last upon the thirtith day of March
1662. she made her address to S. Francis Xauerius, with a strong confidence of
obtaining of God, through his merits and intercession, her perfect health, and
strength. To which end she resolved with herself, the nine days following, to
go to visit his Relics, in the Church of the Professed House of the Society of
JESUS, there to do her Devotions, and earnestly to beseech the same Saint, if
it were the will of God, and would tend to her souls health, that he would
vouchsafe to be her Advocate, and obtain for her, perfect health of the Divine
mercy. And it seems the Saint stood ready to answer her request, for immediately
from the very beginning, and daily forwards, during her nine-days Devotion she
felt herself remarkably better as to her infirmity, together with a like
increase of her confidence in the merits of the Saint; so that upon the seventh
day of April, being Good Friday for the year last past 1662. and the last day
of the Nouena, having ended her Devotions before the Altar and Relics of the
foresaid Saint* finding her self comforted with an interior, sensible sweetness,
and strongly confiding that she was cured through the intercession of S.
Xauerius, and should hereafter be able to go without a crutch, she offered up
her crutch, and there left it: then rising up from her praying place, she went
strait out of the Church without any difficulty: being come in to the street,
finding herself stronger and stronger, she went to the Church of S. James, and
thence to the Church of S. George, and so to her own dwelling, which was there
abouts; with an unspeakable joy, and a heart full of thanksgiving to her curer
and restorer S. Francis Xauerius, and was beheld with like admiration, first by
her own hous-hold and neighbors, who saw her come home, and afterward by
innumerable multitudes of people, who had before seen and known the said
Margarit Crick, lame and miserable, going with a crutch, and high shoos, and
all notwitstanding yet falling on one-side in her gate, whom they now saw
without crutch or prop, to go nimbly, and right upon her limbs, without being
able to perceive any defect in her gate. And this strength and soundnes of her
body, did so increase, that shortly after [to wit in the summer of the same
year 1662. and again in the summer of the present year 1663.] she went on foot
from Baestroo to Aelost, of about nine miles distance, without any help of
stick, or crutch, or any thing else: yea without even feeling any greater
wearynes in one leg, then in the other, to the great admiration of her friends
and kinsfolks, and others of the town of Aelost, who had before known, or seen
her lame, and miserable. In this perfect health and strength of limbs, does she
continue to this very day, for the space of seuenteen Months, always going
upright, without the least limping on one side or the other, without feeling
any pain or contraction of Nerves, or any other incommodity.

All which being so represented unto us, as it has been related, we have
thought good to examine the same more narrowly, according to the duty of our
Episcopal function, and the zeal we have to promote the honor of God, and of
his Saints.

First then, having gotten full information, of the sickness and condition, in
the which Margaret Crick was, before she came to Anwerp; [the same information
being taken at Aelost, upon the Tenth of October 1663. by Right Reverend Mr.
John Fernand. Garrido Dean of the Collegial Church there, and the Reverend Mr.
Marius Canon of the same Church, thereunto especially commissioned in the name
of the most illustrious the Archbishop of Mechlin.] we have also in like manner
to the more strict examen of the sickness, and what has happened to the foresaid
Margaret Crick for the time she has lived here at Anwerp, and also to
whatsoever might be required in this matter and its circumstances, commissioned
the very Reverend Mr Henricus van Halmale Licentiate in both Laws, and Dean of
our Cathedral Church of our Blessed Lady; and besides him, the Reverend Canons
Mr. Antonius van Berchem Licentiate in both Laws, Protonotary Apostolic, and
Archpreist; and Mr. Aubertus van den Eede, Licentiate in both Laws, Protonotary
Apostolic and Canon Graduate of the same our Cathedral Church, who under
solemn oath made in their hands, heard the relation as well from the foresaid
Margaret Crick, as also from diverse other persons, who knew the foresaid
Margaret, from those with whom she had dwelt and from some who saw her come
home upon the day of her cure: afterward, they asked the judgment of three
famous Doctors of Physic of this City, who having well and maturely considered
all the foresaid points and informations, in like manner under solemn oath they
unanimously judged, and attested, that the above mentioned sudden cure of the
foresaid Margaret, was above all natural power and means: and must necessarily
be attributed to God alone, and to S. Francis Xauerius, whom God would hereby
honor.

Wherefore report having been made to us, of all that has been said, by the
above mentioned Commissioners, and we having been perfectly informed of all the
particulars, and having also heard the opinion of our Doctors in Divinity, do
declare the above related sudden cure of the foresaid Margaret Crick, to be
miraculous, and supernatural, and that it ought to be held by every one for a
true miracle: exciting all unanimously to praise and thank God, who has given
us within the town of Anwerp, as well for our corporal, as for our spiritual
necessities, so powerful an Advocate, and who is pleased amongst us, by
remarkable signs to exalt his great instrument and Apostle S. Francis
Xauerius, who carried and propagated Gods true faith, honor, and glory to the
utmost bounds of India and Iapony.

In testimony of the truth whereof we have signed these presents, and confirmed
them with our own Seal, at Anwerp in our Episcopal palace the 23. of Nouemb.
in the year 1663.

Was subscribed F. AMBROS. CAPELLO Bishop of Anwerp.
At the side was put the Episcopal Seal. Underneath was written. By order of
the most Illustrious before-named. And yet lower. D. vanden Br^l Secretarius.

A woman in Travel happily delivered, and freed from witchraft by the
Intercession of S. Francis Xauerius, in the year of our Lord 1662. in the month
of April.
CAtharin van Hoef wife to Peter vander Elst Burger of Lire, was no sooner
delivered of five of her children, but she saw them born, and dead at the same
moment, and they unhappy infants found their cradles in their graves, before
they had been washed from original sin by the sacred waters of Baptism. This
sad accident aflicted their sorrowful mother the more greiuously, for that she
perceived by diverse signs and tokens, that they were stifled by magical
charms and enchantments.

Witches and enchanters, in their diabolical arts, by the permission of
Almighty God, make use of the fruits of the earth, and of the dung of rats, and
other filthy creatures, to work malign effects upon the bodies of men. with
such kind of sorceries as these, this poor woman was outragiously aflicted,
finding her bed oftentimes full of them, although she had caused it to be
cleansed before. Wherefore finding herself thus grievously assailed by wicked
spirits and their adherents, she caused herself to be exorcized for four whole
years, when excited by the noise of the miracles whrought through the
intercession of S Xauerius at Mechlin, she went thither. And entering into the
chapel where the Relics of the Saint are kept, immediately the Saint filled
her soul with such a sweetness and comfort in her aflictions, as cheered her at
the very heart, and she was not a little strengthened by it. The poor woman
being again with child, the four last months of her time she was aflicted with
such a troublesome flux of Blood, accompanied with such a dereliction of
forces, with such languishings and faintings, and so many evils at once, that
fearing least oppressed by them she should by suddenly, they gave her the most
Holy Viaticum or last Sacrament of our Lords Body.

These sad effects made the midwife and her kindred judge that there was no
hopes of her life: notwithstanding the sick party, although her strength and
forces were exhausted, and she given over by all, yet did she not cease to
expect from the abundant charity of S. Xauerius, together with the end of her
dolors, the recompense of her faith, which wonderfully increased when they
brought her a Relick and picture of the Saint; to whom she offered a heart of
silver, and promised to procure a solemn Mass to be sung, and in case she were
delivered of a son, she would give him the name of Francis Xauerius.

As she rolled this sweet thought in her mind she sowned away, and remained so
a long time without motion, so that every one thought she was dead. Coming to
herself again, she comforted those which were about her, with words which
abundantly testified the confidence of her heart, saying unto them with a
languishing voice, Assuredly S. Xauerius will help me, he will cure me of my
Pain^, and in fine he will save my life, and the life of my child.

The Physician being conscious of these strange kinds of evils and miseries of
the good woman, fearing least the bowels of the mother might come to be the
grave of her unborn child, caused a Surgeon to be called, to be ready to open
the womb of the sick party, in case she should come to die, that so the infant
might be baptized if it were yet alive. A little after, sownings, and the
ordinary symptoms followed one another with such violence, that the sick party
had the Holy candle in her hand a long time without any sign of life. Having
continued in this manner insensible for a time, by little and little she opened
her eyes, and besought her friends to say one Pater and Aue in honor of the
great Saint, from whose bounty she hoped to obtain her cure.

A Father her Co^fessarius, who was in a chamber near her, set himself to say
the Lytanies of all the Saints, and when he had pronounced three times the name
of S. Xauerius, behold without feeling the cruel approches, and sharp pangs of
child birth, she was delivered of a son, whose happy birth sweetened the grief,
which the sad loss of her other children had caused in her. Since this her safe
and favorable delivery, she, together with her little Infant, has enjoyed
perfect health, without being troubled from that time with those charms and
witchcrafts, which oppugned her childbearing with so many anguishes and
grieuances.

The Approbation of this last Favor by the most Reverend Bishop of Anwerp, F.
Ambrosius Capello, for breuity sake I have omitted. In which approbation, after
due examen by commissarys by him to that purpose appointed, he declares that
this Favor, [for so he styles it only, and not an absolute Mrracle] may piously
and prudently be believed to have been received by the singular assistance of
S. Francis Xauerius. The omnipotent and most merciful JESUS, through the
intercession of the same his great Instrument in the conversion of souls, work
many like favors for his humble Catholic Clients in England, and compel by
his Holy grace all misbelieuers to say to this Great Apostle and Doctor of the
Roman Catholic Church, what Ni^^demus said of old to Christ our Lord, in like
circumstances, Rabbi scimus etc. Sir, we know that you are a master come from
God, for no man could work those signs which thou do unless God were with
him. But may they never deserve to hear that of our Blessed Savior concerning
the obstinate Jews Io. 15. Si opera non fec^ssem in eis quae nemo alius fecit,
peccatum non hab^rent etc. If I had not don works amongst them which no other
has don they would not have sinned. If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they would not have sinned, but now they have no excuse for their sin. Amen.

Ad majorem Dei and Sancti XAVERII gloriam.
FINIS.
THE RAPTURE Of an Affectionate SOUL before A CRVCIFIX. Composed in Latin By
the HOLY FATHER, S. FRANCIS XAVERIVS.
O GOD, I love Thee, not to get
Thy Favor to be Saved; nor yet
To shun that sad Eternal Lot,
Designed for those that love Thee not.
Thou, Thou, my JESU, to thy Loss,
Would needs Embrace me on the Cross:
Thou would endure both Nayls and Lance,
Disgrace and Dolours; with a Trance
Of bloody Sweat, and boundless Seas
Of Anguishes and Bitterness;
Nay, even Death's last Agony:
And this for me, a Foe to Thee.
Most Loving JESUS, shall this move
No like Return of Love for Love?
Above all things I love Thee best;
Yet not for Hope of Interest;
Nor for to gain Heaven's Promised Land;
Nor for to stop thy threatening Hand:
But as Thou lovedst me, so do I
Love Three, and ever shall, merely
Because Thou art my King, my GOD,
Of Love the Source, and Period. AMEN.
AN OBLATION, By which S. IGNATIUS of LOYOLA frequently every Day Offered
himself to GOD.
REceive, O LORD, all my Liberty, my Memory, my Understanding, and my whole
Will. You ave given me All that I Have, All that I Possess; and I give back,
and surrender All to Your Divine Will, that You may absolutely dispose of All.
Give me only Your Love, and Your Grace, and I am Rich enough. I have nothing
more to Ask.

FINIS.

