A Conciliatory DISCOURSE UPON Dr. Crisp's Sermons, ON THE Observation of Mr.
Williams 's Dissatisfactions in Them: In which the Unsearcheable Riches of
Christ IN THE Covenant of Grace, passing Knowledge, is yet Aspired to, to be
made Known.

Humbly Presented To the Preachers of the Merchants Lecture at Pinners-Hall; To
the Sustainers of it, And the Congregation usually Assembled there.

By T. BEVERLEY.

LONDON: Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1692.
Where you may be furnished with Dr. Crisp's Works: And likewise his Son's Book,
Samuel Crisp, Esquire; Entitled, Christ made Sin. You may also be supplied (...)

The PREFACE.
I Have (not long ago) endeavored to Write as a Reconciler, between Two
Persons of Estimable Memory; Dr. Crisp, and Mr. Baxter; Now Both in their
Spirits with Christ; where They have Fully Concerted their seeming various
Apprehensions, or Representations in so Great Points; not only by Receiving
those (...), those Vn-utterable Explanations of them; but in their Highest
Enjoyments, and Mutual Congratulations, in those Fundamental Truths, and
Graces; wherein they were, even here, notwithstanding a seeeming Discord, (and
much more there) One in Christ.

But we, that are on this side their Line, still See through a Glass Darkly,
Perceive, Know and Speak as Children; and so Express our selves Diversely, one
from another, as we look to this, or that side of Truth: Not being able to
Comprehend the perfect Physiognomy, or Representation of it at once.

And indeed in the Great Points, that are nearest allied to the Coveant of
Grace, we are most unable to pronounce clearly; That first Engraving upon our
Hearts, and the Divine Revelation of Christ, (From Faith, Romans 1. 17. having
not yet Attained To Faith, in Perfection) are ready in this our Imperfect
State, to enter a Centest in our Minds; and we cannot decide, as we ought,
between the Eternal Law of Righteousness, and the Everlasting Gospel of
Righteousness: and while we have Great Discourses in Scripture upon Both, we
very hardly keep the Balance of the Sanctuary even in our Understandings, as
it is in it self: While therefore the Servants of Christ are, some in their
Ministry, inclining the Beam one way, and some another; though according to the
manifold Distributions of one and the same Spirit to both in the main; yet they
are ready to find fault mutually at their so doing: It may be no Injury then
for a Third, to endeavor to set Both even, though great Infirmity may appear
in that also: For who is sufficient for these Things?

Especially it is to be considered, The Gospel-Righteousness, or of Faith, has
ever since the Apostles Preaching and Writing, suffered an Eclipse by the
Mystery of Iniquity early working; and by degrees, from that very time, the
Ap^stle dates, 2 Thessalonians. 2. it was covered more and more. Till the very State of
the Christian Church fell into the (...), the Dark and Foul Place of the
Apostasy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. And though the Eclipse be much less than it was, by the
Light returning in the Reformation; yet it remains in part; and oh that it were
not in Great part! Now it is very observable, That grand Prophecy of the
Revelation, knowing upon what side of Evangelical Truth that Black Shade would
most dreadfully fall, gives its Divine Symbols or most Exquisite Figures for
prevention; for preservation of the Witnesses of Christ; for Condemnation of
the Apostasy; for Recovery out of it; in this Supreme Article of Gospel Truth;
the Blood of Christ. Hence there are so often mentions of the Lamb; of his
Blood; of Robes washed white in his Blood. The pure and perfect Song of the
Lamb, as it was sung in the Apostles Days, is given, chap. 5. as the Great
Standard. The Witnesses are within the measured Temple, during the whole
Apostasy. Which Temple is the known Type of Christ in his Redemption; They are
at the Golden Altar of Incense, the pure Intercession of Christ in the deep of
the Apostasy. Along the entire space of which, that New Song of the Lamb, chap.
5. is almost wholly lost. The Apostasy is thus condemned, chapter 13. 8. All the
Earth Worshipped the Antichristian Beast; whose Names were not written in the
Lamb's Book of Life, slain from the Foundation of the World. The difference is
not very great, whether we apply the last words to the Lamb slain, or Names
written. I prefer the first, showing the Eviternity of the Sacrifice of Christ,
above the Vpstarts of Antichristianism. At the end of the Apostasy, when the
Witnesses Sealed on their Foreheads appeared with the Name written there (as I
have further intimated in the following Discourse) The Song as it were new,
because so much Lost, is Sung again with the Voice of Thunder, and to be
Learnt, chap. 14. and is perfectly Learnt, chap. 15. after the Preaching of the
Everlasting Gospel. There the Kingdom of Redemption, in its fully Glory,
follows, wherein the Saints are Priests, not only of God, but of Christ, a 1000
Years, chap. 20. 6. Have the Name not only of God, but of the Lamb, written on
their Foreheads. And the Throne of God, and the Lamb is in that City of
Redemption, c. 22. 3, 4.

And it is most notorious Matter of Fact, that the most Glorious Ray of the
Reformation, was the Restoration of the Doctrine of Justification by Free
Grace, and Faith in Jesus; wherein Luther, and Calvin, with other Reformers,
however in other things they differed, yet concurred herein, as under the
Spirit and Zeal of Elijah, All in it. How much any under the Profession of the
Reformation have declined from this; Ipsi Viderint, Let them well look to it. I
am far from esteeming the Reverend Persons I have to do with, Dead, or Living,
among that sort.

But this Great Fall of the Christian Church, as from Heaven, in this Point,
would tempt any considering Person to be most on the side of those, who ascribe
most to Free Grace, and the Righteousness of God in Christ; Except they hold
the Doctrine or Deeds of the Nicolaitans, the Turning the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, which Thing Christ hates, chapter 2. 6, 15. being the other part of
Antichristianism; Indulgences to Sin: And this I never heard Dr. Crisp charged
with; and he is particularly acquitted by his Reverend Opposite.

I dare not pretend to justify all my own, much less another Expressions, who
knew his own Grounds and Reasons of so expressing; and, it is most probable,
thought some unusual ones necessary to alarm the Thoughts and Minds of Men into
the Observation of the Truths he designed to exalt, as not enough exalted.

I do not pretend to enter, as they say, the Lists with so Judicious and Worthy
a Person, as Mr. Williams; nor with the Things he has spoken, giving a Cordial
Assent to much the most; nor shall I, I hope, appear Contentious, wherein I
dissent; but have only considered, what Truth lies on each hand, more than what
he himself has so excellently observed; and have therefore made his Heads at
the end of his Book the Line of my Procedure, and so have set them at the end
of this.

I commit all to Divine Blessing, and Christian Acceptance, with this gladsom
Prediction; that if we can but for a little, a very little time, love the
Truth, and Peace, Zech. 8. 19. The Light concerning these Points, that has
been but as the Light of the Moon in the time of the 42 Moons of the Apostasy,
not yet expired, and so still darkning the Sun's Light; shall be not only as
the Light of the Sun of Christ's Face; chapter 10. 1. in the Reformation; But the
Light of the Sun, even since the Reformation, shall be Sevenfold; the Light of
One Day, as the Light of Seven, All in One. Then we shall Rejoice, and no
longer Dissent. Let us Earnestly Pray: Lord, Let (as it shall shortly do) Thy
Kingdom thus Come.

A SECOND Conciliatory Discourse CONCERNING Dr. Crisp's Sermons, AND Mr.
Williams's Dissatisfactions concerning them.
THat which I would lay in the Foundation and as the Center of this Discourse,
shall be a Scheme of the Doctrine of the Gospel in these Points.

1. The Covenant of Grace in all the Graces and Duties of the Convenantees of
it, God in infinite Wisdom, Holiness and Purity has so settled, that it is an
Absolute Covenant, in which Christ is not only the Great Sacrifice, and his
Blood the Price, Ransom, and Purchase; But He Himself is the Surety, the
Mediator, the Testator of it: So that This Covenant shall never be Found Fault
with. Not only on the Account of its own Goodness; but not on this Account,
that the Covenantees, or those who are indeed intended by Christ to be the
Covenantees, have broken it, and so it has become ineffectual to them. This is
most evident from the Apostle's Argumentation, Heb. 8, 7, etc. For if the First
Covenant had been faultless, there should have been no place sought for a
second: The first Covenant, that God made, was in it self good, had they to
whom it was given, been suitable and agreeable to it; The Apostle therefore
changes that his word, if the Covenant had be^n faultless, into those words.
For finding fault with them, he says, Behold the Days come, says the Lord, I
will make a new Covenant, not according to the Covenant I made with their
Fathers, etc. which my Covenant they brake, or continued not in, and I regarded
them not. But this is the Covenant I will make with them, I will write my Laws
in their Hearts, etc. Hence it follows, The Covenantees according to the
faultless Covenant must so continue in it, that God may be for ever their God,
and they his People; there need be no dispute, what Covenant this was, or in
what regard it is here spoken of; whether only as a Covenant of Moral
Obedience, or as a Ritual Ceremonial Covenant; for it is undeniable, the
Apostle represents it herein as a Covenant found fault with, that they who were
under it continued not in it; and therefore whatever Covenant, whether Moral or
Ceremonial, had that Fault to be found with it, God would change, and bring in
a Covenant, that should not have that Fault to be found with it: It must and
shall be effectual to the grand purpose of keeping in the People of it so
within it self, as to be God's People, and that he will be their God; such
efficacies of Grace shall all go along with it: This is not to be eluded by any
Art or Wit of Man.

2. From hence it must necessarily follow, There is a certain number chosen and
elected according to the Grace of this Covenant, and for them this Covenant is
made. For it is too evident in plain view, and as matter of fact, that the most
Gracious and Spiritual Covenant of the Gospel does not thus embrace all that
are under it in profession, as that God should be for ever their God, and they
his People, and that they should be for ever pardoned. Seeing yet, 2dly, it is
God, and Christ, that look to it, that this Covenant should be thus continued
in; And, 3dly, that Scripture, speaking of those thus secured according to the
Covenant of Grace, styles them, The Election, and continually speaks of the
Election of Grace, the Riches of Grace, and the Glory and Praise of Grace, not
of Works, but of Him that calls. All this put together, shows a certain
Number elected. In respect to whom this Covenant shall not be faulted for their
breaking it.

3. The Election is in Jesus Christ the Head, of the Adoption, the First born
among many Brethren, even all the Sons God will bring Glory through Him: So
Jesus Christ must be the Supreme and Chief in the whole Doctrine of Salvation;
His Blood, and Death, his Righteousness, and Obedience, His Appearance with
that Blood in Heaven, in his Melchisedecian Priesthood; and there by the Power
of an Endless Life, Negotiating, and Transacting all for, and in his Servants,
as by a perpetual Rotation of that Power, as in a Sphere of highest Activity,
by his Spirit. These are the very Powers of Salvation.

4. This the Scripture represents to be Eternal, or from before the Foundation
of the World: which is the constant Expression it uses to convey to us the
Notion of Eternity by; now Eternal surrounds and encompasses Time, and gives
all the efficacy to the Motions in and upon it; for as it encircles it, so it
penetrates it every where, with infinity of Lines cutting it every way: so that
though to us, as Creatures of Times, these two, Time and Eternity, seem most
distinct, and are so spoken of; yet indeed Time is supported, and in all Parts
and Lines of it interwoven by Eternity.

5. The Supreme Representation of God in the whole State of our Salvation, is
as of a Father in Christ; this is most demonstrative, seeing it is to the
Adoption of Children, we are chosen, which necessarily carries the notion of a
Father; seeing also it is the making conformable to the Image of his Son; and
seeing it is for the bringing many Sons to glory. And so Jesus Christ is
represented in the nearest and most intimate Relations, as the Firstborn among
many Brethren, yea, sometimes as a Father, as a Husband, as a Root to the
Branches, as a Head to the Members. This is the most inward and intimate
Representation of Scripture concerning our Salvation.

6. But the Outward, and more extern Administration is by God, the Judge of
all, or the Rector and Governor of all; and by Jesus Christ, as Lord of all,
and he, as having all Judgment committed to him, is made known to us. But
though the Elect Children of God and Members of Christ, are comprehended in
several ways of Scripture-speaking under this Outward Administration; yet This
Outward Administ^ation is chiefly with regard to the Non-Elect, to clear and
justify God in all his Dealings with them; and therefore as to the exterior
part of his Administration, there are the same Overtures made to the one, that
there are to the other; and the one are saved, and brought home to God, under
the same means, the other are lost.

7. This Inward Grace, and the Outward Administration exceedingly differ; For
the Inward Grace, is Love, Spirit, Life; the Outward Administration, is (to
speak nothing now of the Government of Christ, by the Laws and Light of Nature,
where his Word is not in Outward Administration) where it is, by the Overtures
of his Word upon the Understanding, Wills, Affections and Consciences, of his
Subjects one with another; By that Ministry of his Word, he presses upon all,
the Obedience of Faith, Repentance and Holiness, the Duties, required of us;
which, according to the Inward Grace and Love to his own, he gives the Inward
Efficacy and Almighty Operation of:

8. In the Inward Grace, and the Operations of it, there is a vesting them in
the Faculties of his Election, and a Conduct of their Internal Action upon
their own Minds and Hearts; and of the Principles of Outward Action, which flow
in all Conformity and Agreeableness thereunto; so that the Vehicle is our
selves, but the Inspiration is God's and Christ's.

9. From all this it is evident, That although there is on many Accounts, after
to be given, a large Field and Scope of Preaching and Discoursing upon, and
according to the outward Administration; yet it is of Superior Necessity, to
preserve the Fountains of Grace and Love, of Power and Spirit clear, the
Foundations sure and firm; and though there may be Fault in not being large
enough upon, and according to the outward Administration; because it shows the
necessity of, and, as a Schoolmaster, brings to the Inward, and manifests how
it diffuses it self; yet the Error and Danger is greater, in not sufficiently
both securing and illustrating the Doctrine of the Inward Grace. For many more
have perished in sticking upon the Outward, without being led in the Inward,
than by applying most to the Inward. For that always, when it is admired adored
and received, diffuses it self into the Outward. So that if Eternal Love and
Grace is Christ, be so taught, as that its Efficacyes are always shown to be in
all Holiness and Purity; If it pleases the All-wise Spirit to carry any of the
Spirits of his Servants, wholly upon the Inward Grace; seeing he balances them
by many Men of his Servants, largely insisting upon the Outward Administration,
therefore such his Servants are not to be blamed; but God is to be acknowledged
in his manifold Graces and unspeakable Gifts, by the one, and by the other.

10. The Glorious Appearance of all these, is not, till in the Fullness, not
only of Time, as in our Lord's Coming, but in the Fullness of Times viz. of all
Time in the Kingdom of Christ; Then shall be a Recollection, a Recapitulation,
a Gathering, and a Gathering together of all in Christ; Then shall the Riches
of Inward Grace be found to Praise and Glory; And the Wisdom, Righteousness,
and admirable Long-Suffering and Patience of the External Administration and
Government of God and Christ, as Rector and Judge of the Universe, be admired
and adored also toward, even the Lost.

Having thus laid a general Scheme, I come now particularly to make brief
Conciliations of the true and most enlarged Apprehensions, and Discourses, upon
even Eternal free Grace in Christ toward all the Elect of God, according to
Dr. Crisp, with Mr. Williams's weighty, and most valuable Considerations upon
the Outward Administration of the Gospel Covenant, according to his Heads of
Discourse at the end of his Book.

Head 1.
To the first Head: The Elect are Children of Wrath, till effectually called;
As it may be opposed to all Dr. Crisp has said concerning the Elect, being
before Faith and Repentance, as much delivered from Wrath, even as the Believer
is, or as a Saint Triumphant in Heaven is.

Reconciliation. If we speak, as Creatures of Time, the Elect are Children of
Wrath; but why may there not be a Declaration of that great and supreme Truth,
setting out the Eternal Love of God in Christ to all his Elect, even while they
are of, and in themselves in the Gall of Bitterness, and under the Bond of
Iniquity? For without Relation to the having done Good or Evil, in the mere
Estate of Nature, which is in fallen Men a State of Wrath. It is said, Jacob
have I loved: Now what more contrary to the State of a Child of Wrath, than to
be Loved of God? So concerning Reconciliation as by the Death of Christ, the
Apostle says, God commends his Love to us, in that while we were yet Sinners,
Christ dyed for the Ungodly: When we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the Death of his Son. Romans 5, 8, 10.

Here then is the Case, God the Supreme and Eternal Being beholds all things,
in, as they speak, a (...), a just now; even Dr. Hammond, however so great an
Enemy to a particular Predestination, acknowledges this view of all things by
the Eternal Being: The Question then is, Whether an Eternity of Love and Grace,
an Eternal Duration in Happiness, after the short time of Life, and some parts
of that short time of Life rescued from Wrath also, may not preponderate in
giving the Denomination to the Elect? Or why may not the Preaching of Gods
Infinite and Eternal Love and Grace, be made an Instrument of the Divine Spirit
for the winning in the Souls of his Elect to himself? When God says, I have
Loved thee with an everlasting Love, therefore with loving Kindness have I
drawn thee, Jer. 31 3. Or why should an^ Man hereupon presume to continue in
Sin? When it is agreed on both Parts; Electing Love and Reconciliation by the
Death of Christ have most indispensable efficacious Emanations into Holiness;
while therefore there is a black and dark side of being passed over by God,
hanging over all, continuing in Impurity, to work upon Men by Terror and
Affrightment out of Sin; why may not the setting out that Grace Work every way
effectually, both by the Bands of Love, and the Goads of Fear, to move Persons
home to Christ? and we know Men are naturally desirous of, and ever Industrious
after, whatever they account Tokens, of what they call being Born to good
Fortune; and as naturally fly from all the Marks, of what is called ill
Fortune; I see therefore no Reason, but it should strongly affect Men, among
whom Scripture is setledly received, and so ought to be universally Preached;
when they hear of so Gracious a Choice of God, to desire with greatest
Vehemence, to find in themselves, any Manifestations of it, (it being the
surest Ground of Hope) and to be under the Dread of any of the black Marks of
Rejection, as being passed by of God; Of which Efficacious Holiness, or
Unholiness are respectively the Tokens and Indications.

And though it must be acknowledged, There is a Point of Time, in which God
speaking, as in the Language of Time, does style his Elect, Children of Wrath,
even as others; Yet speaking in the Language of Eternity, he calls them,
Vessels of Mercy, Vessels unto Honor; And indeed whatever is looked upon as
only a Motion or Ordination of Time, must needs arise from our selves; For all
Acts of Grace are Eternal in their Spring and Fountain; Time therefore genders
only to a Covenant of Works. I know not therefore, but why, as the generality
of Preachers enlarge most upon the one, as to unconverted Elect, There may not
be some stirred up and enabled of God, to triumph in the Savor of the Knowledge
of Christ, made known by them in the other; while they Center upon the Eteral
Election, of God demonstrating it self, in Calling, Conversion, Sanctification:
But they only can do this, who have received it, as a peculiar Talent. But I
doubt not, the Spirit of it will within short time be poured out more
abundantly, and that it shall not turn to Licentiousness, but overflow with
Holiness and Purity, as also Efficacy of Conversion.

The third Head I Transpose into the second Place, as being more Congenial, or
of a kind with the first; and will join the second with the fourth and those
following, to Head 8th.

Head 2.
The laying the Sins of the Elect upon Christ is not their Discharge from their
Sins; This is opposed to what Dr. Crisp has said; All the Weight, and all the
Burden of Sin, the very Sin it self is long ago laid upon Christ; and that
laying it on him, is a full Discharge and Release to that, etc.

The Conciliation. To an Eternal Being, there must needs be an Eternal
Justification, because there is no new thing to him; The Apostle therefore
makes the whole Chain of Salvation of an Eternal old Style; whom he Foreknew,
he Called, he Justified, he Glorified; Romans 8. 30. All in the Time passed, not
in the Style of Time, but of Eternity: But when we speak in new Style, Style of
Time; there is not an actual Discharge of Sin, or a Justification of a Sinner
by Election; but according to the order of things fixed by God in Time; Even so
if we consider Sins laid upon Christ, even the Sins of all the Elect in the
Fullness of Time, as the Apostle styles it, That Fullness of Time may be very
well supposed to collect into it self all Time; And as the Sins that were past
were Recollected, so the Sins to come were Forepriz'd into it: And all this
issues into the Fullness of Times, that is, of all Time in the Kingdom of
Christ; For as Christ dyed in the Fullness of Time, so the Glory of his
Redemption appears in the Fullness of Times, Ephesians. 1. 10. of All Time, when all
Things, in Heaven and Earth, shall be Recapitulated in him, which yet, we know,
they are not. The Offering of Christ therefore is an Offering once for all; and
it is one Offering, that forever Perfects; and Jesus Christ is Yesterday and to
Day the same forever; As then all Time is gathered into that Fullness of Time,
So that Fullness of Time redounds upon all Time, and Flows out upon it, till it
Flows into that Fullness of Times.

Now, as the Lord of Time, offered Himself in the Fullness of Time; he expiated
all Sins in that Fullness, and what was expiated in the Fullness, can never be
charged in the Retail of Time, for then it was not expiated.

Although therefore, when we are spoken of, and unto, as not the Lords of Time,
but the Subjects of Time, we are obliged to measure it out by Parts, as being
Inferiors to it; and below the Hill to it, we see the Approaches of its Events,
one after another only; but the Lord Paramount of it, being so high above it,
sees all at once; we are Creatures but of the Parts of it; so indeed we are not
Discharged from Sin in the Discharge of Christ.

But from hence to conclude, we are not in highest Sense Discharged, but that,
if the Elect dye before Faith and Repentance, they are lost for ever, is to
make supposition of Impossibilities; it is to set Time, the small outlet of
Eternity, to rise up and Encounter, and lead Captive Eternity; even the
Eternity of Election; and that the parts of Time may be set in Battle Array,
and subdue the Fullness of Time. But this can by no serious Considerer be
allowed; I find not then, but as there is just Reason to represent to Men, that
till they find within themselves the Efficacies of the Death and Redemption of
Christ by Faith and Repentance, they stand in the sight of their own
Consciences, as Persons, who have no Interest in that Death, in that
Redemption; And that this is proper on one side, representing God and Christ,
therein as the Rector and Governor of the World, to move them to Repentance;
and it is that which Scripture does very largely and frequently insist upon; So
on the other side, it is most true, That the Foundation of God stands sure and
cannot shake, nor totter even under this very Seal single and alone; That the
Lord knows who are his, and that his Election shall break out with all the
mighty Effects he has pitched upon, as most suitable and Connatural to it; So
that it shall produce in all its own the Derivative Stamp; Let him, that names
the Name of Christ, depart from all Iniquity: 2 Timothy 2. 19. And that Christ is,
in all Senses, the Certain and Infallible Sanctifier of his People by his
Blood; That he not only as a Judge, and a Lawgiver, but as a Prince, gives
Repentance and Remission of Sins; This may be as hopeful to move the Spirits of
Men, and be as gracious a Conveyance of the mighty Efficacy of the Divine Grace
and Spirit; For as these are rich Truths of Scripture, so they have an
admirable mooving Stroke upon the Hearts and Minds of Men; And he that
Ministers them, is a Minister far more immediately of the Spirit, that gives
Life; of that without which the Evangelick Law is a Letter that kills.

Head 3, to Head 8.
I put these Heads together, because there cannot be any difference in the main
Notions, but only in the different ways of Expressions, and what each part may
think, will most lively illustrate and make the deepest imprint of the great
Scripture-truths upon the Heart; I say, there can be no difference in the main
Truths between Persons sober, and Reverent of God, and of Christ; for who can
think the filth of Sin transacted on Christ in such a sense, as that Christ
should be defiled by it?

But now there must needs be a Moral Impurity in every Sin, as it is a Recess
from the Holiness of God, from the Righteousness of the Divine Law; there is a
Dishonor, a Blot, a Stain and Blemish, a Deformity, a loss of Beauty and
Honor, and Happy Conformity to Goodness and Righteousness. This is intended by
Reatus Culpae, another thing from the Reatus Poenae, or a mere Obligation to
Punishment. I demand then, What becomes of this Obliquity, the Guilt of the
very Fault of Sin resting upon the Sinner? Sure those Acts of Dishonor do not
remain upon the beautified Believer in Christ; How then can it be removed? The
Acts of Holiness a Believer does, cannot purge it; for there is Impurity in
them; nor are they able to raze the Records: If then they be taken off, surely
it must be by the Supreme Obedience, Righteousness, Sanctification of Jesus
Christ, by the transcendent Act of Holiness, and Resignation to the Divine
Will; the Glory, and Honor and Perfection of which imputed to the Believer, is
able to sanctify him; as Christ said, John 17. I sanctify my self, I draw up
my Obedience to the highest point of Holiness, by that absolute, perfect
Resignation to the Will of my Father, for their sakes, that they by the
Communication of that very Holiness might be sanctified in Truth; that is the
Moral Impurity, and Obliquity and Dishonor of the Sins they have committed may
be removed. So Sanctification, thus spoken of may be something higher than a
Justification only in Foro Poenae, if I may so speak, in the Court, where
punishment is considered, but in Foro Honoris, in the Court of Honor, where
Attaints are purged off, and Blood, as they speak, restored. If there be only
acquittal from Guilt, binding over to Punishment; even the Blemish, the Stain,
Taint, and Dishonor Sin brings and leaves, is not effaced. This the high
Honor of the Holiness and perfect Purity of Christ, especially in obedience to
Death, even the Death of the Cross, fully purges off, as imputed to all his; by
which they are not only delivered from Punishment, but constituted Righteous,
Romans 5. By the Will of God so fulfilled, they are sanctified, in the sense
given; and he has by one Offering, perfected or consecrated, ennobled them in
Blood to be Kings and Priests, by the Imputation of the Honor of Holiness to
Them that are sanctified; and that he might sanctify his People by his own
Blood, he suffered without the Gate; He has loved, and washed us from our Sins
in his own Blood, to make us Kings and Priests, (Heb. 10. c. 13.) From them all
the Labes, the Macula, the Spot of Sin is taken off, and he presents his Church
without Spot, Wrinkle, or any such Thing, and without Blame, Ephesians. 5. Coloss.
1. This is the Highest and most Honorable Notion of the Redemption of Christ,
and may deserve a Rhetoric, that may seem extravagant, like David's dancing
before the Ark, not so grave and so solemn; that may (...) constrain, or
transport rather, it being before so gracious a Redeemer.

Now if Christ takes off the Stain and Dishonor of Sin, it must be laid upon
Him; on which account it is said, Esaias 53. He was Numbered among Transgressors,
as a shade of this Truth; and it is spoken of Christ, though he was separate
from sinners, yet as if he offered for his own sins, he needed not daily, as
those Priests, Heb. 7. 27. offer for his own sins; and God laid upon him the
Iniquities of us All; and he was made sin for us, who knew no sin. And he was
in the likeness of sinful flesh. And it is made the Distinction of his Second
Appearance, that he appears the second time without sin to salvation, Heb. 9.
28. thereby signifying his First Appearance was as much under sin, as it could
be without inherent sin; He went as a leprous, a defiled, an accursed Person, a
Criminal of Dishonor without the Camp, and without the Gate; all under a
Divine Ordination, to put him to open shame, as under the dishonor of sin. By
all which it appears, Christ as our Surety and Mediator, as our (...), every
way bare as deep a share of adherency in our sin, as could consist with an
unspotted Purity from any inherency of sin in himself, and hereunto all
Scripture expression even labors. And if Humane Speaking, endeavoring to
fathom and expound such Expressions, as may most be to the Capacity, and to
make impression upon Hearers, (For is there not a cause?) If there be something
Humane found, and not with the admirable exactness of Scripture, it ought not
to be so much exposed; for, I doubt not, our Expressions fall generally more
too short of the Divine Sense of Scripture in these things, than other good
Men's exceed; it being always to be firmly believed, no good Man, while he so
spoke, could have it once enter into his thoughts; That there could the least
shade of proper Inherent Filth fall, or enter into the Humanity of the
Mediator, united to the Eternal Word; However Scripture, however he might thus
speak, as has been declared. But these things cannot, since the speaking of
Scripture it self, if we go about by Preaching to enlarge upon them, be spoken
of so accurately, but we either add or diminish from speaking this thing as it
is; nor shall we be able; till within a short time, That, as it were, new Song
be sung on Mount Zion, Rev. 14. Then I trust we shall learn it.

Even so, That our Sins are our own, and not Christ's, is most true in the sense
intended; yet that they became Christ's in his great Offering for Sin, and that
they are neither Believers, nor Christ's when he had born them off in a sense
worthy of and agreeable to the Gospel; The setting out Sin then as our own, for
Humiliation, Faith, and Repentance, is most Evangelical; So to set them out, so
Christ's, in his act of suffering, as to represent him a perfect Offering for
them, and neither ours, nor Christ's, when he had born them away; and God upon
it so acquitted Christ, as to cast them into the depths of Sea, so that when
they are sought for, there shall be none to be found, and plainly none, Jer.
50. 20. This is most Evangelical also, and must be the sublimest Evangelical;
because, abating the short moments of time, in which it may be otherwise
represented, it is eternally so: So in the state of separated Spirits with
Christ; so in the Kingdom of Christ, when it is granted to the Lamb's Wife to
be arrayed in Linen white, and clean which is the Righteousness of the Saints,
Rev. 19. and to each Saint to appear in Robes washed white in the Blood of the
Lamb. And so in the Kingdom of Eternity, Delivered up to God all in all; And
Leave is given to the Preachers of the Gospel to describe things, as in God's
Eternity, and if not to speak the most in number, yet the most important and
significant of Scripture words: For why should we keep our selves and hearers
so close muffled up in this thick Atmosphere of time, and not let out more into
the open Air of Eternals? This stifles and smothers nobler Thoughts and
Elevations of Mind, and the lofty Considerations for Holiness, as well as
Consolation.

But to go on further; The Sins of Believers were in the fullness of Time most
conspicuously laid upon Christ, as it was an Act of God in Time; as the very
Nature of the fullness of Time may assure us; but it is true, they were in
proper senses laid upon Christ before, as he was a Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, and as his Blood was the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant; and so proportionably, when he was born in so low and mean an
appearance, who had as the Eternal Word, Right to have appeared all in glory;
yet still Let the fullness of Time have its pre-eminence; And so sure there can
be no injury done, when all the Aerumnae, the Sorrows of the Life of our
Redeemer meet there.

I go on: That Jesus Christ was not abhorred by the Father, is most true; For
if there could be a difference, he was; even while he bore our Sins (for then
he was in the highest act of Self-resignation and Obedience) above any time,
the Son, in whom he was well pleased; yet that he was made a Curse; that the
Lord bruised him and put him to grief; that he looked like a Man smitten of
God; that God loathing and abhorring the sins, with which he was laden, would
not show himself to him; but that, He cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, is also most true; In that Economy or Dispensation Christ stood
under the Imputation of the Sins of all the Elect; which Sin God hates: whoever
therefore bears Sin, must bear that Abhorrence of God, Sin draws upon it self,
till he has purged it off. Thus Christ did, till He had overcome it; therefore
he stood bearing, that God abhorred; and so must bear such an Abhorrence as the
Sins deserved. Christ, under the multitude of our Sins, was so covered, that,
as, I may say with reverence, He could not look up, so he could not be seen;
the Sins then, wherewith he was so compassed, drew Abhorrence, as upon himself.
And I know not what difference there is between Christ made a Curse, and as
Abhorred of God; whatever explains and reconciles the one to our thoughts, will
reconcile the other also. And in no other sense, can a sober and good Man be
thought to speak it. And so understood, it has its great Scripture-Use, to
show us, how truly and really Christ has by his Death devoured all that Curse,
Hatred, and Abhorrence due to us for Sin, by expiating it in himself: For if it
had not in that Dispensation been upon him, he had not fully and effectually
assured its Abolition; we may humbly imitate Scripture in so speaking, while we
yet know Christ was always the beloved Son. This shows also Sin's hateful
Nature.

I still go on: Christ taking us as his Members, whatever unworthiness we have,
must redound upon him, so, as that he has reason to discharge himself of it;
and so to atone his Members: And what is His, is so far his Members, each one
in particular, as is necessary to us, as Members: But so is not his Mediatorial
Righteousness, nor his Perfection of Holiness. No word of which Mediatorial
Righteousness I find cited; but that Exchange of Persons and Perfection of
Holiness arising from it, are only exuberant Representatives of two great
Truths. 1. That our Sins were fully and perfectly taken by Christ upon himself,
and expiated in himself; For by his Sacrifice for Sin, he condemned Sin in the
Flesh, viz. in his own Humane Nature; And that his Righteousness is so ours by
his communication of it, as to his Members, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his
Bone, and one Spirit with him; that there is, and was as it were real Exchange
of Persons. There is; For the True Believer by such a Reception into Christ is
changed into that Righteous Person, he is made by Christ, and is, as in him.
There was; For Christ in the very Act of Expiation, did as it were put on the
sinful Person of every Believer, made Sin for them. Why should we be afraid to
use such Full Sounds as Scripture has done, however reduced by Interpretation
to the Analogy of Faith? Sure it sanctified such Sounds as it made. And how
great Exundancies of Expression are found, and not blamed in the best of the
Ancient Fathers? and had they not been pressed beyond their Intentions, had
sweetened and made acceptable greatest Truths to Hearers and Readers; Had no
Monstrous and Portentous Consequences been raised from them; The Debtor and
Surety paying the Debt, change persons; so does the (...), or (...); Christ is
made our Sin, and a Curse for us. The Church (...) is called the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 33. 16. even as Christ himself, c. 23. 6. which however, I
know is otherwise rendered, yet is most naturally and easily so to be
understood: Even as Jehovah, Shamah, Ezekiel. ult. Which comes very near a
Concionatory or Popular Ascribing the Mediatorial Righteousness of Christ to
Believers: Massy Truths will endure to be beaten out so into Leaf Gold, while
the Solid Bulk is preserved safe in Doctrinal Forms of Sound Words: Thus
Scripture, representing the mighty Powers of Divine Action and Providence in
God, ascribes to him the Parts of Body, by which Men act, so well known to
them: Yet let no Men from hence Dogmatize, as the Anthropomorphites, that God
is Corporeal; No more, that Christ was indeed a Sinner, or Accursed, or that
Believers are Saviors, and Mediators one to another; For so, there would be
none to be saved, except Christ himself by his own saved, and redeemed; which
who can believe, any one not Phrenetic would assert?

To conclude these Heads. It is most evident, that the Debate concerning the
Perfection of Holiness in Believers can only rest here; Whether the Holiness of
Christ may not be imputed to make up the Imperfection of our Sanctification,
which is indeed, but the same thing, with the Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ; and so that in regard of the Imputation of the Holiness of Christ to
Believers, they may be said to be Holy, as Christ is Holy; of which was spoken
in the last Head: And that Perfection of Holiness can be no otherwise meant, is
most undeniable by the whole stream of Dr. Crisp's Discourse, and Mr. Williams
his Objection; particularly in that part of Dr Crisp, concerning Gospel-Marks,
which he argues against upon the Imperfection of Sanctification, and therefore
could in no other sense think Believers holy, as Christ.

Head 8.
The Covenant of Grace has no Condition, to which is opposed; The Covenant of
Grace has Conditions, though undertaken for, assured, enabled to, by Christ.

Conciliation. If we consider the Covenant of Grace, as it is in its highest,
noblest Representation, it is an Ectype or Exemplification of the Everlasting
Covenant, the Covenant in Election; and therein it must needs be, as
unconditioned, as Election is, and yet, as universally Wise and Holy, as the
whole Scripture Frame is, even so Wise and Holy is the Counsel of that Will in
Election, that God works all things after, Ephesians. 1. 11. More Self-consistent
is therefore the Hipothesis or Scheme of a Conditionate Election, and a
Conditionate Covenant of Grace, then an Inconditionate Election, and a
Conditional Covenant of Grace; except we make the Series and Frame of the
consequent Disposes of Election Conditions, God puts upon himself for the
making good his first Choice; that is, he chooses upon Condition, he himself
will in time give Faith, Repentance, Holiness; which we know, were both
unreasonably derogatory from the Divine Glory; and from that order, in which
Scripture gives us these Supreme Acts of Grace; For Foreknowledge,
Predestination, Election, in Christ, are the Fountain of Calling,
Justification, Sanctification, Glorification, Romans 8. 29. Whereas if
Sanctification were the condition of Justification, Glorification coming last
must be the condition of all the rest; As if the Sense were on condition God
will Glorify, he will Sanctify. So Justification must be the condition of
Calling, and Calling of Election. But how much more Beautiful and Orderly is
the Scripture Chain? Making all after, Wise disposes flowing from the
Independent First. And so every where Scripture Discourses; he has chosen us,
that we should be Holy, and without Blame before him in Love, Ephesians. 1. As, of
God, viz. by the Eternal Fountain of Grace and in his Electing Love, are we in
Christ, who is of God, 1. Cor. 1. 31. without any condition on our part, made
Wisdom in Calling; Righteousness in Justification; Holiness in Sanctification;
All these are brought into Glory in Redemption; that none might Glory in his
Presence, but he that Glories might Glory only in the Lord.

For if there were but one Thing suspended upon us, as a Condition on our Part;
even that single thing would turn the Covenant of Grace into a Covenant of
Works; For it would be Work done by our selves, and we might Glory, we have
done, we have willed, we have run, we have achieved and attained; what ever
indeed that might be Duly demanded of us, and is not required, is Grace; or
whatever is given, is Grace; But what is required on our own Strength, is Work;
and though it be said, God assists by his Grace, by his Spirit; yet if there be
99 Parts given or assisted, and but the 100th Part our Act, that 100th Part is
Work, and all Grace is suspended on that; For on the doing, or not doing that,
All hangs: And seeing thousands do not that 100th Part, if we do it, we have
reason of Boasting, that we were wiser, we were better than they. For how
small, how little soever that nice and curious Point be, on which all the vast
Globes, of not only Eternity, but Supreme Grace turns; and wherein Divine
Wisdom and Holiness placed all; That is ours, and we have done it. And though
in all else, we are beholden to God, to Christ, to the Divine Spirit, yet in
that which is the last Hinge we are beholden to our selves; Nay if all were
first given, and but our Perseverance only were the Condition on which all
depended, the same might be said of Perseverance, that it turned the Covenant
of Grace in that Part into a Covenant of Works. And whereas many do not
Persevere, we have reason to Glory we Persevere, and there is some thing we
have not received. And so the Vertical Point would be our selves, and we might
Glory in his Presence: For that, and not Christ, would be the Corner Stone, and
to it we might cry, Grace, Grace.

And however, there is so much to be ascribed to Grace, and what would in
common Speaking, among Men, be called the making of us, and doing all for us;
Yet it is to be considered, whether the Glory, God will not give to another, be
not parted with, and surrendered by him, if the last Decisive Point Rest upon
us; which makes me Assured, it cannot be so; And so though I acknowledge with
those, who most acknowledge it; the necessity of Faith, Repentance, Holiness,
and of our own Action therein; yet in speaking of the Covenant, as the Covenant
of Grace, and being an Ectype, or Exemplification of Everlasting Grace; I say,
These, nor any Action of the Elect, ought to be styled Conditions, but Wise and
Holy Dispositions of God the Author and Founder; and of Christ the Mediator,
Surety and Testator; And which he will most certainly see to, that they shall
most Infallibly take place in their just Series, Succession and Order both of
Nature and of Time.

And why should we be so afraid to speak of the Covenant of Grace, as
Inconditionate? For what is there that we would single out as a condition, that
is not to be ascribed to Gods Immediate Gift? Is it Faith? Is it the Gift of
God? Ephesians. 2. 8. To you Is it given to believe? Is it Repentance? He has made
Christ a Prince to give it, Acts 5. 31. If God peradventure will give
Repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Is it Holiness? Christ is made so Sanctification to
us that we cannot Boast; Is it the Laws of God in our Hearts, A new Heart, a
new Spirit, a soft Heart, his Fear within us, that we may never depart from
him? One Heart, and one Way to fear him forever, to know him by his Spirit? All
these are assurd to be given, even as Pardon in Sin, and by as free a Gift. All
by a plain absolute Inconditionate Grant; How many and great Scriptures run in
this absolute Style, and yet how expressly is all this called a Covenant? Jer.
31. Heb. 8. Jer. 32. Ezekiel. 11. Chap. 36.

But if it be said, how then comes it to pass, that the whole Strain and Stream
of Scripture, to which Preaching ought to be conformed, speaks of these Graces
and all the Actions agreeable to them, as Conditions of the Covenant of Grace?
There are three grand Accounts to be given of it.

I. It becomes the Wise and Holy Rector and Governor of the World and of his
Rational Human Creation, to treat and deal with, and give them all Scope, Room
and Business, and Advantage in, and for Intellectual Action; Men, as Rational
Creatures, know not how to deal with one another, or to move themselves, but by
the Activities of Understanding, Conscience, Will, Affections; So that they
must lie still, and not act at all, or be moov'd only, as Bruits or Machines,
or thus; There is therefore the continual Rational Breathing, and Motion of
Doctrine, Instruction, Promise, Threat, Reproof, Correction; and all kind of
Motion and Action, suitable and agreeable to it: All Scripture is therefore
prepared, and Profitable hereunto. Besides the Commands and Precepts of
Holiness being so abundant, they show the necessity of a continual Recourse to
Christ for Strength, Grace and Assistance, for Righteousness from him, and
Pardon through him, wherein we fall short; Nothing mooves more to run to the
Righteousness of Christ, than the sight of Imperfect Grace and Action, to which
we are called; if by our selves; though under Divine Assistance from Christ.

II. Now under this Economy, and Dispensation of Things; the Grace of God,
according to Election, and according to the Mediation, Suretyship and
Testamentary Grace (or the last Will of Jesus Christ) display themselves; as if
all things were carried by Intellectual Conditionalities, and the Obedience and
free Complyances of those who are the Election of God, of those, that are
Called according to Purpose; while in the mean time, they are most
Efficaciously, and yet most sweetly Swayed, and Influenced by the Power and
Grace of God in Christ, and by the Increated Spirit, that cannot miss of the
end designed; and though all be Vested in the Action of those, who are thus
Chosen and Called, yet not under the Incertainty of a Condition; but the
Infallible Certainty of a Divine Disposition, a Testamentary Gift of our great
Testator, a Discharge of our Surety for us, though within us; an Acquist of our
Mediator by Intercession on his own Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
presented in Heaven for us, Heb. 9 12.

III. And thus also, there is a Justification of God in his Holiness and
Righteousness, as also in his Patience and Long Suffering toward those, whom
he leaves to themselves; who being applied to, according to their own Nature,
as Creatures of Reason and Understanding, according to all the Riches of the
Word of God to that purpose, are condemned in not receiving such every way
sufficient Applications, taking them so every way, as such Rational Creatures,
and suited thereunto; which could not be so gloriously Demonstrated and
Illustrated, if there were not such a fittedness of the Word of God, and of the
Overtures of Life and Salvation, by way of Condition. To one, Mat. 13. 11. it
is given, to the other, it is not given. So vain is that Exposition of Dr.
Hammond, and violent a Perversion of Scripture; As many as were ordained, viz.
as he speaks, fitted by former Discipline to receive the Eternal Life of the
Gospel, Acts 2. ult. believed: As appears from, Romans 9. 23. For what Discipline
prepared beforehand the Gentiles to Calling or Glory?

Head 9.
Faith is not an Assurance or Inward Persuasion that Christ is ours, and that
our Sins are Pardoned; But it is Accepting, Receiving and Resting upon Christ
alone for Justification.

Conciliation. That Faith is a Grace of a most large and spreading Nature and
Action, as it is represented to us in the Word of God, can be by no one, that
considers it, denied. So that there may be many Excellent and Profitable
Discourses upon it, that may look very distantly one upon another, and yet meet
in the iame Center: Yet Faith as it respects Pardon of Sin, and Justification,
cannot have a fairer and fuller Proposition given it, than that saying, Worthy
of both Belief or full Assent of the Judgment, and Acceptance of the Will,
viz. that Christ came to save the chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1, 15. Now this
Proposition every one is to particularize to himself, as the Apostles, in
believing; and so it differs nothing from Assurance, in the Root at least; And
that, Assurance is every way most Connatural to it, is evident by the Apostles
speaking of the full Assurance of Knowledge, Col. 2. 2. As Faith is an
Intellectual Assent to Divine Revelation; The full Assurance of Faith, as it is
an Application for Pardon to the Blood of Christ, sprinkling the Heart from an
evil Conscience, Heb. 10. 22. and the full Assurance of Hope, Heb. 6. 11. as
Faith concerning our present Interests in Christ not yet appearing fully, or in
future Glory; aides it self against present low Appearances of its pardoned
justified State, or its future Glory. Thus a Plerophory or full Assurance in
relation to Faith, cannot merit any Indignation, as against an Error; And
indeed it is so essential to Faith, that there never was nor can be any true
Faith without the Root, and Seed of it; and the Letting it down in the
Descriptions and Discourses of it from this full Assurance is in compassion to
the low State; Tempted, Deserted, Afflicted, Doubting State, of sincere
Christians; It was the general Doctrine of the first Reformers, when the Light
was purest and quickest.

And it is very suspitionable, the Letting it down lower may have had its Ill,
as well as its good Effects; For if Christians aimed in all their ways at full
Assurance, it would engage them to higher Aims in Holiness, and closer Walking;
It being impossible even in the Judgment of Natural Light and Reason to
separate Holiness from such Assurance; or that receiving Christ, as Lord and
King, should be made to part from it, but that it would flow out into all
Expressions of the Warmest and Indearedst Love to him. Whereas Christians
Resting and thinking it a piece of Modesty and Humility (it were well, if it
were not allied to that Voluntary Humility spoken of, Col. 2. 18.) to be in
doubt, and only flatly and deadly to hope well in general, They find not these
pungent Arguments to move Accurate and Universal Obedience; but poize the one
to the other, their Obedience to their Measure of Assurance. For a rude
Presumption or bold Saying, Christ is ours, and our Sins are pardoned in the
midst of Licentions, and loose Living, is worthy only to be exploded, and
Hissed off the very Profession of Christianity; and cannot obtain the least
Credit, either with others or even the Rational Conscience in themselves. So
that were it not in Tenderness to the Weakness of Christians in general;
Preaching Faith so, as to include Assurance in it, would be undoubtedly the
best; and even that taken care of, as well, as it may be; I know not whether it
might not be much to the Interest and Glory of Christianity, to wind it up in
the most stated Discourses of Faith to the Apostles Plerophory; or full
A^^urance of Knowledge, Faith and Hope; from which Exceptions might be made,
and Allowances for the Weakness of Christians in particular Exigencies. This
sure would more ennoble Christianity. It was the Illustrious State of the very
Primitive Christianity, which we read of in that most admirable part of Church
History, the five first Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles; To this I doubt
not, it will be restored within few Years, when in the Succession of the
Kingdom of Christ, and by the Proclaiming, The Kingdoms of this World are the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11. 15. The Servants of God shall
appear on Mount Zion with the Lamb, having the Fathers Name, not Sealed under
Reserve, as yet it is; but Written in Capital Letters, in splendid Characters
on their Foreheads. It is the dark and foul place of the Apostasy, 2 Pet 1. 19.
in which we are (the Beasts forty two Months, being though near, yet not fully
expired) Rev. 13. 5. that brings so low the Doctrine of Faith, as being not
Assurance.

And because in the Reformation begun Christ appeared, making his Challenge of
his Kingdom, and the seven Thunders of highest Gospel Doctrine uttered their
Voices, Rev. 10. (A Chapter, on purpose, to give us the Prophetic Landscape of
the Reformation.) There was the high Doctrine of Faith, as Assurance; Yet these
Thunders being scaled, (now near again to be unsealed) It flatted again, as now
we see: And this is the Reason, the Discourses of Assurance, as so essential to
Faith, are almost as Portentous, as the Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ in
such a near appearing Glory, and any Aspiring to it, as presumptuous.

Head 10.
Prevailing Enmity is no hindrance to our Interest in Christ.

Conciliation. This may be apprehended three ways, and be very great truth.

1. The Elect Sinner, in the midst of the most prevailing Enmity, has such
Interest in Christ; that his Rescue from Sin, Hell, and Death, is so secured
and deposited by the Divine Decree for him in Christ; that the very height of
Enmity shall not disinterest him, but Christ will break through that Enmity,
and seize upon him, even when it is most Boiling up and Raging: Thus Paul, Acts
9. being a chosen Vessel, even while he had a Knife in his hand to murder
Christ, had yet such an Interest in Christ, by that Electing Grace, that his
Conversion, Faith, Repentance and Apostleship lay treasured up in Christ; and
Christ had such an Interest in him, That an Everlasting Arm was about him, and
he was Appreprehended by Chrst for that very Thing, that in Due Time he might
by Faith Apprehend Christ. And surely this is an Interest of no mean account.

2. At the very height of Enmity the chiefest Sinner has that Interest in
Christ, that he may come and apprehend Christ by Faith, and receive all the
Benefits of Christ; and the very first of those Benefits shall be the Healing
him of that Enmity: He has a Right to come; If it be said, Enmity and Coming
connot consist; it is true; But his present Enmity does not disinterest him in
a Right to come, if he would; But it hinders his being willing to come; Yet in
the moment the Grace of Christ Abounds to the Elect Person at the Appointed
Time with Faith, and Love, which are in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1. 14. Present
Enmity is no more hindrance to an Interest in Christ, but that, as in Paul, it
falls flat, in what moment that Grace pleases.

3. To win upon Sinners to come to Christ, it may be said to them, while in the
Preaching of the Gospel, there is a Probing, or Endeavoring to Find out the
Elect, and Bring them to Christ; It may be, I say, said to them; Come, though
you have the highest Enmity, That is no hindrance to your Interest in Christ,
supposed you come; For in that very moment, you turn to come to Christ, your
Enmity shall drop off from you: It is a Hindrance to the present Application of
Interest, not to the Interest it self; that is secured in Electing Grace, and
the Free Promises of the Gospel, intended, and designed for all the Elect. And
this the Gospel gives right to the Preachers of it to declare; But the doubt,
whether this, or that particular Person belongs to that Election, while he is
in Enmity; and the certainty of Enmity ceasing in the very coming; is as a
drawn Sword between a claim of Interest in Christ, and perservering Enmity.

If it be said, There must be Humiliation, Wearin^ss, Sight of Sin, and Sorrow
for it. The Methods of Electing Grace, that it has prescribed to it self, will
take care for all; and so that all such Affections and Acts shall be raised up,
excited, and carried on in the Sinner himself, and even by himself under the
Efficacy of that Grace: And thus understood, as it must be, except he that
speaks so, be a person void of all Holy Sense, or so much as Sober (and such Dr
Crisp was not in the Judgment of Mr. Williams, as appears in the last Lines of
the Preface) They must therefore be understood to be spoken by way of earnest
persuasion to come to Christ; and to Essay upon Men, by proposing the Largest
and Freest Terms; So the Ministers of Christ, as Fishers, spread the Net, to
Catch Men; As Scripture says, he has received Gifts for the Rebellious also,
that the Lord God may dwell among them, Psalm. 68. 18. And as Abraham is said,
to Believe on Him, that Justifies the Ungodly: Why may not the most expatiating
Expressions be used in so good a Sense, and with so good a Design, seeing
Scripture has used such? And why may not as good an Effect be hoped for from
this way of Speaking, seeing Scripture has used it, as from the severer ways
Scripture has also used, according to the variety of Gifts and Motions of the
same Spirit, and both be blessed by God giving effect through Christ?

Head 11.
The Elect are not united to Christ, without Faith; Upon Believing only we are
related to Christ, as all the Metaphors of Union import.

Conciliation. The being chosen in Christ before the World began, being
predestined to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, cannot be
without Union; The first Powers of Regeneration, Conversion, Softness of Heart,
Contriteness of Spirit, Faith, Repentance, which the Apostle expresses by
Wisdom or Calling, in Christ Jesus, cannot be without Union; And yet it is
true, that settled Union of Communion, or Union of Communion, cannot be, till
Christ be received by the Faith of God's Elect; nor can the Elect be at all
known to themselves from the Non-Elect. So that as there is need of all the
Forcible and Right Words of Scripture, to show; without Faith, Repentance,
Holiness, there can be no Union of Communion with Christ, or of the Consolation
arising from it; even according to the Eternal Counsel of Him, that works all
Things after the Counsel of his own Will; So on the other side, there is
Authority and Warrant to Declare that Inseparable Union between the Head of the
Adoption, and all that are Predestined to the Adoption of Children in Him;
that it may be acknowledged to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, who has
laid his Foundation so sure; And it may be also Declared by way of Invitation
and Encouragement in coming to Christ; that Sinners, who look toward him, may
be begotten; an effect; wherein they are wholly passive; to a living Hope,
through his Grace; who does it of his own Will; and yet by the Word of Truth in
all parts of it, as a subordinate Ministry; and that they may be invited to
look toward him, and that they may be encouraged to expect Grace from Christ
for Union of Communion, flowing from the Union of the Predestined Adoption in
Him, at the just time appointed by God for it.

Head.
That of Justification before Faith has been already spoken to, but I will add
something to it on the next Head.

Head 12. Repentance is necessary to Pardon.

Conciliation. Seeing Justification and Pardon include necessarily the Removals
of the Wrath and Displeasure of God in all the dreadful Effects of it; and also
connote as necessarily the Breaking out of his Favor in the most gracious
Effects of it; how Faith or Repentance can be perfectly or in full sense before
either Justification or Pardon, but that mighty Rays and Beams of each must be
broken out to the Soul, before it enters into the Beginnings of Eternal Life by
Faith and Repentance; is very hard to understand; except Faith and Repentance
are ascribed to Man, as the Products of his own Power and Will. If they are
from God, his Justifying Righteousness and Pardon are come near, whenever,
wherever he gives Faith and Repentance; And as it may be most necessary in
some regards to Preach Faith and Repentance, as in order to Pardon and
Justification; so is it no less necessary to be as Free, and Large, that
without graciousest Approaches of the Righteousness of God and Christ brought
near, Faith and Repentance lie for ever dead; that every unconverted Person may
gasp up to God and Christ for that Grace, that is abundant in Him. The
intention is not, that Pardon or Justification can be without Faith or
Repentance, but whether Justification does not draw and excite its own Faith,
and Pardon, its own Repentance; So that they are rather before Faith and
Repentance, than Faith and Repentance before them: And which Preaching is most
to be preferred in the Nature of Things, without respect to the Present
Necessity, and for the Time Being; That which is most abundant in ascribing to
the Principal, or in pressing the Less Principal, and Subordinate; I make no
doubt, the Singing the new Song, before spoken of, Rev. 14. will in a short
time determine. And yet I defer all, that ought to be deferred, to those whose
Spirits are both enlarged and enabled to offer to the Souls of Men, the things
wherein God appears, as the Rector of the World offering Faith and Repentance,
in order to Justification and Pardon; while the Secret Springs of his
Justifying and Pardoning Grace give the very Faith and Repentance required. But
surely great respect may be had to what is to be, without violating what is,
even as Sacrifices are debased, Esa. 1. in foresight of their final removal by
Christ.

Head 13.
Sinners have much to do to be saved.

Conciliation. Even the Righteous arc scarcely saved; For with Men it is
impossible, but with God all things are possible. I can do all things through
Christ strengthening me; My Yoke (says Christ) is easy, my Burden is light; I
will run the way of thy Commandments when Thou shall enlarge my Heart. The Joy
of the Lord is Strength. His Delight is in the Law of the Lord; Faithful is he
that has Promised, and will Perform it to the Day of Jesus Christ; Great and
Precious Promises are given, whereby we are made Partakers of the Divine
Nature; We can do nothing againstst the Truth, but for the Truth. All these,
with innumerable more of the like, show the Certainty and the Easiness of the
Salvation of God's Elect. And yet as we look to Man, and his Motion and Action,
these Things are impossible: For there is no doubt Holiness and New Obedience
are the Paths wherein, though, with many Imperfections Falls and weaknesses in
the present state, God carries his Elect to Life and Salvation; And the Way is
narrow, and the Gate strait, and require striving to Enter; But God is their
strength, who keeps their Foot from being taken, that they walk in their way
safely, and their Steps are not straightened; He makes their Feet as Hinds Feet;
and sets them on High Places. They that wait on the Lord run, and are not
weary; They walk and faint not. He girdeth them with strength: By him they leap
over a Wall.

Head 14, 15.
I join these Two together. The Gospel has Threats and Promises; Holiness and
Good Works are necessary to Salvation.

Conciliation. As upon the gracious Councels of God before All Worlds Began; so
upon this very Point, among all the Disposes of God in time; the Hinge of these
Points turns; For if the Gospel be a Law full of all Holy and Righteous
Precepts, to which Faith and Repentance introduce us; armed with its Promises
and Threats, and so settled as a Covenant; that who of himself accepts the Terms
of it by Faith and Repentance, under the Assurance of the Assistances of the
Divine Spirit, are accepted, and shall have All the Benefits of it; and whoever
will not shall be Damned, and his Judgment shall be more intolerable, because
he refuses such gracious Terms offerr'd: This does, I confess, perfectly
overthrow Dr. Crisp's Scheme; For then Christ comes in as a Lawgiver, and
having all Judgment committed to him; and there is a Mediatorian Law and
Covenant in the Hand of the Mediator, of more gracious condescension than that
of the Covenant of Works; but the last result of all is into the free Will of
Man, and his Action in compliance with this Covenant; Thus of the Law, and the
Covonant of Works, as the First Law, there is a Perfect Abrogation as a Law;
but as the Holiness and Righteousness of it are transplanted into this New Law;
so here is, as to that Law, a perfect Antinomianism; and all Mankind are only
under this Law; and Justification, Salvation, or Death and Condemnation, are
according to Obedience or Disobedience to this Law or Gospel Covenant, of which
the Conditions are Faith and Repentance. But if the Gospel in the Supreme
Intention of it, and in the Propriety of its Nature, be a Covenant of Grace,
wherein God is pleased to be from his own free purpose of Grace the Sovereign
Covenantee; and his Elect bear the Analogy, or part of Covenantees, as at the
other Extreme; and Jesus Christ the Mediator, Surety, and Testator, pass
between both, that all may be performed, Mediating with God for his efficacious
Grace, in giving the Divine Dispositions promised in this Covenant, as if
performed by the Covenantees; So bringing every thing in effect from God to us,
and from us to God; and by his Death having right as a Testator to bestow the
very things upon All, given to him by God to give Eternal Life to them, John
17. 2. Then shall the Gospel, or New Testament, be supremely a Ministration of
the Spirit, of Righteousness, of Life, according to 2 Cor. 3.

And in its Subordinate Nature, it shall be a Publication of the Divine Grace
and Love to Mankind in general, upon the Terms of Faith and Repentance.

The Law all this time stands in its own place, as the Eternal Sanction of
Holiness and Righteousness, and can never be abrogated; because it is Eternal
Righteousness; but it is as a Covenant so far mitigated, as to accept the
Satisfaction it requires from a Mediator; and so it is in the Hand of a
Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. Toward whom it commands Faith, and Repentance, or return
to God by him; even as it is a Law of Eternal Righteousness, Requiring Faith
and Obedience to all Manifestations from God, sufficiently testified to be from
him; and as these Manifestations of Grace are the only possibility left to a
fallen Nature to return into a State of Agreement with God.

Hereupon the Law becomes a Standard, by which the full Value of the
Satisfaction of Christ by his Sacrifice, and Obedience unto Justification, and
the Infinite Grace of God in Pardon is tried, and made glorious; by which the
Duties of Humiliation, Confession of Sin, Application to Christ for
Righteousness, Repentance, should be both understood and urged; Here is the
Rule for Holiness and new Obedience, out of which all the Holy Precepts of the
Gospel are drawn; Hereby the Remainders of Sin are Discerned, and Humiliation
under them wrought: Hereby is the Infinite Grace of Christ toward his
Legatees, his Redeemed, set at full Light, in working an Inward Conformity to
this Holy Law in all parts of it; And hereby the Government of God, committed
to Christ, is continued with Relation to all Mankind, even to all not given to
him; For they who have the Gospel Preached to them, are judged not only
according to the Law of Righteousness, first written in the Heart, but
according to this Divine Revelation and Grace; which highly aggravates their
Disobedience, and makes it more Tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for
them, Mat. 10. 24. They who have not the Gospel are judged according to that
Law, and Light of Nature, They have concerning the Law; and that Witness of an
Intention of Grace, God gives to them in giving Fruitful Times and Seasons, and
all the Discoveries of his Patience, Leading them to Repentance; even as the
King of Nineveh, who shall rise up in Judgment and condemn Heathens, who have
not by such a Light from the forbearance of God argued to Repentance, as he
did: And thus are the Secrets of all Hearts, judged according to the Apostles
Gospel, as he said, Romans 2. 16. Some Ombrage of which Heathens have.

Thus the Law is established and preserved in its full Authority; and the
Gospel is also established as Divine Revelation; and in its High, purely
promissory Part, as a Ministration of the Spirit; And if the Designation of the
Gospel be particularly singled out for the most powerful Preaching of it by
some, and yet in the mean time the more large, and universal Motion, and
Doctrine of the Gospel be Preached more universally by the most of the
Preachers; whom the Spirit of God, according also to the general Stream of
Scripture, has so Missiond, Commissioned, and Enabled. I cannot see, but here
may be the Sweetest Union, and as great a Conspiration, as between the Apostle
Paul, and the Apostle James; while one tells us a Man justified by Faith
without Works; and the Last tells us by what of Faith, viz, not by the Body of
Faith, or a Confession of Faith, but by the Spirit of it, the Vis Essectrix or
Operatrix, the working Efficacy of it; which I take on great Reason to be the
very true Expedient of Reconciliation between the two Apostles; and yet in
both, by the Righteousness of Christ by Faith alone, and that Faith given only
by Christ; So all is of Grace, Ephesians. 2. For Faith and all its Works flow from
the Blood and Righteousness of Christ, drawing nigh to his Elect People to
Regenerate, and to justify together, Titus, 3. 5. etc.

And surely by a close and universal Compare of Scripture, The Day of Judgment
must be according to this very same Grace; For when the Spirits of Saints are
immediately with Christ; and He receives them, who Dye, and Sleep in him; in a
Moment, in the Twinkling of an Eye made Perfect; and when they are Raised
Incorruptible, he brings them with him; and they together with Christ, Judge
Angels and the World; And it is given to them to Appear in Robes washed white
in the Blood of the Lamb, and to be Clothed in Linen white and clean, which
is the Righteousness of the Saints; and he presents them to himself without
Spot, Wrinckle or any such Thing; It cannot be understood that the Day of
Judgment, in relation to the Saints, is by way of Trial of Judgment on
particular Actions; But their very Appearance is their Absolution, and
Adjudgment to Glory, as Clad in the rich Robes, Washed in the Blood of the
Lamb; All their Graces, and Holy Duties filled up, and their Sins perfectly
blotted out, and remainders of Corruption effaced by Grace perfected in Glory.

On the other side, The wicked have Appearances in their Sins, having found
them out, covering them as a Garment of Dishonor, and as filthy Garments, that
expose them immediately to Condemnation: And as if their particular Sins were
written upon them, and the Condemnation together with them.

And thus each appear visibly before the Throne, Tribunal and Judgment Seat of
Christ, during the whole Thousand Years of his Kingdom; One Crowned with Glory
and Honor, the other covered with Shame and Contempt.

If any should object Christ's insisting on the particular Duty of Visiting,
Clothing, Feeding, Mat. 25. either as performed or neglected: It is to be
observed; each sort first were set, one on the Right Hand, the other on the
Left; one as Sheep, the other as Goats: So the Trial was easy.

If it be further said, God will bring every Work into Judgment, whether it be
Good or Evil. This I attribute to the mighty Power and Wisdom of God, giving
together with every Person before his Judgment, all the Holy Actions of Saints
washed and perfected in, and by the Blood of Jesus; and filled up with his
Grace, and by the Spirit; as in a Moment, an Atom of Time, the Twinkling of an
Eye; and their Sins so taken away, as not only not to be found, but not to be.
Whereas the Talents of wicked Men, that is, any good Things they had here, not
being purged by his Blood, perfected by his Obedience, and filled up by his
Spirit, are taken from them, and they appear All in their Sins; And thus the
Order of Things at that Day, is according to the free Grace of Election,
Calling, Justification; and Sanctification, covered under Justification; in
that Chain of Salvation, Romans 8. and Glorification springing from all.

Head 15.
Holiness and good Works are necessary to Salvation.

Conciliatiion. Good Works are so, as they are the Provision and Preparation of
God; even of his Eternal free Grace, in furnishing us with them; and as we are
his Workmanship in Christ Jesus, Created to them. But the Number, Measure,
Elevation of them in higher or lower Degrees of Excellency, so diverse in
Saints, show, the Foundation of our Salvation, as well as Justification, rests
elsewhere.

Head 16.
Good Works are profitable, and please God.

Conciliation. They do so, as they are the Fruits of the Death and Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, and the Disposalls of his free Grace in us, and to us, and so
by us; And as God is pleased to show himself, as the Supreme Rector and
Governor, according to his Holy Law; but yet so, that the Poles on which
Salvation moves, are the Grace of God in our Election, and his Acceptance of
us to Righteousness in Christ; and if he leave any of his Servants, in their
Service and Good Works to the Eleventh Hour, or that he fits them not to such
Abundant Services, Eminency, and Exemplariness therein, as he does other of his
Saints; He has an Infinite Fund to supply them out of, viz. the Righteousness,
and Obedience of Christ; and Power of Grace to Accomplish them to their Measure.

Head 16.
Our Good should be intended by Good Works.

Conciliation. Our Good should be intended by them, as they are Manifestations
of the Grace of Christ in us, and suitable to that Law, he influences his
Servants by his Spirit according to; In the want of which we have great reason
to Mourn, as giving Fear and Suspicion Christ is not in us of a Truth; and that
he leaves us to do the things very displeasing, and offensive to his Holy
Nature, and the Rule of Life and Action, his Grace governs his Servants by; but
yet they are not of themselves our Title, but our Evidences only of our Title,
which is Christ alone; and if we are his, we shall certainly be born up to
what, He, as our Mediator, Surety, and Testator, has thought necessary to our
Salvation; and will accept; and supply the want of by himself; Yet all is, and
ought so to be carried, that we may be urged, and pressed to our Duty, as under
the Holy Rectory of God, and Christ, and according to all the Rules of his Word.

Head 17.
Assurance is by Gospel-Marks, and not by a Voice within us.

Conciliation. Marks are according to Scripture; yet so, that they are, but
few, of any of the Servants of God, but have reason to fly to the Witness of
the Spirit, and its Voice, crying, Abba, Father; and to appeal to Infinite
Grace; seeing in the midst of our Falls, Failings, and Imperfections, we cannot
otherwise discern, where Sincerity and Perfect Obedience divide one from
another, and what is enough in our many Corruptions to constitute Sincerity.
Besides, seeing our Staple-hold is the Righteousness of Christ without us, our
Supreme Testimony depends upon his Spirit, witnessing within us indeed, yet
from what is without us, viz. Free Grace.

Head 18.
God charges Sin on Men, and they should repent for Repeated Pardons.

Conciliation. This is among the Wise, Holy, and Gracious Methods of God, and
Christ, in this present Low State of the Redemption, appearing; until its Glory
in the Kingdom of Christ; that Sin is charged, and Pardon repeatedly begged in
Daily Prayers; But all notwithstanding is secured in the unchangeableness of
Electing Love, of Justifying Grace, of the daily Issuing Pardon of the New
Covenant, immediately ready; and thus expressed, as if it issued out upon the
very Sin; I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and their Sins, and
Iniquities I will remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. Before David had said any more,
than this, I have sinned against the Lord, Nathan said from God, The Lord has
put away the Iniquity of thy Sin, Thou shall not Dye, 2 Samuel 12. 13. The Grace
of the Covenant went forward therefore in him, (as in all Saints) to the
Composure of his Heart to that great Penitential Psalm. 51. So that in a way of
Consolation of Saints and Encouraging of all to Come into Christ; there may be
great Freedom of Expression used; in which some Things may need Review and
Correction, as Humane; and yet the main Scope and Intention preserved, as
consistent with sincere Design to promote Holiness; most livelily flowing from
the Grace of the Covenant, and the Death of Christ, into the Hearts and Lives
of Believers; there being hence much more hope, both in Conversion and Renewed
Repentance, than in any thing within Men themselves; whenever they have fallen
into Sin after conversion, or while in an unconverted estate.

Head.
Sin may hurt Believers, and God afflicts for Sin.

Conciliation. While we look down to the present State, and to God's present
Government of the World, this must be acknowledged; and yet when we lift up our
Hearts to the Consideration of the Supreme Grace of God in Jesus Christ, the
very hurt Sin does Believers, or even the Elect, is made to serve the Triumphs
of Grace; and all their Afflictions for Sin are Salutary Dispensations. All
which must needs be granted on close reasoning these Points, and will bear out
many Amplifications of this Grace in Discourses declararatory of it; though on
the other side, a very different way of speaking of them must be submitted to
in this Atmosphere, this Dark and Foul Place of the Apostasy, we are yet in;
and it is born out by a very general way of Scripture-speaking.

Head 19.
Sincere Holiness is not Dung; nor does the Apostle include such Holiness in
that so great Scripture concerning Evangelical Righteousness, Philip. 3. 7,
etc.

Conciliation. For the clearing of that great Scripture, and the Points
dependent upon it, I must first take the freedom to assert; That the Apostle
does in that Context, lay down at full and at large, the two great Points of
Justification and Sanctification: In that of Justification, he rises to the
height, and so in that of Sanctification; and these are both handled so
distinctly, that they cannot be confounded.

For the Apostle had fallen severely upon the Concision; by whom he most
probably means, those who compounded the Profession of Christianity with the
Works and Ritualisms of the Law; as if Christ were not enough without them, for
Acceptance with God, for Righteousness in Justification, and Holiness in
Sanctification; and therefore he calls them not, The Circumcision, meaning Pure
and Perfect Jews; but the (...), or the Concision, as a Peculiar Brand of
Reproach upon Them; and calls Himself, and Sincere Christians, The
Circumcision, viz. The Spiritual Circumcision, who Worship God in Spirit; who
hold the True Righteousness of Faith; of which it was the Seal; Rejoice in
Christ Jesus alone, and have no confidence in the Flesh; that is, in Creature
Righteousness; In the same sense Flesh is taken, Romans 4. 1. What shall we say,
that Abraham our Father has found, according to the Flesh, viz. according to
his own Righteousness, not only Ceremonial, but Moral; For if Abraham were
justified by Works, etc. So: But if he had no other way, but to believe on him
that justifies the Ungodly. It is evident, it was not Ceremonial Ritual Works,
the Apostle discoursed of, but Substantial Works of Righteousness, opposed to
Ungodliness. Thus the Apostle reckoning up his own Privileges first, gives
indeed those, which were External, and Ritual, but adds Moral in those words;
According to the Righteousness of the Law, which was not only Ceremonial but
Moral, He was Blameless; which words may be expounded by those; I have lived in
all good Conscience before God to this day, Acts 23. 1.

Now, upon all this, he sits as an Accountant, with his Tables before him, and
what had been Gain or Riches in his Account, he now writes it, All Cipher; And
then, by way of Triumph, and in a mighty Elevation of his Discourse, he adds,
Yea, doubtless, I count not only my Jewish (as I may call them) Effects; but
even whatever else may come into Computation; even All he accounted Loss, of no
Value: On what Recompense or Reparation did the Apostle thus cast out every
thing? On this alone, That he might be found in Christ, not having his own
Righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is the Righteousness of
Christ, the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith.

To clear the Apostle's Doctrine; These two great Doubts must be decided,

Query I.Whether the Apostle thus far, as we have gone, is upon the Point of
Justification, or of Sanctification; or so much as on Sanctification joined
with Justification; or on Justification purely, and alone, when he speaks thus?

Quer. II.Whether the Apostle puts into this Account of Loss and Dung, the
Inherent Holiness, he had as a Christian; looking upon it, as Inherent, and in
Himself; whether, I say, he accounted this, as Loss and Dung, or only the
Ceremonial, Ritual, Righteousness of the Law, together with his Pretentions to
the Moral Righteousness of it, as without Christ, and separated from him?

The clear Decision of these two Questions, will much contribute to our
distinct Judgment in the Points we are upon.

Answer to Query I.
I assert therefore, thus far as I have gone upon this Context, or till the
Apostle comes to those words; That I may know Him, and the Power of his
Resurrection; he is wholly and solely upon the Point of Justification, and not
of Sanctification.

Argument 1.The Apostles does in all his Solemn Discourses most distinctly
handle the Point and Doctrine of Justification by it self, and of
Sanctification by it self; so Romans c. 3. c. 4. c. 5. he begins with
Justification, and so goes on to Sanctification, c. 6. so Gal. c. 3. he
discourses of Justification; and the consequences of it, c. 4. and so enters
into that of Sanctification, c. 5. c. 6. Even in all the Apostolic Epistles,
we may find, the Lines of Justification and Sanctification are kept distinct,
and clear, one from the other. So therefore here it is to be expected he should
do; for the Gospel-Notions are most distinct.

Arg. 2.The Righteousness of God without the Law, Romans 3. 21, 22, etc. is the
Righteousness of Justification.

Arg. 3. Righteousness by Faith, is a peculiar manner of Speaking in the Point
of Justification; Justified by Faith, and Righteousness of Faith, is several
times mentioned in the Discourse of Justification, Romans c. 3. c. 4. in those
great and most distinct Treaties of Justification, Romans 10. Gal. 3.

Arg. 4.The Expression of being Found in Christ, being so plain an Allusion to
the Cities of Refuge, the Security from the Avengers of Blood; plainly shows,
The Apostle was upon the Point of Justification, our great Security against
Guilt, Wrath, and Condemnation, at the Times when the Pursuits will be closest
upon us.

Arg. 5.The First, and Fundamental Riches of every Man is that Righteousness,
by which we stand before God.

Arg. 6.That which is opposed to the Righteousness of the Law, which was
according to the Covenant of Works to justify, is the Righteousness of Christ
for Justification; so no other can be meant.

Arg. 7.The Apostle goes on to so solemn a Discourse of Sanctification; in the
most proper Expressions of it, Source and Springs of it, and to the utmost
Heighths of it; and so consequent and dependent upon his being Found in Christ
for Justification; that it is an Injury to his Discourse to Confound the
Foregoing so proper to Justification, with those so proper to Sanctification,
as shall be presently made further out.

Ans. to Quer. II.
I assert, in answer to Query II. There is great reason to believe, the Apostle
put into the Account, or Bill of his Effects, the Holiness, he had as a
Christian, considered as inherent in himself, but not as in Christ; so that
even this he accounted but as Loss, and of vile Account in the Point of
Justification.

Argument 1.Because by way of Elevation and Surmount, above all he had bebefore
said, of Ritual or Moral Legal Righteousness; the Apostle says, Yea, doubtless,
I count all Things; Now what All, or Any could there be in Relation to God,
between God and the Soul, beyond what he had Named, but what he had, as a
Christian; as in Himself, but not as in Christ. And hereunto agrees that
venerable Person, Dr. Tuckney, in his Sermons on Philip. 3. p. 42.

Arg. 2.That Expression of being Found in Christ, viz. Christ himself; shows; a
Christian cannot rest, in what he has, though from Christ; in himself, as a
Christian; except he be found in Christ himself.

Arg. 3.Because all the Holiness of a Christian, as it is in himself, and not
in Christ, comes under the denomination of his own Righteousness, and even of
the Righteousness of the Law; For it can be no other than the Righteousness of
that Law, which is Spiritual, Holy, Just, and Good; And to assert any other
Righteousness of Sanctification, as to the Matter, is a greater Antinomianism,
or Elevation of the Law of God, than any other thing called so loudly
Antinomianism.

Arg. 4.The Holiness, Majesty, Purity of God, is infinitely great; we cannot
stand before him, but in the increated Righteousness of Christ alone. Angelical
Righteousness is called Folly, and is unclean before Him; What wonder is it
then, our Holiness, however received from Christ, is, as in us, in the midst of
remaining Sin, called Dung, even as Filthy Rags, Isa. 64. 6.

Object.
But can the Righteousness of Holiness and Sanctification from Christ, be
styled Dross, or Dung, of which the Apostle, just after, desired so high
Seize?

Answ. We ought to distinguish between the Holiness of Sanctification, as it is
in a perpetual Emanation from Christ, from his Righteousness, from his Death,
from his Resurrection; and as it is in us mixed, and allayed with the remaining
Corruption in the best of Saints: in the (...) be called Loss or Dung; for it
is considered in Christ the Fountain, and so as from him to us, where it is
pure and unmixed; under his Sacrifice; the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
the Power of the endless Life streaming out always upon it: But as in us, if
considered as separate from Christ; It is as a Beam clipped off from the Sun,
that would presently vanish, and come to nothing, or sink into our Darkness and
Impurity: It is the great Admonition therefore of the Apostle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 1. My Son, be strong in the Grace that is in Jesus Christ.

And to show how earnestly Christians should press to the height of these
Emanations from the Death and Resurrection of Christ; he lays down that great
Canon never Calculated for any Poor, Base, Ritual Conformity; never in the
Apostles Thoughts; But it is fitted to that great end, viz. To Attain, if it
were possible, the Holiness of the Resurrection of the Dead; And for this to
forget All, that is behind; And to press according to the Mark, for the Prize,
but not by the way of any thing we can do, but from God above, alone, viz. by
the High Calling of God in Christ, and not by our own Strength, but as
apprehended of Christ for it; By this Canon all the Perfect, Perfect in regard
of Sincerity, Walk, though they count not themselves Perfect otherwise; This
Apostle, and therefore no Apostle did so Count; For he was not behind the
chiefest: They all then walked by this Canon; If any Perfect or Sincere be
never so little otherwise minded, God reveals even this great Pursuit, and End
to them; That so far as they have attained, whatever it be, they should Forget
what is behind, and press Forward, Mind that Point, the Holiness of the
Resurrection: To raise the Spirits of his Saints to which, though they had not
attained to it, at the going out of the Body; yet in a Moment, in the
Twinkling of an Eye, in an Indivisible Point of Time, Christ apprehends them;
Even then, and with a greater Ease, in the Nature of the Thing, then he raises
their Bodies Incorruptible; having hold of them for that very thing; even by
the mighty Power of his own Death and Resurrection, whereby he is able to
Subdue all Things unto himself. This Canon had never been so depretiated as to
be applied to any Outward Form, or Church Order, as it is called, if the
greatness of the Apostles Point had been considered; and for which, there is
not any Ombrage here; except that the Word, Canon, which has been so Debauched
by the working of the Mystery of Iniquity, puts any one in Mind of it; For only
according to the present occasion, its taken by the Apostle from the Olympic
Races to the great purpose of the New Creation, Gal. 6. 16. and here to show
the Christian's Rule or Line, is up to the highest Holiness, even that of the
Resurrection; Thus large have I been on this Head, because it is of so great
Moment.

Head 20.
Christ does not Repent and Believe for us.

Conciliation. Christ, has yet laid the Foundation of all our State in Grace
and Glory in himself, and in his own Action; wherein we are to be made like
him, as from the Archetype and Life; He took part of Flesh and Blood, because
the Children were Partakers; He was Circumcised, Baptized, Dyed, Rose (...)
Justifies me, who will contend with me? That Agony, wherein He sweat Drops of
Blood, standing under the Sense of the Sins of All, for whom he Dyed, and made
Supplication with strong Cries and Tears unto him, that was able to save him
from Death, and was Heard, in that he Feared; was, as it were, the great
Penitential of the Redeemer in the Behalf, and as in the Person of his
Redeemed; And as for Faith; It is written, Heb. 2. 13. I will put my Trust in
him. Thus all our Springs are in him, and from him; and the Efficacies, that
Work all our Works in us, and for us. They are so vested in our Faculties and
Action, that they are in us; and yet by so Supreme a Virtue from him, residing
in him, and given us as in a Line of Communication from him to us, That they
are wrought by him for us; And in this rightly understood Sense, he may be said
to Repent and Believe for us, though also in us, and by us.

The three last Heads, concerning Gospel Preaching, have been all along aimed
to be thus determined; That it is certain; Both Conditional Preaching, and
Absolute Preaching, have each their respective Foundations in Scripture; And
both tend to the same end, to show the Absolute Necessity of Christ, and Grace
from him; As also the Absolute Necessity of Holiness; as indeed, the Thing is;
flowing from the Grace of Election, through the Efficacies of the Mediator by
his Spirit; as the greatest Scriptures concerning our Salvation, witness; Yet
for Wise and Holy Purposes so Administered, that our Action is all manner of
ways insisted upon by the general Course of Scripture, as has been declared:
So that none are to be blamed in the Abundance of their Ministry in that part,
who do more continually in their Preaching, and sometimes in most solemn
Discourses, set out Christ, The only Way, the Truth and the Life, flowing from
the Eternal Fountain of Electing Love and Grace.

But if we compare one part of Preaching with another, seeing the Life of all
Conditional Preaching depends on the Absolute Grace of the Covenant; That must
needs be the most excellent part of Preaching, wherein the Life of the other is
laid up, and to which the other is but subordinated; But as we find, Scripture
gives Example of the Conditional Preaching, as the more general; So it seems
most adapted and suited to this low State of the Administration of the
Redemption of Christ; and we find, the Divine Spirit, who Divides to All his
Servants, as he will, does more generally and universally move the Preachers of
the Gospel, more abundantly into this Conditional Preaching.

But when that better State, that higher Administration of the Redemption of
Christ in his Kingdom shall come on, as it is now very near; That, as it were a
new Song, which has been so much out of use; it is, as it were, a new Song; at
least in its high Mount Zion Senses; even, I say, notwithstanding so much of it
recovered into use by the Reformation. This Song, of the Redemption of Christ,
in more lofty Ayrs shall be Heard, and Learnt; as has been already said; by
all the Illustrious Assistants, or Bystanders, and Followers of the Lamb on
Mount Zion.

In the mean time God does raise up some, who aspire to these Truths of the
highest Excellency, and, as we say, of the first Magnitude, and highest
Elevation; and such was Dr. Crisp, in my Account; But because we are yet in
this dark and low State, there are many Infirmities, much Rudeness of Speech,
want of Mightiness in Word and Deed in such Aspirings; an Universal want of the
Glory and Holiness flowing from these great Truths, because these Truths are
not come into their proper Time of Glory: This Song cannot be Sung, while the
Babel State yet continues, because it was the Lord's Song, and cannot be Sung,
in a strange Land, to Perfection; by reason of which these great Doctrines are
under a Veil, and not only so, but under great Prejudice. Let us therefore
earnestly prary, these Mists, these Shades and Clouds, may fly away; and yet
even the unwarinesses of Expression in such, as Dr. Crisp are overruled by
God, like the speaking of Stones, to make the main Preaching more notable, and
to excite our Research of them.

These things are written for Reconciliation, not Exasperation; and that we may
be all stirred up earnestly to pray, That the Day may break, and the Shadows fly
away, and our Beloved come on his Mount of Spices.

SOME General HEADS. OF Mr. Williams 's, Conciliated in this Discourse.
THE Elect are Children of Wrath, till effectually called. The Filth of Sin not
transacted on Christ. The Act of laying Sins on Christ, is not the Discharge of
the Elect. Men's Sins their own, and not Christ's Sins. Our Sins laid on Christ,
before he was nailed to the Cross. Christ not abhorred by the Father. No change
of Person between Christ and the Elect. Christ's Mediatorial Righteousness not
subjectively in us, and how imputed. Believers not as Holy as Christ. The
Covenant of Grace explained, and what a Condition is. The Covenant of Grace
Conditional. Faith not a Persuasion that my Sins are pardoned, etc. Prevailing
Enmity, a Hindrance to our present Interest in Christ. The Elect not united to
Christ without Faith. What Union with Christ is. Justification not before
Faith. Repentance necessary to Pardon. Sinners have much to do to be Saved. The
Gospel has Threats and Promises. Happiness and Good Works necessary to
Salvation. They are profitable, and God pleased, etc. Our own Good should be
intended. Assurance by Gospel-Marks, and not by an Inward Voice God Charge
Sin on Men, and they should repent for repeated Pardon. Sin may hurt Believers.
God afflicts for Sin. Sincere Holiness not Dung. Christ does not repent, etc.
for us. Conditional Proposals of Benefits on Terms of Duty, Gospel-Preaching.
To excite Fear in sense of Danger, not Legal Preaching. Christ more Exalted by
the former Truths, than Dr. Crisp's Opinions. The Free Grace of God not
honored by Dr. Crisp, though more Freeness be asserted by him, than by these
Truths.
The END.

