AN APOLOGY For the Hope of the Kingdom of Christ, Appearing Within This
Approaching Year, 1697.

Wherein some of the Principal Arguments for such an Expectation are briefly
Couched, and the Greater Objections Answered.

Presented to the Notice and Examination of the Archbishops and Bishops Now in
PARLIAMENT Assembled.

By T. BEVERLEY.

^zek. 10. 13. As concerning the Wheels, It was cried to them, in my Hearing,
Oh! Revolution! LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by Will. Marshal at the Bible in
Newgate-Street, and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street, 1697.

An APOLOGY for the Hope of the Kingdom of Christ, Entering Its Succession
within this Now Beginning 1697. And an Answer of Principal Objections presented
with It.
To the Archbishops and Bishops, as in Parliament at This Time Assembled.
Most Reverend, Right Reverend,
I Have now, by the Space of Fourteen, or Two Weeks of Years, been Serving for
that Beautiful- Rachel-State of the Church of Christ, in the place of that
Rachel in the Wilderness, weeping for her Children in Sackcloth, and under
Death; and would not be comforted, Because They were not. I have set my self
all along, by Meditation, and Supplication to the Father of Lights, to search
out, and by the Assistance of the Spirit of Prophecy, to Find, What, or What
Manner of Time the Spirit of Christ did signify, for the Fullfilling that Grand
Petition of his Servants; Thy Kingdom come, That thy Name may be Sanctified,
and Thy Will done, as in Heaven, and upon Earth; and I am now Wrestling to the
Break of Day, and I Hope, the Dawn of the Morning, and Resolved, not to Let Go,
Till I obtain the Blessing of it.

The Time, that from the First, and throughout, it pleased the Lord of Time to
fix upon my Mind, as the Time of That Kingdom Entering into its Succession, and
Preparation for its Glory, was, and is, This Approaching 1697. A Year, to which
I could have no Temptation, either in Regard of Nearness, or Distance, or on
any Account whatever, but as a Scripture-Line of Time, and Concurrent Reasons
of Prophecy, and History, very many, and in a Series, and Continuation have Led
me.

On this Foundation, having Settled, I have by Gracious Vouchsafements of Help
from God, Turned my Self to All the Grand Prophetic Points of Scripture* and
Found New Confirmations, and have Given as Public Accounts of them, as I could
attain, and presented some of Them to Your Selves, and to the Great Council of
the Nation: And in as much as Supreme Goodness has Granted me to Set up an
Eben Ezer, now at the Portal of 97. I have Thought it my Duty to offer this
Apology for the Kingdom of Christ so near Approaching; And that The Great
Isaac, The Son of Promise, of Universal Laughter and Rejoicing, The Desire of
all Nations will Appear at a Set Time this Next Year, the very Last of those
Three Set Seasons, Time, Times, Half Time; Eleven Times expressly, or Vertually
Recorded in Scripture Prophecy; and therefore I can have no Doubt; But in the
observing These so often Repetitions, Remarking close upon Them, and on what
Accounts They are Recalled, and to what Applied; and Ballancing These, One with
Another, I have Arrived to Full Assurance, They are Assigned to the Papal Last
State of the Roman Monarchy, the Last of the Four Kingdoms, or Monarchies (and
the Four) now Expiring in the Expiration of These Times and Half.

Indeed I look upon no Truth of Scripture to be more Plain and Certain, except
the Articles of Faith, and Rules of Holy Practice necessary to Salvation, Then
that Those Four Monarchies are given as a Calendar of Time for the
Embarrassment of the Kingdom of Christ, or that Glorious State of Christianity,
which even the Prayers, styled, Established by Law, oblige the Belief, Desire,
and Expectation of: Scripture takes therefore so particular Notice of the Four,
viz. the Babylonian, and Persian; as is well known; and Takes Account of Their
Time; of the Grecian more obscurely; Yet the very New Testament, in that
Language, and the so often Division of the People of that Time, into Jews and
Greeks, is a very undoubted Owning Them, as one of the Monarchies; Out of
which, through a Great Part of the 70 Weeks, the State of the World had been
sliding into the Fourth, the Roman Monarchy, which Surrounds the whole New
Testament History, and Prophecy, as is undeniable.

But as soon as ever the Time allowed to the last of these is at an End, The
Kingdom of Christ will immediately succeed, and there can be no Inter-Reign;
Nor can any other Kingdom Interpose: The Vision is so sure, and its
Interpretation so certain; And such a kind of Kingdom it must be, as was
Congenially to have its succession so Connexed to those before it, that tho it
is a Holy, a Heavenly, a Spiritual, yet it must be also a Visible, Sensible
Kingdom, as to the Dominion, and Glory of it, and no Metaphor, or Allegorical
sense can satisfy without it: And we know the Nations, to which we belong, are
a part of the Ancient Roman Empire, and Remain still of the Ten, into which it
was cantoned; Which Division has been to me an Infallible Reason of
Confidence, France should no more prevail to an Universal Monarchy, then the
House of Austria has done. And herein for the keeping a within the Figure,
allowed its King by Prophecy; I know God has made our K. an Instrument. All
the Iron of it, could never break the Northern Iron and Steel of the sure Word
of Prophecy. But seeing we, I say, are such a part of the Ancient Roman Em^ire,
we are the more concerned, and ought to be the more Awake an the Fullfilling of
Prophecy, as of the first of the Kingdoms of the World, which is to become the
Kingdom of the Lord, and of as Christ.

I have the same assurance, that this Time, Times, and Half Time, must be just
on the Expiration; By Prophecy, we might rather have expected their End sooner;
The Wisdom of the Divine Spi^t draws them so very near to the Time of the Roman
Empire Becoming Christian in all its Portraitures of the Antichristian State
(As I know my self able, by Divine Assistance to make out to the satisfaction
of Any, that will allow themselves the thought, they know, and yield necessary
in any more retired Parts of Science) That had I not the Faithful Evidence of
the Scripture Line (...) Time, (I have already mentioned) together with
uncontestable Events; I should Fourteen Years ago have pitched upon some nearer
Time; For (to mention one of the most obvious) the very Casting the 1260, and
Additional 75 so manifestly into Indictions, a Fifteens of Years, a Character
of Time, not Regulated and known till soon-after Constantine, would have
Inclined to have commenced them sooner.

I know, the Hope, for which I Apologize cannot, but Encounter Great
Objections, but I am assured, God has set it, and my self as a Minister of it,
as a Brazen Wall, that tho it be Fought against, It shall not be prevailed over.

The Objections, and Solutions, I shall very much in short thus Account for:
First, It will be pretended against it; It is a Presumptuous Curiosity to
undertake to Pry into Prophetic Times, and that it ought to be immediately
checked with that of our Lord; It is not for you to know the Times, and Seasons
which the Father has Set in his own Power.

But as to that Particular Scripture, it is evident, it was an Importune
Enquiry of the Apostles, not in the order of Scripture Researches, nor in the
due waiting for of the promise of the Spirit, which was the Duty of that very
Juncture; And therefore tho our Lord is quick upon their disorderly question,
yet he implies, there would be a Gracious method for their Resolution in it,
and commands them to Jerusalem, to wait for The promise of the Spirit from the
Father, which says He, you have heard of me, One Branch of which was, The
showing them things to come, Joh. 10. 14. And in general, we find the search of
Prophetic Times, is much more under the Favor, then the Displeasure of
Scripture; It is recorded with Honor to the Children of Issachar, that they
had understanding of Times, and knew what Israel was to do; Particularly 1 Chronicles. 2. 32.
concerning David's Kingdom, which was the concernment of that Time; And in
which I doubt not, they laid together the Prediction of Jacob, and other
Revelations of God peculiar to that People, and those Times, by which they were
able to give a Judgment: And it is observed, Their Brethren were at their
Command; This swayed no doubt in the Union of Israel in David: The Prophet
Daniel was not satisfied with what he found by Immediate C. 9. 1.
Revelation, but understood by Books of Scripture, and civil Records (It is a
Recommendation of that method) the Number of Years God had Determined for the
Desolations of the Sanctuary; The Prophets in the same manner searched, What
and what manner 1 Pet. 1. 11.
of Time, the Spirit which was in them did signify; The Apostle by the Spirit
Praises the Giving heed to the sure Word of Prophecy, as doing well. Seeing
then the Account of Time is one eminent Branch of that sure Word, It is
Praiseworthy to give heed to that, and no Presumption to do so: Our Lord
charges it as Hypocrisy, not to discern the Signs of the Times, those
Characters and Notes of Impression God has set upon them by Prophecy: How
often is there Encouragement given in that Great Prophecy of the Now Testament,
Blessed is he that Reads, and they that hear the Words of the Prophecy of
this Book. Let Him that has Wisdom Count. Here Rev. c. 1. 3
is the Mind that has Wisdom; Let any one now Impartially lay these things
together, and it will plainly appear, There is waranty for searching Times
revealed in Scripture; And They are still in the Fathers Power, when the
Knowledge of them is waited for by the assistance of his Spirit, in the
understanding of his Word.

It may be further Argued against the Defining of Time from Scripture-Prophecy;
That the Scripture-Prophecies are so Dark, and Enigmatical, that it appears
most probable; The Spirit of God did not intend, They should be understood, or
Laid Open, till the very End of All Things, at the Day of Judgment, or in the
Kingdom of Heaven in Eternity; And therefore, The Soberest, Gravest Men, though
very Learned, and of Great Sagaciousness, do not engage themselves therein, and
Least of All in the Accounts of Time.

To This I would, by way of Defense, Rejoyn in the First Place; That it is most
True, That in the Darkness of the Present State, while the Apostasy of the
Papal State so much Eclipses the Glory of Christianity, There is a Great
Indisposition, and a Great Inability to Interpret Scripture-Prophecies; The
Unlearned Esa. 29. 12.
say, They are not Learned; and the Learned say, The Book is Sealed; And This
Begets a Prejudice against Any Undertakers herein; and they are Charged with
Boldness, and Presumption, or with Madness or Enthusiasm; It is said to Them,
Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from us to you? How come you to be wiser
than others? And this will in a very Great Measure continue, till the Kingdom
of Christ come into its Succession, that the Ears of the Deaf shall hear the
Words of this Book, and the Eyes of the Blind see out of obscurity.

But yet, in the second place, it is undeniable, That which is most
Enigmatical, and under what we call Riddle, if it be wisely contrived, and
designed, must have sense under it, tho not so open, but that it shall require
close Attendance, the most Exercised Thought; And on those Terms it is so
prepared, that it may be understood, and excellent Sense found under it, tho a
Riddle. Samsons Riddle had a very certain Determinate sense, and if we knew
fully the meaning of it, advances beyond the First Unriddling, very admirable
Instructions; All retired Parts of Knowledge in Anatomy, Astronomy,
Mathematics, Algebra, Call for Understandings speculiarly fitted to them, and
most attent Application, and Curious Instruments, Microscopes, Telescopes; and
yet the Knowledge, and Assurance, that rises from them, when understood is the
most Refined and Satisfactory: And so it is in Prophecy of Scripture, although it
does not offer it self at so easy a Rate, as some other Points of
Scripture-Knowledge; Yet by deep and fixed Meditation, by comparing of its
parts, one with another, and especially waiting upon the Spirit of Prophecy for
its Illumination, we shall find, it is prepared, and weighed out with the
greatest Severity of Truth, Divine Sense, and leads into very sublime
Discoveries of Divine Wisdom in the Government of the World, in Relation to his
Church, the Times and Seasons of it; And tends to the Greatest Aws of God, and
obedience to the Supreme Majesty of Heaven, and Earth, and to know, That he is
God.

In the Third Place, It is affirmed by the Spirit of God, that it is intended,
it should be understood; For it affirms, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. It is a Light that
shines in a Dark Place, Now if it be darker, than the Dark Place, How can it be
called a Light? Or how can it enlighten such a Dark place? And it is not of
Private Interpretation, as I have heretofore given an Account publicly; The
very meaning is, It is not of a Reserved, or Apart-Interpretation; As it is
said, Christ privately, or apart Interpreted his Parables to his Disciples. God
says of Himself, Esa. 45. 19. I have not spoken in secret, or in a Dark Place
of the Earth, like the Dark dubious Oracles of Devils: I Jehovah speak
Righteousness; I declare the things that are Right, of Greatest Sincerity,
Vprightness and Truth, not perplexed, but plain to them that understand most
Right, Straight, and direct, to Him that understands; Right to them, that
find knowledge; And I have not said, says our God, to any of the Seed of
Jacob, Seek ye my Face in Vain, Even for the understanding of the Prophecies of
my Word; And in the very same Chapter, God Encourages to Ask of Him Things to
Come; Even, as his Spirit is said to show to his Servants Things to Come: All
which I hope, will appear a sufficient Answer to the Suspicion; That God gave
the Prophesies of his Word, and so Eminent a Part of them; Numbers of Time; and
did not intend, they should be understood.

If it be taken as in this very Joinct, and Objected, How c^m^ it to pass? That
All, who hitherto have Writ on Prophet^ Scripture, have much differed one from
another, and they (...) Fixed Time, have either lived to see themselves
mistaken, (...) has appeared after their Death, They have been so: I des^
(...) should be considered; Those, who as the Holy Servants of Christ, and
Ministers of his Word, have Set Themselves to Understand, have Given Great
Light, and Broken the Way for Those who have Followed; and Their Memory and
Services are precious to All Wise, and Good Men, notwithstanding some Mistakes,
and thereupon Differences; which are yet not more, or Greater, than Those we
Find in most Points not Fundamental, and in All Interpretation of Scripture:
And as to their Mistakes, in Point of Time, It is to be Allowed, Their
Distances, some of Them, from the Time of Completion, might be their
Disadvantage; God not vouchsafing such Light concerning that Time, till nearer
upon it; as not to Daniel, but upon the very Year of the 70 Years Ending.

It is further to be considered; That there are some Eminent and Learned
Persons, who have, though upon somewhat Different Grounds, yet concentred upon
this very 97. and some so near it, as upon 98, 99, and especially 1700. That
their Expectations are yet (as I may say) in Abeyance; and Things most probably
will be so Conducted, as easily to Reconcile so small Disagreements, by the
First Breakings out of Light, and further Illustrations.

But Herein I Humbly Magnify, and Adore the Freeness of Grace, and Divine
Assistance to his Unworthiest Servant; That He has Granted to me, to Lay
before me, the Whole and Entire Prophetical Table of his Word, which is the
Greatest Security against Mistake, that can be vouchsafed: Because by the View
and Survey of things together, They are seen in their Just Scituations, and
Allowances of Room, and placed ^qually, one in proportion to another; That
there may be no crowd, Confusion, Justle upon, or Interfere one with another:
Whereas, if this be not, a plausible Semblance, or Sound of Agreement may
mislead.

If such a Scheme be Reflected upon, as Imaginary, and the Work of Fancy, I
make an Humble Challenge to all the Wit, ^he Fancy, the Learning that is in the
World, to Give a Pa^el Scheme in such an Agreement with the Word of God, and
(...) Providential Events in Concert with it; By which I am ^ed, It is not, nor
cannot be my own, but as Found in Sa^ Writings; seeing Fancy and Imagination
cannot create in^f-subsistent Things; or Erect into undoubted matter of Fact;
As it is; That there are such and such Prophetical Emblems, and
Representations; Such Examples of the Way and Manner of Interpretation, as,
that N^buchadnezzar was the Head of Gold; the King of Persia the Ram; the King
of Grecia the He Goat; The Babylonish Woman, the City on Seven Mountains, that
at the Time of the Revelation Given, was then Reigning over the Kings of the
Earth: All These Give such a Pattern of the Manner of Interpreting Prophetic
Images, and what way the Spirit of God means, They should be Expounded, and
Discypher'd; that They are Equal to Matter of Fact; That there are such
Numbers, as 2300 Eves, Morns; 70 Weeks; Time, Times, Half a Time; Three Days
and an Half; 1260, 1290, 1335 Days, 42 Moons; And all these to be multiplied by
the Prophetical Standard of Time, or Days for Years. And that These, are some
of Them Repeated, variously placed, is plain Matter of Fact. To find therefore
the Concert of these, and to place Them in their Just Order one toward
another, and in the Greatest Friendliness, Peace, Harmony, and Beautiful
^ymmetry; and with the (...), the Admirable Air, and Mien of the Divine Wisdom,
finding out the Knowledge of All Witty Inventions herein; and then Supervening,
or Coming upon All These, Substantial, Undoubted Matters of Fact; the Greatest
Events, that have been in the World; Adjustable to these Numbers of Time,
Comprobated and Assured by the most Valuable History and Chronology, that are
in the World; All Make up such a Plerophory, a Fullness of Assurance, that must
needs deliver from the Scruple, that Fancy, and Imagination have had the
Architecture of such a Triangular, as I may call it, Compage of Things, in such
a Justice of Respect one to another such a Trine, or Threefold strongest
Combination one with another.

For to give a Summary Delineation, on what Grand Pillars of Event the Emblems
of Prophecy are Planted, or drawn; and what Proportions of Time are adjusted to
them, and then (...) well it is known, That such Events and within some General
Ken of such Allowances of Time are owned by History (...) Chronology to those
Events, is the Greatest satisfaction, the can be given: For either small
Petite, or Obscure Events (...) Disgrace any Prophetic Scheme, And to be out
of all Bounda^ of Time, is as Dishonorable.

The Root therefore of Prophetic Time, I make that Stupendous Failure of the
so Illustrious Types of the Kingdom of Christ, the Reigns of David, and Solomon
at the Death of Solomon; and the Incredible Depression of Them, had not Sacred
Writ assured it, in the Division of the Tribes into the Two Houses of Israel,
and Judah; Till Both Involved, each in a dreadful Captivation, distinct to
Each: The Rescue, and Deliverance of the Two Tribes from their Captivity in
Babylon, was by the Destruction of that Monarchy, the First of the Four, and
the Decree of Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Monarchy, at the End of the
390, and 40 Years of the Visional Bearing of Iniquity for them, and settling
the Prophetical Standard of a Day for a Year by Ezekiel.

In Cyrus his Universal Monarchy, so Favorable to the people of God, and so
Great a Type of Christ, as to be called Messiah, or God's Anointed Begin the
2300 Eves, and Morns; That staple Line of Time, that Reaches to the very
Glorious Kingdom of Christ; In the First Hundred Twenty Four Years of them,
there is, though with Interruptions, a Gradual Restoration of Judah, and
Jerusalem, Entering within the First Seven Weeks, or Forty Nine Years of that so
Famous, and by Christians, Universally Agreed Character of Time, confirming the
Prophetic ^ndard of a Day for a Year to 490 Years, Viz. The 70 Weeks

Through these runs the very Dwarf-like and Tributary Condition of the Jews,
besides some horrible Inroads upon them, under the latter part of the Persian,
the whole of the Grecian Monarchy, and the beginning of the Fourth, or Roman.

At the last of these Weeks there is that so Glorious Exaltation of ^me to its
Fullness in the Appearance of our true Messiah, and in the midst of it, His
Death and Resurrection; Greater things then which all his Glorious Appearance,
the Fullness of Times, or of all Time, Time cannot contain; In the other Half,
the Loud Publication of the Gospel of these Things, as by the Heraldry of
Thunder, (...) in the First Seal Opened by the Apostles.

In the Next Four Hundred, the First Seal is continued, and the (...) Three
Seals are Opened, in very Great and New Productions the Roman Empire; till in
that Conclusive Persecution of the ^stians, within the Fifth Seal, under
Dioclesian, and the Con^porary Pagan Emperors: In the Sixth Seal, That so
indeed ^^st Revolution of the Roman Empire from Pagan to Christian, begun by
Constantine in the Sixth Seal, continued ( Julian's short Reign Excepted) till
Vindicated, and Statuminated by Theodosius the Great, in the Seventh Seal, a
Great Precursory Emblem of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

But Early under Constantine, and so Going on, That Appearance of the Kingdom
of Christ, began to be Eclipsed; And the Barbarous Nations Rushed in on the
Empire, in the Just Revenges of Christ upon Antichristian Supplantation (who
yet after United as his People, and as Ten Kingdoms under his Ecclesiastic
Empire) and Undermine by the Interposal of the Antichristian Moon, so soon that
Prophecy gives the Notice of it, as Immediate; in the Sealing the Servants of
God, against both the Antichristianism, and the Vengeance in those Trumpets of
Vengeance Given into the Hands of the Angelick Ministers of it, the Witnesses
Entering into Sackcloth, and the Churches Flight into the Wilderness, or being
so Hidden; that it was hard to be Discovered before the Reformation. These
Early Notices do beyond All Reasonable Contradiction, Assure the Times and Hair
Sworn to Antichrist, must needs be now upon the Expiration, which as before
Noted, are cast into Fifteens, in the 1260 Days, into which they are Expounded,
to show their Nearness to Constantine's Time; and because so Determinate a
Time, and Short, Compared with the Glory to follow, is styled, a Short Time, in
God^ Answer to the Souls under the Altar; And the Devil considering it,
Reflected on it as a Short Time, not as the Father of Lies, but as it was
Extorted from him by God; show it near Ending.

At the End of 400 Years from the Weeks, of 404. from the Resurrection, and
437. from the Incarnation, Begin the Time, Times and Half with the High Sounds
of the Four First Trump^ Of which That Year was not without its Answerableness
to this Prophetic Character, by reason of the Incursions of the Barbarous
Nations, as a Storm of Hail and Fire mingled with Blood, who because They were
to Become the Subjects of the Antichristian Papacy, are called, The Gentiles
Entering into the Outward Court; And their 42 Moons Commence, being Solemnly, as
it were, Inaugurated into Them by Cyril, Bishop of Abexandria the very Year so
Earnest in Adjusting Lunar Time to Solar; At the same Time began that Apostasy
the Apostle Paul speaks of in Delay of the Kingdom of Christ; And in such
Corruptions of the Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation of Christianity, the
True Church was Hidden under the Public Profession so Corrupted, as to be the
Church as in a Wilderness; and on which the Witnesses Prophecy, That is,
Declare Chrsts Kingdom in Delay; as in Sackcloth; of which That Year there was
a Sample in a Persecution Raised by Gensericus, a Vandal Prince, against the
Servant of God Holding the Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God;
and It was continued against Those, who Kept the Commandments of God, and Held
the Testimony of Je^us Christ, by the Papal Tyranny: Within the Four First
Trum^ts, Fall the so often Burning, and Sacking Rome, the utter Cessation of
the Name of Emperor of Rome in the West, and even of Consular Dignity.

At that very Time of the Cessation of Empire begin the Moons of the Papal
Antichristian Power, which Prophecy styles, The Beast; as a Preparation to
which the Hierarchy (as the Historian Sozomen Relates) had been Rising stilly,
as Feet of Clay from the Earth, and crept silently Forward into a Dynasty;
styled therefore, The Other Beast, which procurated for the Grand Beast; thus
Came in the Succession of the Beast, Dated to this very Year 476; and so its
Succession is Given as the 7th Head, and Eighth King, Rev. 17. For it is in
Immediate Succession to the Seventh King, no Head, which was the Christian
Emperor in the West.

Then the Bestian Antichristian Power grew up to its height, or Supremacy at
606, as the Star Fallen to the Earth, within his First Time, and pursued by God
with the First Woe, or the Ma^ometan Imposture, at 622, and so to 797, Armed in
the Saracenick, Inrodes upon the Western Parts of the Empire: This continued
along ^e Second Time, or First of the Two Times of his settled, or, consistent
Power, till the Second Turkish Woe starts out in the Third Time, or Second of
the Two Times, where His stint, or the Bounds of his Power were set: Till it
came down to the Reformation at the Beginning of his Half Time, at the Year
1517. Where it has continued an 180 Years, down to the present. 1697, a
declined and decayed, but not a Fallen Power, according to the very Importance
of Two Times degraded to a Half Time.

Now I would Appeal to all the Reason, and Understanding (...) Man, whether,
when all the Prophetical Images are so expressive of these Events; And that,
the Line of Time, that Prophecy has proportioned to them, when laid to them,
is so fairly every way Adjustable, Viz. From Cyrus before the Weeks; Since the
Weeks, to the Death and Resurrection of Christ, After the Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, and the Preaching of the Apostles at the End of the
Weeks, in 400 Years of the Seals; and the Greater Cantons of Time, Times-Half
Time dividing, and distributing 1260 Years into 360, 720, 180, and All so
according with the very Years, we Vulgarly Account to 1697. I would, I say,
appeal to all Sense, and Understanding, whether this ^ccount can be the
Creature of Fancy, and Imagination, or so much, as of Accident; Except they
think, such a Conspiration of so many things, of so great Concernment to the
World, and to the Churches of Christ, be below the Notice of the Divine Spirit,
or its Care to make them known; For that the very things themselves cannot be
contrived into such Representations, cannot be once said; when it is so
Experimental, that the things, if not so Designed by the All-seeing Spirit,
must by Accident be so subject to the Elaboration of Fancy, and Imagination, or
rather of J^ment, and Understanding; Seeing this Threefold Respect is found in
Reality, and Substance of Scripture-Emblems, of Scripture-Numbers, of
Correspondent Events, in History, and Chronology; To say which Undermines All
Rationality of Inference from the Greatest Correspondency of Effects in
Creation, and Providence, with the Wisdom, and Power of the Supreme Creator,
and Governor of All, V^^. If we may not Reason from these, to the Intention of
Divine Spirit.

Now from hence, reach the Additional 75, to the Thousand Years of the Blessed
State, Viz. From the Kingdom of Christ in Succession, in Thirty years of the
Sealed Thunders, opened in Rev. c. 14. Making the 1260, 1290. Wherein First
there is a Glorious shini^ out of the Gospel, and the Glory of Christianity for
the Conversion, and bringing Multitudes to Christ, and for a Testimony against
those who remain obstinate, the Filthy being Filthy still; And then the Vials
poured out, that Time of Trouble, such as never was, since Man was upon Earth,
Through the Forty Five Additional to the 1290, and making them 1335, to the
Glorious and Blessed State, and the Lots of the New Jerusalem, in the End of
these Days, Dan. 12. 11, 12, 13.

And in the same way of Evidence, and Assurance, I find m^self through the
Gracious Assistance of God, able to go backward in the Analytical, or
Retrograde method to the very Death of Solomon, where I began, and find the
Connection of one thing to another, so Just, so True, so Steadfast, and so
Unmovable, that they cannot be dislocated, nor Disjoynted; And the Numbers of
Scripture-Time so Locked, one within another, That they cannot be Wrench'd, or
Forced asunder; All which I have in Readiness to offer to every Judicious
Considerer, and of which I would give the Briefest Specimen in this following
Scheme, that I can Contrive.

The Thousand Years, are by all the Wonders of it the most undoubted End, or
Finishing of Wonders; And the very same with the Mystery of God to be Finished,
by the Seventh Angel sounding, according as he has spoken in Gospel to, and by
his Servants the Prophets.

This being the Fullness of Times, all Times Center, or flow down, and rest in
it. Here rest the 45 Last of the 2300 Eves, Morns, as is expressed in Daniel; The
45 take such hold of the 30, that all the force in the World cannot divide them;
As is Apparent by 1290 made 1335, the Thirty take the same hold of the 1260;
Which are the Times, and Half; That they can no more be separated, then the
others; The 1260 in the Three Divisions, Viz. The Half Time takes hold of the
720, or the two Times; And the two Times of the First Time, or 360, And they
can endure no distance; Because they are together one 1260. The 1260
necessarily take hold of whatever Time went before, and lay between the 490 of
the Weeks, and the 1260; This can be no way contested; Because the Weeks by
Express Scripture End Three Years, and Half, or Half a Week from the Death of
Christ; And then, we know a Time there must be, from the Beginning of the 1260,
^f some distance of Space from the End of the Weeks; Because him the Three
Years and Half after the Death of Christ, so many more Years, then 1260 are now
passed, and yet the Great Events at the End of the 1260, not yet come to pass,
and therefore not the 1260 themselves. And yet that space must take hold of the
End of the Weeks, Because the Half Week Ends a Three Years, and a Half; Half a
Week; from the Death of Christ; The Seventy Weeks Notwithstanding, They are
divided to Joints, yet are as close, as the Joynted parts of any the same
Member of the Body, being together the Seventy Weeks; The Seventy Weeks lay an
Indisputed Claim to whatever Time went before to ^rus; And every part must be
Joined Each to other, Because all the several Portions of Time stand United in
the 2300; A^^ see^^g so much Time has already passed since the End of the
Weeks, as leaves no more then 75 before the Weeks of the 2300 to Cyrus, we are
sure, there can be no more; I confess, there may be Fewer, and so more of the
1260 to Run out then to 97; But so far, as we can be sure, there can be no more
than 400 before the 1335. We may be sure, there can be no Fewer, than 75 before
the Weeks.

From Cyrus backward, must be the 40 of Judah's Sin B^^n, Lying Close to the
End of the 390 Days of Israel's Sin Born, which Bring back to the Division of
the Tribes into the Two Houses of Israel, and Judah; All which Things have
been, and are Ready to be Fully made out to any, who Desire it in particular.

The Undoubted Emblems of Scripture Answering to these Numbers of Time, may be
Accounted for with the same Evidence, in this Retrospective Motion, as in the
Progression; For the very End of the Wonders is placed in the Beast^ ^^d the
False Prophet cast alive into the Lake; And the Glory o^ Christ's Appearance,
and the Armies of Heaven, for whom Thro^^ were Set, and They Sat upon Them,
and They Lived and ^ig^ed with Christ a Thousand Years were such, as did not
Worship the Beast, nor Receive his Mark, etc. The Vials, that Brought in the
Thousand Years, are Noted to Fall on the Beast, (...) them that Worshipped the
Beast, and had Received his Mark. ^^e Voices, that prepared for the Vials, and
at the End of which, the Vials Began, were also upon the Beast; and the
Witnesses coming out of the Death, the Beast had laid them under, plainly
Entwist the Vials and the Voices with the Beast, and the Witnesses; and ^^
their Times one with another; viz. with the 1260 Days, (...) 42 Moons, the
Times, and Days, and Half. And in this (...) manner the Dragon, and they that
were Beheaded for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus, and the
Dragon cast down, and the Martyrs of Christ Overcoming, by the Blood of the
L^^, and the Word of his Testimony, and not Loving their Liv^ unto Death;
Seeing the Dragon Gave his Power, and his Seat un^ the Beast, show, very
Evidently, that the Moons of the Gentil^^, and of the Beast, Began at the End
of the Seals. Even (...) is most clear in a Progressive Motion, the Seals Issue
into ^^ Trumpets, by the Seventh Seal conveying to them; The Trumpets into the
Voices by the Seventh Trumpet; the Voices by the Seventh Voice into ^he Vials,
the Vials by the Seventh Vial into the Thousand Years.

The Seals Run plainly Back into the Weeks, Beginning in the Confirmation of
the Covenant, by that Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, Emblem'd by
Christ Riding out on his White Horse, conquering, and to conquer, at the Ending
of the Weeks; The Weeks Run back into the Time of the Word Going forth for the
Restoring Judah, and Jerusalem, from whence they are Dated; The Going forth of
the Word into the Babylonish Captivity, which gave Occasion to the going forth
of that Word; and the Last Forty Years of the Babylonish Captivity, which was
the Ground of Bearing the Iniquity, or Punishment of the House of Judah, clasps
Fast with the 390 of Bearing Israel's Sin; because God commanded Ezekiel, when
He bad Born the sin of Israel on the Left side, without any Intermission, to
Turn on the Other side, and to Bear the sin of the House of Judah on the Right
side, and the Bearing* the Sin of the House of Israel goes back to the Division
of the Tribes into Two Houses, at Solomon's Death.

In the Last Place, I dare Appeal to the Greatest Chronologers, ^^ Historians,
whether our General Accounts do not, within ^ome Fair Proportion, Allow the
Years of the Papacy, of the Pa^^ Power, of the Roman Empire, of the Grecian,
Persian, Baby^^sh Kingdoms, to serve these Prophetical Accounts; and so ^^ward
by the Kings of Israel and Judah, to the Death of ^^lomon. Now all these
Things, were there Room to Represent Them clearly, particularly, and in Full,
would Give such certainty ^^ these Points, according to the Exactness of
Scripture-Time, as ^ould amount to the Justification of the Great Hope, I so
pub^^ly make Offer of; and against which, in every minute Par^^ar, I Humbly
Pledge my self to be Ready to Receive Exceptions, and to Return Due
Satisfaction; and therefore shall ^ow Return to the more General Objections.

This way of Endeavor to Justify every Thing, by Plain ^^counts, and Arguments
of Reason* Approachable by every ^^ Reason, and Subject to the Examination of
every Man. ^oever will take so much Thought, and Care of Trial, and ^^ Judgment
upon Himself; may take off much of that Exce^^; Why should All This be Revealed
to you more than to Any ^er?

For The Answer I would give, is, Because God has ^ngaged my Heart and
Thoughts to this Inquiry; And it has been the Principal Subject of my
Intellectual Inquiries, though I hope not in a Neglect of other Points of
Theology, and Scripture-Knowledge; But by this means I have been looking every
way into All the Advertisements of Scripture-Prophecy, comparing Prophetical
Things with Prophetical, and any of the most Accurate Memoirs of History and
Chronology, I could Attain; And This is no other, than what Any Other Studious
in these Things, might have Attained; and much Higher, according to the
Advantages of Learning, more enlarged Capacities of Mind, Clearness of
Expression; as is* most experimental in that Excellent Person, The Annotator on
the Re^elation, and his Annotations, Published about Four Years ago; The Only
Thing that I pretend to, of Peculiar Favor herein from the Most High, is, That
he has thus engaged my Heart, and Thoughts to separate my self, and to
Intermeddle with this Wisdom, and Assisted me so far therein.

When any one vouches any Immediate Revelation, that cannot be disproved by its
plain Disagreeableness to other Sealed Parts of Divine Revelation, though
indeed from God; H^, and his Revelation are Inaccessible, but by the same
Spirit of Revelation, in some suitable Efficacy of the same Spirit, enabling to
discern, or to feel the Virtue of it; As in the Apostles Days* When the
Prophets spoke one by one, 1 Cor. 14. 29. Then the Rest Judged; that is,
Discerned the Divineness of the Revelation; by the Participations of the same
Spirit in themselves: But when Any offer the Interpretation of written
Prophecies, or Prophecies of Scripture, by the Assistance of the same Spirit
that gave them; this Interpretation, if Just, and True, and according to the
Sense of the Divine Spirit, is the Spirit of Pro^^cy; Because it is the
Testimony of Jesus, which is the very Essence of the Spirit of Prophecy: Now
this is plainly Approvable by All, who wait upon the same Word of God by the
Assistance of the same Spirit: I do not therefore in Any of these Prophetical
Discourses, offer at any such thing, as in which the Spirit of the Lord passing
by others, should have spoken to me, but what every one has the same Right,
and Open Door to, and Freedom of; and what every one has a Riight to Examine
and Accept, or Reject, according to the Evidence he sinds of an Agreeableness
with the Sure Word of Prophecy or not: That only I stand up for, is, That He
Judges as a Prophet, according to the measure of that Dispensation of the
Blessed Spirit, now vouchsefed to his Servants; That is, that he Judge by the
Due Compare of Prophecy with Prophecy, by Attendance to every Hint, and
Indication of the Prophetical Mind Flowing from that Spirit, and that he lay
this First, as a Foundation, that the Prophecies of Scripture ought to be Given
Heed to; and that they may be understood, as a Light shining in a dark place:
And whoever does not thus address himself, can no more Judge, then any one
could of the Revelations then made by the Spirit to the Prophets of those First
Times, when they met in those Prophetical Exercises, without the Communication
of the same Spirit to themselves; or then an Illitterate, or unknowing Person
in any Science or Art, Can Judge of the Exercitations of the most knowing
Persons, or Artists, when they meet together for the Communication of their
most Elaborate Exercitations therein: And so I do indeed Claim, and Insist on
this Privilege; That none undertake to Judge, of what I have offered in these
things, but by such Prophetical Preparations, and Attendances upon Scription
Prophesies, that are indeed open to every one that Desires to ^nter by the Key
of Scripture- Prophetical Knowledge, and shut to others. And this is no more
Presumption, then what every one thinks his Privilege, that no one Judge of
his Art, but He that Understands it first Himself: And this I hope Vindicates
from any undue Assumption of any more, then the Gracious Direction of my Heart,
and Thoughts, to that Book of Scripture Prophecy, that Lies open to every one,
that draws nigh with due Preparation; And that every one may Judge of by the
same Preparation.

It may be further Objected, that yet it is very hard, if not Impossible to
attain the Sense of the Divine Spirit to a Year, or any such Precise,
Definitive Account of Time.

To this I Answer, It will easily be allowed that the Divine Spirit has
Determined, and knows according to that its Expression of it self, to the very
Self same Day; And therefore, seeing it has given Numbers of Time, it must be
to the very Self same Day, For the end of every Number is so Precise, and
Definite; That It must needs be to the very Self same Year, and even Day, if we
could have, as Punctual Account of Days, as of Years; But I find not the Holy
Spirit ordinarily, is more particular then Years: By therefore a due Poize of
that Trine Aspect, of Prophetic Emblems, Prophetic Numbers, and Providential
Effects in Event, and Matters of Fact; of the Records of which, It has taken
Care by General History, and Chronology, we may come to know to a Year; And of
this, Besides several other Assurances that Require more Discourse, There is
that Time of the Reformation more Easy, and Immediate* to every Observation;
wherein Divine Super-Intendencies upon all Historians concerning it, to Fix the
Beginnings of it in 1517. does so assure the Beginning of Half Time, as to
assure also the End of Half Time, as of an 180 Years, and so of Time, and Times
at 1697. and therefore the Beginning of Times, or the Two Times at 797. and of
the First Time at 437. The Times, and Half, are contrived therefore into such
Large Cantons of Time, as One Time, Two Times and Half a Time, that They may be
seen in so Large Spaces, and so much together; and yet in such Minute, Exact
Divisions, as Days of Years, especially and on purpose, that they might be
fully known, and exactly understood all along, and at the End. which with so
many Concurrences before-nam'd, (and of which I should be most Ready to Give
the particular State, more at large, to a Free and Desirous, and a Judicious
Recipient) does not make it strange to determine so particularly upon 97. and
may free from that Objection.

But what is there of Preparation to so great a Change? or what Instruments in
view for such Effects? may it be said. To which, this Answer is to be given:
That when we have to do with Him, who Planted the Heavens, and Laid the
Foundations of the Earth: who tells the Number of the Stars, and calls them
All by their Names; and appoints them every one their Course, to Fight in;
Nothing is Hard. Or how wonderful soever it be in our Eyes, can it be so in
His? Who works his signs, and his wonders in Heaven^ and on Earth; and none can
stay his Hand, or say unto him, what do thou? who works, and none can let
it: Has he spoken, and shall he not do it? Is Any Thing too hard for me, sath
our Jehovah?

And as to Means and Instruments, although he could raise them, if he pleased; Yet
His Word of Propheby so expresses the doing of it, as if he would make use of
No Hand but his own; The Stone cut out of the Mountain is not in Hands; That
Power that stands up against the Prince of Princes, shall be broken without
Hand. Now this without Hand, is a manner of speaking, the Spirit of God is
pleased, as by the Translation of it from Daniel, into the New Testament, to
Apply a Tabernacle made without Hands, the Circumcision without Hands; the
House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens, appears to be an Expression
of God working by an Immediate Power of his own, and by Himself. It is by a
Spirit of Life from God, and by a Voice from Heaven. The Four Wheels ^f the
Four Monarchies are brought into the Temple, under the Che^^bims; and without
any more ado, It was cried concerning them in ^y Hearing (the Hearing of the
Servants of God) Oh Revolution! It immediately passed upon them All, and there
were Loud Voices ^^ Heaven upon it, proclaiming that Revolution: The Kingdoms
of this World are bocome the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. And this
is done at Half Time Ending, which signifies Suddenness, and S^rprise: When
this is done, He, who does it, Comes with strong Hand; His Arm Rules for Him.
He understands his own Work; In the midst ^f All the Perplexities of it, His
work is before him; He understands ^^ perfectly and throughout, Every Spring,
every Wheel to be mo^ed, Every Pin of Connection.

But that which may much indeed Terrify, and Discourage, is the Great
Unworthinefs of All Sorts and Degrees of Men, of Nations, and even of Churches;
so that some very Sweeping Judgment, ^^d Desolation rather, or, at least, is
first to be expected.

The Hope yet is, That when God works for his Kingdom, and seems ^ be Lifting
up his Hand to Destroy, He will work for his own Names (...), in a Deliverance.
He will consider, He, to whom the Kingdom ^ to be Given, is worthy: And when
the Lord Jesus Christ, the An^^ of the Covenant, comes into his Temple, He does
not expect to ^^d Refinement ready to his Hand, but He comes to Refine: He has
^^ven an Example in the Apostle Paul of All Long-suffering and Pa^^ce,
especially prepared for that very Time; Those, who shall Hereafter, in a great
distance of Time, Believe on Him: His Reward ^ ^^th Him. He expects it only
from Himself, when his work ie so ^^re him. And even to Impenitents there is
first a time of Warning ^^d Testimony, and then the Day that will Burn as an
Oven, and the ^i^ked are as Ashes under the Soles of the Feet* After this
warning is ^he perdition of ungodly Men reserved for punishment.

I know very well, Notwithstanding, all this Assurance, and ^e Reason of it, I
have given; It will be said yet to me; Seeing ^^is Year ^7 is in so near on
Approach, and there are no Appear^^ces of such a Succession, or opening of the
Kingdom of Christ, ^ght it not therefore to shake your Confidence, and put a
diffi^ence upon such a continued Affirmation of such a Kingdom to ^ake any
Entrance at this Time?

In Answer to this, I would make this Humble Profession, or Confession in these
Three things.

First, I cannot be shaken in my assurance; Because I find my Grounds in the
Word of God unshakable, and unmovable; A False Witness, that has no
Foundation Perishes in this Sense; He cannot Bear up to, nor continue in his
Testimony; But, He that Hears, and knows, on what Grounds He speaks,
Affirms constantly: He that has seen nothing, as the Ground of his Prophecy
is like a Reed shaken with the Wind; But they, that have the Word of the Lord,
Continue to speak it: While I am so certain, The Kingdom of Christ Enters its
Succession without any delay, whenever the Last of the Four Kingdoms Ends; That
the Third Woe of the Seventh Angel, that Sounds the Kingdom of Christ, Comes
quickly; I look to see therefore, what assurances there are, this Last Kingdom,
even its Last State is upon giving up. I find then, the Times and Half, Which
are the Term of the Last State, of the Last Kingdom; By the Time since
Constantine; By the Time, since the Christian Empire Demised; By the Time since
Mahometanism, and more Particularly the Ottoman Empire has entered the World;
By the Time, since the Reformation first entered by Luther, just ending. All
these have such Lively Sculpture and Engravings, in the Sure word of Prophecy,
and their Times so Delineated; I do not better know the Course of the Months in
the Year, the Days in the Month, or the Hours in the Day, then I know the very
Last Year of the 1260 Days of Years, is now entering, and to Run its Circle; and
that within its Circle, the Kingdom of Christ will come into its Succession.

The Second thing, that I most Humbly desire to be Steadfast, Unmovable,
Unshaken in, and upon, is the Exceeding R^^s of the Grace, and Loving Kindness
of God in Jesus Christ, ^e Great High Priest, and Apostle of my Profession;
That Shepherd of the Sheep, that is to Shine forth as the Great Prince, to
have; That great (...), that Fold* that is a Court, One Shepherd, and One Fold:
In the Goodness and Faithfulness of the Spirit of Truth, Guiding into all
Truth: Glorifying the Lord Jesus Christ, by taking of the Things, That are His,
and so of his Kingdom, and showing them to his Servants, and showing them
Things that are to Come; I have Great Assurance in his Tenderest Mercies,
having Led, and Guided, and Supported me thus far, in the Search after his
Kingdom, and Manifested so much to me; He will not Leave more to be ashamed of
my Hope; I can Humbly say before Him, as his Servant Jeremy; Oh Lord, thy Words
have been Found, and I have Eaten them, and they have been the Joy, and the
Rejoicing of my Heart, I Humbly therefore Expostulate with Him, Will Thou? Will Thou be to me as a Liar; I know it is Impossible, He should Lie, He is God,
that cannot Lie; And therefore herein His Servants may plead with Him; The
Vision shall not Lie, He will not ^e, a^ Waters, that are not sure, of which he
has given so Lively ^ Description, in comparing the Unfaithfulness of Friends
to The^; My Friends have dealt Deceitfully with me, as a Brook, and ^s the
Streams of Waters, that pass away; Which are Blackish by Reason of Ice, etc.
But what Time they are warm, They Vanish, when ^^ is Hot, They are Consumed out
of their Place; the Paths of their ^y are turned aside, They go to nothing, and
Perish; The Troops of Tema, Looked, and VVaited; ^he Companies of Seba were
Confoun^^d, Because they had Hoped, they came thi^her, and were Ashamed, Jer.
15. 15. etc. Job 15. 15. etc. How fully does this Express, what Jeremy
understood by Waters not sure! And how Applicable to My Case, if the Hopes I
have of the Kingdom of Christ, should prove mistaken.

It may be said, Indeed if I were sure, I had the Right Sense of
^^ripture-Prophecy, the Argument were enough sure; I therefore ^erein Rely on
his Grace, that he has Guided me into the Truth ^^ his Word; that as I am
sure, His Word cannot Fail; He cannot (...); so neither can any Iron, any
Created Power break the Nor^^rn Iron, or prepared Steel of his Wisdom, Truth
and Power.

But lest any should say, If you have such a Fasth, have it to ^^r self before
God, and Happy are you, if you do not find Reason ^ Condemn your self in what
you so much approve: This therefore ^my Third Profession, The things that I
have so heard and seen by continual search into, Meditation upon, and seeking
Divine Di^^tion in, I cannot but speak; I look upon the Kingdom, as of ^ose
Things wherein we should confess Christ, and not be ashamed of ^^ before Men,
who so despise his Kingdom; and of those, of which Confession is to be made
with the Mouth uneo Salvation. And therefore, ^^ have Humble Hopes, That Jesus
Christ has been Graciously ^^as'd to draw out my Heart, Thoughts, Meditations,
to ^^ch Every Retirement of his Word therein above All, that ^e been before me;
And to give me Greater Confidence and ^^surance; and a more open Profession and
Publication of what I have Found; So that he will graciously Accept, Remember,
Pardon, spare me through the Multitude of his Mercies, and not (...) up to
shame, and Confusion of Face before Men, and confess (...) before his Father,
and before his Holy Angels.

That such a State of his Kingdom, and such a Revolution with it, and by it,
shall this very Year Appear to All the World, as has never been since the
Apostasy of Humane Nature; and that therefore All Mighty Works shall show forth
Themselves in it: The Spirit shall be poured out from on High; The Wilderness
shall Become a Fruitful Field; viz. in the highest Purity, and Prosperity of
his Churches; and that, which looked like a Fruitful Field, become Desert, even
the Antichristian State, and whatever partakes of it, the Glory of All this
World, and the Grandeur of it; and so the Everlasting Gospel shall be preached
to every Nation, Tongue and People, and every Thing move to the Glory of that
Kingdom.

To whom then (Most Reverend, and Right Reverend) could I present equally, as
to you, the consideration of these things, who, I am assured are so Richly
Furnished with all Advantages of Learning, both in that Sure word of Prophecy,
and in History, and Chronology, Correspondent therewith; And whose very Title
Imports the Office of Those, who are on the VVatch Tower, waiting for the
Speaking of the Vision, which will not Tarry beyond its Time; And therefore
should be able to Answer the Question, Watchman, Watchman, what of the Night?
Or how Near is the Morning? and who, as Persons of an Elevated Station, ought
to Vindicate your selves by a Higher Zeal for the Kingdom of Christ, and even
by a Holy Haste to bring Him to his Throne above othe^^ That you may not Fall
under any Ombrage of the Anti-christ^ Hierarchy, who as Feet of Clay, are found
in the Undermine of the Kingdom of Christ; and are Broken by the very First
Openings of it, as upon which that Image Rests, that Stands in delay of that
Kingdom.

How therefore should you be able to answer that Question* What do you more
than others for the Kingdom of the Chief Shepherd, who has it on his Vesture,
and on his Thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? and who Profess to Attend
upon him more Near and in Ordinary.

(...) ^^st Humbly therefore submit this Apology to your Severest ^^ation, and
that as Prophets, that is, Persons above Ordinary, ^^ted in the Sure Word of
Prophecy, (for no otherwise can it be (...)) you would Judge; The Grounds
Themselves I freely tender to ^age and Learned a Christian, a Protestant
Presidency. There is a (...) of Intuitive Knowledge and Plerophory of
Satisfaction, I must (with ^ Reverence yet, and Humble Fear) Hope I have a
Right unto, as ^^per to the having seen together the Curious Lines of Prophecy,
e^l to the Curious Lines and Symmetry in the Works of God, which ^^ most Exact
Astronomer, Anatomist, Naturalist, Mathematician (...) or can Observe. I desire
the Things I offer might be brought (...) Seriousest Consultation, and Debate,
as in the Days of Herod ^^erning the place where Christ should be born, so now
concerning, ^^ Time of his Kingdom Appearing. It cannot be but most Great, ^ be
near the proclaiming of the Kingdoms of this world to be the King^^s of the
Lord and of his Christ. How would it relieve in All the ^ost Inextricable
Labyrinths of the present Difficulties of Nations, ^ our Nation particularly,
to our King, to the Council of the Nation in ^^liament: That He, whose Right it
is, is now about to take to Him^^ his Great Power, and to Reign, and to destroy
them, who have been ^^ong destroying the Earth.

I know, the Paganizing Nations, and Spirits will be very (...) even at the
Mention of these Things, as Vtopian, Imagi^^, Fanatical; and think to Scoff it
off; But as an Hidden and ^^ncealed Train, that Gives Fire, and has its Effect
in a Mo^ent; so the Chain of Divine Councels, the Predictions of ^^nisciency in
All Times take Full Effect in their own Just ^^ments, how Unawares soever the
World be concerning them: ^^ He who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in
working, ^^ neither be outwitted, nor over ruled.

What I offer can be only from Sense of Duty to declare, ^^at I have so Full
Assurance of: Duty as to the Great Re^^r of Prophetical Secrets, the wonderful
Numberer of the Times ^ Prophecy; so Duty to the Public, in the so Generally
Ac^owledged Distress of Affairs; For which my Constant Sup^^cations Ascend, as
also for You whose Most Christian Assi^^ce, and Administration, according to
Your Higher Sphere, I Beseech, and who, I Hope, Count it Your (...) to Serve
Him, who is the Prince of the (...) and therefore will not with a Gallio-like
Spirit, (...) any of these Things.

Most Reverend, Right Reverend, Your Most Humble Serv^ In That Kingdom of our
Lord T. BEVERLEY
This First Month of the Year 1697.
FINIS.

