A SERMON Concerning the Excellency and Usefulness OF THE Common Prayer.
PREACHED BY WILLIAM BEVERIDGE D. D. Rector of St. PETER'S Cornhill, LONDON: AT
THE Opening of the said Parish Church, 27th of NOVEMBER. 1681.

LONDON, Printed by T. James for Richard Northcott adjoining to St. Peter's
Alley in Cornhill, and at the Mariner and Anchor upon Fish-street-hill, near
London Bridge. MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, One of His
MAJESTY's Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
MY LORD,
YOUR Lordship having signified your pleasure that the Sermon which you heard,
when you did us the honor to be present at the Opening of our Parish Church,
should be made public; notwithstanding my averseness to print any thing in
English, yet out of a just sense both of that Obedience which I owe to You as
my Bishop, and of that Kindness which I have received from You as my Patron, I
have now done it, and herewith make bold to present it to You. What Effect a
Discourse of this Nature will have upon the Minds of those who shall have so
much patience as to read it, I know not. But must leave that to him who has
the hearts of all men in his hand. My Subject I am sure is good and necessary:
And as for my plain and practical way of handling it, it is that which my Text
requires, in that it commands that in our Christian Congregations, All
things be done to edifying. So that unless I had endeavored to suit it to the
Capacities of all there present, and to make it as edifying as I could unto
them, my Sermon had been a Contradiction to my Text: And besides that, I had
lost my Design in Preaching it: Which was, to convince those especially, whose
Souls, under your Lordship, are committed to my care and conduct, of the
Excellency and Usefulness of the Common Prayer, and so to persuade them to the
constant and consciencioususe of it; not only because it is conformable to the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Practice of the Universal Church, nor only because it
is established by the Laws both of our Church and State (though they also be
very great Reasons) but likewise because of that extraordinary benefit and
advantage which they would receive from it, for the edifying of their Souls in
whatsoever is necessary to their Eternal Salvation.

I am very sensible, that much more might have been said upon this Excellent
Subject. But intending no more than a plain Sermon upon the occasion, I was
forced to omit many things, and to confine my self to such only, which were
most obvious, and seemed the most necessary for people to know and practice, in
order to their being reconciled unto, and edified by our Public Prayers. And
if upon your perusal of that little which I have said, you shall find any thing
not agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church, I humbly submit it to Your
Lordships Judgment and Censure; only desiring that You would be as ready to
pardon, as I am to retract it.

My Lord,

I have one request more to make unto You, which is, that as You was the
occasion of my printing this Sermon, so You would be pleased to accept of it,
now it is printed: And if, by the Blessing of Almighty God, it may contribute
any thing to those great Ends, which You continually prosecute with so great
Wisdom and Prudence, with such exemplary Care and Diligence in the Management
of that high Office which he has called you to, even to the Glory of his great
Name, the Good of his Church, and the Salvation of the Souls of Men; it is all
that is desired by

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, WILLIAM
BEVERIDGE.

A SERMON Concerning the Excellency and Usefulness OF THE Common Prayer.
1 COR. XIV. 26. Let all things be done to edifying.
WHEN Judas Maccabeus had new built the Altar, and repaired the Temple at
Jerusalem, after it had been polluted and laid waste for Three years together,
the Church of God at that time and place rejoiced so much at it, that they kept
the Dedication of it Eight days, and ordered that the same should be observed
every year; 1 Maccab. 4. 59. And so we find it was in our Saviors time, for he
himself was pleased to honor that Festival, though only of Ecclesiastical
Institution, with his own presence; Joh. 10. 22. In the like manner, we of this
Parish, have cause to be transported with joy and gladness, and to spend this
day in praising and adoring the most high God, for that our Church, which has
lain waste for above five times Three years, is now at last rebuilt and fitted
again for his Worship and Service. For what the Altar and Temple were to the
Jews then, the same will our Church be unto us now. Did they there offer up
their Sacrifices to God as Types of the Death of Christ? We shall here
commemorate the said Death of Christ, typified by those Sacrifices. Did they
come from all parts of Judea to worship God there? So shall we, I hope, come
from all parts of his Parish to worship God here. Was the Temple an House of
Prayer to them? So is the Church to us. Was that the Place where God according
to his Promise came unto his people to bless them? I do not doubt but he will
do the same to us in this place, if we come unto it, and carry our selves in it
as we ought to do. In short, was the Temple the place where all things were
performed that could any way conduce to the Edifying of Gods people, as things
then stood? The same may be said of our Church, as things now stand. For
whatsoever is or can be necessary to the Edifying of our Souls here, and so to
their Eternal Salvation hereafter, is clearly and fully comprehended in those
several Offices, which according to the Laws of the Land, are now to be
performed in this place. Neither is there any thing contained in any of them,
but what does really conduce to those great Ends and Purposes.

But this being a thing which is denied by some, and understood but by few
amongst us, I shall endeavor to explain and demonstrate it unto all. Which I
choose to do at this time, because it is the most proper Subject I could think
of for this Occasion. For unless what is to be now done in this place, will
answer the ends wherefore it is erected, all the Costs and Charges that have
been laid out upon it, will be to no purpose at all. But if it can be fully
made out, That the Service which is here to be performed, does highly conduce
to the Advancement of Gods Glory and your Happiness, the great Ends wherefore
such Places are erected, then you cannot but acknowledge that whatsoever any of
you have contributed toward it, is the best Money that you ever spent; and
that this day wherein the said Service is begun to be performed in it, is one
of the most joyful days that this Parish ever saw.

This therefore is that which I shall endeavor to prove at this time: And for
that end have chosen these words for the ground and foundation of all that I
shall say upon this subject, Let all things be done to Edifying. For the right
understanding whereof, we must know, that the Apostle having in this Chapter
discoursed at large concerning the way and manner of holding Christian
Assemblies, and having proved that whatsoever is there said ought to be spoken
in such a Language, that all there present may understand, and so be edified by
it; he at last sums up the whole in this Proposition, How is it then Brethren?
when ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a
Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation. Let all things be done to
Edifying: As if he should have said, Whatsoever gifts any of you have or
pretend to, yet when you meet together upon a Religious Account, for the
Public Worship of God, take special care that all things be there done, to the
Edifying of all who are there present. From whence it is plain that the Apostle
lays down this as a general Rule, necessary to be observed in all Christian
Congregations. So that whenever we meet together to Worship and Serve God, if
any thing be there done which is not for our Edification, we come short of this
Rule; and so we do too, if any thing be there wanting that may conduce to that
end. For according to this Rule, as nothing is to be there done but what is for
our Edifying, so also on the other side, all things that are or can be for our
Edifying ought to be there done.

But for our better understanding the true sense and purport of this Rule, it
is necessary to consider what the Apostle here means by edifying? For which we
must know, That all Christians being, as the same Apostle says, of the
Household of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone; Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. Hence whatsoever
tends to the strengthening, supporting, cementing, or raising this Fabric
higher, whatsoever it is whereby men are made more firm and solid Christians,
more holy and perfect men than they were before, by that they are said to be
edified. And therefore it is a great mistake for men to think, as many do, that
they are edified by what they hear, merely because they know perhaps some
little thing which before they were ignorant of. For Knowledge, as the Apostle
says, puffs up; it is Charity that edifieth; 1 Cor. 8. 1. And therefore
whatsoever knowledge we attain to, we cannot be said to be edified by it, any
further than as it influenceth our minds, excites our love, and inclines our
hearts to God and goodness. And that this is the true notion of edifying, is
plain from the Apostles own words, where he says, Let no corrupt communication
come out of your mouths, but that which is for the use of edifying, that it may
minister grace unto the hearers; Ephesians. 4. 29. For from hence it is manifest,
that that only is properly said to edify, that ministers grace unto us,
whereby we are made more pure and holy than we were before. And therefore we
read of edifying our selves in love, Ephesians. 4. 16. and building up our selves in
our most holy faith, Jude 20. which are the two graces that make up a real and
true Christian. And nothing can be said to edify, but what tends to the
exciting and increasing of them: Until we come (as the Apostle says) in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. Hence
therefore, when the Apostle says, Let all things be done to edifying, his
meaning in brief is this, that in all our Christian Assemblies, when we meet
together to worship and serve God, All things there are to be so done, that we
may return home wiser and better than we came thither, with our knowledge of God
and Christ increased, our desires enlarged, our love inflamed, our faith
confirmed, all our graces quickened, and so our whole souls made more humble,
more holy, more like to God, than they were before.

The words being thus briefly explained, I shall now apply them to our present
purpose, and show that that Form of Religious Worship, which is prescribed by
our Church, established by the Laws of the Land, and therefore to be used now
in this place, agrees exactly with this Rule or Canon of the holy Apostle, even
that all things in it are done to edifying.

But before we prove that that Form in particular which our Church has
prescribed, is agreeable to this Apostolical Rule, it is necessary to prove
first, That the prescribing a Form in general is so. For unless the prescribing
a Form in general be according to this Rule, no Form in particular that is
prescribed can possibly agree with it. But now that this Rule admits, yea
requires the prescribing of some Form; is evident from the Rule it self. For
the Apostle here commands the Church of Corinth, and so all Provincial
Churches, to take care that in their Religious Assemblies all things be done to
edifying. But how is it possible for any Provincial Church to see that this be
done, except she prescribes some certain Form for the doing of it? If every
Minister of a Parish should be left to his own liberty, to do what he pleased
in his own Congregation, although some perhaps might be so wise and prudent as
to observe this Rule, as well as they could, yet considering the Corruption of
Humane Nature, we have much cause to fear that others would not. At least the
Church could be no way secured that all would; and therefore must needs be
obliged to consider of and appoint some such Form to be used in all her
Congregations, by which she may be fully assured that this Apostolical Rule is
every where observed, as it ought to be. And although we should suppose what
can never be expected, that all the Clergy in every Province should be as wise
and good as they ought to be, yet it cannot be supposed that every one of them
should understand what is for the Edification of the people as well as all
together. And therefore it must needs be acknowledged that the surest way to
have this Rule observed, is for the Governors of every Church, and the whole
Clergy to meet together by their Representatives, in a Synod or Convocation,
and there upon mature Deliberation agree upon some such Form, which they in
their Prudence and Consciences judge to be according to this Rule, which the
Apostle here lays down before them.

And besides, that the prescribing a Form in general, is more for our Edifying,
than to leave every one to do what seems good in his own Eyes, We have the
concurrent Testimony, Experience, and Practice of the Uniniversal Church. For
we never read or heard of any Church in the World from the Apostles days to
ours, but what took this course. Though all have not used the same, yet no
Church but has used some Form or other. And therefore for any man to say, That
it is not lawful, or not expedient, or not so edifying to use a Form of Prayer
in the Public Worship of God, is to contradict the general sense of
Christianity, to condemn the Holy Catholic Church, and to make himself wiser
than all Christians that ever were before him. Which, whatsoever it may be
thought now, was always heretofore reckoned one of the greatest sins and
follies that a Man could be guilty of.

Nay more than all this too: For this is not only to make a Man's self wiser
than all Christians, but wiser than Christ himself: For it is impossible to
prescribe any Form of Prayer in more plain and express Terms than he has done
it, where he says, When ye Pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
Luke 11. 2. And I hope none here present but will acknowledge that Christ, by
whom alone we can be edified, knows better what is, or what is not for our
Edification, than we or all the Men in the World can do. And therefore seeing
he has not only prescribed a Form of Prayer for his Disciples to use, but has
expressly commanded them to use it; we who profess our selves to be his
Disciples, ought to rest fully satisfied in our minds, that the using of a Form
of Prayer, is not only lawful, but much more for our edifying, than it is
possible for any other way of praying to be.

The same may be proved also from the nature of the thing it self, by such
Arguments, which do not only demonstrate that it is so, but likewise show how
it comes to be so. For, First, In order to our being edified, so as to be made
better and holier, whenever we meet together upon a Religious account, it is
necessary that the same good and holy things be always inculcated and pressed
upon us after one and the same manner. For we cannot but all find by our own
experience how difficult it is to fasten any thing that is truly good either
upon our selves or others, and that it is rarely, if ever effected, without
frequent repetitions of it. Whatsoever good things we hear only once, or now
and then, though perhaps upon the hearing of them, they may swim for a while in
our Brains, yet they seldom sink down into our hearts, so as to move and sway
the affections, as it is necessary they should do, in order to our being
edified by them. Whereas by a Set Form of Public Devotions rightly composed,
as we are continually put in mind of all things necessary for us to know or do,
so that is always done by the same words and expressions, which by their
constant use will imprint the things themselves so firmly in our minds, that it
will be no easy matter to obliterate or race them out; but do what we can,
they will still occur upon all occasions; which cannot but be very much for our
Christian Edification.

Moreover, That which conduces to the quickening our souls, and to the raising
up of our affections in our Public Devotions, must needs be acknowledged to
conduce much to our Edification. But it is plain, that as to such purposes a
Set Form of Prayer is an extraordinary help to us; for if I hear another pray,
and know not beforehand what he will say, I must first listen to what he will
say next, then I am to consider whether what he says be agreeable to Sound
Doctrine, and whether it be proper and lawful for me to join with him in the
Petitions he puts up to Almighty God, and if I think it is so, then I am to do
it. But before I can well do that, he is got to another thing: by which means
it is very difficult, if not morally impossible, to join with him in every
thing so regularly as I ought to do. But by a Set Form of Prayer all this
trouble is prevented; for having the Form continually in my mind, being
thoroughly acquainted with it, fully approving of every thing in it, and always
knowing beforehand what will come next, I have nothing else to do while the
words are sounding in mine ears, but to move my heart and affections suitably
to them, to raise up my desires of those good things which are prayed for; to
fix my mind wholly upon God, whilst I am praising of him, and so to employ,
quicken, and lift up my whole soul in performing my Devotions to him. No man
that has been accustomed to a Set Form for any considerable time, but may
easily find this to be true by his own experience: And by consequence, that
this way of Praying is a greater help to us, than they can imagine that never
made trial of it.

To this may be also added, That if we hear another praying a Prayer of his own
private Composition or voluntary Effusion, our minds are wholly bound up and
confined to his words and expressions, and to his Requests and Petitions, be
they what they will: So that at the best we can but Pray his Prayer. Whereas
when we Pray by a Form Prescribed by the Church, we Pray the Prayers of the
whole Church we live in, which are common to the Minister and People, to our
Selves, and to all the Members of the same Church: So that we have all the
Devout and Pious Souls that are in it, concurring and joining with us in them:
Which cannot surely but be more effectual for the Edifying not only of our
selves in particular, but of the Church in general, than any private Prayer can
be.

Lastly, In order to our being Edified by our Public Devotions, as it is
necessary that we know beforehand what we are to pray for, so it is necessary
that we afterward know what we have prayed for, when we have done. For I
suppose you will all grant, that all the good and benefit we can receive from
our Prayers, is to be ultimately resolved into Gods gracious hearing and
answering of them: Without which they will all come to nothing. But there are
two things required to the obtaining an Answer of our Prayers: First, That we
sincerely and earnestly desire such good things at the hands of God, to which,
as I have shown, a Set Form of Prayer conduces very much: And then Secondly,
It is required also that we trust and depend upon God for his granting of them,
according to the Promises which he has made unto us in Jesus Christ our Lord.
And I verily believe that one great Reason why Men Pray so often to no purpose,
is, because they do not take this course: But when they have done their
Prayers, they have done with them, and concern themselves no more about them,
then as if they had never prayed at all. But how can we expect that God should
answer our Prayers, when we our selves do not mind whether he answer them or
no? Nor believe and trust upon him for it? For certainly trusting on God, as it
is one of the highest Acts of Religion that we can perform, so it is that which
gives life and vigor, virtue and efficacy to our Prayers, without which we
have no ground at all to expect they should be answered. For God having
promised to answer our Prayers, except we trust on him for his performance of
such Promises, we lose the benefit of them, and by consequence our Prayers too.
And therefore as ever we desire that he should grant us what we pray for, when
we have directed our prayers to him, we must still look up, ^s^l. 5. 3.
expecting and hoping for the return of them.

Now as this is a thing of greater consequence, so a Set Form of Prayer is a
greater help to us in ^^, than it is commonly thought to be. For if we hear
another utter a prayer extempore, which he never said, nor we heard before, nor
ever shall do it again, it is much if he himself can remember the tenth part of
what he said; how much less can we that heard him do it? And if we cannot
possibly remember what we prayed for, how is it possible for us to expect it at
the hands of God? Or to depend upon him for it? But now it is quite otherwise
when we use a Set Form of Prayer. For by this means when we have prayed, we can
recollect our selves, look over our prayers again, either in a Book, or in our
minds, where they are imprinted; we can consider distinctly what we have asked
at the hands of God, and so act our faith and confidence on him, for the
granting every petition we have put up unto him, according to the promises
which he has made us to that purpose. And as this is the surest way whereby to
obtain what we pray for, it must needs be the most edifying way of praying that
we can possibly use.

These things being duly weighed, I shall now take it for granted, That the
using a Form in general in the Public Worship of God, is agreeable to this
Apostolical Rule, Let all things be done to edifying; and so shall proceed to
show that that Form in particular which our Church has appointed to be used
upon such occasions, is so too. For which end it is not necessary that I should
run through every particular word, phrase, or expression in the Common Prayer,
much less that I should vindicate and defend it from every little exception,
that ignorance or malice may make against something in it. For nothing ever yet
was or can be said or written, but something or other may be said or written
against it, either well or ill. But my business must be to prove, That the Form
of Divine Service, contained in the Book of Common Prayer, which is now used in
the Church of England, conduces so much to the edifying those that use it,
that it agrees exactly with the Rule which the Apostle here prescribes in that
case. And this I shall demonstrate from Four Heads. 1. From the Language. 2.
From the Matter or Substance of it. 3. From the Method. And 4. From the Manner
of Performing it. For if it be edifying in all these respects, it must needs be
acknowledged to be so in the whole. There being nothing in it, but what may be
reduced to these Heads.

First, Therefore as to the Language, you all know that the whole Service is
performed in English, the Vulgar and Common Language of the Nation, which every
one understands, and so may be edified by it. And this indeed is the ground and
foundation of all the benefit that we can possibly receive from our Public
Prayers. And therefore in the Church of Rome, the Common People are made
incapable of being edified by the prayers of their Church, in that they are all
made in Latin, a Language which they do not understand. So that when they meet
to worship God, there are seldom any in the Congregation that knows what is
said there, except the Priest that reads it; and oftentimes not he neither. By
which means they have no such thing really amongst them as Common Prayer.
Neither is it possible for the Common People to be ever edified by what is
there said or done, except they would be once convinced by it of the horrible
abuse which their Church puts upon them, in commanding all her Public
Devotions to be performed in an unknown Tongue, directly contrary not only to
the Rule in my Text, but to the Design of this whole Chapter.

But blessed be God for it, it is not so with us. For ours is truly Common
Prayer, for it is written and read in that Language which is common to all the
Congregations in the Kingdom, and to every person in each Congregation. So that
all the People of the land, whatsoever rank or condition they are of, may join
together in the use of every thing that is in it, and so be jointly Edified by
it. Especially considering that it is not only all in English, but in common
and plain English, such as we use in our common discourse with one another.
There are no unusual or obsolete words, no hard or uncouth Phrases in it, but
every thing is expressed as clearly and plainly as words can do it: so that the
meanest person in the Congregation, that understands but his Mothers Tongue,
may be Edified by it, as well as the greatest Scholar.

But that which is chiefly to be considered in the Language of the Common
Prayer, is, that it is not only common but proper too. Though the words there
used be all but common words, yet they are so used that they properly express
the things that are designed by them. This I confess may seem to be no great
matter at first sight, yet it is that without which we might be subverted by
that which was intended for our Edification. For Impropriety of Speech in
matters of Religion, has given occasion to all or most of the Schisms, Errors
and Heresies that ever infested this or any other Church; as might easily be
demonstrated. Hence the Apostle gave Timothy a Form of sound words, and charged
him to hold it fast. Hold fast, says he, the Form of sound words which thou
have heard of me, 2 Timothy 1. 13. As knowing that except the words whereby he
usually expressed Divine Truths, were sound and proper, it would be impossible
for his Notions and Opinions of the things themselves to be so. And certainly
if ever there was a Form of Sound Words, composed by men since the Apostles
times, our Common Prayer may justly deserve that Title. It being all made up of
such fit and proper, such sound and wholesome words, that if we do but hold
fast to them, there is no fear of our falling either into Heresy or Schism.
For they, being duly considered, will suggest to our minds right and true
Apprehensions of all the Articles of our Christian Religion; and so not only
make us sound* but build us up strong and firm in our most holy Faith. So that
considering the plainness and perspicuity, the soundness and propriety of
Speech which is used in it, the least that can be said of the Common Prayer, is
that all things in it are so worded, as is most for the edifying of all those
that use it.

And as the words in the Common Prayer are all as edifying as words can be, so,
in the Second place, Is the Matter expressed by those words. For there is
nothing in it, but what is necessary for our Edification, and all things that
are or can be for our Edification are plainly in it. First, I say there is
nothing in our Liturgy but what is necessary for our Edification. There are no
such Fables in it, or endless Genealogies, which, as the Apostle says,
Minister questions, rather than godly edifying, which is in faith; 1 Timothy 1. 4.
There are none of those vain Disputations and impertinent Controversies, which
have of late been raised in the Church, to its great disturbance, rather than
its edification. There are no New Opinions, nor Airy Speculations in it, which
serve only to tickle men's ears and please their fancies, and so divert their
thoughts from what they are about. Look it all over without prejudice and
partiality, consider seriously every thing that is in it, and you will find
nothing asserted but what is consonant to Gods Word, nothing prayed for but
according to his promise, nothing required as a duty, but what is agreeable to
his Commands; nothing said or done, but what is grave and sober, solemn and
substantial; nothing but what becomes the Worship of our Great and Almighty
Creator. And therefore nothing but what we may be some way or other edified by.

And as there is nothing in it, but what is edifying, so all things that are or
can be edifying are in it. For nothing can be necessary to edify and make us
solid and perfect Christians, but what is necessary either to be believed or
done, or else obtained by us. But there is nothing necessary to be known or
believed, but we are taught it; nothing necessary to be done, but we are
enjoined it; nothing necessary to be obtained, but we pray for it, in our
Public Form of Divine Service.

For first, As to those things which are necessary to be known or believed, it
is acknowledged by all Protestants, that they are fully contained in the Holy
Scriptures, which make a great, if not the greatest part of our Divine Service,
and are constantly read over, the Psalms once every Month, the Old Testament
once, and the New thrice every Year. And all the Fundamental Articles of our
Christian Faith, revealed in the Holy Scriptures, being briefly summed up in
the Apostles Creed, that we may be sure to keep them always in our minds, we
have that Creed read and repeated, always once and most commonly twice every
day in the year. And seeing the Godhead of our Blessed Savionr, the Foundation
of our whole Religion, has been and still is, denied by some, least we should
be lead away with the Error of the Wicked, every Sunday and Holyday we read the
Nicene Creed, wherein the Godhead both of the Son and Holy Ghost is asserted
and explained. And that we may not entertain any Erroneous Opinions concerning
the most Holy Trinity, or the Incarnation of the Son of God, but keep the true
Catholic Faith whole and undefiled, upon certain days every year, we read that
which is commonly called the Creed of St. Athanasius, wherein those great
Mysteries are unfolded in the most proper and perspicuous terms that they are
capable of.

And as all things necessary to be believed are summarily contained in the
Three Creeds, so they are frequently explained in the other parts of our
Liturgy: In so much that it would be easy to frame a complete Body of Divinity
out of the words there used: At least of all such things as are needful for any
man in the world to believe or know, in order to his Eternal Salvation.

The same may be said also of all those things, which we ought to do. For as we
here do whatsoever is necessary to be done in order to our Worshipping of God
in this place, so we are here taught whatsoever is necessary to be learnt in
order to our serving God in all other places. So that no Man that frequents our
public Congregations, where the Common Prayer is used, can ever plead
ignorance of any one duty whatsoever: For if it be not his own fault, he may
there be instructed in every thing which he that made him requires of him. For
here, as I observed before, we constantly read the Holy Scriptures, which, as
the Apostle says, Is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
instructed unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. And seeing it has pleased
the most high God to comprise his whole will, and by consequence our duty, in
the Ten Commandments, hence we read them constantly every Sunday and Holy day
throughout the whole year. By which means every one that does not wilfully shut
his eyes, may clearly see and fully understand his whole duty both to God and
Man. Especially considering that in the Prayers themselves also there is
frequent mention made of all those Vices which ought to be avoided, and of all
those Good Works which ought to be performed by us. So that we can never come
to Church, but we are still put in mind, both of what we ought, and what we
ought not to do, that we may be saved.

And then as there is nothing necessary to be known or done, but we are taught
it; so neither is there any thing necessary to be obtained to make us either
holy or happy, but we pray for it in the Common Prayer. For here we have the
Lords Prayer, a Prayer composed by Wisdom it self; and therefore it must needs
be the most perfect and divine Prayer that was ever made. Neither do we use it
only once, but in every distinct Service of the Church, in our Prayers before
we read the Holy Scriptures: And in our Prayers after: Toward the end of the
Litany, and in the beginning of the Communion Service, and in every Office of
the Church besides. And the reason is, because although our Savior has not
forbidden us to use any other Prayers, yet he has expressly commanded us to say
this, whenever we pray. And therefore in obedience to his Command, our Church
has wisely ordered, That in all and every Solemn Address that we make to the
most high God, we always say this Prayer, least otherwise by our transgression
of his Command, in omitting this, we make all our other Prayers to be
ineffectual. And besides, by the constant use of this amongst our other
Prayers, we are always sure to use one Prayer, both absolutely perfect in its
self, and most acceptable unto him, to whom we pray, it being a Prayer of his
own Composure: So that we speak unto God in his own words, and so may be
confident that we ask nothing of him, but exactly according to his own will.

And though all things necessary for us, be vertually contained in the Lords
Prayer, yet our Church in Conformity to the Catholic and Apostolical, has
thought good to add some other Prayers in which the same things are more
particularly expressed and desired at the hands of our great and most Bountiful
Benefactor. All which are so contrived, that there is nothing evil or hurtful
for us, but we pray against it; nothing good or useful, but we pray for it.
There is no Vice or Lust, but we desire it may be subdued under us; no Grace or
Virtue, but we pray it may be planted and grow in us. In so much that if we do
but constantly and sincerely pray over all those Prayers, and steadfastly
believe and trust in God for his answering of them, and so obtain what we there
pray for, we cannot but be as real and true Saints, as happy and blessed
Creatures, as it is possible for us to be in this World. Neither do we here
pray for our selves only, but according to the Apostles Advice, we make
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men; yea
for our very Enemies, as our Savior has commanded us, Mat. 5. 44. And what
can be desired more than all this, to make the matter of the Common Prayer
Edifying either to our selves or others? Nothing certainly but truth and
sincerity of heart in the using of it.

I cannot pass from this Head, before I have observed one thing more unto you,
concerning the Prayers in general, and that is, That they are not carried on in
one continued Discourse, but divided into many short Prayers or Collects, such
as that is which our Lord himself Composed; and that might be one Reason,
wherefore our Church so ordered it, that so she might follow our Lords Example
in it, who best knew what kind of Prayers were fittest for us to use. And
indeed we cannot but all find by our own experience, how difficult it is to
keep our our minds long intent upon any thing, much more upon so great things
as the object and subjects of our Prayers are; but do what we can, we are still
liable to distractions: So that there is a kind of necessity to break off
sometimes, to give our selves a breathing time, that our thoughts being
loosened for a while, they may with more ease, and less danger of distraction,
be tied up again, as it is necessary they should be all the while that we are
actually Praying to the Supreme Being of the World.

Besides that, in order to the performing our Devotions aright to the most high
God, it is necessary that our Souls be possessed all along with due
apprehensions of his greatness and glory. To which purpose our short Prayers
contribute very much, for every one of them beginning with some of the
properties or perfections of God, and so suggesting to our minds right
apprehensions of him at first, it is easy to preserve them in our minds during
the space of a short Prayer, which in a long one would be apt to scatter and
vanish away.

But that which I look upon as one of the principal Reasons, why our Public
Devotions are and should be divided into short Collects, is this, Our Blessed
Savior, we know, has often told us, That whatsoever we ask in his Name, we
shall receive: And so has directed us in all our Prayers to make use of his
Name, and to ask nothing but upon the account of his Merit and Mediation for
us: upon which all our hopes and expectations from God do wholly and solely
depend. Hence therefore (as it always was, so) it cannot but be judged
necessary, that the Name of Christ be frequently inserted in our Prayers, that
so we may lift up our hearts unto him, and act our Faith upon him for our
obtaining the good things we pray for. And so we see it is in the Common
Prayer, for whatsoever it is we ask of God, we presently add, Through Jesus
Christ our Lord, or something to that purpose. And so ask nothing but according
to our Lords direction, even in his Name. And this is the reason that makes our
Prayers so short; for take away the conclusion of every Collect or Prayer, in
the Name of Christ, and you may join them all together, and make them but as
one continued Prayer. But this would be to offer manifest violence to the
Prayers, by taking away that which gives them all their force and energy, and
so making them ineffectual to the purposes for which they are used. For
certainly the asking all things in the Name of Christ, as we do in the Common
Prayer, is the only way whereby to obtain what we desire, and by consequence
the most edifying way of Praying in the world.

The next thing to be considered in the Common Prayer, is the Method, which is
admirable, and as Edifying, if possible, as the matter it self. This none can
deny that does but fully understand, and seriously consider of it. Which
therefore that you may all do, I shall briefly run through the whole, and give
you what light I can into it, that you may clearly see not only the
reasonableness but the excellency of it all along. For which purpose I shall
instance only in such things which offer themselves at first sight, to any one
that does but cast his eye upon it.

Let us therefore suppose a Congregation of sober and devout Christians, such
as we all should be, met together to perform their Public Devotions to
Allmighty God; every one of which has lift up his heart privately unto him
already, imploring his Aid and Assistance in the performance of so great a
work, and so are all now ready to set about it. The first thing we do, is to
read some Sentences of Holy Scripture, that so we may begin our Devotions unto
God in his own words. And they are all such Sentences as put us in mind of our
sins against him, and of his promise to pardon them if we do repent: That so we
may present and carry our selves with that Reverence and Godly Fear before him,
as becomes those who are sensible of their own vileness and unworthiness to
approach so great a Majesty; and likewise with that Faith and humble
Confidence, which becomes those who believe that he upon our Repentance will
pardon our sins, and accept both our Persons and Performances, according to the
promises which he has made unto us.

Then follows a grave Exhortation, concerning the end of our present
Assembling, which is of great use, and ought never to be omitted. For Men
generally are apt to rush into the presence of God, without ever considering
what they go about. Whereas this Exhortation puts us upon considering the
greatness of the work which we are now engaged in, and so upon composing our
thoughts and preparing our selves for the due performance of it.

Our minds being thus brought into a right frame and temper for it, we all,
both Minister and People, prostrate our selves before the most high God,
confessing upon our knees the manifold sins and wickedness that we have
committed against him. Which Confession is so contrived, that all and every
person in any Congregation whatsoever may join in it. For it runs in general
terms. And yet so too, that every particular person may and ought in his own
mind to confess and acknowledge his own sins, which he knows himself to be
guilty of. As where we say, We have left undone those things which we ought to
have done, and we have done those things which we ought not to have done. At
the saying of this, every one should call his own sins to remembrance, what
Duties he knows himself to have omitted, and what Vices he knows himself to
have committed, and confess them accordingly unto God. And when we have thus
confessed our sins to God, we presently implore his Mercy in the pardon of
them, and his Grace, that for the future we may forsake them.

And whilst we are thus upon our knees, humbly confessing and bewailing our
sins before the Lord our God, the Minister stands up, and in the Name of God,
declares and pronounces to all those who truly repent, and unfeignedly believe
his Gospel, The Absolution and Remission of all their sins. Which though spoken
also in general terms, yet every particular person there present, ought to
apply it to himself, so as to be fully persuaded in his own mind, that if he
does but sincerely repent and believe the Gospel, he is perfectly absolved from
all his sins by God himself, according to the promises which he has made to
Mankind in Jesus Christ our Lord.

And now looking upon our selves as absolved from our sins, upon our Repentance
and Faith in Christ, and by consequence as reconciled to God, we take the
boldness to call him Father, humbly addressing our selves to him in that Divine
Form of Prayer which he himself has given us. Which done, we lift up our
hearts and voices unto God, for his assistance of us in what we do, in the
words of David, the Minister crying out, O Lord open thou our lips, and the
People answering, And our mouth shall show forth thy praise. The Minister
again, O God make speed to save us, the People, O Lord make haste to help us.
And then immediately we all lift up our bodies too, stand upon our feet, and so
put our selves into a posture of praising and magnifying the Eternal God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for his infinite goodness and mercy toward us;
for which purpose the Minister first says or sings the Gloria Patri, Glory be
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, and the people to show
their consent, answer, As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen. But not thinking this to be enough, the Minister calls
upon the people again, saying, Praise ye the Lord, and the people answer, The
Lords name be praised, and then we go on to praise him together, saying or
singing the 95 Psalm, Venite exultemus Domino, O come let us sing unto the
Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our Salvation, etc. and so
proceed to the Psalms appointed for the day. After every one of which, to
testify our belief in the most sacred Trinity, and our acknowledgment of that
infinite love and goodness, which every one of those Divine Persons has
manifested to us, we repeat that incomparable Hymn, Glory be to the Father,
etc.

Our hearts being thus raised up to God in praising and admiring of him, we are
now in a fit temper and disposition to hear what he shall speak unto us. And
therefore have a Chapter read out of the Old Testament; and that in its
ordinary course, except upon Sundays and Holydays, when more people attending
the Public Worship of God then can conveniently come upon other days, we read
some Select Chapter proper for the day, and such as is judged most edifying to
all that are there present. And having thus heard God speaking unto us in his
holy Word, we presently fall upon praising of him again, for so unspeakable a
mercy, saying, or singing, in the Morning, the Te Deum, one of the most
Heavenly and Seraphick Hymns that was ever composed by Men; or else the Song of
the Three Children, which is nothing but a Paraphrase upon that which David
sang so often upon Earth, and which the Holy Angels sing continually in Heaven,
even Hallelujah, Praise ye the Lord. Wherein we being all sensible how far
short we our selves come of praising God sufficiently, we call upon all the
Creatures in the World to do it, Bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him
for ever. In the Afternoon we sing either the Magnificat, or else the 98
Psalm, both which being taken out of Gods own Word, cannot but be very
pleasing and acceptable unto him.

After this our Souls being got upon the wing again, and soaring aloft in the
contemplation of the Divine perfections, we are now rightly qualified to hear
and receive the Sublime Mysteries of the Gospel. And therefore have a Chapter
read to us out of the New Testament After which we being revived with the good
Tidings of the Gospel, and filled with admiration at the infinite goodness of
God therein revealed to us, we break forth again into praising and adoring of
him, in the song of Zacharias, or else the 100 Psalm in the Morning, and at
Evening, either the 67 Psalm, or else the Song of Old Simeon, still concluding
with the Gloria Patri.

Now having thus heard some part of the Word of God read to us and expressed
our thankfulness unto him for it, to signify our assent, not only to what we
have heard, but to the whole Scripture, we all with one heart and voice repeat
the Apostles Creed, wherein the sum and substance of it is contained. And so
profess our selves to continue in the number of Christ's Disciples, and that as
we were at first Baptized, so we still believe in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, God Blessed for evermore.

Hitherto we have been mostly taken up with confessing our sins to God,
imploring his mercy in the pardon of them, hearing his most holy Word,
acknowledging his goodness to us, and praising and magnifying his name for it.
By which means, except we have been extremely wanting to our selves, our hearts
cannot but be so united and fixed upon God, that we are now rightly disposed to
make known our wants and present our Petitions before him. This therefore is
the next thing we set upon. But seeing that neither Minister nor People can
possibly do it aright without the assistance of God himself, therefore each of
them first pray for his special presence with the other. The one saying, The
Lord be with you, the other, And with thy spirit. And then immediately falling
down upon our knees, we adore and supplicate each person of the most blessed
Trinity to have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon
us, Lord have mercy upon us. After which we address our selves to God in the
words that he has put into our mouths, saying the Lords prayer, which ended,
the Minister and People by turns lift up their hearts to God in some short and
heavenly Ejaculations, striving as it were to outvy each other in prevailing
with the Allmighty to power down his Blessings upon us. And then in an humble
and solemn manner we join together in supplicating his Divine Majesty for his
Grace and Favor, his Defense and Protection, his Mercy and Blessing for our
selves, for the King, for the Royal Family, for his Church, and for all
Mankind. And this we do ordinarily in the Collects appointed for that purpose.
But upon Wednesdays and Fridays (upon which days the Primitive Church used to
perform more than their ordinary Devotions) as also upon the Lords day in the
morning, we do it in the Litany, and in such a Litany as comprehends all and
every thing that we can ever need to desire of Allmighty God, either for our
selves or others.

After this upon Sundays and Holydays we proceed to the Communion Service: And
therefore approaching to the Lords Table, we begin it with his own Prayer. And
after another short Prayer to God to cleanse the thoughts of our heart by the
Inspiration of his Holy Spirit, we read the Ten Commandments which he has
enjoined us to observe; and after every Commandment we ask God Mercy for our
Transgressions thereof for the time past, and grace to keep the same for the
time to come; saying, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law. And then after a Prayer for the King, and the Collect for the day, we
read the Epistle and Gospel, that is, most commonly a short Paragraph taken out
of the Cannonical Epistles, and another out of one of the Holy Gospels, which
was the ancient way of Reading the Scripture, before it was divided into
Chapters. And we do it now to prepare us the better for the Communion of the
Body and Blood of Christ, therein revealed to us. But seeing we neither do nor
can read over the whole, we repeat the substance of it in the Nicene Creed,
which it is very necessary we should do at this time, that so we may
demonstrate our selves to be Christians, and so capable of receiving the most
holy Communion.

He that all this while has employed himself as he ought to do in the service
of our Church, cannot but find himself strangely edified by it. Yet howsoever,
that nothing may be wanting that may any way conduce to our Edification, after
the Nicene Creed, our Church has appointed a Sermon to be preached, which if
sound, plain, and practical, as it ought to be, cannot but be very edifying too.

And now we may be well supposed to be so far edified, as to be raised up to
the highest pitch of Devotion that we can arrive at in this world, and so are
fit to be admitted to the highest Ordinance of the Church, the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. And therefore we now betake our selves to it. But that we may not
appear before our Lord empty, we first offer up something to him of what he
has bestowed upon us, to be disposed of to pious and charitable uses;
testifying thereby our acknowledgment of his goodness to us, and that we have
nothing but what we receive from him. And to excite and encourage us to do
this, all the while that we are offering, we have some select sentences of
Scripture read to us, wherein God either commands us to be charitable, or else
promises a blessing to those that are so. And then we pray for Christ's whole
Church Militant here on earth, whereby we profess our selves to be real Members
of it, and desirous to hold Communion with it in Christ's Mystical Body and
Blood. And so we proceed to the Celebration of it: in which the method is so
clear, so apparently edifying, that I need not say any thing of it. But shall
only observe two things in general concerning it.

First, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being the highest Mystery in
all our Religion, as representing the death of the Son of God to us, hence that
place where this Sacrament is Administered, was always made and reputed the
highest place in the Church. And therefore also it was wont to be separated
from the rest of the Church by a Skreen or Partition of Network in Latin
Cancelli, and that so generally, that from thence the place its self is called
the Chancell. That this was anciently observed in the building of all
considerable Churches (for I speak not of private Oratories or Chapels) within
few Centuries after the Apostles themselves, even in the days of Constantine
the Great, as well as in all Ages since, I could easily demonstrate from the
Records of those times. But having purposely waved Antiquity hitherto, I am
loath to trouble you with it now. But I mention it at present, only because
some perhaps may wonder why this should be observed in our Church, rather than
in all the other Churches which have been lately built in this City. Whereas
they should rather wonder why it was not observed in all other as well as this.
For besides our Obligations to conform as much as may be to the practice of the
Universal Church, and to avoid novelty and singularity in all things relating
to the Worship of God; it cannot be easily imagined that the Catholic Church
in all Ages and places for 13 or 1400 years together, should observe such a
Custom as this, except there were great reasons for it.

What they were, it is not necessary for us to enquire now. It may be
sufficient to observe at present that the Chancel in our Christian Churches,
was always looked upon as answering to the Holy of Holies in the Temple, which,
you know, was separated from the Sanctuary or Body of the Temple, by the
Command of God himself. And that this place being apppropriated to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it ought to be so contrived, as may be most
convenient for those who are to partake of that Blessed Ordinance. But it must
needs be more convenient for those who are to enjoy Communion with Christ, and
in him with one another, in this holy Sacrament, to meet together, as one body,
in one place separated for that purpose, then to be dispersed, as otherwise
they would be; some in one and some in another part of the Church. Or in short,
it is much better for the place to be separate, than the people.

Furthermore, It is not only convenient, but in some sense necessary, for every
Communicant to observe and take special notice of the several Circumstances
which our Lord has ordained to be used in this Sacrament, as the Breaking of
the Bread, and the Consecrating both that and the Wine, to represent his Death,
the breaking of his Body, and the shedding of his Blood for our sins; that so
our hearts may be the more affected with it, and by consequence our Souls more
edified by it. But this cannot be so well done, except there be a place set
apart for it, where they may all be placed, about or near to the Communion
Table, and so behold what is there done at the Consecration of the Elements.
Hence also it is, that the Seats there are and ought to be so ordered, that all
that are in them may still look that way, and contemplate upon their Blessed
Savior, there evidently set forth as Crucified for them.

The other thing that I would observe unto you concerning the Holy Communion,
is this, that our Church requires, or at least supposes it to be Administered
every Lord's Day, and every Holy day throughout the year, as it was in the
Primitive Church. For that is the reason that the Communion Service is
appointed to be used upon all such days, and to be read at the Communion Table,
that so the Minister may be there ready to Administer it unto all that desire
to partake of it. Which shows the great care that our Church has of all her
Members, that they might be edified and confirmed in the Faith. To which
nothing contributes more than frequent Communion at our Lords Table. Which if
people could once be persuaded to, they would soon find greater benefit by it,
then I can express, or they themselves, till then, imagine. I shall say no more
of it at present, but only this, That I am so sensible of what I now say, that
could I be sure to have a sufficient number of Communicants, I should be
heartily glad to Administer this Holy Sacrament every Lords day, both for their
sakes, and my own too.

Thus I have given you a short Scheme of that excellent Method wherein our
Divine Service is performed: Which whosoever rightly considers, will need no
other Argument to convince him, that it is according to the Apostles Rule, very
Edifying indeed. The last thing to be considered in it, is the Manner of its
Performance; by which I mean only the several postures of the Body, as
standing, and kneeling, which are used in it; for they also are done to
edifying.

While we say or sing the Hymns and Psalms to the Praise and Glory of God, we
stand up, not only to signify, but to excite the Elevation of our minds at
that time. For as on the one hand, if our Souls be really lift up in the
praises of God, our Bodies will naturally lift up themselves, to accompany
them, as far as they can toward Heaven; so on the other hand, the raising up
of our bodies helps toward the raising up of our Souls too, by putting us in
mind of that high and heavenly work we are now about, wherein according to our
weak Capacities, we join with the Quire of Heaven in praising God now, as we
hope to do it for evermore. For this cause also we stand at the Creeds, for
they being Confessions of our Faith in God, as such, they come under the proper
Notion of Hymns or Songs of praise to him. All our praising God being really
nothing else but our Confessing and acknowledging him to be what he is in
himself and to us. And besides that, by our standing both at the Creeds and
Gospels, we signify our assent unto them, and our readiness to defend them, to
the utmost of our power against all opposition whatsoever. And as for the
Gospels particularly, they contain the very Acts which our Lord did, and the
very Words which he spoke when he was upon Earth; and therefore we who profess
him to be our Lord and Master, cannot surely but stand up, when we hear him
speaking, and listen diligently to those gracious words which proceeded out of
his Divine Mouth.

And as when we praise God, we raise up our selves as high as we can toward
Heaven, so when we pray unto him, we fall down as low as we can toward the
Earth, not daring to present our Supplications to the absolute Monarch of the
whole World, any other ways then upon our knees. Which is so proper, so natural
a posture of Supplicants, that if all men would but duly consider what they do
when they pray to Almighty God, the Church need never have commanded them to
kneel at that time. For they could not choose but do it: No, not although the
place where they are should seem never so inconvenient for it. For we find our
Blessed Savior himself kneeling at his Prayer in the Garden, upon the bare
ground, Luke 22. 41. and St. Paul upon the Seashore, where he could have no
other Cushion but Stones or Sand, Acts 21. 5. Howsoever, To take off all those
little excuses that men are apt to make for themselves in this case, the Seats
in this Church are so disposed, and all things so prepared in them, that there
can be no inconvenience at all in it, but rather all the conveniences for
kneeling that can be desired. And therefore if any of you shall yet neglect to
kneel, while the Prayers are read, they will give us too much cause to call
their Religion into question, or to suspect they have none at all. For if they
had, they durst not, they could not offer such a manifest affront to the great
Creator of the World, as to carry themselves no otherwise while they pray to
him, then as if they were conversing with their Fellow Creatures. But why do I
speak of their praying unto God? It is too much to be feared they do not pray
at all, nor come to Church for any better purpose then only to see and be seen.
I am sure they perform no Act of External Worship or Adoration unto God, nor
show hm that respect and reverence which is due unto him; and so give very
great offense to all pious and devout Christians.

Whereas if all and every person in the Congregation, would always be upon
their knees, while they put up their petitions to the most high God, what a
mighty advantage would this be, not only to every one in particular, but to
the whole Congregation in general? For as every one would by this means keep
his heart more steadfast in the true fear and dread of God, and likewise more
certainly obtain the good things he prays for, as the Fathers frequently
assert: so the whole Congregation also, would be very much edified by it. For
by this means we should excite and inflame each others Devotions, confirm and
strengthen one another Faith, and convince both our selves and all that see
us, that Religion is indeed a serious thing; and that we believe it to be so,
by our serving God with so much reverence and godly fear, as this humble
posture represents. And therefore as you tender the love of God, the credit
of Religion, or the salvation of your own souls, I beseech you all in the name
of him that made you, that whenever you come hither to pray unto him, you do
it in that awful, lowly, and solemn manner, which our Church commands, and as
becomes creatures, when you speak to your great and almighty Creator; that so
you may give true worship and honor unto him, and also receive that benefit
and edification to your selves, which he has promised and you expect from your
Public Prayers. This being certainly the most edifying posture that you can
possibly use upon such occasions.

From what we have hitherto discoursed concerning the Language, the Matter, the
Method, and the Manner of Performing Divine Service, as contained and
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, we may positively conclude that it
agrees exactly with the Rule in my Text, even that, All things in it are done
to edifying: Which was the thing I undertook to prove. I know that many other
Arguments might be brought to show the Excellency and Usefulness of the Common
Prayer. But these already produced are sufficient to convince any sober and
considering Christian of it. And if there be any here present who are not yet
convinced by what they have heard of it, I desire only one thing of them, and
that is, That they would but make trial of it for a while. For my Charity
prompts me to believe that all the Zeal that some express against the Common
Prayer, and all that indifferency that is in others for it, proceeds only from
their ignorance of what it is, or at least from their want of an experimental
knowledge of it. For let any Man that seriously minds the Worship of God and the
Salvation of his Soul before all things else, let such a one, I say, set
himself in good earnest to use the Common Prayer as he ought to do for some
considerable time, and I do not doubt but that by the blessing of God, he will
find that benefit and edification by it, that his own experience shall convince
him of all that I have now said, more than all the Arguments that I have, or
any man in the World can ever produce to him. Some perhaps may think this to be
a Paradox: But I do not question but that many here present can attest it upon
their own knowledge: Having found themselves more confirmed in their Faith,
more settled in their Religion, more humbled for their sins, more supported
under their troubles, more enflamed with Love to God and desires of Heaven,
every way more Edifyed by the constant use of the Common Prayer, than they
could ever have believed it possible to have been, except they had found it to
have been so by their own experience.

Now these things being thus briefly considered; I shall observe only two
things from them. The first is the extraordinary prudence as well as piety of
our first Reformers, who first compiled the Book of Common Prayer, so exactly
Conformable to the Word of God and that Apostolical Canon in my Text; which I
cannot but ascribe to the same extraordinary aid and assistance from God,
whereby they were afterward enabled to suffer persecution, yea Martyrdom it
self for his sake, and so to confirm what they have done with their own Blood.
Which certainly is no small commendation of it.

The other thing I would observe unto you, is the reason, why the Devil has
had such a spite against the Common Prayer, ever since it was first made. For
the more edifying it is to Gods People, the more destructive it must needs be
of the Devils Kingdom. And therefore it is no wonder that he has all along
employed the utmost of his power and policy to blast its Reputation, and so to
discourage and dissuade Men from the use of it. And by the permission of God
for the punishment of this ungrateful Nation, he has so far prevailed in his
design, that the Liturgy has been twice cast out of the Church, since it was
first brought into it, once in the Reign of Queen Mary, and then again in the
days of King Charles the First.

In the Reign of Queen Mary, you all know, who were his Instruments in the
doing of it, even the Papists. For they clearly and truly foresaw, that their
Erroneous Opinions could never be believed, nor their superstitious Practices
observed in the Nation, so long as the Common Prayer was used. Forasmuch as
there is nothing in that but what is sound and agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and so contrary to the groundless Opinions which the Church of Rome
would obtrude upon the World for Articles of Faith. And besides that, there are
many expressions purposely inserted in it, to arm us against the Popes
Supremacy, Indulgences, Invocation of Sain^s, Transubstantiation, and other
Popish Errors. So that it would have been impossible for the Romish Religion to
be ever restored in the Nation, unless the Common Prayer was first removed.
Which therefore they took care to have done as soon as possible. But within a
few years after, even the first of Queen Elizabeth, it was brought in again.
And as the Reformation was begun before, so from that time forward it was
carried on and perfected chiefly by means of the Common Prayer. For it is very
observable that in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and for several years
too of Queen Elizabeth, there was little or no preaching in most parts of the
Kingdom, and few then could read English, and yet by the constant and general
use of the Liturgy, and Gods Blessing upon it, the whole Nation was so edified
in the True Religion, that there was scarce one in an hundred but forsook and
abhorred all Popish Doctrines and Superstitions: Which is an undeniable
Argument, that in this respect also it is as edifying, as it is possible for a
thing of that nature to be. In so much that so long as the Common Prayer is
used and frequented as it ought to be, it is morally impossible for Popery to
get any ground amongst us. But if this Bulwark was once removed (which God
forbid) our grand Adversary would soon accomplish his malicious designs upon
us, one way or other.

This he knows well enough; and therefore has left no stone unturned to effect
it. But what he had done before by the Papists, he afterward brought about
again by other means in the Reign of King Charles the First. For by what kind
of Spirit the Common Prayer was then cast out, you all know, and some of you
found by woeful experience. All that I shall say of it, is only this, That the
same Spirit that then stirred up people so violently against the Common Prayer,
stirred them up at the same time to Rebel against their King, to take away Men's
Estates and Lives contrary to all Law and Justice; and at last to Murder one
of the most pious Princes that ever lived. And whether that was the Spirit of
Christ or Antichrist, God or the Devil, judge you. Be sure the consequents of
its being laid aside at that time were very sad. For people being deprived of
that whereby they should have been edified, were immediately tossed to and fro
with every wind of Doctrine, until at length many of them fell into the most
pernicious and damnable Heresies that were ever heard of in the Church. Yea
together with the Liturgy, they laid aside all distinction betwixt sacred and
common things; by which means the whole Nation was in danger of being
overspread with profaneness and irreligion.

But blessed be the Name of the most high God for it, he was once more pleased
to appear for us, and in a miraculous manner to restore our Common Prayer to
his Church, together with our Gracious Sovereign to his Kingdoms. But what
shall we render to the Lord for so great a Blessing as this is? All that he
expects, or we can give him for it, is only to make the best use of it that we
can. This therefore is that which I now pray and beseech you all for the future
to do. Do not think it enough to be for the Common Prayer, and to come now and
then to hear it. This you may do, as many do, and yet receive no more benefit
by it; than as if there was none at all to be received. Which therefore can by
no means be imputed to the Common Prayer its self, but to the negligence of
those that use it. Neither must you think it enough to talk high for it, or to
rail at those who are not so happy as to be rightly informed about it. But
rather take all opportunities to inform them, and by all means possible to
convince them of the Excellency and Usefulness of it. Which you can never do so
effectually, as by your out-stripping and exceeding them in Virtue and Good
Works. For this is and ever will be a plain demonstration, that the Common
Prayer is indeed far more edifying, than those new Modes of Religion, which
they are so unhappily seduced into. That therefore you may do this, and so both
experience in your selves and demonstrate unto others, the truth and certainty
of what you have now heard, concerning the Common Prayer, I desire you to
observe these few Rules in the using of it.

First, Come not to our Public Prayers only out of Custom or for Fashion sake,
as the manner of some is, but out of a sincere obedience to Gods Commands, and
with a sure trust and confidence in his Promises for his Blessing upon what you
do. For which end it will be very good as you go to Church, to bethink your
selves whither you are going, and what you are to do there, that so laying
aside all other business, you may put your selves into a right temper for so
great a work.

Secondly, Frequent our Public Prayers as often as conveniently you can. The
oftener you are at them, the better you will like them, and the more edified you
will be by them. And therefore do not satisfy your selves with hearing them
once a Week. In this City, as also in many other places of the Kingdom,
especially where there are Cathedrals, or Collegiate Churches, you may enjoy
the benefit of them publicly every day, and so keep your hearts continually in
an holy and heavenly frame, and always live as becomes Christians: And if you
neglect such opportunities as are now put into your hands, you will one day
wish you had not; but then wishing will do no good.

Thirdly, If possible, come always at the beginning of Divine Service.
Otherwise you will certainly miss of something that would have been edifying to
you, and perhaps of that, which at that time might have done you more good than
all the rest. Neither will you lose the benefit only of part of it, but in some
measure of the whole too. All the parts of it being linked together in so
excellent a manner and method, that they influence and assist each other. So
that nothing can be omitted either by Minister or People, but the whole will
suffer by it, and lose something of that Virtue and Efficacy, which otherwise
you would find in it.

Fourthly, All the while that you are in Gods House, carry your selves as in
his special presence, and suitably to the work you are about; standing while
you praise God, and kneeling while you pray unto him, as our Church has
directed you. For though these may seem but little things in themselves, yet
they are of great consequence, both to our Worshipping of God aright, and also
to our being edified by what we do, as I have showed before.

Lastly, Take special care all along to keep your minds intent upon the matter
in hand. When you confess your sins to God, do it with an hearty and sincere
Repentance for all the Errors of your life past. When the Absolution is
pronounced, receive it with a firm and steadfast Faith in Christ your Savior.
When you repeat or sing the Hymns and Psalms, raise up your Spirits as high as
you can to join with those above in praising and magnifying the Eternal God.
When the Word of God is read, hearken diligently unto it, and consider
seriously what he that made you says to you, and requires of you, and resolve
by his Blessing to believe and live accordingly. And all the while that you are
upon your knees, putting up your Petitions to the most high God, let your whole
Souls be employed in it, earnestly desiring the good things you pray for at his
Gracious hands, and humbly confiding on his faithful Promises for the granting
of them. By this means you will perform reasonable service unto God, and by
consequence that which will be very acceptable unto him, and as profitable and
edifying to your selves. Whereas they that do not observe this Rule, cannot be
properly said to pray, or serve God at all. And therefore it is no wonder that
they come to Church, and hear the Common Prayer read, and yet are no way
edified by it. Indeed it is impossible that they should. For as much as all the
benefit and edification that we can possibly receive from any of our Devotions,
depends very much upon the due intention of our minds in the performance of
them. To which, as I have shown, both a Form of Prayer in general, and ours in
particular, is a very great help.

Do but observe these plain and necessary Rules in using of the Common Prayer
(without which you cannot be truly said to use, but rather to abuse it) and you
will soon find what I have said about it to be true, even that All things in it
are done to Edifying. And therefore I would to God that not only you that hear
me at this time, but all the people of the Nation could be once persuaded to do
so. What an holy Nation, what a peculiar People should we then become? How
Pious toward God? How Loyal to our Sovereign? How Just and Charitable to one
another? For by our constant Worshipping Almighty God in so solemn and devout a
manner as this is, our hearts would be overawed with so great a fear of his
Divine Majesty, that we should never dare willingly to offend him. Our minds
would be filled and impregnated with such a sense of his power and sovereignty,
that we should honor and revere it in those also whom he has set over us. Our
whole Souls would be raised up so much above the World, that we should not do
an ill act to gain it wholly to our selves. In short, we should be every day
edified more and more in Faith, in Love, in Humility, in Self-denial, in
Temperance, in Patience, in all true Grace and Virtue: And so we should go from
strength to strength, from one degree of grace unto another, until at length we
arrive at Glory and Perfection in the highest Heavens, where we shall spend
Eternity its self in Praising and Adoring the most high God; as for all the
other Mercies which he has vouchsafed to us, so in a particular manner for our
being Members of such an Apostolical Church, wherein all things are done to
edifying.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant we may all do in and through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all Honor
and Glory, World without end. Amen.

FINIS.

