A Dreadful Account of a most Terrible Earthquake, Which lately happened in
ITALY, Wherein Thirty Seven great Cities and Towns were totally Destroyed, and
One Hundred and Twenty Thousand of Men, Women, and Children Perished, etc.
In a Letter from the Consul of Messina's Secretary.
Loving Brother,
THE Subject of my present Writing carries that Horror and Amazement, as puts
a Trembling into the very Hand that guides the Pen: The sad Relation I have to
make you, perhaps has not hitherto been equalled in any Records or History of
the World, and I hope never will, the Calamity indeed being unexpressable. It Is
true, we have had very melancholy Narratives of the late Dismal Earthquakes in
Jamaica; but, alas, that Visitation has been infinitely Inferior to the much
severer Hand of Heaven felt amongst us in this Part of the World. As to the
Earthquakes that gave you some small Fright in England and Flanders, those were
so inconsiderable, as to be scarce Shadows, little more than a Name.

For Instance, at a City called Cattana about 60 Miles from Rome, and not far
from the Mount Aetna, on the first Instant there happened an Earthquake so
Violent, that not one House has been left standing in the whole City, but,
together with the Churches and Covents of Friars and Nuns, all levelled to the
Ground, and buried in one Heap of Rubbish, in which near 20 Thousand People
perished, there remaining not above 1500 Souls alive, and those not all
entirely Escaping, for above one third of the Number were either miserably Torn
and Mangled, or otherwise Hurt and Damaged.

The City Seragusa Angusta has participated in the like bitter Vial of God's
Judgment, being in like manner entirely and utterly Destroyed, with an equal
Fatality and Destruction of the miserable Inhabitants, having only Five Hundred
and odd People saved out of above 22000. A great many other Town and Villages
have proportionably groaned under the same destroying Vengeance: Nay, the very
Rocks throughout the whole Island have been all Torn in sunder, and such dismal
Marks are left behind, that the whole Face of the Country is little less than
one continued Chaos and Confusion. In fine, it is altogether so hideous a
Scene, that no Words can express nor Pen describe it. To sum up our general
Misery and Desolation, the greatest part of those Remains of us, that God in
his particular Mercy has been pleased to Spare, are forced to lie abroad out of
the Towns and Cities (as no longer capable to shelter them) in Hutts and Booths
somewhat like your Bartholomew Fair.

But in all these deplorable Objects before our Eyes, and the still frightful
Remembrance behind us, we have Reason to bless God that the least Portion of
this Misery fell to our Share in this City Messina, compared with the more
hideous Ruins and suffering Neighbors round about us; for we had that
particular Providence to have only about 40 Houses entirely destroyed, and
about 30 People Killed, though indeed we have scarce a House in the whole Town
that has not in some Measure been Shattered and Torn.

After the Violence of our Consternation was so far abated, as to give us leave
to examine and compute the universal Loss, we have had a List of 37 Cities and
Towns which have been wholly Ruined by this Earthquake, and above 120000 People
perished; besides several Thousands al Languishing, Maimed and Cripples.

But to quit so deplorable a Theme, and Return Thanks to Heaven for my own
Preservation, Il shall conclude, by telling you, that God willing, I shall be
very speedily with you, this whole Island being now so ruined a Place, that I
shall esteem my self Happy in my Deliverance from so Dismal and Desolate a
Wilderness, etc.

Messina, Jan. 20. 1692/3. In Italy. Your ever Loving Brother W. B.
POSTSCIPT.
THis abovesaid Account was sent in a Letter, from the Secretary to Mr. Thomas
Chamberlin, Consul for Their Majesty's of Great Britain at Messina. And if any
Person desires any further Satisfaction, let him Repair to the Printer of this
Relation, in whose Hands is the Original Letter.



London, Printed by W. Downing in Great St. Bartholomew-Close, 1693.


