A. Catholic Catechism: SHOWING THE IMPOSSIBILITY THE CATHOLIC RELIGION
Should be varied to the Degree of a Thought, from the Measures left Sealed by
the Apostles, WITHOUT THE LOSS of TRUTH.

And therefore The Impossibility POPERY, or whatever else is not found in
Scripture, should be CATHOLIC.

Composed to the Capacity of the Meanest, that will but Consider; that they may
know and be ready, upon unmovable Reasons, to give an Apology, or Defensive
Answer, for the Catholic Religion, if they are indeed of it; and be secured
from Temptation in Times of Danger.

2 Pet. 1. 12. The Present Truth.

Prove. 22. 21. That I might make thee know the Certainty of the Words of Truth,
that thou might answer the Words of Truth to them that send unto thee.

LONDON Printed for Tho. Parkhurst and Will. Miller at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, and the Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Call this A Catechism, because I design it a Familiar Instruction in
Fundamental Truths, Resounding the same Thing from Question to Answer; the
easiest way of Conveying Truth, and Imprinting it upon the Minds of those that
are even of the meanest Capacity: But especially, because the Principles of it
are to be daily so Meditated upon, Pondered and Applied to use, as to be a
perpetual sound in our Ears, and so to be properly styled Catechism.

For Things of such great weight, as Principles are, must have as the most
Advantageous Adm^ssion, as the most Deep, and therefore Leisurely Insinuation;
as the most Resolved Adherence, when found True and Right, (which is Buying the
Truth, and not Selling it,) so they must have the most Easy, and Ready
Application to all their Uses and Ends: They must therefore be bound
continually about our Neck, that when we go, they may lead us; that when we
s^eep, they may keep us; that when we wake, they may talk with us, Prove. 6. 21,
22.

I know the Things I have written cannot be duly received without much
Thinking, and without that they will be in danger of a Censorious rejection
from the most, or of a superficial unintelligent Acceptance in the Kinder;
which is as bad as the other, and therefore I present it as a Catechism, to
those that shall at all approve it, that they may be thoroughly versed in it,
and the Sense of it grow Domestic to them.

I call it a Catholic Catechism, only with Relation to the Great Subjects it
Treats of, the Catholic Religion, and the Catholic Church, in those things
wherein they are Catholic; or in which their Catholickness consist: That is,
that they are of God, and that the whole Society of Holy and Happy Spirits is
by that Catholickness united, and closely banded with it self. Catholic, as
the Epistles called Catholic, that is, after some Doubt Asserted to be Divine,
of the Public Spirit of God, and giving that Public Doctrine, in which the
General Assembly is one.

I have endeavored to contrive the Questions and Answers so, that the Answers
may be an Apology, or Defensive Answer of that Catholic Truth, giving a
Reason, or a Rational Account, to any Demand that can be made upon it: And it
is the Apology of that Truth it self; the Apology it gives and furnishes us
with, for other can no Man give: Truth can need no other, than its Native
Apology for it self; no other will it accept.

To give this, and to be always ready to give it, to keep it within us, and to
have it fitted to our Lips, is the proper Fruit of such a Catechetical
Instruction; and the Apostle assures us, it is the great Duty of Christianity,
and the greatest Honor we can do to God, First to Sanctify him in our Hearts,
by a full acknowledgment of him in his Divine Truth, by a Plerophory, or full
Assurance of Understanding in the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ. For a Devotion to the True God, without knowing him to be the True God,
cannot thus Sanctify or Honor him.

There is nothing we should be more Rational in, than in the True Religion, the
Account of which, and of its whole Content, ought to be so certain to us, that
nothing of a Diverse Spirit from it, can be added to it; nor any thing of its
Integral or Essential Nature taken from it; but we may plainly see, it would
change the Account; and so we need not make a Traverse over all Falsehood to
know Truth, but by having a Right understanding in, and Just Contemplation of
Truth, the most even thing in the whole World; we come to know it self, by it
self, and to be assured of it, although there were no other False Religion in
the World to compare it with, and set it off by, and withal to descry every
false way offered to us, and to hate it: Yea we observe every thing that is but
doubtfully Proposed, and stay it its due time of Examination, and so either
accept, or reject it, or if we see full reason for neither, still suspend.

It is not the Laws of our Country, our Church, our being Baptized, or Educated
in it, that will justify our Religion to be the True: It is not the High
Reverence of it, the Devotion we use in it, our hating of those that speak
Blasphemously of it, will make good our Religion, what Religion in the World
may not be justified upon such Topics? It is not that we find many great
Principles of Truth in a Religion, that will justify it: There is no Religion,
that can be called Religion, that does not espouse many True Principles: And in
Christian Religion, Antichristianism vies with Christianity it self upon the
Fundamental Creeds, which it self Confesses with True Christianity, but has
Built upon them New Creeds of its own, and so Corrupted all: For what is so
pure, and perfect, as True Religion is, must needs be Corrupted by any
Addition: All that is Pure and True, is already its own; who then can add to
it, and not be found a Liar?

Nothing therefore, as I have already intimated, can be our security for True
Religion, but the Just Divine Measure, the Common Faith, the True Catholic
Standard, which in all things necessary to the main End, is most evident, and
in entertaining nothing that is not so evident, till it becomes so upon this
Great Test, this is our Security?

For it is very plain, there is less danger when our Understandings are not yet
extended to the breadth of Divine Truth, (if none of the Vital Principles are
unknown to us, unsensed by us, which are so exceedingly plain, that we cannot
be, except wilfully, ignorant of them,) for no Injury is done to Truth, that
we do not understand its whole Compass; nor to our selves, if we do not hate
knowledge, offering it self to our notices, but in adding to Truth, seeing we
can have nothing to add, but what is of no worth, we must needs defile it; in
having only Truth, though we have not all Truth, we yet are under the Influence
of Truth only, but when we add, we enslave our selves to Lying Vanities:

Now hereunto have I levelled the whole ensuing Catechism, or Discourse;
against which I know many prejudices will lie, except full Consideration be
allowed: I know too many things raise a Detestation at the first, which being
Examined and Weighed by their Reason, gain not only the Discharge of these
Angry Passions, but much Acceptance and Assent: And I must take the Confidence
to say, in relation to any such Doubt upon the ensuing Apology for Catholic
Truth, that it is settled upon such unmovable Reason, and Weighed out by such
exact attendance to it, that I may write upon it without Immodesty; Lo this,
we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it for thy good; for good
in the Quiet and most Peaceable Course of Christianity, wherein to know the
True Grounds upon which it rests, alone makes the Soul both Wise and Good, and
determines it to the Square and Just Rules of that Holy Religion; for Good in
times of Temptation to a False Religion, especially that which calls it self
Catholic. For the truly Instructed Christian, in that which is indeed
Catholic, is even Impregnable against that Delusion of Catholic, falsely so
called; Lastly, for good, in the midst of great Differences, and Diversities of
Opinion and Practice, in relation to lesser things, pertaining more
Circumstantially, or Doubtfully to True Religion, wherein the Rational
Christian carrying it as Inoffensively and Communicatively as he can with all,
centers in that which is Catholic, as to his Faith, Love, Inward Esteem, and
Practice, and unmoveably fixes there, detesting all Animosity, and much more
rigor or severity toward others in Relation to such differences, than which
nothing can be more ungenerous, more unchristian, more irreligious, more
unworthy.

THE CONTENTS.
CAP. I. OF the Perfect and First State of Humane Nature, with relation to
Catholic, or Public Religion. page 1 CAP. II. Of the Violation of this
Catholic Order of Religion, and the Means provided by God to restore it. 7
CAP. III. Of the Vncontroversible Laws of Natural Religion. 10 CAP. IV. Of
Revelation, and the Reasons of so great Miscarriages against both the Light of
Nature and Revelation, with the Means of Cure. 14 CAP. V. Of the Public or
Divine Original of Sacred Writing, or Scripture. 23 CAP. VI. Of the Proof of
Scripture, That it is of God; and that the Proof also is Public and Divine. 27
CAP. VII. Of the Public Interpretation of Scripture. page 36 CAP. VIII. Of
Tradition and Antiquity. 52 CAP. IX. Of the Church Catholic. 65 CAP. X. Of the
Officers appointed by Christ in his Church. 82 CAP. XI. Of every Man's
Obligation to be wise for himself to Salvation. 89 CAP. XII. Of Schism and
Scandal. 93 CAP. XIII. Of the Anti-Church, and its Opposition in every thing to
the True Church. 109 CAP. XIV. Of the Power of Magistrates in Religion, and of
National Religion. 128


A Catholic Catechism,
CAP. I. Of the Perfect and First State of Humane Nature, with relation to
Catholic, or Public Religion.
Quest. WHAT is the most distinguishing Excellency and Perfection of Humane
Nature?

Answ. Catholic, or truly Public Religion; for it is the All, the Whole, or
Universal Man: Whoever therefore has vanquished the sense of that, has put
off Man, and degraded himself into worse than a Brute.

Quest. What do you mean by Religion?

Answ. By Religion I mean a close Binding, or Uniting our selves to, and with
God, the Supreme Being, in the Worship of him according to his Excellent Nature
and Attributes, in keeping his Commandments, and seeking his Grace and Favor,
according to all his Divine Manifestations of himself; and in so doing we are
joined, and join our selves, as far as we can, with one another, in the same
Religious Services performed by all.

Quest. Why do you call it Catholic, or truly Public Religion?

Answ. Because God, to whom we properly and first Unite in Religion, is the
most Public and Universal Being, in whom all holy Spirits unite one with
another; and from whom whoever separates, separates also from all good Spirits,
and so falls into the only dangerous Schism.

2. Because the One God, and Jesus Christ his Son, our Lord, the One Mediator,
would have all come to the Knowledge of this, as the Catholic Truth, that they
might be saved; and has therefore reconciled, and recapitulated all in Heaven
and Earth, into one Catholic Body, in himself the Catholic Head.

3. Because Gods Manifestations of himself are the only true Public Authentic
Records of this Religion, and all other not derived from hence are private and
false, and the Meetings set up to celebrate any other Religion, than thus
manifested, are indeed the close Schismatical Conventicles: For none can be
Public Assemblies, where God, the supremely Public, and all holy Spirits,
withdrawn with him, are not: And all are Public, though but of two or three,
where God the Public it self, and in whom the whole Assembly of Saints meets,
is in the midst of them.

Quest. Whence do you take occasion to call that Public, or Catholic, that is
Divine?

Answ. From the Apostle Peter, who when he is asserting concerning the
certainty of the Scripture Prophecy, affirms it a Principle absolutely
necessary to be known, that it is not of any Private Interpretation; and that
he may demonstrate it cannot be Private, he avows the Original to be Divine.
Now the plain Opposite to Private is Public; in that therefore the Apostle
does not oppose Public, but Divine, to Private; it is plain in his sense,
Divine is the only Public; and whatever is truly Public is Divine, and all
else Private.

Quest. How therefore are we to understand Private, to oppose it to Public or
Divine?

Answ. Idiotick or Private is applied to persons whose Knowledge is very narrow
and strait, and they have cognizance of nothing beyond their little own. 2. To
those that have no Public Character of Office or Magistracy. And lastly, to
such whose care, interest, and concern is confined to themselves and their own:
Even thus Private is justly affixed to all; except only to God, and Religion as
derived from him. No created Knowledge, either Angelick or Humane, is
comprehensive enough to be the Fountain; no Power or Authority is supreme or
vast enough to Enact; nor is any care or concern for the world of Souls, large
or receptive enough to Ordain a Catholic Religion leading to a Common
Salvation, but his who is the Father of the whole Family of Spirits in Heaven
and Earth.

Quest. What Evidence of this is there?

Answ. It is so much the Result of Reason, that whoever considers it, cannot
deny it; and upon this account, all who have pretended to found a Religion,
have pretended some way or other to derive and receive it from God. For who can
know all that is necessary to be known, but the Divine Mind and Spirit, that
knows and searches it self, the Spring of all things, and so first to be known?
Or what Authority can prescribe without, much less against Omnipotency? Or who
can spread tender Mercies over all the Creation, but the Faithful Creator
himself? All which are absolutely necessary to the Concernments of the truly
Catholic, Public Religion.

Quest. What are the Records God has vouchsafed to men, of this Catholic,
Public Religion?
Answ. They are two: The Law engraven upon Man's heart, justified and sealed by
the constant Miracle of Creation and Providence, that carry semblable Lines of
all that is written upon Men's hearts: For that which may be known of God is
manifest in men, for God has showed it to them: For the invisible things of
him, from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

The Work that God commands Men to do is written in their heart, their
Consciences bearing witness, and their Thoughts in the mean time accusing or
excusing one another.

The Eternal Word, or Reason, that made all things, is the Light that lights
the Reason of every man that comes into the world.

Quest. Which is the second Record?

Answ. The second Record is Divine Revelation collected into Holy Scriptures;
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine,
Reproof, Instruction, Correction in Righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work. No Prophecy of Scripture is
of any Private Interpretation; for Prophecy came not in old time by the Will
of Man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

And even as the Law of Nature is sealed by Creation and Providence, so has
Revelation always been by Evidences of Divinity, and Miracles; a new Creation,
proportioned to the Ends of those Revelations: Miracles of mere Power or
Justice, as upon Pharaoh; of greatest Mercy and Benefaction only, as by the
most merciful Savior; of Mercy, and sometimes of Justice, as by Moses, the
Prophets, and the Apostles, who were to establish the Laws of the Old and New
Testament.

Quest. I perceive then all the things of Religion were not clear to Man by the
Law written in his heart.

Answ. No: For some Parts of Religion are so necessary to our very Natures, as
Men, that they were concreated with us, and engraven upon our very Souls, and
the immediate motions of our Faculties must needs lead us to them, while right
and straight, and continuing in that perfect state wherein our Creator left
them.

For he looked upon all things that he had made, and behold all was good, and
very good: And he appointed a Sabbatism for all his Creatures, and especially
his Rational Creatures, the Morning Stars, to sing together, and praise him for
them.

But there are other Divine Truths, which are as the breaking up of the Great
Deep of the Infinite Wisdom, Grace, and Goodness of God, that can be known to
the highest Understandings of Angels, or Archangels, only by Revelation: Much
less to Man, a Reason of a lower Orb, and least of all, as fallen and corrupted.

Yet supposing the Souls of Men had abode in their first Clearness and Luster,
all his Faculties would have immediately received and adored God in all such
Manifestations of himself, and Congratulated those mighty Accessions of Light
and Truth.

Quest. But what need was there of any Revelation, when Man was made perfect
and good, while he continued so?

Answ. Revelation was even then necessary, to show, that it is not consistent
with the Nature of a Creature to have Happiness and Perfection within it self;
but to be in continual dependence upon, and expectation from the Creator: For
even that Perfection wherein Adam was made, was thus to maintain, continue, and
assure it self; and so to rise to higher Perfection: He had therefore at first
a Doctrine by Revelation, suitable to the two Sacramental Trees, so that though
he was Perfect, as such a Creature without Sin, yet he was made with a
possibility of higher Advancement, and Perfection; as he was of falling from
his present Perfection, by not adhering to his Creator, according to what was
revealed to him.

Quest. What Relation do these two Records bear to one another, being both of
God?

Answ. It is therefore impossible, they should either of them one contradict
another, but that they unite with, confirm, and justify one another, and one
pass out of, and repass into another; but the latter being more full, clear,
and perfect, makes not only the Additions of what was not contained in the
former, but does much inlighten and clear it; and since the Fall, it is no
where else perfectly to be found, but in Revelation: Yet so, that whatever of
it remains, or is reinkindled by Revelation, does both prepare a Man to
receive, and does also assure him the truth of Divine Revelation.

Quest. You have showed with what Wisdom, Goodness, and excellent Contrivance,
all things were laid by the Creator, let me now hear from you the use I am to
make of it?

Answ. This teaches us to adore, applaud the Fidelity and Goodness of our Holy
Maker, and to confess whatever disorder has invaded this State of things is
owing altogether to the perverseness and weakness of Man, whose Destruction is
of himself alone, and his help only in God, returning him to himself according
to this first Designation.

Quest. What then is the Supreme End of this Public and Catholic Religion?

Answ. God, the Universal Being, receiving into his own most Public Glory,
Life and Happiness, the Universe of his Holy Creation, is Praised, Glorified,
Enjoyed, and admired in them, and by them, to Eternity.

CAP. II. Of the Violation of this Catholic Order of Religion, and the Means
provided by God to restore it.
Quest. HOw did a change begin in this Catholic State of Religion, in the
place of which we now see endless Schism and Confusion?

Answ. The Fallen Angels, a higher Region of Spirits, being Anathematized out
of Heaven, settled in a black and detestable Heresy and Separation from God.

Quest. How did this affect Man?

Answ. They immediately endeavored upon Humane Natures being newly breathed
from God, and received into Society with himself, and all Blessed Spirits, to
propagate their own Malignancy into it, in our First Parents, and to separate
it with themselves from the Creator, and his happy Public.

Quest. With what appearance was so malicious an Attempt covered?

Answ. Under the plausible Disguise of Man's setting up for Happiness, and
becoming a Public within himself, without, and against the Divine Oracle.

Quest. What was the mischievous Design that lay hid under this?

Answ. To have enslaved Humane Nature under perpetual Vassallage to the
Pseudo-Catholick Synagogue of Satan, and to have depended upon a lie and the
Father of it for Infallibility.

Quest. What was the Effect of this Hellish Attempt?

Answ. Too unhappily successful it was; for drawing our unwary Progenitors from
the Royal Law implanted in their hearts, and rendering suspicious to them the
Oracle of the Divine Universal Spirit, they gave heed to an unknown obscure
Spirit, and to the Doctrine of Devils.

Quest. What was the dismal Consequence of so monstrous a Seduction?

Answ. They lost their place in the General Assembly, and Church of the
Firstborn written in Heaven, and forfeited it from all their Posterity.

Quest. But did these Excommunicate Spirits prevail upon our First Parents, to
become absolutely and immediately of their Separation?

Answ. No: For God clothing himself in his Son, with the Compassions of a
Mediator and Redeemer, laid hold upon Humane Nature, as the Head of its
Recovery, in that very Nature; certainly reconciling his own Seed, the Seed of
Abraham, or his Church, into a state more Catholic than the first, He,
God-Man, being so inseparably united with it: And with a redundance of Grace to
all Mankind, laid the Foundations of their Restoration to their first
Communion, with advantage, if built upon aright.

Quest. What were the Foundations laid by the Son of God, the Savior of all
Men, especially of them that believe, for the restoring them to the first
Catholic state of Religion?

Answ. The very same that were Ordained by God before the Fall, viz. the Law of
Natural Religion, preserved in the Soul, with direct Aspects upon God,
Obligations to serve him, and Desires of his Favor.

And when Man found himself in a fallen estate, and under Guilt, and yet that
God spared him, and had patience with him, there must needs arise from True
Reason, Hopes of and Desires after his Mercy and Pardon, and Motions of return
to him by Repentance, as is plain in the King of Nineveh.

2. Revelation, most exactly suited to our Recovery out of that miserable
Estate, with which God immediately succored our First Parents against Despair:
For that was the Word of Promise, in relief against Satan's taking possession
of Man, as his Spoil; The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's Head, an
everlasting Enmity being immediately kindled between them.

Quest. Who is the Supreme Superintendent, missioned or sent in the Son's Name,
to negotiate our Return to, and preserving our selves in the True Catholic
Religion?

Answ. The Divine Spirit alone, conducting us by Heavenly Assistances,
inlightning us in the uncorrupted Principles of Natural Religion by Revealed,
and assuring to us Revealed Religion by its Intimate Union with Natural, and
enabling us to cut the Lines of the one running into the other with innumerable
Mazes of Union: Sometimes preparing us for Revealed Religion by Natural, always
to the true Natural by Revealed, and so confirming them to us by one another.

Quest. You have made no mention of Creation, Providence, Evidences of Divine
Presence, and Miracles, what Place they have in the Renewal of Man's State
toward God by the Redeemer.

Answ. These are all in the very same Place they were in the first Settlement,
attending the Doctrine and Divine Law they are to seal, with Assurances they
are Divine, and giving the Image and Likeness of that Law in the Power,
Majesty, Rectitude, and Order they themselves carry, and so testifying of God,
and his Word, of what Excellency it is; and that even before the Reason of Man,
as it is imbodied, and ministered to by his Senses.

Quest. How shall there be a Distinction betwixt Miracles and Lying Wonders
that impose on Men?

Answ. There can be no Counterfeit of Creation and Providence, the Universal
Miracles; and all True Divine Miracles are like them, generally, in their
Beneficence to the World: Besides, the Excellency of the Doctrine they come
along with, manifestly distinguishes them.

CAP. III. Of the Uncontroversible Laws of Natural Religion.
Quest. THere having been so much of Account given in general of Public and
Catholic Religion, showing that it can be no other than what is from God; it
is now necessary to enter into a more particular Consideration; and first, what
it is that remains Certain, and Evidently Public; or, that is of God, in the
Law written upon Man's Heart.

Answ. Whatever is indeed written in Man's Heart, must certainly be from God;
seeing no Created Hand could write there. The Hand that Made, can alone Ingrave
it.

Quest. How then shall we make a Judgment, what is written upon the Heart?

Answ. That which is universally acknowledged, and, amidst all the Differences
in Religion, falls under no Variation, assures us, it was placed there by that
Supreme Hand, that alike fashioned all Men's Hearts: and especially, seeing to
this universal Acknowledgment there is no Temptation from the sensual and worst
Part of Man, it being against its Interest; but it springs from the wisest and
best Parts, most unconcerned in this World, or any of the brutish Pleasures of
it.

Quest. What Principles do you account thus to be of Natural Religion?

Answ. I account these following;

That there is a God, the Greatest and Best of Beings, that governs the World.

That God vouchsafes to be acknowledged, adored, and worshipped by Man; and
that he takes notice when he is so worshipped, or neglected, and that with
Favor, or Displeasure.

That there is a Distinction betwixt Good and Evil, settled by the Unchangeable
Laws of God.

That God being himself so Good, is pleased in Men doing well, and rewards it;
and displeased when Men do ill, and punishes it.

That Men have a Conscience, viz. a Knowledge of, and Government of their own
Actions, with Approbation of them if Good, and Dislike if Bad.

That there are Rewards and Punishments beyond this Life.

That therefore the Notions of Virtue, Righteousness, Temperance, Soberness,
Beneficence, and the contrary Vices, are of unchangeable Truth, and the Actions
flowing from them of the same Notion.

That God is both the Judge and Observer of them now, and will be so in the
Future State.

That in the time of God's Patience and Bounty to sinful Man, there is
Forgiveness with him, that he may be feared: and that he thereby leads Men to
Repentance.

That upon all accounts Solemn Worship of him by Prayer, Praises, Honorable
Discourses of him, of all Obedience to him, and Returns to him after our Falls,
are most due from Humane Nature, and according to the sociable Nature of Man in
Public Associations.

Quest. Do you believe these so close to, and inseparable from the Reason of
Man?

Answ. I am fully assured so; and that these, and all the immediate, genuine,
and natural Deductions from them, are so nearly allied with Humane Nature, and
Reason, that they are in no Parts of it wanting, however overcome; but where
extreme Barbarity and Brutishness in all things else make it plain, such People
cannot weigh against the wiser Societies of Mankind, in whom the more vigorous
Efforts of Reason show themselves.

Quest. But would you have Men rest in Natural Principles, without Revelation?

Answ. No, by no means: For, if Adam in Paradise had Revelation to make his
State toward God Consummate, how much more Man Fallen, in whom all Natural
Light is but glimmering and obscure, Heavenly Objects at so great a remove, by
his being sunk down so low from them, and the Mists and Fogs of this Earth so
prevalent upon him in the great Deordination of Spirit into Body, that whatever
true Principles of Reason might effect, if duly pursued, he is, without
Revelation, upon all Experiment, no better than in the Valley of the Shadow of
Death?

Quest. But does there appear any Expectation of Revelation in the Motions of
Natural Reason?

Answ. Very great; so that no Religion in the World has been without the
Pretense of it: And it is both most hopeful according to the Laws of Natural
Light, that God will reveal himself; and most just, that his Revelations should
be accepted with all Reverence, when vouchsafed: our very Reason being a
Revelation from him; and if any Revelation from him could be false, even That
might be so also: But in all things, Natural Light must needs bow to Divine
Veracity.

Quest. How happy might the World be, if all the Religions of the World were
but reformed to this Natural True Religion?

Answ. Undoubtedly so: for the State of it could not then be far from the
Kingdom of God; all True Religion, whether Natural or Revealed, being so
closely allied to it self: For though Revealed rises much higher, yet in an
inseparable connection with, and in a continuation undivided from Natural.

Quest. But as the State of the World is, and has always been, there seems to
have been no Effect of True Natural Religion?

Answ. Very great, in many respects. 1. To justify God in his Dealings with
Mankind, that there have been such Possibilities of Return to True Religion
laid up in them. 2. To be as Sense in a Man's Soul, upon which all Divine
Applications might take, either to Conviction, or Conversion. 3. To be at all
times ready to be re-enlivened by Revealed Truth, and to unite with it. 4. To
be an Universal Code of True Religion, in which it is always reasonable for
Mankind to agree, or in any Parts of it, on any Occasion, as Jonah and the
Mariners did in their Calamity, or as St. Paul and the Seamen with him, in
giving Thanks to God. 5. That it might be a Standard to punish Profaneness and
Irreligion by, without entrenchment on Conscience; which Revelation cannot be,
but in some peculiar Circumstances. 6. That Men may on all Occasions treat with
one another by it, on Terms of Reason and Justice, as the Apostle Paul with the
Men of Athens, with Felix; and generally Men one with another, in all their
Commerce: All Society, good Laws and Government, Restraint of excessive Evil,
depending upon it.

CAP. IV. Of Revelation, and the Reasons of so great Miscarriages against both
the Light of Nature and Revelation, with the Means of Cure.
Quest. SEeing there is, by all that has been spoken, so great a weight
resting upon Revelation, let the Accounts of Gods Revealing himself to Mankind
be more fully stated.

Answ. Besides Gods Revealing himself to Adam, even in Innocence, in a Doctrine
suitable to those two Sacramental Trees, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, and the Tree of Life; and besides that Original Revelation of Christ
after the Fall, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head; he has
been pleased to guide that Holy Seed, which is his Church, by Revelation, as by
a Pillar of Fire, throughout succeeding Ages, till he completed the whole he
intended, in a Kingdom of Truth, that cannot be shaken, which is to continue to
the end of the World.

Quest. How then did God deal with the rest of the World?

Answ. Even they were for some considerable Spaces, in the first Ages of the
World, within the Advantages of Revelation, by mixture with, or Neighborhood
to the Church, by Tradition from the Holy Patriarchs, which if they had
faithfully observed, together with the Improvement of Natures Light, it would
have secured them in True Religion: Besides, that they who were faithful in
these, were on all proper occasions provided for by the Faithful Creator
(though they were not strictly of that Seed) with immediate Revelations: But
when all these were corrupted, as they were in the generality of Mankind, God
withdrew himself by degrees, as the Glory did from the Temple in Ezekiel, till
there was nothing left but the Darkness of Tradition; fearfully debauched;
false Deductions from Nature's Light, and worse than that, the Devils Oracles
in the room of Gods; so that there was in the generality of the Nations a
second and more desperate Fall of Mankind from the true Religion, the Jewish
Church, and a small Proselytisme to that only excepted.

Quest. What Examples are there of Gods continuing Favor to any parts of
Mankind, out of Abraham's Family, justifying him, as not departing from men till
they departed from him?

Answ. Melchisedek, no descendent from Abraham, was King of Righteousness, and
King of Peace, at the same time the Church was placed in Abraham's Seed; Laban
was not wholly revolted from true Religion: But especially Job and his Friends,
of the Posterity of Esau, were eminent Instances of the Favor of God, that
whole Book of Job testifying, that being helped by Holy Tradition, together
with occasional Revelations, they held the Light of Nature at its own Purity.

Quest. How long did the Nations that deserted God, continue under that dismal
obscurity?

Answ. Till that Blessed Seed, in whom all the Families of the Earth were to be
Blessed, and who was the desire of all Nations, came, and shone as the Sun of
Righteousness upon the whole World.

Quest. How was the Light of Revelation conveyed to the People of God in Elder
Times?

Answ. In diverse Ways and Manners, in more immediate Appearances, in Visions,
Dreams, Prophesies, in inward Illumination, by a Voice: In all which there
were, when ever they were truly from God, such mighty Evidences of Divinity as
over-ballanc'd all doubt: Together with these, were the ordinary and familiar
Instructions of Patriarchs, and Holy Men, grounded upon Natural and Revealed
Religion.

Quest. How did God conclude his Manifestations of himself, in the way of
immediate Revelation?

Answ. By speaking in the last Days by his Son, and the Apostles immediately
Commissioned by him, sealing up Vision and Prophecy in the fullness and
Complement of Truth.

Quest. Did God take any care for the securing the Monuments of his Truth given
out by Revelation?

Answ. Yes, very early; how early we know not; but beyond Controversy in the
first forming the Jewish Church into a settled Body, he began the more sure and
certain way of committing his Word and Will to Writing, and for the Honor of
it, set the Copy with his own Hand, and continued it till the whole Revelation
was complete: Passant Revelation, or Oral Tradidition, not being sure enough.

Quest. Wherein is the Written Word more sure than the Word in passing
Revelation or Tradition?

Answ. The Word committed to Writing stands unalterable, Divine Providence
watching over what was Written, to keep it the same. All Covenants and
Treaties, all Monuments of Knowledge have been thus secured, transmitted into
all Parts, and consigned to after Ages: Appeals in Cases of doubt are more
safely made to what is Written, and every one concerned has a ready and open
way to Examine, and in all Cases to be resolved.

Quest. Have all Nations since the Days of the Blessed Seed been Communicated
with these Revelations?

Answ. There has been a Freedom given to Communicate them, and a Right in all
Nations to demand the benefit of them granted by God and Christ to them, but
there are many sad Accounts to be given, why this Universal Grace to Mankind
has not yet taken Effect.

1. The unaccountableness of the Methods of Gods Government of the World, in
the Efficacies of his distinguishing Goodness, even when things seem equally
disposed to the advantage of one, as of another.

2. The Experiment made upon so great a part of Mankind, that have the Gospel,
justifies God in not effectually conveying it to others, who would make as ill
an use of it: The Idolatry Superstition of some, the sottish Ignorance, Sloth
and neglect of others: The Cruelty and Barbarity exercised by Christians upon
one another, and the unanswerable living to it in all Sects, make plain the
great perverseness of our degenerate Nature, and how Nations that have not the
Gospel, would have abused it if they had had it.

3. But especially the great Enmity to, and Contempt of the Heavenly Doctrine,
great Nations are environed with, against the approaches of it, so far as it
has come within their notice; as among Jews, Turks, and Pagans, are a very
obvious Reason, why they receive not the benefit of the Gospels free
promulgation.

Quest. What then is the immediate Reason, why so many Nations that have the
Light of Nature to guide them, and the Jews that have the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, have been the one great Enemies to all Scripture Revelations, and
the other to the new Testament?

Answ. Because Nations, that have the light of Nature, stay not themselves upon
that which is clear and evidently Divine and Public in Natures Law, but either
by unnatural Collections, and miserable wrestings of its Principles, or flying
to false and dark Revelations, fortify themselves in falsehood, or misapplyed
Truth: As to the Jews; it is very plain, they were bemisted with the private
Interpretation they had affixed to the Old Testament, so that they could not
see the clear, easy, and certain Trains of the same Public and Divine,
running betwixt the Old and the New; but the Rudiments in the Old being more
kind to the Cabal or Cipher of their self-interested Sense, they venerated
them, and hated the Perfection and Life in the New, that would not at all bear
their privy Gloss; although both Scriptures had the same Credentials from
Heaven, and carried the same Public Sense: So great is the Delusion of Private.

Quest. But how comes it to pass, that even among those that enjoy the Light of
the Gospel, the Scriptures, and profess the same Christianity, nay, the most
Refined and Reformed Christianity, there are so great Differences and Divisions?

Answ. All proceeds from the same unhappy Spring; Men cannot endure to rest in
the Clear and Certain Oracles of Truth, but by forced Additions,
Misinterpretations, violent Detorsions, forsake that which is Public and
Divine, for that which is Private, and their own; and are greatly offended, and
too often enraged, that others do not concur with them.

Quest. It seems then, the best Method of keeping off from Error, is to rest
upon the most undoubted Points of Truth, before we remove from them to any
thing further?

Answ. It is undoubtedly so; Religion, in all the Branches of it, having
suffered much more by foreign and disagreeable Additions, than by wary
Suspensions: For hereby a Man keeps himself from False Religion, and stands
ready and open to receive Truth.

Quest. But how then should a Man make forward from Natural Religion to
Revealed, or from what he does not understand, to what he may in time come to
see very good Proof for?

Answ. By staying the due time upon the Uncontrovertible Doctrines and Commands
of Natures Laws, yielding full Obedience to God in them, trembling to add any
thing of baser Alloy to them. A Man shall see Revealed Truth shining out upon
Natural, and joining it self to it, and with it. Thus many of the Fathers came
over to Christianity: And so in all parts of Scripture, by rising from the most
Fundamental Truths, loved and obeyed, a Man shall ascend by due degrees to
those more remote. Thus Good Men in the Old Testament waited for the Kingdom of
God, and upon just Considerations moved upon the Line of Truth, from the State
of Religion in the Old Testament, to that of the New; except sometimes a Light
shines suddenly round about Men, as in extraordinary Conversions.

Quest. You seem then to think, False Religion, and All Divisions in the True,
have most nearly sprung up from overconfidence of Things, not of the Evidence
of Public and Divine Truth?

Answ. I do so indeed, although I know Men's not liking to retain Truth, but
being bewitched by false Imagination, betrays them both to the Plague of Lost
and Fallen Spirits, warring under the Prince of our disordered Air, the Ruler
of the Darkness of this World, and to the various Arts of Men, who corrupt
Religion for the Ends they have to serve themselves of by it. I know Men's
Faculties of Search, Inquiry into, and Comprehension of Truth, are much
shrivelled and shrunk up; I know Endless Doubts and Incertainties are brought
upon Religion, by Darkness, and false Appearances to Souls, that are so full of
all the Reasons and Causes of Delusion within themselves, and deserted by the
just Judgment of God, giving them over to believe a Lie; I acknowledge all
these Causes of Error: Yet I am assured, the close Adherence to God in Truths
evidently Divine, and not removing farther into a Religious Esteem of Things,
till upon the same Evidence, is the Means, under the Conduct of the Holy
Spirit, to be secure from dangerous Error or Schism from the true Public: And
whatever is not so evidently Public and Divine, is liable to Private
Interpretation, and so to Error: And when Men are overweening upon Private
Interpretation, they easily fall into Error; and when they are surly and
masterly upon it, it moves Wrath, Emulation, Strife; so that both Falshoood and
Cruelty have entered in at this Door, and ranged over the World.

Quest. But ought we to stupifie all Inquiry, and benumb Judgment, in every
thing not evidently Divine?

Answ. Not so; but to behave our selves humbly, and modestly; to acknowledge
there are vast Tracts of Truth and Knowledge beyond what we know; but we must
feel the Evidence of them, before we can receive them: yet to carry our selves
with due concession to every Man's Sense, that though their Sense cannot, nor
ought to master us, no more ought we to expect ours should them: which would
exceedingly reconcile or abate Differences, and retrench the mischievous
Effects the World has so long groaned under by so many Religions of Nations,
Names of Churches, and Persons propagating their Private, that is, not Divine
Sense, and that with Clamor, and too often with rude Force.

Quest. What are the Instances of the Mischief of making Defection from this
Public, Catholic, Divine Truth, for Private Sense?

Answ. The Angels Fall from Heaven was certainly upon Private Sense and
Interest; Adam's from Innocence and Paradise, upon the same; the Jews Fall from
being the Church and People of God, was upon the Idiotism of having Religion
for their own: All Idolatry and Superstitions of Heathens have risen from
hence: All the Heresies in the Church have come from an over love to Private
Opinion. This is the most damnable Antichristianism of Rome, to make its
Private, Catholic. All Persecutions of Heathens, Romes Inquisition, and
Massacres, have been inflamed in this Furnace, the love of making Private,
Public. And in lesser and more unfundamental Points, Private Interpretation
enforced, as if it were Public, has discomposed the Peace of the Purest and
best reformed Churches, and not only disturbed their Peace, but stained their
Purity.

Quest. I seem to my self in all this unhappy Babelism, or Confusion of
Religion, to be very apprehensive for the Glory of God, and Religion.

Answ. It is most necessary to be zealous for Divine Glory, and for the Honor
of Religion; that Rivers of Tears should run down our Eyes, because of the
Injuries done by Men to the Divine Law: But yet to be so concerned, as to be
scandalized, is to forget that God is infinitely more the Public, than we are;
and therefore to be offended at his Disposes, is to make our Private the
Public. We must then consider, that if God does not miraculously interpose, it
must needs be so, it is no other than the Necessity of the Case, Men moving
with so great Disadvantages, as the Active Soul of Man does in so great a
Concern as Religion is, in our highest Interest: and as thereupon Men will make
use of it in the present World, it must needs be so: There must be Heresies in
Religion. But that this Mormo, or dreadful Apparition, may vanish, we must
remember, 1. That to the Soul humble, and fearing God, all that is of Grand
Interest in Faith, Worship, and Practice is so Public, and evidently Divine,
that no Man need be ever learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth. After this God has given this Employment to those that through Office
or Desire set themselves to seek and intermeddle with all Knowledge, to travel
with advantage to themselves, and others, in their Inquiries into the whole
Compass of Divine Knowledge; whatever Difficulty can be supposed to be in
things of higher Advance to Salvation, is resolved to them, that do the Will of
God, as a Reward of their Obedience; They shall know the Doctrines that are of
God, that rise higher toward Heaven than others.

The due and diligent Search after Wisdom, is a Test upon the truly Sincere,
and well-resolv'd in Religion, that have in them another Spirit, as Caleb, to
follow God fully, and do not, as the Israelites, bring up an ill Report on this
good Land, as if the Difficulties were unconquerable, and the Entertainment
Hungry and Barren, through the many Disputes and Differences in Religion.

Hereby, lastly, the Conduct of the Free Spirit is seen, leading into all
Truth; and the Unction of the Holy One, by which the True Christian knows all
things necessary to him to be known, appears most desirable and necessary. Thus
the Wise and Holy Government of God, who brings Light out of these Clouds and
Darkness, is made manifest; and it is to be ascribed to the Infinite Perfection
of Light, with the Father of Lights, who is without any variation, or shadow of
turning.

Quest. What Rule is then to be observed in the great Diversities of Men in
Religion, that may most abound to the Honor of Catholic Religion?

Answ. To own and embrace any thing we find in any Man, or Society of Men, that
is truly Catholic, if it be but according to the Light of Natural Religion; to
join with them in the Performance of any of such Services, so far as they will
admit it, and keep to the Simplicity and Sincerity of them, according to the
Instances before-named, of Jonah and St. Paul: And much more should we do this,
when True Revealed Religion is joined with Natural, if nothing be required of
us that corrupts and defiles it: No Man's Error, in which we are not forced to
communicate, should drive us from Truth, or any part of it: And upon these
Foundations we should endeavor to win further and further upon all, to bring
them home to God, wherein they wander.

We should make Allowances to every Man, differing in smaller things, receiving
him without conditioning him to subscribe to us, in things of Doubtful, that
is, Private Disputation.

If any one err from the Truth, and one convert him by Evidences of that
Truth, let him know, that he that converts a Sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a Soul from Death, and hide a Multitude of Sins.

But if we cannot be admitted to such Communions with those that are so
enslaved to False, or would bring us under the power of Private, or will have
nothing to do with us, nor admit us to them; we must not yet desert our
Catholic Respect to all that is True and Good among them, but acknowledging
what is so, value and praise it, desire the Divine Acceptance for them in any
Good thing, so as to bring them out of the Errors they have adjoined to it,
and, as you have opportunity, reason them out of the one by the Evidence of the
other.

CAP. V. Of the Public or Divine Original of Sacred Writing, or Scripture.
Quest. SEeing Scripture is the only Public Record of True, Pure, Natural
Religion, and more eminently of Revealed; it is most necessary to be fully
informed in all Points concerning it: And first, What Care God has been
pleased to take, that his Word, and purely that, should be committed to Writing?

Answ. God held the Hands and Pens of Holy Men, by an efficacious overshadowing
their Minds, and conducting all their Motions, that they could not err: In
some things he so fully possessed their Understandings and Affections with a
full Knowledge and Sense of what they were to reveal, that they could not so
much as muse any thing Strange or Diverse from what they were so carried and
born by the Divine Spirit in, even as Elijah in his Body.

In other things, wherein they could not look round about them, nor fully
comprehend what the Spirit in them did signify, though they conveyed it to
Aftertimes, yet they were by Almighty Impressions upon all their Faculties
necessary to that Service, held in stronger than Adamantine Confinements, that
they could not extravagate from Divine Truths. Even Balaam, thus overpowered
against his will, could not go beyond the Word of the Lord, to speak either
Good or Evil, upon the greatest Reward; much less Holy Men, whose Wills were
perfectly resigned to the Divine Will.

Quest. But was not there a Possibility, those Holy Men, Writers of Scripture,
might at other times, when the Spirit was not so immediately present to them,
alter, or add of another Alloy, to what themselves had been the Instruments of
conveying from God to the World? Or might not Pretenders arise, and give out
False Scripture to the World, that had none of that True Spirit?

Answ. When once any Part of Divine Testimony was committed to Writing, it
became a Boundary to those very Penmen (much more to all others) that they were
always concluded by it: So that besides the Dread and Awe of God, and of the
great Sin of Falsification of his Truth or Name, they could not alter any
thing, so as to disagree with what they had before spoken by the Divine Spirit,
whose Righteous Judgments endure for ever: nor could they so much as imitate
themselves, when unassisted by the Holy Spirit.

When therefore they did not understand by immedia^^ Assistance, the utmost End
and Reach of what themsel^^^ were enabled to speak and write, they did (and
they could do no more) search, and pronounce by all the best ordinary Helps God
afforded them, but could change nothing, could add nothing; they searched what,
or what manner of Time the Spirit of Christ in them did signify; they could
not pronounce of the Time, when not revealed to them: They knew the dreadful
Anathema ready to fall, even upon an Angel from Heaven, that should preach
another Gospel. The least Iota, once established by Unchangeable Wisdom and
Goodness, was less movable than Heaven and Earth, and would bear no Addition,
but of the same Authority by which it self was given.

And even the very Manner, Method, Words, as they meet to carry such a Sense,
have their Majesty and Divineness; so that whatever was by Inspiration from
God, bridled that which was not; and they that were inspired, knew in what they
were inspired, and what they spoke as so inspired, and in what they were not;
but were as Samson with his Locks cut, no more than like other Men; and most
cautiously distinguished betwixt the one and the other. Nothing therefore has
assayed to join it self to Scripture; if any has dared to do it, it has been
rejected by it, when not of the High and Public Spirit of it.

Quest. But did not the Writers of the New Testament reverse the Writings and
Commands of the Old; which thing so scandalized the Jews against our Lord, his
Disciples, and Gospel?

Answ. No otherwise than as the Sun commands the Shadow to fly away, and the
lesser Lights to retire, when it self appears; or the things typ'd out being
come, make useless the Types, so that they necessarily give place, or, as
Pictures vail when the Life is present: Else there was such a Respect to the
Scriptures of the Old Testament in those of the New, as to avow them of God
before them, and Elder Scripture than themselves: so that they vouched them for
all they said and taught, and staid the time of themselves being tried, proved,
and sufficiently confirmed, and Canonized into Scripture, by the Scriptures
that were undoubtedly so before them, and in the very same Methods that they
came into the Honor of being Scripture.

Upon which account, the Apostle calls them the more sure Word of Prophecy;
more sure, because of greater Antiquity, and Elder Reception into Scripture,
than that Historical Relation and Doctrine, which yet was immediately to pass
into Scripture of the same Authority and Value with former Scripture, and of
greater Evidence and Divine Clearness, and recommended by Higher Appearances of
Divinity.

And on this same account the New Testament derives it self from the Old,
sometimes by Proofs out of it, drawn according to the most regular Trains and
Consequences; sometimes by more immediate and authoritative Interpretation, but
of the same Public and Divine Inspiration with the Prophecy of Old Time it
self, as shall be presently more fully discoursed under the Head of
Interpretation.

Quest. How far, and to what things does the Rule of the Word of God extend?

Answ. To all things, most assuredly, that are necessary to Salvation and
Eternal Life, or to the true perfecting the Conscience in Purity and Peace;
whether they are things to be believed, as the Springs of Heavenly Action; or
Things to be observed in the Worship of God, or to guide the Practice, and
order the Conversation aright to that Salvation; or that are prescribed
according to the Will of God, for Discipline and Government of the Church: All
these are plainly written, or by just Consequences to be derived from the Word
of God, so far as they are necessary to show Men the way to please God, or to
assure them they do please God, that so they may attain the Promise of Eternal
Life.

Quest. Is there no other Rule of Religion then, but the Scriptures, embracing
the Law of Nature?

Answ. There can be none, except either Religion were not derived wholly from
God, and therefore not so Catholic as we have asserted it, or except any other
Record of Religion can show its Descent as High and Public as Scripture does:
Of which Proof which Scripture gives of it self, and what it is, Inquiry is in
the next place to be made.

CAP. VI. Of the Proof of Scripture, That it is of God; and that the Proof also
is Public and Divine.
Quest. WHat kind of Proof of so Divine a Record as Scripture, is high enough
to prove it to be so Divine?

Answ. That which is, even as the Original of Scripture, Divine also.

Quest. Why must the Proof or Evidence of Scripture be Divine?

Answ. 1. Because it is below the Dignity of Divine, to receive its principal
Proof from Private, or lower than Divine or Public.

2. Because nothing but Divine can so reach the Conscience, as to fill and
possess it with satisfactory Evidence in so great a Concernment as Religion,
nor strikes the Heart with those great Effects of Love to, Fear of, Joy in
Scripture, and the Word of God, so essential to Religion, but Divine: When ye
received the Word of God, ye received it not as the Word of Men, but as it is
in Truth the Word of God.

3. Because it is impossible what is truly Divine should not dart the Rays of
Divinity, as all other Things of Excellency send out the Beams of that
Excellency they have, and thereby discover themselves; For, we know all things
especially by themselves. The Light remonstrates it self by it self. The Genius
of every Writer shows it self first by it self. We see the Divineness of
Creation, and Miracles, by themselves. Best and Greatest is self-evidently
Divine; and whatever it is written upon, is evidently Divine also.

Quest. How does Scripture show it self thus Divine?

Answ. By a Majestic Assumption to it self to be Divine, it speaks so in and
of all things it speaks, and as it pleases effects as Divine only does and can
effect, and is the Best and Greatest Record of Truth to all Holy and Wise
Minds: The only extant inviolate Record of Natural and Revealed Religion in the
World, is Scripture.

Quest. Is Ratiocination then, or the Just Compass Reason goes, to be neglected
concerning Scriptures?

Answ. By no means: For when these Self-evidences of every thing have struck us
earlier than our Scrutinies of Reason, and its Inquest can be performed about
them; that they may neither appear Fancies to us on our second Thoughts, nor we
run into Mistake concerning them by the Power of Imagination, there is then
liberty for Reason to inquire further, and assure it self.

Nor will the Evidence hereupon amount to less than Divine; For, Divine only
can satisfy the Reason that rationally, and like it self, inquires into Divine.

Quest. What then are the great Assurances to Reason, of the Divinity of
Scripture?

Answ. I account this the Chief; That there are Two great Volumes, the Book of
the Natural Law of Religion, written upon the Heart, and engraven in the
Conscience; and the Book of Scripture: That both these are addressed purely to
the Mind, as abstracted from Sense: That each of them is Counterparted by Two
great Manifestations of Divinity to Sense, which Sense is Reason incarnate, or
Mind acting in and by Body. These two are either Ordinary or Constant, as
Creation, Conservation, or Providence; or Extraordinary, as Miracles: That each
of them have also two Executive Powers, acting them to their Ends; The Motions
and Activities of Reason, enabled by the constant Concourse of General
Illumination; and the Supernatural Illuminations and Motions of the Divine
Spirit: And that all these agree in one, unite with, and fortify one another;
all of them carrying the Evidences of Divine Presence, and filling all the
Apprehensiveness of our Faculties concerning God, that he is in them: so that
nothing is Divine in the whole World, the contrary of which we may feel, or
Scripture is Divine.

Quest. But what is to be allowed to Consent of History, Universal Tradition,
and Education, in the Belief of Scriptures?

Answ. All that can be desired to be allowed; for it speaks the Absolute
Sovereignty of God, in making use of whom and what he pleases, in introducing
his Word into any Parts of the World, and contriving the Testimony of Men as
preparatory to the Testimony from himself, which is much greater; even as our
Savior received the Service of John's Testimony, but had much higher; or as
Reason may receive from Sense some accidental Testimonies.

Quest. But is there not much more to be yielded to the Rational Assurance,
that such Historians as the Prophets, Apostles, and Inspired Writers, of such
Honesty and Integrity, would not prevaricate, nor give any false Account of
Things, of the Miracles wrought by themselves or our Savior, of the Doctrines
of Christianity, or of their Divine Original; especially when they sealed all
these with the Contempt of all things in this World, even of Life it self, and
died in the constant Affirmation of them; which removed all base Designs far
from them, even the suspicion of it?

Answ. These Proofs of the Doctrine and Divine Descent of Scripture, are
undoubtedly of the highest Account that any Created Testimony can be, and are a
down-weight of Proof to all sober Reason: Yet that they can rise above the
Value of John Baptist's Testimony to Christ, I cannot find; and therefore we
must remove higher to the Doctrines that those Holy Men preached and writ, the
spiritual Wisdom and admirable Contexture they used in Writing, the Works they
did, carrying the Evidences of Divinity in themselves, and applied by the Holy
Spirit to the Senses of true Believers, with its own assuring Attestations, and
gracious Operations: of which, all that was but created is no more than the
Tube, Pipe, or Channel of Conveyance, if we enter it into a compare with what
is Higher and Divine.

But if the last Resolution of Proof were into any thing Humane, there might be
mistake in that; for Humane at its highest elevation is but Created, and
Created is not firm and sure enough for a Foundation, nor can it raise an
Assent noble and generous enough for a Faith in that which is Divine. All that
can be summoned, may be an outward Fortification or Introduction; but the Rock
of Truth is the Son of God, Divinity it self: Upon this the Church is built,
that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it.

Quest. But are there no Parts of Scripture that receive greater Service from
Humane Testimony, than others?

Answ. There are some Parts of Scripture that are but Ministerial, and almost
Servile, in comparison of others. And that these are found in all Authentic
Copies, and have been delivered down from Age to Age with the Sacred Rolls, may
depend more upon Humane Testimony, especially where the Connection with the more
Divine Parts is not evident: For these being but as the Body, and some of them
of the more remote Parts from the Soul of Scripture, cannot sparkle that Divine
Light and Heat the Spirit of Scripture does, and so may stand in need of
borrowed Light from the Superior Luminaries of Sacred Truth, and in many Cases
may, like the Moon, need Reflections of Light from our very Earth; but the Sun
of Scripture receives the Highest Testimony, by the strongest Reflections of its
own Original Beams.

Quest. How comes it to pass, that there are such different Degrees of
Scripture. Excellency in the several Parts of it, and that it is not one Even
Form of Doctrine, methodically laid together, and of the same Tenor of
Discourse.

Answ. In this seeming Disorder appears the great Wisdom and Majesty of Divine
Contrivance, that without obliging it self to the low and even pedantick Laws
of Humane Discourse, it raises so great a Record of Truth upon variety of
Occasions, and by an Infinite Foresight predetermining to it self the several
Measures and Ends of Scripture, raises them out of a great variety of
Accidents, and in such an Order as seemed best to it self for those Ends, so as
to give easy and ready Advantages to him that runs to read, and gather
Instructions of weightiest moment, and also of quickest and suddenest sally
upon his Mind, of greatest aptness to fix upon the Memory without loading it,
and yet in the mean time to lay the Obligations of all Degrees of Search and
Diligence to join one part of Scripture to another, so as to comprehend the
whole Complex of Divine Doctrine, and extract the Order of History. For by a
most natural, free, and unaffected occasional way, all Truths to make wise to
Salvation, and a complete Sum of all Goodness, is to be found in Scripture,
with infinite Varieties of Address, all the ways possible, to the
Understanding, Will, Affections, Conscience, Memory, Imagination, suited to all
Capacities, States, Conditions, full of plain and obvious, of most retired,
secret, and farthestreach'd Wisdom, which no Mind can fully grasp, nor Tongue
express.

And with these Things of main Importance, runs along such a Chronology of the
Dealings of God, with the World, and especially with his Church, as serves the
main Design. All Learning and Knowledge in the mean time attending with
lowliest Submission, and not with pompous Appearance.

Now from this Supreme Dispose of all things to the Ends of God in Scripture,
out of such a variety of Emergencies of all sorts, arises such a diversity of
several Excellencies in the Parts of Scripture, that yet all meet in that Great
Center of the Glory of God, in a Communication of his Counsels concerning Man,
and that turn round those Two Globes, that little one of the present World, a
Point like this Earth, and the other that vast Circumference of Eternity.

Quest. But is there not as great a difference arising from the various States
and Conditions of the Writers of Scripture, and the so different Periods of
Time they were upon?

Answ. That there is, and must needs be a difference, is undeniable; yet, to
the great Glory of Scripture, and assurance it is from God, even those smallest
and lowest things last spoken of are all treated with all the Purity, Gravity,
becoming the Penmen of the Holy Spirit, and with all the Usefulness their
Nature can extend to; Even so the Holy Men used by God in this Service, how
various and differing soever in their several Ages and Times of writing, in
their Circumstances of State and Condition in this World, High, Low, Rich,
Poor, Learned, Unlearned, how distant soever in their Times of Writing, in the
outward Forms and Modes of their Worship of God, in the Things that fell under
their Account and Relation, before the Law, under the Law, in the Days of the
Messiah, after his Death; yet there is the same Spirit, Scope, Chastness of
Style, Majesty, and Authority in the Contexture; one Aspect upon the Glory of
God, Obedience to him, Desire of his Favor, as the whole Happiness of Man; the
same Reflections upon the great Evil of Sin, and the consequent Misery, and even
of their own Sins: So that where any Combination, or Conference to concert
things, was impossible, yet there is such an Union without a set Uniformity, as
assures the One Hand of the Divine Spirit and Guidance upon All.

Quest. Is not the Church of God the Trustee and Depository of Sacred Oracles?

Answ. It is so in Divine Ordination, and the general Course of Providence; but
yet it adds nothing to them, but receives all from them. The Church is known to
be the Church by the Scriptures, not the Scriptures by the Church, except
declaratorily only. The Church is the Pillar and Rest of Scriptures, where God
is pleased to fix them, that they may be exposed to Public View; but their
Authority is of God, evident in themselves.

Quest. Do we then attribute nothing more to the Church, in which we were
Baptized, and received the Knowledge of Religion?

Answ. A very great Favor it is of God, that when he writes up the People, he
counts that we were born within his True Church, where all the Springs of
Salvation run: but as to the Proof of Religion, or the Records of it, it can be
no more than a Private Proof: For, till we make a true Judgment, by what is
Divine and Public, and of God in the true Church, it does no more than equal
other Societies walking with Confidence and Assurance, with great Awes and
Devotion, in the Name of their God, in the Profession of their Religion. Till
therefore there is a Trial of every Religion, and the Records of it, all such
Societies are upon the same Level. When the Religion, and Oracles of every
Religion, come to be tried, and duly examined, the Church of God rises to
Heaven, and all else, except so far as they join in any Parts of the same
Truth, sink down beneath.

Quest. But how can we know that every Book of Scripture is Scripture, but by
the Testimony of the Church? or, that we have all the Books of it, but by the
same Testimony?

Answ. That the Books we own for Scripture are Scripture, and all of them so,
arises to our Assurance by finding the same Divine Spirit of Truth running
through one, as does through another: For, upon this account the True Church
received them, when first received, and so transmitted them, making the same
Judgment successively in the several Ages, as the first did, the same Reason
always continuing. What is besides this, is to be attributed to the Discerning
of Spirits in all the Times while Scripture was writing, by the due Exercise of
which True Scripture was received, and all other shut out: for, the Writings of
Prophets was subject to Prophets, and by them enrolled into Scriptures. That we
have the same Scripture justly and faithfully consigned over to us from Age to
Age, is to be owned and acknowledged to Divine Providence watching over his
Church and Oracles together, and conveying to us by the ordinary Security of
the Churches Testimony, the Precious distinguished not only from the Vile, but
from the less Precious also: but yet we must have greater Testimony than this,
as has been already urged.

Quest. But how could we be assured we have all the Scripture, were it not for
the Churches Testimony?

Answ. Finding so much Divine, and no more of the same stamp in the World, we
may be concluded that way, and abundantly satisfied, that God will accept us in
our Faith and Obedience to so great a Revelation. When any measure of Divine
Truth has been adhered to sincerely, the Danger has always been greater in
losing True Religion by corrupt Additions; and the injurious Refusals of
further Revelation come to pass more through the Prejudices of that Corruption,
than by humble and modest Suspensions, till God has assured us of his further
Revelations. But besides this, we may easily find, we must needs have the whole
Globe of Truth, and the Horizon of the Gospel gives us the whole Heaven or
Kingdom of it, as it is administered in this World; so that all further Degrees
of Light, and Discoveries of it, shall be but greater Clearnesses of what we
already have in the main and Substance: For, if even the New Testament, though
it made so great a change, did but thus complete and illustrate Christ
yesterday and to day the same, how much more may we be assured, who have the
New it self, so much excelling the Old, as it every where assures us? So that
we can expect a Milennium, or the New Jerusalem on Earth, only for the highest
Exaltation of what we now have, till we come to Heaven it self.

Quest. Do the various Readings, so often bandied by Learned Men, make no
Abatement from the Certainty of Scripture?

Answ. Those various Readings are such as excite and quicken Search, and yet
cannot distract the Doctrine, being not able to alter the Scope, Coherence, and
Design of the Context, much less to change the Analogy of Scripture in other
Places: While therefore they do not that, they take away the suspicion of
Conspiracy, they preserve from greater Corruptions, by turning the Eyes of Men
to look every way; they show how many excellent Senses dwell near the Divine
Writing, and the Bad are manifestly enough thrown off: For in main things there
is so much repeated, and said over again and again, as that all such Truths may
be fully presented and assured, and yet not so much be said, as might be said
of the same kind, without any Tautology; for the Subjects are so rich, that
even the World would be over-charg'd, and not able to contain the Books that
would be written. Amen.

CAP. VII. Of the Public Interpretation of Scripture.
Quest. THat the Progress upon this great Point may be made with the best
Advantage, it will be necessary to state the Amount of what has been already
asserted, viz. That Scripture is a Public and Divine Record; and, That the
Proof and Evidence it is Divine, is Divine and Public also: What therefore do
these two Positions arise to?

Answ. They arise plainly to this; 1. That True Religion is at once given,
unalterably fixed on Monuments of its own, and cannot receive the various
Phases of Increase or Decrease, like the Moon, by new and upstart Decrees,
Canons, or Anathemas. 2. That Religion is in this Sense Public, even as God
himself, that it is of free and open access in the Scripture, and its
Entertainment as liberal as the Light and the Fountains of Water; and no Man
need wait till his Religion be drawn out of the private Repository of Breast or
Breasts. 3. That the Assurance and Evidence of Scripture is very near us, when
we come to treat with it; so that we need not send up to Heaven, that were to
bring Scripture down from above, when it is come down already; nor beyond the
Sea, to oldest Antiquity, for a Scale to it, which has always the Broad Seal
of Divinity with it; for that were to bring Scripture a second time from the
Apostles and former Ages, through which Divine Care and Providence has already
passed it down to us, with the very same principal Assurance it gave them, viz.
that Divine Life of Truth and Holiness that cannot be far from any one of us;
for in it our Understandings and Consciences live, and move, and have their
Beings, and in that Light alone see Light.

Quest. But has the Private Spirit of Apostate Angels, working by Corrupted
Humane Nature, made no Attempt upon this Public Record, though so every way
guarded, as it is, to introduce a False Religion, even under the Appearance of
this Public Authority of Scripture?

Answ. Yes; that very notorious one of Private Interpretation.

Answ. What is Private Interpretation?

Answ. That it may be well understood, being a very great Instrument of the
False Spirit, we must proceed by degrees to the true Comprehension of it: And
first, in the strictness of its Notion, it is an affixing a Sense to Scripture,
or any part of it, that does not so evidently and indisputably flow from
Scripture, as to partake of the Divinity of Scripture.

Quest. How should an Interpretation be so made of Scripture, as to partake of
its Divineness?

Answ. An Interpretation is as Divine as Scripture, when it is the true evident
Importance and Sense of Scripture Words and Scope, and carries the perfect
Spirit and Analogy of Scripture with it, or is a Deduction and Doctrine
arising from Scripture, measured by the Context by its usual ways of expressing
it self, and the compare of one Place of Scripture with another, so as to
evince it self to be a just and necessary Consequence.

Quest. What is the Effect of such Interpretations?

Answ. Every one that soberly, and impartially, and piously attends to it,
cannot but be convinced and instructed by it, as the true Divine
Scripture-Sense, opened and applied to him.

Quest. How else may Interpretation be Public and Divine, even as Scripture it
self?

Answ. When there is truly a Divine Presence, and such Motives of Credibility
by which a rightly qualified Person may be induced to believe, that such an
Interpreter is immediately assisted by the Holy Spirit to give such an
Interpretation, that else could not be found by any Created Sagacity or
Industry, in such particular Places of Scripture, either from the Importance of
the Words, the strength of the Context, or Scope, or in the Analogy of
Scripture, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual.

Quest. What are to be understood to be Motives of Credibility in so great a
Case?

Answ. The Divine Sense of an Interpretation, agreeable with all those so
self-evident Notions of God, and all Goodness; the Weight and Gravity of the
Matter; The Authoritativeness of Scripture Language and Elocution; Miracles;
Agreement with all former Scripture; Awes upon the Conscience; Inward
Illumination of the Holy Spirit, in its Sanctifying and Heavenly Influences
breathing in it, and with it. These are a Divine and Public Presence, and
absolutely constitute further Scripture, even as they illustrate and put a
greater Splendor upon former Scripture, and complete it.

Quest. Who were such Interpreters of former Scripture?

Answ. The Prophets were such Interpreters upon the Law in their Time, even all
that writ after Moses, who either by Histories, compiled by such Divine
Inspiration, gave Examples agreeable to the Scope of the Law, or by Sermons
stirred up to the Obedience of it, and reproved the Disobedience; or by Divine
Meditations, Discourses, and Hymns, displayed it; or by Prophesies foretold the
Government of God in his Church, and in the World according to it; but
especially accommodated all things in it under Prophetic Veils, to Christ, and
the State of True Religion under the New Testament: All the Prophets from
Samuel, and all that followed after, as many as have spoken, foretold likewise
of these days: All which together fill up wholly the Spaces of Scripture in the
Old Testament.

Quest. How did the New Testament, and the Writers of it, succeed in this great
Office of Expounding and Summing up Scripture in this Public Divine Authority?

Answ. They were above all that went before them: For, John the Baptist, than
whom a greater Prophet among them that were born of Women had not risen, yet he
that was least in the Kingdom of God, in the more explained State of
Christianity, was greater than he.

Quest. How is this Notion of Public Interpretation, contradistinguish'd to
Private, made good out of Scripture it self?

Answ. From the Apostle Peter, who expressly tells us, Scripture is not of any
Private Interpretation: Whose Sense in that place is very necessary to be
pursued, both as it much clears the Nature of Private Interpretation, and also
strengthens the Foundations of the New Testament, as laid in the Old.

Quest. But you know the Original Word there used, and translated
Interpretation, is by some understood for no more than the Prophetic
Declaration, or Interpreting the Mind of God, revealed by Inspiration; and by
very many, another Word signifying Inspiration it self, or the Illapse of the
Divine Spirit in those Prophetic Revelations, is preferred to the Word
translated Interpretation, as the more genuine Reading.

Answ. I know the Current of Expositors both the ways you mention; but against
them both there is this great Reason: No other but Interpretation, and that
strictly taken, will fit the Apostles Purpose.

Quest. What was the Apostles Purpose?

Answ. To assure the Jewish Christians in the Truth of Christianity, out of
that more sure Word of Prophecy in the Old Testament.

Quest. Was it not then to the purpose, to assure the Divine Original of that
Word of Prophecy, and to assert its immediate Descent from the Public Holy
Spirit?

Answ. That indeed was necessarily supposed and included, or rather concluded
on all hands; but not the close Point in discourse: For, the Sacredness of the
Old Testament being agreed both by Jews and Christians, the Apostle commends
the giving heed to it, as to a Light that shone in a dark place, a great Lamp
shining when all was dark and deep Night about, till the Day of the Gospel
dawned, and Christ, the Day Star, arose in their Hearts by Faith.

Quest. What was the precise Mark the Apostle was to aim at?

Answ. To vindicate the true way of Interpreting this sure Word of Prophecy.

Quest. Why was this so much to his purpose?

Answ. Because the whole Stream of Interpretation of the Old Testament among
the Jews run against Christianity.

Quest. Whence came this Current of False Interpretation?

Answ. Even from whence Interpretation might seem least of all to deserve the
name of Private, from the Scribes and Pharisees, Doctors of the Law, Elders of
the People, who vogued themselves the Public, and so Proprietors of the Sense
and Interpretation of the Scriptures; but, as our Savior says, they had indeed
taken away this true Key of Knowledge, neither entering in themselves, nor
suffering those that would.

Quest. How does the Apostle vindicate this Point?

Answ. By a vehement Caution on those to whom he vrit, to measure from the
Public and Divine Original of Scripture, to the Interpretation, as necessarily
to be Public and Divine also; You do well (says he) to take heed to the Word
of Prophecy of the Old Testament, as yet more sure to you than the New can be;
if you do but know and well consider this first, and lay it in the Foundation,
That Scripture cannot be subject to a Private Interpretation, whose Original
you your selves, together with us, acknowledge as Public as the Holy Spirit:
For, can that be subject to the Will and Dispose of Man in the Interpretation,
that came not by the Will of Man, but by the Supreme Motion of the Holy Ghost,
in the Original?

Quest. Wherein lies the Strength of this Argument?

Answ. In this: If the Interpretation of Scripture be not as high as the
Original, so high an Original is to no purpose: For Sense being more Scripture
than Words, and Interpretation assigning the Sense, if That be Private, All is
Private at the Rebound, and not Divine: else a Divine Original shall be
mismatch'd, controlled, and even made servile by and to a Private, and often a
False and Unworthy Interpretation.

Quest. Into what Use and Effect did this Argument issue?

Answ. To a silent calling them to compare the Manner and Kind of
Interpretation used by the Lord and his Apostles, and that other of the Jewish
Doctors, and then to udge which appeared Divine, and from God, which not; and
they would easily give the Preference to our Lord and his Ministers, as the
only Divine Interpreters.

Quest. How then did our Savior and the Apostles justify their Interpretation
to be Public and Divine?

Answ. By one of the two forenamed ways; either from the evident Importance of
some very express Scriptures of the Old Testament, applied in the New; as
David's calling Christ (who was his Son) Lord, which muzled the very
Adversaries; or by the immediate Presence of the Divine Spirit, discovering
what it had treasured and sealed up in such Expressions, which Eye could not
see, nor Heart conceive, till in due time the Spirit it self revealed them: The
Spirit, that knows its own Depths; the Spirit, to whom are known all its own
Designs, from the first Foundations or Beginning of Scripture, to the highest
Stone in the Structure, or End of it: The Top is known to it in the very
Bottom; the End, in the Beginning. That therefore which was seen to Men only in
the Rudiment or Foundation, and seemed to mean no more, appeared at that very
time to him in the Complement, and he applies it to that Complement, as
certainly and justly as they did to the first Rudiment or Foundation: As, Out
of Egypt have I called my Son, was as truly applied to Christ's coming out of
Egypt, being then come to its Perfection of Sense, as it was applied to Israel
coming out of Egypt in the first Rudiment; and the Divine Spirit as truly meant
the last as the first, though none could know its Sense but it self, till it
self revealed it.

Quest. How could it be proved the Ministers of the New Testament had the true
Key of Interpretation committed to them by the Spirit?

Answ. By the concurrence of all things that justified the first Writers of
Scripture to be Commissioned by God; Great and weighty Truth, Holy, Heavenly,
becoming God, as the Author; such Speech, as none beside the Writers of
Scripture ever spoke; all of a piece with former Scripture; Miracles; mighty
Efficacy upon Consciences; the Glory of God; the Salvation of Souls; the
abolishing of Sin, the Ends designed in all; the removing all lower Forms and
Ceremonies for the time being, into a most High, Spiritual, Substantial
Religion; True Peace of Conscience introduced. These, with innumerable others,
concurring in any Interpretation of former Scripture, that could not else be
found out in its full Meaning, do both enlighten former Scripture, and enlarge
it into further and more Scriptures.

Quest. If then our Lord and his Apostles, in Interpreting the Old Testament by
the immediate Presence of the Holy Spirit, resting without measure on our
Savior, and in full measures on the Apostles, discovered that Sense in the
Ancient Scriptures which was indeed deposited there, but could not be unlocked
by any Created Wisdom; it will follow thence, That it is an unnecessary Labor
of many Worthy Expositors of Scriptures, to press too hard in every Quotation
of the Old Testament we find in the New, for a free and full Confession of all
that Sense it there expresses, as if it could naturally arise from so many
Words and Syllables so put together, having power and virtue by themselves to
signify so high; since the Holy Spirit had a reach in them, which none could
grasp or fathom, but it self; and contrived that Sense so into Words, as none
could summon it but it self; and that it rested upon the Lord and his Apostles
to bring it to light, and reveal it into New and Higher Scriptures; and that it
appears as undeniably they did so, as that the Old Testament it self is
Scripture.

Answ. The Industry of such Worthy Persons is not to be blamed, to trace the
Sense of the New Testament in the Words of the Old, as far as it is possible
for them to go: But if they cannot give Satisfaction to cavelling Atheists, or
Infidels, or to the Scruples of Good Men, it still remains a just Ground of
Satisfaction: The Spirit, that carried, by an Almighty Hand, the Writers of the
Old Testament, carried those Penmen of the New by the same also; and from one
single Glance of its Meaning, that it self, with Divine Artifice, had left
drawn there, it derives that full Face of Truth in the New. No more impossible
then is that Sense it gives in the New, to be its Sense in the Old, than that
Samson's Riddle in the Exposition, should be his Sense in the dark Cover of it
in Words that could not else import it. He that created the Words in the Old
Testament, and even then inspired them with that Divinest Sense, as with Life,
might yet suffer it to lie intoomb'd in them, till it self, that entrusted it
there, gave it a Resurrection in the New.

Quest. But would you have none undertake in the Interpreting or Expounding
Scripture, except by Inspiration, or the Evidences of immediate Divine
Presence, where either Scripture is not so express as to be its own undoubted
Interpreter, or the Interpretation deduced as evidently as any Consequence by
Reason?

Answ. Far be it from me to discourage or lessen such Undertakings; I rather
wish all the Lord's People thus far Prophets, to search the Meaning of
Scripture, with all the Helps and Advantages they can attain; and that in the
mean time all those who have any part of the Prophetic Office upon them, would
read and meditate day and night, to Interpret Scripture to themselves and
others.

Quest. But how is such Interpretation consistent with the Apostles so great
Assertion, That Scripture is not of any Private Interpretation?

Answ. First, Interpretation guiding it self by the plain, evident, and
Self-Interpreting Oracles of Scripture, in things absolutely necessary to
Salvation, displays a Body of Divine, Public Truth, which in regard of the
Darkness, Inattendence, and Inconsideration of the generality of the very
Professors of the Faith of the Scriptures, and much more in regard of the great
Indisposedness of their Hearts to the Obedience of Scriptures, need such
constant Displays by Applicatory Interpretation, and a distinct Office, to
attend continually on this very Thing. And yet the main Concernment of such
Interpretation lies in what is so plain, that, when opened and applied, it is
impossible to be doubted of, as Scriptures Sense.

2. Such Interpretation as may be Private in regard of its Derivation of any
Doctrine from such or such a particular Place of Scripture, yet keeping it self
to the Analogy of Scripture, in the plain and undoubted Sense in other Places,
does still maintain the free and Public Course of the Waters of Life.

3. Interpretation of Scripture thus guiding it self according to the evident
Sense of Scripture, in its clearest Parts, and taking that as a Clew into the
more abstruse Parts of Scripture, necessarily encounters much Sound and
excellent Truth, nearly allied to Public and Divine, in all Knowledge,
Natural, Historical, Chronological, Moral, Political, pertaining to Language
and Eloquence, which makes the World more lightsom, and less subject to the
Tyranny of the Prince of Darkness. How great a Light of all Learning has
broken out from the very Endeavors of Interpreting Scripture, to the Glory of
the Father of Lights, the high Honor and venerable Estimation of Scripture,
the much Ascertaining True Public Religion, and the Universal Good!

4. Many great Truths, and undoubtedly Divine in themselves, that, being more
at a distance from those that are necessary to Salvation, it has not pleased
the Public Wisdom of the World to give such Assurance of them, as that they
should be imposed upon the Belief of all that acknowledge the Sacred Authority
of Scriptures, and yet may present very large Satisfactions to the Minds of
those who are assisted by the Holy Spirit, into the great Scripture-Reason, in
such Points, though but particularly for themselves: They may then taste the
Graciousness of God, and the Gratefulness of Truth in them, without imposing on
any others, who cannot see by their Light.

5. Yea, even in things controverted between Holy, Wise, and Good Men, in
Interpreting Scripture, each part of the Controversy, when both cannot be
reconciled in their Sense, yet supports and makes stronger to their Faith some
grand, evident Principles of Divine and Public Truth, in which both Sides
meet, and are firmly united, and to which each reconcile their own Opinions,
wherein they seem to differ from such Principles, or from one another, and
leave a Middle, in which they may meet one another, and wherein Persons
unconcerned in their Controversies rest: Upon which Agitations yet follow great
Illustrations and Confirmations of such Grand Principles, and Enlargements of
Knowledge, by the very Traverses of Dispute, among Men sincerely affected to
Truth, and who search into it, without the Love of Contention, without
Bitterness and Animosity; but humbly, modestly, and with largeness of Mind
toward those that dissent from them.

6. God, the Friend of Universal Knowledge, allows the Souls gratification of
it self with probable Sentiments, restrained within due Bounds, that may grow
from Scripture-Interpretation.

7. And lastly, Pardons the Infirmities adhering to Humane Transactions, in
this most necessary Duty of Searching the Scriptures, and overrules such
Miscarriages, yea, and even the more malevolent Distempers of Men herein, some
way or other, to Good; and makes them oftentimes Servants to some great Points
of Truth.

Quest. All this that has been described, I confess, agrees with so Public
and Catholic a Record as Scripture is: A Record, wherein every one that comes
to it, may search his own Interest and Concern in it, and improve it to the
utmost: A Record that offers and exposes it self to be understood and closely
inquired into by all. But how is it secured from a multitude of Private
Interpretations, when so many Interpretations, acknowledgedly Private,
continually pass upon it?

Answ. Herein it is secure; 1. That Scripture is not of any Interpretation, but
its own native Sense: It is not under the Power of any other: It stands free,
and clear, far above all Interpretation of Men, to be considered by any one in
it self, and not under such Interpretation. Such Interpretation does not become
Scripture, nor bind any one under the Curse fixed on those that add to
Scripture, or take from it. These Interpretations may be added to, or taken
from, according as Men see Reasons of Scripture preponderating one way or
other. This is the Freedom of Scripture, to suffer all due approaches to its
Sense. This is its most severe Constancy to refuse all, but its own true Sense.

2. As Scripture is not of any Interpretation, but its own Native Sense, so its
Sense is of no other Evidence, but of Spiritual Divine, and truly Rational
Evidence; so that if any Man does not bring such proofs of Scripture Sense, as
agree with Scriptures way of Evidencing it self; and Scriptures way is not that
of Private Authority, or Humane Imposition, but of Divine Authority and
Presence; his Interpretation, however true, yet does not bind, as it is his
Interpretation, or upon any other Recommendation, but Scriptures proper ways of
recommending it self: I speak as to Wise Men, judge ye what I say.

Quest. What then is that Private Interpretation the Apostle remonstrates
against?

Answ. All Interpretation that brings no Credentials from evident
Scripture-sense, nor from Heaven, of immediate Inspiration, much more if False,
or Mean, and impossible to be so derived, and yet would impale and enclose
Scripture within it self, and impose it self upon the Consciences and Judgments
of others, and so bring them under Bondage: That which forbids Men to Interpret
for themselves, though with utmost Industry, and all the Assistance they can
use, and the Implorings of Divine Assistance: That which gives out Private
Oracles at pleasure, and too often most False ones, as if they were Scripture,
and for its own Private sake would lock Scripture from the possibility of being
Interpreted even by it self, sequestring it into an unknown Tongue, from great
Multitudes of all Nations professing Jesus Christ. This is indeed Private
Interpretation, and adding to Scripture, making another Scripture, which yet is
not another.

And thus are all lower Degrees of this Tyranny to be estimated, according to
their several Graduations in it; imposing upon Men, as from some Scriptural
Authority, what is not of the True Excellency, Spirit, and High Descent of
Scripture, nor manifested in Men's Consciences, as Scripture manifests it self.

Quest. Is it not then necessary, in regard of the Confusion arising from the
variousness and incertainty of every Man Interpreting for himself, and without
certain Divine Evidence, that there should be some Infallible Public
Interpreter, so Divinely assisted as you describe? And is it not reasonable to
believe there is such a one, seeing we cannot suppose God is wanting to his
Church in such a Necessary?

Answ. 1. Scripture it self is such an Infallible Interpreter, it being in all
things necessary to Salvation both clear and certain, to all but the self
condemned Heretic, or Ignorant.

2. When there comes such an Infallible Interpreter, bearing the Seal of such
Credentials, as the Scripture does, we will receive him. Till such an
Interpreter, so armed, comes to us, we are never the better for his Pretense to
Infallibility; But all that receive him are destroyed by him, when he brings
Falsehood for Truth under so great a Title; so that he becomes more an Apollyon,
or Destroyer of the Church, than an open Enemy can be.

Quest. Must we not then necessarily suppose great Tracts of Scripture lying
like unknown Land, for want of Public Interpretation?

Answ. That there may be so, cannot be denied, in Controverted or Prophetic
Parts of Scripture: Yet that God has been pleased to communicate much useful
Knowledge relating to them, is most evident, and most thankfully to be
acknowledged to his Goodness and Bounty.

Quest. What Expectation is there of a Full and Certain Public Interpretation
of all such Scriptures?

Answ. It is not for us to know the Times and Seasons, which the Father has
put in his own power: But, most probably, at the time of fulfilling the great
Prophesies of the New Testament, there shall be such extraordinary Effusions of
the Divine Spirit, as shall expedite all Doubt, and make every thing clear, the
Knowledge of which is not reserved for Heaven, to adorn the Absolute State of
Persection there.

Quest. Seeing by all that has been said, it appears, how incongruous Private
Interpretation is to Public Scripture, or that the Will of Man should be
trusted with the one, and not with the other; What Account therefore can be
given of Translations? May not they bring in a Private Interpretation upon
Scripture, if not performed by an immediate Divine Assistance?

Answ. Even as in the safe Conveyance of Scripture it self, and preserving it
pure from gross Falsifications, so in Translations, we must leave God to be the
Governor of the World, and of his Church. He has been pleased to order the
Conveyance of Scriptures into so many Languages, by raising up many to travel
in the Knowledge of all Tongues, and the Keys of them, as in the Originals, to
find out their Meaning, and to transfuse them into all other Languages, and
that, by so many, of several Ages and Nations, as makes all Combination to
deceive, impossible; and Universal Deception, next to impossible, upon the
Translators themselves. These things are under his supreme Care: It is enough
to us, there is brought to our Knowledge such an excellent Doctrine, rising out
of so many Divine Sayings and Discourses, that are as so many Stars in the
Firmament of Truth, clear as the Luminaries of that name in the Heavens. Why
should we then be more than modestly and humbly concerned to know all the Ages
they have passed through before they came to us, or all the Secrets concerning
their Motion and Appearance* that he only knows, that calls the Stars by their
Names? It is enough, they evidently and undeniably declare God to us, and
assure us by their Light, by their regular Motion according to the Laws of
Truth and Goodness, that they are Stars, the Greater and the Lesser differing
one from another in Glory, yet all Stars, and of a truly Divine Luster,
Certain, and not Wandering.

Quest. Let us now hear the Conclusion of this whole Matter.

Answ. It rests in these two things.

1. That the Evidences of the Divine Presence in the Scriptures, and all the
principal Branches thereof, are as clear and certain, and do satiate the Soul
and its Faculties, enlightened by the general Influences of the Divine Spirit,
much more by its sanctifying Efficacy, even as the clearest Notions we have of
Things do, and much above them: And that these Evidences are the same in the
Original Scriptures, and in the Translations, for that they are indeed All
Original, and not capable of any Translation, but make even Translation an
Original.

2. That as Scripture is such a Contexture, and makes up such a Book, God, the
supreme Governor of the Church, and of the World in general, has always, and
does always take care of its preservation from such Corruptions as would injure
those Evidences of Divine Inspiration he has engraven upon it, not only upon
the Substance, but upon the very Contexture; and the very same care he has
taken for the Conveyance of it, by agreeable Translations, to the several
Nations in their own Tongue, to whom he has vouchsafed the Scriptures
themselves, or the Doctrine of them.

Quest. Has God wrought miraculously to these Ends?

Answ. That need not be asserted; but he has, by the ordinary Interposals of
Providence, watchful in every thing over its own Ends, brought all to pass he
in Wisdom thought necessary.

Quest. What Visible Means has Providence used for the securing Scriptures
against foul Corruptions?

Answ. Continual and various Copyings of the Original, even in the Days of the
Writers, in the very time of the Inspection and Ministry of the Prophets and
Apostles; and downwards from them, both by Manuscript and Print: which various
Copies being compared, though they have not to the degree of a Miracle agreed
in Minutes, have yet concerted the Substance.

Quest. What care has God been pleased to take with regard to Translations?

Answ. Very eminent, where it needed most: For, some Ages before the coming of
the Messiah, it came (no doubt by Divine Superintendency, which has the Hearts
of Kings in his Hands, and turns them as the Rivers of Water) into the Heart of
a Great and Learned Prince of Egypt, to procure the Translation of the Divine
Law into the Greek, the then most known Language of the World. Seventy two
Seniors of the Jews, as History most generally agrees, the Learnedest in their
Native Hebrew, were employed in it. This Translation was generally and
publicly received among the Jews, was approved by our Lord and his Apostles in
several Quotations.

Hereby there was at once a Preparation of those Scriptures to the most Public
Notice, an Assurance of the true Import of the Hebrew Tongue, and an authorized
Translation: And in the same so known Greek Language, wherein are reposed such
Treasures of all Literature, is added that most Sacred Roll of the New
Testament.

And from that time have there been, by the great Industry God has excited Men
to, several Versions of the Old and New Testament, into a great variety of
Languages, with strict Expository Researches, and Criticisms, upon all that
concerns either the Readings, or the Sense of Words and Phrases, as well as the
Doctrine contained in them; by which there might be a freer Propagation of
Sacred Knowledge, and a Security against such Corruptions and Mistakes as might
efface the Divine Image, or any of the Lineaments of it, in these Records, or
their Translations, however differing, as I have said, in minuter Things.

CAP. VIII. Of Tradition and Antiquity.
Quest. BY what has been said, Scripture and its Interpretation appear guarded
by their own Divineness, against all Private and Counterfeit, as by Cherubims,
and a Flaming Sword turning every way. But has there been no Stratagem of the
Adversary to undermine Divine Catholic Religion, and the Authority of
Scripture, the Public Record of Religion, with its Public Interpretation; and
yet that all these should seem still to rest firm upon their own Base?

Answ. The great Enemy of God and Truth has been wanting in no Artifice, and
therefore has fallen upon that very Method inquired of; that what could not be
achieved by denying Scripture, by bringing in False Scripture, or Private
Interpretation, monstrous to the Text, (all such gross Frauds being in some
Times and Places exposed and exploded) might be more successfully attempted and
effected, by yoaking Tradition with Scripture, a Private Uncertain Oracle with
a Public and Certain one, and so avowed to be by the Traditionists themselves.

Quest. What is Tradition?

Answ. These four things concur to the making up Tradition.

1. That from the Divine Authority of Scriptures, and the True Religion of
them, which (as has been said) it acknowledges, it borrows not only
Countenance, but Occasion, and more than that, a show of Reason and Necessity
for it self.

2. That it therefore endeavors to tack and join it self to Scripture, and the
Religion of it, as necessary to complete and fill it up, or to provide
something more requisite to that Religion, that Scripture has not provided for.

3. That it having grown up from no true Root, nor risen upon any just
Foundation, it has stolen into its Authority and Reverence, by being passed
from Hand to Hand so long, that its Elderliness looks like a Patent for that
Authority and Reverence: And its Original (some Injudicious Devotion, at the
best) not being easy to be traced, it comes to be supposed, or rather
superstitiously to be suspected to be Divine; and at length, like a long told
Lie, assuming to be Truth, it takes upon it self to be Divine, and to curse all
those that derogate from it.

4. That having thus rivetted it self, it by degrees, like Pharaoh's Lean Kine,
eats out the generous and rich Sense of Scripture, and devours the Authority of
it, and yet it self remains a jejune and starved Superstition.

Quest. Who are the great Masters of Tradition?

Answ. They that have, under the True Religion, set up some private Diana of
Profit, Honor, or Worldly Advantage, and cannot maintain it by that True
Religion, they eke out therefore with Private Tradition what may support it.

Quest. What Antidote is there against the Mischief of Tradition?

Answ. To cleave with full purpose and resolution of Heart and Soul to the Word
of God, and to that only; to have no Religion, nor any thing in Religion, but
what is enjoined and recommended by Divine Authority, in that Blessed Word of
God; and this is indeed to be of the truly Catholic, Apostolic, and Public
Religion.

Quest. But is the Sense that has now been given of Tradition, the best Sense
of it in Scripture-use?

Answ. No, it is not; and the Consideration of a better Sense will much clear
to us the Nature of Tradition. When therefore our Savior discoursed of the
Commandments of Men, delivered down from Hand to Hand, subsisting only upon the
Private Authority of the Elders, not founded on the written Canon of the Old
Testament, at that time the only Rule of Faith, Worship, and Practice, he
always names Tradition in the ill Sense already given: But when the Doctrine
and Rules of the New Testament, in those grand Points, were just breathing from
the Holy Spirit, and not yet fixed in that abiding Canon, Tradition is so long
accepted in a good Sense. The History of the Things done by our Savior, though
most surely believed, Luc. 1. 1. was first but delivered or tradition'd by Word
of Mouth, but afterward written, that the certainty of them might be more
fully known to those that had been before Catechized in them by Oral Tradition.
All the Ordinances of the Christian Worship were first Traditions, 1 Cor. 11.
2. and the very Rules of Life were in Tradition, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.

But yet all these, though they were Traditions delivered by those that were
Commissioned immediately by the Holy Ghost, and were themselves Eyewitnesses
and Ear-witnesses of most Things they gave in Tradition, were yet not sealed so
sure as the more sure Word of Prophecy, because they were not yet written by
Divine Inspiration, though given out by it, nor generally received and assured,
as so written, till the due time of Trial by former Scripture had passed upon
them. The first Christians did therefore well to take heed to that former
Scripture, till they had the full Day of the Gospel, as has been before spoken.

If Tradition then was not so sure in the first and truly pure Times of it, how
much less would it have been sure afterward, if it had continued in Tradition?
All therefore of Doctrine in the New Testament was first prepared by Tradition,
laid in and proved by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, either by direct
Consequence, or by Interpretation from immediate Revelation, demonstrated, as
the First giving of Scripture always was, by Miracles; and so all at once, and
once for all, consigned over to the Posterity of Christians by Divinely
Inspired Writings, so assured, so confirmed, as to leave no place for Tradition
of the Best sense: There remains therefore nothing for Tradition now, but its
Ill sense.

Quest. Why might not True Religion continue in Tradition, committed all along
to Faithful Men, even as it did in the Custody of the Apostles, and such
Faithful Persons as they committed it to?

Answ. Even in the time of the Apostles it was trusted no longer to Tradition,
than it must needs; for the Apostle John, the Survivor of them, closed the
Canon of the New Testament, that was drawn apace into Writing all along: But at
that time there was such a continual immediate Energy or Efficacy of the Holy
Spirit, that Truth moved every way, like Lightning, and both by its direct and
straight forward Motion in Doctrine, and its reverse strokes in the Conviction
of all Falsehood, Error was blasted every way: But when this Extraordinary
Appearance ceased, there was then no safety for Truth, but in an unchangeable
Written Word, that was in such an extraordinary Season of Miracles and
immediate Revelation, settled and established, under so great a Supervisal, in
the midst of so many Witnesses of all things, by their Eyes and Ears; and it
being once written, and always so secured by Divine Providence, as has been
represented, it always speaks the same Things, in the same Words it first did.

Quest. Why might not Divine Truth be committed, some more Fundamental Parts to
Writing, and some, according to variety of Occasion, to Tradition?

Answ. God, to whom all Futurity is present, who foresaw all that was necessary
to be written, before he had done writing, cannot be supposed to commit his
Will in part to Writing, and that upon great Reasons; and the same Reasons
notwithstanding, to leave a considerable part, or so much as any one Branch
obligatory upon the Conscience, to Parol-Tradition: For, if he that offends in
one Point is guilty of all, there needs the same Authority, and as well
assured, for one Point of Faith and Obedience, as for all the rest.

2. It is unconceivable, what End Tradition, unconsign'd by Scripture, can
serve, that Scripture does not more fully and effectually take care for.
Public Religion reserves nothing to be a Cabal for Private Interest, within a
close Cabinet or Conclave.

3. Whatever is supposed to be entrusted to Tradition, must either be the very
same we have in Scripture, and then Tradition is needless and superfluous; for
we have it in Scripture, if we duly exercise our selves in it: or it is more
than Scripture has declared, and yet supposed to be of equal Authority with
Scripture; and then it must be a Motionary and Itinerant. Word of God: But
where are the daily and continual Seals and Credentials Divine Tradition had,
and in a constant fresh Motion with it, as it moves; for so it had need be, in
so fluid a Thing as Tradition, if it would pretend to be Sacred; and so
Divinely Inspired Tradition had, while it continued in Tradition: But what
Reason can be given, Tradition, as we now speak of it, was not incorporated
into Scripture, as was argued before? Or that in so long a Course of Time it
has not been enrolled into Scripture, as the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles still was? Seeing, if it had all things else, it cannot but want the
Benefit of the Divine Contexture and Conveyance that Scripture has, in Words
chosen, and put together by Inspiration, and the ready, easy, and certain
Access to it by all: For all are equally concerned in it. Now seeing Tradition
wants all these, how can we accept it? How can we look off from Scripture, to
pore upon Tradition? or what hold can we have of it?

Quest. But how can it be, but there must be Tradition, seeing there were so
many Things spoken and done, more than the Scripture contains, or the World it
self could contain, if they were all written? These then being known in the
first Times, have been conserved by Tradition, Tradition made valuable by those
of Honorable Name among Christians, and their Discourses of Christianity?

Answ. Granting such things so preserved, suppose them the Actions and Words of
our Savior himself, yet if not written by Inspired Penmen, they are not
recommended as obligatory upon After-ages: For whatever was necessary, that we
might believe, and have Eternal Life, was so written; and that not only just so
much as might serve Necessity (for that the One Gospel of St. John might serve
to That, it self witnesses) but also be matter of Bounty and Abundance; so that
out of that greater World of Truth, than our World could receive, there was so
much selected as was bountifully sufficient, and abundant to all Intents and
Purposes of Clearness, Certainty, Enforcement upon the Affections, Variety,
continual Exercise and Delight, that so every Christian might be thoroughly
furnished to every good Work, to all things that pertain to Life and Godliness.

As for all that Christ did and spoke, or that the Apostles spoke or did by
Infallible Guidance, and Immediate Assistance, if it be not written, a Veil is
drawn over it, and a Cloud has received it out of our fight: It is a secret
thing, that belongs not to us, but is sealed up from us, like the things which
the Thunders uttered in the Revelation.

And indeed the Wisdom of Providence seems to have dealt with all such Sayings
or Actions, as with the Body of Moses; all Monuments of Worth and Certainty,
after Scripture, in relation to them, are concealed from us: There is a great
Darkness upon the History of that Time, lest we should superstitiously
venerate, in place of that which is divinely written and preserved to us, the
things that were not prepared for our Learning, and so, to us, but as a Body
not divinely inspired, that is, a Body without a Soul. All too fierce Disputes
about them are therefore raised only by Satan, the Enemy of Light and Truth,
to no other purpose than that about the Body of Moses, that is, to found an
occasion of Superstition, and silently to whisper, Scripture is not sufficient.
And yet we see with what an eager Zeal Men are set upon such Researches, not
satisfied with the Proportion of Manna allowed by God; but even as the
Israelites, that gathered much, had nothing over; so may it be truly said of
those that would abound beyond Scripture, in that which pertains to the true
guidance of Conscience, That they have nothing over, and what they will needs
keep, as such, corrupts.

Quest. Is there Reason sufficient to support this Sentiment?

Answ. This great Reason: If we had undoubted, but not inspired History of that
Time, it could not be like the Evangelistick History, or the Acts of the
Apostles to us; we should in some things want the Application and Direction to
our use, dictated by Divine Wisdom; in others, the unerring Censure of even
Apostolic Actions, as in that of the Apostle Peter, Galat. 2. 11. Now because
our Consciences would be apt to be drawn into subjection to things of so great
Reputation, and yet there would be no Divine Authority to draw them, nor
Infallible Authority to support them, in which Cases it is the Absolute Will of
God they should not be in subjection, God has therefore in his Providence left
that time so much in the dark, that we may trust in his written Word only.

For separate Immediate Divine Presence from the Prophets and Apostles
themselves, and there remains nothing at the highest, but the Wisdom and
Prudence of Understanding, and Good Men, applying General Rules to particular
Cases, Times, Places, and Events, as they for that time could best judge, and
yet besides the variation of Circumstances in every Age, they themselves were
as Men, subject to mistakes, as Nathan about David's building the Temple, as
Paul assaying to go into Bithynia; to like Passions with other Men, as in the
Contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas; to like Temptations, as in the
Miscarriage of Peter before referred to: All they did and said, not shining
with immediate Light from Heaven, must be tried in the Light of what
themselves, together with all the other Penmen of Scripture, had written. They
themselves therefore acting or speaking by way of Prudence or general
Assistance, must be tried by themselves, acting or speaking according to
Revelation, and special Assistance, in which only they are and ought to be
Authoritative.

Quest. But it still remains, There might be some things that were not so fit
for vulgar Knowledge, and so were Secreted into Tradition apart from Scripture,
and that Tradition deposited with Trusty Men, who should successively so
deposite it, that it might at convenient Seasons be brought forth, as Goliah' s
Sword from behind the Ephod.

Answ. None like it indeed, to serve a purpose: But to satisfy Reason and
Conscience, nothing so improper. For, first, let these Traditionaries give
clear Expositions, and such as are worthy to be acquiesced in, of the
Prophetic, or otherwise Dark Places of Scripture. If they cannot do that,
where is the Wisdom above the Vulgar? and why did not Tradition, without
Scripture, enclose those mysterious Visions of the Revelation from Popular
Inspection? But the things Tradition is employed indeed in, are quite of
another Nature; either the Prelation of Men in Church-Office and Dignity, or
some Rites of Worship, that should change Devotion into Superstition, or lull
it into Ignorance; or some Canons, that turn Religion into Trade, or Doctrines
suited to that End; or, which serves to all such purposes, a Tradition to call
back all Scripture out of the Written Word into Oral Tradition, by locking it
up in a Tongue unknown to the generality of Christians. And yet if there were
any seemingly Purer, or more Contemplational Traditions, seeing they are not
enrolled into Scripture, they must, as has been said, give such Evidences of
themselves, as Divine Revelation has, or be, at their highest, but Enthusiasm
and Fanaticism.

Quest. But what Esteem is to be had of the Writings and Transactions of the
Ancients, whom we call Fathers, Doctors of the Church, Men of eminent Holiness,
great Abilities, Confessors, and Martyrs of Christianity?

Answ. It may be easily judged, by what has been said already, that they must
be brought to Scripture, laid at its Feet, and submitted to its Acceptance,
whether according to its true Sense, or not: For, if the Apostles, when the
Holy Spirit was not upon them, could not exceed Humane, how much less can any
of a lower Class pretend? The Fathers therefore had so great an Awe of
Scripture, that they did not assume any thing to themselves or their Writings,
or yield any thing to the Persons or Writings of those of the same Time with
them, but according to the undeniable Sense of Scripture.

Quest. But the nearness of these Fathers to the Days of Christ and the
Apostles, must needs enable them, either from what they themselves received
warm from their Lips, or from what they had from others, not quite cold, to
know the Apostles Doctrine, Discipline, Manner of Life, Purpose, their Sense of
the Scope and Meaning of those Things wherein they were Divinely Inspired, and
so to deliver it to After-ages.

Answ. Whatever they have spoken, or written, giving us more light and
advantage to understand, and behold Scripture in its own Light, ought from
them, or from any other, to be accepted with great regard; but if it do not
thus, it cannot be accepted, even from the Writers of Scriptures themselves
upon a single, or divided Authority: They were so bounded by the very Things,
and Words, they themselves had once spoken and written by the Holy Ghost, that
all the deference to their knowledge in Divine Things above others, was to be
made reasonable in the clearest Expounding what themselves and others had
written by Divine Inspiration, and to be discerned in the very Writings
themselves, and not to be drawn oracularly out of their Breasts, when the
Evidences of Divine Inspiration were not upon them: For he that is Spiritual,
i. e. that God vouchsafes Inspiration to, or pretends to it, must acknowledge
all that is either truly written, or spoken by the same Inspiration, to be the
Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37.

And as for the newness, freshness, and life of Truth given by Divine
Revelation, God graciously providing it should remain, as Revelation left it,
and the Evidences it has done so, appearing with it; it is the same in all
Ages; Divine never loses of its life, nor abates of its vigor; what it was so
many Ages ago, that it abides now; what the Holy Ghost spoke so many Ages ago,
that it speaks now as warmly as then: All Divine Truth given, is after the
power of an endless life, the Eternal Increates Spirit lives in it, and gives
Divine Quickness to it. It is yesterday, to day, the same for ever; and so
breathes its own sense in Scripture, by the ordinary Assistances it vouchsafes
to Holy, Humble, and diligent Waiters upon him in this, even as it did in the
first Ages, though the extraordinary Motions are withdrawn.

Quest. But still the Gifts and Endowments of those Eminent Men, with all the
Light, Truth, Grace, Learning and Reason, they shine to us with, ought to be
esteemed and improved?

Answ. Yes doubtless: For whatsoever Things are true, whatsoever things are
pure, are of Virtue, and deserved praise, they are Public, and of God,
wherever they are found: And whatever there is in these Elders, in their
nearness to the First Times, their Holiness, their Sufferings, their great
Learning, their Encounters of Paganism, their Apologies for Christianity, their
Heavenliness, their Contempt of this World, all is a Donation, and a Grace of
God by them to his Church, and Mankind in general.

Quest. And does not there arise great Evidence to Christianity, and the
Doctrines and Practices of it, from such eminent Witnesses?

Answ. No doubt there does, both to Christianity in particular, and to all
Religion, Virtue and Goodness in general: But yet neither their Writings, nor
Practices can in any wise become Scripture to us; they all lead to Scripture,
and ought to do so; they are all to be seen, and reflected in Scripture Light,
and from thence they receive their luster: For though they are a Subordinate
Testimony, as has been said, yet Christian Religion has greater Testimony,
and first enabled them to give a valuable Testimony to it self, by
Communicating so great knowledge and worth to them: And besides all that has
been spoken, the Writings of the Fathers are so Voluminous, as not to be read
over by the most; so doubtful in their Genuiness, that they cannot be Examined,
but with great Labor, and well prepared Judgment; so disputable in their
sense, that to attain a certainty in it, would cut off Time from the greater
Employment of Meditation in the Word of God, day and night, where Men's
Callings lie otherwise; so that to receive our Religion from hence were of too
remote an assurance to any one, much more to those who have not Books, and
study for their Profession: But every Man, whether learned or unlearned, is
concerned deeply to try his Religion with his own Eyes, and not another for
him; and God has therefore provided a Word nigh him, even in his Mouth, and in
his Heart; and has also taken care by stirring up so many both of the Ancient
and Modern Christians, to separate themselves to intermeddle with all sacred
knowledge, that there is a worthy exercise of the learned World herein, and
great advantages arise thereby for universal knowledge even to the less
learned, and the very unlearned.

Quest. But did the Fathers themselves distinguish thus their own and one
another Writings from Scripture?

Answ. It is most evident, as has been already affirmed, they put a greatest
difference betwixt the most excellent Monuments of Christianity, that were but
Humane, whether their own, or others, and inspired Pages; else Clement,
Ignatius, and others, might as well have been Canonized by them, as what is
from them come down to us for Sacred Canon it self; and even as they did, we
may see the great odds betwixt the one and the other; and as we adore God the
supreme Author, so the Sovereign Preserver of Scripture, who by Divine
Evidences, and by superintending Providence, has divided the bound of
Scripture at so great a remove from all the Writings in the World, whether
Christian or Profane, the Apocryphal Books not excepted, which though too
adventurously joined so generally in a Volume with Scripture, yet are evidently
disproportioned in the Majesty of Sense, and Divine Eloquence.

Quest. Is there no greater Authority of the First Councils?

Answ. How many Humanes soever meet, they cannot make up Divine, where it was
not before; nor can a multitude of Privates constitute a Public: Divine and
Public may be declared, but cannot be made so by such Contribution. All
Determinations of Councils are infinitely outweighed in Value, and overruled
in Authority by Scripture indeed Public and Divine.

Quest. But in such a number of his Servants, may we not conclude, God is
certainly among them, and does guide them?

Answ. Give them all the advantages that can be given, and either we must say,
they are Infallibly guided, and then we must receive their Decrees, as
Scripture, and they must be attested to us, as Scripture is attested; or they
are not Infallibly guided, and then their Decrees must be tried, as all
Fallibles ought to be, by a Rule surer than themselves: If even Divine
Revelation it self was at first tried, and found perfect; nay, if even all that
God proposes to us, as from himself, comes laden with its own proper Evidences,
how much more must that which is confessedly humane, be tried by that which is
confessedly Divine? The great use of Councils is therefore so to debate, and
bring things to a Result, by a confluence of Wisdom and Learning, that we may
see Divine Truths in their own Light, in Scripture light, to hold out which
they are but ministerially employed, and not to impose upon any under the name
of Public; for that alone is Public, that is Divine: All Comparison of
Privates among themselves, must needs be lost in this Public, before which the
greatest name of Public, is but as the drop of the Bucket, and the small dust
of the Balance: And the union with that true Public makes the most Private a
Public; and Separation from it, the most seemingly Public, a most Idiottal
Private.

And it were very happy, if the Experiment hereof were not too evident in the
Councils that have been, how little Number of it self can Contribute to truly
Public, or Divine; yet the fitness of the Means is withal to be acknowledged,
as ordained by God.

CAP. IX. Of the Church-Catholick.
Quest. SCripture, the Public Record of Catholic Religion, being thus far
Establ^^^^^ and Secured, both by Internal Characters, and External Care of
Providence; it still remains necessary, there should be some stated Ordination
of God, for the Actuating this Record to its several Purposes and Ends.

1. Because Divine Revelation (...) now finished its measures, there cannot be
expected (...) immediate motions of Truth, that were vouchsafed by God ^n his
extraordinary Presences, but all is to be derived from, and displayed in
Scripture.

2. Scripture yet being but of the nature of a Record, it would lie still, and
unmoved, and, as it were dead, if not produced and applied; even as other Laws
and Records do, that are not continually executed to their proper Uses, be
their Virtue never so great, if so Executed.

What therefore is that Ordinance of God, in the Cessation of Immediate
Presence, for the exposing this Record to its universal notice, and for the
applying it daily to its great purposes, which is the Executing it, as far as
it is to be Executed in this World?

Answ. God has by his extraordinary Ministers, whom he gave his Divine
Revelation, and Word, first founded the Church, and, according to the Degrees
of that Revelation, exalted it to be serviceable to this great End, and so to
supply the place of Immediate Presence.

Quest. What is to be understood by the Church?

Answ. The Church is The Catholic Congregation of Mankind, called to the Faith
and Obedience of that Word it self; and which being called it self, is
entrusted to call others to the some Faith, and Obedience, and so is Governed,
and Governs according to it, by daily Exercises in, and according to that Word.

Quest. Why do you give the Church the style of a Congregation, are not the
Parts of it so distant that they cannot be Congregated in the Worship of God?

Answ. They (...) all so united in the Faith and Obedience of this Sacred Word,
and in the Worship of God according to it, as to be most properly called a
Congregation in that regard.

Quest. But still, how can the Church be called a Congregation, seeing that
^^^aks it always actually Congregated, but those very Members, that in regard
of nearness one to another, are at due seasons Congregated, cannot yet be
always Congregated?

Answ. The Twelve Tribes of Israel, (that is, the Church in its several
Members) always united, always ready to the Instant serving God, Day and Night,
are beheld and seen by him, as in a perpetual actual Congregation.

Quest. Why do you call the Church, The Congregation?

Answ. Even as Holy Writing is The Scripture, and The Bible or Book; so the
Church is The Congregation, by way of Eminency, the only Excellent Assembly or
Congregation in the World: And indeed, upon a true account, there is no other
Religious Congregation, but either a rude Multitude, or a Conspiracy and
Faction against God.

Quest. Why is the Church said to be a Congregation called by the Word?

Answ. Because Humane Nature, uncalled, lies in the Lapse of Separation from
God, in Private and False Religion, and in those Assemblies, justly branded as
before, till it be recalled by him into the Church, united again to him: So
that a Church is not a Natural, but a Supernatural Assembly; yet it is ready to
embrace all true Nature, and the Associations of it, into it self.

Quest. Why is the Church described to be One Catholic Congregation, when both
Scripture and daily Observation assure us, there have been, and are, so many
Particular Congregations, very Regular Churches, and duly so styled?

Answ. Because the Church is of the Nature of those Things that are
distinguished only by the several Accidental Receptions they find, and yet
still remain One; the Catholic Church, and a Particular Church differ no
otherwise, than as a Beam of Light differs from the whole Globe of Light, or a
Stream of Water from the Ocean: Even the most Particular Church is in this
regard Catholic, that it is united to God and Christ, that indeed give both
the Name and Nature of Catholic from themselves. Particular Churches, yea even
Particular Persons, truly of the Church, have every one the whole Character,
Title, Promise, and Privilege of the Catholic Church, so far as they can need
or receive them, even as Heaven is Entire Heaven to every single Glorified
Soul: Every Lively Member of the Church touches the Head and Corner stone, and
so, in him, the whole General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, both in
Heaven and Earth, and is at last consummate with them to Eternity.

Quest. How is this Church Congregated?

Answ. It was begun and has always increased by Particular Persons converted
and brought home to God, according to his Word, in several Ages and
Successions: For the Church, as it is a Church, is not a Society formed by a
common Consent of Men, or by their Will, but its several Parts are added by
God, so that it consists of all that are inwardly and truly of that Catholic
Religion in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Eternal
Spirit, all the World over, and in which meet all that have been, are, or shall
be thus converted by the Word of God, as the Church is, and shall be triumphant
in Glory.

Quest. The Call then that makes this Congregation, is first to God and Christ,
and not to the Church it self?

Answ. It is evidently so: All true Converts first give themselves to God and
Christ, and, by virtue of That, to the Church. The Apostles were not
sollicitous of any other Conjoyning Men to the Church, than what most
necessarily followed upon their receiving the Gospel, and were afraid of their
fixing upon them that were but Ministers and Servants: We preach Jesus to be
the Lord, and our selves Servants for Jesus sake. The Corinthians heading
themselves under Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, was very mischievous; and
therefore the Apostle knowing the Union ought to be only to Christ, directs
himself so vehemently against it, as also against any fanciful Distinction of
themselves under Christ, as an ordinary Chief of a Party, and not as the Divine
Head of the whole Body in the Catholic Truth: Even as he erred, that vulgarly
called Christ Good, not knowing him to be God, the Supremely, Solely Good.

Quest. Are they all true Converts that are of the Church?

Answ. All that are indeed the Church, are so; but all that may appertain to
the Church, are not so: as all that were of Israel, were not Israel. There is a
visible Profession, that is too often not sincere; yet this makes Men Of, or
belonging to the Church, but not truly The Church: Many are so called, that are
not chosen. But all that are truly The Church, are also truly called, and truly
Converts, not only outwardly and visibly the Church, but inwardly and invisibly
so too, whose praise is not of Men, but of God. In the mean time, they that are
only of the Visible Church, have the Means of Grace, and are not thrown out of
that Register of God's People, till the Final Judgment cuts them off: A very
great Benefit in it self!

Quest. Is not the Church then so Catholic, or General, as the Profession of
the True Religion is?

Answ. The Catholickness of the Church, as has been often inculcated, is its
Union to God and Christ, and that in sincerity. As to the general Profession,
though the number of it be as the Sand of the Sea, a Remnant only shall be
saved: For God will finish the Account, and cut it short in Righteousness; for
a short work will the Lord make in the Visible Church: There shall be an often
eating, or brousing it off, a retrenching of it again and again; it shall cast
the Leaves of its mere Professors, as the Teyle-tree or Oak, when yet their
Substance is in them; the Holy Seed are the Substance of it, Isa. 6. ult. not
losing them, it loses nothing.

Quest. In what sense is it then said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church?

Answ. It is undoubted, none can fail while they are the Church, while united
to Truth, to the God of Truth, to Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: It
is also certain, from this high Declaration, there always shall be a Church in
the World, so united, Hades, or Mortality, shall not prevail over it; and how
much farther it assures the Perseverance of those that are once truly the
Church, I leave the thing it self to speak. It is said, They that overcome ar
Pillars, that never go out of it; and, They that go out of it, were not of it;
for if they had been indeed of it, they would no doubt have continued with it:
And how the Church it self shall always continue, if any True Member of it may
perish, is not easy to conceive.

Quest. How is the Church ordained by God to actuate Scripture, as it is the
Secord of Catholic Religion?

Answ. The Apostle, in his Noble Description of the Church, has laid the
Foundations of our Instruction herein, in those three Honorable Titles he has
given it:

1. That it is the House of the Living God. 2. That it is the Pillar of Truth.
3. That it is the Ground of Truth.
Quest. Before the Explanation of each of these Titles, in the first place, I
desire it may be determined, whether these things are spoken of the Catholic,
or of a Particular Church, the Particular Church of Ephesus?

Answ. Although I have already affirmed, That the Catholic Church differs from
a Particular True Church only in the Compass and Comprehensiveness of it; yet I
very willingly represent it over again in this Instance: These things are truly
applied to the Catholic Church, to the Particular Church of Ephesus, to every
Particular Church; nay, it reaches down to every single living Member of the
Church, so far, that God makes his abode with him, dwells in him, he is a
Pillar in the House of God, the Truth rests and dwells in him, and shall be
with him for ever; so that he is a Ground of Truth, and has more of the Church
in him, than greater seeming Portions of it, that err from the Truth.

Quest. If you please now to proceed in the Explanation of these Titles; and
first, What is the Importance of the Churches being the House of God, for the
actuating the Scripture?

Answ. God, the most High Possessour and Owner of Heaven and Earth, places his
Court, Family, and particular Residence where he pleases; and he has chosen
the Church to be this to him. This is my Rest, here will I dwell for ever, for
I have desired it. Heaven is my Throne, Earth is my Footstool; where is the
House you will build me? To this Man will I look, that trembles at my Word. And
where God dwells, there he manifests himself: As a Master of a Family makes
known in his House and Family his Nature, Will, Laws, and Government; so God
does in his Church: In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel. In his
Church he shows the Light of his Countenance, expects and rewards Services, as
a Great Master, and makes known his Dislikes and Displeasure. This is brought
to pass in the Church by those many Ways that God has of bringing his Word to
any Places or Persons, giving it Reception among them, and then stirring up his
Children and Servants to hear his Voice, to search his Mind and Will, and to
understand it; so that it is as a Voice continually behind them. In his Temple
therefore, in his House, every one must needs speak of his Glory: His Word
cannot lie still, for all are concerned to meditate, ponder, inquire, and
discourse of it, and are by Supreme Management excited so to do; and so much as
this Exercise in his Word is by any means depressed, so far God is withdrawn,
and the Excellency of the Church State lost. Now of the Church being the House
of God, there was this great Type: God dwelt in the Temple at Jerusalem, as in
a Palace; there was such a Diet of Shewbread, changed every day; of Sacrifices
of all sorts; such Perfumes of Incense and Odours, such Officers and Servants
attending continually, such Resorts of the whole Body of the People to the
Court of this Great King and Princely Householder. Together with this State,
runs along in a mighty Stream, Gods showing his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and
Judgments to Israel. In the New Testament, the Pomp and Ceremonial Part is
wholly transferred into Spirituality; but Spirituality is not lower, but higher
in the Substance of all that could be figured by these things: and the
substantial part of that State, the Communication of the Word of God, is much
exalted in the true Christian Church, that the Light of One Day is now as much
as the Light of Seven was before. Thus the Church, as the Family of God, cannot
but actuate his Word.

Quest. What is the meaning of the Church being the Pillar of Truth? Does the
Church support Truth?

Answ. Not so; for, it self is built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.

Quest. How then is it said to be the Pillar of Truth? And of what Importance
is that to the Actuating Scripture?

Answ. As the Laws and Ordinances of Courts and Governments are publicly
fixed, that every one may know and take notice of them; so the Church in all
its Members, but especially by Deputed Ministers, giving themselves wholly to
it, proclaims, preaches, and makes offer of the most Public Notice of the Word
of Truth, within it self, that all the Children and Servants of the Family may
be continually catechized and built up therein, and Strangers have opportunity
to know, if they would apply themselves to it. Thus it is a Famous City set on
an Hill, that cannot be hid; and therefore its Laws, Constitutions, Manners,
cannot but in all reason be inquired of, by all that do so much as pass by it:
It is a Candlestick, bearing the lofty Torch of Divine Truth. Of this the
Pillars of the Temple at Jerusalem, and the affixing to them the Rolls of
Divine Revelation, was an eminent Type, and alluded to by the Apostle. As
therefore from a Prince come forth Edicts, Proclamations, Manifesto's, and
Declarations, according to Laws, which are fastened to Public Pillars of the
Court it self, and all open and conspicuous Places of Concourse; so are there
in the Church the most advantageous Publications of the Divine Truth and Word,
to all, both the Natives and Freeborn of the Church it self, and Ingenuous
Strangers, that would hearken out the most Reasonable Proposals of Truth, or
whom God is pleased to Naturalize to himself.

Quest. What is the meaning of the Church being the Ground of Truth? And how
does this actuate Scripture?

Answ. It means nothing but the Perpetuity and Continuation of Truth with the
Church, establishing it self by all that Firmness of Divine Evidence and
Reason, and on those very Securities taking Possession of the Church, as the
Ark of its Strength, where it self, or the God that is Truth it self, places
the Soles of his Feet, as on his unmovable Footstool, for ever: Of which the
Ark in the Holiest was a Type, the Footstool of the Throne of Mercy, the secure
Repository of the Tables of the Covenant, the Ark of Testimony, over which the
Shecinah or Glory appeared as enthroned, attended with Cherubims, and setting
its Feet upon it; the place of my Throne, and the place of the Soles of my
Feet, Ezekiel. 43. 7. For thus the True Church, against which the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail, is the unchangeable Rest of Truth: It adheres to Truth; it buys
the Truth, and never sells it; Truth dwells with it for ever: God never suffers
it to apostatize from Truth; but by the constant holding of the Judgment, and
retaining the Love and Zeal of the Affections of those that are indeed his
Church, he has settled his Word in his Church on Earth, even as it is for ever
settled in Heaven. The Church therefore actuates Scripture, by finding out
Reasons, debating, enforcing, defending by all Arguments, that Truth of
Scripture, and so persisting in it for ever.

Quest. Cannot then the Church fail?

Answ. It has been said before, the True Church cannot fail: For, the True
Church is (as has been described) the House of God, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth; and that which is so, cannot fail, and God will have such a Church
always in the World. If any Person, City, or Nation, that seem to have been the
Church, have this Light eclipsed, the Candlestick removes; for it is only a
Candlestick for the sake of the Light: and the Pillar it self shakes and falls,
if the Records fixed to it are taken away: and the Palace and Court remove with
the Prince, who is always with his Truth, and the lively Motion of it. So much
Truth therefore, and active Display of it, so much a Church, in any Place; and
the Truth removing, or lying dead, the Church removes also, or is ready to die
in that Place.

Quest. But is th^re no higher Sense of the Church being the Pillar and Ground
of Truth?

Answ. No other, but what arises from the most intimate and inseparable Union
betwixt the Church and Truth; Truth taking an undefailable possession of the
Church: so that wherever Truth, in that Fullness as to lead to Life and
Happiness, is, there is the Church, and no where else. The True Church then may
be styled a Pillar and Ground of Truth in the highest Sense, if rightly
understoo; that is, Truth it self, that is the unmovable Pillar and everlasting
Foundation, has so closely banded the Church with it self, that it is One
Pillar and Foundation with it. Thus the Church may be both the Building; and
the Rock and Foundation, to succeeding Parts and Members of the Church: The
Building, as it self rests upon the Pillar and Foundation of Truth; else it
cannot be the Church: The Pillar and Foundation of Truth, to the still
succeeding and rising Church, as it is One with Truth it self, to which every
True Member first comes and unites, and therein to the Church; even as every
Degree of Building is a Foundation and Support to the still growing Building,
not in it self, but as it is surely cemented to the Foundation, regulated by
it, and partakes its Strength: Yet if it swerve never so little from the
Foundation, it is presently a Deformity; and the more it swerves, the greater
danger of the Ruin of it self, and all that rests upon it.

Quest. May not this help to explain that so much disputed Expression of our
Savior, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the
Gates of Hell shall not preval against it?

Answ. I shall be glad if it may give any Light to it, and hope it may: For the
Apostle Peter making that Confession of the Divinity of Christ, not singular,
but representing the whole Body of Apostles and Christians, and being possessed
with and by that Truth he confessed, was both part of the Building upon that
Rock, and, as united with that Rock, he became Rock it self, upon which
succeeeding Christians were to be built. The Prophets and Apostles are in this
Sense Foundations, and the Twelve Apostles Twelve Foundations, Christ himself
being the Cornerstone, in whom alone the whole Building, even the Apostolic
Foundation it self, rises, in a strict and proper Sense.

Quest. Is there not a good Security then in joining our selves to the Church,
to those that have been in the Building before us?

Answ. No otherwise than as we join our selves, by their Ministry, to that
Foundation it self, which always lies sure, upon which they themselves must
alone rest, if the True Church. For, by placing our selves not upon them, but
upon that Common Foundation, we are adjusted to the whole Building that was
before us, that lies regular with that Foundation, by the Care of him who is
both the Foundation, Cornerstone, and is also he that built all things, even
God in Christ

Quest. We must then seek to find the Truth by it self, and then the Church by
that Truth; and not the Church by it self, and then the Truth by the Church?

Answ. Very true: For God has so in his Infinite Wisdom established the very
Nature of Things. Truth can give many Assurances of it self to us by it self,
so suited to our Faculties: The Church can give us none, but by its agreement
with Truth, revealed in the Word of God. We could not have known such a
Congregation as the Church at all to be, much less which it is, but by that
Word manifesting it self in our Consciences, and so distinguishing to us the
True Church among the many Associations in the World, each calling to us, as
having the best Religion among themselves. Even the True Apostles themselves
could be known to be so, and False Apostles tried and found Liars, no other
way, but by this Truth, viewed, and considered singly, and distinctly by it
self.

Quest. But when we have found the Church by the Truth, may we not then deliver
up our selves wholly to the Church, as so united to Truth?

Answ. No, by no means: We can never so deliver up our selves; nor will the
True Church desire any such thing of us, seeing its Office is not to hold out
it self, but the Word of Truth; and in doing any thing else, it acts not as a
Church, but as any other ordinary Society; and on no other Terms can we have to
do with it: For the very Attempt to hold out, as a Church, any Laws of its own,
ought to enter us into a Jealousy whether it be the True Church, which is, as
a Church, the Pillar and Rest of Divine Truth only.

Quest. What Reason is there of such a Jealousy, when once we have found it a
Church, by the Truth it holds out?

Answ. Because a Church, that has been a True Church, may several ways decline
from its State.

Quest. How then can it he said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it?

Answ. That Prophetic Promise does not secure this or that Particular Church,
but that there shall be a Seed of the Church in the World, with which the
Covenant of God is Eternal: My Word shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out
of the Mouth of thy Seed, or thy Seed's Seed, for ever.

But it is yet further true, the True Seed, the Holy Seed, the Substance of the
Church, can never utterly and finally fail in any Particular Member of it; for
if it could, it were too great a violation of our Savior's Truth in that
Declaration, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church, or force
that Immortal retrograde into Mortality, even that most dreadful one of the
Second Death, for which a Succession of others, and in the same Danger, is but
a faint Salvo, though it go on so to the End of the World.

Quest. Who are this True Church in every Age and Place?

Answ. They which are by True Saving Faith united to Christ the Son of God, the
Rock of Eternity; and being so founded upon him, are Pillars that never remove,
and a Rest of Truth for ever, having been taught, and learnt it, as it is in
Jesus.

Quest. Who are the Professionary Church only?

Answ. They that though they may, as Artificial Pillars, give some Ornament to
the House of God, and offer Truth, yet not being indeed united to the
Foundation, are movable, and may go out of the House. They are such as have not
received the Truth in the Love and Obedience of it within themselves, and so
may fall away from it: It cannot be said of them, as of the former, The Truth
shall be with them for ever, having made its Edraioma or Settlement in them.

Quest. How does the Professionary Church fall away in the Bulk and Body of its
Professors, and Profession?

Answ. The Office of the Church being to Actuate Truth, and only Truth, it may
fail, either in abating the Fervours due to Truth, though nothing False or
Foreign be admitted, or in receiving Falsehood, or things of a baser Alloy, for
Truth, and wasting those Fervours due only to Truth upon them. The one may be
called a departing from the true State of a Church; the other, from the State
of a True Church: and they usually meet one in another.

Quest. How does this come to pass?

Answ. From the Judgment of God upon the present sinful State, permitting
things so to themselves, that in very few Instances it is, but that the
Imperfections of Good Men, and the prevailing Corruptions of Professionary
Christians, change the Holy, Lively Activities of the True State of a Church,
into Lukewarmness and Formality, or by admitting Falsehood, and impure Mixtures,
into Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, corrupt the State of the Church, so
that it loses its Truth.

Quest. What becomes of the Professionary Church, when it loses the True State
of a Church?

Answ. It is, as the Prophet expresses a Civil State, or a City that has lost
its Splendor; It becomes like a burnt Mountain, or extinguished Globe of
Light: It retains the Form, but loses the Life and Vigor of a Church, like
Ephesus, that lost its First Love; or Sardis, that had a Name to live, but was
dead; or Laodicea, that was neither cold nor hot.

Quest. What becomes of it when it is corrupted, and loses in its Truth?

Answ. It exchanges the Lively Oracles for Forms of Doctrine, and Lifeless
Discourse, not of the High Spirit of Scripture: It debases pure Worship into
Ceremonialness, Superstition, or Idolatry; and the Gospel Rule and Discipline
it sells for a Worldly Polity; and the true Graces of Christianity, expressed
in a Holy Conversation, for what is much beneath, or contrary. Sometimes it
forsakes Truth in some Fundamental Article, that it swells out from the
Foundation, in a Breach, ready to fall: And there is one Instance of all these
in the Anti-Church, which will deserve a greater Consideration.

Quest. How does God deal with such Churches?

Answ. Sometimes sweeps them with the Beesom of Destruction, taking away both
the Candlestick and Place of it together, Alienes Both to them and their
Religion thrusting them out of their whole Possession: Sometimes he suffers
them to continue even for Ages, yet so that their Candlestick is moved out of
its due stately Positure, hardly appearing like a Candlestick, and that by the
Indignation of God.

Quest. In these Cases how does it fare with the True Holy Seed, the
Substantial Church?

Answ. God chastens them to Repentance, Self-purification, and greater Zeal, in
that Case of the Churches losing its Brightness and Vigor, that they may
recover their first State and Work, aad sets them on work to retrive Truth
lost, in that other Case of the Churches Defection.

Quest. How is it with them, when the very Place and Candlestick are taken away?

Answ. They are either first removed into the higher State of the Church in
Heaven, or driven before into other Parts of the World, by Persecution; or the
violence of the Judgment makes no distinction, but carries them Captive with
the rest, though in different Baskets, as the Prophet Jeremy represents.

Quest. How do they survive in the time of the displaced and dejected
Candlestick?

Answ. They are either called out to a Zealous Appearance and Suffering for
Truth, or sometimes retired into Corners, like the Seven thousand in Israel, or
the Church in the Wilderness, that they cannot appear like a Church, offering
those Public Notices of Divine Truth a Church is designed for.

Quest. How is a Visible Profession lost from Particular Persons?

Answ. It is too often thrown up by Apostasy or Profaneness, or dwindled into
a very Spiritless Form; but very often a Profession without the Power being not
inconsistent with the working of Iniquity, it may pass out of this World like a
Lamp burning: but being found to burn only in a small Temporary Light, without
Oil in the Vessel, a Plenitude of Grace in the Heart, shutting out every Lust,
it becomes a Lamp put out in utter Darkness.

Quest. What is to be inferred from all this?

Answ. That there is no Trust but in the Lord himself, the Truth it self, by
which at all times the Church, that is indeed the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
and wherein it is so, will be known to us; and in uniting to Truth, we are
united to That.

Quest. There remains one thing yet to be understood in the Description of the
Church, which is, its Power of Governing, even as it is Governed by the Word of
God: Under what Notions, I beseech you, is that Government expressed in
Scripture?

Answ. That Power is by our Savior represented under the Mataphor of Keys; and
the Use of those Keys, in opening and shutting, or in Binding and Losing.

Quest. What is the meaning hereof?

Answ. The meaning is plainly this; When the Church of Christ has by the Key
of Knowledge inquired into all the Divine and Heavenly Doctrine of the Gospel
and Word of God, it has in and according to that Word, and only so, a Power of
Application of that Doctrine to Particular Cases, binding Men under the Sense
of Guilt, and fear of Damnation, in such or such Sins, and an impenitent
Continuance in them; or of Absolving, and assuring Men of the Divine Favor and
Acceptance, in a holy course of Life, and Obedience to God, and of Pardon upon
Repentance, after Falls into Sin, and Disobedience; and so of Declaring and
Pronouncing upon Men, as to their present State in the Church, by
Excommunication, or Absolution; all these are the Power of Binding and Loosing;
according to what our Savior speaks in parallel Words, Whose Sins you remit,
they are remitted; whose Sins you retain, they are retained; meaning still
according to his Word, the Pole Star by which they are to direct all their
Motions, who claim any such Power: For, only where it is declard according to
the Word, is it, that what is bound on Earth, is also bound in Heaven; and what
is loosed on Earth, is loosed in Heaven; there being an Invariable Agreement
between what is Published from Heaven, in the Word of God, concerning the State
and Actions of Men on Earth, and the Transactions in Heaven, in relation to
them. He then that pronounces agreeably with that word, pronounces as Heaven
does and will pronounce; Heaven binds what he binds, and looses what he looses,
because he speaks the Voice of Heaven in both Cases.

But that there should be any Binding or Loosing, except in the Power of this
Word, and according to it, in its Virtue, in its Truth, nothing can be more
contrary to the Ends, to the Glory, to the Sovereignty of Christ. To bind any
single Christian by Excommunication, and not according to this Word, is as much
a Brutum Fulmen, a Thunder to no purpose, a causeless Curse, that shall not
come, as for the Pope to Excommunicate whole Protestant Churches.

Quest. What is a Particular Church?

Answ. It is the Catholic Church in a Neighborhood, or number of Christians
Communicating one with another ordinarily; even as the whole Cotholick Church,
would, if it were possible, Communicate with it self, in the Ordinances, and
Worship of Christ, exactly according the to Rules of his Word; wherein this is
the distinguishing Character of the True Church, that its Communion is not with
it self primarily, but ^ts Communion is so with it self, as to be with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ principally, as the Fountainhead, Center and
Rule of the Communion, and therein it holds out, and invites to its Communion.

CAP. X. Of the Officers appointed by Christ in his Church.
Quest. CAn there be either an Orderly, or an Effectual Actuation of the Truth,
by the Church as a Congregation, without distinct and separate Offices and
Officers that may attend continually on this very thing?

Answ. It is imposible; for, an Assembly without Order, would cease to be an
Assembly, and fall into a Confusion, or Rude Multitude. All Wise and Prudent
Assemblies have always had Elders to preside over them; and our Lord has
ordained such to moderate throughout his Congregation or Church, to conduct all
the Public Services of Religion: For all things therein are actually
administered by the Ministers of Christ, the Noblest Organical Parts of the
Church, like those Senses that attend upon the Understanding most immediately;
Seeing Eyes, and Hearing Ears; so these upon the Word of Christ. And that they
may be most fitted, engaged, and provoked hereunto, they are, even according to
the very Laws of Nature, separated to their Offices, and unto all Preparations
for them, by Reading and Meditation, as to their Proper Calling and Business of
Life, seeing they do not pretend to Immediate and Extraordinary Inablements, or
Excitations to their Service.

Quest. What Titles or Characters does the New Testament place upon these
Officers?

Answ. Those that we have especial Respect to (for in the Deacons, if strictly
taken, we are less concerned) receive Denominations either from their Work and
Service, or from that Honor and Estimation due to the Faithful Discharge of
such a Service. From their Work they are styled Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, Ministers, Servants of God and Christ, and in a just sense, of the
Church also. From the Estimation and Honor due to the Discharge of their Work,
and the Authority it ought to carry in the Hearts and Consciences of
Christians, they are styled Bishops, Elders, Rulers, Guides, and Ensamples, as
also, Ambassadors: And the Work and the Honor do so enclose one another, that
they ought not to be separated, and are in their Institution the Measure one of
another, extending both to Obedience, and Support of them in their Work; and
the Titles are so prepared by the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, that they ought not
to be changed for any other, nor the Scripture Language herein to be altered,
for any Words not importing the same proper Sense.

Quest. How shall the True Ministers of Christ be known, that there may be that
Obedience and Submission paid to them that is commanded?

Answ. There can be no other Means to discern them, but by the Word of
Righteousness, of which all True Ministers are the Ministers, on account of
which alone, Obedience and Submission to them is due: Their bringing that Word
in its own Life, Evidence, and Power, is their best Commission.

Quest. But how are they most orderly enstall'd into so high a Function?

Answ. Christ as the Head of the Church, has ascended up on high, and given
gifts to Men, and as the Lord of the Harvest takes it upon him, as his Supreme
Care, to thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest. The several Congregations of
Christians, observing Ministerial Abilities, and Meetness to Teach, call out to
such to help them; and herein, in the Cessation of Extraordinary Gifts, the
Schools of Learning and Religious Education, like the Schools of the Prophets,
do best prepare; and the Judgment of those that have been Pastors and Teachers
before them, does most orderly recommend to Choice and Acceptance, in the great
Service, such as are Scribes, instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, and commits
to them the Charge of Teaching others: For in this, as in all other Acts, the
Elders of the Church are to preside, with due Respect to the Congregation.

Quest. Is the Lord Christ pleased then to act generally by the Elders and
Officers of the Church?

Answ. Generally and ordinarily he does so; the Officers are therefore more
particularly entrusted by Christ with the Keys, even as the Church in general
is. Thus eminently, by the Ministry of the Apostles, our Lord founded his
Church, and so edifies and builds it up in After-ages, by Pastors and Teachers;
and when great Defections have prevailed upon it, summons it to Reformation, by
some raised up among those Officers, and whom he sends out, as such, to reform
and recover his Church: Yet still all this Power is in and according to his
Word, and no other; and so, that in all things, as much as may be, the
Knowledge, Judgment and Approbation of the Church is to be joined in all the
Officers do, as having their Interest in the Keys also; because they have their
Interest in the Word of God, in the Understanding, Opening and Applying of
which to Particular Cases, the whole Power of the Keys rests. The Apostles,
Elders, and the Brethren, or whole Church, were together pleased, and together
joined in that Famous Conciliary Epistle, Acts 15. 22.

Quest. I desire your more full Explanation of the Public Offices of the
Christian Church, and the Power accompanying it?

Answ. I will very willingly do as you desire, and begin with the Apostles.

Quest. Wherein stood their Power?

Answ. It stood in their Preaching, Acting, Directing, Governing, by that
Immediate and Infallible Assistance of the Divine Spirit, by which they writ
and sealed Scripture, and by which they were so guarded every way, that they
could turn neither to the Right Hand nor to the left, in any thing wherein they
exercised this Power.

Quest. How was this Power Justified?

Answ. By the Divineness, substantial Goodness, and Reasonableness of all their
Prescriptions, proposed in all the Methods of Rational Discourse, and
manifestation of themselves in Men's Consciences, witnessed to by the Holy
Spirit, and authorized by a Power of Miracles, generally of Beneficence, or
doing good; and in some, but sparing Instances, of infliction of Bodily Pains,
or Death.

Quest. Did the Apostles never err in their Administration?

Answ. Whenever that Infallible Guidance was not present to them, they might
err, as was before observed in the Apostle Peter's Miscarriage, which no doubt
was recorded to show their Power was not in themselves, but in the Divine
Spirit acting by them; that none in After-ages, might pretend to dictate as
their Successors, having not their Power, and yet requiring Obedience, as if
they had it; whereas even the Apostles themselves might err, and so lose their
Power, if never so little deserted by the Holy Spirit: And therefore what they
consigned over to After-ages, was winnowed from every thing Humane and
Fallible, that both Officers and People might know the one Common Rule, by
which one is to Govern, the other, in the Application of it, is to be Governed.

Quest. Who were next to the Apostles in this Office and Power?

Answ. Evangelists, such as were Timothy and Titus, who having a Portion of the
Apostolic Work, to plant and settle Churches, and Ordinary Officers in them,
had also a Portion of their Power to enable them to it, it being absolutely
necessary there should be such, till the General Rule was fully settled and
fixed.

Quest. Were not the Apostles and Evangelists above Ordinary Pastors and
Teachers?

Answ. They were, in this great Point of Difference, that they had the Word of
God by Immediate and Infallible Revelation committed to them, to commit the
same to others, by direction from the same Spirit, who gave them Discerning to
whom to entrust it, till all things relating to the Kingdom of God in the
Church were sealed in the Canon of the New Testament; else they owned
themselves Compresbyters, as the Apostle Peter styles himself, A Presbyter with
Presbyters.

Quest. From all that has been spoken, we are to conclude, That the whole
Power in the Church, and in all things pertaining to Religion, is retained in
the Word of God.

Answ. It is so: For Christ in his Word is the only King and Lawgiver of his
Church, which Glory he will not give to another: Whatever Power can be supposed
resident in the whole Church together, is no other than in that Word of Truth
publicly offered by it. The Apostles Power was only the presence of that Word
to them, by the Immediate Revelation, and infallible Guidance of the Holy
Spirit, for the Preaching it throughout the World, and thereby founding the
Christian Church: Such was the ordinary Power of any extraordinary Ministers
under them. The and constant Rulership of the Elders of the Church remains
unmoveably in the Word, which it is their Office to speak.

Quest. Are not those we distinguishingly call Bishops, Successors to the
Apostles, in that Preeminency they had over other Pastors and Elders?

Answ. That Successors to the preeminency of the Apostles may be well
established, Three things are necessary,

1. That there be found, and produced Distinct Commands given in Scripture to
the Inferior Ministers of the New Testament to obey Superior Ministers, or
Bishops; Commands to Christians to obey Inferior Ministers, or Ordinary
Presbyters, as Inferior Ministers, with respect to Superior Ministers, and
those Superior Ministers, as Superiors. We must find the Apostle
distinguishing, ordinary Presbyters, as Inferior Ministers, with respect to
Superior Ministers; and those Superior Ministers, as Superiors; as we find him
distinguishing Civil Magistrates into the King, as Supreme; and Governors, as
those that are sent by him.

2. Seeing it is very clear, and apparent, there is nothing more distant from
the Design of the Gospel, than to Constitute any thing for the sake of making a
great Figure, without as great an Use, or End; and that Christ has not given
Power to his Rulers to Command the very least thing, but as Commanded by
himself first, for then they would be Lords, which he plainly declares against,
and absolutely denies to them, and that what they do as Commanded by him, they
should do so in Duty and Service to the Supreme Lord, and Subordinately to his
Church, as not to be called, or esteemed Benefactors for their Services; so
that it must be evident, what their Superior Service is; it must be plainly
expressed in the Word of God, and there at least so determinately set down, as
to be deduced with greatest clearness to the Understanding and Conscience of
Christians, and distinguishingly from the Service of other Subordinate Rulers
appointed by Christ, that so it may be waited for, and received according to
his Ordinance with Faith and Obedience.

3. Seeing Christ appoints none to an Eminency of Service, without a suitable
Eminency of Abilities, as is plain in the Apostles, and Evangelists; it is
therefore reasonable to expect some extraordinary promises of the presence of
Christ to those Superior Ministers, to assist them in the Conduct of their
Superiority, wherein they might, above any other Ministers of the Gospel,
Visibly and Experimentally make some approaches to the Eminent Assistances the
Apostles and Evangelists had in the time of their Ministry, and that they have
continued, and succeeded in their High Function in the Church of Christ, so,
that the History of the Real, Substantial Services of Bishops to Christianity,
has come near to the Acts of Apostles, and as much excelled that of Common
Presbyters, as the Order it self is supposed to do: Now without these three
self evident concurrent marks of Superiority, secret invisible Characters are
of no signification.

Quest. How then is such a Succession of Bishops, in a Superiority over
Presbyters, so uncontrolably deduced from Antiquity?

Answ. Besides all other Coincident Accounts, there is this to be given. After
the Apostles, there was but a Gradual Cessation of Apostolic Men, Men of
Eminent Graces and Extraordinary Gifts, though not of the Infallible Guidance
of the Divine Spirit for the Revelation of the Gospel, or the writing of
Scripture; yet of more immediate Divine Assistances, in resemblance of Timothy
and Titus, for the Confirmation of the Churches planted by the Apostles,
Supervisal over them, and Care for them; and also for the further propagation
of Christianity, which being but newly set out, had not arrived many places,
where it was to come, and so needed some more than ordinary Assistances: Even
as Miracles did not immediately Cease, no more did these Personages
extraordinary in their Endowments: Such as these were worthily in a Degree of
Superiority over those that had not the same miraculous Inablements, nor
Knowledge as yet in Christianity. Afterward such Manifestations of the Divine
Presence by Degrees retiring, and Christianity having fixed it self where it
was then to go, and the Churches settled, the best accounts of the continuing
Distinction between those that were upon the same level, in regard of their
Gifts and Graces were but Humane Prudence and Order, which oblige no Man's
Conscience beyond the valuableness of the Reasons of that Prudence and Order.
Except undeniable Holiness, Industry, and Improved Understanding recommend any
Person to such Eminency. For Eminency, and being Taller than others in those
Qualifications, will make any Person a Bishop, in the true sense of one,
whether so ordinated or not; and cannot make him that is a Dwarf in these,
truly a Bishop; however for Orders sake he may stand in the place of that
Figure.

He that excels in his Knowledge of, Obedience to, Zeal for, and Authority in
the Word of God, seeing that Word conveys all this kind of Power from it self,
must needs have more of that kind of Power so conveyed than others; for the
more purely this Word is understood and Preached, the more Power goes out of
it, and along with those that display it, and so they become Pastors of a
higher Character, whether of a higher Order, or not.

CAP. XI. Of every Man's Obligation to be wise for himself to Salvation.
Quest. ACcording to all the precedent Accounts of the Church, it seems not
only reasonable, but most necessary, every Man should be wise for himself unto
Salvation?

Answ. It is certainly so: for every Man is to be determined by the Word of God
to the True Religion; to which purpose, he is to apply his Mind to search for
true Wisdom, as for Silver, and to seek for it, as for hidden Treasure.

Quest. How should Men of so great Disadvantages to such High Things be enabled
to Judge?

Answ. Wisdom assumes most justly to it self to be of so high Value, that every
Man should think it worth his while, to Labor, and Travel herein; and to them
that do so, it has promised the most certain Success, even the pouring out its
Spirit to them, and that they shall understand the Fear of the Lord, and find
the Knowledge of God: The Things of greatest moment are not of such difficulty,
but that they are attainable in the use of Right Means, under so great Promises.

Quest. What are those Right Means?

Answ. Bowing down our Ears to the Words of the Wise; that is, of those that by
Inspiration from God have been Wise, and written their Wisdom for Future Ages;
and by applying our Hearts to Divine Knowledge, upon which they come to be
inlay'd within us, and to be fitted to our Lips, to be agreeable and well
matched to our Discourse, and not like a Parable in a Fools Mouth.

Quest. But are not these things spoken, and written to the Learned and Elders
of the Church, that they might know for the People, and the People put their
trust in them?

Answ. No: They are written to thee, even to thee; that is, to every one, that
they might have their Trust only in God; that is, find the Rock of Divine
Veracity, and Infallibility, and have no need to trust in Men, but to know the
certainty of the Words of Truth, and be able to answer the Words of Truth,
either to those that advise with them, as Friends, or challenge them, as
Enemies.

Quest. If this was the sense of the Old Testament, it is undoubtedly much more
so of the New?

Answ. It must needs be so, as a higher, and more Intellectual State of the
Church, as much freer, and clearer in its Notions of Truth: The Apostles
Discourse Christians, as no Christians, if they are not able to Judge, as Wise
Men, what they say: If they are not Men in understanding, if they attain not to
the state of Teachers, by skill in the Word of Righteousness, and have senses
exercised to discern, by an Intellectual and Spiritual Gust, Things Good and
Evil; if they cannot give an Apology, or Defense of the Hope that is in them,
that is, of their Christianity, to every one that asks them a Rational Account
of it.

Quest. But in things of Perplexity, and Doubt, are not Christians bound to
submit to the Judgments of their Teachers?

Answ. If they can receive and digest their Reason, and take in the Light they
judge by, so as to make it their own; else if they cannot find their Reasons,
nor acquit themselves from doubt, they must suspend. For a Christian is
Commanded by his Lord, to call no Man upon Earth Master, or Father.

Quest. What is the meaning of that?

Answ. It is this very Thing, that we should receive nothing as Doctrine, or
Indisputable Truth, or Precept, upon any Man's Word, that does not offer such
Reason and Authority from God, and his Word, that we our selves see Reason, not
to receive it as the Word of Man, but of God.

Quest. But is it not said, that they that have the Rule over us, watch for our
Souls, as they that must give an Account for the same? If we are not to believe
them, and surrender our Judgment to theirs, how can they give an Account?

Answ. They that Rule over us, watch for our Souls, and must give an Account,
as Ezekiel's Prophets and Watchmen, by giving Warning, laying Truth before us,
offering the sincere Word of God in all Cases; the success of which upon Souls
Converted and Saved is their Crown and Glory; and their unsuccess looks like a
sorrow, to see those Souls lost, for whom they labored in vain, and spent
their strength upon them for naught; yet so, that if they have been faithful,
though without success, their reward is with the Lord, and their Work with God:
But notwithstanding this, every Man is so to account for his own Soul, that the
very success is not a Blind Obedience to Rulers, but as is said, a Receiving
the Word, not as the Word of Men, but as it is indeed the Word of God: And if
these Watchmen neglect their Duty, or Seduce instead of Teaching, Men are to
apply to better Means afforded by God; and if they do not, they still die in
their Iniquity, and, following their Blind Leaders, fall into the Pit; which is
an unanswerable Argument, that we may trust in no Man, but in God only: For if
an implicit Faith could be a saving Faith, it should save those that followed
such Guides, though they themselves were justly Condemned in not discharging
their Trust.

Quest. But were not the Apostles, and Prophets, to be Trusted at a higher rate
than thus?

Answ No: There were such evident Marks of Divine Doctrine always given by God,
to those that desired to Know, Love, and Obey him, that even the very Prophets
and Apostles were not to be received without them, nor to be believed but
according to them, nay, to be plainly Anathematized, if they varied from it:
Christians were therefore to judge, to try the Spirits, to search the
Scriptures, whether the things spoken were so; to have recourse to undoubted
Principles of Truth, that were as standards to all that came after, besides the
Unction from the Holy One, whereby they were enabled to know all things
necessary to Salvation.

Quest. But is not all Humane Teaching, and Instruction, hereby taken away, and
what becomes of the Ministry, the Eldership of the Church, and their Rule?

Answ. They are all hereby Established; for they are the Ordination of God to
this very purpose, to make Men see, to bring them Light, to clear things to
them, that by the awakening their Judgments, the summoning and collecting their
Principles, they may see with their own Eyes the ways of God and Religion; the
Holy Spirit graciously adjoining it self to their Ministry: They have no
Dominion over their Faith, but are helpers of their Joy; that is, they
facilitate, and make pleasant the knowledge and assurances of Religion; and
they Rule, by Exhorting, Admonishing, Rebuking, Comforting, and even Commanding
in the Evidences of Divine Authority, on Account of which they are to be
obeyed, and highly esteemed for their Works sake.

Notwithstanding all this, no Man is excluded from his own Office to himself;
for every particular Christian is in some Sense a Congregation, and Preacher to
himself, as Solomon; his Conscience has the Keys, binds, and looses within it
self; nay, Christians are not excluded from Rule in the Church; when they have
the Word of God on their side, they may plead and reason with their Mother,
Hos. 2. 2. When they have more understanding than their Teachers, or the Rulers
Rule not according to the Word of God, they that speak according to the Law,
and the Testimony, even Rule their Rulers, and prove the more noble Organs of
the Church; when those that should Rule it, are as the Idols Eyes that see not,
Ears that hear not; or as the Idol Shepherd; a Bl^st is upon their Right hand,
and Right-eye, that their Arm is clean dried up, and their Eye utterly
darkened; the most naked unfurnished Christian with outward Accomplishments,
that yet knows the Word of God, is among the Prophets in such a time of
necesity.

CAP. XII. Of Schism and Scandal.
Quest. FRom the precedent Discourse of the Church, I conceive, the truest
Notion of Schism may be deduced: I desire you therefore to Explain what the
true Nature of Schism is?

Answ. The Question concerning the Nature of Schism, follows very pertinently
upon the right settlement of the Nature of the Church; now the whole Being of
the Church consisting in its Union to God and Christ in Love, according to the
Truth of his Word, and that it receives all its Members into Union with it
self, by their being first united, as it self is. Schism, which is Division,
must needs, in its strictest and most formal Notion, be a Division from that
Truth, wherein the whole Church is one, and so from the Love consequent upon
such an Union.

Quest. What is that Truth of the Word of God, in which the Church is One?

Answ. The Truth of the Doctrine of God, or the Unity of the Faith of the Son
of God in things to be believed; and the Truth of his Law and Commands in
things to be done.

Quest. How is the Love of the Church United in these?

Answ. It is a Love in the Truth; and hereby we know we Love the Brethren, when
we Love God, and keep his Commandments, John Epist. 2. No Love, how great
soever, is Christian-love; nor Union, how close soever, Christianunion, if it
be not in the Truth, and Commandments of God: From whence it necessarily
follows, the Schism, that is a Schism from the Church, must be a Disunion from
the Faith of the Scriptures, and the Love springing from that Faith; and there
is no danger of any other Schism from the Church, as it is a Church.

Quest. How does Schism differ from Heresy?

Answ. Heresy in the highest Sense, and worst Sense of it, is a Disunion from
Truth in some Fundamental and Grand Concernment of Religion, either in the
Doctrine, or Commands of God, so that a Man is subverted, and sins, and must
needs be Condemned of a Separation from the Assembly of Truth, both by himself,
and the Thing it self; and that both as to Faith, and Christian-love, he is so
separated. Schism is a Disunion in some less momentous parts of this Truth,
under an apprehension of a greater moment, than there is indeed in the Causes
of such a Disunion, and a proportionable abatement of Christian Love arising
from it.

All Heresy therefore includes Schism, but all Schism does not rise up to
Heresy.

Quest. Are these the Scripture Notions of Schism, and Heresy, according to
its use of those Words?

Answ. They are most agreeable with the Sense of it, but the words were not so
set, solemn, and formal in Scripture, as afterward in Ecclesiastic Writers;
for Dichostasyes, or Division into two or more Parties, and Contentions, are by
the Apostle used to the same Sense as Schism; and Heresy s^metimes signifies
no more than a Sect or Division, though that is remarkably used in its worst
Sense by both the Apostles Paul and Peter.

Quest. Is every different Apprehension, and Practice ensuing upon it, though
distant from Truth, immediately to be Condemned of Schism?

Answ. By no means; if it be a Modest and Humble Distrust and Suspension
concerning the Truth, and Command of God, in some things of smaller moment, and
doubtful; yea though it comes to a positive Determination, so far as a Man's
judgment, and yet erroneous, can at the present discern, it cannot be branded
as Schism, if there be no stress laid upon the Thing beyond its desert, if the
Union in the greatest and clearest Truths and Commands remains firm, and the
Love due to such an Union with the Church of God, be sincere and fervent; yea
even Dissent in greater points thus qualified, and free from ill practice, has
not been rigidly censured for Heresy.

Quest. Is there no danger then of running into Schism, if there be an Union
with Truth?

Answ. In this Sense only; when the weakness or misapprehension of others are
rated against them beyond their Merit, and without regard to the greater Truths
they agree in, and the Love due to them, upon Union in those greater Truths is
withdrawn, or the Spirit of meekness in endeavoring to restore the Erring
Christian denied. This may be justly esteemed like Schism, as it recedes from
the just value of Great Truths, and from the Charity of Christians upon Union
in them; but no Man is to espouse any Man's Erro^s, or to receive even Truth by
an implicit Faith, for fear of Schism; in things that carry not a broad
Evidence of Divine Truth, there is great scope for Modest Suspensions* and even
Dissents, without Imputation of Schism; for Truths of magnitude either in
Doctrine, Worship, Practice, or Di^cipline, are too bright to be refused by
sincere and honest Minds, after due admonition.

Quest. Wherein lies then the great Evil of Schism?

Answ. That Schism, and the Evil of it, may better be understood, I will set
before you the several Instances of Schism in Scripture, and the Evils noted by
the Apostle in each of them.

1. The first sort of Schism, is the Disunion in the sincere Doctrine of the
Gospel, and bringing in upon it the necessity of the Judaique Rites to concur
with it: This the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 16. 17. calls making Divisions,
or Parties, beside, or contrary to the Doctrine received: The great Evil of
this adding to the Word of God, is, that it lays Scandals before Men, and draws
them into this great mischief, that instead of the pure nourishment of Divine
Truth, all runs into this over-beloved Sentiment, and so deprives the Soul of
the true and vigorous Spirits of Truth; and also the Service due to True
Christianity is drained away, and consumed upon this private Opinion, which is
indeed the mischief of all Falsehood in Religion, and Devotion in Things not
appointed by God, who only can prescribe what is truly fitted to our Good, and
bless it with suitable Effect: Miscarriage from Divine Truth is always found in
Schism, with this mischievous Consequence, that it deceives the Soul with a
Cloud and Wind, instead of Truth and solid Good.

2. A Second kind of Schism the Apostle Notes, 1 Cor. 11. 19, 20. was the
Disorder in Divine-Worship, in that great Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
wherein they that were reproved were necessitated to withdraw, and to stand
apart for the manifesting themselves in the purity of that Worship and Service,
for the very honor of it. The great Evil of this Schism is, that it brings in a
necessity of divided Parties in Public Religion, and the Duties of it, seeing
good Men must separate from such Corruptions, and stand at a Distance from
them, on Account of which Religion it self is dishonored, as if it were a
Jumble of Sects, and gave an uncertain sound; and further than that, is
charged, as if it were but a Sect it self, because it stands by it self: Thus
Christianity was called, This Sect, and the Sect of the Nazarenes: Idolatry
damns the True Worship of God, as a Heresy from it self, and the False Church
charges the truly Publick-Assembly with Schism, and a Private Religion.

3. Another Degree of Schism the Apostle taxes in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.
11. c. 4. 3. was, that this one entire Profession of Christianity in the one
Universal Church of Christ, they thought, ought to be shred into little
Fraternities, under the Names of some prime Minister of Christianity, or even
under the Name of Christ himself, as an ordinary Master of a Party, except we
will understand, that, Those Approved, who stood firm in Christ alone, were
manifested, and stood alone, by being at a distance from the Schism of others,
and so appeared, as was said before, like a Schism themselves. Thus vain
Philosophy parcell'd out it self under its great Masters. The great Evil of
this, is, that it raises Feuds, Contentions, and Factions, as if this one
Integral Christianity could have distinct Interests, and some ingross one
Interest, others another: Whereas the Apostle thus reduces this Schism; all
Ministers, says he, with all their Gifts, Graces, and Functions, are the whole
Churches, without any cantoning, other than, that Order and Convenience
requires the more constant administration of Religion, in certain Congregations
with their Elders. Cephas, the Apostle of the Circumcision, was the
Corinthians, though Gentiles, as well as the Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul
himself; and not only the Churches Ministers, but the whole World, and the
Cargo of Light and Truth in it, are the Churches. Every Truth, every Ordinance,
every Minister, whether of Truth Natural, or Revealed Religion, with all the
happy Effects of them, are all the Donation of Christ to the Catholic Church,
whose the Catholic Church is, and no Ministers whatever; and Christ is Gods,
who is the Foundation, Center, and Supreme Head of this Unity, and Union.

4. The last Instance of Schism (I find in Holy Scripture) is intimated to us,
under that curious Parable, 1 Cor. 12. 12. of the Wise and Excellent
Temperament betwixt the several Members of the same Body, set in different
Degrees of Dignity; the less comely parts have more abundant Comeliness, and
those that we think to be less Honorable, on these we bestow more abundant
Honor, that there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the Members should
have the same care one for another; under this Elegant Shade the Apostle
teaches, that a neglect, and a contemptuous over-looking the Rights and
Interest of the lower and less Honorable Members in the Church, incurs the
guilt of Schism, as arguing the want of that Compassion, and Feellingness, that
springs from the head of the Church, down through the higher, to the meanest of
his Members; for no Man ever hated his own Flesh, even the meanest, and lowest
part of it, but nourishes, and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. They
therefore, that carry the greatest Grace, and Honor in the Church, should
invest the least comely Members with more abundant Honor and Comeliness, in the
most humble Christian Condescensions, and kindest Treatment, covering all their
defects, in Imitation of God, who has given most abundant Honor to that part
which lacked, and being more tenderly careful of deferring to them the utmo^t
God has allowed them: On the other side the groundless, and unreasonable
Repining and Discontent of those Inferior Members, that they are not the most
noble parts, is Schismatical also; not feeling the Glory of those more
excellent Members, as their own Glory, with delight and complacency, even till
it rises up to the Glory of the Head Christ, and God. To be perfectly united
therefore in the same Judgment and Mind, and to speak the same thing God has
spoken in his Word, and herein to Love one another; to observe the same pattern
of Worship given by God himself; to look upon our selves, as only Christ's, and
all Ministers to be the whole Churches, given it by Christ alike, so far as God
gives us opportunity to enjoy them; to rejoice in the Honor of the highest
Members, and to Honor more abundantly the meanest, as being all the Body of
Christ, and so tempered by him; and wherein we cannot in this State of the
Church come up to the exactness of these things, yet to perform thus in the
greatest instances of each of them, and in the smaller to tolerate, and
forgive one another, these are our security, and certain preservation from
Schism.

Quest. Is there not another sort of Schism yet to be spoken of?

Answ. No other that I can find spoken of by the Scripture.

Quest. Is it not Schism, when the Church, or that part of it, wherewith we are
conversant, prescribes Indifferences, to make orderly and decent the Worship of
God, and any Christians separate themselves into particular Assemblies, to
Pray, to Hear, and Speak the Word of God, to Admininister Sacraments, that they
may be free from such prescriptions? For this is setting up an Altar against an
Altar, and one Part of the Church against another, what can it then be, but
most notorious Schism, and so esteemed in all Antiquity?

Answ. I know not whether it is at all Schism: I am sure, if things were
rightly managed, it were the least Guilty kind; for there being an Union, as is
supposed, in all things that are Commanded by God and Christ, if there be that
Value and Love for one another in those things wherein they unite and agree; a
desire of Interest in, and benefit by one another Prayers, and a Joy in the
Gifts, Graces, and Spiritual Abilities one of another, a care mutually to
impart, and receive the benefit of them, as far as may be; such an Union in
things Commanded by God, shall overruled the little distances in indifferences,
and no more divide, than Worshipping God in different Congregations, by reason
of Distance of place; or the Church of God using differing Circumstances of
Worship in different Countries and Places.

Quest. But what, if besides these mere and simple Dissocations of themselves,
and use or non-use of these Indifferences, there be Anger, Strife, Emulation,
Bitter Zeal in one against another, as is generally and usually seen, do not
these sour Passions beget Schism?

Answ. Wherever these are found, they must needs amount to that kind of Schism;
That Christians do not love Christians in the Truth, and in keeping the
Commandments of God: Since it is supposed, that each part are united in the
Fundamentals of Faith, and Divine Commands; upon which ought to flow, from the
Love every sincere Christian has to God and Christ in these, love to one
another also: For Faith works, or is effectual by Love; and this is Love,
that we keep his Commands: This Love therefore must needs to all united in
these mighty things, wherein True Christians are united, surmount the
disaffection that arises in the Disunion about Tything, Mint, or Cummin; or
else we must value our Confidence in small things, or our Doubts about them,
above the clear and undoubted Truths and Commands of God, which must indeed
needs be Schismatical in both parts, or on whatever part is be found.

Quest. But seeing these Contentions are so hard to be avoided in the midst of
different Judgments, and especially diverse Practices of Christians, and in so
distinct Congregations, and that in the Eye of one another; and further, that
the Assemblies of Christians together ought to be as Universal, Numerous, or at
least as Free, and Mutual, as is possible in regard of nearness of place one to
another, for that it is most for the Honor of Christianity they should be so,
and most advantageous to the imparting Spiritual Gifts and Graces between all
the Pastors, and People; seeing all this is so undeniable, how can separation
from the Assembly of one another, do less than carry the guilt of Schism?

Answ. There can be no Schism in keeping close to the Doctrine and Commands of
Christ, without adding or diminishing, turning to the Right Hand or to the
Left; for therein, as has been often said, is the Bond of the Churches Union,
therein alone is the Church a Church; and the Peace lies infolded in the Truth;
the more than the Considerations forenamed are pressed, (and they deserve very
earnestly to be pressed,) the more absolutely necessary it is to stay in the
Doctrine of God, and the Commands of Christ, or (which are as truly the
Commands of God) the Dictates of Nature: Nay, it is better to allow Men a
Suspension of their assent to some Truths, and of their Compliance with some
Commands, that are but upon the outward skirts, and marches of Christianity,
and so not so evidently revealed, than rush them upon a precipitate belief of a
blind obedience; the plainest things, (and those are always the most necessary)
being the safest to pitch Christian Communion severely upon.

Quest. But may it not be reasonably supposed, that according to the
Constitution of Church Governors by Christ, they have a Power in things
neither Commanded nor Forbidden by God, to interpose their Authority, and to
determine them this way, or that way; and that Obedience cannot be refused
without Schism?

Answ. There are very great Reasons against any such Supposal.

1. The Apostles, the Highest Authority under Christ, as will be easily
acknowledged, had Commission only to teach the Observation of things Commanded
them by the Lord himself.

2. There is a constant Disclaimer in the Gospel of any Despotick, or Lord-like
Power in Church-Rulers; Christ expressly Compares the Power he gave with Civil
Powers, and Resolves, it shall not be so among his Disciples, as was among
them: He says, the Chief among them shall be Ministers, and Servants,
delivering the Will of their Lord, and not Lords themselves; they must have no
Will of their own to promulge: They profess they Preach Jesus the Lord, and
themselves Servants for Jesus sake; Servants of those they Preach to, as they
Minister to them the Divine Will; not Lords over Gods Heritage, but ensamples
of the Flock; Ambassadors, delivering only the Messages of their Master, and
beseeching Men: But if the whole scope of Indifferent Things were given them
for a Dominion, how great would it be?

3. These Circumstances in Religion may grow so bulky, and cumbersome, and make
such a Medly in it, that no one would know what Religion it self is.

4. The Free Votes and Suffrages of Christians in all things they receive, as
most con-decent and convenient, is that more abundant Honor God has given to
the meanest Members of his Church: Thus the whole Affair in that Council, Acts
11. was managed by not only the Apostles, the Elders, but the Brethren also;
each according to their Station, and Situation in the Body the Church: For that
there may be no Despotique Power; what is Commanded by Christ, must be so
represented, that the Evidences it is so Commanded, must be duly Represented,
and the Divine Authority sufficiently remonstrated; what is of Advice, and
Convenience, must be carried by free Suffrage, and Consent.

Quest. But still the Church being a Society, and the best of Societies, it
must be Subject to the Laws of Nature concerning Society; and what is carried
by the Votes of People, being always subject to Turbulency, and Confusion; have
we not great Assurance, seeing Christ reversed nothing Natural but confirmed
it; that there are many things not written in Scripture, but left to their
necessity and expediency according to Natures Laws, and so what is nearest to
Monarchick, being farthest from Confusion, the Rulers of the Church, and among
them the Bishops, ought to determine all things neither Commanded nor Forbidden
by God?

Answ. There is in the Church the perfect and absolute Monarchy of Christ in
his Word, and besides this, there is no other, nor can the Laws of Nature
dictate any other; there is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, or destroy, and
there need not any more Masters, for more would certainly breed Confusion;
whatever therefore is clearly according to the Word of God, or to be made out
to be so, whatever is the evident Dictate of Nature, as distinction of Sexes, 1
Cor. 11. 3. in their public appearance in Religious Assemblies; administration
of Divine Services in a known Language, 1 Cor. 14. v. 5. the speaking of one
Prophet only at once, and not in a Confusion of Voices, v. 31. All such Natural
Order, and Decency, or whatever is of Indisputable Decency, according to the
Manners and Custom of our Native Country, these are the utmost Bounds of
Prescription: All things else are to be Comprimiz'd by Agreement, and Suffrage,
and even these necessary things are to be Managed by Doctrine, Rational
Convicton, Exhortation, Admonition, Rebuke, and even Charge and Command with
all Authority in the Evidences of the Divine Word, and Will, and no otherwise:
For this, I say again, is the more abundant Honor, the Rulers or more
Honorable Members of the Church are to invest the lowest with, to Circulate
with them the Life, and Spirits of Truth, by transfusing the Advantages of all
the Light and Knowledge they have, that they as Living, Wise, and Intellectual
Members also, may judge what is Commanded them by God, and not be as Fools, or
Lifeless Members: For what Blood, Spirits, and Life are in the Body, that is
Spiritual Wisdom and Understanding in the Will of God in the Church: And in all
Indifferent things, the very same Freedom the Foot has to represent to the
higher Powers of Nature, what offends it, and is immedately heard; the very
same Power the lowest Member of the Church has to remonstrate to the Higher,
what Scandalizes it in the accepting this or that Indifferent Ceremony, and it
ought as feelingly, as immediately to be heard: For as the same Soul is present
to all parts of the Natural Body, so the same Spirit of the Head of the Church
animates his whole Body, the Church; which is the Fullness, or Complement, the
Receptacle of his Fullness, the Fullness in which he will appear Full, and
Complete, who fills all in all: As therefore the Head it self feels by this
Spiritual Union, so are the Eyes and Ears, the Higher Members of this Body, to
do: And if they do not so feel, it argues an Interruption between them and the
Head it self; for that most concernfully reciprocates with the whole Body, and
the extremest part of it; and so does every part inliven'd by him also, if
there be no Intercision, nor Obstruction betwixt it and the Head.

Quest. Is there yet any further Reason against a Power in the Rulers of the
Church, for imposing in things of indifferency under the Names of Decency and
Order?
Answ. There is the great Reason of the Mischief of Scandal, to be added to all
that has been spoken.

Quest. What is to be understood by Scandal?

Answ. Scandal is a Subject of Discourse of too large a Compass for the present
purpose; but as it is strictly to be adjusted to it, it may be thus understood:
Scandal is that Hurt, and Grief, a Man receives in Submitting either to Humane
Example, or Imposition, in things of themselves neither Commanded nor Forbidden
by God, when the Conscience is in doubt whether that which is required to be
done, be not displeasing to God, and forbidden by him, or that which is
required to be omitted, or not done, is not pleasing to God, and Commanded by
him, and yet submits it self to be led by that Example, or Commanded by such
Impositions, and so falls into Sin, and under a wound of Conscience.

Quest. When the thing is indeed neither Commanded, nor Forbidden by God, how
can it be changed by the Conscience being in Doubt concerning it?

Answ. Because the Conscience is that complex, or congregated Power of the
Soul, wherein are preserved all the Doctrines to be believed, and Rules of
Action, to the end that it may observe, and direct, how the Soul is to Govern
it self, and square all its Actions to the Will of God; and that it may comfort
or check the Soul in doing Well, or Ill, according to those Doctrines, or Rules.

Wherein then Conscience is mistaken, and misjudges either way, against that
which is Commanded by God, or for that which is forbidden by him, there is
nothing to be done, but to reduce Conscience to its Right Rules, which is the
Will of God in every thing, revealed in his Word. But in things neither
Commanded, nor Forbidden, if Conscience be apprehensive of danger any way, this
is the Honor and Dignity that God has conferred upon Conscience, as his
immediate Vicegerent in the Soul, and carrying his Authority, (by always
presenting it in his Word, and Command,) that a Man should suspend his Action,
wherein Conscience is not satisfied, and at rest concerning the Goodness of the
Action; and this is the Honor which those that are above, either in their
Authority in the Church, or the strength of their Understanding, Gifts, or
Graces, should bestow upon those that are below, that they should not either by
their Authority, Influence, or Example, Scandalize the little ones, or the
weak, that are so, either in regard of their low Station, or the weakness of
their Gifts, and Graces, that is, draw them into the Sin of doing any thing, of
which Conscience has a mistrust of displeasing God in so doing, in regard,
that it both weakens, and disables Conscience in the discharge of that Trust
reposed in it, for the carrying on the Soul in a Christian Course, its
Authority being violated, and prostrated in the reverence due to it, and
disturbs the Peace and Comfort it ought to Minister to the Soul in that Course:
For by this sort of Scandal, the Apostle Witnesses, the Weak Christian falls
into Sin, his Conscience is defiled, is wounded, is grieved, is made weak: All
the mischief of which, the value of indifferent things is not such, as that it
can answer, and make recompense for; and so to sin thus against the weak, is to
destroy them for whom Christ died, and therefore to sin against Christ; which
is the reason of those weighty Discourses of our Savior against Scandal, Mark
18. and of the Apostle, Romans 4. and 1 Cor. c. 8. and cap. 10. which being
compared, give great light one to another.

Quest. But it seems, that a Conscience only in doubt, might be settled by the
Advice, Example, and Authority of those that are the Elders, or Eminent Members
of the Church; for when Doubt supposes the Conscience inclining neither this
way, nor that way, in it self, but standing between both, or sometimes moving
to one side, and then to the other, the coming in of those Considerations,
taken from the Example and Authority forenamed, should give an over-weight to
that side on which they fall?

Answ. Yet on purpose to show the great Dignity of Conscience, and its
Government, without which approving, and directing accordingly, even Obedience
to the Divine Commands wants the just Complement of a Good Action; and also to
show of how little moment in Christianity, all things are, not under a Divine
Sanction, the whole weight of the Apostles Discourse is hung upon a doubting
Conseience; a Conscience in doubt concerning things indifferent, when urged
either way.

Quest. But are not all Sinnews of Government hereby cut, and dissolved, even
of Civil Government; for Conscience may be in relation to such Commands
disatisfied?

Answ. As Scripture every where supposes the whole Government in the Church of
God to be confined within the Monarchy and Word of Christ, and nothing to be
Imposed or Forbidden but according to that; so it does every where disinterest
the Church of Christ to judge or intermeddle in Civil Government, or Things
pertaining to it; it supposes Civil Powers will oblige to, and determine
Indifferencies in Civil things, this way, or that way, as they please, and
therein exercise a Lordship; but Christ having declared, it shall not be so
among his Disciples, does yet Command by himself, and his Apostles, all
Obedience to these Principalities and Powers, even thus Commanding, if not
against Gods Command directly, so that in all such things the Doubting
Conscience is only to be instructed in its Rule and Duty, but can have no more
Relief against Obedience to Civil Commands, than it has against Obedience to
the Commands of God, when it is mistaken about those Commands; for such
Obedience to Magistrates, is Obedience to the Divine Command.

Quest. There appears so near an Affinity in the Commands concerning
Indifferent Things, of those that have Rule in the Church, with the Commands of
those that have Civil Rule, that the one may be a Measure for the other; or
wherein is the difference, especially when they join in one in their Commands
concerning these Indifferoncies?

Answ. The Commands of Civil Authority concerning Indifferent Things in
Religion, deserves a particular consideration, for which a proper place shall
be reserved. But that the Church is such a kind of Political Regiment, that
should set up for it self, as one of the Polities of this World, by Canons and
Constitutions of its own, not founded in the Word of God, but introduced on
other pretenses, and that if Christians do not Submit to them, they should be
accounted Schismatics; and Excommunicated as Heathens, if they do not hear the
Church, that is, the Rulers of the Church, thus Ordaining in their own Wisdom,
and all this by the Charter of the Keys, or the Power of Binding or Loosing, is
as gross a Forgery, as Popery has any in this Point: Indeed if there were such
a state of things, there were reason to believe the whole Church should by
proper ways and means, found out by Christ, be modelled into one universal
Uniformity of Government and Ceremony, seeing the whole Church is but one, and
that the Roman, supposing it had not so grossly contradicted the Laws of
Christ, might sooner pretend to be the Metropolis of it, and the Bishop of Rome
the Head of the Unity, than any other, it being the first Imperial City that
was famous for Christianity.

But how little Uniformity is to Christ or his Kingdom, in those things wherein
he has not interposed at all, but left Christians free, and intended they
should be free, appears in the Ununiform Unity of the History of the
Evangelists concerning his Life, Doctrine, Death, and Resurection. To suppose
therefore the Church to be in this manner Uniformed by the Prudence of its
Governors, is to turn it so far into a Civil State, and the Bishops of it,
into Lay Elders.

CAP. XIII. Of the Anti-Church, and its Opposition in every Thing to the True
Church.
Quest. IS there not an Anti-Church, or Antichristian-Church, that stands in
Opposition to the True-Church?

Answ. There is, and has been so for many Ages, and that has taken upon it in
the most Public way, to be the Church of Christ, the House of the Living God,
the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

Quest. With what Advantages has it been armed thus to take upon it self at
all the Name of a Church?

Answ. It having risen out of the True Ancient Apostolic Church, that received
the True Christianity from the Apostles at Rome, and the Faith of which, as the
Apostle Paul witnesses, Romans 1. 8. was spoken of throughout the World; it has
retained the Scriptures, and the Fundamentals of Christianity, the Writings of
the First Christians and Apostolical Men, and so has continued to do from that
very time of the Apostles to this Day, and has also actuated the Truth of the
Scripture, and those Fundamentals of it, according as its Interest has led it,
in some Ages more, in some less, as shall be presently more discovered.

Quest. Having then the Scriptures, those Fundamentals of Christianity, and the
Discourses of the Ancient Fathers, and Doctors upon them, in such a length of
time, with what reason can it be looked upon as an Anti or Antichristian-Church?

Answ. With very great reason, because by a multitude of Additions, fowlest
Idolatrous and Superstitious Corruptions, and false Interpretations upon the
Scriptures, the Fundamentals of Christianity, and the Discourses of the
Ancients shamefully interpolated, and by Spurious Writings under their Names
despited, it has turned whole Christianity into a very contrary thing to it
self: while therefore it holds those points of Christianity, and the Records of
it in veneration, and yet supports all its Falsehoods thereby, it becomes
perfectly an Antichurch, or Antichristian: It has in regard of those Articles
of Truth it holds and actuates, so much, as to have the Name of a Church, and
Christian; and yet having them so falsified, corrupted, and changed from
themselves, it becomes a Mock-Church, a Mock-Christianity, that is, an
Antichurch, and Antichristian, in despite of the True-Church, and
True-Christianity: And as to its Actuation of Truth, it has so Actuated Truth,
as to Actuate by Truth its own Falsehoods, and Lies upon Truth.

Quest. How then did it rise to such an Eminency and pretense of being
Catholic and Public?

Answ. The many Concurrences of Divine Providence, under his deep and
unsearchable Judgments in the Government of the World, in relation to that
state he had appointed for his Church, I leave to the History of the Church and
Roman Empire in those times; by which may be understood, how the Papacy took
the advantage to Exalt it self, not only above the Episcopal Chairs then in an
Ambitious Contest for Supremacy, but above all that was called God, that is,
the Imperial Power it self, and so set its Foot upon the Necks of Christian
Princes throughout the World, till the great Cheat began to be detected; and
all this, by and upon pretense of being the Vicar of Christ, or the Head of the
Catholic, that is, the Roman-Church.

Quest. These things I confess not so convenient to my Inquiry; I desire only
to know, how, in the middle of so many horrible Corruptions, this Antichurch
could be so bold, as to vaunt it self the Universal Church of Christ.

Answ. Taking the utmost benefit of its Antiquity in the Christian-Faith, and
Fundamentals of it; and especially of the Conspicuousness and Famousness of its
State, and in the mean time the Corruptions growing up by degrees, and not so
observably as at once, (for Papal Rome was not built in a Day,) It usurped the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven as its own; the Key of Knowledge, in its
Infallibility; the Keys of Power, in opening and shutting Heaven Gates, so as
that in the Darkness then overspreading the World, and the Church, Ignorance,
the Mother of False-Devotion, so bewitching the Minds of Men, that they all
wondered after the Roman-State, as new modelled under the Beast Armed with two
Horns, like those of a Lamb, counterfeiting Power from Christ the Lamb, but
that spoke as a Dragon, pursuing all its pretendedly Christian Decrees with the
extremest Salvageness of any of the greatest Earthly Tyrants, but all under a
Mask of the Catholic Apostolic Church, by which Fascination of Zeal to the
most excellent Religion, though so Vitiated, Princes and People Surrendered
their Power to this great Sorceress, using at once all the Frauds and Cheats of
False-Prophesie, and the Arts and Policy of the most Designing Universal
Monarchy: Thus while this Antichurch stole into Power by the best appearances
of True-Religion, and secured it by all the Blandishments of a Meretricious
Religion; it found it self so strong, as to force its False-Religion by its
Power; and using both together, raised the Grandeur of both a Secular and
Spiritual Tyranny to such a height.

Quest. But how did the True-Church in this time Actuate Truth, or agree with
those Characters of being the House of God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth?

Answ. It was by the might and prevalency of this Secular and Spiritual Tyranny
so suppressed, that it was in a manner known only to God, who reserved a number
to himself in the midst of so great a Defection, wherein that promise was made
Good, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church: Exposing and
Actuating Truth, pure from those Corruptions, is hardly and very hardly to be
found in History, in any of the Lines and Motions of it, in the most dark and
dolesom period of that Defection.

Quest. How was it with the True-Church recovering it self from this great
Darkness?

Answ. God raised up by extraordinary Measures of, though but an ordinary
presence, such, who by Indefatigable searches into his Truth, and Word, and
those Records of Christianity that Antichurch was concerned to preserve,
because, as was said, it could not without so much of a Church, be an
Antichurch; and by bold Publications of it, shook so that Enchanted City, that
a tenth part of it fell: And by the great contrivance of Providence, even the
chief of that Antichurch were forced, by way of Repercussion, to raise greater
Light, by endeavors to defend themselves, from Scripture, Antiquity and
Reason, by the Summons of all, that Learning, Wit and Industry could levy in
their Defense; so that they were necessitated to awaken out of that Barbarity
and Ignorance in which they had been so long drowned, and to Actuate even Truth
more fiercely, that they might together with it make as potent and prevalent as
they could, and give countenance to those great Falsehoods they had interwoven
with it: From all which broke out such a light in the World, that Princes
rowz'd themselves, and no longer crouch'd down under such an intoxicated
Servitude, which had long galled and pinched them, but that they knew not how
to rid themselves from it, till the Sorcery was laid bare, which still gave
greater scope for the display of Truth.

Quest. Could the Scripture be inconscious, or silent concerning so great
Revolutions in the Church of God, as these?

Answ. It is in all True Reason most impossible; and therefore it is a mighty
Argument, that those great places of Scripture, that do so notoriously agree to
such a purpose, as the Discovery of this Antichristian State, are justly
applied to it by Protestant Interpreters.

Quest. If you please, point me to the chief of those places you refer to?

Answ. I will do it very briefly, as being too large for the present purpose to
enumerate many, or enlarge upon any of them: But what more proper to delineate
such a State, than the Apostasy the Apostle describes, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and 1
Timoth. 1. 4. or than the Church in the Wilderness, Revel. 12. 14. the
Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, being slain, and lying dead three Days and
a half, True Christianity being in all appearance extinct: The measuring the
Altar, the Temple, and those that Worship in it, signifying the close
Retirement of Pure Religion, and the outward Court left to be trodden down by
the Gentiles, or Heathen Christians, and their impure Rites, and Worship; and
therefore excluded from those strict measures true undefiled Christianity is
enclosed within, Revel. 11. 1.

Now upon all these Representations of such a State of the Church, so
exquisitely shadowed and resembled, and compared with that deep plunge and
immersement of Christian Religion in the time of the Popish Midnight, who can
but believe, these, with many concurrent Delineations in all those forecited
Scriptures, were on purpose to give the Portraicture of that so Fatal
Apostasy, that believes it at all to be Prophesied in the Book of God? and
who, that considers the weight of the thing, can but believe it foretold, if
there be any thing prophetic of the State of Christianity to the end of the
World? As it most evidently appears there is.

But if any be so incredulous, as to suppose such a State of Christianity
beneath the prefigurations of the Divine Spirit, he cannot, if he be indeed a
Protestant, but agree, that nothing does with more Art and Divine Skill
Pourtray, and Draw to the Life such a Devastation of Christ's True Religion, as
all History knows Popery has made, and as far as it can prevail, does now, and
would do much farther, and in its very Frame is constituted so to do.

Quest. But seeing you suppose these Types of Popery may be applied another
way, though it is, I confess, very hardly to be supposed; yet I desire, if any
thing has fallen under your Observation, that can be less avoided, to make
plain, how different a Religion Popish-Christianity is from the
Scripture-Christianity, you would give me leave to ask what it is?

Answ. I must needs commend your Rational Enquiry, for I know neither the
Veneration given to any Religion by the Natives of it, nor the ill Words
against any Relion by those that are Strangers and Enemies to it, should
conclude against it: The Professors of every Religion are startled at any
reproach of their own Religion, as at horrible Blasphemy, but freely speak ill
of a diverse from it: Mahometans call themselves Believers, and Christians
Infidels. Popish Religion calls it self Catholic, and Protestancy a Grand
Heresy, and Schism. Judaism charges whole Christianity with Cheat and
Imposture: It is therefore necessary, we should have some Magnetic Needle to
point us to the True Religion, and to the True Christianity, seeing its Name is
not only distributed to many, but so solemnly divided into the Popish and
Protestant Profession of Christianity.

Quest. What then can be our Invariable Northpole in Religion, in such a Wide
and Tumultuous Ocean?

Answ. I hope you have not forgotten what was at first given in Instruction
concerning Natural and Revealed Religion, their exact Agreement with one
another, and with all our Faculties; so that no Religion in the World can
deserve the Name of a Religion, but looks monstrous and horrid, only so far as
it borrows some or more of the Grand Principles of our True Religion; nor can
be at all Weighty and Considerable, but is vain and ridiculous, if it receive
no Ballast from True-Religion.

That then, which was accounted for in the beginning, being remembered, I shall
especially apply my self to ascertain True Christianity in contradiction to the
false, or Popish Christianity, by that which will much ascertain all True
Religion also in General, and difference it from all False Religion.

Quest. I much desire to have some such Test, as you seem to intimate and
promise?

Answ. I cannot furnish you with a better, surer, and more lively, than that
Emblem of the Divine Spirit, representing the New Jerusalem by a apiece
City, the Length, and the Breadth, and the Height of which are equal: The Walls,
and the Gates, and the City it self amounting to so many Square, Solid
Furlongs, all exactly regulated by the Number Twelve, all of Massy-Gold and
most precious Pearil, Rev. 21.

Quest. The very General view of so rich an Emblem much affects me, but I
desire you to lead me into the Application of it to each Particular purpose,
and in the first place, what am I to understand by the City?

Answ. It is evidently told us, it is the New Jerusalem that is coming down
from Heaven, the True Church Seated in the Christian Religion; for so the
Apostle Paul assures us, the Christian Church so Spirited with True
Christianity is Jerusalem, which is above, the Divine and Spiritual Jerusalem,
which is free, and is the Mother of us all, if True Christians, Gal. 4. 26.

Quest. What do you understand by the Foundations, the Wall, the Gates, the
City it self?

Answ. I am not bold, or curious in pursuing Emblems too close, but understand,
in general, by the whole of all these, the Doctrine, the Worship, the Rules of
Life, the Discipline of the True Church.

Quest. What are we directed to, by all being reduced to the Number Twelve?

Answ. It is very evident, the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb give the Honor to
the Number Twelve; for the Prophets and Apostles, that is, the Truth ministered
infallibly by them, is the Foundation upon which the True Christian Church is
built, Jesus Christ himself being the Cornerstone; and so to show True
Religion has been always Substantially the same, The Twelve Tribes of Israel,
and the Name of Jerusalem, the People and City of God of old, are Recorded with
Honor, as expressive of the True Church, fixed in the True Religion in the
Times before Christ.

Quest. Why are all things in the Christian State deserib'd to be of Pure Gold,
and Precious Pearl?

Answ. To teach us by sensible things the transcendent Purity and Worth of
Christian Religion, and the equal Purity and Worth of all things in it, of a
most transparent clearness, being all Spiritual, Intellectual, full of Light
and Truth, and so to be received and enjoyed by Purity, and Intellectuality, or
Clearest Understanding, Wisdom, and Prudence in the Knowledge of this Divine
Revelation, and by greatest Innocence, Cleanness and Heavenliness of Heart,
Affections, and Life.

Quest. But can this be supposed to be the present State of the Church of God,
as it is here upon Earth?

Answ. This is the certain and most unalterable Constitution and Designation of
God concerning it, and whoever plants it lower, in any of the Things before
Named, viz. the Doctrine, Worship, Rules of Life, or Discipline, contradicts
the very thing it self, or degrades and embases it, though it must be
acknowledged, its being thus prepared and adorned as a Bride, must be from
Heaven, in some just season appointed by the Father: This is yet always the
Trial of the True Church, and the True Religion, although the Church be not yet
perfected to it.

Quest. But you seem to have forgotten the City, and all the Parts of it lying
Foursquare, and being solid square measure, for so it must be, if the Length,
Breadth, and Height are all equal?

Answ. I did not at all forget it, but suffered your Questions to lead through
all, I less designed, that they might come to the Principal Character of the
True Religion and the True Church, so exactly adequate to one another.

Quest Will you then more fully explain this Similitude?

Answ. That I may the better do it, I must repeat it from the very Ground and
Bottom of it, which is, that God makes use, as he pleases, of all the Knowledge
and Science that is in the World, to Minister to Divine Knowledge, ^^ which he
principally intends to Instruct, as being most absolutely necessary for all, of
what condition soever: As then Mathematics is the most Demonstrative Science,
and some things in it are of most retired and fine Speculation, so are others
most known, and necessary to all employed in Mechanics: Thus God has been
pleased to deposite some Prophetic Truths in the most mystic parts of that
Learning, and some of the more general use in the most known and acquainted
parts of it; now those that are more secret, and not so necessary, I shall
leave to those that are most fitted thereunto: But what is most plain, and
imports what is most necessary for all, I will insist upon.

As then Number and Measure are means Ordained for Humane Nature, and principal
Instruments of Reason, to come to the most certain knowledge of things, and to
be secured, they are, and continue what they justly ought to be; so True
Religion is thereupon presented to us under exact Number and Measure, falling
in one with another, the Number Twelve multiplied into a Square Cube of Twelve
thousand Furlongs.

And as the Foursquare Figure does so bind, and is so compact with it self,
that it cannot receive the least Addition, but with the loss of its Square, nor
the least Diminution, but under the same Forfeiture; thus True Religion is so
perfectly it self, that it can neither be added to, nor diminished from, but
with a proportionable loss of it self: God was pleased upon this account to
choose this Figure for the Altar under the Law, for the Breast Plate of
Judgment; this was the Measure of Solomon's Oracle, how far the Measures in
Ezekiel agree, I leave. The Heathen by Natural Wisdom had such a Sense of the
so Just to it sell, Foursquare, that they called a Good Man, (...), of a
Foursquare Man.

And lastly, as Solid Square Measure is in all parts of it, and throughout
every part, exactly Square, and gives the most certain account of the whole
content of a Body; so is True Religion in all its Parts exactly so it self, and
every Part of every Part is reduced to the same exactness; for so the Length,
Breadth and Height of it are equal, and so is the True Church exactly adequated
to True Religion: The Faith is therefore said to be at once delivered to the
Saints, because it can receive no New Measures, and it is called, the Common
Salvation, or Doctrine of it, because the Universal Standard is one.

This then is the Measure of a Man and the Measure of the Angel: For by that
Wisdom, that is natural to a Man, in which Beasts have no share, that is, to
Number and Measure, is made plain to us Angelical Number and Measure, that is,
the Number and Measure of True Relion, as the Angel delineated it, beginning in
the Apostolical Twelve, and Multiplied by it self to an exact Square Figure or
Measure; Square in the whole product, Square in every particular part, and of
that just content. And with this exact Number Twelve, so Foursquare, agreed the
Altar, Temple, and they that worshipped therein; when the outward Court was
left out of Measure, to be trodden under Foot by Heathenish Idolatry, and
Superstition, disguised under Popish Christianity; of which whenever it shall
be perfectly freed, it shall appear in that Glory here described. All richest
Pearl, pure Gold, most transparent Jasper, that is Brightest, Clearest Truth,
and of the exact Apostolical Number and Measure.

Quest. Is there no farther Improvement to be made of this Divine Symbol, the
Foursquare City?

Answ. Thereis, when I have first observed to you False-Religion is out of all
Square, just Measure, and even Number; it is a constant and perpetual Odd,
wandering from True Religion, and the justness of it to it self; and that both
in Doctrine, Worship, Rules of Life and Discipline, so that it is impossible in
it to Measure one thing from and by another, or any one point of any of these
by it self, uneven in the whole Product, uneven in every part; uneven in the
Root: The most significant Emblem of the Popish-Church, which having the
Fundamentals of Christianity, has yet lost the Apostolical Twelve, by
innumerable most irregular, ^^d wild Additions, and deformed every Single
Article of Truth by most disagreeable Corruptions of it; and therefore, as a
Man most Learned in Numbers has demonstrated, the Number 666, a Number no way
to be reduced to a Foursquare Figure, is the most Fit, and Significant
Hieroglyphick of it, and indeed, of all False-Religion, that must have
something of Truth, to make it a Religion; but as it is false, is an Odd from
that Truth.

Quest. Let me now desire the most plain and useful Application of this
Parabolick Scheme?

Answ. You shall have it; and it consists in observing Four Prime Characters of
the True Christian Religion, that may be as Four Equal sides of this
Foursquare, and of the Church adjusted to it; from each of which may be
measured to each of the rest, and the Equality, or Inequality, will discover
the Truth or Falsehood of all that is brought to the Trial.

1. The Transcendant Holiness, Goodness, and Purity of the Doctrine, Precepts
of Worship, Rules of Life, Discipline, is one side of this Christian-square,
with which whatever does not Square, is convicted not to be of that Doctrine
and Religion; whether it look toward God, in all the Highest, most Honorable
Apprehensions of him, suitable Discourse, Worship, Love and Obedience; or
whether it look toward Men, in all Justice, Righteousness, Mercy, Compassion,
Charity, Benevolence, Beneficence; and these, as they respect all the
particular Offices of Life; Public, of Magistrates, Subjects; or Private, as
of Parents, Children; Husband, Wife; Master or Servants: The Peace and Welfare
of Mankind are treasured up in the Law of Christ; or lastly, whether it look to
a Man's own Person, in Soberness, Purity, Continency in the Thoughts, the Words,
the Actions. The Honor and best State of the Mind and Body are provided for by
this Doctrine that is after Godliness, not only in the World to come, but in
this Life: Whatever now does not agree with these wholesome words, is detected
not to be Christian; which is all Truth, Virtue, and Praise.

2. There being nothing more intimate to Man, in this fallen state, than the
Sense of Guilt, and knowledge that he is a Sinner, the whole platform of
Redemption by Jesus Christ is become like the Original Law of Righteousness, by
which Man was formed, and Answers to it in all the Attributes of Perfection; as
therefore the Plot of Restoration by the Son of God infolds it within it self,
and answers every way exactly to it, so that very Law and Doctrine of Holiness
owns the Reconciliation and Atonement by that great Sacrifice, as Equilateral
to it self, the Dimensions of one being found correspondent in the other, and
each to be Tried one by the other; so great a Sacrifice would be unnecessary,
if it had not so great a Law to answer; so great a Law can be answered by so
great a Sacrifice, and only by that: It must have that; it can need, it can
acknowledge no other. So then, the one may be Measured by the other: The
Holiness, Purity of such a Law violated, requires such an Effectual
Pacification, and Purgation of Conscience, such a Renovation as Christianity
sets before us. Such a Sacrifice, such a Renovation or Sanctification by the
Divine Spirit from it, teaches us, what an excellent Law was violated; so often
therefore is the Lamb made the Title of our Lord and Savor, so often it is
Signally Recorded in the Revelation; and the Names of the Apostles of the Lamb
are said to be written in the Foundations of the New-Jerusalem, to show the
weight of the Doctrine of the Christian Sacrifice in the Blood of Christ, and
the Holy Spirit breathing in and from it, in Renovation and Sanctification.

3. The Liberty that Jesus Christ has brought in by his Gospel, is another
Equilateral Character of his True Religion, to be Measured by each of the
former, and it also Measures them: It is not a Liberty from Holiness, it is not
a Liberty from close application to the Redemption of Christ, and not to need
it, on any pretense whatever; but it is a Liberty from any Imposition that is
Ceremonial, and does not by its Intrinsique Worth and Goodness, or by its
Supreme Ordination from God, center in the true Perfection of the Mind,
Conscience, and whole Soul: yea, whatever God himself had Commanded the Jews,
is not only reversed, but despised for the sake of Christian Liberty, if it
does not square with it, so that no Yoke of Ceremonial Bondage is laid upon us
by God himself; that which had been, is taken away, and a Yoke of humane
imposiing is under the Gospel-Anathema: the Doctrine of Godliness, of
Redemption by Christ, may be justly measured by the true perfection of
Conscience. To do well in things intrinsically good, according to the Rule of
Christianity, and being inwardly purged and atton'd by the Christian Sacrifice,
do also truly measure this Liberty: for on one side, the Kingdom of God is not
Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. He that in
these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men: It is
not applying to the Blood of Bulls and Goats, that can never take away sin, but
to the Blood Offered by the Eternal Spirit, which certainly makes the comers
thereunto perfect: On the other side, this Liberty lays not open the Enclosures
of a Holy Life, nor removes the Barriers of Justice against Sin, if not
satisfied and attoned by Faith in the Blood of Christ.

4. Lastly, That which answers to each of these Characters of True Religion,
is, that it has no Secular Interest, no Interest of this present World, that
it looks not upon the things that are seen, that are but for a Moment, but on
the things that are not seen, that are Eternal; such is the Godliness, such is
the Sacrifice, such the Christian Liberty, that their Uses and Ends are too
great and large to center in Earthly things; and though themselves are the True
Interest of the present state, yet they no way make it, or the Grandeur of it,
an Interest, but seek a Heavenly Country, and City; even as the Lord of this
Religion said, My Kingdom is not of this World: Now as this measures each of
the other Characters, so each of them measures it; such a Transcendant Holiness
and Purity can alone see God in Eternal Habitations; such a Sacrifice alone can
have its Blood enter into the Holy Place made without Hands, having obtained an
Eternal Inheritance; such a Blood speaks alone in the Heavens, better things
than the Blood of Abel; a Conscience so free, so perfected, has boldness to
enter into the Holiest, and none else: These are all fitted and Consecrated to
Eternity, and Eternity to them; Light and trivial Holiness, Insignificant
Ceremonies, and Rites of Purgation; a cumber of External Observations, invented
by Men, can never enter within the Vail, nor endure for ever. And on the other
side, by such Divine Things to grasp at this World, and a Patrimony on Earth,
is as gross and out of Square; so that these things exactly measure one
another, and square together.

Quest. How is the Apiece City, or the True Church, adjusted to these
Dimensions?

Answ. In all these things I before mentioned, in having these, and these only,
in its Doctrine, its Worship, its Practice and Obedience, its Discipline or
Government.

Quest. How is the False Church out of Square to all these?

Answ. In that retaining the Profession of the Christian Religion, constituted
according to these, and pretending an Imitation of them, and the Miracles
attesting them, it has been most extravagant from them, by its Traditional
Additions and Counterfeits of them, every of which are a Violation and
Irregularity from one or all of these Characters, or equal Sides, of True
Religion, a great Lie upon them, with which they can never be brought to agree,
being not only an endless Variation from, but a flat Opposition to them, and a
despiting them with themselves, so strangely, so monstrously misshapen, and
that in so great numbers, that as in mockage to the many excellent things our
Savior did and taught, so many, that if they were all written, the World it
self could not contain the Books that would be written; even so, if all the
numerous and prodigious excursions of the Antichristian Church, and Antichrist
the Head of it, from Christian Religion, by its indeterminable swarm of New
pieces of Antichristianism, should be written, the whole World it self would
not be able to contain the Volumes that would be written.

Quest. But does not the Profession of so much of the Christian Religion in
such an Eminence, like the City upon the Hill that cannot be hid, give it the
Reputation of a most Famous Church, if not the Catholic, as it calls it self?

Answ. Christianity so abused, as in the Popish Religion, is infinitely the
more dishonored for the Eminence of the Antichurch, that so exposes it; and it
is only the Eminence of Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God, and the
exalting himself above all that is indeed and truly God in his Church, and
showing himself, that he is God, in his Oracles, Wonders, and Miracles, but
they are all but one great Lie of this Son of the Father of Lies, the Image of
the God of this World, the Son of his falsehood and perdition, contrary to
Christ the Son of the Father in Truth and Love. But if any one receiving
Christianity or the Scriptures from the Antichurch, and measuring them in and
by themselves, separates True Christianity from the Antichristianism, and
retains it Pure; it is but like the Service God received from the False Prophet
Baalam, when he Prophefied Truth, into whose Place and Office Antichrist
succeeds, and is therefore styled, the False Prophet, Revel. 16. 13.

Quest. What then can this pretended Catholic Church be, in relation to the
True Catholic Public Religion?

Answ. It can be no other, upon strict account, than the Synagogue of Satan,
the Pseudocatholick Antichurch, in a Damnable Heresy from, and hatred to the
General Assemby, and Church of the First Born, written in Heaven, united with
the God of Truth and Love, and the Son of the Father, in Truth and Love, in a
Hellish Schism and Separation from the Apostolic, Catholic Church, of which
God and Christ are the Head.

Quest. How can it be believed, that so great a Lie upon Christianity should be
received by so large a proportion of the Christian World, or that Persons of so
vast Abilities and Comprehensions should so deceive others, or be themselves
deceived?

Answ. Scripture has taken all the care possible, to Arm us against this
Objection, which is indeed very great: It calls this Apostasy, a Mystery of
Iniquity, and to assure us, the Apostle Paul, and the Divine Person in the
Revelation, point to the same Thing; upon the Forehead of this Adulterous
Church is written, Mystery; (Now a Mystery, if it were presently understood,
and all easy and plain, were no Mystery:) It has the Energy of Delusion, in
causing Men to believe a Lie; it is the whole Deceit of unrighteousness; it
sets up a great Stage of Counterfeit Miracles that it vaunts upon; and that it
might have that Reverend Face of Antiquity to deceive with, and say it comes
from a far-off Ages; It was a Mystery that was then at work, in the Apostles
time.

Lastly, It has its effect upon them that may be Christians, and receive
Truth; but not the chaste unprostitute Love of Truth alone.

Quest. But it seems imposible, that any parts of the Christian World, that
have been once disabused, should return any more under so great a Delusion?

Answ. There are very great hopes, that God, who has Commanded his Light to
shine out of this Darkness, will interpose by the perpetual Brightness of his
own appearance, and by that Divine Breath of his Mouth in his Word, against the
return of so great a Darkness. This set aside, there are so many Reasons of
fear, and such possibilities of laying a Train of Causes reaching to such an
Effect, that there can be no place for Security, but in the Almighty
Providence, and yet what Degrees of that deadly Scourge may fall on the
Protestant World, God only knows; we know our Sins deserve very ill.

Quest. What is the greatest Security, under the Divine Grace and Providence,
against so great Desolation upon True Christian Religion?

Answ. A perfect Acquiescency of the Protestant Nations upon the Foursquare of
Divine Truth, and Resolvedness not to move from thence. For as a Foursquare
never removes from its own Base, because it is All Base; so they that are
Squared to it, and settled upon it, never move: For it always bears them alike
with it self, and by its own Justness recalls them, if they offer to wander:
mere angry prejudice against this or that False Religion, is not enough,
without being thus grounded upon Truth; Entertainment of Truth with any
Addittaments will secure no Man, for he that receives one Addition, may receive
another: He that receives Truth lying Foursquare with it self, is called back
by that Even of Truth: He that adds one to it, and makes it Odd, may go on
indefinitely, as Popery has done, because he has forsakent he Just Even that
should stay him: He can no longer wait for the Voice of Truth, that by it self
always answers it self, but to what is not like it self it will not answer, but
discover it to be off from this Square; it will not on any respects hearken to
any thing different, because it will not be solicited to move from it self: So
that upon the whole, the Laws of Symetry and Commensuration are the great
Security of True Religion, and ascertain the True Church both to it self, and
all Beholders. For Additions to Religion, like Surds or Irrational Figures,
incommensurable to the Rational Square, can never be reduced to this Foursquare
of Truth, but are like the Deaf Adder, that will not hearken to the voice of
Reason, Charming never so Wisely: Nor can they ever be reduced to a certainty
or exactness with themselves, but are one thing to day, another to morrow. But
Divine Truth, is (...) Rational, Certain, Expressly it self, Deaf indeed to any
thing else, but in it self it is Testerday, and to Day, the same for ever.

He therefore that daily ponders, meditates upon, has a just Measure of the
Fundamentals of Divine Truth, and does all things in a Regular Square with
them, shall know the Doctrine that is of God; all the Fruits of the Tree of
Life, though they are various, yet come all within the Apostolic Twelve, and
he that has a Spiritual Gust, exercised to discern betwixt Good and Evil, by
tasting any aright, will taste all, and find them Apostolical, and know
whatever pretends, and is not, and so reject it: He will know all the Gates of
Wisdom and Truth, and the Angelical Guard attending at them, and go in and out
by them, but the Disorderly Breaches and Gaps, that Wild Beasts, or Deceitful
Foxes have made, he avoids, knowing they exceed the Apostolic Twelve, and are
therefore dangerous, and pernic^ous; and whatever Apparation of Angels may be
at them, he knows it is only Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, and his
Ministers transformed as the Apostles of Christ, as the Ministers of
Righteousness: Thus the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles Numbered, and
Measured exactly by it self, is the Security of the Twelve Tribes of Israel,
that is, of the True Church.

CAP. XIV. Of the Power of Magistrates, in Religion, and of National Religion.
Quest. IT is I think very clear, by all that has been spoken, that the
settlement of Religion in the Word of God, is most stable and certain, and that
by no Powers he has given in his Church, it can be changed, nor receive any
Arbitrary Additions, that should be Obligatory: But I am in great doubt, how to
reconcile those Commands of Scripture, to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, with those strict Precepts, to keep close to the Word of God, and to
turn neither to the Right hand nor to the Left, where Rulers so often prescribe
in Religion, contrary to, or different from the Word of God?

Answ. I aknowledge, the Resolution of this Doubt contains many difficulties in
it, and cannot be given at once, but I shall endeavor so to lead your
Questions, by every Degree of Answer, as may direct into the best method for
your satisfaction.

Quest. What, I pray you, is the first step necessary to be taken in order to
the Resolving this Doubt?

Answ. To settle a True Understanding, how the Magistrates Power and Authority
in Religion made entrance into the World.

Quest. I very much desire to know that, and believe it to be of very great
Influence into all things that concern the unfolding this Question?

Answ. This then I take to be the best Account of it; After the apparent
Degeneracy of Humane Nature, so that the Laws written in Men's Hearts, were
evidently defaced and blotted by contrary Practices, there was a necessity of
forming the great Notions of Natural Religion, Godliness, Righteousness, and
Soberness, into Laws, that Men might be thereby preserved from highest
Irregularities, and excess, under the pretense of being at Liberty, or every
Man being a Lawgiver to himself.

Quest. I desire you further to Explain how this brought in Magistracy?

Answ. That such Laws might be made and Executed, there must be some supreme
Legislative and Executive Power in every Community; whether placed in one, or
more; whether by the Title of Paternity or Primogeniture; whether Hereditary
and Successive, or Elective; whether by Agreement and Covenant primarily, or by
Submission and Pacts after Conquest: These things are variously ordered by God
in his Paramount, but secret Government of the World. But the Laws of
Godliness, Righteousness and Soberness, are so necessary, and Men know them to
be so necessary, that they cannot be without them, nor without some Supreme
Legislation and Execution of Laws formed according to them: They that are
above, see a necessity of Governing by them; they that are below, see a
necessity of being Governed by the same; and therefore submit by Common Consent
to some supreme Authority, and Subordinate Magistrates under the Supreme, to
that end. Mankind is touched by this Impression from God, and all that are not,
are branded as Sons of Belial.

Quest. But how are Princes and Magistrates secured in the Exercise of their
Power against those that would not be Subject?

Answ. Besides the Laws of God, written in the Heart, and promulg'd in the
World, besides the secret Touches, and Motions of Providence, and Interlinkings
of Common Interest, with the Rights of Sovereignty; Princes and Sovereign
Rulers are both by the Will of God, and the Common Consent of Mankind,
surrounded with Grandeur of Highest Estate, that they may draw Subjects into
their Service, and Dependence upon them, by the greatness of their Rewards,
being both the Fountain of Honor, and of Splendour of Condition: But
especially, they are Armed with the Power of the Sword, entrusted with them by
God, that by the awe of their Wrath and Vengeance they may bring People into
Subjection and a Readiness to Obey.

Thus they appear as Gods in the World, as Living Images of the most High, in
their Vicegerency, according to what is said to them by Inspired Wisdom, I have
said, ye are Gods, and Sons of the Most High.

Quest. But why has it not pleased God, to appear himself in this Authority
and Power, Visibly, and Immediately, which would cut off all Dispute, as to
Supreme Right, and Maladministration; which do now often disturb the Peace of
Government, and the People under it; or at least why has he not given Angels a
Superiority, and Visible Presidency over Kingdoms, as that which would much
more awe, and Compose the World?

Answ. The Wisdom of God has in all things appeared, in attempering things one
to another with greatest Equality. So he has thought fit in infinite Wisdom,
to Govern Men by Men. He has Committed all Judgment to Christ, because he is
the Son of Man; he will Judge the World at last by that Man whom he has
appointed, Christ Jesus: Thus he Governs Men all along by the Men of his
Right Hand, as Images of himself, but more immediately of Christ, the Great Son
of Man; thus in his Word he speaks to Men, by Men like themselves. And as to
the Conceit of Mankind Submitting with greater awe to a Government from Heaven,
it is but like that of having one from the Dead to speak to them, when they
have Moses and the Prophets, by which if they are not persuaded, neither would
they be persuaded, though one should rise from the Dead; nor would they be
Governed by one from Heaven, that are not Governed by that Humane Majesty and
Sovereignty, Created by God on purpose for them, as is most Evident in those
many Rebellions of the People of Israel, under so evident a Theocrasie, or so
immediate a Government of God.

Quest. Is the Power of Magistrates only in those clear and undoubted points of
Godliness, Righteousness, and Soberness?

Answ. Because under the two latter of these, there is a vast Compass of the
Interests of the Peace, and Weal, and Honor of Nations, in all Traffic and
Commerce, in provision for safety and security, and adjusting of Laws to all
these ends; there must be a vast Compass also of Power in these, extending to
all Indifferent things; Indifferent till they come to be determined by Princes
and Powers, but then, by the Ordinance of God, to be observed according to
those Laws, determining them this way or that way.

Quest. But I desire you to give yet a closer and stricter Account of the Power
of Sovereigns in Religion, or Godliness, being the main point of of the present
Enquiry?

Answ. That I may answer your desire, I must consider Religion as it is Natural
Religion, written in the Hearts of Men; as it is Revealed Religion, published
by extraordinary Ministers, and Consigned to after Ages by inspired Writing, or
Scripture; and lastly, as Religion is so or so Circumstantiated and Modelled in
the External Administration of it.

Now by Natural Religion, as distinguished from Revealed Religion, I do plainly
intend, that Religion, whether it be drawn out by the mere force of Natural
Conscience, without any plain or known Assistances of Revealed Truth; or
whether it was not known to be Natural Religion till being Revealed, Natural
Conscience acknowledges it, and must needs Confess it to be True Natural
Religion; or that the wisest and soberest part of Mankind confesses it to be
so; or whether it be what Natural Religion teaches, upon the supposition of
Revealed Religion, acknowledged, and confessed to be from God; for then Natural
Religion confesses, and urges, that all Revelations from God, that evidence
themselves to any Man's mind to be from God, should be received with Reverence,
and submitted to with Obedience: In all these cases of Natural Religion, I
boldly and positively assert, the Sovereign Power has a Right given it by God,
to Make, and Execute Laws according to the Obligations of Natural Religion,
even as in all Cases of Righteousness and Soberness, or Common Peace and
Welfare, and to punish Offenders, and Transgressors according to the Degree of
their Guilt, and can no more be Impeached in that procedure, than in any the
most undoubted Functions, or Rights of Government whatever.

Quest. I must desire to be guided in my Thoughts concerning the Power of
Governors in Revealed Religion?

Answ. Besides the Legislative and Vindictive Power of Supreme Magistrates in
Natural Religion; there is that Divine stamp of Authority, God has Engraven
upon them, so that besides their Laws, they recommend Religion by the very
representation of God himself, whose Presence they bear, and have not only the
more Remote Authority of a Prince, but the nearest, most Natural, and kindly
Authority of a Father. On account of which Solomon, as a King, so often speaks,
Hear, O ye Children, the Instruction of a Father, and (as having all Parental
Affection in himself,) forsake not, says he, the Law of a Mother. The Care of
all means for Instruction, and Propagation of Religion, is most proper to
Government: And all these Administrations in Religion, run not only through all
points of Natural Religion, in that ampleness before expressed, but do most
genuinely and freely stream through all points of Revealed Truth, and the whole
Counsel of God in the Scripture, nothing being more Princely and Paternal, than
the utmost Providence, and Influence of Princes, and Sovereign States herein,
wherein they fulfill the Prophecy, of Kings being Nursing Fathers, and Queens
Nursing Mothers to the Church of God.

But there is this difference between Natural and Revealed Religion; Natural
Religion is written in the Heart, and may certainly be found there, (however it
comes to be known, clearly, and truly, only by Revelation) and so may be
absolutely Commanded: But Revealed Religion is reco^ded by Faith, and Faith
comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, and therefore cannot be
Commanded, but must be expected by the Blessing of God upon Instruction: But if
any Man profess to believe Revealed Religion, to have receievd it as the
undoubted Truth of God, it is then the Law of Nature, he should deport himself
in it, and toward it, as to the Truth of God: Nebuchadnezzer, Darius, and the
King of Nineveh, their Laws were rightly grounded upon the Principles of
Natural Religion concerning the True God: The Laws of Moses, and the Princes of
Judah in Revealed Religion, were upon the so unavoidable acknowledgement of the
Divine Presence and Authority in and with those Laws, the so many Repeated
Covenants, Indentures, and Engagements of that People, on the evident
Appearances of God, to be obedient to those Laws. But in the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, we find no tracks of Humane Power, but all was done by
Instruments fitted from Heaven, naked of all Humane Authority, that the
Excellency of the Power might be of God and not of Men, till Princes and People
agreed in the Faith of the Gospel, not by Compulsion, but by Evidences and
inward Assurances of the Faith; and so it is still to continue.

Quest. Before you pass from this point, that it may be made the clearer; will
you give the Distinction between Sovereign Powers, and the Elders of the
Church? For they are both called Rulers, they are both called the Ministers of
God?

Answ. This is indeed most necessary to be known, as tending much to Illustrate
this whole Matter.

1. The Power of the Elders of the Church lies wholly and entirely in the
Evidence of the Truth, and the Word of God they Minister, without which their
Persons are Invested with no Power, or Authority at all. But there is a Sacred
Character upon Sovereign Powers, and their very Persons, so that Reverence,
Prostration, Obeisance, Honorable Titles, and Obedience in all Lawful Things
are due to them, even when their Commands, in some things being unlawful,
cannot be obeyed, as appears every where in Scripture.

2. The Authority, Power, and Majesty of Sovereign Princes remains Inviolable,
and not to be invaded by any, no not by those who have Commission to speak the
Word of God: There is no Temporal Power in order to Spirituals Conferred by
Christ, or Ordained to his Ministers, to Create a Civil-Spiritual Power within
a Civil, and to rencounter it: But Princes are in all Causes, and over all
Persons, within their own Dominions, under God, and according to his
appointment, Supreme Governors; so contrary is Scripture to the Usurpation of
the Anti-Church herein: All Religious Princes guiding themselves by Gods Word,
have great Power and Authority, not only by that Word, but by Virtue of that
Authority and Majesty God has Clothed them with, as his Vicegerents, to
Direct and Govern according to Truth; wherein the Divine Spirit is pleased
often to be so immediately present with them, that a Divine Sentence is in the
Kings Lips, that they may direct according to Truth; and in all Truth they are
to be Obeyed, not only for the Truths sake, but for that Authorities sake also
God has Invested them with.

3. The Elders of the Church lose their Power by erring from Truth and the Word
of God; for of what Authority is the False Prophet, or the False Teacher? But
Princes and Sovereign Powers have a Power, though misapplied, to vindicate
their Authority upon those that cannot Obey them; except they should Disobey
God to Obey Magistrates, which none dare assert that acknowledge God; in which
Power Magistrates must not be resisted, even while they cause Men to suffer for
Righteousness sake.

4. The Admonitions, Excommunications, Anathema's of Church Rulers, have no
Force, when not grounded upon Divine Truth, nor ought to make Impression upon
Conscience, but to be rejected with Disdain: But the Penal Sentences, and
Vindictive Decrees of Sovereign Powers have their Effect so far, even when they
are unjust, as to be received as an Ordination of Power appointed by God,
though used to a wrong purpose: Where the Word of a King is, there is Power,
and his Wrath is as the Roaring of a Lion, and it is so appointed by God:
Against such a Supreme Executive Power, Armed with the Supreme Legislative
Power of a Nation, there is no rising up, no remedy, but appeal to God by
Prayers and Tears.

Quest. This whole Account might be much Illustrated if it be declared on the
other side, what Obedience is due to the Ministers of the Word, and Truth of
God; whether extraordinary, as Prophets and Apostles; or ordinary, as the
Elders of the Church, and Ministers of the Gospel, even when Supreme
Magistrates Command the contrary?

Answ. The Word, and Truth of God are of so Supreme Authority, that though the
Ministers of it are of no Authority, separated from that Word, yet the Word and
Truth of God, of which they are Ambassadors, is much higher than the Kings and
Princes of the Earth, and there is no Compare between the one and the other;
God therefore raised up extraordinarily what Messengers he pleased, and sent
them with what Messages he thought good, to what Princes or Magistrates soever;
because immediately from God, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: and yet
these extraordinary Ministers, in all things wherein they were not Commanded by
God, preserved the Just Rights of Sovereignty. Thus the Word of God ought by
ordinary Ministers to be faithfully declared, by those who are called to do it;
and if it be so declared, it has, and ought to have a Sovereignty above all
Earthly Sovereignty, both with Princes and Subjects; and yet the Publishers of
it, and they to whom it is Published, stand in their Just Distances, and in all
things pay the Homage due to Sovereignty, by Obedience Active, wherein they are
not Countermanded by God, or by Submission to penal Laws, and Decrees made
against them, by the Supreme Legislative Power of a Nation, wherein they cannot
Obey God, and the Powers at once; because so is the Will of God, that they
should by suffering for well doing, put to silence the Cavils of the Ignorant
or Malicious.

Quest. But ought we not to expect, that Princes should be the Supreme
Interpreters of the Mind and Will of God, that so their Command and Superiority
might be more absolute; and because that Government that does not determine the
Religion of the Subject, cannot have so free a display of it self, nor rest so
secure, as is necessary to Government?

Answ. While the Holy Patriarchs Ruled, who by the Laws of Nature, more
unsullyed so near the Creation; by purer Tradition; by Divine Revelation
vouchsafed to them, as occasion required, preserved Religion Undefiled; Supreme
Authority and Instruction in True Religion Resided in the same Persons: yet
even then their Authority in Religion, was from the Evidences of Divine Truth,
even as afterward in Moses, Samuel, David, and Solomon, who were both Supreme
Princes, and immediately Commissioned by God as Prophets; for wherever Men are
Deputed by God, either as ordinary, or extraordinary Ministers of his Truth,
the Authority is not in Man, but in the Word of God, evidencing it self to be
the Word of God: When therefore the Patriarchal, both Power and Holiness
expired, and the Revolt of Princes and People from True Religion grew greater,
God begun to Instruct his Church by Messengers sent on purpose, and Separated
betwixt Princes and Prophets: Yea even in the time of so Sacred a Priesthood,
Established by God himself among the Jews, he taught his Church very often by
Prophets of an extraordinary and immediate Character. And lastly, by the
Apostles Founded the Christian Church, without any Consultation with, or
Concurrence of the Powers at that time in the World, (and yet those Apostles
taught all Subjection to those very Powers) until the whole was settled in the
Canon of Scripture, Consent with which is now the only Credential of a Teacher
appointed by God, however he be Ordinated by Men.

Quest. What is to be Inferred from hence?

Answ. Especially, that the Truth of Religion is so independent upon all Humane
Sovereignty, that it is to be accepted only upon Trial by its own Evidences,
and not by those of Humane Authority: This Treasure is therefore for the most
part entrusted to Earthen Vessels, not only to Men, but to the Men of unguarded
condition, that the Excellency of the Power, and Evidence of Divine Truth, may
be more apparently, as it always is in it self, of God, and not of Man.

Quest. What other reason may there be of Separating the Administration of
Divine Truth from that of Princely Government?

Answ. Because each Administration requires the whole Attendance of those
engaged in either, except they are, at least, immediately inspired: It is said
of the Magistrate, he is the Minister of God, attending continually on this
very Thing: To the Elders of the Church, it is said, take heed to the Ministry
thou have received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Give attendance to
Reading, to Exhortation to Doctrine; give thy self wholly to them; make full
proof of thy Ministry: Be Instant, Preach the Word in Season, out of Season, or
without Season; Publicly, and from House to House.

Quest. I desire you, now to apply your Discourse to the Administration of
Sovereign Powers, in modelling and Circumstantiating Indifferent things in
Religion, what their Power given them by God therein is?

Answ. That I may give you an answer in that, I must observe our Saviors
Distinction of the Things that are Gods, and the things that are Caesar's; and
his charge, that the things that are Gods, be rendered to him; and the things
that are Caesar's, be rendered to Caesar. Now none of the things that are Caesar's
are his first, but they are first Gods, and given to Caesar by God.

God then has entrusted Caesar with the rendering the things that are Gods to
God, that is, to take care, that the Obedience due to God according to
Godliness, Righteousness, and Soberness, may by the making of Good Laws, and by
the Vigorous Execution of them, be given to God; and also that the good
intended to whole Humane Nature, may be preserved to it, as a Service of great
Acceptance with God, for every Governor is the Minister of God for Good, to
every Man; he is the Minister of God for Public good.

But in the mean time, all these Supreme Notions, are so Gods, that they must
not be changed by Magistrates, or their Laws, but must be rendered entirely to
him, as he gave them, in the Glory of them, not Adulterated or Imbas'd.

And especially in all things that concern God himself more immediately, as in
the Purity, Spirituality of his Nature, the Divineness of his Truth and Word,
the Service and Ordinances of his Worship, and whatever he has herein reserved
to himself, all these are so his, that no Caesar has any Power in or over
them, to add, or diminish, or make the least alteration: So that though they
may have great Power in many things relating to Religion, to the Accommodation
of the most External Exercise of it to Government, and the Peace of Nations,
yet as to the very Religious Actions themselves, and the Management of them,
they must be close confined to Gods Manifestation of himself, how he will be
Worshipped, and to those things that are absolutely necessary to Moddel, and
decently to Circumstantiate that Worship, and so it is to be rendered to God,
perfectly according to his own Pattern; and the Magistrates Care is, that it be
so rendered; if in things evident to Natures Light, the Magistrates Laws have
place; if only to be known by Revelation, the Magistrates Power cannot rise
above the means appointed by God: that is, Instruction producing Faith, and
Obedience, and not Compulsory Laws, seeing Natural Reason may be Obliged, but
Faith is the Gift of God. Now these things God has by the Prerogative of his
Divine Power reserved to himself, and they are to be rendered to God, distinct
from the things of Caesar, that is from all Civil things given by God to
Coesar, and so to be rendered to Caesar: Yea, even distinct from the Appendant
Laws for the securing Justice, and Soberness; which though they are Gods, yet
having not so immediate a Respect to him, as Godliness, or Religion, are more
under Humane Legislation in the particular adjustments to the General Ends. But
both the inward Court of Religion, or Divine Truth, and Worship it self, and
the outward Court of Decency and Order, are within such Limitations of the Word
of God, and the Laws of Nature, that all indifferent things therein, not
prescribed by God, are left to the freedom of every Man by God, and no Power of
Prescription ought to come there, that a Man may not be either incumbered by
unnecessart Observances, or in danger to mistake them, as having any influence
into his Worship of God, which ought not to have any, and can indeed have none
that is good; Nor lastly, be in doubt whether he do not displease God in adding
to his Worship. But if a Man can see his Freedom in all these, it is serving
out of Love, and being made all things to all Men, and going to the utmost he
can, in Obedience to Magistrates; if a Man cannot see his Freedom, but doubts
of the lawfulness, he is under as severe a prohibition of Compliance against
his Doubt, as in other Cases of Sin: For the Sentence is Positive, He that
Doubts is Condemned in doing the Indifferent thing he doubts of; and
whatever is not of Faith, or assurance, it is pleasing to God, or not
displeasing to him, is Sin.

Quest. But this Doubt may extend to Civil Things, and Indifferences there, or
to those Rights of Sovereignty, and Grandeur of Supreme Power, God has
invested them with?

Answ. When Obedience is enforced in such Things, the Magistrate has this to
justify him, he is within his own Territories, given him by God; he requires
the things that are Coesars upon Gods Donation: But in Religious things, he is
within Gods Peculiar, and so cannot be justified in that enforcement, because
the things are so peculiarly Gods.

Quest. The great Question now remains, what are Subjects to do, when Anthority
stamps it self upon False Religion, or enforces Indifferent things against the
apprehensions of Conscience concerning their lawfulness, so that they cannot
Obey, but with a doubting Conscience, and the danger of that has been already
opened?

Answ. There is one Rule in all these Cases, even as it is impossible, Laws of
Injustice, and Licentiousness, when Sovereign Powers so Err in Government,
should change the True and Everlasting Notion of Righteousness, or Soberness,
or those Eternal and Immutable Laws of them, in themselves; even so impossible
it is, the Laws of a False Religion should change those of True Natural, or
True Revealed Religion; or, the Laws imposing Indifferent things in Religion,
should take away the Liberty God has given, or the sinfulness of Obeying
against Doubt of Conscience, when a Man does not see that Liberty: That
therefore which is Eternal and Unchangeable, must be adhered to, and obeyed.

Quest. How then is there a Subjection to Magistrates?

Answ. The Subjection then is in this, as in all other Errors of Magistracy, in
Cases of Justice, or Soberness; not to resist the Power, vindicating its
Commands by Sufferings and Penalties upon those that cannot actively Obey,
wherein Religion, Justice, or Soberness are contradicted, which are Gods, and
must be rendered to him according to themselves, who is able to make them
recompense, who suffer for Righteousness sake, as he pleases in this World, or
most certainly in the Resurrection of the Just.

But if there were not such an absolute Legislative and Executive Power in
every Community thus fixed, and unmovable, and accountable only to God; the
Restless Love of Change would be always disturbing, and calling to account
Government, and every Man take upon him to be a Lawgiver, and a Justicier, or
indeed to be Licencious and Inordinate, and as they could Consult and together
Collect themselves into a Rebellion, would enter into open Hostilities against
it, and so the ends of Government in the Peace and Order of Humane Societies be
quite lost; so that till any Principalities, sitting on the Seats of
Government, are so bad, as to retain less of the Uses and Ends of Government,
than they destroy, and it can be made apparent, endeavors of Change cannot
introduce so great and general Mischiefs, or that even Anarchy it self cannot
introduce greater Mischiefs, than that Government is the Author of, (which has
come to pass in few Instances) till then, I say, we must fear the Lord, and the
King, and not meddle with them who are given to Change, For their Calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Quest. But what are Christian Subjects to do, when Titles of Sovereignty, or
Legislative, or Executive Powers of Laws are Disputed, either betwixt various
Pretensions of Princes, or where the bounds of Power, and Rights of
Sovereignty, and the Liberties and Properties of People are in Controversy?

Answ. I shall no more intermeddle in that, than the Doctrine of Christianity
does, which leaves all those things to the Laws and Constitutions of Nature, of
Nations, and of each Particular Country. The Duty of Christians is to those
Sovereign Powers, whose Authority is Current, whose Image and Superscription is
upon all things Public, the Powers that are in being, are to be Obeyed
according to the Ends of Government already Discoursed, that is for the
Punishment of Offenders; for the Executing Judgment betwixt Man and Man, for
the securing Common Peace, in all Godliness and Honesty: Our Lord, and his
Apostles intimate nothing either way, to strengthen or weaken the Claim of the
Powers then present; but declare Obedience to them, Prayers and Thanksgivings
for them, as they then were, although they could not have the clearest of
Titles; Christianity as it is strictly the Religion of Jesus Christ, does not
make it self a Divider over Men, nor Decide such Controversies, which are quite
of another Cognizance: yet it subverts no Rights, it betrays no Liberties,
justly so called; it reverses no Laws of Nature, nor rescinds Constitutions,
and Compacts of Government, but teaches Men to do all they can to preserve
Common Good and Right determinable upon other Principles: Only this, the more
clear, ancient, and indisputable the Titles of Princes are, the more
indisputable Boundaries betwixt Prince and People are kept, the greater are the
Obligations of Obedience, of quiet and peaceable rest in that Obedience, of the
most vigorous Defense of the Power over us; and the greater the Guilt of any of
the Sins of Mutiny, Faction, Sedition, Rebellion.

Quest. The Discourse of the Power of Magistrates in Religion, has brought to
my thoughts, National Religion, and a National Church, wherein I desire your
Instruction?

Answ. I can but apply, what I have said in general, to this Particular Case,
which I shall endeavor to do to your satisfaction, in these six Propositions.

Quest. What is the first Proposition I am to be Instructed by?

Answ. It is this, That to join in True Religion with our Native Country, or
Nation, is such a Law of Nature, that cannot be reversed: For the sake of the
True Religion, we may be obliged to forsake not only our Country, but our
Fathers House, and to unite to the Church of God founded in that True Religion;
yet in the mean time we must own all that is Divine, Rational, True, weresoever
we find it, much more in our Native Country, and if it be possible propagate
True Religion upon it: For we shall not only be judged in this World with our
Nation, but shall rise with it at the Day of Judgment, in the same Station or
Lot, wherein we were placed in this World; according to our doing good in it,
we shall receive our Reward with those of it, that are saved, who shall then
survive in Glory, and become, as if they were the whole Nation; the perishing
part being lost; as we therefore desire the prosperity of it in this World, so
ought we to endeavor by all means the Eternal Happiness of as many of it as we
can, by joining with them, and engaging them in True Religion.

Quest. I desire your Second Proposition?

Answ. It is this, That in a Political Sense, National Religion is, when
Magistrates and the Body of the People join in the True Religion, and Establish
it by Law, and devote to it the most Public Advantages, that the Largeness and
Grandeur of such a Nation have in their Power, fixing Characters of Civil
Honor, and ample Condition upon the Rulers of the Church, and Communicating to
them Magistratical Power in things pertaining to the External Defense, Honor,
and Provision for the True Religion, as it is National; all which, so far as it
is Serviceable to the best Ends, is acceptable to God our Savior, who is not
the Author of Confusion, but of Peace; and ought to be Submitted to with
Reverence, both in Obedience to Government, and also as it is done in Honor to
the Name of God, and True Religion: The State of the Church in times of
Persecution being not the Standard (as to these things) in the prosperous times
of it.

Quest. I now desire the Third Proposition?

Answ. The Government of a Nation in Religion, appointing and prescribing
Liturgies, Confessions of Faith, Catechisms and Public Forms of Instruction,
or Homilies, they may be so far useful, as when they are composed according to
the Word of God, to secure True Religion, and the Public Administration of it,
by so much publicly Ratified; and requiring of all, whom it Intrusts, as
Ministers of the Word of God under its Approbation and Maintenance, to assent
to the Truth of Religion so Comprised, and Publicly to declare it, by using
them, as is appointed: But these are not to be understood to put Limits upon
the Ministers of the Word, first entrusted by Christ, who are both in Prayer,
Preaching the Gospel, and all means of Instruction, to search into all the
Scripture, that is profitable for Doctrine, Instruction, Reproof, and to Pray
with all Prayer and Supplication according to the particular occasions, and in
that abundance and liberality of the Divine Oracles, that they themselves may
speak as the Oracles of God, and Pray with the Understanding, and in the Holy
Spirit, and that all their Service may be matter of Bounty from their own
Minds, and not of Constraint and necessity, as imposed: For how should they
then, as every Good Scribe Instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, bring out of
their Treasure Things New and Old, or like the good Householder, that has made
provision and laid up in store to that End. In all these things Solomon's
Example is Great. According to which the Preacher ought to be Wise, and to
teach the People Knowledge, and give good heed, and seek to find out acceptable
Words, that may be as Goades and Nails, not blunted with Common use.

Quest. I now desire your Fourth Proposition?

Answ. The Benefit of National Religion Established by Law, is, That every
Subject of that Nation, has a Right to the True Religion so Established, and
may claim his Interest and Property in it, as in all Things else legally due to
him, and is not obliged upon the account of Passive Obedience, to desert or
relinquish his Right in it, any more than his Righteous Claim, or Title, to any
thing else he enjoys by Laws, and yet Trangresses no Rule of Christianity, but
has the same Obligation to defend that his Right, as any other Right whatever,
so far as the Laws of the Nation enable him, nor can there be any Resistance to
Government in so doing; even as there can be none, but it is the Duty and Trust
of Subordinate Magistrates to adhere to the Laws in the point of True Religion,
as in all other Cases; and of the Supreme Legislative Power of a Nation, to
foresee Dangers and prevent them by Additional Laws, as necessity shall
require: And all this with the Prerogative due to Religion.

Quest. I desire your Fifth Proposition?

Answ. National Religion, seeing it is designed to Comprehend a multitude of
Persons of most necessarily, and unavoidably various Sentiments and
Apprehensions, must be so prepared, as that with greatest Ease and Room to
Consciences and Understandings, of so many several Figures and Impressions,
there may be an Union in National Religion with least Scruple, and therefore to
give all the Liberty, that Truth gives, not imposing Arbitrarily, because
Religion as has been said, is Gods Peculiar, and in that, the Doubting
Conscience cannot Obey farther, than it sees the Divine Rule before it, not in
things Dark and Disputable, because clear things are only necessary to
Salvation, not forcibly, except when Natural Religion is Violated, because
patient Instruction, Counsel, and Ratiocination are the Divine Methods in
giving and working Faith.

Quest. I now expect the last Proposition?

Answ. I shall give you the last, and therein Conclude this whole Enquiry, and
Instruction, and it is this,

The True Religion of the Word of God in a Nation, or City, does overtop all
the False and Private Religions in it, and become in the Sacred Register, the
National Religion. In the Sacred Maps, the Christians of Achaia, were Achaia it
self: The Seven Churches of Asia, were the Cities themselves: And whatever
Lesser Differences, or Divisions, this or that Name of Distinction may seem to
make in National Religion, yet, the True Substantial Religion in all of them
shall be one National Religion; and become one Rod and Scepter in the Hand of
Christ, and the Nation be as one National Tribe, and Church: For let Men do
what they can against it, True Religion, as it is the only Public Religion,
and no Separation of Men from it, however called Public, can make it Private;
so in what place soever it is, it shall have the most Public Character, and
the True Religion in all those that sincerely profess it, shall be one True
Public Religion, and those little Differences shall not cleave it into more
than one. Without the Change of True Religion it self, there cannot be a Schism
of a deeper Sense in it; if Bitterness and Animosity, Censoriousness, and the
Persecuting Spirit were away: God will graciously Interpret Scruples on one
side to a Jealousy for the Purity of Religion, the freedom of the other to a
desire to Propagate it under the favor of Laws, and thereby to be capable of
doing most Good. In Heaven they now are all one, and shall be one, and the
Envy, Strife, and Contention (which the Good Lord Pardon) shall be utterly
Abolished. This is the Honor of True Religion, of Public Divine Religion.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead, our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, by the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make his
Church, and his Church in this Nation, perfect in every Good Work, to do his
Will, Working in it, that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 36. l. 20. for scale read scal. p. 70. l. 9. r. Record.


