THE Interior Christian;

OR THE Interior Conformity: WHICH CHRISTIANS Ought to have with JESUS CHRIST.

Divided into Eight BOOKS, which contain most Divine Meditations; Extracted out
of the Writings of a great Servant of God of this Age.

Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus St. Cyprian. Not our Tongues, but our lives
speak the Excellency of Christianity. Translated out of the 12th. Edition in
French.

Antwerp, Printed in the year 1684.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IN this unhappy Age of Contentions about Religion, wherein the heat of
Controversy has so much cooled the fervor of true Devotion among us, that
even some great Pretenders to Piety have only an outward form of Godliness
without the inward Power; like gilded Sepulchers full of dead-mens Bones; it
cannot but be very seasonable, to teach all those who believe in Jesus, how to
be real and Interior Christians.

Now in my Judgment, this Book written in French, and often Printed for its
Excellency, has so well presented to the eye this Heavenly Lesson, that I would
not let so precious a Treasure lie hid to the greatest part of our Nation in an
unknown Language, but have taken Pains to expose it to the public view for a
public Good; and God give a Blessing to my Endeavors.

If you ask me, What is it to be an Interior Christian? I Will briefly tell you,
An Interior Christian is one, who being well grounded in Faith, walks with God
in simplicity of Heart, and Purity of Intention, loves him above all things,
serves him Faithfully, endeavors to please him constantly, and had rather die
than wilfully by mortal Sin break friendship with him. There Is no Devil he
hates worse than Hypocricy, his chiefest care being to be really in the sight
of God, what he appears to be in the eyes of Men, Yea, he is more inwardly then
he seems outwardly, as well considering, that God who sees our hearts, will
reward us accordingly.

We may say of the Interior Christian what our Blessed Savior said of
Nathanael, Ecce vere Israelita, in quo non est dolus, Behold Joh. 1.
a true Israelite, in whom is no deceit: And he may truly say of himself with
good Hezekiah, O Lord I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a Perfect
Isa 38.
Heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And he may say also with
St. Paul, Herein do I exercise my self, to have a Conscience Acts 24.
void of Offense toward God, and toward Men. And therefore may safely say
with the same Saint elsewhere, Vivo ego, jam non ego, vivit vero in me
Christus, It Is not so mueh I that live, as Gal. 2.
Christ who lives in me, Making me a new Creature by Internal Sanctification;
whereby I become Crucified to my Lusts, and dead to the World, that I may live
to him who died for me.

Now we must know that there are infinite degrees of Internal Sanctification,
and the least degree is sufficient to put us in Gods favor and the state of
Salvation, and make us really Interior Christians. As the least Pigmy is as
much essentially a man as the greatest Giant: This I mention, least some
timorous and well-meaning Souls, who really endeavor to please God in
sincerity of Heart, reading in this Book, and other Spiritual Authors, more
sublime and elevated ways of advancing our union with God, then they
experience in themselves, (or perhaps ever shall in this Life,) should he
discouraged and tortured with scruples, as if they did not serve God as they
ought, and were not truly Interior Christians.

I must put such Souls in mind of what St. Paul tells us, That there are
diversities of Gifts, but the 1 Cor. 12.
same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will, and pleases. Some
indeed are wonderfully elevated Saints, rapt with St. Paul into the third
Heaven, ravished in an extatical manner with the Glimmerings of Glory, and
those joys which may be felt, but are inexpressible. Such Contemplations and
Unions with God, are rare and admirable.

Others in their Re-collections and mental Prayer receive from Heaven Divine
Visits, and wonderful Illuminations, which direct them how to purify their
Hearts more and more, and to advance in Piety and Godliness. These are great
Proficients, and walk in a region of Light above ordinary Christians.

But if Gods Holy Spirit has not vouchsafed us these special Gifts and Graces,
we ought not to be discouraged in our Pious Endeavors, but rest contented with
our present state in the course of our Devotions, if upon severe examination of
our Conscience, we find that with Zakariah and Elizabeth we really endeavor to
walk in all the Commandments of God blameless; and daily make it our work to
conquer our selves to mortify our Passions, to kill our Inordinate Desires,
and to make a progress in the ways of Holiness. This is sufficient to entitle
us to Heaven, and make us Interior Christians, though without raptures and
ecstasies, without visions and unions extraordinary, without wonderful
irradiations in mental Prayer, which God only vouchsafes to some special
Favorites. Think upon this, and be content with what measure of Grace Heaven
bestows upon thee, walking with God in true Humility of Soul and Spirit.

It Is not much material, good Reader, in what order thou read these
excellent Instructions; every Treatise containing a Complete Subject,
independent on each other. But my advice is, to make those more familiar to
thee, wherein thou find most gust and Spiritual profit to thy Soul. This I
am sure of, whatever order thou observest, they will highly conduce to the end
they were written; namely to withdraw our hearts from the Love of the World,
and to advance our Union with God, by taking up our Cross to follow Jesus. This
is the Spirit and Soul of this Book, and I heartily wish it may work these
effects in every Reader. In the perusal whereof Remember in thy Prayers.

Thine in Christ Jesus. A. L.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
I Thought good, Courteous Reader, to explain some terms frequently occurring
in this Treatise, to prevent mistakes in such who are not accustomed to such
expressions.

The word Annihilation, is not to be taken Physically, but Morally. Now a Moral
Annihilation is to acknowledge our selves, as St. Paul tells us, Not able so
much as to think a good thought, as of our selves, But that all our sufficiency
is of God, for whom is both the Will and the Work in Meritorious Actions.
Gratia Deisum id quod sum. By Grace we are saved.

Our nothing, our ruin, self-destruction Poverty of Spirit, are terms which
for the most part signify the same thing as Annihilation. So that to ruin or
destroy our selves, is to bring our selves to this Annihilation.

Annihilation in some places signifies to be content to be thought of by others
as of no worth, or good for nothing; an unworthy person, of reputation. And in
this Sense it is often applied to our Blessed Savior.

But that the Reader may the better understand the Spirit of the Book by the
Spirit of the Author, I have described as much of the Qualifications of that
Excellent Person, as I could collect from the French Preface; the perusal
whereof I assure thee good Reader is worth thy pains and consideration.

THE Author's Life, Extracted out of the French PREFACE.
THE worthy Author of this Excellent Treatise, was a Person, whose Life was
answerable to his Writings, a true Interior Christian; elevated by God's Holy
Spirit to Sublime Contemplation; making it his Business to have his
Conversation in Heaven, while he was upon Earth. It Is said of Moses, that after
he had Conversed familiarly with God, and descended from the Mount, that his
Face did shine with an extraordinary Glory. So this excellent Christian came
from his Prayers, as it were from Heaven, all enflamed with Divine Love,
raising a holy Fire in their Breasts, who enjoyed the Happiness of his
Conversation.

But his Goodness was more Diffusive, for many of his absent Friends received
wonderful Benefit and Advancement in a Spiritual Life by his Heavenly
Instructions and Divine Letters. Which were so many, as that from those
Writings was extracted this Interior Christian, not long after he had left men
to live with Angels, by a Person of Worth and Quality; who was so touched to
the heart by reading some of his Letters, that he thought himself obliged in
Charity, to make them Public for the Common Good. Especially in this Corrupt
Age, wherein, alas! we find more Formal than Interior Christians. And
doubtless it was the Will of Heaven this Treatise should not lie hid, but be
exposed to the View of the World, having in a short time enriched the Hearts of
many with inestimable Good, who entertain it with great Joy and Satisfaction.

He was in the right who said, Loquere ut te videam, If once I hear you speak,
I shall know what you are. For it is impossible to read this Book without some
Knowledge of the eminent Perfection of the Author: for what Soul, unless
irradiated with extraordinary Beams of Heavenly Light, could make such
Discoveries, or give such Directions in Spirituality? It was from hence, that
the Humiliations and Dolorous Bloody Sufferings of Jesus Christ, (so terrible
to Nature) did appear to him with a Ravishing Beauty, being taken with nothing
more in his Devotions, than Jesus Suffering.

For he had a singular Devotion to the Humiliations of Jesus, and thought
himself a Person culled out by Providence to honor his Sufferings. He did much
affect to lead his Life in Abjections; and yet notwithstanding his profound
Humility, he was much esteemed, and admired by all who had the Happiness to
know his Virtues. Though he looked upon himself as an unprofitable Servant; yet
God was pleased to treat him as a faithful Friend. Though he desired the
Bitterness and Rigor of the Cross, yet God did oftentimes so visit his Soul
with extraordinary Consolations, that sometimes he would cry out, When then,
good Jesus, shall I suffer for you! Though he desired to follow Jesus on Mount
Calvary, yet God was pleased to lead him to Mount Tabor, and vouchsafe him the
Glimmerings of Glory on this side Heaven. Though too many make it their
Business to find out ways to please their Sensuality, he made his Body a
Continual Victime of Mortification, hardly abstaining from Austerities, when
his Weakness required a Relaxation.

He earnestly desired, that after the Example of Jesus he might finish his Life
on the Cross; and on the day the Church celebrates the Invention of the Cross,
God was pleased to rob the World secretly of so great a Treasure, lest if his
Sickness had been known publicly, the holy Importunity of many Prayers might
have prevailed with Heaven to defer his Happiness. He wanted no long
Preparation for his Death by a Languishing Disease, but being Fruit-ripe for
the Harvest of Glory, by the constant Dews of Heaven and Fervor of Charity,
upon short warning, with wonderful Content, commending his Soul into the hands
of his Savior, he joyfully embraced Death to live Eternaly.

This showed the extraordinary Triumph he had made over the World, and Himself,
by the Power of Grace. For though some, even Great Saints, who had left the
World for Christ's sake, to avoid it is Contagion, seemed timorous at their
Deaths, yet He, with an invincible Generosity, contemning the World, without
forsaking it, did conquer Satan in the midst of Temptations, and smile on Death
as a Friend to his Happiness. Though he changed not his Secular Habit, yet he
had fully banished the World from his heart, and without engaging in any other
Profession, than that of a perfect Christian, he spent his days in the
Exercise of the most Austere Religious. And this was more admirable in him,
than in those Fountains, which conserve their Sweetness in the midst of Salt
Waters: because he did not only keep the Purity of the Spirit of Christianity
among the Infections of a Corrupt Age, but without any great noise he made
notable Conquests over the Powers of Darkness, seeing by his Pious Endeavors
he changed many Carnal Men into Spiritual Christians.

We may say without Vanity, that the World never had a more Dangerous Enemy. He
stayed in it, the better to discover its Designs, and convert Worldlings:
exposing himself to combat its Allurements, that their Weakness might be
known, and to testify to the World, that one may be a Perfect Christian in
despite of this great Enemy of God and Godliness. His Example has made it
manifest to all Persons of Quality, that one may live like a Hermit in the
midst of a City, and may love Evangelical Poverty, though not practice it in
the Possession of Riches; and that true Self-contempt is not impossible to
such, whose Birth or Employments have advanced them to Honor: and that without
being an Apostle, or Preacher, one may be an Evangelist: And lastly, that
thoroughly to establish the Maxims of Christianity, solid Practice is more
efficacious than thundering Eloquence.

And though the Graces which beautifyed his Soul, did most incline him to deep
Retirements and Contemplation, yet he was so wonderfully dexterous in the
affairs of God's Service abroad, that his Eyes fixed on Heaven, did not hinder
him from affording a Helping hand to the good of his Neighbor; neither was his
Zeal herein confined to one only Kingdom. His Piety was so ingenious, that he
found out ways to be at the same time one of the greatest Solitaries, and yet
much engaged in the Labors of them, who endeavored the enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom.

His way of expressing himself, is conform to his Thoughts, and both of them to
the Gospel; where such who chiefly hunt after Eloquence, and vain Curiosities,
will find nothing that will please their Palate: But a Soul which relishes
Evangelical Truths, cannot but find a Gust in the Expressions of this Book,
which breaths forth nothing but the Spirit of Christianity. And God grant that
they who take it into their hands, may find it working in their hearrs, to
engage them efficaciously in his Love and Service. So be it. Amen.

The Contents.
BOOK I. OF the Love of Humiliations, which is the solid Foundation of all
Christian Perfection.
Chap. 1. That we ought to endeavor to attain Christian Perfection, with the
spirit of Humility. Page 1. Chap. 2. The foundation of Christian Humility. 5
Chap. 3. That the Center of the Creature is his own Nothing. 8 Chap. 4. That
the greatest Saints have attained to Perfection by a singular Love of
Self-contempt and Abjection. 11 Chap. 5. That we have only so much of the true
Spirit of Jesus Christ, as we have an inclination to abjection. 14 Chap. 6.
That the sight of our own Nothing, inspire us with Self-contempt, and the love
of God. 17 Chap. 7. That God is glorified by our annihilation. 20 Chap. 8. That
the Soul is rich, when she possesses the Love of Self-contempt. 23 Chap. 9.
What profit we draw from Humiliations. 26 Chap. 10. The way how to arrive to
perfect Humiliation. 29 Chap. 11. That we ought to leave our selves wholly to
God, to become annihilated. 32 Chap. 12. That we must renounce our sense and
humane reason, to love humiliations. 34 Chap. 13. That the experience of God's
goodness to us, does annihilate us powerfully. 44 Chap. 14. That a Soul
espousing Jesus Christ espouses his Cross and Sufferings. 41 Chap. 15. That the
experience of Gods goodness to us, does annihilate us powerfully. 44 Chap. 16.
To be content with abjection after our faults, repairs the injury to God, and
makes up our ruins. 46 Chap. 17. Considerations upon tho vileness of this
corruptible body. 51 Chap. 18. Considerations upon the natural inclinations we
have to evil. 54


BOOK II. Of the Supernatural Life, which is the Life of all true Christians.
Chap. 1. The Idaea or description of the Supernatural Life. 75 Chap. 2. Of the
high esteem we ought to have of the Christian Life. 60 Chap. 3. That we ought
(with St. Paul) to convert our selves wholly to God. 63 Chap. 4. Of the
Alliance we must make with the holy Folly of the Cross. 67 Chap. 5. How we
ought to conform our Interior to that of Jesus Christ. 70 Chap. 6. The
sublimity of the Christian Life. 74 Chap. 7. There are diverse degrees of this
supertural Life. 77 Chap. 8. The practice of a Supernatural Life. 80 Chap. 9.
Of the Liberty we enjoy by the exercise of the supernatural life. 81 Chap. 10.
Our greatest happiness on earth, is, to profess the way of Christianity. 87
Chap. 11. That Truth is only found in the Spirit of Christianity; the rest is
Vanity. 91 Chap. 12. There are many ways in Christianity, all which are
according to the Life of Jesus Christ. 94 Chap. 13: Some Maxims concerning a
supernatural life. 98 Chap. 14. What content a soul receives in a supernatural
life. 101 Chap. 15. That it is impossible to live this supernatural life by
humane prudence. 105 Chap. 16. The Conclusion, That we ought to apply our
selves to the practice of a Supernatural Life. 108


BOOK. III. Of the Presence of God, and giving our selves up to Divine
Providence.
Chap. 1. Our first thought in the morning ought to be, That God is present.
111 Chap. 2. The presence of God in the soul makes us little value the absence
of the Creatures. 114 Chap. 3. That we can and ought to conserve the presence
of God, in occasions of Extroversions. 118 Chap. 4. That the presence of God is
clearly seen in a purified interior. 121 Chap. 5. That our union with the
Presence of God, ought to be the Rule of our Actions. 125 Chap. 6. That the
presence of God in us, puts us in a state of suffering and enjoying. 128 Chap.
7. That the Divine Presence makes us to love Prayer, or Action, as best pleases
God. 132 Chap. 8. The Presence of God brings us into a disesteem of other
things. 136 Chap. 9. Where we may best find the Presence of God. 139 Chap. 10.
That we ought to give our selves up with Divine Providence. 143 Chap. 11. To be
indifferent to all things, but Gods good Pleasure. 146 Chap. 12. We ought to
comport our selves with a respectful reverence in God's presence. 149 Chap. 13.
To give our selves up to the conduct of Gods Spirit. 153 Chap. 14. How the
perfect abandon of our selves to God, makes us find a Paradise upon Earth. 157
Chap* 15. How the Beauty that is in the Order of God contents, a Soul. 161
Chap. 16. The practice of the Presence of God, for the seven days of the Week.
163 The first Day. The Being of God. 164 The second Day. The Omnipotency of
God. 166 The third Day. Of the Wisdom of God. 167 The fourth Day. The Patience
of God. 169 The fifth Day. Of the Love of God. 174 The sixth Day. The Justice
of God. 172 The seventh Day. The Mercy of God. 173



BOOK IV. Of Solitude, and the Practice of two excellent Retreats of ten Days.
Chap. 1. Of the Beauty of Christian Solitude. 175 Chap. 2. Of the necessity of
Solitude. 179 Chap. 3. The difficulties of Solitude. 182 Chap. 4. The
Occupations of Solitude. 186 Chap. 5. How we may put our Soul and Senses into a
Solitude. 189 Chap. 6. A Solitude, or Retreat of ten days upon the infallible
Mystery of the Sacred Trinity. 192 First Day. 195 Second Day. 199 Third Day.
203 Fourth Day. 207 Fifth Day. 211 Sixth Day. 215 Seventh Day. 219 Eighth Day:
224 Ninth Day. 228 Tenth Day. 232
Chap. 6. Another Retreat of ten Days, upon the Adorable Person of Jesus
Christ. 236 First Day: Of the Mystery of the Incarnation. Ibid. Second Day.
Jesus an Infant. 241 Third Day. Jesus Poor and Abject. 245 Fourth Day. Jesus,
the Fountain of Grace and Piety. 249 Fifth Day. Jesus, Zealator of souls. 253
Sixth Day. Jesus contemplating and enjoying. 257 Seventh Day, Jesus our
Exemplar and Guide. 262 Eighth Day. Jesus our Light. 266 Ninth Day. Jesus
suffering and dying. 280 Tenth Day. Jesus risen from Death, and Gloririous. 285



BOOK V. Of Communion and its Effects.
Chap. 1. Of Preparation before Communion. 291 Chap. 2. To Communicate
worthily, we must put our selves in a state conformable to that of Jesus Christ
in the Blessed Sacrament. 294 Chap 3. To receive the Communion Worthily, we
must imitate those Actions which Jesus Christ practiced when he Instituted it.
298 Chap. 4. Interior Entertainments during Communion. 303 Chap. 5. Other
Entertainments to give Thanks after Communion. 306 Chap. 6. Another Method of
Thanksgiving after Communion. 309 Chap. 7. The first Effects of Communion, is
to beget in us the Love of Crosses and Humiliations. 313 Chap. 8. Continuation
of the same subject. 316 Chap. 9. The second Effect of Communion, is to
Transform us. 319 Chap. 10. The third Effect of Communion, which is the perfect
and consummate Union. 323 Chap. 11. The fourth Effect of Communion, is to
confer the highest Love. 327 Chap. 12. The fifth Effect of Communion, is to
give strength and perseverance in the service of God. 332


BOOK VI. Of Interior and Exterior Crosses.
Chap. 1. That we must have a high esteem for Crosses. 337 Chap. 2. That we
must have a Love for Crosses. 341 Chap 3. That we must have a great Love for
Crosses. 444 Chap. 4. God is pleased to send us Crosses in the place of
Persecutions, that our Life may be a continual Martyrdom. 347 Chap. 5. Of
exterior Crosses by the loss of Goods. Chap. 6. Dispositions during Sickness,
where the Body suffered and the Soul rejoiced. Chap. 7. Other Dispositions in
the time of Sickness, where Body and Soul are on the Cross. 357 Chap. 8. The
Interior Crosses of the Soul in Obscurity. 360 Chap. 9. Of the heaviness of
interior Crosses. 364 Chap. 10. The great Fruit we may reap from interior
Crosses. 368 Chap. 11. That we must bear patiently our Imperfections. 371


BOOK VII. Of Ordinary Prayer and Contemplation.
Chap. 1. What esteem we ought to have for Prayer. 377 Chap. 2. Of the
different sorts of Mental Prayer. 380 Chap. 3. That we ought to be indifferent
to what manner of Prayer God is pleased to give us. 384 Chap. 4. That above all
things it is necessary to practice Prayer. 387 Chap. 5. Of the impediments of
Prayer, 392 Chap. 6. Of the Means that facilitate the Exercise of Prayer. 396
Chap. 7. That we must not presume of our selves to attempt any manner of Prayer
but what is ordinary. 400 Chap. 8. How to pass from Ordinary Prayer to
Contemplation 404 Chap. 9. Of the Prayer of Faith. 407 Chap. 10 Of the Sacred
Darkness of Prayer. 411 Chap. 11. Of the Lights of Prayer. 414 Chap. 12. Of
Passive Prayer. 414 Chap. 13. Of pure and perfect Prayer. 421 Chap. 14. Of the
hungring of the Soul after God, and of her being satiated with him. 425 Chap.
15. Of infused Prayer. 429 Chap. 16. Of Prayer of quiet. 433 Chap. 17. Of the
intimate Union of the Love of the Soul with God in Prayer. 437 Chap. 18. Of
interior Silence, where God speaks, and is heard. 441 Chap. 19. Of most
purifyed Contemplation. 444 Chap. 20. Of the different Caresses God vouchsafes
a Soul in Prayer. 448


BOOK VIII. Some Maxims of Great Importance to conduct us in a Spiritual Life.
Chap. 1. To have above all things an extreme Horror of Sin. 453 Chap. 2. To
keep an even pace with Grace, neither out-running it, nor following too slowly.
456 Chap. 3. That a Soul must wholly give her self up to God. 459 Chap. 4. We
ought to make it our Business to be content to suffer. 461 Chap. 5. To renounce
or selves wholly, and strive against our proper Inclinations. 463 Chap. 6. How
to comport our selves well in Superiority. 466 Chap. 7. That we ought to have
our intentions purified from all Self-interest. 469 Chap. 8. A conference
clearing many difficulties touching Prayer. 471


THE Interior Christian.
BOOK I. Of the Love of Humiliations, which is the solid Foundation of all
Christian Perfection.
CHAP. I. That we ought to endeavor to attain Christian Perfection, with the
spirit of Humility.
LEt us endeavor after Perfection, not because it is a sublime and elevated
condition, but because it is the will of God. We ought not to set upon the
practice of Piety by a motive of grandeur, and to become greater Saints, but
only to do what God wills and expects from us, and rest therewith content and
satisfied.

Our happiness consists in a constant dependence on his divine will and
pleasure, with a perfect submission and resignation thereunto. I must be
content with my condition, whatever it be, seeing it is what God expects from
me; and it is no small presumption to assume to our selves what great Saints
have found in the practice of Piety. God calls some persons to glorious
performances, others he places in a lower rank; in all this we must suffer him
to work his will upon us, and receive with thankfulness his Divine Impressions,
whether great or little; it is enough for us that they come from God. This is
the way God calls us to walk in; a way sublime, pleasant, full of peace, in
which we desire nothing but to please God. It concerns us to take whatever he
gives with simplicity of heart; be it never so little, it is certainly more than
we deserve. To be annihilated in God, is to will nothing but what God wills,
and in what manner he pleases; otherwise we seek our selves, and our own
satisfaction, and not purely God, and his good pleasure.

We must labor for Perfection with a Spirit wholly dis-engaged from all
self-interest. To suffer, to live poor and despised, being the only way (among
infinite other means) the Eternal Father made choice of, for us to attain to
Glory, and regain those Excellencies Adam lost for himself and us by sin. This
being his design from Eternity, his Son, in the fullness of time, embraced the
Cross with affection, and was inflamed with the desire of suffering, valuing
the Cross as a thing of great excellency, being the Altar chosen for the
life-giving Sacrifice by his heavenly Father: preferring the Glory and the Will
of God before the natural inclinations of his Humanity, which had a repugnancy
in the sensitive part thereof to pains and sufferings. This is evident from
that of the Evangelist; Pater, si possibile est, transe at, etc. Father, if it
be possible, let this Cup pass from me; yet not my will, but thine be
fulfilled. And that of the Psalmist, Sacrificium and Oblationem noluisti, etc.
Thou would not have Sacrifice or Oblation, but thou have prepared a Body for
me, and behold I come to do thy will. And so he did run his course with joy,
though full of sufferings, because he knew it was the good pleasure of his
Father.

Wherefore, by how much the more welove and esteem the Cross, by so much the
more do we participate of the Spirit of Christ, and please his heavenly Father.
For, to suffer, is to sacrifice to God our pleasures and interests, uniting our
selves to the design that Jesus had by suffering to repair his Father's Glory.
O my Soul! if these Verities have made deep impression in thee, thou ought
from henceforth to glory in being despised, seeing thy Glory is to procure the
Glory of God, which cannot be done more advantagiously, than by imitating his
only Son.

O good Jesus! possess my heart with your divine Spirit, that may enable me to
live your life. O how your humiliations seem great unto me, your abjections
honorable, your poverty rich, and your Cross pleasant! My Soul does languish
to possess your Spirit, and desires it most ardently; whatever has not a relish
of your Spirit, is not grateful to me. O that I had inflamed affections to
embrace the Cross, and that I could bear the greatest can happen to me! In the
interim it seems to me that I do nothing, and when occasion presents it self, I
find difficulty to suffer the least afflictions. Dear Savior, how is this life
troublesome unto me! Strengthen me forthwith to set upon the practice of this
life, hidden, crucified, despised, which you have taught us by your example;
that I may truly say with St. Paul, Absit mihi gloriari, nisi in cruce Domini
nostri; Your Cross, dear Jesus, is my Glory, and I will glory in nothing else.

Honors, Pleasures, Riches, I declare my mortal enemies, seeing your property
is to incline me perpetually to deviate from those ways to which Jesus calls
me: I abhor you, as enemies of my Perfection. Ah dear Savior! make me partaker
of your life, humble, poor, despised, or let me live no longer in this life of
mortality. When Heaven shall be my Habitation, I shall be content to be in
Glory, because there you are also in Triumph; but seeing that on Earth you
would not be but in an abject condition, I desire there to be with you also.
Alas! I march but slowly to arrive at Perfection: however, in reality I would
fain be wholly humbled both interiourly and exteriourly, as your Divine wisdom
sees best for me. If it was your will, I would search after external
humiliations, for I find no better food for a Christian Soul. Perhaps they will
prove hard of digestion to me; yet, for all that, they may become by use
profitable and delicious O dear Savior! seeing it is said of you by the
Evangelical Prophet, Saturabitur opprobriis, Give me my fill of opprobies and
abjections: Ravish with your sweetness and consolations those who know well how
to use such favors; As for me, let my repast be with Gall and Vinegar, because
by their relish I shall be rendered more like unto you.

O Jesus! why was you circumcised? O Mary! why was you purified? Your hearts
were not sullied, and yet you submit your selves to the abjections of sinners,
because to be despised was the object of your most tender affections. There
were never two hearts more full of the love of God; and never more inflamed
desires after humiliations. Seeing then that one is the measure of the other,
if we will testify that we love God, we must also love to suffer for him.

How unjust are our complaints against those who undervalue us; and how
unreasonably are we disquieted when we are scorned by others! We ought rather
to be troubled because we are not despised enough; and thus it would be with
us* if we had a heart entirely Christian. It Is true, Grace can only infuse such
inclinations into our Souls, Nature eggs us on to the contrary. And it is my
unhappiness, that I who write this, shall (I fear) fall short hereof in time of
trial. For I am altogether frail, and good for nothing; and, for ought I know,
what I have said or done, which appears so beautiful, may be rotten within;
witness my often relapses, which sufficiently tell me what a poor abject
Creature I am, and how much I deserve to be despised.

CHAP. II. The foundation of true Christian Humility.
WHen I consider that God is all in all, that he possesses in himself
incomprehensible perfections; that he has created and provided for us infinite
good things; I cannot but acknowledge, that all Honor, all Glory, all Praise,
all Adoration, is due unto him. O how just a debt is all this from us to the
Divine Majesty!

When I consider, O God, that I am a pure Nothing, that I have in my self an
inexhaustible Mine of imperfections and miseries; that I have committed great
offenses, and am yet liable to more, unless prevented by Grace: I acknowledge
that I deserve to be the scorn of men; all sorts of opprobries and disgraces;
all maladies of Soul and Body; Darkness, punishments Temporal and Eternal; to
be afflicted, mocked, persecuted by all creatures, as Executioners of Divine
Justice: And I look upon my self as the Mark, whereat should be aimed these
Arrows of deserved indignation.

God can never be sufficiently honored, loved, exalted, glorified; and I can
never be enough debased, hated, despised and persecuted. I ought to have not
only this humility of Spirit, but likewise a will and affection to suffer for
God; always esteeming my self worthy of all scorn and contempt though never so
public, if it may conduce to God's glory, and the good of others. For if I be
honored as my condition requires, if I do not debase my self below the meanest
Vassals, it is because the Order of government forbids it, and would not be
expedient for those who might abuse this condescension. However, as for me, I
ought to have this will and inclination, and believe it is the place is due unto
me.

Alas! dear Savior, I cannot be acceptable in your sight, unless I have an
humble heart; and this I cannot have, but by your grace: For if all natural
good proceeds from your bounty, much more must all supernatural grace flow from
the pure Fountain of your Mercy; and if you are the Giver of all grace,
doubtless principally of true humility, which is so repugnant to nature, that
there is nothing she more abhors than Humiliation.

Seeing, dear Savior, all good proceeds from you, the glory thereof ought
solely to be rendered to you. I ought to take no complacence but in you,
rejoicing in that you glorify your self, enriching my poverty with your
abundance.

When I see persons afflicted, poor, distressed, lame, deformed, I confess
(dear Savior) these humiliations are my due; and if you should inflict any of
them on me, I would adore and love your Justice; and for what you have bestowed
upon me, I adore and love your mercy. I will never complain, because no
Creature can do me an injury. I ought not to look on the designs of men, whose
intentions oftentimes are only to hurt, to revenge and solace themselves with
others miseries; but to have an eye to the purposes of God, which are to
chastise me, to better me, and to humble me. The Jews put Jesus Christ to death
out of revenge and envy; and God the Father had a design thereby to save
Mankind. I will not hereafter hunt after Applause and Honor, for I am resolved
not to follow the inclination of depraved Nature; but following the example of
Jesus Christ, who suffered for me, I will desire poverty, contempts, pains; and
uniting them to his sufferings, I will earnestly beseech him according to the
multitude of his mercies to have pity on me.

If we would once seriously endeavor to know our selves, the beams of Divine
Grace would make wonderful discoveries in our Souls, without which it is
impossible for us to see the depth of our miseries. In this Dungeon lies a
prolifical Seed of Treason ready on all occasions to conceive and bring forth
all sorts of iniquity. O that it is not sufficient to be without the black
tincture of actual sin! We have the source thereof within us, and certain
vicious inclinations deeply rooted; even as we find some Weeds in Gardens so
fixed, that their roots seem to reach the very center, which will never hardly
be entirely plucked up, but daily they appear anew, and keep us in action.

CHAP. III. That the Center of the Creature is his own Nothing.
OUr blessed Savior gives me so clear a sight of my own Nothing and
Unworthiness, that I am convinced this is the place of my abode, which I
neither can, nor ought to abandon. When it pleases God to vouchsafe me no
Heavenly influences in my Prayers and Recollections, I have no cause to
complain; if the Dews of Heaven mollify my heart, they only flow from his pure
mercy. O how well-pleased am I with this view of my own weakness and
unworthiness! In this I acquiesce, as in my Center. If it be your will, my God,
to leave me in this place, I am content, for this is only belonging to me.

Provided you be in your place, O my God, it is enough; that is to say, in your
own Being, your Power, your Grandeur, your Glory; Soli Deo honor and gloria. O
how well are you in your place, and I in mine! Rest there then, O my God; and
if you vouchsafe to prevent me with any of your graces, I will abide
contentedly in my place, because I shall be surrounded with your mercy
remaining in my Nothing, my Weakness and Unworthiness. Seeing I know it is
God's pleasure that I continue in my place, it is evident I cannot forsake it
without displeasing him. It Is my duty to abide fixed in my Nothing, by a free
acknowledgment that I can do nothing, and can merit nothing, for this is truth.
To forsake this, and pretend to what I am not, is but to live in deceit and
vanity. Vt quid diligitis vanitatem and quaeritis mendacium? Truth commands to
shrink into our Nothing, and rest there contentedly to please God, who is Truth
it self.

God to bring man back into his place, and guide his feet into the way of
truth, did leave his own, that is, the grandeur and splendour of his Majesty,
and came to us in weakness, in poverty, in annihilation, to show us the way we
ought to walk in, out of which all is but deceit and vanity. Man then must
imitate the life of Jesus in the ways of annihilation and abjections. O Jesus!
despised, persecuted, crucified, do you vouchsafe to put your self in my place?
Alas! this only belongs to Me a wretched sinner, and it is for You to live in
Glory.

What is man become since the fall of Adam? A very Nothing, infirmity and
frailty it self. What is man in his sinful condition? An Abyss of pride, of
blindness, of aversion from God, and conversion to the Creatures; a mass of
corruption, of poverty, and inability to good. What then ought he to do? He
must humble himself, annihilate himself, plunge himself into the Abyss of his
own Nothing, and live in perpetual fear of his own frailty. We shall never find
God, unless we lose our selves in self-contempt and abjections. If in our
retreats we profit so far as to rest convinced, that the true way to come to
God, is to follow Jesus Christ in poverty and abjections, and abnegation; we
gain what can be got by recollection.

When I see God affords me no great occasions to suffer contempt, or pains, or
poverty, I ought to be humbled in my own eyes, because this is a sign I am but
little in the sight of God, who sees here nothing of grandeur, which has not a
great conformity with Christ crucified. God has not designed me for any great
example of Virtue, because he gives me so small a part in the profound
abjections of his only Son; which is all the portion he gave him here upon
Earth, having reserved for him in Heaven the full possession of his infinite
Grandeurs and Perfections.

CHAP. IV. That the greatest Saints have attained to Perfection by a singular
love of self-contempt and abjection.
COntempts and abjections are the dearest delights of the Friends of God.
Although exteriourly they may possess Riches, yet their heart is well advanced
in the esteem and love of Poverty. If they live in Honors, it is but in
appearance, their hearts having an affection to be despised. Nature indeed does
not relish this kind of life, because it fights continually against our sensual
inclinations. Human reason finds little or no gust herein, seeking God only by
her own light: but Grace elevates a Soul above sense and reason, pushing us on
to supernatural actions. Jesus Christ himself having resolved to embrace the
folly of the Cross, did not do it but by a supernatural impulse, as is manifest
by his combat with the inferior part of his Soul in the Garden; Father, if it
be possible, let this Cup pass from me.

Those who seem to us most wonderful Saints, are such who have been
super-eminent in self-contempt and abnegation. Who does not admire the generous
Spirit of holy Paula, that Roman Lady, who being enamored on the poverty and
humiliations of Jesus, forsook Rome and all her Relations, to embrace a poor
and abject life? She that could have done very much for others with her Riches
in that capital City, did prefer the Stable at Bethlehem before sumptuous
Palaces. Elegi abjectus esse in domo Dei.

Alexius might have done God good service in a marriage life; yet he was so
ravished with the beauty of a life hidden and despicaple, that he forsook
Father, Mother, Wife, Friends, Possessions, Honors, which may be kept with a
good conscience: but having a Divine call to the eminency of an abject life, by
a wonderful miracle of grace, he, amidst his dear Relations, would not suffer
natural (though lawful) affection to take a lodging in his heart; he afflicts
himself with hunger, in a House which belonged to him; he becomes the scorn and
sport of those Servants, to whom he was Master; his heart continued constant
and faithful, to desire nothing but abjections, and no batteries of human
reason could conquer or weaken his resolutions. O how this way is elevated
above the low designs of our nature, which is too much enamored on flattering
vanities!

Many fly from abjections and sufferings, thinking to glorify God in a more
noble manner, by actions more glorious and profitable to others: but this is
rather to follow our own inclination, than the example of Jesus Christ. For we
ought to serve him after his model, and not according to our fancy: and we see
his life was a life of sufferings and humiliations.

It Is wonderful to consider the elevated Soul of St. Armogastus, a Count and
great Seigneur, condemned by the King (a Persecuter of Religion) to keep Beasts
all his life, and die by miseries and poverty in this employment. It Is
wonderful to consider what a Kingdom and Sovereignty abjection had erected in
the heart of this great Saint, manifesting it self daily by supernatural
actions. For he loved nothing more dearly than to see himself buried in deep
Oblivion, and to be despised by all Creatures; and the miseries he suffered in
this low condition, were the delights of his Soul. Whilst other Nobles, his
Contrymen and Contemporaries, lived glorious with their Tryumphs in the
Courts of Emperors, Armogastus lived amongst Beasts, as if good for nothing,
he deserved not the company of men.

O Armogastus! where is the generous spirit of a Cavalier? where is the courage
of a Gentleman? why do you not quit this employment, at least that you may
shine bright in the grand exercises of Christianity? Free your self by flight,
and in some other Country preach the Gospel, do marvels in helping the poor
and miserable; but continuing thus miserable in your self, you cannot arrive to
any excellency in Christian Virtue.

Let me alone (says this great Saint) in my abject condition; this suffices me,
and I am content to be thus thought as a thing of no worth, O how well am I
pleased to be thus scorned and forgotten! Happy are those who preach the
Gospel; happy are those who are merciful to others: I have as great an esteem
of them as you; but likewise, happy are those who are as nothing in their own
eyes.

To be poor, despised, annihilated, and miserable, shall be the only matter of
my discourse as long as I live; by this means I am emptied of my self, and of
all Creatures, and made capable to be filled with Divine graces. O that these
things did touch our hearts with a sensible Devotion.

CHAP. V. That we have only so much of the true Spirit of Jesus Christ, as we
have an inclination to abjection.
IF the purity of love be on Earth, it is in the heart of those who love
abjection, seeing they desire nothing but the interest of God, his glory
purely, being in a manner wholly absorpt in self-oblivion. To behold God
advancing others to states sublime and glorious, that they are but as atoms in
comparison, and to rest content in their abjections, is a matter of greatest
difficulty, because herein they quit even their own spiritual interests, being
satisfied with whatever God does for them, and with that measure of glory he
will have us bring unto him, though never so little. It Is true, that this sort
of abjection was not in Jesus Christ, because being God, the fullness of all
grandeurs belong unto him. But this is altogether proper to us, because we are
Creatures, poor and abject; and that little God gives us, is more than we
deserve, seeing we of our selves can merit nothing.

It Is to be feared there are but few who follow Jesus Christ in the practice of
that abjection he loved for our sakes. In our thoughts and words we may do it;
but when any occasion of humiliation or suffering happens, we make the bravest
pretensions possible to be freed from it. Even such who make a profession of
Devotion, will suffer the want of nothing, nor any injury from others; they are
for governing affairs as they please, without any subjection or dependence;
shunning abjection, because they think they can more glorify God by Grandeur
and Reputation in the world. This is a mere illusion of self-love, and a vanity
of nature, which in every thing affects to be exalted, and not to be humbled.

Not with standing, let us think and say what we please, what measure we have
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, is according to the degree of true mortification
and self-denial we find in us. He expects we should honor his voluntary
humiliations with the sacrifice of our pride. Now, in a Sacrifice the Host
immolated is destroyed, and deprived of its former being; so that we must make
a continual Sacrifice of our reason and understanding, of our will and
inclinations, to the judgments and commands of others: of our reputation, by a
love to abjection: of our goods, by poverty: of our health and corporal
satisfactions, by pains and austerities: In a word, we must sacrifice all our
natural inclinations to the honor of God, being as well content with adverse
accidents as prosperous successes; because the good use of humiliations is
better for us than prosperity.

It is an excellent Lesson we learn by the love of abjection, but it is very
hard to take out, and without a continual looking over is soon forgotten. The
virtues which consist in action, are more easily practiced, less troublesome to
us, and more satisfactory to others: But those that consist purely in
suffering, as Humiliation, Patience, Abnegation, are very difficult. O Jesus!
abject and humble, infuse into my Soul the Science of Saints, and a relish of
contempt of the world, and I shall learn perfectly the Lesson of true humility,
which is above the apprehension of human reason.

Our blessed Savior sometimes puts us upon the undertaking of certain good
designs, whereof he wills not the Execution, but the Practice of many Virtues,
which arise in their pursuance and failing of the desired issue. Nature is much
disturbed at ill successes, but God, by the wonderful contrivance of his
wisdom, oftentimes more glorifies himself by adverse than favorable events.
For the dispositions of humiliation, resignation, and contentedness, which he
sees in a Soul, are more pleasing than what she designed.

St: Lewis earnestly desired to re-establish the glory of God in Palestine: all
fell out contrary to his good designs; but the purposes which God had to
advance his glory, took good effect. For this great King was humbled and made
abject in the eyes of the world, falling into the hands of his Enemies, his
Army being destroyed either by the Sword or Pestilence. O how these grand
humiliations (in the midst of which the invincible Soul of this holy King
rested more content than in a Trpumph) did render a marvelous homage to the Son
of God, in the self-same place where he suffered for us! Perhaps this glory was
greater in his sight, than if the Sword of St. Lewis had sacrificed all the
Infidels in Palestine.

Our weaknesses and imperfections are as ill Trees, because they cannot of
themselves bring things to maturity; however, they do not fail of bringing
forth fruit in the worst successes by abjection, humiliation, and self-denial.
When we cannot do the good we would, it is no small good to acknowledge our
insufficiency and unworthiness. When we are hindered from our usual
recollection, by some incommodity, we may hope that one good hour of suffering
and abjection with a contented mind, will prove better to us than an hour of
Prayer, wherein, perhaps, we should take more self-satisfaction. When we think
the Soul is not in fit temper to converse with God, because we are disturbed
with many importunities, let us remember that this may proceed from Nature; but
the repose of grace is that which is only necessary for recollection. Now, the
repose of grace finds her self better in crosses, and pains, and abjections,
than otherwise. In tribulatione dilatasti mihi; My heart was enlarged toward
God in tribulation.

CHAP. VI. That the sight of our own Nothing, inspires us with self-contempt,
and the love of God.
THe principal reason of our little or no amendment, is because we do not
sufficiently depend upon grace; we are not so frequent as we ought in our
recourse to God; we too much rely on the Creatures, that is, on the means we
use, for our proficiency; as, the reading of good Books, Conferences, Sermons,
Meditation, etc. All these are very good, when they are done with great
confidence in God, and fervent Prayer; for nothing but an Almighty hand can
pluck us out of the depth of our Miseries, and crown us with Glory.

God is an infinite good, in whom all fullness dwells; and whatever good is in
the Creature, are but emenations from Him: the Creature of it self being but a
mere Vacuum, and privation of goodness. As we cannot conceive a greater fullness
than is in God, so we cannot imagine a more extreme*indigency than is in the
Creature. It Is the same thing to be God and all Goodness, and to be a Creature
and Nothing: the One is all Abundance, the Other all Poverty. Every one grants
this truth, but without serious reflection; which is the cause we have no true
self-denial, and diffidence in our own abilities: and as much as we rely on our
selves, we hinder the operation of grace in us. O my God! I am content with my
Poverty, because it brings me to the knowledge of your Riches; I should forget
what I am, if I were not full of wants and imperfections. I am well pleased
that you are All, and I am Nothing, but what you vouchsafe to bestow on me.

The three Divine Persons can only proportionally communicate to each other
their infinite Perfections. I, poor Creature, can give nothing to God, nor do
any thing for him. The best I can do, is to acknowledge my inability and
weakness; neither can I do this, without his grace, which also he gives unto me.

There is so infinite a disproportion between God and a Creature, that if I
should lay down my life for God's sake, it would be less than if a Pismire
should die for the greatest Monarch. Whatever the glorious Angels or Saints in
Heaven, or his Servants on Earth, can do for God, adds nothing to him. We
cannot dive into the full depth of our Nothing, God only knows it; and what we
discover by it, is by the illuminating Rays of his Grace and Mercy.

To understand this well, we must know, that God is not glorified by our good
actions, but inasmuch as they are agreeable to his will, from whence they
receive the tincture of goodness; and he magnifies his bounty and mercy, by
accepting and rewarding our small performances. So that the graces and favors
he bestows upon us in this life, and the glory of the other, are the effects of
his pure goodness.

It Is very advantageous for a Soul thus to know her own Nothing, for it makes
her a Martyr of Love, and loving God will do any thing for him; and by this
knowledge, sees that of her self she can do nothing. So that, hanging as it
were between will and weakness, she breaths forth such desires as did St.
Austin; If I was God, and you a Creature; I would willingly become a Creature,
that you might be God. But perceiving this to be an impossible imagination this
poor Soul increases her Martyrdom, and dies of love, because not able to do any
thing for her Beloved. Yet this one consolation does revive her, in that though
she can do nothing, her well-beloved can do all, and taking delight in what he
is, and that he has no need of any thing, she reposes quietly in the bosom of
God, who is her all, and final happiness.

CHAP. VII. That God is glorified by our annihilation.
NOthing but Divine Faith can teach us to love mortification, and the
annihilation of our selves. Natural and worldly wisdom cannot relish it, and
therefore are not to be consulted, or hearkened to, being but blind guides in
the practice thereof.

The sin of pride has ruined the Glory and Kingdom of God in our Souls, and
that cannot be re-established, but by our ruin: and by how much the more we
are mortified and dead to our selves* by so much the more God is revived in us.
Poor Creatures as we are, we afflict our selves because we are so weak, and
good for nothing, without talents, without knowledge, that left to our selves,
all things go wrong with us. O that we would learn to be content with these
miseries, that we might thereby arrive to the happy state of annihilation, we
might then bring as much glory to God, as by great performances; for in all
these privations the Soul finds no relyance or consolation in her self, or in
any other Creature, but in God alone.

Holy Job never brought more glory to God, than when he was plunged in the
Abyss of humiliations, on a Dunghill. God glorifies himself in Heaven, by the
exaltation of his Creatures; here on Earth, by their humiliation. Do we not see
that the Wisdom of the eternal Father did prescribe to his Son this way of
honoring him on Earth? Has not our blessed Savior taught us by his words and
actions in the constant practice of self-denial? And think we to find out a
better way to glorify God, than what our Divine Master has set before us?

There Is nothing wherein a Creature can more purely glorify the Creator, than
by a willing submission to that self-destruction, which God works in us; for
where there is the least of the Creature, there is most of God. But in this God
does in a manner work all, and the Creature yields obedience to his operations.
To bear patiently the deprivation of light, and sweetness, and sensible
influences in Heaven in our recollections, may do us more good than the most
illuminated and gustful Prayer. To be abandoned and forsaken by our Friends,
and bear it with patience and resignation, may more profit us than their
friendship and services. And so it is in the loss of other things, because in
derelictions and deprivations we seek God with a more purified intention; there
being less of self in it, having not the satisfaction to act, but only to
receive the loss of what is dear to us, merely because it pleases God thus to
deal with us for his greater glory.

It Is a sad thing to consider the blindness wherein I have lived. O how hard a
thing it is for human reason to apprehend the Doctrine of the Son of God! It Is
true, it teaches us to crucify and deny our selves, which is what naturally we
fear and dread. The measure of God's love to a Soul is to be judged by its
degree of humiliation; which is a way without all exception, seeing the Gospel
tells us, that whosoever does not deny himself and all worldly things, cannot
be the Disciple of Jesus Christ. O dear Jesus, humbled for us! I see the way
wherein you have walked, and that I must take up my Cross to follow you; I am
content to accept it, and am willing to be your Disciple.

Be it then that my Body be afflicted with sickness, my Goods lost, my Honor
in the dust, and I become, as I deserve, of little or no esteem and repute: Be
it that you withdraw from me your Divine Illuminations in Prayer and
Recollection, so as to be in a manner void of understanding, sicut equus and
malus, quibus non est intellectus: Provided, dear Jesus, that I be but content
with these humiliations, it is sufficient; I shall be happy. Let others ask of
you what they please; as for me, my desire is to be entirely annihilated, and
that my portion may be to honor your Divine humiliations.

We are not courageous enough to fight as we ought, to destroy in us our
sensual inclinations, for we are too feeble against our selves, and too
indulgent to our defects in this spiritual combat. But, O my God, put too your
helping hand, and work in us your will, that we may be humbled, and contentedly
submit to your operation.

CHAP. VIII. That the Soul is Rich, when she possesses the love of
self-contempt.
GOD has infused this thought into my Soul, that the love of self-contempt, and
the desire of humiliation, may be that hidden Treasure mentioned in the Gospel,
Thesauro abscondita in agro, Matt. 13.

It Is really a great Treasure to love abjection; yea, a Treasure that contains
abundance of inestimable Riches: but they appear not outwardly, being hid on
purpose to preserve with more security; And he only has this Treasure, who
keeps well hidden what he possesses.

It Is a Treasure hidden and unknown to the world; For who would imagine that
there should be any thing so rich and precious in Sufferings and Humiliations?
Should our senses, or carnal prudence, or human reason, make enquiry, would
they search here to enrich themselves, and satisfy their desires? We could
never have thought that a hidden Treasure was here enshrined, if Jesus Christ,
who put it there himself, had not revealed this great secret to our Souls, by
his peculiar favor, and merciful illuminations.

If we will have this Treasure, we must buy it, and give for it whatever we
possess: that is to say, we must lay down our whole Patrimony, the fatal
Inheritance left us by our first Parents; namely, affection for Honors, for
Pleasures, for Riches; too much seeking our selves, and our own interests, the
love of our own excellence, and all the other wretched movables, which we
possess by being conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity. If we will
not be content to part with all, yea the utmost farthing, we cannot be enriched
with this Treasure.

O how rich and happy is he who does possess it! For it is a Treasure, which,
as the world cannog give, so it cannot take it from us; and as long as we are
in quiet possession thereof, we find God in our Souls, and such a profound
peace, as passes all human understanding. When one has purchased a good Estate
in Land, we are ready to say, He is in a good condition; what need he fear now,
having a sure foundation of subsistence? If a War happen, the Enemies cannot
carry that away with them: they may indeed deprive him of his Money and Goods;
but for his Land, that is fixed and immovable.

It Is the same case with this precious Treasure; when once the Soul has it in
possession, and will not part with it, she need not fear, she has sure hold of
subsistence for her spiritual life. Neither the World, nor the Devil, nor all
the Enemies of our Salvation, let them make never such furious on-sets, can rob
her of it; it surpasses their power, and belongs not to them. It Is true, they
may deprive her of some movables, as sensible consolations, the love of
austerities, the desire to undertake brave actions for the Glory of God, as to
go to Canada or England, for the conversion of Souls to the Catholic Faith; in
a word, all the fair Idaea's of Spirituality. The Devil, the World, Nature, has
a mind to these movables; and a Soul that possesses only these, has nothing but
what may be taken from her: but whosoever possesses this Treasure of the love
of abjection and self-denial, is rich for ever. And when God is pleased to
discover to a Soul the value thereof; Prae gaudio illius vadit, and vendit
universa quae habet, and emit agrum illum; she joyfully parts with all she has,
to get it in possession.

We have a double right to pretend to the possession of this Divine Treasure.
The first is, our natural inability to good: the second is, our criminal
sinfulness. These two lay upon us a continual obligation to endeavor after
self-denial and annihilation; and this endeavor is very pleasing to God, who
delights to see a Creature acknowledge what is due to it self, and render to
him his deserved Glory. The Son of God began as a Giant to run in this way of
self-contempt, by his Incarnation; for it is a wonderful humiliation for God to
become Man: and he finished this course by his Death on the Cross, which was as
low as humility could descend. For God-Man to die an infamous death, between
two Thieves, as a Malefactor, and his whole life besides was but as one
continued humiliation: and yet (alas!) we pass away our days in vanity, calling
our selves Christians, though all for exaltation of our selves, destitute of
self-denial and true humility. O wonderful blindness!

O Jesus, poor and abject! when will you draw me after you by the powerful
attracts of your mercy? Your ways are pure, and pleasant, and odoriferous to
those whose Souls are enlightened with the Rays of Grace. You, (O Jesus!)
establish your Empire in humble hearts, and reign there in peace; as the Devil
sets up his Kingdom in proud Souls, and there domineers with intolerable
Tyranny.

CHAP. V. What profit we draw from humiliations.
PAins and Miseries humble the body; Poverty, Riches, Contempt, Reputation and
Honor, Death, Life, aridities in Prayer, spiritual Consolations; all these
conduce to purify Virtue, and sacrifice man wholly to God. Some glorify him
by action, some by suffering, others by privations and humiliations: and these
last are the greatest Saints, though here despised, and known to God alone. We
ought to resign our selves to the conduct of God's spirit; but if it was left
to our own choice, the way of abjections is best and safest. Job did more
glorify God on the Dunghill, than in his Palace. Happy is he, who in glorifying
God, follows the call of his holy inspirations, in a way which the world
neither does nor can well understand.

It Is a great misery not to be willing to acknowledge, that human wisdom is but
folly before God, which continually eggs us on to get out of the happy state of
abjection, upon the fairest pretenses imaginable, as the salvation of souls, to
help our Neighbors, and the like. Notwithstanding it is safest to yield our
selves up to the sole conduct of God's holy Spirit, the order of whose
providence we cannot shun. God glorifies himself in Heaven, by the exaltation
of his Creatures, on Earth by their Humiliation. Let no person complain then,
that he cannot be instrumental to the glory of God; for let him but heap up his
own miseries, and lay himself thereon, as Isaac was on the Altar, and then
sacrifice himself by a voluntary annihilation, with the fire of Divine Love,
and God will be glorified thereby.

When a Soul is left to her self in Prayer, so that aridities and desolations
do darken her wonted light, and deprive her of the usual feelings she had of
God and Goodness, she may make her address in these or suchlike words; My God!
I am nothing, and I am contented with all my heart with this dealing with me;
it is your pleasure thus to mortify me, and I have no other will but yours.
You have sometimes vouchsafed unto me illuminations and consolations, which
were dear unto me; but now you are pleased to deprive me of them; blessed be
your name; I am contented with your pleasure.

If poverty, or ill success, or sickness, afflict us, let us apply our selves
to God, with these, or suchlike words; My God! I can do nothing of my self,
but I am well pleased with what you do unto me; sacrifice me wholly to the
grandeur of your Majesty, whatever reluctance I find in Nature, upon the Altar
of my miseries and imperfections. Little Isaac, ready to be sacrificed by his
Father's hand, might have said these, or suchlike words; I had hopes that in
aftertimes I might have been signally instrumental for the glory of God; and
that, according to his promise, out of my Loins, by continued Generations,
should come the Messiah: but I sacrifice all this beforehand, and reflect on
nothing but the Burnt-offering God is pleased to make of me by my Father's hand.

St. Lewis had hopes to establish the glory of Jesus Christ in Palestine; but
seeing his Army defeated, he might comfort himself, in saying, O my God! seeing
it is not your pleasure to have it so, but have humbled me and my Army by the
Pestilence and Sword of your Enemies, your will be done, I submit unto it. I
behold the generous Enterprises of your Servants, and their great Attempts, and
bless you for them: but my comfort is in the consideration of my objections,
which have brought me to a state wherein I see God alone, and possess Him in
the denudation of all Creatures, after the example of Jesus Christ; Christus
non sibi placuit; whose work was only to do your will.

Let us not then so much disquiet our selves with our imperfections. They are
indeed but an ill brood, and deserve not to be loved; but we must bear them
with patience, seeing they serve to debase our selves in our own eyes, and to
conform us in some sort to the infinite humiliations of Jesus Christ crucified
for us. Man was created in the state of innocence, now he is born in a sinful
condition. He has then had two opposite ways to conduct him to Glory. The first
was a state of Exaltation, happy, and enjoying all Creatures freely; but the
second is a state of Abjection, in misery, and denudation of all Creatures. He
that will walk a third way, attempts above the condition of that from whence he
is fallen, and that provided for us after this life.

CHAP. X. The way how to arrive to perfect humiliation.
I Conceive three deprivations necessary to effect this. First, the deprivation
of all exterior things; as, Riches, Honors, Pleasures. This is the first
advance a Soul must make to draw near to God: for as long as there remains the
least inordinate affection to these things, she can never make any great
progress in finding God, being fettered as it were by other affections, and so
cannot have perfect possession of God, being excluded by the Creatures, which
more or less take up the heart.

When necessity or charity require it, we may have the real possession of these
things, and live only in disposition of spirit, and affective poverty. However,
it will be matter of joy to be freed from them, because for the most part they
rather hinder than advance us toward union with God. And if we have not a
great care, Nature will cheat us with a pretext of Charity, and helping others;
which is but a good illusion; for sometimes they who have the less Riches, have
the more charitable hearts.

It Is good counsel to forsake Riches and Honors, when it may be done
conveniently; but when, by secret tracts of Divine Providence, they forsake us,
it is our duty to possess our Souls in patience, and be contented; which is in a
manner better than if we our selves had left them; especially when we believe
these losses happened by our own fault and imbecility; for this brings us to a
greater abjection and self-contempt, which is the center whither we ought to
tend.

If there was nothing else good in poverty but this, that it mortifies our
liberty and independance, whereof naturally we are so amorous, it is a great
happiness to be enriched therewith. When we are out of Employment and Honor in
the world, we are looked upon as unprofitable, and easily forgotten and
forsaken by our best Friends; it is so much the better for our humiliation.

This is the second deprivation that we must suffer. O the great Grace that is
necessary to carry on a Soul to God, when we are despised by our Friends,
whereby they become rather the subject of affliction than affection to us.
Without doubt we have a strong inclination to them, to whom we are so glew'd,
that without some great and special grace we can never mortify our selves
therein, without some attach to conserve such friendship. They are happy
occasions, whereby we are deprived of our Friends without sin; in losing them,
we lose a great upholder of self-love in us.

St John Baptist, when very young, left his Father's house, to live in a Desert
with God alone. Great Saint! they are Saints whom you forsake. I know that very
well (says he) but they are my Relations that have an affection for me. O what
a violence is this to nature! For when an attach to Friends, (especially if
virtuous) seems more spiritual and reasonable than any other affection, to
mortify our selves in this, is an extraordinary Sacrifice to God, and only
granted to such Souls whom he carries on to great perfection. But we must pass
further yet:

For there is a third deprivation to lose our selves; which is, to be esteemed
as Fools for Christ's sake, according to that of St. Paul, Nos stulti propter
Christum. To love, to obey, and be in subjection; to have no reason, and yet to
renounce our own reason, and to enthrone Faith in our Souls for direction. O
how the pure light of Faith discovers to us, that we ought to be well pleased
to have no great natural parts, but to be (as it were) good for nothing! For
the view thereof, if it come to the heart, does powerfully annihilate the
natural inclination we have to be esteemed. To consent willingly to be abject
and despised, is a great means to empty us of this self-love; and according to
the measure of this evacuation, is the degree of perfection.

O my God! how hard a thing is it for us not to seek our selves, and not at all
to pretend to esteem and excellence! The desire we have thereof, is as intime
to us as the marrow of our bones; and in a manner in all our actions, whether
for our selves or our Neighbors, we seek more or less our own excellence. The
greatest Saints have had little esteem of their own Talents in their own eyes,
when they have been obliged to make them glorious in the sight of others. And
unless they did cause them to appear for the good of others, they did tend to
humiliation, plunging themselves in their own Nothing, to bring down thereby
all Pride of heart.

CHAP. XI. That we ought to leave our selves wholly to God to become
annihilated.
IF we put our selves into the hands of Jesus Christ, he will treat us as his
Father treated him; for Divine Love has severity as well as Divine Justice.
Happy is that Soul, which (all on fire with Divine Love) is not content nor
satisfied, till she has so wholly sacrifie'd her self to God, that the love of
the Creature is burned to nothing This Love is a Sun full of fire and light,
which by little and little draws up the vapors from the Earth, (that is, the
Creatures) and drinks them up.

I have a business in hand, which puts me to hard labor; namely, to mortify
my self in spirit and affection to all Creatures; if I can bring it about, I
shall be happy. All that I have done hitherto, is but a preparation to take up
my Cross, and entirely to follow Christ in his humiliations. I see him born in
a poor abject manner in the eyes of men, and thus, like a Giant, he begins the
course of his abjections. Why do we delay to follow him by annihilation,
poverty, and self-contempt? Let Us never leave him, whatsoever we suffer. For my
part, I have made a solemn protestation, that I will follow him so close by
being crucified to the world, that every moment of my life I shall be able to
say, It Is not I that live, but Jesus crucified who lives in me.

Let us not wonder at the proceedings of Jesus Christ, who preaches to us
nothing but death and annihilation, the Cross and abnegation. It Is because our
Soul, infected with sin, wherein we are conceived, is so strongly corrupted,
that all her operations are impure. Jesus Christ is come by his grace to
cleanse this impurity, which is so deeply fixed and in grain, that except we
resolutely correspond to the workings of grace in us, we shall still remain in
our imperfections; which grace tends to bring us to selfcontempt and
annihilation.

Having this day received my Savior in the blessed Sacrament, I kept my self
as it were wholly annihilated while he continued in me; and permitted him to in
me and for me what he pleased, both in relation to his Father, and my poor
Soul, and those persons for whom I had interceded in the dreadful Sacrifice. It
seems to me I ought not to mingle the operations of an impure Creature with
those of Jesus. O that Jesus would alone work in me what is my duty! I ought to
plunge my self in my own Nothing in his presence. If I must love God, Jesus
will work this in me; if I must pray, Jesus will be my Advocate; if I must
glorify his Father, he will glorify him, and I will sweetly consent to all
his operations. O Jesus! be you All, that I may be Nothing; work your will in
me, I will remain in my Nothing, to let you work all in me without resistance.
Many good Souls honor the abjections of Jesus Christ, but few will practice
them, or imitate his poverty and humiliations. Shall we think that it did not
beseem you to be so debased, and thus to suffer? O Jesus! is not this to make
no account of your example, and condemn you of Folly, who are the Wisdom of the
Father? It Is a great folly to be thus censorious; and certainly, the more we
participate of your poverty and humiliations, the more we participate of your
wisdom. Come then, O my Soul, let us follow Jesus poor and abject, and live
poor with him, and thereby testify our love to him, and our fidelity.

CHAP. XII. That we must renounce our sense, and human reason, to love
humiliations.
THe impediments that our sensitive part brings to perfection are easy to be
discovered, but the interpositions of human reason are nice and delicate, and
few discover them. They are hard to conquer, and many cannot be persuaded of
their badness; for reason is ingenious to seduce by a thousand fair pretenses,
which we dare hardly condemn, appearing so reasonable; but the example of Jesus
Christ is above all reason and human prudence.

What reason was there that the Roman Emperors should live in tryumphs; that
cruel Herod's should shine with Honors, and melt in Pleasures; that the
hard-hearted Jews should enjoy all worldly contents and abundance: and in the
interim, the Son of God should be born in a Stable, should fly by night into
Egypt, live a poor life in a shop with a Carpenter, overwhelmed with pains and
disgraces? However, these are the proceedings of the eternal Father, to
confound thereby our human prudence, and teach us to renounce our selves, if we
will be good followers of Jesus Christ.

As long as we give more ear to the persuasions of human reason, than to the
light of Faith, we shall never make any great progress in Piety. If one be in a
poor and abject condition, human prudence is for Advancement and Riches, when
any occasion presents it self. If one be born to Honors and Possessions,
reason says, Leave them not, to become poor and abject. How can we draw our
selves out of Nature, to imitate Divine Jesus, if we will always follow the
Maxims of men?

We are very busy to live in the world according to our condition; but we do
not remember sufficiently, that our chiefest care ought to be to live the life
of Jesus Christ, and let all other obligations give place unto it. Jesus Christ
executing the eternal purposes of his Father, in a poor, despised painful life,
did infinitely glorify him thereby. Before the Incarnation, God was not
infinitely loved and glorified out of himself, but only in himself; inasmuch as
the humiliations of one that is God, brings an infinite glory to God, which
before he had not. A Christian Soul likewise executing the divine Will of the
eternal Father, by following his Son in a life of humiliations and
self-contempt, does glorify him with sovereign Honor: For 'twas decreed from
all Eternity, that the Members should live the life of the Head; Quos
praedestinavit, conformes fieri; and first suffer with him, that they may at
last with him be glorified. All human reason must yield to this divine
determination. O Jesus! how strange are the foundations of that perfection to
which you call us! They are nothing but Deaths, Renunciations, Poverties,
Abandonments, and Crosses; so that whatsoever is agreeable to Nature, seems
wholly contrary to Grace. Why do you not, dear Savior, bring man to his
Nothing in a moment by your Omnipotency, to make him thereby a new Creature?
Why will you that he must annihilate himself and contribute to his own
destruction. O how the methods of your Wisdom are admirable! Your design is
hereby to bring man to love you. But he can never do this more generously, than
by the strongest efforts of self-contempt and annihilation. Human reason
prompts us to self-love and self-esteem: Divine reason inspires us with
self-contempt and abnegation. Abraham sacrificing his Son, did foolishly in the
judgment of human reason, as being an enemy to Himself, and his whole Family:
but this was an action of wonderful prudence in the judgment of Divine reason;
showing thereby that he loved God more than himself and his dearest Relations.
Come then, O my Soul, let us strive to be dead to all things but God, and to
annihilate our selves for his sake I see an unspeakable beauty in the horror of
mortifications and sufferings, seeing they are the source from whence purity
flows into the Soul.

CHAP. XIII. That self denial and annihilation is better learnt by practice
than speculation.
I Know now better than ever, that abjection is the way wherein we must march,
to advance assuredly to the perfection we aim at: all other ways are liable to
deceit, but self-denial is without delusion. O how few do consider the
proceedings of Jesus Christ! and fewer dive into and comprehend his holy
dispositions! But fewest set upon a perfect imitation of what they know.

Let us fall to work, we know enough of it. We are not ignorant how Jesus
humbled himself in the Womb of his Virgin Mother, and there remained nine
months, and at his Nativity did increase his humiliation, by being born in a
Stable; continued them all his lifetime, and finished them by his Death upon
the Cross, the grand Theater of his humiliations. We know all this; it only
remains to imitate him; Grace will conduct us, if we faithfully correspond to
God's Inspirations. To this end God permits that our Friends fall off from us,
that some little disgraces happen, that we are somewhat despised, and suffer by
others, that our imperfections are discovered and made known, and that we are
censured for undertaking to aim at perfection. All this tending to humble us is
good, what way soever it come, and no better thing can arrive unto us. To be
faithful on these occasions does far transcend all speculations. If you still
complain of cross accidents; if you don't hide your self from the eyes of men;
if you love not poverty and contempt, and the things of this world have still
some hold upon you; thou art not annihilated, and God has not wrought the
marvels of his love in thy heart.

Hearing sung in the Church these words of the Psalmist, In toto cord meo
exquisivi Te; I have sought Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; it seemed to me,
that our blessed Savior answered me interiourly, Thou have made a fair search
after me every where; but thou will not find me any where on Earth, but there
where I have been in the stations of my mortal life; in solitude and silence,
in poverty and sufferings, in persecution and reproaches, in crosses and
annihilation. The Saints find me in Heaven in the splendors of Glory, and Joys
ineffable; but this is after they have found me on Earth in Disgraces and Pains
I am thoroughly convinced of this Truth, and humbly thank our blessed Savior,
for making it so clear unto me; and I beseech his infinite goodness so to
imprint it in my heart, that I may practice it without delay.

Alas! how long shall I behold the excellency of humiliations by Divine
Irradiations darted into my Soul, and practice them so little? Divine Jesus!
take from me this rebellious heart, if it refuse to be conformable to you in
your annihilations, open my breast, and take it from me; for I had rather have
none at all, and die, than have a heart that has other Maxims and Affections
than what you have taught me. O my beloved Jesus! I do not in this desire
cruelty to my self, but a signal favor. The eternal Father who beheld you
hanging on the Cross with complacency, will not be offended with this bloody
spectacle.

O my Jesus! what a love have I for your Cross and humiliations! The view of
their beauty, so well-pleasing to your eternal Father, does at present so
ravish and transport me, that I shall become as it were a Fool, I shall lose my
senses, and speak I know not what; unless, dear Jesus, you put a stop to your
Divine motions, and eclipse those Heavenly Rays which present to my view
sufferings and humiliations so amiable.

I have a particular Devotion to make a Litany of Jesus in all his
humiliations; and when I feel a repugnancy to the practice of annihilation and
self-denial, I find great encouragement by reciting it.

Have mercy upon me.
Jesus, poor and abject,
Jesus, unknown and despised,
Jesus, hated, calumniated, and persecuted,
Jesus, abandoned by men, and tempted by the Devil,
Jesus, betrayed, and sold at a vile price,
Jesus, blamed, accused and condemned unjustly,
Jesus, arrayed with a shameful Garment,
Jesus, buffetted and mocked,
Jesus, reputed a Fool, and to have a Devil,
Jesus, scourged in a bloody manner, being bound with Cords,
Jesus, thought worse of than Barrabas,
Jesus, exposed naked with Infamy,
Jesus, crowned with thorns, and saluted with scoffs,
Jesus, sorrowful to death,
Jesus, oppressed with injuries, pains, and humiliations,
Jesus, affronted, spit upon, and despightfully used,
Jesus, charged with your Cross and our Sins
Jesus, crucified between two Thieves,
Jesus, dishonored before men, and thought as nothing,
O good Jesus! who have suffered for the love of me an infinity of disgraces
and humiliations above my comprehension; imprint powerfully in my Soul an
esteem and love of them, that I may practice them by your example.

CHAP. XIV. That a Soul espousing Jesus Christ, espouses also his Cross and
Sufferings.
THe infinite Wisdom of God has condescended to espouse the lowness of our
human Nature, by his Incarnation. This same human Nature has espoused the
Cross, Sufferings, Abjections, Death; and when a Soul espouses Jesus Christ,
she contracts an eternal Union with all these during her Pilgrimage. O happy
Alliance! She is married to Jesus, and Contempts and Sufferings are the Dowry.
O precious Riches! If she love her Beloved indeed, she ought to have a tender
affection to the gifts she presents to him at the Espousals, because she gives
them, and he much values them.

O my Soul! being thus espoused to Jesus Christ, behold then how strictly thou
art bound and engaged to him; for hereafter thou must suffer pains of body,
griefs of mind, affronts and injuries; thou must be well content with
humiliations, love disgraces, and make sport for others; thou must be content
to be thought but unconstant by Devotes, and of little understanding by worldly
persons; thou ought not to be discouraged at bad successes, and thereupon
drink deep of the Cup of humiliations, whether thou be in fault, or not; to be
content to see others advanced, and willingly embrace a low condition. O my
Soul! this engagement may terrify thee; but take courage, thou can do all
things, through Christ strengthening thee.

Jesus Christ was praedestinated from all Eternity to sufferings and
abjections, by the Decree of his Heavenly Father, to satisfy for our sins. And
it is certain that all the Friends of God are praedestinated to be conformable
to Jesus Christ, and so are praedestinated to sufferings, to satisfy God
offended, and repair his Glory. Whosoever therefore refuses sufferings and
humiliations, forsakes the way of the Praedestinate, for doubtless, by how much
the more a Soul participates of the states of the life of Jesus, so much the
more is she in God's favor, being more conform to the great Exemplar of those
who are praedestinated to Life eternal.

Crosses and humiliations are best for Christians, and nothing does them more
hurt than temporal Prosperity. O my God! burn, kill, mortify, disgrace,
debase, crucify me, otherwise I shall not have your face and favor, nor be
numbered among your Friends. Make me wise in good earnest, to the end I may walk
in your ways, that I may have a love for crosses and humiliations, that my
heart may not be at rest, till it rest there, as in a Center.

I should never have believed, if experience did not make it evident, that a
Soul can be brought to such a state by the conduct of Grace, as to rejoice
exceedingly to be plunged in all sorts of miseries. But these joys are so
pleasant, and so sweet, that after a relish of their goodness, all things upon*
Earth seem nothing to them. A Soul then much wonders at her self, to be
terrified so much with the sight of abjections, seeing now they seem to her a
Celestial Paradise; and, next to Heaven, she desires no other: for she knows
that Jesus Christ enjoyed on Earth both these Paradices, that of Glory in
Heaven, and this of Humiliations on Earth. She knows, that in the Paradise of
Glory, she shall be glorified of God; she knows, that in the Paradise she
conceives to be in Crosses and Abjections, God is glorified by Her. This is
that which makes her have such an esteem and love for sufferings.

She thinks it a punishment to part with this Paradise; and she cannot
sufficiently lament the blindness of men, who hunt after Honors and
Preferments, of which she has no small abhorrency. She sees clearly, that those
advanced to Honors, commonly seek their own Glory: but by self-denial and
abjections we aim at the Glory of God; And therefore, laying most to heart the
Glory of God, she falls in love with humiliations.

A Soul once enlightened with these irradiations, if she refuse abjections and
sufferings, is very faithless, and deserves to be in the world without crosses
and humiliations, which is the most formidable chastisement that can happen to
us upon Earth.

CHAP. XV. That the experience of God's goodness to us, does annihilate us
powerfully.
LEt us not imagine we have the Spirit of suffering and true humility, because
we are affected with the thoughts and sentiments thereof, for we can only know
it assuredly in the effective occasions. O how rare a thing is it to be wholly
crucified to the things of this life! Nature must pay dear to purchase this
Jewel. It Is not because the fruits are not sweet, which are indeed so
ravishing, that no other sweetness in the world may be compared to it; insomuch
that those Souls who have once tasted thereof, are, as I may say, daily mounted
on the Cross, as a Tree of Life.

Search for sweetness where you please, you will never find it so full as in
the bosom of the Cross; all other sweetness is but superficial and fleeting;
this is solid, permanent, and efficacious. But this a Soul cannot know by
thoughts only, and sentiments thereof, but by the real effects of suffering.
Some Souls are as St Cordula, in whom the weakness of Nature was so strong,
that she hid her self to escape Martyrdom; but the power of Jesus Christ made
her a little after discover her self, and lay down her life for his sake.

There Is a wonderful frailty in human Nature, but the power of Grace in man is
mavelous; the sight of One, makes us tremble for fear; but beholding the
Other, we are encouraged by hope. Humility, and confidence in God, are two
Virtues very necessary to man, who left to himself is all weakness, and is not
strong but by the Grace of Jesus Christ, in whom poor, humble Souls arrive to
their Crowns of Glory, and he is also crowned by them: for they cannot conquer
the World and Nature but by Him, and this puts eternal Crowns upon his Head.
The Crowns which the Saints wear on their heads, belong not to them, as if they
had gained them by their own abilites, but to Jesus Christ, the Crown of the
Blessed in Heaven; Jesus Corona Sanctorum omnium.

O dear Jesus! I am well pleased with your sweetness and consolations, and with
the moderation you use toward me, in trying me only with small afflictions, as
well knowing my weakness would be overwhelmed with a torrent of sufferings. I
am pleased with those sensible influences you infuse into my Soul in Devotions;
for though they be evident signs of my weakness, yet they are assured effects
of your amiable Providence, to strengthen my frailty against temptations.
Glorify then in the depth of my Misery the riches of your Mercy.

When a Soul calls to mind her imperfections, and inclination to evil, God
thinks upon her, and supplies her with his assisting Graces. When she forgets
her miseries and corruptions, God also forgets her; for he loves not Vanity,
but Verity. For this reason the most usual exercise of a Soul ought to be to
endeavor for a perfect sight of her imperfections. This is an Altar on which
we sacrifice all self-conceits, and desire of our proper excellence, to do
homage to the sovereign Perfection and infinite Majesty of God. This Altar
ought to be every day prepared.

What corrections and reproofs we may receive from others, are not to be
thought full of passion and exaggeration; yea, they come from our greatest
Enemies: for they are less than our sins and corruption, the source whereof is
so profound, that no Creature can fathom it, but God alone. O what a blindness
is it then to complain!

CHAP. XVI. To be content with abjection after our faults, repairs the injury
to God, and makes up our ruins.
YOu know my last inconsideration. This fault has made me see very well my
extreme misery, and the little strength my Soul has on such occasions. I see,
methinks, the depth of my weakness, and know how little I am mortified, and how
active my passions are yet in me.

God of his mercy grant, that by this fault I may see my Nothing, my weakness,
my inclinations to evil, more clearly than formerly. I was miserable, and I did
not know it; I was frailty it self, and I did not perceive it: but (...)
acknowledge my vileness, though I cannot (...) ^athom the depth thereof.

(...) I am well-pleased that this fault happened (...) presence of my Friends,
who will there^^^^ (...) ^ow what I am. It much displeases me to (...) offended
God, by being so faithless to his ^^^ces; but I joy in this, that I am
well-pleased ^^th my humiliation. It Is a good hap to be de^^^sed in the esteem
of others, and does relish ^weet to such who desire to repair the injury ^hey
have done to God, by sinning against him. To be powerfully convinced of our
pure Nothing, and great Frailty, is the profit we ought to make of our
imperfections. How profitable is the discovery of my misery to me, seeing it
makes clear unto me all these verities!

This is the truth of it, I am nothing but infirmity and corruption, and more
than I can comprehend. And for the love I ought to have for Truth, by a
voluntary acquiescence I love and adore Divine Providence, which has brought me
to the sight of my own Nothing. I acknowledge my self to be miserable, and am
pleased the world should know it, and use me according to this verity.

It Is true also, that we ought not to complain of whatsoever injury is done us
by word or deed, for it is always less than we deserve. It Is the Law of
Christianity, and a great truth, that we ought to love abjection, Jesus having
loved it by his Father's order, and he is the grand exemplar we must imitate.

It Is true also, that after our failings we ought to comfort our selves with
the love of abjection, and make use of our infirmity to please (...) Just as
when a Ship is broken by a Tem^^^ we get some shattered Plank to save us (...)
perishing.

It Is true also, that since this lapse I perce^^^ better than ever the Bounty,
the Power an^ Mercy of God toward me; and all the Divine Perfections appear
unto me beaming forth more splendors of Glory. Just as the Moon never makes
more evident the dependence she has upon the Sun, than in Eclipses.

It Is true also, that a Soul sensible of her infirmities, is content with her
Talent, without disquieting her self to attain the perfections of great Saints,
whereo^ she acknowledges her self unworthy. And if God be pleased to
communicate unto her great Graces, she will not grow proud, as well knowing her
own weakness, but rejoice in this, that God thereby may be more honored.

It Is true also, that being convinced of her own unworthiness, she has no
confidence in her self, but in God alone, to whom entirely she gives up her
self, to deal with her as he pleases in Mercy or Justice*

She wonders not to see her self left and abandoned to sin, because she knows
she deserves no better, and then blesses the Divine Mercy, for not dealing with
her according to her Merits.

It Is true also, that a Soul grieving to have displeased God, would be content
to be really reduced to her first Nothing, i^ such was the Divine pleasure.
For, though she knows, being so brought to Nothing, she cannot be capable to
please God, or enjoy him: notwithstanding such is the love she has for the
Divine Will, that she would have that done, though she perish.

To acknowledge, and be content with our own baseness, is one of the greatest
mercies God can do for a Soul. For hereby she draws Salvation from Perdition,
as God knows how to advance his Glory by our sins. A Soul thus enlightened, is
content to be set on the Dunghill of her miseries, surrounded with humiliations
for her faults, as Job was with afflictions: and beholding her self as it were
the Queen of Infirmities and Abjections, she is pleased therewith, seeing she
may thereby honor and magnify the Divine Goodness. If a Soul be miserable by
falling into sin, she is rich in possessing the Treasure of humiliation after
her failings. But this is a truth hidden to most men, who do not discover this
advanrage. They are poor, and yet have a Treasure in their Field, which they
may have for digging.

Jesus, poor and abject for love of me, leave me not to my self; lift up my
Soul after her fall, and g^ve her some of that Cordial Water, which is called
the love of Abjection, that chases away the vain vapors of self-love, by which
the Soul is darkened, and loses courage. Glorify your power in my infirmities;
be pleased to condescend so far, as to receive me returning into the arms of
your Mercy, and grant I may die unto my self, that I may live in your Embraces.

Methinks, dear Jesus, I already feel your tenderness unto me; your divine love
vouchsafes me a relish of the sweets of Paradise; my eyes are bathed in tears
of contentment; my heart is dilated; and love does firmly unite me to you.
Wherefore do you vouchsafe the kiss of Peace so soon to such a Wretch as I am?
Why do you not leave me in bitterness of Soul, and trouble of Spirit, as a just
chastisement for my sins? Your Mercy will not so deal with me, but by wonderful
preventions of love, in the midst of my infirmities you redouble your favors
and consolations. O that I was all love, to serve you wholly by way of
gratitude! I would have all the world to see my Infidelities, to the end your
mercy may shine more glorious.

I know that the sight of my sin had so frozen my heart, as in a manner to make
me liveless: but, O my Jesus, you have provided an excellent remedy, seeing the
flames of divine love have set me all on fire to do your will. It Is a great
favor to be in this temper of Soul; but, dear Jesus, stay not here, visit my
heart again with the feelings of your humiliations, that your inscrutable
abjections may be its center, and render it in some sort conformable to yours:
and do this miracle of your Grace, that this faithless heart may become a
divine heart, by the infinite merit of your most precious Blood.

CHAP. XVII. Considerations upon the vileness of this corruptible body.
HOw is a Soul pleased to know that her body must return to dust! This
humiliation is the object of her complacency. When the illustrations of a
Divine Light clear up the understanding, then she knows that perfection
consists in a tendence to humiliation, wherein she meets with the exaltation of
God by the admirable contrivance of the Divine Wisdom.

O dust and ashes! you may be terrible to worldly Souls, but I am sure you
bring joy to those who (walking by the light of Faith and conduct of Grace)
love dearly the interests of God, and life eternal. The loss of worldly
Interests, Honor, Contentment, is painful to Nature, too much attached to her
self: but a Soul elevated by Grace, rejoices at the loss of her own interests,
to advance God's glory.

A Soul ought to be well-pleased that her body shall be crumbled to dust, and
(as it were) reduced to nothing, to exalt the Glory of God, and glorify his
Justice. A holy person much wondered how the Saints, who are powerful with God,
kept their bodies so long entire, not obtaining that they might be humbled by
putrefaction; because they knowing the inestimable value of humiliation, which
most glorifies God, ought, as it seems, to have procured it to their bodies.
But if God think best to glorify himself by preserving them from corruption,
his Divine Will is, and must be, the Rule of their desires.

Sometimes I have desired death as amiable, because it would give me free
access to enjoy God; but at present I have the spirit of annihilation. This
annihilation is a state above that of death, and by it we offer a perfect
Sacrifice. A Soul which seeks the Glory of God, desires death to enter into
this perfect annihilation. What is most horrible in Death, paleness, deformity,
noisomness, putrefaction, pleases her best, for these are companions of a
perfect annihilation, to humble her as much as possible. O death! how lovely
art thou to such a Soul!

It Is a strange thing, that the fire of Divine Love burns no brighter in our
hearts, upon the frequenting of the Sacraments. Oftentimes we exercise our
selves twice a day in mental Prayer, sometimes by holy Conferences, daily
Lectures and Considerations. Now I think the cause of this is, that we are sad,
dejected with abjections, which so chills the heart, that the fire of Divine
Love is stifled thereby: but when once humiliation is a joy unto us, the heart
presently becomes enflamed.

My Soul having a great degust of this life, feels a wonderful desire of death;
she never was more sensible than now of her Captivity and Prison in this mortal
body. She sighs after the liberty to see God, and enjoy him without any
disturbance whatsoever: for all created things do divert this happy exercise,
in which consists her felicity. Being a Prisoner in this Body, she is yet in
darkness and distractions, by eating, sleeping, several affairs and accidents.
O how is she crucified in being deprived of the full Embraces of her Beloved!
Quis me liberabit de corpore mortis hujus? This made St. Paul earnestly desire
to be freed from the Prison of this mortal body.

I admire the happiness of those who die in our Lord; and do wonder at the
blindness of of such who passionately desire this present life, and are taken
up so much with the care of the Body, Goods, Employments, which are so many
impediments of our converse with God, and Christian Perfection. O how
importunate is sensuality with us, and yet how contemptible is every thing that
is not God! We ought not to be discomforted at the loss of temporal things,
because thereby some chains of our Captivity are broken: Much less ought we to
be troubled to see our Body, the Prison of our Soul, to weaken by degrees, and
threaten death. Take courage; we shall soon see our desires accomplished, and
shortly we shall enjoy God in full possession.

This state of desires and languishings after God, is a state whereby we honor
him as our final happiness: and being so, he deserves by reason of his
excellence, that we should continually sigh after him. Such as have no love for
their final end, make no matter of it, and give too much evidence, that they
find their repose in something else, which is a most dreadful disorder. But
considering our happiness by death, methinks I see nothing more lovely than
crosses and abjections; which can only refresh a Soul panting after the full
possession of God, and sometimes so content with it, that she forgets the pain
of her banishment; seeing her self in a state wherein she may glorify God in
so transcendent in a manner; which is what she chiefly desires, aspiring to
enjoyment, without having regard to her proper satisfaction.

CHAP. XVIII. Considerations upon the natural inclinations we have to evil.
A Stone held in the Air, if let go, falls naturally to the ground by its own
weight: and it is no more matter of wonder, when we fall into imperfections. If
God leave us to our selves, we are presently in our own nothing, weakness and
infirmity. And if the Grace of God was not very great unto us, we should fall
more often.

They may be thought valiant, who bear up stoutly against the blast of strong
temptations. Alas! take us at the best, we are as frail as Glasses on a
Cupboard: If some are sooner broken, it is because they are more used, and found
in the hand of an ill manager. Those that stand still on the Cupboard, if they
had reason, would not brag of their strength, but only acknowledge, that they
have not been tried by occasions.

When the Grace of God keeps us from falling we ought not to take complacence
therein, as if we were better than others by reason of such Divine Favors; but
our content ought to be in the good pleasure of God, who is so munificent to
his Creatures, yea, the most unworthy. To be thus pleased only with God's will,
is also very necessary, when it is God's pleasure to leave a Soul to combat
with some singular imperfection a long time without victory. For it being the
will of God to leave a Soul thus to fight it out, she ought to be as well
content as if she was more elevated by Grace, seeing in this state she meets
with the Divine pleasure, which is the object of her complacency. Insomuch that
the Soul has no more inclination for one Grace than another, but indifferent to
all, being content to have her faults made known, to glorify God by the love
of abjection. Secret faults do us the greatest hurt; when manifested, if we
make good use of it, they may bring no small advantage to us.

I have at present a wonderful distaste of this Life, which is hardly a Life,
but a continual Death, because it deprives us of knowledge and and love in
perfection. O how this mortal life is a great punishment, and full of Crosses!
Here we sin, here we forget God, and run a hazard to lose him eternally. Love
here finds little nourishment, being fed with slender knowledge, sometimes much
clouded, and continual propensions to evil. Dear Savior! when will you deliver
me from the body of this death? This was the desire of St. Paul, which I take
the courage to make, being so much out of love with this miserable life.

The End of the first BOOK.
BOOK II. Of the Supernatural Life, which is the Life of all true Christians.
CHAP. I. The Idaea or description of the Supernatural Life.
WE can never attain Perfection by the sole conduct of human reason, which is
the light of Philosophers. Faith is the light of Christians, which teaches us
to renounce the ratiocinations of carnal prudence, to follow in simplicity a
Jesus Crucified. To observe the Commandments of God, as to their substance, is
to keep our selves in the bounds of human reason, to which they are
conformable: but to observe them in an elevated manner, so as our obedience may
be meritorious; to follow Divine Inspirations, in loving Contempts, Poverty,
Mortifications, and embrace Evangelical Counsels: To do this, we must be
elevated above our selves, and live a Supernatural Life.

See then what I understand by a Supernatural and Christian Life. To live
Christianly, is to live according to the Spirit of Jesus, according to the
Grace of Jesus, the New Man. A Grace far different from the Grace given to old
Adam, in the state of Innocence. A Life more holy and more eminent, and which
carries along with it different effects, and contrary proceedings.

The Grace of Adam did enable him to use the Creatures virtuously, and by the
holy use of Pleasures, Honors, and Riches, to arrive to his final happiness.
This was the way of the state of Innocence; from whence being fallen, the
infinite Wisdom has found out another way quite different, which is the way of
privations, of the Cross, of sufferings, of humiliations, in which Jesus Christ
marched from the first moment of his Incarnation, to his last breath on the
Cross.

This is the true foundation of the Christian Life; this is the true Principle,
this is the only way, out of which there is no Salvation, or Perfection.
Worldly men, and too many Christians, are ignorant of it; and not knowing
supereminentem Scientiam Jesu Christi, this supereminent Science of Jesus
Christ, they know nothing as they ought, because they know not Jesus crucified.
This Doctrine is harsh to flesh and blood, and wholly contrary to the Spirit of
the World. But the Saints have practiced it, and I must walk the same way,
except I will be very faithless, and renonnce the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

O my God! I will become a New Man in my Understanding, Will, Life,
Proceedings; and to this end I will change my Doctrine, my Principles and
Maxims. I will deny my self, and take up my Cross to follow Jesus; I will be
content with Poverty, Contempt, and Mortifications; my inclinations shall tend
this way for the future, and sufferings for your sake shall be delights unto
me. And if I do otherwise, it shall not be through wilfulness, but human
weakness. O good Jesus! give me to live with you a crucified Life on Earth,
that you may make me partaker of your glorified Life in Heaven. There is a time
for all things. This is a life of Sufferings, the other of Enjoyments.

O blindness of Christians, not to see the excellency of the Christian Life!
Some are busy to make themselves fit for worldly Employments; some are all for
Science; others for War, etc. but few make it their chief work to become good
Christians, as being of little value with them. O the ignorance of Christians,
not to see that all things besides are pure vanity!

CHAP. II. Of the high esteem we ought to have of the Christian Life.
JESUS on the day of his Ascension was elevated to the highest Heavens, where
he sits at the right hand of God: upon which my Soul rejoiced with her Savior
in admiration of his Tryumphs, and breathing out after him a thousand Praises
and Benedictions with all Saints and Angels, found motions in my self to follow
him, not to Heaven, but to Mount Calvary, not in his Tryumphs but Humiliations.
O my Jesus! (said she) that I was elevated above my self; that I could so keep
Nature under, as to live a supernatural Life, and tryumphing over human Reason,
and natural Maxims, I may repose quietly in the Bosom of your Cross, and there
live happily in that content the world knows not, with that peace which passes
all understanding.

I know that all the Patriarchs which you led in triumph, were justly ravished
with joys unspeakable; But if you please to raise me by Grace to a supernatural
Life, I will not envy their happiness. They are elevated to Enjoyment; but as
for me, I am for Privation, for Contempt and Miseries, which seem to me, being
suffered for your sake, dear Jesus, more delicious than Paradise. If I
persevere with Fidelity in a crucified Life, I will not trouble my self about
the life of Glory. But, alas! my frequent falls and failings, by reason of my
weakness and inconstancy, make me desire that Life, where is no fault or
imperfection.

The ascension of a Soul to Heaven, O how delightful is it! the ascension of a
Soul to a supernatural Life, O it is admirable! How happy are they who are
acquainted with it! O my God! clear up the eye of Faith in me, that I may
behold the wonders you work in Souls in this valley of tears. What if I say,
That a Soul is as happy and tryumphant in going out of her self, for the love
of the Cross to embrace abjection, as in going out of the World to possess
Heaven? So many sallies as she makes out of her self for the love of the Cross,
are so many glorious ascensions, which delight even God himself, the Saints and
Angels beholding it with admiration. The same Faith which opens my eyes to see
Jesus poor and abject, does assure me that the triumph of a Soul in
humiliations, is no less admirable than in Glory.

What can be done more to make us have the highest esteem of this supernatural
Life, when we see God the Father, among so many possible ways, has from all
eternity chosen this for his Son, while he lived upon Earth? How did his
well-beloved Son, who is infinitely wise, leave the bosom of his Father with
joy, to embrace this life with love and affection! How did the holy Spirit, who
reposed in his breast as the center of his more noble sentiments, carry him on
by most powerful inspirations to the Cross, Contempts, Poverty, Humiliations,
during the whole course of this mortal life!

What other way can those who belong unto Christ take to make themselves
conformable to him, but by treading in his steps? But when our blessed Savior
lived in the world this wonderful life, Mundus eum non cognovit, the world knew
him not, because he lay hid in poverty, pains and sufferings. In like manner
those who live a life most conformable to him, the world knows them not; for we
must have eyes cleared by Divine Irradiations to discover the excellency of
this state. And yet so much Glory and Grandeur is enveloped in the shadows of
this Life, that they who live it, do most glorify God, and exalt his Honor.

Take courage then, and let us tend to the perfection of Divine Love, which we
shall find in the solid practice of this supernatural Life. Let others do what
they please, we will follow the conduct of God's holy Spirit, and march stoutly
after Jesus Christ, abject and crucified.

O what happy advantages enjoys that Soul, to whom God is pleased to give a
view of this supernatural Life, a Life hidden and unknown to worldly men! It Is
of more worth than all the Treasures of the Earth We ought daily (according to
our abilities) to examine our selves, to the end to purify our hearts from all
affections that tend not to this supernatural Life. It resides in the superior
part of the Soul; and therefore we must not wonder, if the inferior part has
degusts and aversions from it.

We must expect, that Nature, Sense, Friends, the World, and ordinary
Christians, will keep a noise, and trouble our ears with many Arguments against
it: But to all this it is enough to answer in few words with St. Blandina,
Christiana sum, Christiana sum; I am a Christian. Let us say to such who
endeavor to divert us, I have undertaken to lead this supernatural Life; I
will never abandon it, maugre all the contradictions of worldly Maxims, and the
repugnances of sensual Nature. I know, to become a perfect Christian, I must be
turned up-side down, destroyed, annihilated, according to my natural
inclinations, hate in a manner all that the world naturally loves, Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, (yea, though innocent;) and love what the world naturally
hates, Poverty, Contempt and Sufferings. This is a great attempt, but we have
powerful helps; for we can do all things through Christ strengthening us.

CHAP. III. That we ought (with St. Paul) to convert our selves wholly to God.
I Am now resolved in good earnest to convert my self wholly to God, to be
taken solely with his Divine Beauty, and Infinite Goodness, forsaking all
Creatures, which heretofore have too much taken up my time and affections.

O my God! deal with me as you did with your Apostle; strike me down to the
ground; humble me; make me blind to all things but to You, who are in the
interior of my heart, beaming forth Lights, which discover sufficiently your
Divine presence. This makes me ask you, O my God, what you will have me to do?
And methinks you answer, That this manifestation of your presence in me, should
make such an extraordinary impression on me, as to change my life, and conform
my self wholly to your Divine will and pleasure.

Behold, it seems to me, this is what you would have me to do. First, Not to
persecute the sentiments and inclinations I have to a Christian Life, by taking
part with the struglings of old Adam in me. St. Paul persecuted Jesus Christ,
in persecuting the Primitive Christians; and I also persecute the same Jesus,
when I stifle the motions of Grace in me, and will not suffer my Soul to live
his life, which he did lead here for me to follow. Pardon me, good Jesus; I
will no longer persecute you by stifling your holy Inspirations. I desire to be
a Christian and your Disciple. I will profess Christianity in the face of the
Sun, and only be ashamed to live after the Law of old Adam.

To be a Christian, this is my Glory, this is my Life, this is my Delight.
Poverty, Contempts, Pains, Humiliations, I will no more be afraid of you, but
make much of you, seeing Jesus has loved you even to death.

To live this Life, we must become blind, and have no other light than what the
rays of Faith afford us For Nature cannot teach us the Grandeur Excellence, and
Eminency of Christianity. St Paul after his Conversion suffered a thousand
hardships; He was whipped, banished, despised, mocked, imprisoned, tormented,
used as if he was the filth and offscouring of the world: which is as much as
to say, St. Paul after his Conversion was a Christian to death; nothing could
deter him from living the life of Jesus Christ.

Let us then, O my Soul, be true Christians, that is, let us be content to live
in Sufferings, Persecutions, Mortifications, and the Ignominies of the Cross of
Jesus Christ. Let us embrace the wisdom of the Word Incarnate, and become as
Fools in the eyes of the world, who persecute true Christians; that is, those
who die to themselves, and all things else, to live to Jesus. Poor Christian
Life, little art thou known how ill art thou treated in the world! Thou
dwell'st in the lips of many, but few afford thee a place in their heart.

I am fully persuaded, that a Soul truly converted loves God entirely; that
this entire love of God is a perfect union with his goodness; that such a union
implies a universal detachment from the Creature; that such a detachment cannot
be got without the profession of Virtues, and among the rest, Poverty and
Self-denial, by which we are interiourly disengaged from earthly things; and
exteriourly, when God pleases, contentedly suffer miseries, sickness, loss of
Goods, and whatever the world naturally abhors as evil; but by the work of
Grace are for our greater good, because they advance our union with God.

When we abound with Riches and Honors, we live in a continual fear of having
too great an affection for them; but in sufferings a Soul possesses a stronger
assurance of Divine Love. Nothing but Grace can teach us these verities, and a
greater Grace can only make us relish and practice them: the weight of our
natural inclinations still hindering us from rising to so great Perfection.

When we give up our selves to God, with resolutions daily to advance in
Virtue, we can more easily conceive what this perfection is, than practice it.
However, let us take courage, nothing is impossible to God, and we shall find
(doubtless) this Jewel by a perfect abnegation: that is, possessing nothing,
not the very means of serving God, but with a spirit of resignation To follow
Jesus naked on the Cross, we must divest our selves of all Creatures, that we
may be solely united to him.

Yea, dear Jesus, my desire is only to be for you; my resolution is to serve
you, and in what manner you please, be it by action, or by suffering, or
contemplation. I will be attached to nothing but You; my desire is to be
dis-engag'd from all Creatures, to find You, and possess You; as my only
happiness.

CHAP. XV. Of the Alliance we must make with the holy Folly of the Cross.
AFter many illustrations of Grace, which have cleared up to me the beauty of
the sacred Folly of the Cross; after many proposals and reviews: I have at last
espoused it; saying with fervor the same words which Christ used to his Spouse
in the Canticles; Sponsabo te in aeternum: My Friend, my Spouse, my Sister, I
have espoused thee for ever.

Methinks I say these words, for ever, but yet faintly, my infinite frailties
making me fearful I may become an inconstant Lover. Notwithstanding, I say for
ever with a real heart, in hope, that by virtue of that immense Love whereby
the Divinity has for ever espoused our human Nature, and this same Humanity
has espoused the Cross, sufferings and abjections, our blessed Savior will
vouchsafe me some part of the Grace of this Divine Alliance, to enable me to
walk his way, and live his life, in annihilation* humiliations and self-denial.

Let us then, O my Soul, live this life of the Son of God; any other life is
but a real death. Jesus has espoused the folly of the Cross, and it is his will
I shall do so likewise; and shall not I do his will? O my God! I am content to
be deprived of what the world loves and desires; leave but me the folly of the
Cross, I shall be rich enough. O amiable folly! he who knows thee, cannot but
love thee: What a fool have I been, to embrace thee no sooner!

Behold, my Soul, thou art engaged, and this engagement makes thee fearful:
Quare tristis es anima mea, and quare conturbas me? But why, O my Soul, art
thou disquieted? It Is true, for the future thou must suffer injuries, affronts,
pains of body, troubles of mind, be content with annihilations and abjections;
be pleased with disgraces; be the play-game of Worldlings, and esteemed as a
Fool; yea, to be ill spoken of by some Devotes: Thou must not be cast down with
ill successes, whether thou be in fault, or no: Thou must drink deep of the Cup
of humiliations; see others exalted, and love to be humbled; yea, though by
spiritual Desolations. Take courage, O my Soul, we can do all things through
Christ strengthening us.

I confess the greatness of my engagement would have quite cast me down, being
sensible of my own wonderful weakness, if I had not been supported by the
infinite mercy and goodness of God. Wherefore I must love the Cross, which I
have espoused for ever. I shall find my self well enough in this alliance, if I
do but continue faithful; for the more I converse with it, I shall the more
discover its Beauty; my fears will vanish, my passions will be appeased; and
being in peace, my Soul will be enlarged, and melt in love toward this Spouse;
which, though black, is wonderful comely.

If I love the Cross, it must needs be an effect of pure Grace, my own
frailties bearing witness: but at present I find my self in great disposition
of love. O how weak is my Soul, when left to her self! O how strong is she,
when supported by Grace! O my Jesus! it is your love, and your example that
makes me love the sacred folly of the Cross, which you have so dearly loved, as
to die in its embraces.

When I consider a God crucified, methinks I discover certain rays of Beauty,
which make the horror of Mount Calvary seem wonderful amiable; and I can hardly
be satisfied with looking on this lovely object, and say; O my Jesus! how
delightful is it to see the beauty of a God dying for men! This beauty indeed
is not in his sacred visage, for that was all disfigured with blood and
buffettings; but in that God was pleased to die on the Cross for men, and the
eternal Father took complacence in this beauty. I cannot explicate what is this
beauty, unless by the effect it produces in me; for verily my Soul sees nothing
besides this to captivate my sight: Jesus only in his humiliations and
sufferings on the Cross, commands my eyes and my heart.

When I consider the other states of the life of Jesus; his Incarnation,
Nativity, Solitude, Conversation, and the like; I find in them a beauty invites
me to behold them with delight, because I discover certain irradiations to beam
from the obscurities and humiliations of these states, which are very
ravishing. I often say with my self, How lovely is the abjection of this state!
How is the poverty of that admirable! And in all I perceive the beauties of a
sacred Folly, which the infinite Wisdom would make use of, to confound the
false Maxims of worldly Prudence. O what a favor have you in mercy done for
me, O my God, to discover to me the beauty of this Divine Folly, which to
worldly men seems nothing but deformity! But what abundance of Grace do you
vouchsafe me, by enabling me to make so strict an alliance with it! I have
espoused it; I will live with it; I will die with it; and nothing shall ever
divorce me from it.

CHAP. V. How we ought to conform our Interior to that of Jesus Christ.
OUr Interior ought to be conformable to that of Jesus Christ, that as his
Members we may be governed and animated by his Spirit, that having part of his
Grace as Christians, part of his light from his Doctrine, part of his
inclinations to put us upon practice, we may be so transformed into Jesus, as
to have a perfect union with him. And this is that wherein lies the excellency
of a Christian; this is that which makes Christians indeed, and to do and
suffer as becomes Christians.

It Is a strange thing to see what little knowledge we have of the Christian
life. Some who have left Nature, to follow Grace, suppose it consists in doing
much for God, and for the good of our Neighbor, by preaching instructing,
giving Alms, and suchlike charitable exercises. This is good indeed; but we
must form the Interior Christian, and then we shall do best for others what
God calls us to undertake.

The Interior consists in Illustrations inward Teachings, Sentiments, and
affections of the Soul. If those be high and elevated, the Interior is so
likewise. But the Soul of Jesus had the most elevated illustrations possible of
the excellency of Self-denial, Poverty, Pains, Abjections, and the Cross; and
from thence a singular love and esteem for them. These irradiations and
affections were infused into his most beautiful Soul, the first moment of his
Incarnation, and continued to his last breath on the Cross.

The eternal Father, who by this New Adam would repair his Glory, which was
obscured by Old Adam's fall; amongst the infinity of means which lay treasured
up in the bosom of his Omniscience and Omnipotency, chose this of the Cross,
which his Son (made Flesh) embraced, cherished, loved, and put in execution all
his lifetime; esteeming Contempts, Crosses, Sufferings, as things great and
excellent; preferring the interest of the Glory of his Father before the
satisfactions of his sacred Humanity, which had a natural repugnance to them.
By how much the more then that a Soul is partaker of the Divine Spirit and
Interior of the Son of God, by so much the more she esteems and loves the
Cross, and consequently does more glorify God the Father. For, to suffer, is
to make a continual Sacrifice of our Pleasures and Interests, uniting our
selves to the design the Son of God had by suffering to repair the Glory of his
Father.

Wherefore, when a Soul ceases to value and love the Cross and Humiliations,
she is no more conform to the Soul of Jesus, and so does not glorify God the
Father in a high manner: but when she feels in her self a high esteem and love
of the Cross, she highly glorifies the eternal Father, who takes great delight
in her, in that she resembles his well-beloved Son.

When a Soul is enlightened with these irradiations, she sees her Glory is to be
despised, because her Glory is to procure the Glory of God, which she does most
by humiliations. She finds her delight to be in suffering, because her delight
is to honor the eternal Father, which is best effected by this means. A
faithful Soul will never part with an esteem and love of the Cross, as to the
Interior, because her desire is to please God, and we best please him by
humiliations.

Let us well ground our selves in this exercise of the designs of God, who
would have us conformable to his Son, and consequently to have a love for
sufferings and abjections. Whatever disposes us to this conformity, ought to be
precious to us; as, few natural Talents, Sickness, ill successes, and the like.
The Spirit of the World and Nature find therein their punishment; but the
Spirit of Jesus Christ takes pleasure therein, and so advances a faithful Soul
to Perfection.

We are not yet spiritualized, if we be not faithful to the love of sufferings
and abjections. And we are not faithful herein, if we are not content with
those things that humble us, and cause abjection.

A right prospect of abjection and sufferings is supernatural and delicate, and
requires time to bring it to perfection; and must be first tried in our selves,
before we extend it to others.

As for my particular, when I see a person in great misery and poverty, I am
not much troubled at it, because I consider the real good that Soul may procure
to her self by this abjection. On the contrary, I am in fear for those who are
advanced to Honors, and have great natural abilities, for the difficulty they
must needs find to curb the Spirit of Nature and the World, and bring them off
from the love of these things, which are so powerful in them, and hinder in
them the love of Jesus Christ.

Let us therefore remember, that the purity of Virtue consists in a faithful
tendance to abjection and suffering; and by how much a Soul is more faithful
herein, the greater advancements she makes in Virtue. Abjection being as the
center of the Soul, the more she is humbled, the nearer she draws to her
repose, and by consequence has a greater feeling of God in inward peace. A
Peace that the World nor Nature can ever give us; a Peace that passes all
understanding.

CHAP. VI. The sublimity of the Christian Life.
NOthing but God made man, poor, annihilated, sacrificed, could honor God
according to his greatness. The designs of the eternal Father to this end are
admirable, full of Divine Wisdom, of unspeakable Love and Mercy toward Man and
most ardent Zeal for his own Glory. O the wonderful economy that discovers it
self in all the mysteries of the Word Incarnate!

O the ineffable mystery of Jesus! By you the eternal Father is loved,
glorified, honored, and his Justice satisfied to the utmost rigor. In this
mystery is contained an inexplicable Commerce and Trafique of God the Father
with his Son, the Interest of his Glory, in the Salvation of mankind. The will
of the eternal Father was, that his Son should be incarnate, circumcised, poor,
scorned and crucified; and the Son of God in all these states of his life,
intended thereby to render to his Father all the humiliations, respects, love,
and adoration, which were due unto him. These are the annihilations which so
much elevate and exalt the Christian Reliligion; to these she owes her grandeur
and excellence.

O amiable, eminent, and excellent Religion! how unknown art thou to wordly
men, who taste no sweetness, but in sensual pleasures! O Christian Religion! how
art thou admirable! how art thou ineffable! whose chief business is to employ
your Children with the Divine Trafique of the eternal Father, with his Son
Incarnate. When thy Heavenly Lights shine upon a Soul, she sees the deceit, the
vanity, and pitiful baseness of the thoughts of those men who love not God, nor
aim at his Glory. O my Soul! how wretched will thou make thy self, if thou
follow thy sensual appetite, and walk not in the ways of Jesus Christ! But this
we cannot do of our selves, but by Grace and Power of the same Jesus, who is
our hope, and only helper.

We ought to bear no less respect to the Maxims of a supernatural Life, than to
Jesus Christ, who has established them; seeing we ought to believe that they
are full of Divine Wisdom, and ineffable Sanctity. To have no esteem for
poverty, contempt. and humiliations, is to undervalue the Wisdom of Jesus
Christ. Some are so brutish, as to be led only by sensuality; others follow
only the light of Reason and human Prudence: but neither of them know the
excellency of Christianity, but such only who are conducted by the light of
Faith.

O Life supernatural! how sublime art thou! How do thou so elevate a Soul, as
to become blind to things here below, yea, to her self, and to see nothing but
God in her by the rays of Grace. Be pleased, O Divine Spirit of Jesus, to
bestow upon us some part of this holy life, which the world can neither
receive, nor know: Quem mundus non potest accipere, nec scit eum, as St. John
testifies. The world cannot receive it, being wholly taken up with Creatures;
nor can know it, being blinded with sensuality. What a malediction is this! But
what a happiness is it to know and embrace this supernatural life!

This was wrought in the hearts of the Apostles, who returned with joy to be
found worthy to live this life; that is, to be whipped and despised for the name
of Jesus. Verily, if there was nothing to suffer here, I know not why we should
desire to live here. We should endeavor to imitate that great Saint who
suffered a greater Martyrdom among Roses and Suavities, than by Racks and
Tortures. Worldly pleasures are a kind of torment to a Soul that loves Jesus
Christ crucified.

Let us take a resolution, O my Soul, not to be pleased but with the Cross, and
when that does not relish, let us please our selves with our own annihilation,
seeing the Creature is nothing in effect, but what she is in the sight of God.
But she is no more in his eyes, than inasmuch as she is a Christian; and she is
no more a Christian, than inasmuch as she loves this supernatural life. While
then we are too sensible of a suffering condition, we have no great share of
the spirit of Christianity; that is, of the spirit of Jesus, abject, suffering,
and annihilated.

CHAP. VII. There are diverse degrees of this Supernatural Life.
GOD has been very gracious to us, to draw us out of nothing; but more gracious
and merciful, in withdrawing us from sin, and the occasions of displeasing him:
But the choicest of his favors is, to advance us from a common, to a
supernatural Life: That is, when the eternal Father does lead us into the
states of the mortal life of Jesus, by abjections, sufferings and
annihilations; which is the choicest of his Mercies and Favors on Earth,
because thereby we bring to him the greatest Glory.

A Soul is not all at once elevated to the perfection of this life. But as soon
as she beholds the beauty thereof, being ashamed to be so much attached to
worldly things, she is taken with the excellency of this admirable way, and
begins to be mortified to her self and the world, aspiring after a profound
oblivion and contempt of all Creatures, and desiring to be in privations, the
better to curb her sensual inclinations, and practice Virtue. Thus the Soul
proceeds in the purgative way of this supernatural Life.

The Soul thus purged, advances to partake of the Divine Illuminations of this
Life, and becomes in a manner clear-sighted thereby, her understanding
receiving many illustrations and discoveries of its excellency and grandeur.

She sees the wonders couched in the mystery of Jesus, poor, suffering, and
annihilated. She perceives the eminency of those sanctified Souls who have
followed Jesus in his humiliations. She begins to apprehend, that a Soul which
has no knowledge nor esteem of this life, is buried in darkness. She is amazed
at the blindness of Christians, in being besotted on empty vanities. And
lastly, she perceives that there is enjoyment in suffering, and that by crosses
and privations we come to union with God.

The Soul thus illuminated, enters into the Unitive state of this life, and
tends to a continual union with God, whom she sees present in her Interior.
Nothing can hinder this union, as long as the Soul finds enjoyment in
sufferings. This proceeding of grace in a Soul is not extraordinary.

God behaves himself in a Soul, as a King in a Kingdom newly conquered, who
kills and destroys all that oppose the establishment of his Dominion.
Notwithstanding the Prince hereby seems to put all things in disorder, it is but
to procure peace, and to rule without disturbance by the conquest of his
Enemies. God proceeds in like manner: As soon as he enters into a Soul to set
up his Kingdom, he makes a havoc of all his Enemies by penetential rigor, to
bring the Soul wholly to his Obedience.

Then he establishes the Maxims of his Policy, and convinces the Soul how good
and just they are by the following illustrations.

First, That the greatest Treasure on Earth is, to have part of the Poverty of
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, That the greatest Glory is, to be partaker of his abjections.

Thirdly, That the greatest Joy is, to suffer pains with him.

Fourthly, That the Life of Christianity is, to deny our selves, take up our
Cross, and follow Jesus. That when we cease to die to our selves, and crucify
our Lusts, we leave off to be Christians, and die in a manner to Christianity,
because we lose the Spirit thereof.

Fifthly, That there is nothing more amiable, more precious, and more honorable
in the world, than to imitate Jesus poor and abject, seeino this state was most
precious in the eyes of God his Father.

Finally, The Soul being persuaded of these verities, which are in a manner
evident unto her, though by the obscure light of Faith, has no love for any thing
upon Earth, nor any pretensions but those of Jesus Christ; and these were only
to suffer, and be annihilated, to perfect in his Person the designs of his
eternal Father, by dying on the Cross.

Then she absolutely forsakes her self, to give her self up wholly to the
Maxims and Spirit of Jesus Christ, uniting and conforming her self, as much as
may be, to his states; and her thoughts are far different from others
sentiments. And this is not to be wondered at, seeing St. Peter says of
Christians, that they are Gens sancta, Genus electum, regale Sacerdotium; a
holy Nation, a chosen People, a royal Priesthood, to offer to God Sacrifices of
good Odor; which is by crucifying themselves with Jesus Christ, who is a
continual Sacrifice. O the sublime state of a Soul in this supreme degree of a
supernatural life! Alas! the sentiments of Nature do too much take up our
hearts, so that those of a supernatural life have little or no place in them.
What a misery is this!

CHAP. VIII. The practice of a Supernatural Life.
WE without cause esteem our selves spiritual, if we march not straight without
reserve by the ways of Jesus Christ, or pretend to any thing on Earth then to
be conformable to him. This does not consist in sole speculation; for we can
never do it better, than when the occasions of abjection and contempt present
themselves, to embrace them heartily, as the most necessary means to make us
conformable to Jesus Christ.

God the Father cannot praedestinate us to be conform to the Image of his Son,
but he must prepare for us from all Eternity many occasions of contempt and
abjection, which time brings forth. Our fidelity lies in complying with these
occasions, to follow Jesus without reserve, by his Light and Power. I will tell
you how it must be done.

We ought before all things to have an eye to Jesus abject and despised, repose
our selves in his bosom, abide there with delight, and then make upon our
selves some short and sharp reflections. Reflections that may form in us the
Image of Jesus Christ, without any great trouble to our selves. These, when
done to the purpose, are as so many powerful Thunderbolts to beat down our
natural inclinations, and destroy the Maxims of human Prudence, according to
which we commonly square our actions. Such Reflections breath into us a
supernatural wisdom, which gives us a relish of the proceedings of Jesus Christ
crucified, so little known by worldly men.

But perhaps it would be better to regard nothing but the infinite beauty of
Jesus in the state of his abjections, without making any reflections on our
selves, or busying our selves with our own miseries; considering only the
example of Jesus exposed to our view, and the power we receive from his grace
to follow him. It is enough, if he vouchsafe to cast a glance of his Divine
rays on our natural repugnances, to quell and conquer them. O my Jesus! I will
regard you in your humiliations, and then you will look propitiously upon me,
and that is sufficient. O Jesus, annihilated in your sufferings! make me, as it
were, lost in my self, by suffering with you, that I may be absorpt in you, and
by you in God.

Shall the men of this world be more provident than the children of Light?
What? shall they have a care of their affairs, and I neglect my business? I
will enrich my self, as well as they, with my own ruins; and from my
humiliations I will draw great aids and succors, to follow Jesus; for my
resolution is to march after him absolutely, without reserve.

To do any great matters in the ways of the world, we must have much Wealth,
many Friends, and good success. To do great matters in the ways of God, it will
suffice to be poor and despicable, to have Enemies, and ill successes: For the
more a Soul suffers, the more she does great matters in God's service; the more
she is deprived of the Creatures, the more is she enriched with the Creator.
Therefore she must work as hard for poverty of Spirit and Self-denial, as
worldly men do labor to enrich themselves according to Nature, and must employ
all means and Motives to this effect. I will set down some of them,

It Is a good Motive, or means, to renounce all Creatures, and our selves, by a
spirit of denudation; saying with great fervor and affection, Away Creatures;
get hence from me, and leave a place in my heart for God alone

2. It Is a good Motive, to do this by a spirit of Poverty; for it is not
possible to follow Jesus poor and abject, unless in due circumstances we be
willing to leave all things for Jesus sake, and become poor to follow him. Let
us therefore be content to quit all things joyfully, and be glad to have
nothing, to possess God himself alone.

3. 'Tisae good Motive, to die to all things by a spirit of abjection, What
greater happiness is there, O my Soul, than to live in humiliation, seeing this
was the life of God upon Earth? To be despised with Jesus, is a state of
beatitude. Worldly Prosperity is a hindrance to our happiness.

4. It Is a good Motive, to abandon all things by a spirit of oblation,
sacrificing and annihilating our selves sincerely, to pay homage to the
Infinite Majesty of God, with such a confidence in him, so as to rely never
more on any Creature. Quid enim mihi est in Caelo, aut a te quid volui super
Terram, Deus cordis mei? O my God! shall any Creature take part of my heart
with you, when all is yours? If it was possible to love you too much, I might
give place to something else; but seeing I am infinitely below my duty in that
particular, what Creature can pretend to have the least part with you?

CHAP. IX. Of the liberty we enjoy by the exercise of the Supernatural Life.
It Is wonderful to see the great liberty which a Soul enjoys by the exercises
of a supernatural life. When the illuminations of this state irradiate a Soul
thoroughly, she enters into a new region of light, full of Peace and Love,
marvelous large and spacious, in which she lives in high union with God. A
union which is not so liable to vicissitudes and disturbances as formerly;
because accidental occurrences, as sickness, disgraces, etc. do not hurt such a
Soul, by reason they make no strong impression in her; and by consequence,
being become less sensible, she is not easily diverted from the supernatural
Object of her love.

Yea, such a Soul improves hindrances and divertisements to her greater
recollection and increase of Divine Love; because in this state she is
dis-engag'd from the Creature, and so freed from fear of miseries, which she
can cheerfully embrace, as the occasions of her happiness; whereby she enters
into a perfect liberty, and great purity of Virtue.

I could never well understand what that is, which is called Purity of Virtue;
but now I see it is the state of a supernatural life, wherein the Soul lives no
more in her self, and of her self, and for her self; but in God, and of God,
and for God; being wholly separated from the Creatures, and united to God.
Alas! how is this poor Soul afflicted to do things so much below her self, in
this high condition! For oftentimes she must act according to her natural
inclinations, and the dictates of pure reason; which affords her matter of
sighs and languishings after her Beloved.

This is that which kindles in her breast an ardent desire to be dissolved, and
leave this earthly Tabernacle; wherein by the common misery of mankind, she
lives a life displeasing to her self; for being not wholly for God, as she
desires, it seems to her a kind of death. And seeing she cannot continually
live this supernatural life without vicissitudes, it is, as it were, a death
unto her. A Death unknown, to sensual men, but such that are spiritual are very
sensible thereof. O Jesus! deliver me from this life of mortality, seeing here
I cannot live your life of purity, in comparison of which all other lives are
but death and corruption.

To see so clearly the excellencies of a life so lovely, and not to be able to
live but little of it, considering my frailty, makes me resent my misery, and
acknowledge, dear Jesus, how necessary your Grace is for me. O how great is the
dependence which my Soul has on your mercy! it is so mighty and essential
dependence, that words cannot sufficiently express it. However, this comforts
me herein, that it gives you all the Glory of the Interior beauty in the Soul;
which is a work more magnifies your Power, Bounty and Wisdom, than the whole
outward work of the Creation. Your greatest wonders, dear Savior, are secret
and hidden.

A Soul that lives this supernatural life above her inclinations, does more set
forth the great power of God, than to elevate the Heavens above the Earth; for
this is as miraculous, as to elevate the Earth above the Heavens. This makes
me, O my God, desire to live this blessed life, that I may thereby bring
greater Glory to your Name. Assist me powerfully with your Grace; for if I be
once left to my self, I shall relapse into my natural weakness, which is but a
mere Nothing and Infirmity.

Some trouble themselves too much in philosophising on this spiritual life,
which is needless; it being enough to say, The Spirit of Jesus must be the
Spirit of my Interior; it is He by whom I must live this life, and act
accordingly: and so free our selves from other considerations, which may hinder
our liberty to follow this light; and fall faithfully to practice, on the
occasions of Crosses, Contempts, and Disgraces which happen to us in this life.

I ought daily to endeavor after purity, although I cannot attain the highest
practice, because the course of my life, wherein God has placed me, will not
permit it, nor does exact of me to attempt of my self the grand effects of
purity, lest I should be discouraged by failing in the enterprise. This is only
the perfection of the greatest Saints, and herein we must give our selves up to
the conduct of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, who being infinitely wise, we need
not fear having him for our Leader.

But, as we ought not to be too rigorous, so we must not be too faint-hearted
in the ways of perfection, but apply our selves with love and resolution to all
occasions, by suffering peaceably, and with contentation, whatever injuries we
may receive from others, in seeking too much their own interest.

All sufferings are to be entertained with love, but especially what we suffer
by Injustice. For is not this that which the Son of God has done principally
upon Earth, by suffering innocently? Do not therefore say, I would suffer this
injury, if he that does it, had the least reason for it: for this proceeds from
self-love and passion. It may well be, that he has no reason to do you this
injury, but Divine Reason and the spirit of Christianity teach you to bear it
patiently? It Is good to suffer thus, and in this to imitate Jesus; is pleasing
to him.

And seeing this exercise of the supernatural life does bring with it a
universal Peace; and this Peace cannot be preserved, without suffering
contentedly all injuries whatsoever, this excellent life does teach us holy
Patience. Now, this Patience preserves this Peace, and this Peace brings with
it an admirable Liberty, and Resolution to mind principally the One thing
necessary; which is, to give up our selves to God and his direction.

CHAP. X. Our greatest happiness on Earth is, to profess the way of
Christianity.
I Have a great resentment of joy and thankfulness, to see my self a Member of
Christ's Church, and in the number of the Faithful. I have a sensible taste of
this happiness, which is incomparable. O my God! what shall I return unto you,
for having prevented me with this signal mercy? why have you chosen me out
among so many thousands? Alas! this is the excess of your sole bounty to me. To
be a Child of the Church, O what a happiness is this? It Is of more worth than
to be Monarch of the whole world. The Church is the Congregation of the
Faithful; that is, of those who believe and confess Jesus Christ, and have no
other Maxims nor Sentiments than his. O my Soul! let us then live as becomes
our Profession, that Jesusmay live in us, according to his holy will and
inclinations.

To be a Member of Christ's Church, is to be a person who ought to have an
affection for humiliations and crosses; to be well content not to thrive in the
world, and to advance in Virtue by opprobrious usage and contradictions. What a
misery is it, to see us live so little in the exercise of Christianity! We
account it an honor to be in authority, to be well descended, to have a
generous spirit; but to be a Christian, we are afraid to own it by our
actions. O the beauty that adorns our Christian Profession! How wonderful is
it, and yet how little esteemed by us! I shall be very honorable and happy to
keep that with me, when other things are gone and vanished.

O how amiable are the Maxims of a supernatural life! in what an excellent
order do they put all things! They give to every one what is their due; to God
all Honor and Glory, and to me a wretched sinner Contempt and Confusion. For I
ought to consider my self as a center of all miseries and deserved punishments.

God is the Center and Object of all the adorations of Men and Angels; Glory is
his just tribute, but to me belongs confusion. If I should be beaten
disgracefully, I ought to take it with contentation, to see Justice so well
done to me on this occasion. And if I was truly animated with the spirit of
Christianity, I ought as much desire to be humbled, as worldings thirst after
Honors, Praises and Preferments.

It Is a supernatural disorder, not to love Ignominies, and not to endeavor the
destruction of our corrupted Nature. Jesus has built his Mystical Body on the
ruins of our Natural Body: and we cannot form in us the same life of Jesus.
without the ruin of ours; that is to say, our natural life, according to our
depraved inclinations.

Poverty, Pains Contempts, your dear Companions, good Jesus, make sometimes my
heart ache; and then again they refresh me, breathing forth such sweet Perfumes
as cheer my spirits. A Perfume that purifies and calms my Soul into a fit
temper to converse with you. I will now wonder no more that your Spouses run
after you in the Odor of your Perfumes. A Perfume that does strengthen me to
accomplish the desires I have to be conformable to you. My heart dilates it
self with hope to see that happy day in this life, when I shall be free from
all molestation of Creatures, and have some participation of the poverty and
abjections of Jesus crucified.

We cannot live here without some Director or other; for either the Humanity of
Jesus will direct us, or the Humanity of Adam will govern us. If we live the
life of Christianity, the First will conduct us, and impart to us such
directions as his holy Soul received from the Divinity, which are all for the
Cross and humiliations. If we love only a human life, the Other will guide us
in the ways of self-love.

It Is as great a miracle for a Soul to live a supernatural life, as for a stone
to elevate it self into the air: because the corruption of sin has made the
Soul so heavy, that of her self she cannot but tend downward to sin and misery.
This is that which magnifies the power of Grace in us. So that it is a
prodigious vanity to boast of our good actions, when being done by the
supernatural power of Grace, they are not the fruits of human Nature.

If a Soul loses the sight of the light of Faith, she will soon lose her self
in the Mist of self-love. If she does not live in a continual mortification by
curbing her natural appetites, she must needs fall into superfluities and
imperfections.

The sweetness and joy that a Soul receives from austerities, crosses, poverty,
denudation of Creatures, makes her spiritual, peaceful, cheerful, and affords
her solid content and satisfaction. The content and delights she receives from
sensual pleasures, though lawful, as Meat and Drink, temporal successes,
Reputation, etc. make her carnal, and afford her but a false peace and vain
joy: and instead of elevating her to contemplation, do more or less depress her
to sensuality.

CHAP. XI. That Truth is only found in the Spirit of Christianity; the rest is
Vanity.
WHen the beams of the light of Faith are darted into a Soul, they discover to
her, that there is nothing true indeed but the verities of Christianity, which
Jesus came from Heaven to teach us, and all the rest but deceit and vanity. O
what happiness is it for a Soul to be thus irradiated. Then she begins to know
how she has been enveloped with darkness, and dwelt in obscurity. O what joys
do now refresh her! How rich and glorious is she in perceiving that what she
thought to be true Riches, Glory, and Joy, is false and counterfeited, and in
reality but poverty, infamy and sorrow.

These heavenly Illustrations do open her eyes to see perfectly the vanities of
this world, which now she values not; but Jesus is her only joy, her life and
verity. Whatsoever is not Christian, (that is to say, according to the Maxims
of Christianity) she esteems now as folly, death, and perdition: and what to
the world and the flesh is folly, death, and perdition, she accounts to be
wisdom, life, and the greatest gain. O when the rays of this light do pierce a
Soul, how on a sudden becomes she knowing, content, and elevated!

It Is hardly credible how much such a Soul is alienated from her self, and
whatsoever is not God. She sees so much wisdom in the folly of Saints, and so
much beauty in their miseries, that all the allurements of the world cannot win
her affections. For having been taken up with the super-eminent knowledge of
Jesus Christ, she cannot understand why she should dread crosses and
mortifications; nor how it is possible for men to apply themselves so much to
the affairs of the world, and so little to the concerns of Eternity. Carnal
prudence believes these Maxims to be Chimaera's, but in reality they are solid
Verities. She thinks the contrary Maxims to be Truths, which in effect are but
mere Illusions and Vanities. What more convincing evidence can be given hereof,
than the example of the Son of God?

The sacred Humanity of Jesus entered into the highest and most eminent alliance
with God that ever was, or can be, by being united hypostatically to the
Divinity: And so being united to an infinite Verity, without doubt by this
alliance entered into the possession of all real good. But what was the
consequence of this alliance? The greatest humiliation that ever was. What
profit arrived to Jesus Christ thereby? He became the most abject, persecuted
despised of all Creatures. And why all this? Because being so strictly allied
to Verity, he could not but have the possession of all veritable goods
belonging to his mortality; and being so intimately united to the Divinity, he
entered into a strict obligation to procure the interests of his Father. But the
best means to repair the Glory of God offended by the pride of sinners, was
humiliations, sufferings, annihilation. The sacred Humanity therefore would
suffer and die, to repair the injuries done to God, and to purchase Souls for
him, that might adore and love him to all Eternity.

This being considered, let men tell me that Honors, Pleasures, and Riches,
are true goods to be desired; and I will answer with the Psalmist Omnis homo
mendax, that every man's a Liar. I will hold close to the eternal Verity, who
has taught me by his words and example, That pains, poverty, humiliations, are
the true goods that a Christian ought to esteem and love above all things. But
it is a very hard matter to dive into the bottom of this Verity; it must be a
great and powerful supernatural illumination can only do it. O how happy is
that Soul which sees sufficiently to disern Verity from Vanity.

A great number of Christian Verities lie hidden to us, because we acquiesce in
only human appearances, which are vanities, and cloak real truths from our
eyes. Jesus was born in a poor Stable, under the appearance of the Edict of
Augustus Caesar; nevertheless this was in verity the design of the eternal
Father hidden under this Edict. The Emperor executed his vanity, and the
eternal Father at the same time executed the verity of his Divine Decrees.

Herod made Jesus fly into Egypt; we judge he did it for fear he should take
his Crown from him: And 'twas in effect the eternal Father who crowned himself
in bringing about his sacred Ordinations by such mysterious proceedings. O how
the exercise of a Christian Life, and the study of its mysteries, discovers to
a Soul admirable Verities! And besides this all is but vanity.

CHAP. XII. There are many ways in Christianity, all which are according to the
Life of Jesus Christ.
It Is a great pity to see how we trouble our Brains with nice subtleties, and
daily find out some pretense or other, to excuse us from the practice of this
supernatural life, as having not proper qualifications for it. Now there is no
condition, for which Jesus has not formed a Model for a supernatural life.

1. For he himself has led diverse lives on Earth. One was a life of a
sufferings, chiefly at the time of his passion.

2. Another was a hidden, unknown, despised life, almost all his days, except
the last years, when the Glory of his Father, and the Salvation of Mankind, did
necessitate his manifestation.

3. Another was an illuminative life, by his Divine Sermons, when he preached
as our Doctor, to instruct the People.

4. Another was a liberal and charitable life, as when he fed his Auditors
miraculously in the Wilderness, and healed all manner of Diseases.

4. Another was a life of converse, as when he treated with the Jews to bring
them to Faith and Repentance.

6. Another was a life all of sweetness and extraordinary illuminations, as on
Mount Tabor.

7. Another was a life of Contemplation, as when he passed whole nights in
prayer.

8. Another was a life of mortification and fasting, as when tempted by Satan
in the Desert.

Now, Jesus led all these lives so different, to instruct Christians, who are
his Members, and in them shall live to the worlds end; so as they may truly say
with St. Paul, Vivo ego, jam non ego, etc. I live; yet not I, but Jesus who
lives in me. Jesus has honored all these states of his life in his Church on
Earth: Some has chosen to honor his suffering life, and in a manner it seems
they are proper for nothing else. Others he chooses to honor his abject life,
and in this they are excellent; never ceasing to glorify highly the abjections
of Jesus Christ, by being well-pleased with their humiliations for the love of
God. God has in his House those sorts of Servants, who are thought by some to
be unprofitable, being neither proper to suffer much, nor procure the good of
others, spiritual or temporal; and so are despised, and of no repute, but
judged a charge to Religion, and nothing serviceable; and it is thought a mighty
matter to endure them.

O Divine Light of Abjection! descend from Heaven, and enlighten poor Souls.
What changes will thou make in them? What glory will they return to God? O the
blindness of some who are spiritual, not to know how to be content with the
portion that Jesus gives them, and live the life which he assigns them! It Is
decreed in Eternity, that I shall live a life of abjection, and I will needs
live an active life, not proper for me.

O Christian, whoever thou art! it matters not what life thou live, provided
thou do honor the life of Jesus* If thou desire nothing but the will of
God, any one of his ways will content thee. If thou be well mortified and
annihilated in thy self, thou will be content to glorify God so much, and in
that manner as best pleases him. A hidden life glorifies God as well as an
active; have a care in desiring one for the other, under a false zeal to do
more for God Perhaps herein thou secretly seek after Fame and Splendour; but
this is rather to desire the Honor of the life of Jesus, than purely the life
of Jesus Christ: A purity where Nature cannot find what she desires. O the
happy state of denudation, which ravishes the Angels with admiration! A Soul
that has mounted to this point, has left all Creatures below her, and can
truly say with holy David, Quid mihi est in Caelo, aut a te quid volui super
Terram? God is the only object of my desires. To be plunged in abjection, is to
find God purely. Behold whither a Soul is conducted, whom many think good for
nothing. O how the judgments of men are different from the thoughts of God!

Let then every one honor God, by the way and life that is proper for them;
otherwise they will fall into perturbations of spirit, and being disquieted,
will become troublesome to themselves and others. But this is not the work of a
day, we shall find it a hard task to become dead to the world and our selves.
Every state is good; yea, the most abject. All Grace is excellent; yea, the
least and meanest. There are many sorts of Graces, which we perhaps do not much
value, and yet are really to be more esteemed than Visions, Rapts, or
Revelations. To labor and suffer for God, is of greater worth than Ecstasies.

It Is a truth well enough known by many, though practiced but by few, that a
little matter hinders the operation of God's grace in us. One only small
natural inclination unmortified, suffices to retard our progress to perfection.
For this reason we must exactly die to all Creatures, annihilate in us every
motion that tends not to God some way or other. As for example; To give no
refreshment to the body, by meat, drink, or sleep, etc, but for necessity. We
must also mortify in us the desire of Honor and temporal Commodities; yea,
love abjection, pains and poverty, willing nothing but what may conduce to
advance God's glory. I more value the union of a Soul with God in humiliations
and sufferings, than in consolations.

CHAP. XIII. Some Maxims concerning a Supernatural Life.
O God! what a poor Christian am I in occasions of trial! I have imprinted in
me some Idaea's and Sentiments of a supernatural Life, but when it comes to put
them in practice, my timorous Nature shrinks, and makes excuses to shun
sufferings: and then the occasion being over, I have great regreat for not
being courageous, and come to know thereby my little Virtue, and small
Perfection. I then see that the rule of Perfection is the conformity which we
have with Jesus crucified, poor, and abject. When that is great, our Perfection
is great also; But that I find I have little or no affective conformity with
Jesus crucified.

Behold here those lights and directions I have learnt by conference with a
holy person, and are good for my practice and solid establishment in a
supernatural life.

1. We must accustom our body to austerities, exercising it with loving
chastisements for our own transgressions, and the sins of others.

2. We can never attain to contemplation, and a perfect love of the Divinity,
but by passing first by Jesus crucified, poor and abject. We see him poor and
despised, attended with few followers, because we refuse to walk in those rough
paths he has set before us.

3. We must have an ardent love for solitude and recollection, to the end we
may be wholly for God, and correspond faithfully to the inspirations of his
holy Spirit. And although we ought to have a general indifferency to all states
and calls of God, yet it is better to incline rather to retirement and solitude,
not merely to enjoy the sweetness thereof, but that we may not be wanting to
cooperate with the Grace of God vouchsafed unto us. Holy solitude is the
region of Divine Communications; Ducam eam in solitudinem, and loquar ad cor
ejus, says God by the Prophet: I will lead a Soul into solitude, and speak
interiourly to her heart.

4. The reason why we see so few, even devout Christians, make progress in
perfection, is, because they limit the Grace they have received, hindering its
enlargement by natural arguments, and human prudence. They say, It Is enough for
me to do this, or that; I ought not to aspire to so high perfection; those who
live in the world cannot be so elevated in the ways of God. These, and
suchlike excuses, they make, which hinder the Grace of God from working fully
what he intended.

If we did but consider the ardent desire that Jesus has to advance Souls in
the ways of Divine love, and how ready he is to bestow on us new Graces, upon
our faithful corresponding with the former; we would be both ravished and
ashamed also, to be so backward in giving our selves up to the conduct of God,
who desires nothing so much as that we may love him perfectly, and enjoy him
eternally.

But as while Jesus was on Earth, it is said of him, That the world knew him
not, and his own received him not: for seeing him born in a Stable, circumcised
as a sinner, live poorly as a Carpenter, persecuted, accused, condemned to die
an infamous death on the Cross; they would not take him for the promised
Messiah: so as yet he is not well known, and many Christians themselves do not
receive him, nor let his Spirit and Maxims reign in their hearts. Yea, some who
profess the way of perfection, do not, as they ought, esteem and embrace his
humiliations and abjections: For we too much desire Honor and Preferment, and
too much fear abjection and suffering.

O my Soul! what have thou done hitherto, not to have as yet begun this life
crucified and annihilated? I confess my folly and blindness. O my God! make me
presently to set upon it, and let not any day pass over without the happiness
of suffering something for your love.

CHAP. XIV. What content a Soul receives in a Supernatural Life.
WE have oftentimes no need of any other care than to be faithful to an
ordinary way of Devotion, without pretending to what is extraordinary; and we
have reason to fear that motions now and then to undertake a life of greater
perfection, may proceed rather from a seeking of our own excellency, than a
true desire of pleasing God. Among these dangers, blindness, and obscurities,
we stand in great need of the light of Grace, and conduct of some holy Person,
who is able to discern what is best for us. However, putting our confidence in
God, and living in an entire dependence on him, we shall find peace and quiet
of mind.

If we have desires for any thing, let it be for such things as Jesus crucified
desired, for they are contrary to our natural inclinations. And though there
may possibly occur some self-seeking, yet this is the way of Grace, inasmuch as
the Found of our Soul is agreeable to the Interior of Jesus, and not to that
of Adam. Let us have a desire to be mortified daily with good St. Paul;
Mortificamur tota die. We must endeavor to draw profit from incommodities and
ill successes, by using them for the advancement of Grace in us. By this means
we shall purify our selves, and the Interior of our Souls will empty it self,
and make room for the spirit of Jesus Christ, bringing with him joy and peace
unspeakable.

When we shall have found out the corruption of our heart, our inability to any
good, yea, to the least good thought, as of our selves, it is not for us to
aspire after the most eminent ways; but judging our selves unworthy thereof,
and content with little our Savior shall please to give us, we must cooperate
humbly and faithfully with that small portion of Grace we have already, and not
grow idle, wishing for those eminent Graces, wherewith perhaps our Souls shall
never be beautified.

This is one of the chiefest points of humility, to be content with that little
portion we have in the state of Grace, and judge our selves unworthy of God's
favor. It Is true, there is nothing we ought so highly esteem as Grace, and its
increase in us, and desire it of God with incessant prayers; but this must be
with perfect submission to his Divine will and pleasure, that we may not
disturb the peace of our Souls.

On one side, I behold my extreme misery, and I find my self so depressed, that
all my natural strength and endeavors, do what they can to the utmost, can
never bring me out of my self; On the other side, I burn with desire to be
wholly for God, by living a supernatural and spiritual life. It is to you, O
Divine Spirit, I address my sighs, the infinite source of all Graces; you know
I have a longing to live this spiritual life; in the exercise whereof I shall
find the true practice of Divine Love, by which I shall satisfy my ardent
desires to be wholly for Jesus, and shall live no more after my natural
inclinations, and the Maxims of human Prudence. But I see how impossible it is
for me to attain this, unless you vouchsafe to assist me with your
illuminations against my darkness, with your strength against my weakness, with
your continual supplies against my relapses: For how often, O Divine Spirit,
have I begun this supernatural life, and fallen from it, conquered by my
Nature, and worldly temptations! Draw me after you so powerfully, and
continually, that I may no more return into my self, but may follow your
attracts with perseverance.

I will follow you, dear Jesus, in the states of your mortal life, in
annihilations, contempts, poverty and sufferings. And if I lose the sight of
you in those obscurities which sometimes cloud my Soul, yet let me not lose
courage. Provided I continue in your ways, that is, in the esteem and love of
the true Christian Life, you will not be far from me; it being impossible that
Jesus annihilated and suffering should not be near to a Soul suffering and
annihilated.

Well then, though we may lose the sight of Jesus, the light we have in Prayer
leaving us: though we feel him not by sensible influences, yet we are assured
that he is near us, if we be in his ways by self-denial and a love of
humiliations for his sake. O how happy is a Soul to be content to follow the
annihilations of Jesus, without the feeling of his persumes and sweetnesses!
She does practice the purity of love in this condition: For to be deprived of
light and consolations, which is very harsh to Nature, and suffer it
contentedly, is one of the most excellent acts of a spiritual life, which
consists chiefly in a perfect resignation to suffer as well inwardly as
outwardly, when God pleases.

I am very sensible by experience, that there is a vast difference between
thinking and doing, talking and living this true Christian life. When we meet
with no repugnance, we find it not difficult to practice Virtue, whereof the
Idaea's are as sweet, as the Acts are bitter of such as consist in privations
and sufferings. I am in a state wherein I feel repugnances, and am resolved
thereby to humble my self the more, and keep the peace of my Soul, by an entire
confidence of the succors which the Grace of God will vouchsafe unto me. I
consider that nothing was more seeble than the Apostles, before Pentecost; They
hid themselves, abandoned their Master in his sufferings, and Peter denied him:
but after they had received the Holy Ghost, he infused such strength into their
Souls, that they became powerful and courageous to admiration.

CHAP. XV. That it is impossible to live this Supernatural Life by Human
Prudence.
THe supernatural Life is a continual mortification of depraved Nature.

1. For it is certain, First, That we cannot live this excellent life, but by
annihilating our sense and reason.

2. Secondly, That this life is wholly according to the Spirit, which cannot be
but the Spirit of God, which inspires the Soul with his influences and sacred
motions.

3. Thirdly, That the Soul which lives this life must be elevated above sense
und reason, whether it be in Prayer, or the practice of Virtue; which cannot be
done, but by offering up her self to God as a continual Sacrifice. That though
oftentimes w must do things sensual, as to eat and drink; yet these must be
done as Grace directs us: And other things according to reason, as to love our
Relations and Friends; yet this must be only in God, and as his Oracles do
dictate to us: O life of Grace! how art thou a continual death and
mortification! Who lives Christianly, lives a Martyrdom. Tota vita Christiana,
Crux est and Martyrium: However, it is a joyful Martyrdom, for solid joy cannot
but make glad the Soul where Grace inhabits.

O that this fundamental truth of our Salvation did once well sink into our
hearts! The Son of God, and eternal King of Glory, leaves the bosom of his
Father, and becomes man, to live and die in infinite humiliations. Jesus gives
us life by his death; He puts us in a state of Grace, by ruining himself
according to Nature; He purchases Eternity for us, by yielding up his temporal
life. And the Evangelist expressing his death, does on set purpose use these
words, Emisit Spiritum, He sent forth his Spirit. Without doubt he sent it into
the hearts of his faithful Servants, to the end they may learn to live by his
Spirit to him who died for them. So says St. Paul, Misit Deus Spiritum Filii
sui in corda nostra, ut qui vivunt jam non sibi vivant, sed ei qui pro ipsis
mortuus est.

What remains then, but that we banish our carnal Spirit, which carries us on
to sensual delights, although sometimes not sinful? Let us love the Spirit of
penance, of suffering, of selfdenial, and humiliations. Gerson has an
excellent saying: By how much the more Nature is mortified, by so much the more
Grace is infused. We must often call to mind, that the Grain of Wheat cast into
the Earth, except it die, cannot bring forth fruit. If we do not die to our
selves and the World, and the Spirit of Nature, we can never become perfect
Christians, nor bring forth the fruits of Divine Love. We must be as nothing
before men, that we may be something in the sight of God. Why should the
Disciple be above his Master? The Spirit of Grace and the Spirit of Nature do
continually jar and war one against the other. The exercise of the spiritual
life will afford us light to discern their different motions; but when
discerned, it requires great courage to be faithful to the motions of Grace. To
yield to Nature, weakens and darkens the Soul; to follow Grace, gives life and
vigor. It concerns us therefore to take part with God against our selves. This
practice is clear and efficacious to conquer our passions, and carry us on to
the purity of Virtue, when this light is infused into us, after the
manifestation of God's goodness to us.

Reason may be serviceable to conquer our passions, but this light must give
place, when the beams of Grace display their splendors. For we ought as much as
we can to stifle the Maxims of reason, that we may become more capable of
Divine Illuminations, which elevate us above human reason. In a word, as no man
can come unto the Son, unless the Father draw him by preventing Grace: so no
man can come unto the Father, but by the Son, following his Maxims and Example,
and obeying the motions of his Spirit. This is the order and way of Grace, and
it is in vain for us to look for any other in a spiritual life.

CHAP. XVI. The Conclusion, That we ought to apply our selves to the practice
of a Supernatural Life.
WE must have a special care, that we place not Perfection amiss, for this will
much retard us in the way of Virtue. Hence it will do well, not to have too
great an esteem of the Vnitive and Mystic way. Not but it is good, yea,
excellent, for a Soul to be so elevated by God's gracious conduct. However, we
must acknowledge that the unitive way brought to practice, is more excellent
and necessary, seeing this is the Christian life in action; and the other is a
mystic life, consisting in extraordinary elevations of the Soul, and wonderful
unions with God in Prayer and Contemplation.

I observe that our blessed Savior says, Whosoever will be my Disciple, must
take up his Cross, and follow me. He does not say, that he must be elevated in
Prayer, but that he must take up his Cross; that is, he must practice the
Maxims of the Gospel. Happy then are they who are crucified to the world,
though they be not elevated in Spirit; and those elevated Souls are but happy
in that they are conformable to Jesus crucified, and by their unions more
disposed to the Cross and Sufferings. The crucified Life is, as it were, the
end of the mystic life, whose illuminations and sweet influences do much
conduce to fortify the Soul to bear the Cross.

S. Teresa observes, That one of the best signs of a Divine Ecstasy is, when it
works in the Soul an extraordinary desire of suffering; and that a Soul cannot
return to her self from such holy communications with God, but well instructed;
which must needs be, that the perfection of love consists in suffering for
Jesus, and not in enjoying him. Enjoyment in this life is not of so much worth
as suffering; This more than That advances our Glory. Let us not then complain
that we have not our part in the mystic life, so that we be but crucified
Christians; and let us be content to feel our Spirit in Prayer among Thorns of
aridities, coldness, and desolation, as well as among the sweet perfumes of a
sensible Devotion.

We must take up our Cross to follow Christ, as well when we suffer in Soul as
Body. For it is the property of a true Christian, to glory in the Cross of Jesus
Christ. But this did extend as well to his Soul, as to his body. The Divine
Soul of Jesus was left without sensible influences and succors from the
superior part, and from his Father for some time. We must love to be
conformable to him herein, and rest there with resignation and contentment. Let
our affections be more inflamed with the love of her sufferings here, than of
enjoyments. And if we complain of any thing, let it be when we do not suffer
something for Jesus Christ.

The End of the Second BOOK.
BOOK III. Of the presence of God, and giving our selves up to Divine
Providence.
CHAP. I. Our first thought in the morning ought to be, That God is present.
AS soon as I awake, I ought to consider that I am in the bosom of God, for in
Him we live, move, and have our being. We live, and are indeed in his presence,
and yet hardly think of him. I am surrounded with his Grandeurs, his Mercies,
his Riches, his Divine Perfections, and yet am taken up with petty matters. O
what blindness! what darkness is this! I fall from one sleep into another, my
Soul being no more awake by day than by night; my interior senses being then
bound up, as before the exterior.

I am like a blind man asleep, doubly blind, for sleep takes away his sight a
second time. When he awakes, he sees not the light of the Sun, nor the beauty
of the Universe, nor the variety of Creatures that are before him, He walks in
the world, but beholds not the different parts thereof; when he is asleep, his
blindness increases. In like manner, when we sleep, we are in a profound
forgetfulness of God: But, what is lamentable, we continue this Oblivion when
we are awake, by reason we seldom think on God and his Perfections, our Souls
are so wholly taken up with worldly business.

Alas! how dangerous is this sleep and forgetfulness! We have no excuse, seeing
Nature does teach us better manners, Tempus est de somno surgere; When the Sun
rises, it is time to walk as Children of light. When natural sleep leaves me,
let me not (dear Savior) lose my self in the crowd of Creatures, but take up
my thoughts with your Perfection, with your Love, with your Mercies, that I may
not sleep all day long, by being unmindful of your presence.

Dear Jesus! it is not in my power to hinder this spiritual drowzyness, and my
misery will not permit me to think on you continually: but be pleased to watch
for me, that I may be conversant with God by your divine and holy Occupations;
that I may know him by your knowledge; that I may have an eye to him by your
regards; that I may love him by your loves: and by this means I shall be
strengthened in my weakness. If we do not awake with Jesus Christ, we sleep
with the men of this world, who sleep their sleep, being wholly taken up with
worldly matters. To be awake with Jesus Christ, is to be exercised in the
operations of this life, to do as he did* and be content to take up our Cross
and suffer with him. Pains, sufferings, reproaches, ought to be dear to us,
seeing they make us to be awake with Jesus Christ, and live his life, a life of
sufferings. On the contrary, we must look on Honors, Pleasures, and Worldly
advantages, with a suspicious eye, because they are apt to make us forgetful of
God.

When we see with the eye of Faith, that God is everywhere, and is the first
Mover, we take delight therein, and look upon God as the Soul of the world, and
our Soul tends to him, as to her Center, and sweet repose. This repose works in
her a will to give her self up wholly to his Ordinations, with an entire love.
This resignation, when it is general and real indeed, does powerfully free her
from the love of the world, making her passive to the Conduct of God, and his
holy Attracts and Inspirations. What good thoughts God sends her in the
morning, she nourishes all day long, making use of them on all occasions, and
takes from the hand of God whatever happens, peace or trouble, sweet or bitter,
rest or labor, because it is God's will, who glorifies himself by all events.
This carries a Soul on to the practice of pure Virtue.

CHAP. II. The presence of God in the Soul makes us little value the absence of
the Creatures.
I Find my Heart and Soul so content in that God is inseparably united to me,
that I am hardly sensible of the absence of my dearest Friends. I know not when
I shall suffer any thing, for all mortifications prove sweet unto me, by reason
of the abundant joy the presence of God affords unto me. God is in me, and I in
him, and nothing can separare me from him, because he is always present in me
by his Immensity, which is his Essence. The thought hereof does so affect my
heart, that I value not the privation of all Creatures; but rather I get this
advantage, in that methinks by their absence God is more intimately present
with me. And by how much the more I am elevated above all Creatures, though
some be holy persons, and dear to me, by so much the more I feel my heart more
united to God, as to its Center, where I find true quiet and repose.

I take for a special grace and favor the employment God gives me by his
sacred Providence. What have I to do with Creatures, seeing God is in me, and I
in him, seeing he is for me, and I for him? O what Riches it is to possess God!
But this cannot be without being dead to the world. Blessed Mary Magdalen being
dead to the world, and forsaking it, yea, her dearest Brother Lazarus, and her
beloved Sister Martha, found God present in her Soul, and that sufficed I
participate a little the joys of this Saint, in possessing God after I have so
happily found him* When a Soul complains of the absence of any Creature, it is a
sign she has not yet found God so well as she ought. But may not some Creatures
be instrumental to bring us to God? I grant it. But when we have found him, why
don't we then leave off all affection to worldly things?

Alas! how flat is the gust that Creatures affords, after we have tasted of
God's sweetness, and it is but a torment to us to continue with them! O my God!
seeing I have found you, I will never forsake you. My Soul is so present with
you, that methinks I enjoy you. Separate me more and more from all Creatures,
that this sweet enjoyment may increase in my Soul. What need shall I then have
of converse with Creatures?

It Is of singular profit to consider how many holy men and women have (as it
were) buried themselves in solitudes, flying the society of all Creatures, that
they might be wholly taken up with the presence of God! Saint Mary of Egypt
hid her self in a vast Desert, to be far from the sight and remembrance of the
world, that she might only find her God and Creator. O my God! how happy was
she by thus finding you, living without the help of any Creature, without
Clothes, and almost without any refection. She had no person to comfort her, no
person to complain to of her sufferings, no person to take part of her
consolations; she alone was with God alone, in a general deprivation of all
Creatures O how this Spirit of separation from all created things is excellent!
O how necessary is it to a Soul, who desires to be wholly for God, and enjoy
the sweets of his Divine Presence!

But to come to this, we must suffer much both from our selves and others, to
the end we may be freed from the love of the world. God himself, who will be
all in all to his Creatures, oftentimes brings us home to himself, by great
variety of afflicting events. This makes the lives of the Servants of God full
of continual alterations, as well in temporal affairs as spiritual, designed
for his greater Glory; sometimes it goes well, sometimes ill with them, in
their Souls and bodies, by constant changes. These vicissitudes oblige them to
love nothing but the Sovereign Good; and in this general abandon of all
Creatures, God is pleased to let them feel the sweets of his Divine presence;
and by this happy experience of God's presence, they grow insensible of the
privation of things dearest to them, in which before they found Contentment.

It Is true, those Servants of God with whom we can converse, are as so many
Conduit-pipes, by which God conveys some streams of living Water; so that we
learn from them eternal verities, and many secrets of spirituality, with much
advantage to our Souls. But these are only Pipes, Jesus Christ, God-man, is the
true Source and Fountain from whence those Streams flow, which we receive from
them, or rather by them. It Is from the splendours of his Divinity we can have a
prospect of his Grandeurs and Perfections. It Is from his sacred Humanity we
must learn the exercises of all Christian Perfection. When you please, dear
Savior, you will make a Soul to know the difference that is between the
Springhead, and the Pipes; between drawing the living Water of your Graces
from your self, and from your Saints; between a view of your Interior, and the
Perfections of Servants. And so to lose the presence of the holiest persons, to
enjoy the presence of God in a more transcendent manner, is no loss, but a
gain. To be without the converse of God's Servants, to have more of their
Divine Masters company, is no prejudice, but an advantage. The pierced side of
Jesus Christ, is (as it were) a Sacred Mouth, from whence his Heart speaks more
divinely to us in dumb Eloquence, than can the Tongues of Saints and Angels.

CHAP. III. That we can, and ought to conserve the presence of God, in
occasions of Extroversion.
A Soul may be as much separated from Creatures in the midst of Towns and
Cities, as in the Deserts. Behold how I conceive this may be done: When God
once makes a Soul sensible of his Grandeurs, and gives her lively resentments
of his presence; this Soul thus illuminated, begins to be dead to the world,
and regardless of it, because the light that brings her to know and taste God
present, makes the Creature disgustful to her. Neither is it so much the
insufficiency of Creatures that causes this disgust, as the all sufficiency of
God, and the lively feeling of his Divine presence, which may be had as well
among the crowd of men, as in the Deserts.

This makes one a Citizen of the whole world; every place is indifferent to
such a Soul; for being not attached to any Creature, God alone is what she
desires, whom she knows is all in all, and his presence alike in every place.
When we are sad for the absence of any Friend, it is for want of light from
Heaven, seeing our greatest Friend is continually with us, And indeed it is
injurious to God present in us, to be troubled at the absence of any Creature,
and it is as much as if we should say to God, You alone are not sufficient for
me. It Is an excellent means to bring us to a denudation of all Creatures, to be
willingly content with their absence; yea, hardly to think upon them by reason
of the veneration we have of the grandeurs of God, who being infinitely present
with us, we cannot voluntarily be taken up with any thing else, without some
sort of injury to his infinite Majesty.

It Is a great Mercy when Divine Providence orders our affairs so as to bring us
off from vain occupations, seeing we can never possess God fully, unless we be
dead to worldly things. As long as they flatter us, and go on as we desire,
they take us up too much, and we easily forget God: but his amiable Providence
has a thousand ways to make them disgustful to us, by losses, by maladies, by
falseness of friends, by ill success of affairs, by the substraction of
sensible favors, and by a distaste and bitterness, which at last we find in all
worldly contentments.

We who understand not his amiable designs, do oftentimes our utmost endeavors
to shun these things, as no small miseries; and yet this is indeed the Paradise
of holy Souls, whereby they find God, who is most present to that heart, where
no Creature finds entertainment. And when such a Soul tastes the sweetness of
God, she disgusts the Creatures; and though they importune her, she generously
contemns them, and it is a punishment to give any attention to their allurements.

When a Soul does not engage her self in worldly affairs, but by the order of
God, her Interior will receive no prejudice; for she is always in a state to
return to God, whom in a manner she does not leave in those employments. And
the same light which discovers to her the intime presence of God, makes her see
also the orders of God in respect of external affairs, to which she yields a
peaceable and ready obedience. For she is for doing what God would have her,
though she must lose for some time that sweet repose which she possesses by the
enjoyment of God. What makes her retire into her internal quiet, is not the
quiet it self, nor the sweetness thereof, but the order of God, who is pleased
to unite a Soul to himself by intervals, and gives her a gust by his presence,
that he is her center and final happiness* But when God will have it so, she
changes also her operations, and leaves God in a manner to converse with
Creatures. She is so dis-engaged, that she willingly moves not but by God's
motions, which carry her whither he pleases, either to enjoy him, or do good to
others; all is indifferent to her, because she seeks nothing but to please God.

Nevertheless, it is true, that a poor Soul enamored of the sweetness of God's
presence, and of the internal peace of this enjoyment, does not without some
regret return to exterior Objects, and sensual Functions. She then neither
speaks, nor hears, nor takes refection, without some reluctance; because being
sensible of this infinite Good present with her, and finding nothing in the
Creatures but misery and dissatisfaction, she cannot well quit this excellent
Object, to turn to the deceitful figure of sensual things. Her Treasure being
within her, all her thoughts and her affections are there also.

I have sometimes felt in my self desires to be blind, deaf, and dumb, to the
end I might be more entirely separated from all Creatures, and more intimately
united to the Creator present in me; experiencing with grief, that my Soul
oftentimes forgets this Divine presence, when she makes sallies out upon the
Creatures by the Gates of my Senses. Well then, I must keep them shut, that my
Soul being cloistered up within her own walls, may be wholly taken up with God
alone.

CHAP. IV. That the presence of God is clearly seen in a purified Interior.
THe Idaea of a Looking-glass is very pertinent to explicate this matter. For
God makes himself sometimes to be seen in the Interior of the Soul as in a
well-polish'd Glass, in the same manner as the Sun, or rather its figure, is
visible in a Fountain of pure Water. The Soul sees not the face of God, that is
the privilege of Glory; but she beholds him there more clearly than elsewhere;
God painting his resemblance in her, in the same sort as the Sun shows his
visage in pure water.

But the purity and peace must be very great in the Interior of such a Soul,
to present the impression of this presence: For as the breath darkens the
Looking glass, in like manner voluntary imperfections sully the purity of the
Soul And as the least motion that troubles the Fountain, makes it lose the
Image of the Sun, so the extroversions and sallies out toward Creatures, makes
the Soul lose the sight of the Divine presence in her.

When God manifests himself so present to a Soul, she must regard nothing but
him, otherwise she loses her happiness; it being not possible to behold the
Image of the Sun in the Fountain together with those that pass by the way, We
must let them pass without gazing on them, whatever Friends they be, otherwise
we shall find that our Beloved will veil his face, from whom we our selves have
turned our eyes. There is a time to speak, and a time to be silent.

Let us therefore in this happy moment speak to no Creature, and give this
reverence to the presence of God in us, as to regard It only, and nothing else.

It sometimes happens, that God permits the Devil to show his visage in his
place. This is when the Soul is molested with black thoughts, wicked
representations, foul temptations, fond imaginations; and then she must guard
her self with patience in the acknowledgment of her unworthiness, and confess
that she deserves to be continually banished from God's presence. But if our
fidelity be great in this state of darkness and interior disquiet, it will not
be long ever God show his face, and make fair weather. There be some who loved
others so passionately while they were alive, that they go to Magicians to
procure a sight of them after death, and are ravished to behold them in their
enchanted glasses. A Soul passionately enamored on God, is ravished to behold
him, though but for a moment in her Interior, and fears no Motifications, nor
the loss of all Creatures, if they do but purify the glass to show God to her.

According to the degree of Purity in the Soul, we find the presence of God in
us; and the following Instructions, in my judgment, may conduce to purify the
Soul, and preserve her in Purity.

1. An indifference to every condition, to any employ whatsoever, whereby God
may be glorified.

2. To be regular in our Exterior Actions, not to busy our selves too much,
and to do them with great attention.

3. To be well rooted in the Spirit of Mortification, to love Suffering and
Humiliations, a manifest sign of a purified Interior.

4. To have a great love for Jesus Christ, dying on the Cross for us.

5. To have a continual recourse to God for a supply of his Grace, with a
constant dependence on it.

6. To be dead to the World, and worldly things.

It Is said, That God is in the fond of the Soul, and there is hidden; so as to
find him we must hide our selves there also, by recollection and an internal
Life, which Spiritual Authors call, The state of Introversion. The night time
is most conducing to advanee this disposition, when all creatures are in a
manner dead to us, making no impression on our Senses, whereby we better
conserve that reverence we owe to the presence of God in us. O how many
Irreverences are we guilty of on this account? We leave him alone, when we
perceive he is in the fond of our Soul to receive our homages, and we turn our
eyes from his Majesty, though he regard us. Just as if one by special favor
admitted into the Closet of his Prince to converse with him, should presently
turn his head to look out of the Windows to behold the Passengers.

A Soul that is sensible of Gods presence, is not guilty of such ordinary
miscarriages. The least word or action that tends not to God, is troublesome to
her; because that being unwilling to leave that respect she owes to Gods
presence, she fears the least irreverences, as death. And seeing that all
Creatures are nothing to the Creator, she often cries out, Quis ut Deus? Deus
meus and omnia. Who is like unto God? My God is all in all unto my heart. In
this state, the Soul has not only a great respect for God, as God, but for
Jesus Christ; God and Man, and for his Doctrine and for his Maxims. The
privation of all Creatures does relish better with her than the possession;
knowing for certain, that to enjoy God by such happy experience, is of more
worth than the World.

CHAP. V. That our union with the Presence of God, ought to be the Rule of our
Actions.
THat Soul has no small obligations to God, who manifests his Presence in her
Interior, and makes her sensible of this blessed union I know very well, that
this union is so full of sweetness and desirable, that it is of more worth than
the enjoyment of all Creatures: But it is also full of extreme rigor,
separating a Soul without any pity from whatsoever nature loves most dearly.
She must then bid adieu to the most innocent Pleasures, by being generally dead
to all things but God, or what relates to him. O what a pain is it, not to
dare, because God is present, to be complacent to our Friends, or be
serviceable to them with a natural inclination, but only upon a motive of
Grace! For such a Soul must not follow the order of Nature, as from nature, but
as elevated by Grace.

If the World call upon us, let us not regard it, for it will withdraw us from
the presence of God, to please our selves or others by divertisements. A Soul
attracted to enjoy the presence of God, has another rule. Those who are not
thus attracted, nor have this enjoyment, may do well to comply with their
neighbors by charitable complacences.

The Fidelity which a Soul owes to God present, requires of her not to charge
her self with affairs but what are necessary; and to manage them with the
Spirit of indifferency, aiming only to do Gods will, which sometimes we meet
with as well in ill as good successes. She must be more taken up with God than
those affairs, knowing well no business is of greater importance, than to
conserve her union with God present. It no less concerns her to be well
resigned to the Orders of Divine Providence, to be content with Poverty, with
Miseries, with Desolations, never seeking deliverance upon natural motives, but
being pleased with abjection and humiliations, to say with St. Paul, Placeo
mihi in infirmitatibus, I am well pleased with my Infirmities. Such a Soul will
give her self up absolutely into the hands of God, to let him work her into
what form he pleases, as soft wax, and set what Impression he thinks best upon
her, receiving all with profound humility; and if she be left naked, she rests
contented. O how a Soul so dead to all Creatures, is a pleasing Mansion for God
to dwell in? It Is his delight to take there his habitation.

O how a Soul that finds God thus present with her, is troubled to be obliged
to quit the sweetness of his presence! And when this is often, makes life
somewhat troublesome, and she cries out: O my God, the well-beloved of my Soul,
when will you deliver me from this burdensome necessity? This is the greatest of
miseries; to be deprived of all Creatures is no misery in comparison: But to be
deprived of you, to enjoy whom I was created, and without whom I cannot but be
miserable, makes me cry out, Quando veniam, and apparebo ante faciem tuam? O
when shall I come to enjoy your presence?

It seems to me, I am like a Traveller, who sees a far off a high mountain, and
the way before him, but being on foot, he must sweat to get thither. In like
manner, I have some prospect of Perfection, and the obligations of a Soul
longing after God, but I cannot accomplish them: However, I have a desire, and
I stand in need of an abundance of Grace, to mount to Perfection. Holy Virgin;
Mother of God, intercede for me, that I may receive a participation of your
Graces, to enable and conduct me in the ways of God*

We must have a care that the Contentments we enjoy by this union with God
present, does not exclude a union with the Cross, Contempts, Poverty and
Sufferings. A strict tie to the Interior of Jesus glorified, does require also
a strict conjunction to the Interior of Jesus Crucified. Those two unions go
hand in hand here, it being impossible to have part in the state of Jesus in
Heaven, without having part in the states of Jesus on Earth. Let us take
courage, and love as yet rather to suffer than enjoy: We have but this short
life to suffer in, but our enjoyment shall be to all Eternity.

CHAP. VI. That the presence of God in us, puts us in a state of suffering and
enjoying.
PErfection does not consist in a general freedom from Interior and Exterior
troubles. Hitherto my weakness could not comprehend how a Soul at the same time
might be happy and miserable. I had so little strength, that my sufferings did
stifle the enjoyment of Gods presence in me; and the sensibility of them did
eclipse the other. And because I thought that this enjoyment of God could not
be found, but in a Soul exempt from all sorts of Sufferings, when Sadness, or
Pains, or Troubles did seize upon me; I got free as soon as possible, to regain
my former state of enjoyment. But I see my error, for now these sufferings
shall become the means to unite me more strictly to God; I am content with
them, and will offer them a sacrifice to that hidden Majesty, who is really
present in my Soul.

For I conceive that the Sacred Humanity of Jesus, Hypostatically united to the
Word, had God most intimately present, remaining in this union in a state of
enjoyment and suffering also. As Man he offered up to the Divinity a continual
Sacrifice of his Humiliations, Poverty and Sufferings; and the Divinity
imparted to him a wonderful enjoyment of sweetness by his presence. And in this
manner God is yet glorified in a Soul: He bestows upon her a profound Peace in
the Superior faculties, by being sensible of the Divine Presence: And in the
mean time being mortified in the inferior part, she makes a perpetual homage
of Sacrifice to God, by offering up her Suffering to him. A Soul in this state,
is an excellent Image of Jesus, as both Traveller and Comprehensour.

God does not always manifest his presence to a Soul by abundance of Divine
Irradiations, but sometimes by a sensible Peacefulness, which gently touches
the heart, and unites it to God. In this the Intellectual Faculties do nothing
but barely eye God, and now and then the heart breaths forth some amorous
Aspirations. As, O what a Happiness is it to have God present without a
possibility of Separation! What can I desire more then to have the possession
of God? O my God, be my Portion, and my Heritage for ever. Sometimes also the
Soul receives a certain prospect of the Grandeurs of God present, which works
in her Adorations, and Humiliations: Sometimes the Soul is moved with such
sensible touches, that she experimentally finds God present in her, whereby she
melts into affections respect, and love, and praises to the Divine Majesty; and
thereupon enjoys a Peace that passes our understanding.

Crosses and Sufferings may bring a Soul in time to a more union with God,
though not to the pleasures of enjoyment. A union so much the more excellent,
by how much the more it is imperceptible to the Soul, who seeking her own
satisfaction, has some mixture of self-love in the sweets of enjoyment, but
cannot happen in the Crucified union, which joins the Soul to God, in such a
manner as is hardly perceptible.

That state is most perfect which brings us to the greatest Interior Purity;
but this cannot take up a mansion in our heart, without an entire death to all
Creatures* Now in the Crucified union, the Soul being only attached to the will
of God, and not reflecting on her own operations, and so taking no
self-satisfaction from them, she thinks all is lost, and that she has no part
in the love of God, which is the only thing she passionately desires. What
great pity is it to love, and not to know it?

Nevertheless this Soul that seems to her self in so sad a condition, is a
delightful Object in the eyes of God, who sees in her the love only of his
interests, in that she is content with a total denudation; and confessing she
is not worthy of Gods Graces, wherewith she beholds others adorned, and
admiring their beauty, perceives not all this while what she is her self. And
this ignorance of her own state possessing her Spirit, by a true sense of her
own indignity, she easily concludes that she is a miserable Creature. And it is
no wonder if discouragment and sadness set upon a Soul in this disposition, at
least to affect the Inferior part.

I clearly see, that this union Crucified, does advance us in the participation
of the states of Christ Suffering, which is the greatest advantage a Soul can
pretend to in this Life of Mortality, seeing this puts us in a condition of
most expressing our love to God. This great Truth, well considered, will
wonderfully comfort a Soul that desires to be conform to the Image of Jesus
Crucified.

The Crucified union carries Mortification to the marrow of the Soul, making it
die to whatsoever is not God, seeing that she lives by the privation of all
Creatures. But the sensible union does nourish it self by reflections upon such
a state, which will indeed purify a Soul from worldly affections; however, she
will go on but slowly to the purity of Perfection, if God be not very merciful
unto her.

O my God, how ought we to give up our selves wholly, though in the dark, to
the conduct of your Divine Providence! It Is your wisdom to lead us through
Obscurities, to the end we may deny our own judgment, which is no lover of
Mortification. O how this insensibility does purify the operations of the
Will, which cannot relish in this state of denudation any thing, but only your
good pleasure!

The Soul in this Crucified union, has the advantage to know how tenderly Jesus
Christ loved her in his abandonments and humiliations. He makes us to suffer
this, that we may know the greatness of that; and this experimental knowledge
discovers to us how much Jesus suffered in the state of his Humiliations, and
puts the Soul in a disposition to follow him in his Humiliations. And seeing
the greatness of the love of Jesus to us, was most manifested by his Sufferings
for us, so our love to him is greatest by our Sufferings for him.

It Is to be observed, that the highest degree of this Crucified union, is to
have no sight of the excellency of this state, which once being perceived,
begins to lessen our Holy Sufferings.

CHAP. VII. That the Divine Presence makes us to love Prayer, or Action, as
best pleases God.
I find the Life of Man to be poor and miserable, we see not God unless
surrounded with Clouds. Our true Life consists in a Holy Converse with God
present, whereby a Soul enjoys a delightful repose, and is filled with Peace
unspeakable. And being ravished with such lovely sweets, does melt into
enjoyments which transcend infinitely all earthly pleasures.

In this disposition a Soul does not relish the affairs of this World. Ordinary
Discourses, though never so harmless, are troublesome to her. Yea, the
occasions to help our Neighbor, though Good and Holy, are not then convenient
nor pleasing to her. She is all for to be at the feet of Jesus with Mary
Magdalen in a perfect repose, and let Martha go about her business.

Notwithstanding, God makes us to understand, that sometimes we must go out
from this in time presence, and undertake Exterior Actions in the Affairs of
his Glory: Ingredi and egredi, And this is the Life of a Holy Soul. She goes
out by secret Orders well known to her self, and walks Peaceably in the
pursuance of those Affairs which have immediate relation to God. And is content
also to be extroverted by Secular Affairs, as Goods and Honors; to serve our
Corporal necessities, and help our Neighbors. But it is God present in us that
sets a a Soul on work by his Orders and necessary Instructions.

1. We must undertake no business; yea, not good works without a Mission; that
is, without some Interior Call from God. And therefore it concerns us to have
recourse to him by Prayer, to know his will, least we do what he does not
require of us.

2 When we know that God sets us on work, we ought to be very faithful in the
performance of it. I observe that affairs of obligation do not distract our
Introversion.

3. We must acknowledge our insufficiency to bring our endeavors to a Happy
issue. It Is the Sun that makes the Plants to grow, to blossom and fructify,
and not the Gardener that sets and waters them: In like manner, it is the Grace
of God that makes our endeavors prosperous. Paul may plant, and Apollo may
water, but God gives the increase.

4 To regulate the times of our Exercises, without which the Soul will languish
and grow feeble: Charity well ordered begins at home. I must not for others,
neglect the most important affair of my own Salvation.

O my God, when I am in the privation of the sensible sweets of your presence,
and find a dryness on my Soul, it seems to me not hard to bear it: But when I
am ravished with enjoyment, to be called from it to mind other business, this
seems to me more difficult and mortifying. We may strive to have the like
content in other affairs, but our infirm condition will not suffer it; and do
what we can, we fall short of the sweets of such enjoyment. It remains then to
make an excellent act of abnegation; and by an amorous resignation of our will
to Gods, make it our contentment to have no other contentment than Gods good
pleasure, who will not have us to be disturbed to want enjoyment.

And thus we offer up to God an excellent Sacrifice, seeing we give to God what
is most dear and precious to us, by dying to our selves, to live to him. I am
therefore resolved to fall a working, without troubling my Spirit too much with
the Ideas of Affairs, that I may still conserve an actual endeavor to practice
on diverse occasions and maxims of Christianity and Evangelical Councils, by
self-denial and a love of Sufferings for Christ's sake. And if I continue in
this Spirit of Sacrifice and entire abnegation, it will make me content with
that little Service God requires of me, being unworthy, by reason of my sins,
to be advanced to greater performances. He is indeed our Sovereign Lord, and he
may be do with his Creatures what he pleases.

But whatever we undertake, let us have a care to do our works for God with
purity of intention; and in ill successes to have a Spirit of resignation,
which may prove to us of more worth than the conversion of Souls.

When we are in the heat of our Affairs, it much concerns us not to let them
deface in our Soul the incomparable Idea of the Interior of Jesus, which is
the Copy we must endeavor to write after; in imitation whereof, we always find
sufficient matter of glorifying God, which is the only pretention we ought to
have both for Time and Eternity. In this Abiss of Perfections, I find how to
behave my self in Prayer, in Action, in Affairs, in Contempts, in Temptations,
in Aridities, in Disconsolations. And without the Idea of this Divine
Interior, we do but blunder in the way to Perfection, and seek our own esteem
and excellency.

There are in Spiritual Persons three sorts of Purity. 1. Purity of Conscience.
2. Purity of Virtue. 3. Purity of Perfection. Whoever is careful to avoid sin,
even those that proceed from Frailty, has purity of Conscience. Those who on
all occasions practice Virtue without a mixture of nature, have Purity of
Virtue. And those who being divested entirely of themselves and the creatures,
endeavor purely to practice the perfect acts of Virtue, are arrived to the
purity of Perfection. By these degrees of Purity; we may discover the different
states of Virtuous Souls.

CHAP. VIII. The presence of God brings us into a disesteem of other things.
AFter God has manifested himself to a Soul, making her to see that he is all;
the Soul enamored on this adorable presence, takes no rest but in him, finding
her self ill at ease without him, who is all in all unto her. O how Powerful is
this Divine Idaea to withdraw a Soul from all Creatures, that she may be united
to her all! How does she happily loose her self in this great all! O my God,
says she, how true is it that you are all, and I am nothing! Dear Lord, what
can we do for you? You are all, and have no need of our goods, Of the all of
our Souls, how little are you known and beloved!

I know not what men intend in not having their thoughts taken up about him who
is our all. Where art thou, O my Soul, when thou art not in this all? Without
doubt thou art in nothing; for as long as thou art in thy self, or in the
Creatures, thou art in the depth of nothingness. The content I have in that God
is all, is more, as it seems to me, for him, then my self: For my joy is to
know him to be what he is, before I was any thing. O great all, be you for ever
what you are; and that you shall be our all everlastingly, does comfort and
ravish me.

I see that God is not only all, but that all Glory, all Grandeur, all
Beatitude is in him; neither loses he any thing by his communications to his
Creatures. He takes infinite Pleasure to do good to them by his mercy, and no
less content is he to punish them by his Justice, because they deserve it, for
nothing can disturb his happiness.

O what Felicity is it to a Soul that loves God purely, to be assured that God
shall be infinitely happy to all Eternity, and that no malice of man can alter
his Beatitude! Such a Soul is greatly pleased to consider the contentment God
takes to make her live, to make her die, to keep her in Health, or in Sickness,
to supply her Corporal necessities, and furnish her Interior with all Graces.
For God draws great Glory to himself by all his Creatures. Be comforted then, O
my Soul, and be not disconsolate, seeing that God is always happy. Be not
troubled for any thing, seeing that every thing which torments thee may bring
Glory to God. Do not value any thing but God alone, seeing in his presence the
most excellent Creatures are as pure nothings. Tanquam nihilum ante te.

It Is easy and pleasant for a Soul to value nothing in the presence of God,
she finds in him her Sovereign good; all her faculties having in him a taste of
her repose, their joy, their satisfaction, and blessedness. God has created
them for himself; he is the only center of the Understanding as the Sovereign
Verity; he is the sole center of the Will, as the Sovereign Goodness; and the
Memory finds in no other Object full contentment. All the several Truths, and
Goodnesses, and Beauties, and Perfections in the Creatures do but increase her
thirst, God alone can give her satisfaction; and this she learns only by
experience, This experience is of marvelous efficacy to detach her from all
things that is not God, and when once she has had a relish of his sweets, she
will not return to creatures, nor to Exterior Actions, but with submission to
his Will.

How is such a Soul crucified in this state, by reason of the condition of this
Life, in reference to Corporal necessities and Worldly affairs! Passions,
Aridities, and Distractions keeping her off from God, will not suffer her to
taste and enjoy him, this much afflicts her. I know very well that the love of
the Cross, and resignation to Gods will does comfort her, and an indifferency
to any state whatsoever keeps her in peace and repose. Notwithstanding this,
she is not in her center in such a manner as she shall be eternally. She is but
tending thither, and so being as yet in privation, must needs be in a suffering
condition.

Accustom thy self, O my Soul, to be present with God in thy Interior; quit
all Creatures, for this Divine Bridegroom will have no Rival, he must have all
thy heart. His grandeur and infinite perfections will not admit of other
Lovers. Look upon him often with an eye of Faith, and he will lead thee into
his Closet to enjoy him in Peace and Silence. O my Soul, it would be happy for
thee, if once thou did accustom thy self to have attention to the Orders of
God, manifested in thy Interior of his Holy Inspirations. Thou would then
follow blindfold his Divine conduct, without much standing upon reason or
humane prudence: But give ear to God alone, and follow his motions, without any
reflection on self-interest. Thou know that God is all Goodness, all Wisdom,
all Power, and this is sufficient to banish all vain sollicitudes.

I ought to live in Peace and Denudation of all Creatures, relying upon God,
who alone, ought to be all things to me. I ought to make it my consolation to
live without consolation, if God will have it so: And be content with what
portion of Grace he is pleased to give me. The more we participate of the
states of annihilation of Jesus; it is better for us. What though we want all
things else, if God be with us? A Soul that has God in possession, cannot value
the absence of other things.

CHAP. IX. Where we may best find the Presence of God.
IF we will search for God as we ought, we must not have recourse to the
Creatures, but we shall find him in the fond of our Soul, where he resides in a
peculiar manner, reigning, ordaining, and instructing us. The Soul by the help
of Faith finds him there, as also by some feelings and experiences, accompanied
with such a peace, all the World cannot give her. God alone does communicate
this Peace to a Soul by his presence, for his dwelling is in Peace, which is a
certain satisfaction the Soul receives thereby with full contentment. A Soul
that has found God, has nothing else to do, but to submit and commit her self
wholly to God both for the Interior and Exterior; and her Fidelity consists
in this perfect abandon and resignation; because now being absorpt in God, she
is to live out of her self, and her own will and interests. So as when God does
all in a Soul, he does much in a little time; and this is when she is
annihilated as to her own strength and interests, in a total dependence on the
operations of God. In this state she is free and indifferent to all things, and
disingaged from her self and all Creatures, and wholly taken up with God, who
works in her what he pleases. Her principal devotion is to have attention to
God present, and to receive his orders and impressions, be it in Prayer, or the
practice of Virtues, or other affairs. If business, or the Creatures, put her
out of this state, she presently has a care to put her self in again, by a
perfect submission to Gods will.

God thus present in us, conducts us by his illuminations and instincts,
directing us, correcting us, strengthening us, doing for us what he pleases, if
we be faithful to his motions. But a Soul yet attached to her self, and the
Creatures, do not understand him, nor perceive his directions; for only pure
peaceful Souls are sensible of Gods acting in them. A Soul that is free, and in
possession of God, is diversely employed; sometimes on God and his Perfections,
sometimes on Jesus and his Mysteries, or on some Christian Verity; sometimes
she is discouraged with her defects, and then again comforted and strengthened
with the Power of Grace; other times she feels Interior Sufferings, and
afterward is refreshed with the enjoyments; now in fervor of devotion, and
then again in aridities of Spirit; but always the same in dependence on God,
and submission to his will. We ought therefore still to regard God in us with
the eye of Faith, suffering our selves wholly to be possessed by him, giving
our selves up to him without reservation, loosing our selves in him by a happy
forgetfulness.

God is in his Creatures, and there we may find him; but his presence in the
Interior of the Soul is in a more special manner: There is his Holy Temple,
where he pleases to dwell, and where the Soul may see and taste God with a
suavity transcending all sensual delights and Pleasures. A Soul thus conducted
by the light of Faith, and attracted with this Divine sweetness, seeks to find
God in this his Sanctuary, and converses with him in such a familiar manner, as
makes the Angels stand in admiration. Now it is when the Soul can make pure
Prayer, seeing here is nothing but God and the Soul, without the intermedling of
any Creature. God working all of himself, without representations, or
discourse, or sensible gusts of devotion.

This supreme purity of the Soul being not capable of sensible things, the pure
Spirit only can possess it, and God present communicates his illustrations,
irradiations, and all necessary motions to effect this pure union. The time
seems short in this happy and experimental enjoyment of God; but the condition
of this life affords no other; where we must live with peace, patience,
humility, and crosses; leaving for some time the sweets of this pure union for
other affairs, to act, and suffer, and practice Virtue. O thrice happy that
Soul, to whom God is pleased to vouchsafe this experimental manifestation of
himself, of his goodness, and sweetness! O what peace arises from thence, what
high esteem, and desire, and love of God, and his Divine perfections!

Let such a Soul be in light, or darkness, in peace, or war, elevated or
dejected, she is still the same, because God's will is hers, and she desires
nothing but what pleases him. Her chief care is to give her self up wholly to
Gods will in so great variety of Interior states And why should a Soul be
concerned at this variety? For if I purely desire to please God; 'twill be all
one to me, whether I do it by suffering or enjoying.

CHAP. X. That we ought to give our selves up with confidence to Divine
Providence.
DEar Lord, draw the passions and affections of my heart wholly after you. O
that I could go out of my self to abide only in you! Oh that I had no love but
for you, no fear, no desire, no joy but in you, and that my affections were
only for you! O that your Grace would mortify in me the fears, hopes, sadness
and desires of nature, that you might be the sole Object of my love! This is
the purity we must aim at, or else we possess our Soul in vain.

Our blessed Savior says in the Gospel, That one Sparrow shall not be
forgotten of God. Why then have we such fears to want, who are chiefly called
upon to rely on Providence? If God permits us to be in want, it is to bring us
to perfection by sufferings. God is pleased to give us daily his precious Body,
and will he deny us Bread? I cannot believe it. All thoughts to to the contrary
are from the Enemy, or nature sollicitous for the things of this Life. My
confidence ought to be in God alone.

Though it happen that we fall into troubles, temptations, or sickness, which
seem to deprive us of the good temper of Soul to attend to our devotions, we
ought to abandon our selves to the good pleasure of God, and say; God only, and
his holy Will. If the Idaea of some state of perfection presents it self to the
understanding, if we make some resolutions upon the feelings of an actual
favor, we ought the more entirely abandon our selves to God, and say, I desire
God only, and his holy Will.

This abandon makes a Soul peaceable and content, and dead to the World, to
which though she may feel some motions of affection, yet they are troublesome,
and gain no consent. In this state she is wholly absorpt in God, finding her
repose in him alone, and out of him is no contentment. It seems to her that
whatever accidents may happen, they shall not disturb her quiet, she is
grounded in God her Sovereign peace: And though she may feel some emotions in
the inferior part, they do not reach the Superior Faculties.

We must be perfect as God will have us, not as we will have it; the ways of
God are far different from the judgments of men. The World believed that King
Lewis must be Sainted by conquering the Holy Land, God made him him a Saint
indeed, but not by his Victories, but his Captivity; not by his Triumphs but
his Sufferings. We intend to Sanctity our selves by actions, and God will do it
by afflictions. We must give our selves up to his conduct, absolutely abandon
our selves to his Will, and only love his designs.

When shall I be so mortified to my own endeavors as to abandon my self wholly
to Divine Providence? I must follow purely the designs of God, love only his
good pleasure, put my confidence in him, and he will have a care of me in such
a way as shall be best to advance his Glory. Doubtless it is an effect of Grace
in us, not to rely on our own Providence, but to depend chiefly on Gods
assistance. We must therefore elevate our selves above nature, which relies on
Creatures, and fears wants, and abhors sufferings, that we may put our sole
confidence in God. Whoever trusted in him and was confounded?

There be as well Martyrs of Providence, as Martyrs for Faith. They are more
hidden, and sometimes suffer little less than the other; being content with all
occurrences of Providence, which deprive them of their Goods, or Honors, or
call their Lives in question for Conscience sake* And sometimes to enjoy God in
a more perfect way, they despise and forsake the accommodations of this life,
that they may Sacrifice themselves to God with the flames of Divine Love in
Pious Exercises. Or if Providence has so ordered, that they should be born
subject to Deseases and Miseries, they bear them with perfect resignation.

There be also Spiritual Martyrs whom Providence has ordered to suffer much by
Interior pains. O how advantageous is it for such Souls to have an eye to Gods
designs upon them, and be faithful therein! As for me, the love of Gods will
shall hereafter be the rule of my actions and undertakings. I will abandon my
self and all Creatures, and put my confidence in God alone.

If our imperfections disturb our inward Peace and union with God, we must
repair it without too much disquieting our selves for our passed faults. Union
with God is never without love, and love will blot out our Offenses, and bring
the Soul to repose in her wonted center.

CHAP. XI. To be indifferent to all things, but Gods good Pleasure.
ONe excellent effect of the Presence of God in the Soul, is to make us as it
were insensible of all things, but Gods will. A Soul that is enriched with this
indifferency, can desire nothing else; yea, not Virtues themselves, except in
order to Gods pleasure. We must strictly examine our selves concerning this
general disengagement from Creatures, and not easily believe we have it, except
on several occasions we find so by experience.

Our blessed Savior vouchsafes me extraordinary attracts to be wholly his. He
puts me into a state of wonderful Interior peace and quiet; so that it cost me
little to do Virtuously. I aspire after dear Solitude and holy Poverty. My
Health is but feeble, and in probability my Life here cannot be long, and
therefore I endeavor to live so disengaged, as if in effect I was already
dead. My dear Jesus infuses into my Soul a Spirit of denudation, and I do
cherish it; that I may live no more in my self, but my continuance in this
Pilgrimage may be beneath me, and I without any gust or affection to it.

So that at present I suffer not a little to see my self so far from God amidst
the distractions and necessities of the body, and other affairs incumbent on
me. For when God manifests himself to a Soul, experimentally tasting his
infinite goodness, to live here: below is a pain unto her. However she
continues in great Peace, because in her Interior she is purely resigned to
Gods good pleasure.

I am so habituated to have an eye to God alone, and not to please my self, but
in him, and to have no joy but for him, that I cannot rejoice to see my self
perfect, nor be sad at my Imperfections. God is my all, his will, his pleasure,
and nothing else. All reflections on my self seem to fully that Purity,
wherewith I ought to love him who is essentially good and perfect. I know God
is a jealous God, who will admit no Rival in his love; and that with great
reason, because he is only truly amiable as our Sovereign good. O that he was
loved according to his Beauty!

My Soul is inflamed with a great desire to disengage her self from all
Creatures, that I might wholly be busied about God alone. I see clearly that
this is my principal concern, and not to meddle with other affairs without
necessity. For a Soul whom God attracts to a sublime union with himself, must
cut off abundance of superfluous thoughts, discourses and occupations, or else
she will be liable to a thousand amusements. For my part, I often say to my
self; Come my Soul, let us to our principal work, and let the rest alone, that
does but estrange us from our happiness. We must live a life more retired than
ordinary, with greater silence and attention to God and Holy Duties.

This life will seem a little abject, and will not be so pleasing to many, who
are for unprofitable recreations: But will be amiable to such who are wholly
taken up with the exercises of Divine love in a beloved retirement. For they
have tltogether given themselves up to the good pleasure of God, and love
nothing but the accomplishment of his holy will.

This perfect abandon is wrought in us by pure love; and this pure love cannot
reign in our hearts without a generous mortification to all Creatures, and a
freedom from an attach to imperfections. This death does work but according to
the measure of our love to sufferings, which sufferings for God wonderfully
unites us to him with the bond of Perfection. Purity, love, suffering, God,
what would we more?

If Providence so order, I shall freely forsake my solitude, though most dear
to me. I will endeavor to die to all things, to apply my self wholly to Gods
pleasure; and sacrifice my self, and whatever I have to his holy Will. Has he a
mind to reduce me to my first nothing? If he will have it so, I am content:
Will he have me in a suffering condition? His will be done; neither will I
complain, but have recourse to Jesus Suffering for me on the Cross, and rest
contented with his good pleasure.

A Soul that loves God and his Will more than the Creature, is content and
peaceable in all events, seeing Faith assures her that the will of God is
accomplished therein. She embraces miseries and afflictions as proper means for
her sanctification, and discovers more clearly therein the good pleasure of God
then in prosperity. O my Soul, we must now give our selves to God in good
earnest indeed, by embracing contempt and poverty, forsaking the vain respects
of the World and sensual delights, to expose a Penitent, poor, hidden, abject
life, so contrary to worldly men. Methinks hitherto I have had but Idaeas, now
I desire to fall to the practice of Perfection, after the example of St.
Elizabeth. While she was a Princess, how did she abhor the life of Worldlings,
and what love had she for a poor abject life? O my God, when shall I give you
the practice of so many excellent truths, whereof you have given me the
knowledge by heavenly illuminations! O my God, speak powerful to my heart, and
make me faithful in my obedience; take from me all other things, and attach me
entirely to your good pleasure.

CHAP. XII. We ought to comport our selves with a respectful reverence in God's
presence.
A Soul that sees God present with her by the light of Faith, will often times
feel in her self the great veneration she has for so infinite a Majesty and
Benefactor. She cannot but have a respectful regard for all the inspirations
and secret advices conducing to perfection, all good desires which come from
God; yea, she has a reverence and love for Crosses that come from the hand of
her Sovereign good. The Soul in this state is peaceable, and may so continue a
long time.

O my Soul, remember this well, and when any thing comes into thy thoughts,
which thou believe to be an inspiration, cherish it with great respect, and
be faithful to the designs of God upon thee, according to the measure of their
manifestation. O what irreverence will thou be guilty of, not to be Faithful in
such cases? Above all, be content to look upon crosses and humiliations with
respect and love, and hold thy self happy to be accounted worthy to suffer for
Christ's sake. Vobis datum est, ut in Jesum credatis, and pro eo patiamini.

God is pleased to manifest to me with what dispositions I ought to walk in his
presence and in his ways,; namely, humility, patience, longanimity, simplicity
and purity. When we find our selves in good disposition of heart, humility
makes a Soul to esteem it highly, be it never so small; and thinks her self
happy to have it, because she deserves nothing; yea, is rather worthy of
eternal punishment. This will free us from sadness and discouragements, when we
see others glittering with greater Graces; and pulls down our pride from
exalting our selves higher than God will have us to be. Moreover by patience
the Soul is well composed, and labors after perfection with courage and
perseverance, be the time never so long before God bestow on her the gift of
Prayer. By longanimity the Soul suffers and supports her self in her defects
and imperfections, so that self-love shall not discourage her in her
endeavors. Simplicity makes her still to have an eye to God, and to follow his
conduct; whereby at length she arrives to Purity.

Our chief work must be to do Penance with all humility; and if God gives us
not the gift of sublime Prayer and eminent virtues, to abide peaceable in that
little we have, and we shall find favor in the eyes of God. What we ordinarily
want is a noble generosity to support crosses, and surmount the contradictions
we meet with from nature in the occasions of Fidelity. These difficulties make
us timorous and fearful; but we must be content to be feeble, that the Power of
the Grace of Jesus Christ may be glorified in us. When I am weak, then am I
strong, says St. Paul, Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. This acknowledgment of
our weakness does wonderfully humble us, and opens our eyes to see our own
poverty, and the great need we have to rely on the Grace of Jesus Christ.

I find that God requires of me to be Faithful in these following practices.

1. First, I must be very indifferent to whatsoever it shall please God to do
with me; and to be content either with action, or suffering, being attent
wholly to his good pleasure. Why therefore should I long after the Graces of
others, because great and glorious? It Is enough for me to bless God for them,
and be faithful to my own with peace and contentedness; seeing our happiness
consists in serving God in what manner he pleases.

2. When I find my self in indisposition of Health, I ought to value it, and
not forsake my usual Devotions, nor have recourse to such refreshments as
satisfy sensuality: But to take pleasure for once to make bold with my body,
that has often made bold with my Soul. Notwithstanding this must be done with
discretion.

3. I must rejoice at crosses and difficulties which I meet withal, as
affording matter to practice many great virtues, which prepare the Soul for
great graces, and make her worthy of great love. What God pleases to give
oftentimes to his best Friends in this life are fair occasions to suffer for
Christ's sake by a generous renunciation of what the World most affects, and
nature most desires.

4. I ought to be strongly persuaded that I shall be so far rich in virtue, as
I shall be poor in worldly goods; provided I be faithful to the Grace of my
vocation, which invites me to be dead to all things but only God, I must
therefore have a care not to harken to the arguments of humane prudence, which
still finds pretensions enough to shun contempts and sufferings. Our sensuality
does much retardus in the way to perfection, but humane reason more, being more
subtle and powerful to persuade. The only remedy is to abandon our selves to
the conduct of Grace, and fall in love with the folly of the Cross.

CHAP. XIII. To give our selves up to the conduct of Gods Spirit.
WE must not use violence in the practice of a Spiritual Life, by binding our
selves severely to this or that way, but sweetly follow the motions of Gods
Holy Spirit. We must row against the stream of our corrupt nature, but not
strive against the wind that comes from Heaven. Work we must, but by following
Gods holy Inspirations, which are sensible enough to holy hearts; a Soul
accustomed to the conduct of God's Spirit, does know his motions, I cannot
explicate this as I would, but it is an assured truth, she knows them by
experience*

I must wholly depend on Divine Providence, without any dependence on
Creatures, though holy; casting my self into the arms of God, as an Infant that
takes no care but to lie in the Mothers bosom, to suck the teat, and delighted
therewith does love her dearly, I confess our blessed Savior treats me after
this manner; for without any solicitude of mine to nourish my Soul with
Spiritual food, or without any searching into Books for that end, but only in
his Sacred heart, I experience that I want nothing; which sometimes does strike
me with admiration and fear, that I have been negligent to do my duty. But this
fear does presently vanish, seeing God was pleased to provide for me, before I
thought on it.

This makes me know experimentally, that God will have me wholly depend upon
him, without any support from Creatures; for if I seek to them, his care
diminishes, and my Soul falls into indigence, finding little succor from the
Creatures she had recourse to; which makes her soon retire to the Paps of
Providence, and this suffices. A Mother sometimes has milk in one Pap, and not
in the other; if the little Infant will change, he is deceived; but finding
little help from the left Pap, he returns to the right, and now will not quit
it, being grown wise by experience. My Soul thus finding little help from the
creature, returns presently to the Pap of Providence, and there abides.

I fear sometimes to have too many consolations in Prayer; but this does
satisfy me, that God will have me live as an Infant, that stands in need of
such comforts. He make choice of other Souls for great performances that regard
his glory. If an Infant should leave the bosom of his Mother, to do her
service, he would fall and hurt himself, and do no good. He must then let
others work, and be content with his Mothers embraces. Wherefore what I have to
do, is to stick close to God, and let others travel in great affairs, as more
grown up in grace, in comparison of whom a little Infant is nothing but
weakness.

My perfection consists in my fidelity in a perfect abandon of my self to God;
which will increase, as I advance in the ways of God and his designs. I must
therefore be in a manner passive, and in my thoughts, desires, actions,
dispositions interior and exterior depend on the pure conduct of God and his
pleasure. A Soul well illuminated, loves not the dispositions she finds in her
self, but God who gave them, and his will is the sole object of her
complacencies; it being all one to her to be in this or that disposition as
best pleases God, and loving nothing more than a perfect abandon of her self to
his Providence.

O dear abandon! Thou art at present the object of my love, which by thee is
purified, augmented and enflamed; whosoever possesses thee does know and taste
the amiable transports of great liberty of Spirit. A Soul loses her self
happily in thee, after having lost all Creatures for the love of abjection, and
finds her self no where but in God, being dead to all things besides him.

O dear abandon! Thou art the disposition of dispositions, and all other do
refer to thee. Happy are they that know thee, being of more worth than all
other graces. A Soul in abandon has a pure regard to God, and is not concerned
but for his Interests; yea, desires not abjection, nor any thing else but Gods
good pleasure. Few words cannot explicate the great effects that it works in
the Interior, to establish a Soul perfectly in God. It Is abandon that makes
her insensible in all kinds of accident, and nothing but the loss of abandon
can afflict her.

You are admirable, O my God, you are admirable in your holy operations and
assentions that you make in Souls, whom you conduct from light to light by your
Divine Providence, which is not known but by experience. Sometimes it seemed to
me that the grace to love abjection was the highest pitch, but now I see that
abandon mounts the Soul to a more elevated state.

O dear abandon! Thou doubtless wilt be the ultimate disposition. I desire
nothing but thee and death, as the gate whereby to enter into an eternal
abandon. Dear death, how pleasant and lovely do thou seem unto me! What
allurements do I see in thee! Deliver me from my captivity, that I may fully
enjoy my well-beloved. However if thy coming will interrupt my abandon, come
not, for thou art nothing in comparison, and all thy delights will be bitter to
me.

O dear abandon! Thou art the beloved of my heart, which ardently breaths after
thee. But when shall I know that I possess thee perfectly? This shall be when
the Divine will shall reign perfectly in me. For my Soul shall be established
in an entire indifferency to all events, and means of perfection, when she
shall have no other joy then in God, no other content, no other felicity.

Our blessed Savior says often to a Soul abandoned to his will, Think upon
me, and I will think upon thee. That is to say, let thy care be to be lost in
me, and I will take order for thy affairs. Such a Soul does not spend much time
in the things of this Life, but in the praises of God: Her exercise being a
pure consideration of Divine Providence, in whose arms she quietly reposes her
self, fearing nothing but infidelity.

CHAP. XIV. How the perfect abandon of our selves to God, makes us find a
Paradise upon Earth.
SO much as a Soul is faithful to this abandon, so much does she abound with
consolation. For she is content with the state wherein Providence has put her,
and is well-pleased with all God's Ordinations concerning her self, as are most
for his Glory, and has a tender love for the Decrees of God's will, who from
all Eternity has determined to conduct her in this way, which she would not
change for one more elevared, though one sigh would gain it.

Moreover, such a Soul takes much delight in knowing that many Souls are
conducted by more excellent ways, whereby God may be more glorified. For seeing
she desires purely the Glory of God, she is well-pleased that God is glorified
by others, and rejoices at it, saying with great resentment, Omnis spiritus
laudet Dominum; Let every spirit praise our Lord, every way, every state.

This resentment somewhat resembles that of the Blessed in Heaven, where the
Angels rejoice more at the Glory which the Seraphins render to God, than at
their own service. And that great difference which an Angel sees between
himself and a Seraphin, does not raise in him the least desire to be a
Seraphin, and his joy is greatest, in that the Divine will has made him only in
the Order of Angels. Thus it ought to be with holy Souls on Earth, who
participating of one another good, are content with the graces God bestows
upon them, and sees no good dispositions in themselves or others, which does
not comfort them. O what profound peace is here!

There is but little difference to be in the state of blessedness, or in a
perfect abandon to God's good pleasure, because there is nothing can afflict
such a Soul, and she can want nothing that contents the heart. Great Saints do
not wait for Paradise with impatience, having in a manner found it upon Earth,
by a perfect abandon to God's good pleasure.

O holy Virgin! how were you content that your Son should ascend into Heaven
without your company? Had not you as much right to follow him, as the holy
Fathers detained in Limbo? They were his Servants only, but you his Mother
also, and yet you remain upon Earth to partake of Miseries, and they mount to
Heaven to possess Joys eternal, and a Crown of Glory. How different is this
distribution! Your own dear Son, holy Virgin, vouchsafes to go to Limbo, to
assist the holy Fathers, and carry them from thence with him; and you who are
so near him, who have served and accompanied him during his mortal life, even
in his Passions and Ignominies, now he is full of Glory, leaves you here.

And, what I more admire, you amorously acquiesce in this abandon, and are
content to want his corporal presence with spiritual joy. O what marvels do
pass in your Soul, O admirable Mother, which transcends our understanding! All
that we can discover, is, that you are as well content with the privation as
presence of Jesus; to remain in Jerusalem among his Crucifyers, as the company
of Angels who sing his Praises, when it is the good pleasure of God, and the
Eternal Father has so ordained.

O my Soul! when shall thou be perfectly abandoned to God's good pleasure? Do
thou find thy self as equally content in privations as enjoyments? When will thou be satisfied with all events, dis-engaged wholly from what is not God, and
value nothing but his good pleasure? Seeing that the Mother of God is content
to be deprived of the visible presence of Jesus, because he will have it so,
ought not thou to desire solely the will of God, with an indifferency to all
things else? If thou might choose, thou ought rather to embrace
Desolations, than Consolations; Neglects and Contempts, than Honors and
Endearments; seeing Jesus and Mary have most loved a suffering life.

But this perfect abandon, this holy indifferency to any state, this union with
the good pleasure of God, is yet a Mine of greater Treasures. It Is the
sublimest, purest, perfectest disposition that can be in the Soul; it is of more
worth than other dispositions, and they without it are of no value; yea, in
some sort are but imperfections. Contemplation, a desire to be charitable, a
will to help our Neighbors in spiritual things, are good and holy disposition,
however God does not always require these of us. When God is pleased to leave a
Soul in aridities, poor and desolate, she would be unfaithful, if then she
should attempt such matters: but union to the good pleasure of God can never
lead us to imperfection, but always elevates us in grace, and therefore ought
to be permanent in us.

When a Soul has lost all, she may believe she has lost nothing, so that she
lose not this disposition of union with the will of God; which indeed cannot be
lost, if our hearts be elevated above all earthly things. Such a Soul can say
truly with some great Saints, Deus meus and omnia; O my God! you are my all, in
possessing you I have all things else.

How ignorant are we, in complaining of the loss of whatever this world
affords, seeing the loss of them, if we be not our own Enemies, may make us
find a more pure union with God's good pleasure! For we never advance more in
Virtue than in a state of denudation. And if we desire nothing but the will of
God, and are content with that, whatever it be, we can want no disposition to
perfection.

Every state, every gracious disposition has its proper worth, they are good
and pleasing, and ought to be valued, though some have more excellency in
themselves than others. But we must be content with those God is pleased to
vouchsafe us, in peace, submission, humility, and indifferency to every state,
reposing our selves in the will of God, as in our center. A Soul in this state
somewhat approaches to the Peace and Felicity of the Blessed in Heaven.

CHAP. XV. How the Beauty that is in the Order of God contents a Soul.
I Never yet have well understood this verity so often repeated; Not one hair
of your head shall fall to the ground without the will of your Heavenly Father.
The clear and full understanding of which will make a Soul happy on earth, and
the crosses which before did afflict her Spirit, will be a joy unto her, and
cordial comfort: For then she tastes the wonderful sweetness contained in the
order of God to bring her to Happiness; so that Paradise without this order
would be as a hell unto her, and to be in a suffering condition with this order
will become a Paradise. The order of God is all in all unto her, and without it
all things are as nothing, seeing she is only content with the will of God.

The Soul that truly understands this Truth, lives always well pleased in the
changes of this Life, observing therein the order of Gods Providence, wherewith
she is well satisfied, and resolved to be indifferent to every condition. If we
be not content with a low vocation, as well as with great Graces, it proceeds
from interest and self-love. Great Saints of God, your ways are high and
sublime, and mine are low and ordinary; in which, however I live well pleased
without aspiring after your elevations, because I taste a sweetness in Gods
order that contents my heart.

To abide in interior peace and tranquillity with submission to the Orders of
God, by a strong union with his good pleasure in all things, is not the work of
a day, we must fight courageously many years with all sorts of enemies, before
we can gain so great a victory. In my judgment, there is nothing more dangerous
than to leave the order of God, and to aim at greater things than he will have
us. But a Soul content with Gods good pleasure is well pleased with any state,
wherein is no Sin, nor beloved Imperfections. But our Pride is the source of a
thousand disturbances, and we continually trouble our selves, if we will aim at
too high a perfection, or run too fast to that which God discovers to us by
light from Heaven.

A pure Soul must desire nothing but the pure satisfaction of God, and not her
own interest, though she find in her self much imperfection. Jesus Christ, to
whom she has absolutely given her self such as she is, is all perfection; this
is enough for her, she will find in him her repose, her tranquillity, her
beatitude, without troubling her self too much with her defects and failings. I
know not how it comes to pass, but I am content and imperfect both together,
and yet my imperfections do not please me; neither by the Grace of God shall
they disquiet me. I do not seek for the object of my contentment in my self,
but in my God and Savior, the only love and center of my Soul.

CHAP. XVI. The practice of the Presence of God, for the seven days of the Week.
THe solid foundations of a Spiritual Life are Mortifications, pure Virtue, to
shun excess of business, though never so good, to converse with Holy Persons;
but above all, Prayer and the love of Solitude, which affords more liberty to
attend to the one thing necessary. The Soul that loves, cannot but suffer at
the absence of her Beloved; and therefore love sets her to Prayer, to make him
present. And the better to converse with God, and entertain him with amorous
discourses, she applies her self sometimes to the Being of God, sometimes to
this or that Divine Perfection, considering him as the Being of Beings, who
only is of himself, and before whom the whole Creation is nothing. Sometimes
her Meditations present him to her all-powerful, with his only word creating
and conserving all things: And then again she considers him as infinitely wise,
ordering all things by his wonderful Providence: Sometimes as infinitely
merciful and patient, bearing with our manifold sins and provocations: And then
again as infinitely loving and amorous of our Souls in a manner unspeakable.
Sometimes as infinitely just, hating iniquity with an implacable aversion, not
sparing his only Son, being a Sacrifice for sin: Lastly as infinitely good and
merciful, pardoning our innumerable sins and transgressions. Each day of the
Week may take up one of these considerations in mental Prayer, if God do not
suggest to the Soul some other matter of Meditation.

The first Day. The Being of God.
IS it so, that we live, move, and are continually in the bosom of God, In
ipso vivimus, movemur, and sumus; and yet think so little of him? He vouchsafes
to dwell in our hearts, and our hearts run after Creatures to rest in them,
that is, in nothing; for the Being of all things is nothing else in respect of
God but as shadows about us. What takes up the greatest part of the World, does
consist but in imagination, as Honor, Dignity, Praises, Reputation, etc. so
much beloved and admired. There be other things have a Being to our Senses,
visible and palpable, yet but corporeal and corruptible, to day here, and gone
to morrow; however poor Creatures as we are, we set our hearts upon them, as if
they were eternal. There are other things whose Being is more permanent and
elevated, above sense, as universal Verities, which consist in the
understanding, however not eternal nor immense, nor without defect. O my God, I
elevate my self, as I am able, to find you, and I discover that your Being
depends not upon imagination, or sense, or reason, but you are above all this,
Incomprehensible.

O Eternal Being! You never had beginning, nor ever shall have end. O infinite
Being! You are nothing of what we see, or know here below; You are an Infinity
to whom nothing is wanting, to whom nothing can be added, from whom nothing can
be taken away; Your Perfection is Infinite. O immense Being! You fill all
things without extension, without quantity, without parts or composition; it is
You alone in whom is the eternal source of Life and Being. When I search for
you, if I go out of your self what do I find but privation and nothing? O my
God, what damage, what annihilation is it, when we fall into sin or
imperfection? For this is to go out of our Being, to plunge our selves in the
Abiss of nothingness. Ad nihilum redactus sum.

O my Soul, will thou always commit folly? Will thou daily run after deceits
and vanity, that is, the Grandeurs and pleasures of this World? Will thou
continually tire thy self to follow a shadow that flies from thee? And will thou forget God, the Being of Beings, who is every where present, and offers
himself unto thee? O my God, so take me up with your presence, that I may
forget all other things to think on you, my only Happiness.

The second Day. The Omnipotency of God.
It Is no better than a Prison to confine our Souls within the small limits of
created Beings; it is a slavery to be tied to the intolerable yoke, which the
World and Vanity impose on their Servants; it is a Hell to be precipitated into
the dungeon of exorbitant Passions and filthy Vices. But it is a Paradise and
glorious liberty, to be taken up with the Thoughts of God, where we may walk at
large, finding all in him to be infinitely great, his Goodness, his Beauty, his
Sweetness; and to apply our selves to admire sometimes This, then That
perfection.

This day, O my Soul, let us contemplate the Omnipotency of God, wherein we may
behold so many wonders. O how the effects thereof are admirable in the
Production, conservation and operations of all Creatures! It Is by this Power
the Immense Machine of the World is upheld upon vast spaces of nothing; it is by
It the Heaven and Stars observe their motions without deficiency, the Elements
and Plants, and Animals are constant in their Productions. Without the
influence of this Omnipotency, no Creature could subsist one moment, or have
any operation. In a word, so great is this Power, that in an instant it could
by one silent word produce a thousand new Worlds out of nothing. O Divine
Omnipotency, how little art thou considered, and yet how able to ravish all
considering hearts?

O my Soul, let us consider that we are always in the hands of an Omnipotent
God. Shall we then be discouraged with the difficulties we meet withal in this
Life of Miseries? Shall we be afraid of our own frailties and weaknesses, and
the Power of our Adversaries? Is not Omnipotency able to uphold us? Who can
pluck us out of our Heavenly Fathers hands? If God be for us, who can be
against us? This is our hope, this our comfort.

O my God, I am very sensible what a weak Creature I am, and how Potent are my
enemies; but this does not terrify me, because You, my strength and supporter,
are Omnipotent, in whom only I put my trust. Omnia possum in eo qui me
comfortat, I can do all things, as St. Paul assures us, through Christ
strengthening me.

The third Day. Of the Wisdom of God.
O My Soul, let us this day contemplate the Wisdom of God, which is able to
ravish us, if we consider a right the beautiful order of the Universe. O what
admirable Economy is there in the order of Nature, of Grace, of Glory! O how
all the dispositions of the Divine Wisdom do appear therein most wonderful! We
cannot seriously reflect or meditate on any of Gods works, but we shall find
his Wisdom to be incomprehensible, and this does ravish a devout Soul, and
makes her often cry out; O my God, how well is this done! how wisely is that
ordained!

If my Soul fixes her thoughts in Heaven, to contemplate there the admirable
order of that Holy City, in the various ranks of Angels, the several Glories of
the Holy Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, who are themselves
transported in admiration of the Divine Wisdom herein, can we but cry out, O
infinite Wisdom, how profound art thou in thy dispositions! If from Heaven we
descend to Earth, how is the Soul ravished to observe the unspeakable bounty of
Divine Wisdom in the order of all things, bringing about the great work of man's
Salvation so infallibly and sweetly? To see God himself in a manner annihilated
to purchase for sinful Creatures Infinite Grandeurs by his Humiliations, to
behold the triumphs of the Cross, of Jesus Crucified, over the World, sin, and
hell, and the powers of darkness; to see and consider these things, must needs
make us cry out in admiration of the Divine Wisdom incarnate, O sapientia; quae
de Caelo ad terram descendisti! O Wisdom, which descended from Heaven to earth,
what wonders have you wrought for man's redemption?

What Praises, what Thanksgivings, O my Soul, will thou render, what returns
will thou make to God for all his benefits and ordinations concerning thee? We
must conform our selves to the Divine Will, and say, O my God, righteous are
you in all your ways, it is well done, because so ordered by your Infinite
Wisdom. Do we live, or die? are we afflicted, or comforted? Sit nomen Domini
benedictum, Seeing God will have it so, his Name be blessed. The consideration
hereof, O my Soul, will teach us patience and resignation in all the events and
changes of Mortality.

The fourth Day. The Patience of God.
O My God, how long is your Patience, how profound and unsearchable! Who but a
God of Infinite Patience could suffer daily such provocations and
contradictions from mortals, and yet continue to do them a thousand favors, to
persuade them to amendment? O patience of God, how art thou unspeakable, how
art thou unconquerable! O my God, you know those who will hate and Blaspheme
you eternally, and yet you bear with them, vouchasafing them your Sun, and
Light, and daily Mercies, still calling upon them with your holy inspirations
to return unto you for their everlasting good. Sustinuit in multa patientia
vasa irae. Your patience is wonderful to sinners; we must blame our selves when
we perish eternally.

On what side soever I cast my eyes from one Pole to the other, I see God every
where offended, contemned, contradicted, provoked, blasphemed, and in all the
infinite triumphs of his patience sweetly working the Salvation of Sinners, O
what a long series of patience do I observe in the course of my Life? To bear
with me so many years wallowing in the mire of my sins, when I deserved by
Justice to have been cast into Hell: To pass over all the resistances I have
made to his holy inspirations: To have waited and conducted me by his mercy to
repentance. O ye infinite Patience of God toward me! It Is to you I owe my
Salvation, or else I had been long since a lost creature for ever.

Are we not ashamed to see our passions and impatience with others, when God,
notwithstanding our manifold provocations, is so long-suffering toward us? A
single word, and sometimes our sole imagination does put us in choler, and we
contend in heat, without containing our selves 'till our anger be over. O my
God of Infinite patience, if you should thus deal with us, what would become of
us poor creatures?

The fifth Day. Of the Love of God.
COme my Soul, let us walk this day in the pleasant and vast extensions of Gods
love; the holy love of our merciful God, a love incomprehensible, which is from
eternity to eternity, as large as his Essence, and the self-same thing with it;
where ever I am, I find my self surrounded with the effects of this infinite
Love. O my God, I sometimes contemplate you as good to us, and consider you as
in your Creatures, which you vouchsafe me for my use and delight: But now I
have an eye to you, as you are in your self, and I find my self so in you, that
I cannot go out of you, for you environ me on every side; you are in me, and
out of me, and I cannot go from you, but I must go to you. How art thou
beloved, O my Soul, how art thou beloved of God, with an affection surpassing
the love of a Mother to her Children? The most she can do, is to carry them in
her bosom with a tender affection, which is sometimes wanting: But God does
lodge thee in the midst of his heart, and will never forsake thee. O what
benefits and mercies do thou receive from this Infinite goodness!

Alas! when shall I live in God alone, and not in my self, that he may only
reign in my heart? O my God, I confess and acknowledge that you have the sole
right to possess my heart entirely, and it is most mine, when it is wholly yours;
but be pleased, dear God, to defend your right, which the World would take from
you against my will. O how miserable am I, if I set my affections on any thing
beside you, knowing that this is my duty, and my Happiness.

O my God, from this moment I for ever forbid any Creature to possess my heart.
Hark hither my will, I now give thee this express command; that thou open not
the door of my heart but to my Well-beloved, whose infinite love has prevented
us from all eternity.

The sixth Day. The Justice of God.
TO take a prospect of the Divine Justice is not less pleasing to good men, nor
less admirable. Thou will see it, O my Soul, governing the whole universe. The
throne of this Divine Justice is established in Heaven, the arrests are
pronounced on earth, and the execution thereof in the regions of darkness.

It Is Divine Justice that sets a Crown upon heir heads who have fought the
battles of the Lord of Hosts with courage and fidelity: And for these momentary
and light afflictions rewards them with an eternal weight of Glory. O Justice
crowning and glorifying us, how lovely art thou!

It Is Divine Justice that thunders Comminations against sinners on earth, to
bring them to repentance by the terrors of everlasting sufferings, and
sometimes chastises them with temporal afflictions, that they may not be
tormented to all eternity. O amiable Justice, that treats so here poor sinners,
as to make them Penitents, and not miserable!

But O how terrible is the Divine Justice, which in hatred of sin does punish
eternally those who will not be brought to any amendment? O how does a severe,
but just Sentence condemn such to everlasting flames, always devouring, and
never consuming them, which the breath of Gods anger has kindled, and shall
never be extinguished! O my God, you did not spare your own Son taking our sins
upon him, to show us the better how to detest sin. O who can but tremble,
considering your severity? O who dare provoke the Almighty to anger? Quis novit
potestatem irae tuae? O my God, I do consider this, and fly for refuge to your
Mercy.

The seventh Day. The Mercy of God.
O Divine Mercy, how do thou ravish my heart? It Is to thee my Soul will sing
eternally, Miserecordias Domini in aeternum cantabo. In my retired thoughts I
look upon this World as a great Hospital, filled with some sick, some maimed,
some lame, some blind, some languishing some incurable; and Divine Mercy goes a
visiting of them. These she encourages, those she comforts, binds up the wounds
of others, and offers remedies proper to each misery, not absolutely abandoning
any one, though never in so desperate a condition.

O amiable Mercy of our God, into what corner of the World do not thou go, to
exercise thy goodness? Are there any miserable Sons of Adam, who have not
tasted the sweets of comforts? Who ever made his addresses to thee, that has
not found most tender compassions in thy bosom? O my Soul, what must we pant
after but the more then material embraces of this adorable Mercy? In what can
thou put thy hope and confidence, except in the source of this inexhaustible
goodness?

The whole World is full of the Mercy of God, and will thou O my Soul, afflict
thy self, and be discouraged with temporal miseries and momentary sufferings?
It is the work of Mercy thus to punish thee. Do not the Sufferings of this
life, work for us a far more eternal weight of Glory? Art thou, O my Soul,
terrified with the remembrance of thy sins? Consider God is a God of infinite
Mercy, and desires not the death of a sinner. He who refuses to throw himself
into the arms of Gods Mercy, is ignorant, or else* lays not to heart, that
Mercy attends the greatest sinners to the last moment of Life for their
Conversion. Miserecordia tua subsequetur me omnibus diebus vitae meae. O my
God, as your Mercy has prevented me, so grant that it may follow me all the
days of my Life.

Soli Deo sit Gloria.
The End of the Third BOOK.
BOOK IV. Of Solitude; and the practice of two excellent Retreats of ten Days.
CHAP. I. Of the Beauty of Christian Solitude.
WE ought to have an esteem of all sorts of Professions, whereof God is the
Author; who though he be but one, does nevertheless afford to his Church
different states of living. It concerns us therefore to think very honorably
of them all, and manifest as much by our words, but to betake our selves only
to what God calls us. The excellency of other ways ought not to withdraw us
from our proper Vocation. A Soul then may delight her self in beholding the
Church as a most beautiful Meadow, replenished with great variety of Flowers of
singular virtue; and so taking complacency in all states of Life, to apply her
self only to that which she has a call from Heaven, and this also, because God
requires it from her.

A Solitary retired life is so beautiful, and has such charming attractives,
that when the Soul has once experience of it, she finds there her Heaven upon
earth. Being to take a farewell of one of my Friends; who was returning home,
and having parted with him, this thought forthwith strongly ceaz'd my
imagination. Alas, my God! when shall I return home to my self, that is, to
you? Seeing your goodness is more manifest in affording me a place in the
Idaeas of your understanding from all eternity, before time gave me an
existence among created entities, now I am your Creature, let me consider my
self daily as in you, who are my inheritance and everlasting possession. To be
be at home, O my Soul, is not to be with thy self, but with God thy Creator.

O how great is the blindness of men, not to understand that they have no other
Country but the Divinity, from whence they proceeded by their Creation!
Inconsiderate Creatures, whether are you going? For my part I will return home
to the Fountain of my Being, my true home who is great, beautiful, admirable,
eternal and incomprehensible. O what joy is it to consider that my true home is
such as he is! Is it possible, O my God, that you are the home and center of my
Soul? Why do we not readily go out from the clogging crowds of Creatures, where
we are in perpetual banishment, to return to our home, the bosom of our
Creator? What can I desire in Heaven or in Earth besides you, my portion and
Inheritance for ever?

Comfort thy self, O my Soul, considering that thou shall return to the
Divinity, thy glorious home, and in the interim rest content with Jesus, thy
crucified home, and repose. O how amiable also, how great and admirable is
Jesus crucified! My Soul can find no Peace but by resting in him, where nature
tastes a bitterness a thousand times more sweet than all Worldly delicacies.
Without him all other pleasures are but dreaming fancies. O Jesus crucified,
the World knows not your sweets, the beauty of your sufferings is hid from
their sight; they behold you on the Cross with carnal eyes; else next to the
Divinity they would discover nothing more sweet and lovely.

Do not therefore stay me up with Flowers, but with Thorns; do not encompass me
with Apples, but with Nails, because I languish with love. The beauties and
sweets of Jesus pierce my heart, and I cannot suffer more, than to be without
suffering in the sight of my suffering and crucified Jesus. But some say, to
suffer much is hurtful to us. Alas! do we find it hurtful to us to love much?
Wherefore will ye that love crucifying, shall be more moderate then
love-enjoying, which too often weakens the Soul, and sometimes wounds us to
death? A too great solicitude about corporal health, is a sign we do not take
up our abode in the wounds of Jesus crucified. We are never better then when
sighing under the burden of the Cross.

God beholding himself, takes infinite delight in his own perfections; out of
himself he is alike pleased, to see those Perfections crowned in his Creatures.
His mercy does triumph in the Blessed Saints and Angels, and his Justice in
Hell. A Soul introverted in solitude with God alone, finds sweetness
unspeakable in considering these marvels* She feels also an excessive joy to
see that the travels, and sighs, and sufferings, and blood of Jesus are crowned
with a Glory by the Elect on earth, whether it be by suffering or enjoying.
When they conquer a temptation, the blood of Jesus is crowned. When they
practice heroic acts of Virtue, the blood of Jesus is crowned. All glory be to
him both in Time and Eternity.

O Mortals, come and see, if there be any beauty, goodness and perfection
comparable to that of Jesus, our God and Savior. O how lovely is he, and yet
how little is he beloved? How great, and yet how despised? How infinite in his
Perfections, and yet how little known? O the only desire of my Soul, discover
your self somewhat more clearly to me, that being ravished with your Beauties,
I may be solely taken up with your Perfections. Shall any creature after this
oblige me to regard it? No, my eyes shall be fixed on God alone.

Farewell then poor Creatures, I am above you; you shall never more amuse me; I
leave you to place my thoughts on my Well-beloved. Methinks I feel his powerful
attracts, drawing me out of my self, to possess him alone. My Friends, do not
molest me any more, leave me in my self to possess my God, and admire his
Perfections. You may serve him by helping others, but leave me to serve him in
himself, I desire none but him, nor to be taken up with any thing but him,
seeing he is pleased to let me know it is his pleasure. Farewell Creatures,
farewell Friends, farewell Devotes, farewell World; I am going to God, to unite
my self unto him by a constant retreat, that shall never suffer a separation.

CHAP. II. Of the necessity of Solitude.
I am resolved on the Vigil of All Saints to mount up to Heaven, to
congratulate their Happiness, and beg their Charity; for surely they will be
very liberal on their general Festival, and my Soul hopes for great succors
from them in her miseries. However I will chiefly solicit the Blessed Hermits
and Solitary Monks, whose habitation in this Life was in Deserts and
Monasteries. I have a call from Heaven to address my self to them, to beg their
Intercession, for some part of their Spirit of Introversion, retirement from
the World, and Interior poverty, which is the true life of Holy Recluses,
being in a profound solitude of Soul by a denudation of all Creatures; while
their Bodies inhabit the most secret Deserts.

Great Saints! what do you here upon Earth? You labor not to help others,
being far removed from the company of Men; so that you seem to be but
unprofitable servants. Alas! how ill do sensual men judge of the Interior of
Saints? I tell you these are the great Servants of God, who in their Deserts
offer up continual Sacrifices to the Grandeurs of an incomprehensible Majesty,
by profound poverty of Spirit, and annihilation of themselves: And being in a
denudation of all Creatures, their desires are for God, and him alone. This is
the Happy state, this is the Paradise my Soul sighs after at present; to live
so sequestered from Creatures, as if I were in the Deserts of Lybia.

Good Jesus, there is nothing impossible to your Grace, grant me this poverty of
Spirit; and if Exterior poverty be necessary to possess this Interior whereof
I speak, make me as poor as Job; if my Friends must leave me, I will freely
part with them, and be content to be forgotten in their affections for ever.

O my God, estrange me from all Creatures, give me that profound poverty of
Spirit, which methinks I understand, though I cannot express it. Thus dead to
the World, I shall enter into the joy of my Savior, for there is no enjoying of
God, without a perfect denudation of all Creatures. But how shall I get this
Treasure, who have the dominion of Temporal Possessions? I must either really
quit them to gain this Jewel; or possess them, as if I possessed nothing. The
examples of the Blessed in Heaven afford me both comfort and satisfaction. The
Saints are rich, for they want nothing, and notwithstanding they are poor in
Spirit, because they continually annihilate all the riches of their glory in
the presence of the great God, being ready to part with their Felicity, and to
be annihilated, if such was the Will of God. In this manner I must possess what
I have, being prepared to part with it, when God will have it so.

I observe that for want of Solitude, the Soul does not discern the more
subtle workings of God in her interior, which afterward she discovers by
experience. These are great Graces, but come to no effect for want of
introversion and attention. I know well enough that Faith is sufficient to
direct the Soul to attain to the knowledge and love of her Creator; But it is
true also that the God of love has more secret and in-time ways, wherewith the
Divine Wisdom works the Soul into a temper, to make her sensible of his amorous
embraces. O my God, how are you hidden in the fund of our Souls! And you do not
discover your self to us except in a perfect Solitude; when we are out of the
noise of Creatures, God and the Soul being alone together.

O poor Mortals, how long shall your hearts hanker after the things of this
World? Turn your selves perfectly to God, and see and taste how sweet he is.
Happy are those moments, although but short, wherein we have a taste of the
Divine sweetness, and partake of the effects of his sensible presence. Such a
Soul will find in her self a certain aversion and disgust of worldly Vanities,
a desire to leave them, a love of Solitude and Silence, to be the more at
liberty to attend to Gods Service; all other things now appearing to her but as
dross and dung, and of no value. Speak to such a Soul of worldly affairs, and
you seem to cast dust in her eyes, which hinders her from beholding the
beauties of her Beloved; and as soon as she can, she clears her eyes, to
recover her Happiness. This inconvenience makes her flee from the World, to
preserve her purity from being fullied with the dust of Creatures.

When we leave our Solitude by the order of God to converse with men, we find
our selves better disposed to the practice of Heroic Virtues, to a perfect
contempt of riches and honors, to patience in cross affairs, to the love of
enemies, to an affability, condescendance, and fidelity to our Friends: Thus
expressing in our actions the Image of Jesus Christ, by faithfully complying
with the occasions of Virtue. Pure Mortification, pure Virtue, these are the
delights of a Soul, that has conversed with God in a holy retirement, where
she has learned to love him purely, and suffer for him.

CHAP. III. The difficulties of Solitude.
I find by experience, that nothing more hinders our Salvation and Holiness,
than to overwhelm our selves with multiplicity of Affairs, though lawful, so as
to loose thereby the times allotted for Prayer and Mortification, the proper
nourishment of a Spiritual Life. A gracious Soul must therefore so comport her
self in converse and action, as not to engage at all her affections therein;
for God alone is the life of her Spirit; without whom she finds her self both
poor and miserable. It Is God only makes our Solitude amiable, being a kind of
participation of the Life of God, which consists in knowing and loving. This
Solitary life is much endang'red, and sometimes lost in a crowd of Creatures;
nor can the Soul approach to them without some spiritual detriment. She must
therefore have a care not to leave her retirements, to follow Worldly business,
unless it be by some inspiration from God, or obedience to Superiors. In which
cases if she labors to do good to others, it will be no prejudice to her self.

You may give them a hearing, who tell you that it is not well done thus to
retire from the World; for they may speak this out of Charity, but yet without
a true knowledge and understanding of your way. To discern this aright, we must
have a care not to confound spiritual maxims, some whereof are proper for a
Contemplative, others for an Active Life. These are to be put in practice
without partiality, for otherwise we shall much disorder the ways of God, and
disquiet others. Seeing the Active and Contemplative Life are different, the
practice must be different likewise. The Active requires to spend much time to
do others good both Spiritually and Corporally; which cannot be done without
abilities and possessions to relieve the poor. These possessions cannot be kept
without some care and trouble; and this care of Temporals is suitable enough to
the Active Life: But damagable to the Contemplative; which lays aside all
Temporal Affairs, least they should divert them from their principal
employment, which is the actual love of God, and attention to his Divine
presence.

The Active Life requires possessions, to have wherewithal to give to the
poor: It Is enough for the Contemplative, to have himself in possession, that he
may give himself up wholly to God, whereby he possesses him with great
advantage. Those that undertake this Solitary Life of Contemplation must expect
sufferings on every side; yea, some spiritual men will account them Sycophants.
There Is little discourse of them, because they live a hidden life, and pass in
a manner for unprofitable Persons. They live unknown, and die in abjection; and
living a despised life, they are esteemed by too many but as the dust of the
earth. And which is the greatest cross of all, if their Directors have not
light and judgment in these matters, they force them to an Active Life, and so
bring them off from their way and center, with a continual rack and violence to
their Conscience and Inclinations. The Devil Persecutes them in their
Solitudes, endeavoring to divert them by disgusts, or by Idaeas of great
matters they shall do by helping others and that they ought to prefer the
salvation of one only Soul, before all their Prayers and Contemplations.

Notwithstanding all this, they ought to continue constant to the Solitude, to
which they have a call from Heaven; unless God give them different
Inspirations, to apply themselves to an Active Life. Holy Abraham did quit his
Hermitage upon these terms, to search out his debauched Niece, to save her
Soul. The truest Rule for Contemplatives, either to continue, or quit their
Solitude, is to observe the instincts and motions of God in their Interior,
examined by skillful Directors in those matters.

We must have a special care, that in the eager pursuit of the things of God,
we do not withdraw our selves from the Divine Order concerning us in a course
of spirituality. Our great efforts must be, not to do much, but to please God:
And seeing God is pleased with a little from us (though all we can do for his
glory is always very little; and almost nothing) we must be content to do
little, since such is the order of his Providence. Let every one go on in his
own way with indifferency, love and fidelity: leaving others Peaceable in
theirs, with a great esteem of the Grace of God in them; and continuing on our
course; it is no prudence to discover the actings of God in us, unless to such
who are Practitioners in Contemplation.

Who has a call to Solitude and Contemplation, must free himself from Creatures
as much as possible; shun discourses of News, and reflections on Worldly
Affairs, unless constrained by necessity or Charity: For a little matter will
darken the Soul, and hinder her from being elevated to God by Contemplation. To
conclude, believe me, a true Contemplation must be endowed with profound Purity
of Virtue, which cannot be attained by a constant Mortification of sensual
nature, which is no small and a lasting Martyrdom.

CHAP. IV. The Occupations of Solitude.
MEthinks for some days past I have had many inward motions inviting me to
Solitude and Contemplation, which notwithstanding did not relish with me,
because in such retirements we do little or nothing for the good of others. But
we ought to carry our selves above such considerations, resolutely following
the conduct of God, with a firm adherence to his Orders. In this faithful
compliance with Divine Inspirations, consists the Purity and Happiness of our
Souls; it being the principal work, and most advantageous means to attain to
Perfection and union with God.

O my God, I am in a manner good for nothing; you have not endowed me with
great Talents for the good of others: But I must needs acknowledge your
singular mercies to me, in enriching my Soul with Divine love, and continual
aspiring after union with you. Let others do what you have set them about, it is
sufficient for me, if the ardours of Divine Love inflame my heart. To have
inflamed affections for you, is my greatest work, but to bring my heart to such
a temper, it must become like dry wood, being emptyed of humidity, by a
separation from all Creatures. This desire of inflamed affections puts me upon
purifying my heart; and the expectation of enjoyment makes me eager in the
practice of Mortification, by embracing Evangelical Councels, and maxims of
Christianity. Seeing poverty, contempt and crosses increase the flames of
Divine Love; they are welcome to me, for I ardently desire to see them arise to
their highest elevation.

I know a good Religious man, who in his Solitudes is in continual Prayer, not
only by the elevation of his Spirit, but by union with God in a wonderful
manner. My Soul finds great contentment in his discourse and conversation. In
sickness his enjoyment of God is not so vigorous, nor his Peace of Soul so
savorous, though always great. Worldly conversations seem but as dreams to him,
and when past, they did only leave confused Idaeas in his memory. A blessed man
doubtless while here on earth. And conversing with me in simplicity of heart by
obedience, he declared to me what wonderful enjoyments God was pleased to
vouchsafe unto him.

He told me, that to attain Purity of Heart, we must divest our selves of all
affections to Creatures, and not satisfy our natural desires; which is a great
Mortification; when it is continual. In sickness we must stand very much upon
our guard, for we easily relax, and yield too much to nature. Not to correspond
to a known inspiration is gross infidelity, and much retards our advancement in
a Spiritual Life. A principal point of Devotion, is by a punctual fidelity to
omit no occasion to practice virtue, whether of humility, patience, abjection,
or any other. This Contemplative told me, that the choicest effect wrought in
us by Revelations or Visions, is this punctual fidelity to Gods calls.

It Is an affair will take up the whole Soul, to free her self from any
engagement with Creatures, and conquer her own natural Inclinations, that she
may enter into the states of Jesus crucified, and into his ways with his
Spirit, that is, with his intentions and dispositions. Let us, O my Soul, in
the profound silence of our Solitude, often say to Jesus: O Divine Jesus,
despised for me, contemptible, poor for me, a poor Creature annihilated for me
a mere nothing. Terms which in some sort express the perfect union that the
Soul ought to have with Jesus Crucified. And this union is the grand occupation
of Solitaries.

In the Court of Kings, the Cooks and Bakers, and other meaner Officers labor
more than a Gentleman of the Chamber, who has little to do but to attend his
Majesty, as a Companion rathen then a Servant. A Favorite has yet less employ,
being admitted into his Prince's Closet, to converse freely with him, and
entertain each other with mutual caresses. In the House of God, they who are
appointed most for action, are not the greatest Favorites; those to whom God
vouchsases extraordinary visits in Contemplation, labor less, and yet are more
accepted by him; *It Is not for us to apply our selves too much to Exterior
actions of Charity, but to correspond to Gods Holy Inspirations, if he call us
to Solitude, to attend on himself alone out of the noise of Creatures.

Is it not great pity that Temporal affairs should take up the best days of our
years, and the choicest hours of our days, leaving us little time in comparison
to apply our selves to the one thing necessary, the work of our Eternal
Salvation? 'Twould be better for us, if we would allot more time to our Holy
retirements, to converse with God by Prayer and Contemplation, and begin on
earth what we must continue without end in ever Blessed Eternity.

CHAP. V. How we may put our Soul and Senses into a Solitude.
LEt us not deceive our selves in being content to receive the seed of Divine
Inspirations, without bringing forth any fruit according to the designs of God.
If we have a discerning Spirit in the ways of Grace, we shall soon discover
that this our only affair, and all the rest is but amusement and folly. To
nourish this Divine Seed in us, we must shun the conversation of Worldly
wisemen, who are guided only by Carnal Prudence, and so being strangers to the
Procedings of Grace, leave in us more or less by their Discourse some
Impression of their ill opinions, which will retard our advancement in the ways
of God.

To put the Soul into Solitude, we must retire from all Creatures, and put our
selves absolutely in the hands of God, to do with us what he pleases, and apply
our selves to him alone with all possible endeavors. To be faithful herein, we
must resolve to suffer much; for we cannot abide Peaceably in this Divine
Hermitage without leaving Parents, Friends, Worldly Entertainments, Affairs,
and to suffer almost a continual Persecution on every side. For one tells you,
that it is an Hypocritical and unprofitable Life. Another, that so much
Solitude cannot be good, in that we ought to have some Charity for our
Neighbor. But let them talk on, every one is to follow his own work, and the
will of God, according to their vocation. The best and most noble employment in
the World, is to converse with God, and do that on Earth, which the Saints and
Angels do in Heaven.

How the Devil persecutes a Soul in this state under fair pretenses? But she
must stop her ears, and quit all to adhere to her Sovereign good, when he
vouchsafes to call her to attend on him alone. When God says he will lead a
Soul into a Solitude, Ducam eam in Solitudinem. It Is a singular Mercy: For we
shall find but few in the World prepared for the Cross, and resolved to go
through all the difficulties of a Life so supernatural. A Soul that is in such
a happy disposition, will live Solitary, not troubling her self with the cries
of others. When God once speaks Powerfully to the heart, 'twill make more
impression on us than all the noise of the World: It comes into my mind, that
to be Faithful to the Call of God, which I have to Solitude, requires of me to
spend six hours a day in Prayer, and to comply therewith, to retire my self
about five in the Afternoon, and eat little at night.

Methinks also I ought to observe a general Solitude, not only in relation to
my Soul, but to my Interior and Exterior Senses; yea, when I shall converse
with my Friends; and behold her, I conceive this may be done. Sacred Solitude
consists in being alone with God, in a vacancy from Creatures, and whatevet is
not God. It seems to me then, when we discourse of God and his affairs, we make
our tongue Solitary, and so speak like a Hermit. When we will not give ear to
any but Divine Discourses, our ears turn Hermits. When we will not allow our
eyes any Objects, but such as are pleasing to God, we put them into a
Hermitage. The same may be said of our Memory, wholly taken up with Idaeas of
God and his Excellencies: Of our Understanding and will, employed only in the
knowledge and love of God. If we would often put our Senses into this Solitude,
we should attain great Purity of Virtue.

A true Solitare does hardly touch the earth with his Feet, that is, all his
stay with the Creatures is for pure necessity, his Conversation being with God
and Heavenly things: I have Inspirations from God to Prayer and Solitude so
frequent and powerful, that my Soul takes pleasure in nothing else. Methinks
God speaks thus to my Soul: Be thou Faithful to quit all Worldly things, and I
will conduct thee into an Interior Solitude, where no Creatures shall hinder
thee, and I will speak to thy heart, which shall answer: Of what will my Divine
Bridegroom speak, except of his Infinite Beauty and Goodness?

CHAP. VI. A Solitude, or Retreat of Ten Days upon the Infallible Mystery of
the Sacred Trinity.
ALthough every one who will seriously apply himself to the great affair of his
Salvation, ought to have an affection for Solitude, as the proper School of
Virtue; yet it is necessary from time to time to make some more severe retreats,
by seperating our selves from all business and company, that we may converse
with God alone, in a more continual Prayer than ordinary. I observe that there
are diverse manners to treat with God in Prayer, and a devout Soul must conform
her self to the measure of Grace bestowed on her, cooperating therewith with
all humility and dependence, whether her Prayer be of higher or inferior
nature.

The first is, when the Soul by the light of reason discourses on the
Principles of Faith. The second is, when in converse with God, she only beholds
the proper objects of Faith by a simple view and apprehension. The third is,
when a Soul receives Supernatural Illustrations in the understanding, and
extraordinary motions in the Will, to know and love God by the gift of Wisdom.
And this passive and extraordinary Prayer has many degrees, of which I have
nothing to say at present. A Soul experienced in the operations of Grace, will
easily know to what sort of Prayer she has a Call from God, and will betake her
self to it with great sweetness, submission and simplicity.

Spiritual Authors tell us, there be three sorts of passivity. The first, not
approved by them, is, when a Soul, yet very imperfect in Prayer, expects
extraordinary illuminations from Heaven, by neglecting to help her self with
considerations suitable to her condition. The second, doubtful and called in
question, is, when a Soul yet imperfect, provides her self of no subject for
Meditation and mental Prayer, but expects that God should furnish her
immediately with matter for it. The third, good and commended, is, when a
purified Soul receives Divine impressions in her Spiritual Exercises.

It Is also of high concern to observe well, that a Soul may be Divinely
inspired to this or that undertaking, or kind of Life in such different ways,
that to discern perfectly the Call of God, will be somewhat difficult.

1. God sometimes works upon a Soul by his Grace, jointly with the Light of
reason, to move her to those things, which do not transcend, but are
conformable to the dictates thereof.

2. There are some things, to do which we can have no motions but only by the
Light of Grace and Instinct of the Holy Spirit. But those whom we consult about
them, ought to be experienced in Spiritual matters, and in whom the Light of
Grace is more predominant than that of reason. For if those instincts are
purely from God, the light of nature is no fit judge of Supernatural
Inspirations: From whence arise great troubles to persons so inspired, by
meeting with contradictions on every side. A Director must be highly elevated
in Grace, to discern between the motions of Grace and reason: And therefore
it is no wonder to see some good men, of good judgment, not to relish or approve
of some manner of extraordinary Devotion. Great resolution and fidelity is
requisite to follow such Instincts of Grace; for Sense and Reason, and their
Partisans, (who are no small number,) will mantain strong disputes with them.

I will begin my Exercises, taking God for my only Conductor; but nevertheless
am resolved, according to the method prescribed to me by a Friend, on Gods
behalf, to take up my thoughts principally with the Infinite and Eternal
Perfections of the Divine Persons of the most Sacred Trinity, and set apart at
least four hours a day for Prayer and Meditation.

First Day.
BE taking my self to Prayer the first day, I was seized with astonishment,
that men so little considered this ineffable Mystery. Yea, great Devotes are
much taken up with it, but apply themselves either to the Saints, or the
Mysteries of Jesus Christ, which is very well done; however this grand Mystery
ought to be the principal Object of their Thoughts and Adorations.

O Mystery of Mysteries, foundation of all other Mysteries! A Mystery not only
Divine, but God himself involved within himself. A Mystery of Beauties and
Eternal Grandeurs. A Mystery of Eternal Ravishments, in consideration of the
Infinite Perfections of the Godhead. O Grand Mystery, too much forgotten by
us, who think but little on these Infinite Productions. The greatest of
Mysteries, and the most forgotten.

O my Soul, let not this justly be charged upon thee, but be often attentive to
these eternal emanations, adore them continually, and sing on Earth the Song of
the Angels in Heaven, Holy, Holy, Holy, Holy in Essence, Holy in Attributes,
Holy in all his Ways, and all his Works.

This present Retreat will work much good in me, by putting me in mind of my
Duty toward the adorable Trinity. Hereafter nothing shall appear to me so
great and beautiful, as this employ about the most Sacred Trinity. The
application to Saints, and Mysteries of Jesus must yield to this, and not
appear while this possesses my Soul, nor take place 'till God is pleased to
change this disposition.

In my second Prayer I considered, that my Soul was created to be an express
and excellent Image of the most Sacred Trinity: God having made it Spiritual,
Intelligent, and Loving, to exercise in her his Divine operations, which are
the knowledge and love of God. Entering into this Idaea, I considered, that the
found of our Interior ought to be a Pure Mansion for God himself and his
Divine operations; and that the best Prayer we can make, and most acceptable to
his Majesty, is to annihilate all the Powers of our Soul in her operations,
that God may work in us, who can only know and love himself, according to his
infinite Perfections. That our understanding be not otherwise employed, then to
adore God present in his operations, and the will to consent thereto. That the
Soul wholly apply her self to Gods workings in us, corresponding in all things
to his good will and pleasure, by a ready and faithful cooperation.

O how did I discover clearly the abuses most men commit by profaning the
Faculties of their Soul, in employing them about Vanities and unprofitable
Curiosities, as are for the most part our Worldly Affairs? We see not except in
a Retreat and Solitude, how Worldly business hinders the actual knowledge and
love of God, wherein consists the true Life of our Soul. O the happy condition
of true Solitaries! O how great Wisdom is it, to free our selves from Worldly
Affairs, the better to mind the one thing necessary, that is, to live a life
Divine, for which we were created! Let us, O my Soul, fly from distractions,
and the amusement of Affairs, which engage us in a thousand Discourses,
Vanities, Extravagancies, and Weaknesses. Let us be Faithful, O my Soul, and
give our selves up wholly to God, that we may live up to the end of our
Creation.

In my third Prayer this Truth made deep impression on me, that the most Sacred
Trinity made Man after the Image of God, which afterward being disfigured by
sin, the same adorable Trinity vouchsafed to imprint it anew, and more exactly
in our Holy Baptism, when we are Baptized, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. We owe our Christianity to this impression of
the three Divine Persons: We enter not into the Church, but by this great and
ineffable Mystery, which is the foundation of our Catholic Faith.

I do not see that the Sacred Trinity brings forth any thing created of a more
noble Production than a Christian; the whole Machine of the World is less
considerable, for the order thereof is only Natural, but a Christian is a
Supernatural work, wherein it seems the most Sacred Trinity takes delight to be
born as it were anew, by imprinting his Image in our Souls. Shall we deface
this Image, to make our Souls deformed by some monstrous resemblance?

Yet this is that we do, O my Soul, when instead of carefully preserving the
Image of the most Sacred Trinity imprinted on us by Baptism, not considering
the great Honor and Happiness we receive thereby, we deform our selves by sin,
and deface this Image with unclean resemblances. O my Soul, when shall we be
purified? Fly from the World, and betake thy self to a Holy Solitude.

For my fourth Prayer God was pleased to inspire me with this thought, that my
Conversation ought to be in Heaven already, that is, in God; for it is God is
our Heaven, and it is in Him I ought to take up my Mansion; seeing I was created
to consider his Eternal and Temporal Affairs, and to contemplate his Infinite
Perfections. I call the Eternal Affairs of God, his Divine Interior
operations; the generation of the Eternal Word, the procession of the Holy
Spirit, and the Infinite Complacency which he takes in his incomprehensible
Beauties and Grandeurs; the Eternal Designs of the Mysteries of the Word made
Flesh, which was to be accomplished in the fullness of time; in which however he
took an Infinite satisfaction from all Eternity.

I call the Temporal Affairs of God, the execution of his Divine Decrees,
touching the Mystery of the Incarnation and Passion of Jesus Christ, the
Creation of the World, the Justification and Reprobation of Men, God before all
time having Infinite Sallies in himself, by the Production of the Son and Holy
Spirit, has in time had Sallies out of himself full of wonders and admiration.
O my God, how a Soul enlightened from Heaven finds great joy and content in
contemplating these Eternal and Temporal Verities, out of which all is but
deceit and vanity!

But how low Spirited are they, who never attempt the knowledge of these
Truths? For my part, I will never more stand in admiration, to see the Holy
Hermits forsake the World, with intentions never more to return to earthly
matters, when once they have discovered the Truth and Beauty of things Eternal
and Divine. O my God, make me dead to the World, that I may live to you alone,
and my Thoughts may be only taken up with your Perfections.

Second Day.
BEhold, what suddenly comes into my mind about this great and incomprehensible
Mystery: I am wonderfully content to be in a state of inability to understand
it, in that the Powers of my Soul are led captive by Faith, surrounded with
Clouds. This inability, this obscurity, this captivity are pleasing to me; and
for the future I Will believe that there is no better way upon earth to please
God, then by submitting our understanding and will to his Revelations: Yea, I
do more value this captivity to Faith in believing what I see not, than all
Splendours imaginable. How is this submission of our Spirit, naturally curious
and inquisitive, pleasing to God! How much hereby do we honor and glorify him?

O glorious Saints, with all due reverence I challenge you to be more in love
with your Eternal Splendours, than I am with these Clouds of Holy Faith. If you
be content, I am no less, to be so happy as willingly to captivate my
understanding to the high Mysteries God has revealed. And that which fills me
with joy, and makes me happy before I come to Heaven, is to find my will in
perfect submission to my God, and to the meanest Creature for love of him. O
blessed Souls, I am a little too bold with you, yet I speak the Truth, and ye
well know it. I aspire to Perfection of Divine Love, and this submission is the
way to practice it. A way sure and excellent.

In my second Prayer, I yet found my Soul taken up with the Grandeurs of this
incomprehensible Mystery; and being almost lost in this Ocean of infinite
wonders, was full of Faith and Sweetness, at the sight of such adorable
Perfections, though all surrounded with clouds of darkness. For as soon as this
Mystery presents it self to the eye of the Soul, her light is obscured, and
casts our Spirit into a thick darkness, which yet brings with it a Light to see
what reason cannot. Nox illuminatio mea, My night has some day, and I perceive
the Infinite distance between the Creator and his Creature; and being plunged
into the Abiss of my own Nothingness, I acknowledge, O my God, and adore your
Grandeurs and Perfections. I admire, I love, I obey.

O my God, I adore and believe steadfastly what you are pleased to reveal to
your Church. I neither know, nor comprehend, nor desire it, but am content with
my ignorance and submission. Let us, O my Soul, abide as low and abject as
Grace can make us; for nothing renders us more pleasing to God, than profound
Humility and annihilation. God who is infinitely delighted to dwell in his own
Grandeurs, is also well pleased to see an abject Creature content with its own
nothing. It Is an error in Spirituality, and savours of self-love, to shun
abjection under pretense to advance our selves in Divine Love. O my Soul, let
us comply with Gods will, and march on in the ways of abjection, if God be
pleased to require it of us.

My third Prayer passed on in these Thoughts; that the most Sacred Trinity
being Eternally Knowledge, and Love Substantial, my Soul ought to endeavor to
produce in her self an actual knowledge and love of God, the better to resemble
this adorable Trinity. A Soul in the state of Contemplation, renders this
honor to God in a more peculiar manner, enjoying God by the gift of Prayer in
as transcendent a manner as Mortality permits.

It Is true, the prospect I have of this Divine Life here below, draws my Soul
Powerfully after it, and I love it better than formerly: But I see that to
persevere therein, we must be very poor in Spirit, that is, not only free from
exorbitant Passions, but all distracting Images which pass by the senses that
are not Mortified. News attended with curiosity, or the eyes attached to
sensible objects, or such like immortifications, fill the Soul with
unprofitable Images, which make her incapable of Divine impressions, by
corresponding to which we most benefit our selves, and most glorify God.

In my fourth Prayer I was taken up with a view of those amorous complacencies,
and those Infinite joys, wherewith the three Divine Persons replenish the
Souls of the blessed in Heaven. It seemed to me, that the Happiness of the
Saints was the clear vision of the Ineffable Mystery of the most Sacred
Trinity; and to be made partakers of that knowledge and love, which is
reciprocal among the Divine Persons. To see God clearly, is the Beatifical
Vision.

Alas! how ought we to be humbled, to consider how Infinitely we fall short in
our Devotions of the continual Hallelujahs of the Saints in Glory! Yet this is
the end of our Creation, and our hope is at last to bear them company. O how
this life is poor and miserable, where all is vanity and vexation of Spirit?

The view of my own weakness making me sensible that all I do for God is as
nothing, what shall I say at the sight of my sins and unworthiness? I have
nothing to say, dear Lord, but that I merit Eternal Confusion; which must needs
fall upon me, unless your goodness have pity on me, according to the greatness
of your Mercies. Can we imagine we can do any thing too much for God? It Is for
the glory of his Bounty and Goodness, that he is pleased to accept of our small
service and endeavors, and reward them eternally. O how great a Truth is it,
that Grace and Glory are the effects of his pure Goodness and Mercy vouchsafed
to us! Blessed be his Name to all Eternity.

Third Day.
IN my first Prayer of this day, I considered that the three Divine Persons
were Happy in Contemplation of themselves from all Eternity. When they created
the World, the Preservation, and Government thereof does not at disturb their
repose and Felicity. The Father is the center of the Son, and the Father and
the Son is the center of the Holy Ghost, Three in One, and one in Three,
Infinitely Happy in each other before all Time, and shall be to all Eternity. O
what ravishing Beauties do they behold in each other, and what unspeakable
Delights do they take in there Infinite Perfections? Nothing without them can
interrupt their Joys, or add to their Happiness.

Tho true Solitaries who live the Life of God, in like manner repose only in
him, and being dead to themselves and all Creatures, live only in him, to him,
and for him. O Divine Life of Solitude! Thou art here begun on Earth, and can
not be perfected but in Heaven. A true Hermits life is not a Sensual, but
Divine Life.

God calling me to Contemplation, I will repare to Church, as to a Hermitage,
where I may live this Divine Life. The Psalmody there much rejoices my heart,
and lifts up my Soul to Contemplation. Through Natural Considerations I have
condescended to please others, against my own inclination; but now I have the
Happiness to converse with the three Divine Persons, I can no more relish the
Company of my Friends and Relations, except rarely, to maintain Peace and
Union, or for some great necessity; and if they be displeased, I must not value
it.

My second Prayer was an amorous attention upon what past Eternally among the
three Divine Persons: How the Father knowing his Divine Perfections did beget
his Son, and how the Father and the Son by an Infinite Love did produce the
Holy Ghost. The Father is an Infinite Ocean of Perfections, by an Infinite
Fecundity begetting his Son, and they being absorpt in each other, produce the
Holy Spirit, by an everlasting flux and reflux of Love. This I did contemplate
with great repose of Soul, and yielded up the Intellectual Powers thereof to
the obedience of Faith, to receive some Rays of Divine Light about such great
and Incomprehensible Mysteries.

God then working in my Soul, I became passive, contenting my self to behold
simply and sweetly the Infinite operations of the Sacred Trinity, and said
within my self, Blessed Trinity know your selves, for I can do nothing toward
it; it is enough for me to contemplate that mutual Love which is among you,
which I believe and admire with adoration. It seems to me that no other Mystery
of our Faith can so take up and content my Soul, nothing being more Divine than
the Divinity. No other practice is so charming to me, we being created to know
that Knowledge, and to love that Love, which God has to himself to all Eternity.

In my third Prayer I considered, the Souls of Just Men and Blessed Spirits are
as so many Sacred Vessels, into whom God infuses his love and knowledge by a
continual emanation. Which love and knowledge returns to God, its source; as
the water of a running Fountain rises as high as the Spring, from whence it had
its Origin. This love and knowledge does establish God in us, and also does
firmly establish us in God. So that God takes a delight and repose in the Soul,
and the Soul finds her center and rest in him: Thereby faintly representing how
the Divine Persons have a mutual repose in each other.

Empty Vessels are most capable to be filled: And by how much the more our
Souls are empty of Self-love and Nature, by so much the more are they capable
of Divine Love and Knowledge. A Soul in such a state delights in Solitude, and
cares not to live in the thoughts and affections of men. What most saddens our
Spirits, and retards us in the ways of God, is a natural aversion we have from
a hidden life. For man naturally desires to be known and loved, and thinks life
is as nothing without repute. And as long as we are full of this liquor, we are
not vessels proper to receive the influences of Divine Love and Knowledge. Let
us, O my Soul, empty our selves of Self-love, that Divine Love may take place
in us.

In my fourth Prayer, I found an amorous complacency in my Soul, in that God
being but One, does subsist in three Persons, knowing and loving themselves,
wherein consists their Felicity. The Father is the source of Being, the the Son
the term of his Knowledge, and the Holy Spirit of his Love. The Son and Holy
Ghost are from the Father: The Father and the Holy Spirit know the Son: The
Father and the Son love the Holy Ghost. These are the wonders that make Heaven
Happy. Firmly to believe them, is our Blessedness on Earth, and to Contemplate
them continually brings solid consolation to the Soul.

I saw clearly that to dispose my self for this incomparable Happiness, I was
to purify my Interior, and to mortify some natural resentments, which yet
live in me: As namely, too great a fear about the loss of Worldly things, or to
be despised by others, or ill success of Affairs; besides too great a sense of
humane respects, and a backwardness to follow the instincts of Grace for
worldly considerations.

I know God sometimes suffers these Imperfections to live in us, for the
exercise of Virtue, and the Trial of our Fidelity: However his will is, that we
strive to be dead to the World and our selves, having our affections so fixed
on Heavenly things, as to live a Divine Life in Mortal Bodies. Believe me,
'till our Interior be thoroughly purified, we shall not not be capable of high
contemplation, nor arrive to much knowledge in the secrets of God.

Fourth Day.
IN my first Prayer I was principally taken up with the adorable Person of the
Eternal Father. Methought I saw how he was ravished with Infinite Joy in
Himself, with the Son and the Holy Spirit: And what complacency he also took in
the Suffering of the Humanity of Jesus Christ, though he loves him with the
same love wherewith he loves himself* And because these sufferings were
pleasing to his Divine Father, as satisfactory for our sins, he did thirst to
suffer more, to fulfill his will. And therefore after such variety of dolorous
sufferings, dying on the Cross, he cried out, Sitio, I Thirst.

It much rejoiced my heart to see what Infinite Complacency the three Divine
Persons took in the Divinity, and said within my self, O Sacred Trinity, enjoy
eternally these Infinite delights; But I desire as much as I can to add to your
Exterior Contentments, by imitating the suffering of my Blessed Savior. And
herein I will not have so much an eye to the reward, to please the Sacred
Trinity, whom I adore.

Behold then what hereupon, it seems to me, God put into my mind. 1. To eat
neither Fish nor Flesh, but in case of Sickness. 2. To Discipline every day: 3.
To be pleased with occasions of Contempt. 4. To despise all Temporal things, to
follow the attracts of Divine Love. 5. To lie down upon a hard Bed. 6. To cut
off all Worldly Visits, and retire my self into a Solitude, where the World may
despise me.

I considered in my second Prayer, that the Son of God in the bosom of his
Divine Father, in possession of Infinite Delights and Joys unspeakable, out of
love to his Father, did quit his bosom, and cloth himself with Mortal Flesh,
to plunge himself in the depth of Miseries, abjection and sufferings, that he
might glorify his Divine Father by his humane and suffering Life; and teach us
Men, his Brethren, that the way to enter into the Love and Glory of his Father,
is by the gate of Sufferings.

Is it You, O only begotten Son of the Eternal Father, is it You born in a
Stable, working in a Shop, dying on a Cross? You that are all Splendour and
Glory, the Light of the World, and the Delight of Heaven? Is it You that are so
poor and abject, so void of Friends, so full of Disgraces, so scorned and
despised? Is it You whom they esteem as the outcast of men, and not worthy to
live on the face of the Earth? O the Love of the Son toward his Father! O the
strange invention of the Son to advance the Glory of his Father! O my Jesus,
how admirable are you in your Divinity! But how amiable are you in your
Humanity! I desire, O dear Jesus, to follow you all the days of my life, and
seek no other Glory than in your Cross and Poverty, your Humiliations and
Sufferings. Absit mihi gloriari nisi in Cruce Domini nostri Jesu Christi. The
Cross of Christ is my Crown and Glory.

We ought not to possess Honors, Riches, and Worldly Preferments without Fear
and Humility. Have we not cause to fear that in a state of Worldly greatness
Nature will seek her self, and not follow Jesus, poor and humble, which ought
to be done, either effectively, or in affection? A state of Suffering under the
Cross is truly Glorious, and full of Interior Consolation.

In my third Prayer I considered, that the union of the Father with the Son,
and of the Son with the Father, is by the Holy Ghost; a union Infinite and
adorable. O Holy Spirit, seeing it is your property to unite, unite my heart so
intimately to the adorable Trinity present in me, that I may never suffer a
separation; and that this adorable union may be frequent in my Thoughts and
Meditations.

Blessed be your Holy Name, my God, that you are pleased to be so merciful unto
me, as to take up my thoughts with this incomprehensible Mystery. O how do I
begin too late, having been too long amuz'd with vain trifles! My past Life
displeases me, and the course of the World is troublesome unto me, seeing it
hinders me from conversing with you as I desire. Natural Necessities, as to
Eat, to Sleep, to Recreat, are burdensome unto a Soul quickened with your
Spirit, strongly inclining us to live here on Earth as in Heaven, in a perfect
and perpetual union with your Goodness.

The consideration which took up my thoughts in my fourth Prayer, was, that the
Eternal Son and Holy Spirit seemed to have more commerce with men then the
Eternal Father; because they appeared to us by external Missions, the Son being
made Man for to die for us; and the Holy Spirit taking diverse forms for the
Service of man, and to inflame our hearts with Divine Love. The Eternal Father
seemed always to remain in himself ravished with his own Infinite Beauties and
Perfections. O adorable Mansion of the Eternal Father within himself! O
wonderful Missions of the Son and Holy Spirit toward us Men, and for our
Salvation, eternal matter of Adoration!

O my God, when shall I go out of my self, to elevate my heart to you, and
converse with you? I see very well that to enter into a Spirit of Prayer,
Retirement is requisite, Abstinence and Spiritual Exercises: And to conserve
the same temper of Soul, we must practice silence as much as our condition and
affairs will permit. If the Son of God and Holy Spirit did appear here upon
Earth only for our good, certainly we ought to endeavor, to have our
Conversation in Heaven, and adore the most Sacred Trinity for these Infinite
Mercies.

Fifth Day.
MY first Prayer past in acknowledgment and admiration of the Fullness of God.
An Infinite Fullness containing an Infinity of Perfections, each of which has
an Infinity of Excellencies incomprehensible, A Fullness which is the Source of
all good in the Creature, we being of our selves but a mere privation and pure
nothing, full of imperfections, and liable to Infinite Miseries. Alas! O my
God, I now see more then ever that you are all good, Omne bonum, you are the
Source of our Being and Existence, and without your continual influx for our
preservation, we should in a moment return to our first nothing.

The general Idaea of this Truth is in every understanding, but well to
consider it, and lodge it in our Heart, is very rare. We believe this, as many
other points of our Religion, but without deep reflection or correspondent
actions. Hence it proceeds that we are without perfect self-denial and
abnegation, being not sufficiently persuaded, that of our selves we are
nothing. And therefore God leaves in us many Imperfections unconquered, that we
may know by experience, that we are of our selves nothing but weakness.

O my God, for ever Blessed be your Holy Name, for discovering to me your
Fullness, and my Poverty. I adore your Infinite Fullness with a cordial
affection, because it shows your Grandeurs: and I am pleased with my Poverty
because it humbles me in your presence. I am well content, O my God, to be
nothing, that you may be all.

Kneeling down to make my second Prayer, I desired our Blessed Savior to take
up my thoughts with what he pleased. And it came into my mind, to consider the
three Divine Persons, as they are to teach other the center of all Happiness,
repose and Glory. I beheld this fixedly, and with an amorous resentment and
complacency of mind, it seeming to me, that the repose, the joy, and the Glory
that the Divine Persons have in the Sacred Humanity, is infinitely below that
repose and Glory they have in themselves: And that delight they have in the
Saints, is much below that which they have in the Sacred Humanity. I sometimes
adored this Divine center in it self; and sometimes I adored the occupations of
the Soul of Jesus toward this Divine center; and I endeavored to fix my
thoughts with a complacency therein.

God then gave me to see, that accidental occasions of Charity are not
repugnant to my Solitude and designs of extraordinary Devotion: But to take
upon me the care of a Family, and to have a continual eye over them, as I had
formerly, was inconsistant with it. For that engaged me to many Conferences,
many Letters, much care and Extroversion; and for the present God does not
require that of me, but calls me to a retreat, to Solitude, to Exterior and
Interior Silence, to Mortification, to converse with Him alone. This is my
present affair upon Earth.

In my third Prayer I discovered how just and reasonable it is, not only to
adore the Divine Life of the most Sacred Trinity, but also to Honor the
Service which the Soul of Jesus rendered to his Father on Earth by a continual
and ineffable application. I observed that all the Mysteries of the Life of
Jesus are honored according to the various applications of devout Souls as
inspired from Heaven. Some have a special Devotion to Jesus, as regarding Mary
Magdalen with an eye of Mercy: Others are much taken with his Divine Discourses
with the Samaritan Woman and her Conversion: And shall we forget to adore the
Divine regards and converse the Soul of Jesus continually had with the Divine
Persons? There Is nothing in God made man more worthy of veneration, this being
his most noble employment while he was upon Earth.

Let us therefore, O my Soul, according to our Duty set upon this work without
delay. Let our greatest care be to please Jesus; and then many Worldly affairs
will become burdensome unto us. Let us recollect our Spirits and Affections from
other things, and place them wholly on God our final Happiness. A true
Christian indeed will be so generous, as to esteem all things besides God, not
worth his labor. It Is true, while the Soul is imprisoned in the Walls of
flesh, she cannot always soar up to Heaven on the wings of Contemplation; but
this she must sigh after, and considering her present condition, on all
occasions exercise her self in works of Humility.

In my fourth Prayer God and his Perfections did possess my Soul, rejoicing in
that he was perfect and happy. I had a mind then to take up my thoughts wholly
with the Perfections of God, without any reflection on my own Interior, or
requesting any thing to supply my wants, for it is not seasonable to do this,
when God calls us to contemplate his adorable Perfections. The Soul then
forgets his own Interests, to mind only those of God.

I then was pressed with a vehement desire, to forget my self entirely, and
have God only in my remembrance. I was then much pleased with the multitude
that followed Jesus in the Desert, taking no care for Bodyly Provision. Their
Divine Master provided for them, being well pleased with their affection, in
being only attentive to his words. What content was it to me to remember how
Mary Magdalen forgot her self, yea, in some sort our Blessed Savior, in not
serving him in her Castle at Bethanie, by reason she was so intent on his
Divine words? O my Soul, let us not be too Solicitous for the things of this
Life; if we think on God, he will think on us, and nothing necessary shall be
wanting to us.

Sixth Day.
IN my first Prayer my Soul found her self much taken with the Beauty of those
excellent words in the Gospel, Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is
perfect. I considered how impossible it is for Mortals even to conceive the
Idaea of an Infinite Perfection, and if we cannot conceive it, how can we
imitate it? But God the Father has provided against this inconvenience, in
sending to us the perfect Image of all his Infinite Perfections, his Eternal
Son; and exposing him to our view, says to us, Be perfect, as your Heavenly
Father is perfect; open your eyes and behold this Model, here is the Perfection
you must imitate, let it be your care to conform to this Exemplar, and you will
be perfect as I am perfect It Is hard to say to what sublimity of Perfection we
are called by a Christian Life; and how glorious a thing it is, even to pretend
to imitate God himself?

But alas! how far are we from the Spirit of this grand Exemplar? Jesus would
have us to be annihilated, poor, despised, living a hidden life in Solitude, by
daily converse with God: But just contrary, we desire to appear in the World,
to be esteemed, to have all things according to our hearts desire, and enjoy
the Creatures. Alas! we do not sufficiently endeavor to dive into the
inclinations of the Spirit of Jesus, to conform our selves thereto, and
annihilate our own. The Science of Jesus is not well known, there are few
persons that study it sufficiently; and fewer that practice it in Purity, and
really aspire to form the true image of Jesus in them.

In my second Prayer I did apply my self to consider, how the Son of God being
eternally in the midst between the Father and the Holy Spirit, came down from
Heaven to be a Mediator between his Eternal Father and us Sinners. He tells us,
that no man can come to Father but by him, and that he is the way which leads
to Happiness. And is it not a sad case that men should so much go astray? This
is a low, and humble way, and they puffed up with Pride will march over
mountains in ways above them. This is a poor, penitential, suffering way, and
they are for a way easy, delicious, rich and commodious. Is it possible to
come to the bosom of the Eternal Father, except we will march by the way of his
Son? There Is no other way to come to him, and if we take our own way, at every
step we go farther from him.

O my God, how long shall my Soul lag behind, merely in a way of nature? When
shall we, O my Soul, enter into Dispositions truly Christian, and conform to
the Dictates of a supernatural Life? O Jesus, my Savior, Redeemer, my
Exemplar, my Way, my Light, it is only by following you, and your Divine Maxims,
that we can enter into the light of Life. Of necessity then we must pass by
Jesus Crucified to come to the Divinity of the Father, and enjoy Jesus
Glorified. We must take up our Cross and follow him, if we will enter into Glory

My third Prayer was a continuation of like Thoughts. I then understood that
there is no entering into Society with the three Divine Persons; or arriving to
such a height of Prayer, as thereby we may live in them a Divine Life, but by
entering into communication with Jesus Christ, and conforming our Life to his
example.

This is a general Rule without exception. The Life of Jesus was a severe,
self-denying Life. and ours ought to be of such an austerity, as may not ruin
our health, or dull the Spirit, but humble the Body, to elevate the Soul. In a
word, we must daily endeavor to humble and annihilate our selves, having only
in our eye the Will of God. The Eternal Father cannot take delight in any Soul,
that does not endeavor to resemble his Son.

It concerns us therefore to examine our hearts, to see how they stand affected
to Sufferings on all occasions, If we cannot relish them, but fly and
complain, it is to be feared, nature does possess us, and not the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. Water in a glass remains quiet, but if it finds the least
passage, it tends to its own element, from whence it can only be kept by force:
In like manner a Soul that has overtures of Sufferings afforded her, will find
an inclination to embrace them, if Jesus Crucified be her center. It matters
not by what means these occasions to suffer happen, whether by the imprudence
of Friends, or the malice of Enemies. Or her own neglect, or any other
accident, she lays hold on the occasion, to unite her self to the abjections
of Jesus, as to her center, Happy is that Soul which is in this temper, Grace
and the Spirit of Jesus has wrought it in her.

In my fourth Prayer I went on to entertain my self with the wonders of the Son
of God. I admired that being in the Glory of his Father, he descended to our
Miseries, that he might glorify his Father in a new manner; by purchasing for
him such holy Souls, who being animated with his Spirit, after his example,
would be in love with Sufferings for Gods sake I saw clearly how the Son of God
by his Eternal Birth is most glorious with Infinite Perfections; and how he
became Man, to be capable of Sufferings for our sake: And that we must follow
Jesus in his Humiliations, if we will be partakers of his Glory. O what dark
Souls have they, who see not these Glorious Truths? We live here a sensualor
worldly life, or at most do follow the light of reason, rarely do we live a
Christian, and very rarely a Divine Life. A thousand times happy are they, who
dear Jesus, are enlightened by you the true Light of the World*

Jesus Christ clothed himself with a Mortal Body, that he might suffer, and be
Sacrificed upon the Cross; and we ought to bear part with him* The Saints who
have known and tasted of his Spirit, have Martyred their Bodies by a thousand
Austerities. Others have wasted away by degrees in the flames of Divine Love.
All have been desirous to suffer more or less. But we are afraid to hurt our
selves, and are too apprehensive to endamage our Health. For whom do we keep
our embraces, or for what is it, that we are so desirous to live long upon
Earth? It Is a vain fear to think we shall shorten our days, by our endeavoring
to live a Divine Life in our Mortal Bodies.

Seventh Day.
I Began my first Prayer by a peculiar instinct of the Holy Spirit, bringing
often to my mind those precious words of St. Paul, God has sent the Spirit of
his Son into our Hearts, crying Abba Father. And then I found that a Soul
assisted with the extraordinary infusions of the Holy Spirit, is elevated above
her self; which is the effect of the gift of Wisdom freely communicated,
whereby she sees and tastes the ineffable Mysteries of our Religion. O what a
gracious gift is this! What a great favor is it, when God is pleased thus to
communicate himself unto us! It then seemed to me, that the faculties of my
Soul ceased their ordinary operations, and the obscurity of Faith as it were
vanished; this Divine Wisdom elevating them in such a manner, which they cannot
conceive who know not by experience, to a very sublime way of working, much
above their ordinary proceedings. The Soul stands wondering at it, and can
hardly believe she could arrive to such a point of Perfection.

Then a Divine Light gave me to see at once my unworthiness to receive the
Graces of God, his Goodness and Mercy to bestow them on me, and the merits of
Christ whereby they were purchased. I was much amazed that God should vouchsafe
so great favors to so wretched a sinner. And I did melt in acknowledgements,
being humbled in my self, with an entire confidence in the merits of Jesus.

I continued my second Prayer, and this Divine Light increased in my Soul, and
discovered the favors God vouchsafes to Souls; of which there are many
degrees, according to the proportion of their Purity of heart.

1. They see the Deformity of Sin clear enough, to conceive a horror and
detestation of it; and know confusedly the Christian Virtues, the Mysteries of
the Sacred Humanity, and Divinity.

2. They see more clearly some Christian Principles; as an Eternity of a Happy
or Miserable condition after this Life; that our Salvation is our Principal
concern, and the one thing necessary; aend that all things else are but deceit
and vanity.

3. They considering the Mysteries of Jesus, begin to discover the beauty of
his Humiliations and Sufferings, which yet is shadowed with some obscurity.

4. Their eyes being more opened, they behold distinctly the Beauty of the
Sufferings, Contempts, and Poverty of the Word Incarnate; and thereupon
conceives a great contempt of the World.

5. In persuance hereof they contemplate the Divine Mysteries, and if they be
Faithful to imitate Christ Crucified, they will arrive to a great knowledge of
the Divinity.

6. Then, if they keep close to Purity of Heart, they are wholly in a manner
taken up with the Divine and Humane Mysteries of Jesus; being very sensible
what an Infinite Mercy it is, to be delivered from the darkness of that
ignorance, which is in carnal men, who have no feeling in the things of God or
their Salvation.

7. Their Light increasing, they more and more discover the Perfections of God
in the Creatures, more clearly without comparison in the Sacred Humanity of
Jesus, but yet more transcendently in their Source, the Divinity; sweetly
applying themselves thereto, with much Felicity.

Behold, this is what God gave me to know ^n a little time; and this Light will
increase, if I be Faithful to practice the Virtues of Jesus Crucified; who is
the True Way to the Divinity, the center of the Soul, and her perfect repose.

In my third Prayer I found my self in a disposition to admire the operations
of the Holy Spirit in our Souls. God our Creator works in them what he pleases;
he having endowed them with a certain capacity extraordinary to receive his
extraordinary Divine operations. This must needs be extraordinary to our
Faculties, which before had great difficulty in believing the Mysteries of
Faith, and with great obscurity, and with little or no gust: But no sooner is
this Light darted into our Souls, but we see and taste them with great delight;
not as in Glory, but in a very sublime and extraordinary manner. The
Meditations of many years cannot attain to this; it is a special gift we must
receive from the Father of Lights, to which we can only dispose our selves by
Humility and Mortification.

O what Happiness is it for a Mortal man to be thus elevated and Spiritualized
by the Holy Ghost? Let us therefore O my Soul, humble our selves profoundly,
for the Spirit of God takes not up his Mansion, but in a humble heart. I know
we ought to go whither God is pleased to Call us, and not refuse his Gifts
under the pretense of a counterfeit Humility. But I know also that it is not
displeasing to God, for us to be careful how we entertain extraordinary
attracts, least we be too ready, by innate Pride of heart, to walk in ways
above our capacity.

In my fourth Prayer I considered the admirable preventions of the Holy Spirit
in the conduct of Souls: How he awakes us from the sleep of sin, and draws us
from the love of the World, to unite us to himself by undeserved preventing
Graces. What wonders are there, unknown to Carnal men, which pass in these
preventions? I know nothing that may work in us more Love, or more Humility.
For would any but a God of Infinite Goodness look with an eye of Mercy upon a
Soul all black with Sin, Ingratitude, and Infidelity? This miserable Creature
is beloved of God, having nothing to invite him, but on the contrary, to avert
him from us: and if his exceeding love had not surmounted the Infinite hatred
God has of sin, we had perished for ever without a Savior. To Love us, Redeem
us, and prevent us with such Mercies, does only proceed from his
incomprehensible Goodness.

I am astonished to see that any Soul believing these admirable preventions,
should not be enflamed with Divine Love. What can more humble a poor Creature,
than to consider that we are nothing but Misery, from which we can never free
our selves, unless God prevent us with his Grace and Favor? What can more
inflame us with Divine Love, than to consider that God then loved us, and
prevented us with his unspeakable Mercies, when we were just objects of his
Eternal Hatred? O my God, who can comprehend the riches of your Infinite
Goodness? O my Soul, acknowledge with thankfulness the great obligations thou
have to Love God with all thy Powers; and Loving him to Praise him to all
Eternity.

Eighth Day.
IN my first Prayer this thought presently possessed my mind; that all Power is
attributed to the Father, all Wisdom to the Son, and all Goodness to the Holy
Ghost: And seeing these three Divine Persons are in each other, by a
Communication of the same Substance and Infinite Perfections, the Eternal
Father is the Power of the Son and Holy Ghost, the Son is the Wisdom of the
Father and Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit is the Goodness of the Father and
the Son. A pure Soul that lives in the sublime exercises of a Supernatural
Life, becomes a Mansion for the Divine Persons, and receives from them the
impressions of Power, Wisdom and Goodness.

The Power of the Eternal Father dwelling in her, gives her strength and a
Christian generosity, to conquer all the obstacles of Perfection; and she
discovers that many difficulties are rather imaginary than real; insomuch as
the Principal and the most difficult of Christian actions, is to believe that
they are possible, and that nature shall not suffer so much thereby as is
imagined.

The Wisdom of the Son cummunicated to her, affords her Light and Overtures to
defend her self against the apparent reasons of sensual nature, which damp many
excellent Spirits, that they can make no great advancement in the ways of God,
because they have too much of humane consideration, and too little of this
Divine wisdom, which discovers to us the Beauty of Contempts and Sufferings in
following Jesus.

The Goodness of the Holy Spirit imprinted on her, makes her conquer the
Inclinations of corrupted nature; which is more or less according to the
degrees of Grace in us. He that is Holy, let him be Holy still; but we shall
never rise to the height, 'till we come to Glory.

In my second Prayer I considered that the adorable Trinity is the Treasury of
all Beings, Increated and Created: That in respect to the Divine and Uncreated
Being, the Eternal Father is a Treasury that is exhausted by communicating all
his Infinite Perfections to the Son and Holy Ghost: But in respect of Created
Beings the Sacred Trinity is an inexhaustible Treasury, because all the whole
World, or ten thousand more cannot exhaust or diminish the least drop of his
Infinite Power and Goodness.

I was almost equally taken up with both these wonders. That a Million of
Worlds, drawn out of the Treasury of Gods Omnipotency, should not make the
least diminution of his Power, is certainly matter of admiration. But much more
that the Grandeurs of the Eternal Son should be so elevated above the World, as
to exhaust the whole Substance and Perfections of the Father, as that he cannot
beget another like him.

O my Jesus, how this Verity discovered to me the Riches, the Glory, the
Grandeurs of your Person! What Prodigious blindness has seized on men, as not
to see this, and not to esteem you above ten thousand Worlds? You appear poor,
humble, and abject in their eyes, and nevertheless it is true, the whole World
is less than an Atomn in your presence.

I took for the subject of my third Prayer this admirable Truth: That the
Eternal Father is the source of the whole Divinity, which he Communicates to
his Son, begotten of his substance, yet without any Superiority or Authority
over him by his Paternity: And the Son who receives all from his Father, owes
him nothing of thanks, of service, or obedience. Not but that he knows his
Father well deserves all these returns: But being of the same Substance and
Authority with him, he is not capable to render these Submissions.

But the Infinite love he has for his Father, made him go out of himself, and
put himself into an Inferior state by his Incarnation, that he might render
those thanks, praises and services which he merited, descending to those
wonderful Humiliations, and profound annihilations, whereby he might do homage
to the Infinite Grandeurs of his Father. Teaching us by his example, that as
the Son of God had no other means to honor his Father than by Humiliations and
Sufferings; so we should take up our Cross and follow him, that God may be
Glorified.

My last Prayer this day was a profound consideration of this verity: That all
the works of the adorable Trinity in relation to the Creatures are common to
the three Divine Persons. The Father, Son and Holy Spirit did concur in the
same design of Creation, and Conservation of the World, though the Father alone
begets the Son, and the Holy Spirit proceeds from both: But all three united
employed their Power to do us good; as if We had been the object of their
Beatitude.

Is it then true, O my God, that all the Orders of your Providence by your
united forces tend to our good, and shall we not have an eye to you? Alas! we
little think on you, although the most serious Affairs of the World are nothing
in comparison of our concern to consider your Infinite Perfections, and love
your incomprehensible Goodness. St. Arsenius saw this very well, when he
quitted the Emperor, and would not so much as write to him. Those who are thus
nobly employed, cannot be taken up with Worldly Vanities. You see a poor Hermit
in the Deserts of Thebais, ill Clad, abject and unknown, who seems to the eyes
of Flesh the scorn of men; however his Soul is wholly taken up with God, which
is of more worth than the whole Universe: You see a great Prince glittering
with Gold and precious Stones, with a great Train of Courtiers, Honored and
Respected of all; and in the Interim his Life being only taken up with Worldly
concerns, is guilty of the greatest Folly, and of no esteem in the eyes of God.

Ninth Day.
IN my Morning Prayer our Blessed Savior plunged me into the Abiss of our own
Nothing and Vileness; insomuch that this exercise was wholly taken up with my
own annihilation. Thereupon I said, None but the Eternal Father can give to his
Son, none but the Father and the Son can give to the Holy Ghost; and these
Presents made to each other, are Infinite. There pass among them Communications
Ineffable, and proportioned to their Grandeurs. I considered them in my
Thoughts, and rejoiced, plunging my self in the Abiss of my own Weakness, in
that I could do nothing for God, nor give him any thing. The best present I can
make him, is to acknowledge I can give him nothing worth acceptance; and this
acknowledgment I receive also from the hand of his bounty; it is the effect of
his Grace, for of my self I cannot do it.

O the depth of the Nothing of a Creature! If I should give my Life for God,
it is less then if a Pismire should give hers for a King; there being an
Infinite distance between God and a Creature. All the Angels and Saints that
ever shall reign in Glory can add nothing to the Divine Grandeurs. The Abiss of
my Nothing is beyond expression. God only knows it, and I see nothing of it but
by his Grace. O my God, if all the Angels and Saints are as nothing before you,
I that am infinitely below them, what I can give is less than nothing.

My second Prayer went on in the same Thoughts and Considerations. And I was
much astonished, in that being acquainted with many Persons, and seeing their
examples, I was so far behind them in Virtue. But looking narrowly into my
self, I must needs acknowledge that the least pittance of Grace, the least
degree of Prayer, the least part I can have in the states of Jesus, is
infinitely above my deserts.

It Is true, that a Soul inflamed with Divine love is confounded at the sight of
her own unworthiness, and suffers a kind of Martyrdom. For in that she loves,
she would do something for her Beloved, and being conscious what a Nothing she
is of her self, and that she can do nothing; being in suspense between will and
weakness, seeing in effect she can do nothing of her self, she breaths sorth
her desires in such like amorous expressions: If I was God, and you, my God, a
Creature, I would willingly be a Creature, that you might be God. But seeing
this is an imagination of a thing not possible, her Martyrdom of love
increases, and she languishes in that she loves, and can do nothing for her
Beloved. That which comforts her, is, that being able to do nothing for God,
she sees that he is all, and wants nothing; and taking a complacency in this,
she reposes her self quietly in the bosom of the Divinity, with full
resolutions to abide there for ever.

In my third Prayer I applied my self to consider the Divinity it self, without
forming any distinct thoughts thereof; but though so I saw nothing, yet I knew
God more, then when I see him in his Creatures. They are always finite and
limited, and therefore the knowledge they afford of God is narrower, than that
which I have of him beheld in himself. Oftentimes when we apply our selves to
God to know him, we become stupid, and as it were without understanding. It Is
our duty then to give our selves up into the hands of God, who does justly
chastise us for our sins, by withdrawing himself from us. God is very merciful
unto us to give us patience in this state: During which we must continue our
Exercises of Prayer and Retirement, and rest as well content with these
Insensibilities and dryness, as with illustrations from Heaven and gustful
Devotion: seeing a Soul in either state is well pleasing to God.

A suffering Life is our Portion on Earth, that we may be conform to Jesus
Crucified: For the union with Jesus Glorified is a Life more proper for
ever-Blessed Eternity. O my Soul, let us not follow our own Fancy, but serve
God in what manner he will have us, by a perfect resignation of our selves to
his good pleasure.

The Eternal Song of the Saints in Heaven was the subject of my fourth Prayer.
I considered with great delight, that all the Angels and Glorious Saints shall
Eternally Glorify the adorable Trinity with this Sacred Trisagion, Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God of Sabbath Me-thought the first of the Seraphins began this
Anthem with an admirable Air, and all the Choirs of Angels joined their Voices,
all Singing with a Tone more or less elevated, proportioned to the degree they
possess in Glory: And this innumerable multitude of Angelical Voices made a
most Melodious and admirable Harmony, wherewith the Divine Persons were much
delighted. It came into my thoughts that the Sacred Humanity of Jesus Christ,
the noblest of all created Entities, the Sacred Virgin, Mother of God, and
Queen of Angels, with all the multitude of Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins did bear a part in this Sacred Harmony with
great contentment: And my Soul being much delighted therewith, desired to
Glorify God as much as possible.

I saw that the Church Militant in a Holy emulation of the Church Triumphant,
did use to the Glory of the most Sacred Trinity a like Canticle, repeating in
her Divine Offices on all occasions, Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui
Sancto, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: And so
Heaven and Earth did Echo forth incessantly the Glory of the adorable Trinity.
I heartily wished that all Creatures had Voices to Praise God continually, and
with much affection I often repeated, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost. Tribus honor unus. Amen.

Tenth Day.
THis day beginning my Prayer, I felt my Soul prevented with an extraordinary
Sweetness. I represented my God in the fund of my Heart as my Beloved, and I
returned him Thanks for his manifold Visits. My Disposition was then as a
Spiritual Springtime, I scented the Odor of the Flowers of Virtue perfuming
my Interior, and I made thereof a Crown for the Bridegroom of my Soul, and set
it on his Head, and he seemed to be much pleased with it; and my Soul took
great complacency therein.

I observed that when the Spiritual Bridegroom comes to Visit his Spouse,
whether it be in the Holy Communion, or by any Visit extraordinary, it is with
different effects. Sometimes the Soul is as it were inebriated with Divine
Love: at other times she has a feeling of great variety of Virtues wherewith
the Interior is Beautified, as a Garden with Flowers* The Soul is is not then
taken up solely with the Sweets of Love; but being adorned with variety of
Virtues, sometimes she presents this, sometimes that, sometimes altogether to
her Beloved.

My second Prayer was a continuation of the same Thoughts: And I perceived that
every step the Divine Bridegroom of our Souls made in the Garden of his Spouse,
gave a new Birth to different Flowers. This is no small contentment to the
Soul; but what ought most to affect her herein, is, that her Beloved is pleased
to take with her his recreation, who delights to be sometimes with the Children
of men. Then it is He refreshes us with the Perfumes and Odours of his Graces as
Glorified; and we must give our selves up to his Divine Will.

Other times he Visits a Soul in this Crucified state, bringing with him
nothing but Thorns and Nails, and Bitterness and Sufferings: But a Soul must
not think that her Beloved is not then well pleased with her because of this
rough usage, for this is his Will and it is best for her. I was much astonished
to see the excess of Gods goodness to me, who deserved to have been treated as
an enemy. But he was pleased to unite me to himself with such ravishing
transports, as transcend expression: O that I had a heart so full of love, as
might be answerable to the greatness of his Mercies vouchsafed unto me! O
Jesus, the Love of my Heart, if you continue thus, I shall die of Love for you.
O amorous flames consume my heart to ashes, that nothing may be found there but
Love and Humility. O my Friends, come and see, what great things God has done
for my Soul.

My third Prayer was taken up with the amiable Communications that the most
Sacred Trinity is pleased to have with our Souls. The Divine Nature unites the
three adorable Persons in the Sacred Trinity: The Person of the Son unites two
Natures in Jesus: And Grace unites Jesus to purified Souls: And this unions of
Grace and Love is perfected by exercises of Prayer, and wonderful communication
in contemplation. This union sometimes is so high and elevated, that Jesus and
the Soul seem to be but one thing, one Spirit, one Knowledge, one Love, and is
in a manner the Soul of our Soul. And in this state she Glorifies God in a
transcendent way, being wonderfully united to that Love and Glory Jesus renders
to the Divinity, and the Divinity to it self.

The design of the Son of God by communicating himself to us in the Blessed
Sacrament, is to augment this gracious union, that, as he Prayed to his Father,
we may be one, as they are one. By which wonderful union he gives unto us a
fullness of Grace and Divine Love, imprinting on us, (unless we be refractory,)
the like inclinations he received from his Father, to keep us continually
united to him by Love; and Honor him with the grateful Sacrifice of our
Humiliations.

My last Prayer was an amorous repose of my self in Jesus. Finding my self in
this disposition, I dwelt upon it, knowing well that a Soul united to Jesus is
transformed into him by amorous affections; and so Glorifying God, does Love,
and Honor, and Adore the Divinity, by the Love and Adoration of Jesus Christ.
The Soul in this amorous repose finds all her wants supplied: As Courage in
Adversity, Humility in Successes, Perseverance in Good Actions, and Grace to
practice all those Virtues which God commands on all occasions.

By how much the more the Soul is thus amorously united to Jesus in Prayer, by
so much the more does she participate of his Spirit and Dispositions, and
consequently is more in love with the Cross and Sufferings. To have union with
Jesus Christ in Prayer, and to be divided from him in our Life and Actions, is
an illusion; for one principal effect of pure Prayer, is to imprint in us a
love to follow the Life of Jesus.

There now comes into my mind an excellent Observation of a Father of the
Church; That the Holy Spirit having visibly descended to us as well as the Son,
did not (as the Son,) visibly return to Heaven, but takes up his Mansion with
us here on Earth, to unite our hearts with our Heavenly Father, as in the
Divinity he is the union of the Father and the Son. O Sacred Spirit of Love and
Union, what consolation is it to my Soul, and what encouragement for my
weakness, that you will vouchsafe to unite my heart to God, from whom you
proceed from all Eternity? O Divine Spirit so unite me to your self, that I may
never forsake you, but depend absolutely on your conduct. In You, and by You, I
adore, I love, and return all possible Thanks to the most Sacred Trinity, for
all Graces and Favors received in this retreat, Amen.

CHAP. VI. Another Retreat of Ten Days, upon the Adorable Person of Jesus
Christ.
First Day. Of the Mystery of the Incarnation.
I Entered into this retreat being greatly desirous to know Jesus Christ; and my
first Prayer passed in view of the Incarnation; a Mystery to be admired by Men
and Angels to all Eternity, the source of all our Happiness: A Mystery brighter
then the morning Star which ushers in the day to Mortal eyes, by showing to us
the Sun of Grace, to enlighten the darkness of our Hearts, and Cloth us with
Immortality and Glory: A Mystery of Mercies, an evidence of the greatness of
Gods goodness to us, Christ manifested in our flesh, to die for us: A Mystery
big with wonders, where God is made Man, and Man becomes God by an Hypostatical
union.

O unspeakable Mystery, what Grandeurs and secrets are contained in Thee above
our understanding? O Mystery that brings Heaven upon Earth, that scatters our
darkness, that cures all our evils, that teaches me to know and love God thus
debased and annihilated for love of me. O what sweetness do I taste in this
consideration! What wonders do I discover of the goodness of God herein beyond
all expression? O happy those who know it by experience!

Hereafter I will not trouble my self, how I may Love God according to his
Goodness, or do him Homage according to his Greatness, or Praise and Adore him
according to his Excellency, seeing the only begotten Son of the Father was
born of a Virgin Mother, and gave himself to me, to discharge these Infinite
obligations for me. O my Jesus, seeing you have wholly given your self to me,
that I might by you acquit my Obligations, my care shall be to Love God by your
Love, to Obey by your Obedience, and to Adore by your Adorations. Be you my
Light, my Strength, and my Conductor to find you, to know you, to be perfectly
united to you in this retreat.

In my second Prayer I considered the great Happiness of the Blessed Virgin, in
being chosen from all Eternity to be the Mother of the only begotten Son of
God. And I said within my self: Doubtless this is the greatest Favorite of God
among all Creatures, enabled with more eminent Graces than any other; for there
can be no greater Privilege or Prerogative Communicated to a mere Creature,
then to be the Mother of God. How are your Thoughts, O my God, above the
Thoughts of Men? You bring your Designs about in ways most admirable. This most
excellent of all Creatures, the greatest Favorite of Heaven, Mother of God,
must be Espoused to a Carpenter, a poor Tradesman, working for his Living: She
brings forth her Son, the King of Glory, in a Stable, flies into Egypt, lives
but poorly, and suffers Infinite shame and dolours, to see her Beloved Jesus
Crucified. Behold the Designs of the Eternal Father about this Blessed Virgin,
whom he had chosen to be the Mother of his only Son.

The weakness of Humane Reason, cannot fathom this. But this is to teach us, to
have an esteem for Poverty, Sufferings, and Abjections, seeing God deals thus
with his dearest Friends. He is pleased to put them in this condition, that
they may be able to render him the greatest Love and Service is possible upon
Earth. To Love God Supernaturally, is to love him at our own expense, and being
content with Sufferings for his sake: A Creature having nothing more to do for
God, then to offer to him what he most values, namely, his own Interest and
Satisfactions. O my Soul, do not now complain, that thou can do nothing for
God, it is enough that thou can suffer for him. It Is no easy thing to sound
the depth of this verity.

In my third Prayer I was much taken up with the Grandeurs of the Sacred
Humanity of Jesus, being elevated to the Divinity in the Mystery of the
Incarnation, where, by a Personal Union it entered into a state of Purity and
Love toward the Divinity in so transcendent a manner, and surpassing the
understanding of Men and Angels, that we are fit for nothing but Adoration. O
what Grandeurs were communicated to the most Sacred Humanity in the first
Blessed moment of the Incarnation? My understanding though enlightened by Faith,
found it self lost in this Ocean of Wonders, and my Will was actuated with an
esteem and Love of Jesus beyond all expression. Hence such a Joy possessed my
Soul in knowing Jesus, with such content and satisfaction, that all other
knowledges seemed nothing to it; and with St. Paul, Non aestimavi me scire
aliquid nisi Jesum, I esteemed my self to know nothing but Jesus, and Him
Crucified.

I perceived that an amorous union with Jesus Christ, does elevate a Soul to a
wonderful excellency, because it puts us in possession of whole Jesus, his
Divinity, his Humanity, his Mysteries, and Verities. For this union is
accompanied with a perfect amity, and that makes all things common among
Friends. O my Jesus although I am of my self nothing but Weakness and Misery,
being a sinful Creature; nevertheles I love you with all my heart, and having
my part in you, I can supply my wants with your Perfections, as belonging to
me; and among my Inabilities present them to the most Sacred Trinity, to acquit
my manifold obligations. O how admirable is this union with Jesus Christ! What
wonderful benefits does it bring to a Soul, who having nothing of her self,
has all things in him, and by this means becomes Infinitely rich!

These Thoughts continued yet with me in my fourth Prayer; and I admired Jesus
from the first moment of his Birth in his applications toward his Divine
Father, to whom he then offered himself a Sacrifice, to do him Homage: And in
his amiable Communications toward us his poor Brethren, little worms of the
Earth. In these Discoveries I was much troubled that I could not serve him by
reason of my Inabilities, and could not please him by reason of my Infidelities.

O that I was so happy as to spend my self in his Service, and die with Love!
This is a favor granted but to some special Favorites: And alas! I am a most
unworthy and ungrateful wretch.

At this time methought I heard our Savior speaking to me, and giving me a
strong impression of his Presence. O what Happiness is it to know Jesus! O what
favor is it to find him! What sweet repose finds that Soul, who has a feeling
knowledge of Jesus in her? When this Science of Jesus appears in her Interior,
all is sweet and lovely, full of Joy and Peace; and It then seems to her, that
heretofore she was wandering in darkness.

In effect it seems to her that she now lives in another World, with other
Lights, and other Principles, and other Proceeding, and another taste of
Spiritual things. She now seeks occasions to mortify her Senses; obedience,
dependence, contempts, losses do relish with her, and she is pleased only to
live a Life of Faith, making no matter of the mockeries of Worldly men, who
judge not but by Sense, or at best but according Humane Reason.

Second Day. Jesus an Infant.
BEginning my Morning Prayer, these words of the Prophet were presented to my
Thoughts, Consideravi opera tua, and expavi, I have considered your Works, O my
Savior, and stand amazed with admiration. And how could I be otherwise
affected, to see the Eternal God an Infant? To see that Immensity which the
Heavens cannot contain, lie Swadled in a Manger? Eternity but one day old?
Omnipotency become weakness? The joy of Angels in a suffering condition? O God
of Love, who can but fall into an Ecstasy, to see these wonders, this excess of
Goodness, above the comprehension of Men and Angels? But Blessed Savior, it is
your Glory to have nothing, and do nothing, but what is altogether
incomprehensible.

I observed a great silence in Heaven and Earth, where the whole Creation
seemed to be struck dumb with admiration of the great Mysteries then brought to
pass. I beheld how the Virgin Mary and good Joseph fixing their Eyes on the
Infant, God-man, lying in a Manger, spoke not one Word, being transported with
Love and Admiration, and wholly astonished at an Humiliation so Prodigious; and
I wondered all Creatures did not stand immovable for a whole Age, at the sight
of so incomprehensible a Mystery. All Expressions are below this excess of Love
and Condescension: Let us, O my Soul, be silent with a respectful attention,
loveing, adoring, admiring these great things God has done for us. Methinks I
have a desire to stand always in silence at the feet of Infant Jesus.

I applied my self in my second Prayer to consider the universal denudation of
all things that seemed most necessary at his coming into the World: To be born
as an Exile out of his Mothers House; to have no lodging usual for men, but a
Stable, which is prepared for Beasts, to be his Bedchamber, and a Manger for
his Cradle, to suffer the rigours of Winter for want of Fire; what poor
miserable Creature could be reduced to a greater denudation?

Notwithstanding this is that which ravished both Heaven and Earth, and the
Glorious Angels found nothing in Heaven of equal admiration; and therefore
hither they came to contemplate these wonders, and to bring the glad tidings
thereof to men, making the Air to echo with their joyful Melody, and without
any mention of the Divinity, declare only to them, that they shall find an
Infant wrapped in swaddling Clothes, lying in a Manger: And hither the Shepherds
ran transported with Joy, and the World has followed them.

When the Wise men demanded of Herod, Where he was born who was King of the
Jews, This Idaea of Royalty did much afright him, and in rage he designed a
Cruelty more Barbarous than what as yet the Sun did ever behold. It Is a great
Truth, that Grandeur and an elevated condition (though in the Person of God
himself made man,) is attended with many evils and commotions; but abjection
and Humiliations in the Infant Jesus has force enough to win our hearts. And
yet we will not understand this.

In my third Prayer I discovered, that since the Mystery of the Incarnation,
which is the wonderful union of the Creator with the Creature, then Sons of men
are called to a higher degree of Prayer and Converse with God then formerly.
The gift of sublime Prayer is one effect of this Divine Mystery, and we ought
to value and preserve it as a Treasure. The heart of Jesus is the center of
men; and when a poor Soul is distracted, she must gently lead her self to the
heart of Jesus, to offer to the Eternal Father the holy dispositions of that
adorable heart, to unite that little we do with that Infinite service Jesus
renders to his Eternal Father. Thus our little will be made great by Jesus
Christ.

O my Soul, let this Divine heart of Jesus for the future be thy Oratory. It Is
in him and by him thou must offer all thy Prayers to God, to make them
acceptable to the Divine Majesty. Make this thy School, to learn there the
supereminent knowledge of the Love of God, which is quite contrary to that of
the World. Thou will find there Principles sublime and pure; a Treasure which
will enrich thee with Purity, Love and Fidelity; and what is very plentiful in
this Treasury, Humiliations, Poverty, and Sufferings. The love and esteem of
these things is a precious Jewel, which principally and originally is found in
the heart of Jesus. Other hearts, how noble soever, have more or less of it,
according to the measure they receive from this exhaustible Treasury.

In my fourth Prayer I had a strong Idaea of the dispositions, which the
Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph had toward the Infant Jesus. 'Twas revealed to a
Holy Soul, that the Blessed Virgin passed all the time in Prayer, while her
Sacred Womb was the Tabernacle of the Son of God, and never ceased to adore the
Word made Flesh. That St. Joseph entering with the Holy Virgin into the Stable
at Bethlehem, was elevated in high contemplation upon the Mysteries there to be
Accomplished; and in this Prayer was so replenished with the Holy Spirit, that
his desires for the coming of the Messiah, were more pure and more ardent, then
of all the Holy Patriarchs before: And that next to the Holy Virgin he was
enlightened with the wonders of the Mystery of the Incarnation.

At the moment of the wonderful Nativity of the Infant Jesus, such Rays of
Glory and admirable Splendors were darted from his Soul, as pierced the Spirit
of the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph, and discovered to them the Infinite
Grandeurs of that Babe, through all the weaknesses their eyes were witness of.
And in deep silence and contemplation, they offered to him a pure and amorous
offering of their whole Being, as to their God. O who can comprehend the
wonderful effects, that his presence caused in their Hearts? These
considerations did sweetly possess my Soul during my Prayer; and I found my
self in a disposition of great Love for Internal Prayer, in Silence and
Solitude with Infant-Jesus.

Third Day. Jesus Poor and Abject.
IN my Morning Prayer I found in my self a great esteem and love for Poverty,
seeing Jesus had so esteemed and loved it, and we have an obligation to be
conform to him. And I said within my self: O Poverty of Spirit, what riches
do thou bring to a Soul? Thou give her possession of a Kingdom of Peace:
Thou do purify her, to unite her to Jesus in his Humiliations, which gives
her a right to the riches of Glory; for Truth has said it, Blessed are the
Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

O how a Soul, which once has beheld the Beauties of Holy Poverty, is ready to
follow Jesus poor and abject, and conform her self to his example? She finds
her self freed of her Fetters, which keep men Captives and Slaves to the World;
and it seems to her to be deprived of all Creatures, is the greatest Treasure
upon Earth. She grows rich by her losses; and when God will have her to
possess Goods and Honors, it is yet with a disposition to quit them, and
possess God alone. She therefore only keeps them by a pure dependence on the
Divine Will, without an esteem or love for them, but loves in them solely the
Will of God. These were the impressions my first Prayer made in me.

In my second Prayer I continued to consider the poor and abject states of
Jesus Christ. God in his Eternal Decrees had a love for the humane ways of the
Word Incarnate. Those Souls, who are favored with Illustrations from Heaven,
are strongly carried the same way, discerning clearly that they can do nothing
better upon Earth than to tread the footsteps of God himself. To this end the
Divine Wisdom elevates them above themselves and their natural inclinations, to
conduct them solely by the instincts of Grace; whereby they make a glorious
conquest over the weakness of Nature, Self-love, and Carnal Prudence, which
stand in the way to Christian Perfection, and hinder us from following Jesus in
his Abjections.

It highly concerns us to die daily to the World, that we may attain to the
Purity of Divine Love, that is, Possess and Love God alone: The Pride of Adam
will not die in us, unless we be content to follow Jesus in his Abjections. O
my Soul, let us fall in Love with this state of Jesus Christ, which is little
known to the World, and take it for a Sovereign favor from Heaven, to become
so contemptible for Gods sake, as to pass for one hardly good for any thing. O
Jesus, how few Companions have you of your extreme Poverty? Many Honor this
Virtue in you, but few practice it. They must be Faithful Friends indeed who
follow you in these ways, so bitter and distastful to Flesh and Blood. O Jesus,
be Merciful unto me, and grant me this Fidelity, that I may never forsake you
in Life, nor Death.

My third Prayer was taken up with a general view of the Humiliations of the
Son of God, for which I felt my Soul had much Love and Respect. These Divine
Humiliations did ravish me beyond comparison, and I discovered such wonderful
Beauty in them, that I could not be satisfied with beholding them. I was deeply
possessed with a desire to conform my self to Jesus in his Humiliations, and to
spend my days in his imitation; and I was much troubled, I could not yet quit
all things, to live a poor, abject, retired life. It Is no less the work of
Grace, to bring us to relish the Abjections of Jesus Christ, as to be taken
with his Grandeurs: His Grandeurs are incomprehensible; but nothing in my eyes
seem more great and rich, and precious than his Humiliations.

The unspeakable Love that Jesus Christ has for Souls, does manifest it self by
making them partakers of his Humiliations. Be content, O my Soul, with what
part he shall give thee: For it seems to me a punishment, to abound with Riches
and Honors, whereby we become unlike to Jesus, and march on in ways contrary
to his practice and example. When I reflect upon my sins, I cannot sufficiently
admire the great Graces God is pleased to vouchsafe me. A strong argument to
convince of his Infinite goodness, and affords much matter of Humiliation,
considering how unworthy I am of the least favors. But for me a poor wretch,
to have a call to solitude, to converse only with God and his Holy Angels, what
a Mercy is this?

It came into my mind that Moses, who had been a Captain of Thieves, was
afterward a Holy Hermit; and I had a special Devotion to him, desiring him to
help me by his Prayers. O the wonderful effects of Grace, that a Robber should
become a Hermit! I have a Devotion to Saints that have been great sinners,
methinks they are Powerful with God, to help sinners to be converted.

This view of the extreme humiliations of Jesus yet continuing, was the subject
of my fourth Prayer: And I found in my self great desires to begin a new kind
of life, to give my self absolutely to God as a Sacrifice, by dying to all
things of the world by a vow of Poverty. But I being not yet in a condition to
forsake my temporal affairs, I resolved to make such a Vow when all things were
settled; and I took care that my affairs might be so regulated, as to put me in
a condition to comply with the call of God.

Having taken this resolution, I found my heart inflamed with desires to be
wholly for God; and to conform my self as much as possible to Jesus in his
humiliations. Nature felt some afflicting resentment hereat, and furnished me
with arguments to divert me from it: But the light of Grace scattered these
thoughts, and taught me to neglect the help of Creatures, by casting my self
wholly into the arms of his Providence. O my Jesus! the only love of my Soul,
though the most despised of men, your Divine attracts and inspirations do so
powerfully invite me to follow you in your ways of poverty, that I shall never
soon enough see the happy moment to engage my self thereto, by a Vow never to
be recalled.

Fourth Day. Jesus, the Fountain of Grace and Piety.
IN my first Prayer God gave me to see the infinite grandeurs of the Sacred
Humanity united to the Divinity in the same person. This ineffable union was
the general and amorous object of my regard, which wrought in my Soul a very
great esteem, and singular love and union with Jesus Christ. This state of
Jesus rejoiced my heart, and I dwelt upon it, my Soul being satisfied with
wonderful contentment. I had interior assurances, and very great certitudes of
the Divinity of Jesus; nothing in him seemed dark unto me, though all surpassed
the strength of reason. I beheld him as the Principal of Grace and Glory. This
manifestation was in me by a Divine light, and I found it filled my heart with
most pleasing impressions.

The small conviction we have of the Divinity of Jesus, makes us such cold
Christians, and that we walk so slowly in the ways of Grace. For who firmly
believes that Jesus is God, will have a singular esteem of his Doctrine, of his
Counsels, of his Proceedings, and think it his Glory for to follow him. The
perfect belief of the Divinity of Jesus, carries a Soul to real endeavors
after perfection, to despise the world, to take up the Cross, and follow Jesus
in his abjections. This is to be the Image of Jesus Christ. The poorer we are
in Spirit, the richer we are in Grace; the more a Soul is nothing in her self,
the more God is all in her, and is pleased to work great things for her.

Jesus presented himself to my spirit in my second Prayer, discovering to me in
general the different states of his life; passive in his Sufferings, active in
Virtues, and how he is the Origin and Source of all purity, to which we aspire
by a spiritual life.

I conceived, first, That there is a purity of suffering, which is great indeed,
when we suffer without seeking relief; carrying this Cross for God's sake as
long as he pleases*

There is a purity of action, when we act not (whether interiourly or
exteriourly) but by the motion of God's spirit, with pure intentions. Here
arguments of humane reason are cut off, and we stir not without some
impressions of Grace, working only for God by his working in us. We must labor
hard, and be perfectly dead to the world, before we can come to this state of
purity.

There Is a purity of intention, when we have only an eye to the will of God, to
do what pleases him, without acting upon other Motives, though good and
laudable, wherein seems to be some self-interest; as, fear to offend; to be
faithful to God's call, to be more loved and rewarded. A Soul in this state has
no regard to her self, but solely to the will of God, her End and Object.

There Is a purity of employment, when a Soul will not divert her thoughts from
God, but by Order from God himself, by some motion of his holy Spirit. Hence we
shun unnecessary visits, unprofitable words, superfluous occupations; and that
is superfluous to one Soul, which is not to another, by reason of the different
degrees of Grace imparted to them. We must suffer many mortifications to attain
this purity; and such a Soul must fear nothing more than Infidelity. This is
but a branch of the purity of action.

There Is a purity of Virtue, when we practice only what God will have us to do.
There Is a purity of spiritual delight, when the superior part of the Soul
receives no consolations willingly from any Creature, or sensual things, but
stands upon her guard to keep them out. And there is a purity of Prayer, when
the Soul (elevated above her self by the workings of God in her) is in ecstasy
of spirit, and united to God alone by contemplation.

A Soul that once has had a feeling of God in her, sees an infinite difference
between Him and the holiest Creatures; and entering into a great interior
solitude, converses with God alone. All these sorts of purity appeared to me in
the Interior of Jesus, as in their Source.

In my third Prayer I came to know that the mysteries or states of Jesus Christ
are not only the exemplar, but also the efficient of our states; so that we
suffer, not only to imitate Jesus in his sufferings, but because Jesus by his
sufferings imprints on us the virtue of his spirit to give us the grace to
suffer for him. When we pray, it is not only to imitate Jesus in contemplation,
but because he infuses into our hearts the gift of Prayer by his holy Spirit.
And if a Soul arrive to that height, as to possess Jesus Christ in an
extraordinary manner, he then does all in her, and for her, she being only
pliable to his Divine Operations. We cannot continue in this state without
wonderful purity; the least sally of immortified Nature will much endamage it.

How often has God been pleased to give me experience of this, when Jesus
uniting himself unto me in the holy Communion, annihilates all my thoughts,
words and affections, to become to me all things in me! He is my Thankfulness,
my Offering, my Humility, my Charity, my Prayers; and I do nothing, but remain
united to him, who works all for my Soul, as it were, annihilated in his
presence. Words as well as thoughts fail us in the presence of the WORD, who
pleads to his Fathers for those Souls he possesses in such a mysterious manner.
What marvels are there hidden beyond expression?

In my fourth Prayer I considered, that being a Christian, I had a strict
obligation to follow Christ: but besides that general tie, I had a special
vocation to imitate Jesus in his humiliations. To follow him in this way with
purity, I must forsake all grandeur, and be content with poverty and objection,
and labor stoutly for a perfect abnegation of my self. Since God has given me
a generous resolution, to sacrifice my self wholly to his service, I will
follow his call, though I die for it. Methinks I am enabled to do it with great
peace and liberty of Spirit. What evil can happen to me, if I die for God, who
died for Me?

Those who choose to be poor, out of desire to follow Jesus, are peculiar
Objects of God's care and providence, which extends it self to all men, but
especially to those who are the lively Images of his Son. He is their Father in
a peculiar manner, and sets a watch about them more than others. For is it
possible he should not give Bread to them, who leave all their Temporals, to
serve him better, and love him purer? Let us stifle all humane reasonings on
this subject; let us go whither Grace calls us, and fear nothing: If we die in
the service, 'twill be happy for us. It Is a great favor from God, when we
breath out our Souls in the flames of Divine Love.

Fifth Day. Jesus, Zelator of Souls.
IN my first Prayer I applied my self to Jesus, as Zelator of Souls, for whom
he gave his most precious Blood. I beheld, what I could not comprehend, that
this Zeal of Jesus for the good of Souls was infinite. It seemed to me, that my
Soul received some small portion of this holy Zeal, and I was powerfully
inclined to lay out my self for my Neighbors good, offering my self to God, to
do and suffer what he pleased.

But I perceived this Zeal for Souls must be infused into us; we must not run
before we be sent, otherwise we shall neither do good for others, nor our
selves, but disturb our Interior, and commit many disorders. When this Zeal is
kindled in our Souls by the breathing of God's holy Spirit, it puts nothing out
of order, but we go in Perfection, and advance in Prayer. However, all must be
regulated by Prudence, lest we outrun our call, and hurt our selves, while we
would do good to others.

For our care must be to procure the good of others, according to the grace
conferred upon us. Some in an active life, by Preaching and Instructing: some
by works of corporal Charity: others by offering up to God their contemplative
life, their Solitudes, their Austerities, their Sufferings, their Prayers.
There are many ways to be instrumental for the good of others. Let every one
employ his proper talent.

Our blessed Savior being near his Passion, left us as a Legacy this divine
Commandment, Love ye one another, as I have loved you, which was the subject of
my second Prayer. I then found, that when a Soul has made a good entrance into
the heart of Jesus Christ, and by the light of Prayer sees the infinite love of
God toward men, Grace then discovers how this divine charity is free,
generous, and magnificent. Free, having a love for us when objects of his just
displeasure. Generous, surmounting all difficulties, and conquering all
resistances. Magnificent, in giving his own life for our Redemption. This is a
Zeal truly Divine for the Salvation of Souls.

Now his pleasure is that the charity we have for our Neighbor be regulated by
this divine Model, that we love them to do the will of God, and obey his
Commands. That we love them generously, without any regard to natural
aversions, or injuries they have done us, or any temporal advantages we may
receive from them; but after the example of Jesus, to love and do good even to
our greatest enemies. O how many great Saints, considering the ardent love of
Christ to us, have burned with the flames of a holy Zeal, and spent themselves
in labors, to do good to those Souls for whom Christ died! But (alas!) we have
little zeal for God, for our Neighbor, or our selves.

My third Prayer passed in considerations of the prodigious goodness of Jesus
to men, who seemed to forget himself, and depose the grandeurs of his Majesty,
to debase himself in the search of our Souls; to indulge and love them with as
much affection, as if they did contribute to his felicity. He prevents them
with wonderful mercies, and though they be unworthy of his love, he gives them
sensible feelings thereof, by speaking to the heart in this, or suchlike
manner: My Sister, my Spouse, my love takes a delight in thee; know thou
well who I am? It Is I that am thy God, thy Creator, thy Savior: It Is I, who
came from the bosom of my Father into this world, to find thee, being lost, and
tell thee how I love thee, and I demand nothing but love again.

My Soul thus prevented with the blessings of this sweetness, and powerfully
touched with a sense thereof, wanted words to express my thankfulness: However,
I said, O my God! You are my love; I love you, and will love you eternally,
with all my heart; for what else have I to return, but love for love? It Is a
wonderful love for you to debase the grandeurs of your Divinity, to search
after poor sinful Souls: Nor is it less wonderful for you to draw these Souls
out of themselves, to free them from their miseries, and advance them to your
embraces, and place them in your heart as some rich Treasure. This is the
wonderful excess of the love of Jesus Zelator of Souls. This love that so
humbled Jesus, does elevate a Soul to these amorous exercises, and makes her
see her own unworthiness, and the incomparable beauty of her well-beloved.

In my fourth Prayer I had a deep impression of Jesus humbled, and doing
Penance for us. I beheld him as it were annihilated in the presence of his
eternal Father, to honor his eternal Being, by sacrificing his humanity,
which he continued his whole life, and consummated on the Cross. I beheld also,
how being charged with our sins, he did continual Penance for us, to satisfy
the divine Justice, and give content to that infinite love he has for our Souls.

Let us love then, O my Soul, our Jesus, as he has loved us, and imitate his
sufferings by a spirit of penance and annihilation. I am a great sinner, and
therefore ought to entertain a spirit of penance, and thereby make advantage of
all evils and infirmities which happen to me. My principal affair in this world
ought to be to annihilate my self, and to suffer; to annihilate my self, to pay
homage to the infinite grandeurs of God, and to suffer, as a just punishment of
my sins.

After Confession, having but one Gloria Patri for my penance, it came into my
thoughts, that no penance is little when it is united to the sufferings of Jesus
Christ, who by them has done penance for our sins. It seemed to me, that one
only Ave Maria, united to the sufferings of the Son of God, which are of
infinite merit, and did infinitely satisfy his eternal Father, becomes a
penance which wonderfully satisfies for our sins. My Soul was comforted with
this truth, and I had no more to do, than to unite my little Crosses to the
Cross of Jesus.

Sixth Day. Jesus, contemplating and enjoying.
OUr blessed Savior did fill my Soul with such super-abundant consolation in
my morning Prayer, that I seemed to have some part of that state of enjoyment
which is reserved for the Saints in Glory. O amorous enjoyment! how wonderfully
do thou purify our Souls! Thou take our hearts off from the World, thou
do Crucify us with a delightful Martyrdom, thou do enlighten, thou do
purify, thou do inflame, thou do mortify, thou do fortify, thou make
us live and die together.

A small taste of this Ocean of delights will inebriate the Souls of men, and
the Angels in Glory. This is that Blessed Life which is granted to some
Servants of God, honoring him by continual enjoyments, which he pours into
their Souls. It Is a great secret of the Interior Life, to be passive to the
operations of God in us, whether he visits us with dolorous and crucifying, or
joyful and beatifying impressions. Our fidelity consists in a pure
correspondence to his designs without reluctance. If he please to make our Soul
a Garden of Delights, embrace his Favors. All the ways of God are good in
themselves, but that which he puts us in, is best for us. O how the state of
Jesus suffering, is adorable! O how his state of enjoying is admirable! We must
apply our selves to one or other, according to the designs of the Divine Wisdom.

I found an Image of Jesus in Contemplation, his Look and Posture ravished me,
and this took up my second Prayer. I was not satisfied with beholding his
Divine Aspect, I admired and adored him. Considering the profound attention he
had to the Grandeurs of his Eternal Father, and how he was absorp'd in the
Divinity, I made it my work to contemplate also by him, and in him, uniting my
self to the utmost of my Power to his Divine entertainments. O Jesus
contemplating! Jesus taken up with your Father, with whom you pass in Prayer
whole nights made as bright as the days of Eternity! Jesus living a retired
life in the Divine Essence! You are the object of my Love, I see nothing so
beautiful as you are in this state.

My Soul has no greater delight upon Earth, than to have an eye to Jesus, to
think of him, to speak of him, to sigh after him. O how happy is that Soul,
which Jesus makes his Mansion? I know not how Jesus comes into a Soul, but he is
there sometimes sooner then perceived, filling her with Blessings, and making
her to find, that he is her repose and true Felicity. Alas! when shall it be
that Jesus possesses my Soul, so as never to leave me? This is what I sigh
after, and I will purchase it at any rate. So to possess Jesus is a Heaven upon
earth, and all we have is too little to gain it. Come, O dear Jesus, and make
my Heart your Mansion for ever: Of all your Graces and Favors, I only desire
you to be always present with me, and that I make it my business so to serve
you, as in some sort to be made partaker of those admirable disposition of your
contemplative Life.

I then had a sight of the Infinite difference between the service of Jesus,
between the Sensual, and a Spiritual Life. This cannot be discerned; unless
Jesus imprint his Maxims, his Spirit and Sentiments in our hearts, which will
enable us to Crucify our Sensuality, and obey his motions.

I observed that my Devotion to the Sacred Humanity increased daily, and felt
in my Soul such Powerful attracts, that no sooner was I in a Praying posture,
but Jesus possessed my heart, and discovered something of his Grandeurs to me.
This Grace I received from his goodness in my third Prayer. After which me
thought I knew Jesus Christ in a new manner; who though inaccessable to the
Creature, by reason of his Divine and Infinite Perfections, yet sometimes he
does most clearly manifest himself to special Favorites. Such a view of Jesus
is more to be valued than the whole World; and a Soul that once has been
vouchsafed this Grace, esteems her self so rich, that she looks upon all
Worldly things as dross and dung, adhering close to Jesus as her only Treasure.
We can never know what admirable effects this sight of Jesus works in a Soul,
but by experience.

It Is true, there is a great deal of difference between the Visions of Jesus. A
Soul in the beginning of a Spiritual Life is taken up with the sensible part of
the Sacred Humanity, but in the progress she receives such pure discoveries of
Jesus, that she only relishes Jesus wholly Divinized, but cannot express what
she sees in him. Souls thus disposed, receive much of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, and his humane states seem to them so elevated and transcendent, that
they find nothing more beautiful, more precious, or more charming to win their
Affections. O that we did know Jesus as he ought to be known! O that we could
see the inestimable riches, the rare and precious Treasures contained in him!

My fourth Prayer was only to open the eyes of my Soul, to see Jesus Christ, as
we behold any Object with the eyes of our Body, to consider it attentively. He
was pleased so to manifest himself to my Soul, as my joy was superabundant, and
I was dead to all things, and my self, to live in Jesus, and love his Beauties.
I found my self in a manner like a drunken man; who is not himself, but as a
dead man; he knows not what he says, nor is capable of any business, nor can
govern himself; his drunkenness has possessed him, and made him fit for nothing
else.

Enjoyment, for the time it continues, has the like effects in a Soul, she is
then capable of nothing but this enjoyment, which is all in all unto her. Such
Souls are now and then put upon the rack by themselves or their directors,
fearing least this may savor of idleness. They think it may be better to
suffer, and more profitable to help their Neighbor, and that self-love may
creep into this enjoyment: This sometimes brings a Soul to quit this enjoyment,
so as to put her self out of the way where God has placed her, except some
particular Grace preserve her in the performance of Gods will.

A Soul capable of this Grace must be in a state of great Purity, disengaged
and dead to all things Exterior and Interior, indifferent to all Divine
Ordinations whatever, and be in a perfect disposition to adhere to God, and his
Divine operations in what manner he pleases. O how great is our humane
weakness! O how often do we resist the Designs of God by our Imperfections?

Seventh Day. Jesus our Exemplar and Guide.
IN my first Prayer I considered how Jesus was a scandal to the Jews, and to
the Gentiles foolishness; that the same Person should be God and Man, and die
upon a Cross to save the World, the belief of this seemed a pure extravagancy
to poor, blinded Creatures. I considered also how a true Supernatural Christian
Life seems but as folly to Worldly-wise-men, who cannot understand it, being
elevated above sense and humane reason, wholly Spiritual and repugnant to the
Inclinations of deprived nature. Alas! how the practice of the true Christian
Life is rare? To love crosses, and contempts, and poverty, and humiliations,
and to rejoice in Persecutions, by preferring the Maxims of Faith before humane
Wisdom, is a proceeding very extraordinary to Carnal men, who in a manner are
wholly guided by their Senses. If Grace do not open the eyes of Faith in us,
our poor Soul has no director but Reason which casts a mist before us, to
hinder our sight from Christian Verities.

The same Grace also discovered to me, that as Jesus lived a Suffering Life, we
likewise should conform to his states, and be content with crosses and
contrarieties, pains and deprivations, and be pleased with whatsoever comes
from the hand of God: The poor, retired, abject Life I resolved to lead,
answerable to my Vocation, without doubt will be accounted a folly by Worldly
men, and may sometimes so seem to my self. But take courage, O my Soul, a
lively Faith will discover the deceit by a Light from Heaven. The Proceedings
of a Spiritual Life are not governed by Humane Arguments, but Divine and
Supereminent Motives: For we must suffer, to do Penance, and we must love
Poverty, to advance pure Love, which despises all things to have God in
possession.

In my second Prayer I clearly saw, that Jesus took no pleasure without
necessity, to prescribe such rough Maxims to us. He knew that the corruption of
our Nature was great, our inclination to things of this World was continual,
and therefore to live in his Love, required constant Mortifications and
Contradictions to Nature. And the degree of Love is according to the degree of
Self-denial and Mortification. Jesus has founded Christian Perfection upon two
high Mountains, Calvary and Tabor; on the one we learn Perfection and
Mortification, on the other the Perfection of Prayer; and on both the Sublimity
of Divine Love.

To follow Jesus Christ upon one or the other mountain, we must die to the
World, and never let the love of the Cross and Mortification to languish in us.
Solitude must be dear to such Souls, and they must take no employ but what God
will have them; least interessing themselves, and spending their Spirits in
other matters, they make themselves unable to follow vigorously the works of
their Vocation. My Soul, would it not be a sad thing to quit thy Creator and
Redeemer? to lay out thy self upon the Creature, and not correspond to his
Inspirations, who calls thee to himself? What a horrible Infidelity would this
be? Let us not grieve the Holy Spirit, by whom we are Sealed to the day of
Redemption.

The subject of my third Prayer was the admirable Economy of the Incarnation,
in that by the excess of Love and Goodness, God was made Man, and Man became
God. I had profound veneration for the adorable Humanity absorpt in the
Divinity, and with an amorous confidence beheld the Divinity as it were
annihilated in the Humanity, which seemed to me as a Tabernacle of Honor,
where God dwelt with Infinite Delight: This Humanity also in a manner
diviniz'd, takes Infinite Delight in the Divinity; from whence it receives
wonderful Impressions of Annihilation, to be poor, abject and despised,
Crucified. For after God was made man, he inspired the Humanity with ardent
desires and love of Sufferings for us Men and our Salvation.

O Jesus, when you communicate your self to a Soul, she receives impressions
from you, which incline her to a love of Contempts and Sufferings. And when a
Soul feels in her self the greatest propension to Sufferings and Self-denial,
it is then she most participates of your communications, and has the greatest
assurance of them. For O good Jesus, your Spirit is full of such impressions
from the Divinity, and the Soul where you reign as King, does Infallibly
receive the like impressions from your presence.

In my fourth Prayer I was touched with a great desire to leave this Mortal
Life, so full of Sin and Misery, and deprived of the Beatifical Vision of God
my Savior. Oh how irksom is it, not to be in a capacity to contemplate at
leisure this Infinite Beauty, this Essence full of Infinite Perfections, this
only true Object of the Loves of Heaven and Earth? O when shall I be delivered
from this Prison of Flesh, that I may behold Jesus the Light of my Eyes, and
Joy of my Heart? Must I yet continue longer in this banishment? What a cross is
it to live here? What a punishment is the delay? Death, how welcome will thou be
in my embraces?

We must languish with Love after the Infinite Beauty of Jesus Christ, and sigh
to enjoy him. O my Soul, do not amuse thy self with Creatures, love the Cross,
which is the highway to Happiness. Is it possible to believe in Jesus Christ,
and Love him, and to languish with Desires to enjoy Him? To stand much in fear
of Death, is a sign we have little desire to see the Infinite Beauties of God,
seeing Death only opens the gate of Paradise. O Death, thou art desirable,
come, and put me in possession of the Object of my Love, that I may live with
Jesus who is the source of Life, and the joy of the Blessed. In the interim, O
my Soul, let us have neither Love nor Life, nor operation, but what is in him,
and for him, our Sovereign Happiness. Vivit in me Christus.

Eighth Day. Jesus our Light.
JEsus was present to me in my first Prayer, as the Light of the World, which
discovered to me such a Beauty in the Mysteries of our Religion, with rays of
a new Light, that I saw more then ever the vanity of the World, and the strange
Sottishness of such men, who preferred the Darkness of Falsehood before the
Light of Truth. Insanias falsas.

The beams of this Light works wonders in a Soul, for it leaves such
impressions as bring her to know Truth in another manner then by the sole Light
of Reason or Faith either. If we be in the Closet of some great King in the
dark, we know well there be excellent pieces there; we may know their number,
bigness, and value of the Precious Stones, the rareness of the Painting, and
what else we see not: But when once the least light of day appears, then we
begin to have a view of all their Riches, Beauties, and Excellencies, and the
whole order of the Closet salutes our eyes, and in admiration thereof, we are
taken with it in an extraordinary manner.

When it pleases God to give us a sight of his Divine Beauties, discovering
them to a Soul by the least Ray of his Heavenly Light, then the Soul is
wonderfully affected, and being more then ever transported with admiration,
looks upon all things of the World as nothing. Faith indeed gives us a certain
assurance of her Objects, but leaves in obscurity: But one sole Ray from the
Eyes of Jesus, when he is pleased to dart it into a Soul, does confirm,
fortify, encourage, and refresh her with Illustrations extraordinary, and
Sovereign consolations. Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini, We cannot approach
to Jesus, and not be enlightened.

I came to know in my second Prayer, that when Jesus is pleased to manifest
himself to a Soul, he infuses a Light into her, which gives her a mavelous
Facility to believe the Verities of the Word Incarnate. She has a certainty,
and as it were experience, that his Thoughts, his Words, his Actions, his
Proceedings, his Doctrine, his Sufferings were Divine, and brought a Sovereign
Honor to the Divinity. O Science of Jesus, how art thou sweet and admirable?
All other knowledge in respect of thee is but ignorance and vanity.

I have by the great goodness of God had some little experience to know Jesus
in this manner, but I cannot express it. The more this knowledge increases, the
less is it explicable. The profound attention to Jesus does so take up my
Spirit, that it takes away my Speech: It calls me from all Creatures, to
converse with him alone, and draws me out of my self, to be ravished with him.

O World! how blind art thou, not to see the Beauty of the Poor and abject
states of Jesus! His Doctrine and his Maxims are the only true Light: All that
thou have, O ignorant World, seduced by the Prince of Darkness, is but mere
Darkness, thy opinions, thy employments, thy hopes, thy fears, thy desires, thy
entertainments are but Darkness and disorder; thou stumblest almost at every
step, because thou walk in Darkness, out of which thou can never get but
by Jesus Christ* For as the Sun is the principle of Corporal Light to the
World; so Christ the Sun of Righteousness is the source of all Spiritual Light,
and whom his Grace and Doctrine do not enlighten, they wander in Darkness. Ego
sum Lux mundi, qui sequitur me, non ambulat in tenebris.

My third Prayer passed in continual astonishment, in that I had so little
known Jesus Christ; and of that extreme blindness wherein I had lived. At
present I had almost a continual sight, and a sweet and forceable inclination
to regard this admirable Object; so that I thought every moment lost, which was
not so employed. To behold him with amorous affections is a Cure for all my
evils. For when my Soul is afflicted with fears of loosing Gods favor, or with
experience of her Miseries, or with difficulties about Perfection, one gracious
look from Jesus does easily scatter these clouds, appease this storm, and
brings a calm and serenity to my Soul.

Methinks I see clearly, that diffidence in our selves, and confidence in
Jesus, (to keep our selves at his feet in Prayer, or any other manner near him,
as Grace shall suggest,) is an excellent means to Pray well, and to receive
from the Father of Lights, what is necessary to advance us in our way to
Perfection.

We must well observe, that what Light and motions we have from Grace, do more
unite us to God by proficiency in Virtue; but Natural Lights and Sentiments do
not produce the like effect. For example, I may see my frailty and weakness by
knowledge acquired by experience of the Miseries of this Life. I may know the
same also by the Light of Grace. Grace with knowledge gives me also strength
and courage to humble my self, to confess my frailty, to have recourse to God
for his assistance. A natural light has not the like effect, but leaves a man
in his pride and miseries; or what is worse, in sadness and disconsolations.

Our blessed Savior in my fourth Prayer gave me a sight and sentiment of his
adorable Person above all expression. The eyes of my Soul being fixed to behold
the Beauty, the Goodness, the Grandeurs and Perfections of that admirable
Compositum, my Will could not be satisfied with those pleasures and
contentments she then received. O what great happiness does an enlarged Soul
receive, when the Veil is a little drawn from these Divine Mysteries! Methinks
I could have stood beholding this Divine Object all the days of my life. I
considered chiefly, that the holy Soul of Jesus was enlightened with the
Divinity, to know what measures he ought to take during his mortal life, to
fulfill the Decrees of his eternal Father; his wonderful Wisdom in choosing an
humble, poor, and suffering life, to instruct us Men, and give Us Example; and
that worldly Wisdom is but mere Folly, false and pernicious to her followers.

In this view of Jesus, every thing in him seemed to me charming and admirable;
not the least glance from his eye, or word from his mouth, or sigh or tear from
him, but at present, was to me an object of infinite delight, and seemed to me
sufficient to take up a Soul for ever with contemplation. But the contemplation
of God must be accompanied with imitation, and by the conduct of his Grace we
must enter into his states, poor, abject, and suffering; it is in vain to think
to attain to perfection any other way. The only imitation and conformity to
Jesus, makes the Soul capable of pure contemplation, and contemplation will
preserve her in this conformity.

Ninth Day. Jesus, Suffering and Dying.
JEsus, in the Idaea of Ecce homo! crowned with Thorns, clad with a Purple Robe
in derision, buffeted, mocked, spit upon, and scourged, was the object and
subject of my morning Prayer. I took great gust, though full of compassion, to
see him in this posture, because he himself was never more satisfied, in that
he could never better satisfy his Father. And presently I said, O my Jesus!
you were never thus arrayed before now; all the Glory of Mount Tabor did not
cloth you with such Beauties; doubtless the eternal Father takes infinite
complacency to behold you in this state; for you are a Holocaust, all
surrounded with dolours and deaths, with contempts and annihilations.

In this entertainment I communicated, and received my Jesus in this state, who
spoke in this manner to my Soul; I come to thee, to make thee like my self:
Thou will be never wholly acceptable to me, or my Divine Father, till thou
become like me. I then found in my self a great desire to be so, and that I
might take contentedly all disgraces and losses that any accidents brought upon
me, as so many advantages to make me like to my Savior. Ecce homo! I then
remained much comforted and fortified, and very devout to Jesus in this state.

In my second Prayer I found my Soul attracted with a wonderful gust, to behold
Jesus crucified, a spectacle pleasing to the eternal Father, the comfort of
Heaven, and the terror of Hell. I discovered a certain way of beauty, which
clothed the horrors of Calvary with wonderful comeliness. O my God! (said I)
what pleasure is it to see the God of Beauty die for man upon a Cross! This
beauty is not in his visage, now all disfigured; but in the goodness of God,
which is here all in splendours, and in the tryumphs of an incomparable love,
which sacrificed his most precious life for our Redemption. The eternal Father
was much delighted with this Beauty.

The Bruises, and Wounds, and Blood upon his sacred Head and Face, did not make
him disfigured in my eyes, because the beauty of Divine Justice, which was
thereby infinitely glorified, gave him a grace which is unspeakable. Speciosus
forma prae filiis hominum. In this state Jesus appeared to me the most
beautiful of men. And my heart was so taken with Jesus crucified, that I could
not but love him in the state of his annihilations.

The Grace which this view left in my Soul, was a particular esteem and love
for sufferings. I saw nothing more beautiful, seeing they were a kind of
Ornament to God himself, and rendered him an object of singular complacency to
his eternal Father. Jesus has sanctified the states of poverty, contempt, and
sufferings, through which he passed, to make them sources of grace to such
Souls as love them for his sake. If the holy places where Christ was on Earth
are in singular veneration, much more ought the states of Jesus Christ. If the
men of the world think it a great honor to participate of the grandeurs of
their Prince; how happy and Honorable ought a true Christian to think himself
to be, if he be partaker of the humiliations of the King of Glory? The Crown
and Scepter are the glory of a King: Poverty, Contempts, and Sufferings, are
the glory of a Servant of Jesus Christ.

In my third Prayer I was pierced with a wonderful feeling at the sight of
Jesus suffering and dying on the Cross. Being not able to comprehend how the
infinite Majesty of a God should condescend so low, I said, O my Jesus! why did
you not rather let all men perish? for it is more just beyond comparison, that
men should be lost, being Guilty, than you suffer, being most Innocent. But in
this triumph of your love, you have no regard to your self, but to satisfy
Divine Justice, and that Infinite Charity you have for your poor Brethren in
their miserable condition. Suffer then even the death of the Cross, seeing,
dear Jesus, it is your pleasure.

I considered the eternal obligations we have to Jesus Christ, in that he died
for our Salvation. It seemed to me that hitherto I had been as in darkness, in
regard to this incomparable benefit Jesus Christ is our true and faithful
Friend indeed; and yet, alas! he is neither known nor regarded as he ought, nor
loved with thankfulness. He loves us so as to die for us, and we make no
reciprocal returns. O the prodigious insensibility of men! Is then Jesus Christ
a stranger to us, and not our God and Savior? Does the History of his holy
Passion pass with us, as a profane or indifferent thing? Ought not the bloody
Tragedy of Calvary fill all Christian hearts with love and sorrow? For my part,
I could hide my head with shame, that I have so little compassion and love for
Jesus dying on the Cross for our Salvation.

O my Jesus! I confess my fault, in that I have so little known my infinite
obligations to you. But seeing your Grace discovers now to me more clear than
heretofore what you are, I will never more lose sight of you; I will love
nothing more than You, and esteem nothing more than to do you honor. You are
my true Father, my true Brother, true Friend, true King, true Redeemer. O how
great a truth is it, that you are all in all unto me! O that I have been so
long without knowing you aright! O Jesus, how Happy am I that I have found you!
O let me never so much loose my self, as to forsake you!

For my fourth Prayer, I stood at the Sepulcher of Jesus, and seeing his
precious Body dead and covered with Wounds, I made this Epitaph; Here lies
Love. Yes, yes, here lies Love indeed, for his excessive Love to us, brought
him to this state and condition. A state full of horror and wounds, Blood and
Infamy; But a state well pleasing to God, as satisfying his Justice for man's
Redemption. I embraced his precious Body, and kissed his Sacred Wounds; I
adored Jesus in this state, and said; O my Soul, we must either cease to Love
Jesus, or die with him, seeing Love equalizes Lovers, and makes them alike. My
Soul then chose to die with Jesus, and after many sighs and desires to please
her Beloved, she died with Jesus, never willing more to live a Natural and
Humane Life, but a Life Divine and Supernatural, as that of Jesus. And I made
for her this Epitaph. Here lies a Soul dead of Love.

Behold in what consists the death of my Soul; it is to live no longer according
to the natural Inclinations, but according to the motions of Grace; which are
the Love of Poverty, Contempt and Sufferings. While these dispositions live in
a Soul, she is dead to Sensual desires, and lives a Life of Grace, a Life
Supernatural. Therefore for the future I will never hunt after Honors, or
Pleasures, or Riches willingly, and by Election; but I will either heartily
forsake them; or if I use them, it shall be upon Divine Motives, for the good
of my Neighbor, or for pure necessity; seeing That is the Will of God, the
surest rule of all our Actions.

Tenth Day. Jesus risen from Death, and Glorious.
IN my Morning Prayer I considered the Glory of Jesus Christ in the state of
his triumphant Resurrection. O Jesus how Glorious are you! How well does this
become you? Verily 'twas a strange state whither your Love had brought you: A
state of Misery, Shame, and Sorrow. This was well for us Criminals, but in no
sort agreeing to you, who are Innocence it self: For what belongs to you, is
Majesty and Glory, What joy did swell my heart to see Jesus Glorious? My Tongue
cannot express what my Heart feels. This great Feast of the Resurrection is to
be celebrated by all Creatures, seeing it is the day wherein Jesus appears as
God. O Feast of the Glory of Jesus! O Feast of the Glory of Mary! 'Twas a
Miracle she did not die of Sorrow at the Death of her Son; and it is another
Miracle she did not die of Joy at his Glorious Resurrection.

O my heart, be thou enlarged with Joy, for it is a general rule without
exception, that the Interest of the Creator is to be preferred before all
Creatures. And therefore O triumphant Jesus, I more rejoice that you are
Glorious, then that I hope to be Glorified with you. Yea, though I should never
be raised, your Glory does ravish me. It glads me when I consider, that
damnation only concerns the Creature; for the Interest of Jesus suffers not
thereby; seeing God is Glorified by the Reprobates, as well as by the Saints in
Glory.

It Is also a certain rule, that the Elect, O Divine Jesus, are Images of you,
and so necessarily must resemble you in your Sufferings, if with you they will
be Glorified. It Is a folly to think not to suffer here some way or other, more
or less, seeing the way to Glory is by Sufferings. O my Soul, be thou united to
Jesus Crucified, and then thou shall have part with Jesus Glorified. To this
end thou must love the Cross, and desire of Jesus to die, or suffer. O World,
thy way is mere folly, and nothing else.

In my second Prayer I was taken up with these words of Divine Jesus: Ought not
Christ first to suffer, and so to enter into Glory? I discovered how all the
Divine Perfections did wonderfully shine forth therein: But above all the
Wisdom of God does ravish those hearts which contemplate the works of Grace and
Mercy. O Divine Wisdom how well is the Economy of your Mysteries ordered, to
work our Salvation, and bring us to Glory? Every Mystery which I considered,
did raise a new Fire in my breast, to inflame my affections with the Love of
Jesus. Sometimes they altogether did, (as with so many arrows,) pierce my
heart, and made me languish with Divine Love, For seeing my self so Beloved of
good Jesus, how could I but Love him again?

O Infinite Love of Jesus, for whom shall I have a heart, if not for thee? O
Love, it is for thee my heart is reserved. Thy attracts are powerful enough, do
not redouble them so sweet and charming; it is enough, my heart is for thee. O
Love, except thou will have me die, do not wound me any more. Yet I will die
willingly, if thou will have it so, on the Cross of Interior and Exterior
Suffering, that I may be conform to my Loving Savior.

My third Prayer was a continuation of the Sentiments of the Love of Jesus. I
made use of the words of great St. Austin in his Confessions: O my Jesus, you
have wounded my heart with the arrows of your Charity, and I have devoted it to
your Love. Since that you have scattered my Darkness, and made your self known
unto me, I have not forgot you. Since I had the Happiness to know you, I have
imprinted you in my memory; there I find you, and I taste perfect Delights; and
receive extreme Joy and Contentment when I remember you.

My Soul feeling Divine Fires within her, which did fill her with Pleasures, I
did sing extempore Canticles to my Beloved, and though not methodical, yet they
better expressed her amorous languishings. Though alone in my Chamber, I spoke
of Jesus aloud, as if I had had many Auditors to be partakers of my Happiness.

I make Colloquies among many Lovers of Jesus. I think I hear St. Romuald say;
My dear Jesus, my sweet Love, the inestimable Object of my Desires, the Delight
of Saints, the Joy of Angels, who will give me to Love you as much by my Self,
as they do altogether? Another answered; Seeing your Perfections, O good Jesus,
have no limits, the Love which all hearts have for you, ought to be Infinite.
Another said; O Savior, the Fruits are Testimonies of true Love; your appear
to me admirable in the effects of your Sufferings, and that bloody Death you
endured for me. But what have I done as yet to testify my Love, or make you
Love me? Another concluded, and said; Let us Love, and Suffer, and let us die
by the hands of the same Love, which made Jesus die upon the Cross.

O Sacred Love, how kindly cruel art thou to those who fall into thy hands? For
thou do cut and mortify, and humble, and annihilate. All thy Servants more
or less carry the marks of thy Severity. St. Philip Nereus in his Ribbs; St.
Francis in his Hands, and Feet, and very Heart. But O Divine Love, I fear not
thy Cruelty; Mortify me, Crucify me, Burn me Alive; I desire to die by no
other hand.

The conclusion of all the Prayers of my Solitude, was an absolute abandon of
my self to Jesus Christ; to whom I gave my self up in a new manner irrevocably,
to live or die, to act or suffer, to be in such a state as best pleases him:
Ardently desiring that his Sacred Love would make me die to all things but
himself. The Martyrdom of Love is longer then that of Tyrants, and sometimes
more tormenting; fighting against all our natural Inclinations, breaking
through all oppositions whatsoever, to practice the virtues of the Word
Incarnate. Without doubt we suffer much, to follow that Grace which calls us to
die on a Cross, poor, contemned, and abandoned. But he that Loves, finds
sweetness in these Sufferings.

It Is a great wonder to make a Creature of nothing: But it is a far greater to
make a sinner a Saint: And this, O Jesus, is the only work of your Grace. It Is
you that are victorious and triumphant in all your Elect over the corruption
and malignity of Sin.

O Jesus, how great is the Power of your Grace? How is your right Hand
glorified by working wonders? O Jesus, the Infinite source of Power and Virtue,
of Grace and Sanctity, of Beauty and Perfection, O that I have as yet so little
known you! In Heaven they only see you clearly, but yet it is a Favor and
Happiness beyond expression to have some knowledge of you in this Life. When I
behold Jesus, my Soul wants words, and can say nothing but Jesus; and in saying
Jesus, it says all it would, though it be ineffable.

O Jesus, vouchsafe me some little sight of you in this banishment, that my
Soul may be comforted. Jesus, God and Man, the eternal Splendor and Crown of
Saints, be you hereafter the only Object of my Desires and Love, that I may be
so united to you, as never to suffer a separation.

When Jesus once possesses a Soul, her Thoughts are on him, her Words are to
him, and her Love is for him. She then lives in a region of Light, Beautiful
beyond all expression; and in her ardours of Love, she seems wholly Passive to
the operations of Jesus in her. Jesus is enlightening, enflaming, Piercing, and
Consummating; Jesus is more in the Soul then her self, and lives more in her
then her self; all is converted into Jesus, by a cooperation of Love which she
feels, but cannot explicate.

It seems to my Soul, that hitherto she has been but in continual amusements.
How many vain Idaeas have taken up her Thoughts? But at the sight of Jesus, all
Creatures appeared but as Dreams, and they fled before him, as Owls at
Sunrising. I know you then, O amiable Jesus, I see that you are Verity, and
all the World but Vanity.

O Divine Jesus, reign for ever in my Soul, establish your Empire in my heart,
and be absolute King there, for it is yours. Let all the Blessed Angels and
Saints in Heaven, and all Creatures Bless you and Praise you, and help me to
return you Thanks for all the Favors your Infinite Goodness has vouchsased me
in this Retreat. Add this also, O most Merciful Jesus, to your other Graces,
that I may have a perpetual dependence on your Holy Will, and live in you, and
for you, who lives and reigns World without end, Amen.

The End of the Fourth BOOK.
BOOK V. Of Communion and its Effects.
CHAP. I. Of Preparation before Communion.
A Person that often receives his God in the Holy Communion, ought to direct
all the Actions of his Life to that end, and render them a Preparation to it.
And as those Acts whereby we prepare our selves, ought to be most Holy, most
replenished with Grace; so by consequence the Life of one that does often
frequent the Sacrament, ought to be a continued exercise of Holy and
Supernatural Acts. We ought to lead a Life worthy of the Divine Bread which is
given us in this adorable Sacrament. A common and material Bread supports the
Life of Nature: But he who is himself the Bread of Graces, bestows on us a Life
of Grace, a Life Holy and Divine, and Infinitely raised above the Humane Life:
And therefore is little known, little sought by such as lead a common Life, and
are unwilling to leave themselves and their Temporal concerns, to live to Jesus
Christ, who to that end gives himself to them, that he may be their Life.

O my God, how Ignorant and Earthly has my past Life been, since I am so little
acquainted with this Life more than Humane! But now out of your Mercy you
vouchsafe to bestow on me such Sentiments as incline me to enter upon this
Life: For I plainly see that a Soul well settled in the state of Grace, ought
to live no longer according to Nature, but according to Grace. The Motions,
Maxims and Designs of the Supernatural Life take their Original from Grace, and
are of a very different relish from such as affect Souls, which move only by
the impressions of Nature. For the Soul actuated by this Life, embraces
Contempts, Sufferings, Abjection; and her delight is to be annihilated in the
esteem and love of Creatures; so far it is from seeking those things, never so
little. To live this Life, is to live the Life of Jesus, and to become one and
the same with him; and it is an excellent Disposition to live by him, while the
Soul receives him as its proper nourishment: Qui manducat me, vivet propter me.

Your Delights, O Lord, are to be with the Children of Men: But these Delights
ought to be Reciprocal; that is to say, That Souls ought to take their Delights
in you, in your state of Poverty and Abjection, that so you may take your
Delights in them. What an excess of Goodness is this, O Lord, that being so
great, so full of Glory, you come to humble your self, and to annihilate your
self in a Soul so Criminal, so Unfaithful! It Is true, Abjections were not
inconsistent with the condition of your Mortal Life: But since now you are in
Glory, methinks you ought to be exempt from them. If my Soul had any Love for
your Interests, she would not procure you such Humiliations: and therefore she
would do better not to Communicate so often; for then she would not be the
occasion of humbling you so often. This Sentiment, joined with the knowledge of
my own unworthiness, would make me abstain from Communicating, if I did not
know withal that your Delights are to be with such Souls as desire likewise to
take their Delights in you, and that you have said in St. John, That if we do
not eat your Adorable Flesh, we shall not have Life in you.

When I consider my Indignity, and yet present my self to Communicate, with a
Soul that is an ever-flowing source of Vices and Sins; I should be very much
afflicted to see Jesus Christ so ill lodged in the midst of my Imperfections,
not knowing in what part of my Soul I might place him. Where he might not see
things unworthy of his Presence. This sight would doubtless cause me a great
deal of pain, if another regard did not encourage me. I consider that, when the
Sun enters into a stinking and and offensive Dungeon, he is received there more
in his own Brightness and Luster than in the Dungeon it self; and that so he is
there without prejudicing his Grandeur or Purity. When I have this Idaea before
my eyes, I say to my Lord: It Is true you enter into me all miserable as I am:
But it is true also, that you are more in your Self, in your Glory and in your
Brightness. Be therefore received in your Self, O Divine Jesus, in your Beauty
and in your Grandeurs. I rejoice that the offensiveness and streightness of my
Dungeon cannot prejudice your Beauties, or your Greatness. Enter therefore into
me, without going out of your Self: Be received in me, but more in your Self, O
bright Sun of Glory! Live for ever in the midst of your own Splendours and
Magnificence; but do not cease to live also in the middle of my Obscurities and
Misery. Convert me unto you wholly, and without reserve.

CHAP. II. To Communicate worthily, we must put our selves in a state
conformable to that of Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament.
JEsus Christ chose to give himself to us in this stupendous Mystery, in the
state of Death, as to any thing that concerns the life of the Senses; but as a
Fountain of Life in regard of the Interior Life; a Divine Life, a Life of
Grace, a Life of Contemplation and of continual application of the mind to
adore the Majesty of God his Father: A Life, I say, poor, and nothing to the
Exterior, but shining with the Divinest and most awful Luster, and Infinitely
rich under the vails of the outward Species that hid it from the eyes of the
World. Thus and with these dispositions he presents himself to us, requiring
that we likewise present our selves unto him with dispositions conformable to
his.

His Sacred Humanity, that he gives us in the Holy Communion, was raised to a
Divine Life by the Hypostatical Union: So also must we be by Grace, viz. Our
understanding must be elevated above it self by a high illustration of Faith,
and our Will inflamed by a sublime Sense of the Love of God; and so in fine,
our whole Soul must be animated with the Life of Grace. O the Sublimity of the
Life of Grace! How Admirable art thou, how High, how Ineffable! Thou raisest
man from Earth to Heaven, thou make him live in God, I, and of God too, since
thou do prepare him to live in this World upon the same Substance which
nourishes the Blessed in Heaven. O great Life of Grace! thou art poor to the
Exterior, but most rich to the Interior: Thou appearest low, but art most
high. I am ravished with thy Beauties, I cannot live a moment without Thee, who
make us live with a Life Divine, who placest the Soul in the heart of God,
and disposest her to see God placed in her own Heart.

When the Charms and Beauty of this Life have once discovered themselves to the
Soul, she willingly quits all other things, to embrace them, and whatsoever
else seems to her no better than Death and Corruption; she renounces the World,
Pleasures and Riches; she condemns her self to Pennances, Mortifications and
Poverty, to obtain this Divine Life; and feels a Sacred hunger after this
adorable nourishment that is her only support. O that I did thoroughly know,
that I did Faithfully pursue this Divine Life, a Life so little known, so
little practiced in the World, where People do not thirst after the Living
Waters of your Eternal Fountain. O my God! O Jesus, draw me after you through
all the Actions and Duties of the Life of Grace, which is at its greatest
height among Injuries and Miseries. Draw me, O Lord, and I will run after you
in the Odor of your Perfumes. What a pleasure is it, O my Soul, to see you
march like a Giant in the ways of Grace, nourished and strengthened in your
course with the Bread of Heaven: Ambulavit in fortitudine cibi illius usque ad
montem Dei.

To live in Death, (as Jesus seems to do in the Blessed Sacrament) to change
Glory for Contempt, to be most delighted when one is annihilated and even
Sacrificed, is the true Character of the Life of Grace. It makes all things die
to the Exterior, and live only to the Interior, and above all things it
confers the Spirit of Prayer, keeping the Soul almost in a continual exercise
and elevation, by fixing its regard upon that Infinite and incomprehensible
Being which she adores and is not able to understand, and therefore annihilates
her self in his presence, suspended with admiration of those Divine Grandeurs
which she sees annihilated in the Holy Eucharist. O my Soul. how great is thy
Vileness, how extreme is thy Poverty! What is man, that thou, O Lord, art
mindful of him; Do visit him and take pleasure to come and dwell personally
in him? His Soul is drawn out of nothing, his Body is but a piece of Clay, and
still you vouchsafe to set your eyes upon him! How can a Creature so filthy, so
wretched, so gross, receive within it the Infinite Majesty of God. Sink and
humble your self to the very center of your Nothing, and confess your
Indignities, O my Soul. Cast down your eyes, and acknowledge that you are
unworthy so much as to lift them up toward this formidable Grandeur; and more
than all be penetrated with the deep sense of Admiration, Gratitude and love of
this excessive Goodness, which condescends in this incomprehensible Mystery to
annihilate it self, to come and give it self to you even in the state of your
own Nothing.

We must needs be very much in Love with our condition of Interior Captivity,
where the Soul lies bound and tied up in darkness and prison. For this
condition Honors the Captivity of Jesus confined to the narrow compass of a
little Host. This Divine Lord of ours shuts himself up in this strait Prison
for the Love of us. The King of Glory is contracted under these little Species,
and so renders himself a Prisoner to man; yes, he renders himself in appearance
his Slave; giving all of himself to man, and still Sacrificing himself to his
Eternal Father for man: He still suffers (as I may say) and dies for man, and
communicates to him all the merits of his precious Blood and Passion. O Divine
Captive, captivate my heart so strongly that it may never be able to re-enter
into its natural liberty: But that wholly destroyed and annihilated, it may
never be capable of any other Life than that which is more than Humane: Never
enjoy any other liberty than that of your Children. Let the World look upon
them as slaves: And load them with all Indignities as the outcast of men; in
despite of all contempt they are still your Children.

Every time we approach to this Sacrament wherein Jesus Christ gives himself to
us whole and entire, we enter into a new obligation and contract to give up our
selves wholly and entirely to him, and to endeavor to render all our Actions
Divine. Wherefore a Virtuous Soul ought not to say; I have not had time enough
to prepare my self before Communion; for she ought to aim at no other thing in
all the Actions of her Life, than to receive this Bread of Life, to the end she
may live the Life of Jesus, and keep her self continually in such dispositions
as she sees him in, in the Blessed Sacrament.

CHAP. III. To receive the Communion Worthily, we must imitate those Actions
which Jesus Christ practiced when he Instituted it.
I remark Principally three Actions that Jesus Christ was pleased to do for our
example when he instituted the Holy Sacrament: And we cannot make a perfect
Communion without the practice of them. 1. He never performed any Exterior Act
of such a profound Humility. In Truth he annihilated himself in the work of his
Incarnation: Both according to his Humane Nature which he deprived of its
Natural Substance in an extraordinary way of conception: And according to his
Divinity which he plunged into the Abiss of Humane Miseries. Yet he debased
himself farther when he chose a Stable to be born in, as the most Poor and
Abject of Men: Still more when he condescended to take the Badge of Sinners in
his Circumcision; But the lowest Abiss and center of annihilation was in the
Chamber where he made the last Supper, and where he did a thing that is the
most humbling of all Humane Actions, washing the Feet drying them, kissing them
with his adorable Lips, and this even to the greatest of his Enemies, and most
wicked Miscreant that ever lived, even to Judas.

O my Jesus, this is too much debasing of your Grandeurs* it is too profound a
Humiliation of your Majesty. It Is my duty, who am a mere Nothing by the
condition of my Being, and become less than nothing by the enormity of my sins;
it is my duty to annihilate my self under the feet of the vilest of Creatures.
What an intolerable Pride would it be in me, if, having seen the God of Majesty
humbling himself so profoundly to give example, and having heard him tell me so
with his own mouth: Exemplum dedi vobis, ut and vos it a faciatis; I have given
you an example, that you should do so as you have seen me do: What a Pride (I
say) would it be in me to approach to your Communion without the Sentiments of
the greatest Humility that I can possibly exhibit in any Action of my Life?

The second Action our Divine Master practiced when he instituted this great
Sacrament, was a sublime Prayer, one of the most perfect, as well as one of the
last that he made in all his Life; lifting up his Hands, Eyes and Heart to God
his Father, by an Act of a most respectful Reverence. And though he was himself
his own Heaven where his Father reigned, he recollects himself into this most
Sacred Humanity, as into a new Heaven, and there addresses his Prayers to his
Father who was present to him, and his first Petition is, Glorify me, O
Father; which is to say, give me the joy of Humiliations and Opprobries of the
Cross which I have so long desired and sighed after: Teaching his Church to
look upon Contempts and Crosses as her Glory, and the greatest Honor she can
desire upon Earth* He demands also the Institution of this ineffable Mystery of
the Holy Eucharist, which he was going to make in obedience to his Eternal Will
and Decree; knowing that it was to be unto us a Fountain of Eternal Life, and
unto himself the beginning of a perpetual Death, as continuing there in quality
of a Sacrifice even to the consummation of the World.

It is my Duty therefore, after his Example, to prepare my Soul to receive his
Divine Mysteries by the most pure and most perfect Prayer, as God shall
enlighten and inspire me. The most assured is, to apply ones self to him by a
simple regard of Faith, accompanied with Respect and Love, considering him full
of Graces, full of Mercies and Blessings in this awful Mystery, and that he
comes unto us with all his riches, and gives himself without any reserve, even
rendering himself in a manner passive for all the designs that he intends to
accomplish within us, whether he comes himself in person to operate there the
mavelous effects of his Love. This sole regard of Faith in its simplicity
contains all the Perfections of other Acts. It Is sufficient to have God by
Regard unto him and by Love; this is to attain to the end where the heart
rests: All other Exercises of Meditation and Practices of Interior Virtues are
but only means to arrive unto God; when he is once found, the Soul is to repose
there and rest satisfied.

The third and most endearing Action that I admire in our Lord when he
Instituted the Blessed Sacrament, and when he made his Love appear in its
greatest Luster, and in its most Ardent Fervor, as well toward God the
Father* as toward Men, even his Enemies. When he comes into the World, his
Love is a rising Sun: But when he comes to leave the World, in the vigor of
his Life, and in the excess of Charity that he showed in dying for us, he is a
Sun in the heat of Noon day. The Gospel tells us, That having loved his own
that were in the World, he kindled the flames of his Charity, and raised them
to the highest point imaginable, when he Instituted the Holy and adorable
Sacrament; In finem dilexit eos. But that which is most inconceivable in it,
which the most of any thing demonstrates the eminence of his Charity, is that
he did not refuse the most charming and most tender embraces to the most
unworthy and most perfidious of all his Enemies. Judas, whom Envy had already
poisoned even to the heart, whom Avarice had perverted and made a Thief;
Insensibleness had blinded and made ungrateful; whom Malice had corrupted and
made an Apostate, a Traitor, a very Devil; yet this Judas in this condition
that he was, and in which Jesus saw him at the bottom of his heart, is not
excluded from the eminent Grandeurs of the Love of our Savior, which feeds
this Demon with the Manna of Angels. O Love, how thou art admirable! O Love,
how thou art invincible! an abundance of waters cannot extinguish thy flames.

And now, my Soul, is it possible thou should continue tepid and insensible
while thou art near so great a Fire? Had thou all the Ardours of the
Seraphins, thou would still be too little on Fire to answer and reflect the
Fires of that incomparable Love which inflames his heart when he comes to give
himself to thee: A good Religious Capuchin, called Br. Bonaventure, felt his
Soul so inflamed with this Sacred Fire when he approached to the Holy Table,
that one day, among others, finding himself more than ordinary replenished with
an Ardent desire to unite himself with God; and seeing the most Blessed
Sacrament in the Priests hand ready to Communicate him, his heart seemed to
make strong efforts to leap out of his Breast and meet the only Object of its
desires, which also broke forth into words: For the abundance of his Love
forced out their amorous Aspirations: My Jesu! My Jesu! My Jesu! But to let
both him and us know that the Love of Jesus in this unspeakable Mystery
surpasses all ours in an Infinite measure, the Holy Host quitted the Priest's
hand, and as it were all on a flame and encircled with Glorious Rays of Light,
of its own accord, flew into the Mouth of this worthy Servant of God.

CHAP. IV. Interior Entertainments during Communion.
SOme times when I was Communicating, it came into my mind to think that my
heart was an Altar, and that Jesus Christ came to continue upon it the same
operations that he had performed on that Altar where the Holy Mass is
Celebrated. Wherefore my heart received him lovingly and simply, united it self
to all his Divine Operations relating both to his Heavenly Father, and to
Creatures: And my Soul adhering to all his Adorations, all his Sacrifices, all
his Love that he bears his Eternal Father, became wholly passive, like an Altar
upon which Jesus does all that he pleases, as well in regard of the Divinity,
as in regard of Men to whom he distributes and dispenses his Mercies.

It seemed to me that in the first place he applied himself to honor his
Divine Father, to annihilate himself before his greatness, to love his Goodness
and other Divine Perfections, and then he turned himself to succor my
weakness, and show his Mercies upon me, by giving me a glimpse of what he is,
and a fight of the strick and close alliance whereby I ought to be united to
him; that I ought not to subsist a moment but by his Life; that his Holy Spirit
ought to animate my Soul, and be the first spring of all its motion, as my Soul
moves my Body, and is the Principal of all its operations: That to live a Life
purely Humane, is a state wherein though a Soul does not offend God, yet she
cannot please him; which is a thing Love cannot suffer, nor will it endure that
a Soul wherein it reigns should cease any one moment from pleasing her Beloved.

O Jesus, enter into so absolute a possession of my Soul that she may be wholly
yours, and that she may never have any other motion than what your Grace gives
her. It Is the great desire of my Soul, which would not live to you partly, and
partly to Creatures; but that all the actions of my Life be Consecrated to your
Love. I have need of a Powerful Grace, O Jesu, to continue thus elevated above
my self in all sort of occasions: But vouchsafe to magnify your Omnipotence in
my weakness, your Mercies in my Miseries.

Another time after Communion, I had represented to me the manner how all the
Interior Faculties of Jesus Christ in his Mortal Life did most worthily
Glorify his Eternal Father: All the parts of his Holy Soul were taken up in
this employment; the Intellectual Powers of the Superior part the Beatifical
Vision and Fruition; the Inferior part and his Body by a most perfect
Suffering. I saw the admirable connection which was between these so different
states, and their joint accord to Glorify the Eternal Father: And the
wonderful Economy of this Sacred Interior charmed my Soul: I continually
offered it up to God in the pressures I lay under; in the midst of my troubles*
I entered into these Holy Dispositions, and united my Sufferigs with his, my
Actions with his Divine ones. This disposition remains deeply imprinted in me,
and serves me for a comfort and support upon all occasion of our contempt,
pains or any other affliction.

Another time my Interior entertainment during Communion was after this
manner. I considered that a Christian has but two concerns in this Life, how to
maintain the Life of Nature, and that of Grace, thereby to arrive to that of
Glory. Generally men think of nothing but the first, though it be of no
consequence, and but for a moment, besides that is full of Miseries; and they
forget the second, which is Eternal, and Infinite importance; yet scarce any
body minds it, for every one lives in the darkness of Imperfection, and the
blindness of Sense. O what a Misery! And on the contrary, how Happy are they
who set no value but upon the Life of Grace, and consequently love those
Exercise which nourish and improve it, as Mortifications, Prayer, frequent
Communion! O how clearly do I see that I ought to disingage my self from
Temporal Affairs, to apply my self more fully to the Exercises of the Life of
Grace, and to pure Prayer!

I made another time my Action of Grace after this manner. An attention to the
Presence of God before Communion had raised in me a great and awful respect
toward that most Sacred Majesty, before whom the highest Seraphins in Heaven
do tremble. The like impression continued in me also after Communion: My Soul
was all adoration seeing the adorable Jesus was become her Guest: His Presence
heightened my respect, as being the source of all Graces, and of all good
Dispositions. I saw himself also sometimes paying a profound respect to God the
Father; and then I plunged my self deeper, and even lost my self in those
Divine Respects, unwilling to come out of them: And fearing least some persons
should come to visit me, and interrupt my Devotion, I hid my self, that I might
remain thus wholly plunged in this Sentiment of Reverence which Perfumed my
Soul.

CHAP. V. Other Interior Entertainments to give Thanks after Communion.
THe Dispositions most frequent with me after Communion are;

1. Jesus entering into my Mouth, veiled with the Sacramental Species, I
Sacrifice to him all my Being, my Faculties and Operations in Homage to his
Grandeur. And after this Act I remain quite annihilated and passive to Jesus,
operating toward his Heavenly Father, Love, Respect, and Praise; toward my
Self, Death, Annihilation, and Alliance with his Divine Life.

2. A second Disposition after the Holy Communion is, that Jesus entering into
me, presently operates a straight Union. At that time I have no sight of any
that may annihilate me; only at first he unites me to the state of his Humanity
in its Poverty and Abjections; the Contempt, Labors and Sufferings of his
Mortal Life; and being hereby purified, next he draws me to a Union with the
state of his Divinity, that is to say, to render to his Eternal Father, Love,
Praises and complacency in his Grandeurs.

3. Another time after Holy Communion, these great words of our Lord presented
themselves to my mind to serve for my Entertainment; Rogo Pater, ut sint
consummati in unum: Father I beseech you, that they may be consummated in one.
They disclose to me a little of that perfect Unity, or consummated Union that
ought to be contracted between Jesus and us: His Love requiring that our Souls
should be confirmed in that Union by the frequent use of the Holy Communion,
and that they act continually according to the conditions of this Alliance;
from whence they fall by the least Infidelity, and very much offend God, who
sees himself neglected, and as it were contemned and post-poned to Creatures,
after he has called them to so perfect a Union, and come expressly to work it in
them. Wherefore a perfect Union requires that our heart be united the most
continually that possibly it can, and that it tend incessantly to a Unity of
Love with Jesus Christ, to a Unity of Instinct, of Inclinations, of Desires,
and to a great conformity with the condition of his Mortal Life, which is that
whereby we are to walk during our present Life, if we desire to arrive to the
enjoyment of his Divine Life.

4. Sometimes after Communicating, I have had this representation in my mind,
that Jesus giving himself to me, seemed to speak to me, but without any kind of
words: For the sole manifestation of his Love imparted to the Soul, is in lieu
of speaking; and the Soul answers by Acquiescence and Admiration that cannot be
expressed. In effect, the Soul in this state does not understand any Interior
words, after the manner that Mystique Divines explain them in their Writings:
But the lively and clear representation that is made to her of the state of
Jesus in each Mystery, without any thing else, serves her for Discourse. While
she is in this condition, it seems to her that Jesus says, Hear Daughter, and
see, and forget your People, and the House of your Father, to enter into an
imitation of me. To which words the Soul makes answer by acquiessing, and
without any noise in her Interior, she signifies her acceptance by a most
efficatious consent. She hears by seeing, and Jesus speaks by manifesting
himself.

Another while at the Communion I had a general view of the multitude of the
great wonders that Jesus operates in these Mysteries of Faith, in favor of
Men, with whom he takes his Delight. This general view raised me to a high
admiration, which nevertheless terminated in a sense of a most profound
acknowledgment of the Goodness of God, seeing that all these wonders tend to no
other end than to manifest unto us the intenseness of the Love he bears us, and
import that he expects Love for Love. That is your only design, my good Jesu,
in bestowing on me this Divine Food, to bestow on me the Life of your Love; but
this Life may very well cause my Death. O Love, Love, Love! was all that I
could then say, being struck dumb with admiration.

CHAP. VI. Another Method of Thanksgiving after Communion.
I Find a great gust in the understanding of these words; Fortis est ut mors
dilectio: Love is strong as Death. Methinks I see them practically verified in
the Holy Communion, where I see that Love has reduced Jesus to the state of
Death and of a Sacrifice immolated, as Death reduced him upon Mount Calvary. I
consider, that while his Love severs him from the Splendours of his Glory to
unite himself to me, it excites me at the same time to separate my self, from
Creatures, from my Self, and from all other things, thereby to unite my self to
him alone. My Soul thoroughly penetrated with a desire to correspond with this
design of her Beloved Jesus, and clearly discerning that the love of Crosses
and Contempt is necessary to dispose and prepare her for this great Favor, she
looks on them with affection and delight, as so many Springs whence flows her
Happiness.

Another wonder, which sometimes my mind has been intent upon, and received
great Comfort from it, is the Infinite desire that God has to Communicate
himself, and to lift us up to a full participation of his Divinity. This view
well penetrated into, discovers so many wonders of the Love of God toward Men,
of the Felicities to which they are destined after the Miseries of this World,
of the Dignity of their Creation (since the end for which they were made is to
possess God,) of the Infinite desire God has to unite himself to them, and of
the perfect corresponding and compliance they are from thence obliged to,
especially such Souls as are chosen, and in a particular manner called to this
state, that after all this it is scarce possible to resist such cogent impulses
and attractives of God. They make one desire to die to all things, the better
to prepare for so great a work of Love; the hurries and business of the World
is not to be any longer endured, and one becomes passionately in Love with
Solitude. My Soul, reflect diligently upon the Grace is given thee, and
correspond to the Love of God toward thee, which thou art now so thoroughly
acquainted with: Thou have no other business but this; for thou must never
betake thy self to any other employment, unless thou receive express orders
from God for it.

The more one is estranged from Creatures, the better a Soul is disposed to
this Divine Union, wherefore Disgraces ought to be our Felicity, because they
are the means to obtain it. The Cross, Purity of Love, Union, God alone: These
are the degrees that Grace leads us through, and our Fidelity calls us to.

There is also another good method of giving Thanks after Communion, which
consists in abandoning and resigning our selves absolutely and without reserve
to the power and dependence of Jesus Christ, who coming into our hearts, ought
to be master there, and command as Sovereign. When it pleases him to continue
with a Soul, to entertain her, and to unite her to him by a most delightful
feeling of his presence, we must not think that to remain thus united, is to do
nothing; for it is the doing of all that God demands of us, and the cooperating
with him in the greatest work of Grace, which is the Union of a Soul with the
Divinity. This Union is a repose of the Soul, and it is found in several and
different manners: Sometimes it is diffused through all the Soul, sometimes
it is only in the Superior part thereof; other while it restrains it self to
the supreme point of the Will; and if the Soul be Faithful, she does not
considerably interrupt this Union: For the trouble of the Interior part, or
distractions of the imagination, may indeed lessen the tranquillity thereof, but
cannot destroy it. The thing that weakens it the most, and as it were smothers
it, are the Passions when violent, Cares that touch one to the quick, Troubles
of mind, Pleasures of Sense; Wherefore one must be dead to all these, and
endeavor to die perpetually to them.

Another time Jesus entering into my Soul in Communion, did not impart to it
this Union so desirable, but deprived it of it; whether it were in punishment
for her Imperfections, or that he designed her at that time for other
Employments, and required Exterior Duties from her for the good of her
Neighbor. Her business was then to remain in Peace, and to make a free
offering of the most noble thing in the World (to wit, the enjoyment of God) to
God himself, who takes an Infinite delight to see himself thus Honored by his
Creature. And he is often pleased to be Glorified in this manner by perfect
Souls, and the Souls find themselves raised to a very sublime Purity by these
sorts of Sacrifice, wherein they renounce the most dear Caresses of God, to
abandon themselves more purely to God, and to adhere to him only. O how true is
it, that in the fund of the heart the most noble operations of Love are
performed, hidden from all the World, and known to God alone. Even the Soul it
self does not know the Interior Communications of God, till after long
experience, which renders her self skilful in the secrets of the Supernatural
Life, whether neither Sense nor Reason can penetrate.

CHAP. VII. The first Effect of Communion, is to beget in us the Love of
Crosses and Humiliations.
GOd in Himself and in his Eternity, does nothing but Love Himself in
contemplating his Divine Perfections. For it is his Essential occupation, and he
cannot but Love Himself, and desire to be Beloved. Wherefore since by the
Hypostatical Union man is become God, he takes upon him the same Sentiments,
the same Inclinations as God. And by consequence Jesus Loves God, as God Loves
Himself; and as he clearly saw that there is no way whereby God can be more
Loved, or more Honored, out of Himself, than by Crosses and Annihilations,
which pay homage to the Grandeur of his Infinite Being, he applied Himself to
Love Crosses, Sufferings, and Contempt with all the Powers of his Soul. Never
man so passionately in Love with these things as Jesus Christ, because never
any one was transported with such Zeal as he, to Love and Glorify God his
Father.

When therefore Jesus enters into us by the Holy Communion, he brings with him
all his Sentiments and all his Inclinations, particularly those which he
affects most, and desires to imprint them in our Souls, for which purpose he
gives himself to us under the form of nourishment; because, as the meat we
take, communicates to the Body all its principal qualities, so he inspires the
Soul withal its principal motions and operations. And this is the reason that
the oftener one Communicates, the more one ought to be penetrated with the
Sentiments and Inclinations of Jesus; that is to say; so much more one ought to
Love Sufferings and Humiliations: The property of the Communion, which is the
Living Bread which descended from Heaven, is not to be changed into us, as the
inanimate Bread, that comes from the Earth, is, but to change us into Himself.
And the Holy Communion should raise man above his Natural Love, to lift him up
to the Love of God, and to a perfect union with his Will, by Mortification and
Destruction of Himself.

The most inward and most Perfect of all the Unions that a Creature can have
with his God, is the Personal or Hypostratical one, which produced in the
Sacred Humanity of Jesus, a Love of the Cross, and of the Poverty: Insomuch,
that it was no sooner Divinely assumed, but it was inflamed with the Love of
Suffering, and esteemed nothing, next to the Divinity, so worthy an bbject of
Love as the Cross. Now it is evident, that we cannot arrive to any Union with
God so much resembling the Hypostatical Union, as that which we obtain by the
Holy Communion: Whence it follows that it ought to produce in us such
Inclinations as very much resemble those which the Union Hypostatical produced
in the Sacred Humanity; that is to say, it should incline us to Love the Cross,
Poverty, Humiliations, and all other manner of Sufferings. O my Soul, where are
we? How comes it about that we Communicate so often, and feel still such
repugnance to suffer? Jesus Christ coming into us, and, as I may say, again
Incarnate in us, would not he confer the most signal Grace of Love of the
Cross, if he found us well disposed to receive it? He that Communicates often,
and yet is unwilling to suffer, without doubt Communicates but imperfectly: For
he does not receive the principal effects of the Divine union, which are, to
make us love what Jesus loved the most of any thing in the World. O my God, how
long shall we live in the low Sentiments of Nature? Give me, to suffer, or to
die. O my Soul, be ashamed to live without Suffering, for That, methinks, is to
live without Love.

The Fruit which we gather from the Holy Communion, is not discerned by
abundance of sensible sweetness, or by reception of much Light in the
understanding, but by a firm and vigorous resolution of the Will to suffer and
to mortify it self; and the more one advances in Mortification, the more one
also increases in purity of Love. Jesus, who is the nourishment of our Love in
Heaven, where Love will be Infinitely pure, is likewise the nourishment of our
Love upon Earth, (in the Blessed Sacrament,) which by consequence ought to be
Soveraignly pure, I mean, without any mixture of any thing that is not God. But
this cannot be without dying to all Creatures, and even to our Selves; and this
Death is not compassed but by Mortification, and all that which Crucifies
Nature.

CHAP. VIII. Continuation of the same Subject.
AFter Holy Communion, it seemed to me that as Jesus received of his Divine
Father the Fullness of Light and true Love, in the Hypostatical Union, so he
makes his Friends partakers thereof in the Sacramental Union; and thereby lays
an obligation upon them to live by the same Life, to guide themselves by the
Light, and to enter into a Comformity to all his States. This Divine Light
discovered to me a great many Verities very important for my direction and
conduct.

1. That we are never to be without Sufferings: For the Spirit of Christianity
is the Spirit of the Cross: The Grace that feeds and supports it, is the Fruit
of the Cross; and the adorable Bread so full of Delights, inspires no other
Sentiments then those of the Cross; Venite mittamus lignum in Panem ejus.

2. That as Jesus manifests the Purity of the Love he bears us, by dying for us
upon the Cross; so ought we to prove the Sincerity of ours, by nailing it to
the Cross. 3 That he worked our Salvation by the only means of Suffering:
Therefore it is a manifest deceit to hope that we can cooperate toward our
Salvation by any other means than that of Suffering. 4. That we must attend and
harken very diligently to the Spirit of Jesus within us, which of it self
sometimes furnishes us with Crosses of Providence, or else inspires us to seek
them of our selves. We must embrace them all cheerfully, or search them
amorously. 5. That no other Soul but what is in Love with Crosses, can taste the
ways of the Spirit and its Heavenly Sweetness: For God who mixes the Pleasures
of Worldlings with wormwood and Gall, does often sweeten our Sufferings after
an admirable manner.

Moreover I was taught in the Holy Communion, that Jesus is a Sun, which was
Eclipsed during this transitory Life, but now shines in Heaven full of Luster
and Glory. And according to the measure Souls partake of his Eclipse and
Darkness, they shall proportionably share of his Splendours in Glory. Why then
flee we Poverty, Contempt and the Cross? For that which Eclipseth a Soul, with
Jesus Christ, is the Seed of an Immense Glory in Heaven.

What is the reason that we see nothing but Crosses in Churches? All the Altars
are adorned with the Cross, the Priest going to Celebrate wears the Cross in
his Vestments; while he is saying Mass; while he is saying Mass, he makes a
great many Signs of the Cross; when he is about to Communicate to us, he first
gives us his Benediction with the Sign of the Cross; even the last Action he
does, holding the Blessed Sacrament in his Hand, and ready to present it to us,
is forming the Sign of the Cross with the Sacred Host. We are told also, that
in Ancient times, when Christians received it in their Hands, they placed them
in form of a Cross, laying the Right Hand a Cross over the Left: What can we
learn from all this, but that the Christian who Communicates, ought to be
Crucified? and that as he receives his God among Crosses, so he should take
delight in passing his Life amongst Sufferings.

My Soul, when shall I begin the practice of a Life wholly Crucified, a
thoroughly Christian and Supernatural Life? When shall I love Poverty, Contempt,
Affronts, Injuries; O my God, that I might begin this very day to serve you,
and trample upon all the Sentiments of Nature, which ought to be continually
upon the Cross? And therefore I ought not to be troubled at such things as
impoverish and ruin me: The more poor, the more dead one is to the World. I
ought even exteriourly, (if People would believe me,) to live poorly, and
become vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, following the example of Jesus
Christ, who lived thirty years in a Shop like a Servant. Therefore it is my
Duty to tend contrary to all that which the World, with its Wisdom of the Flesh
esteems: And that suddenly, for I am already grown Old, and have not yet
begun. In becoming wretched according to the opinion of the World, I shall
answer the Grace of my Vocation, who am called to Poverty and a Solitary Life.
I shall obtain Peace, and become a man of Prayer. Assist me with your Powerful
Graces, O Jesus, and grant me Perseverance.

Let us follow Jesus, O my Soul; He, from the very first instant of his Life,
walked like a Giant in the ways of Humiliations and Sufferings, the ways that
his Father appointed him: All his concern was to cooperate with his Fathers
Eternal purposes which regarded himself. Let us walk courageously in the rough
and Holy Paths which Jesus has traced out; Let us not fear our Natural
Weakness, since he did not fear his Humanity, but showed himself obedient even
to Death, and to the Death of the Cross. Let us count every thing Folly that is
contrary to this Wisdom; and let us quit, one for all, every thing else to
follow none but him.

CHAP. IX. The second Effect of Communion, is to Transform us.
THe following consideration after Communion entertained me long, and continued
a whole Morning: That the principal Effect of Communion is to produce in us an
intimate Union with Jesus. This Union is a perfect Assimulation to his States
and Mysteries. And this Assimulation is the same thing which they call a
Transformation into God, and renders a person wholly Divine, and devoted to the
Interests of God, insomuch that by Grace he becomes Divine, as having no other
Inclinations then those of God, living by the Life of God, and desiring nothing
but the Love and Glory of God.

In this sight which appeared to me very clear, I beheld the lowness and
imperfections of such Sentiments and Actions as are merely Natural; I wondered
at the blindness of men, who set such a value upon an operation of Nature,
though it be of it self so infinitely vile and contemptible. It seems they
never understood the importance of advancing toward Perfection with all their
sorce, nor the miserable condition of an imperfect Soul. This Light wonderfully
separated me from Imperfection; and I am now as full of Horror of it, as I was
formerly full of Sin. It seemed to me that Jesus, who so prodigiously debaseth
himself in the Blessed Sacrament, by a Miracle of Love, of Mercy, and of
incomparable bounty, did thus excite me to rise from Nature to Grace, and and
from a Humane, to a Supernatural Life: Toward which I felt in my self such
strong Inclinations, and such powerful Obligations, by my frequent Communions,
that I had rather have died, than have passed one moment of my Life in the
state of Nature.

We ought to tend incessantly to the Purity of Jesus, and if to enter into it
more readily and more perfectly, one must quit Honors, Goods and Friends, let
us quit them, my Soul, and take in their places, Poverty, Contempts and Pains.
The Purity of Virtue charms me and animates me to pursue it: I do not find any
Creatures that I do not willingly abandon, nor any difficulty that I do not
easily conquer.

O my God, separate me by your Holy Grace from every thing which hinders this
Divine Transformation; and grant that I may cease to be what I am according to
Nature, that I may become what you are by the power of Grace. When shall I be
wholly united and transformed into you? When shall I quite forget my self, and
be no more, and act only in you, and you in me, (in me manet, and ego in eo:)
and continue thus Absorped in you all the days of my Life? Being thus united
with you, I shall learn your secrets, discover your purposes, and see, with you
and your Lights, the ways that you take to Love, Honor, and Glorify your
Father, which he revealed unto you at the instant of your Incarnation. Ever
since that Happy minute you are become the Light of the World; he that will
follow you, shall not walk in Darkness. Who can know the Secrets of the Father
better than the Son; or his Designs and Thoughts, than he, who being equal to
his Father, is privy to all the Sacred Councels of the Divinity? These he
teaches us by word of Mouth, he opens them to us by the comportment and
examples of his Life. Let us see, approve, imitate: Herein consists the right
Transformation.

The Grace bestowed on us in the Holy Communion, principally tends to
annihilate in us all inclinations of Nature; and in their place introduces
others most conformable to those of Jesus Christ; according to the measure that
a Soul conforms to Jesus Christ, proportionally she becomes more capable of
Divine Communications: For a Soul grows not more pure, but in as much as she
participates of the Spirit of the word Incarnate, whose whole aim is to
Crucify us to all that is merely according to the Inclinations of Nature. How
different is the judgment and discernment of true Christians from those of
Worldly men! How quite another thing are the Thoughts and Convictions of an
Illuminated person, and those of one who lives only according to Reason! There
are Souls upon which, Jesus, entering into them by way of Communion, makes such
admirable impressions, that Lead turned into the finest Gold by the
Philosophers-Stone, would not be more changed than they are. For in effect this
Sacrament is the Mystery of the Omnipotence of God where the words of
Consecration, by a Miraculous Power change the substance of Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: By which mutation we are instructed that
under the weak and common Species lies a secret Virtue, which is able to
transform the most Imperfect Souls into the greatest Servants of God.

One of the things in the World that most astonisheth me, is, that when we
receive Jesus in the Holy Communion we are so little changed, and his Presence
so un-active in us. We experience none of his wondrous operations. He ought to
be to the Soul a grain of good Seed, that makes very great productions. Jesus
ought to do admirable things, Jesus ought to form Jesus in us, and produce by
his Grace all his own Sentiments, and fill our Life with all the States of his:
Yet he makes no change in me; he does not strip me of my Humane Inclinations,
that I may live the Life of Jesus: A thing which frights me very much, and
gives me reason to fear that I do not approach unto him with all the
preparation requisite: Whereupon I flee to the Mercy of God, and beg it with
all instance, for in that alone is my Hope.

CHAP. X. The third Effect of Communion, which is the Perfect and Consummate
Union.
THe design of our Lord in giving us the Blessed Sacrament, is laid open to us
in the Prayer he made to God the Father while he was actually Instituting it:
Rogo Pater, ut sint unum: I ask you, That they may be made partakers of the
Union that is between us. Wherefore the Union he enjoys with God the Father, is
the model of that which he desires we should contract with him by means of this
Divine Sacrament. Now He is so much one with his Father, that whosoever sees
Him, sees also His Father: And if we were transformed into Jesus Christ,
according to his intention in the Communion, whosoever should see us, would at
the same time see Christ.

But this Consummate Alliance with God is not discernable in the most of those
that receive the Communion: Because that Consummation pre-supposes another,
which fails in the greater part of Communicants, viz. The Consummation of the
Soul in Jesus Christ; which is then obtained, when by the attractions of Grace
she is wholly annihilated as to her Natural Inclinations, and the Supernatural
succeed in their place, being cleared from all dispositions but those of the
word Incarnate. A Soul in this state, receiving the Holy Communion, ought to
remain simply united to Jesus present, and receive in quietness and tranquillity
such effect of Grace as he works in her; which are, to live no longer to, or in
her self, but to enter effectively into the poor and abject state of Jesus, to
live like Him, to live by his Spirit, to live no longer as the World, nor by
the Spirit of the World.

Moreover the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in the Person of Jesus
Christ, is another most expressive Image of the Union he assumes us to by the
Virtue of this Sacrament. For we assuredly believe, that his Sacred Humanity is
wholly absorpt and plunged in the Divinity, after such an unspeakable manner,
that there is no comparison which can be drawn from any Created thing, may
serve to illustrate it. To compare it with the Stars which are lost and drowned
in the Light of the Sun, is a too weak and imperfect similitude, and falls
infinitely short; for there is an immense distance and disproportion between
Divine and Created things. But the Soul needs not such allusions; she is
contented to behold it in God by the obscurer Light of Faith, and thereupon
falls into Acts of Admiration, Adoration and Love: and discerning that the
intention of Jesus Christ, by uniting himself to her in the Blessed Sacrament,
is to perfect her in himself, she accepts of it joyfully, and resigns her self
entirely to the Divine operation, and wishes she could say with St. Paul, Vivo
ego, jam non ego, vivit vero in me Christus; I am no more, I live no more; but
Jesus Christ is my Life and my Being.

Now it is evident that this high and Consummate Perfection is the effect of an
eminent Love, and that it cannot be raised to such a degree, without destroying
in the Lover every thing that is not God, and by consequence it costs Nature
dear, and requires a firm and generous Soul, and very Faithful to the
impressions of Grace. Light and Knowledge are ineffectual of themselves to this
great work: Nothing but the real and earnest practice of pure Virtue, in the
full extent of the Grace given us, and as occasion shall afford the exercise,
can bring a Soul to this eminent Perfection.

Such a Soul cannot be more charmed and delighted, than to observe the amorous
inventions of the Wisdom and Mercy of God, in deriving upon Christians the
Fullness of his Divinity by means of the Blessed Sacrament, where Jesus Christ
presents us his Humanity, to draw us into partake of his Divinity. O how great
is the dignity of pure Souls when they Communicate! O how low and abject are
all the Grandeurs of the World! They are a mere Nothing compared with this. For
what Glory is comparable to that of a Soul intimately united with the Supreme
Being! My God, how delightful and transporting is the sight of the Wonders and
profound Secrets wrapped up in your Mysteries; how they penetrate the Soul you
disclose them to!

This Union with Jesus in Communion is inessable. For as the Father and the Son
are one in Unity of Essence; the Word and Humane Nature one in Unity of Person;
so the Soul that is one in Jesus, partakes of both the Unions, Divine and
Humane. Jesus is in her according to both his Natures; and she is All in Jesus;
and while she does all things in him, he works all in her, he Prays, Adores,
Loves, Suffers, Labors; insomuch, that this perfect Union produces a certain
Unity between God, Jesus, and the Soul, and between all their operations. It
settles a kind of Partnership and Community of Goods and Possessions between
them: In a word it imports more than can be expressed. Now this condition must
needs be most Holy and Divine, where God works in the Soul, and the Soul in
God; In me manet, and ego in eo: And the Alliance between them grows
continually streighter and closer, proportionably to her increasings in Virtue
in this Life, and receives its ultimate Perfection only in Heaven.

O amiable Jesus, with what a profusion of Goodness and Love you entertain our
Souls in this Sacrament? You conceal your Presence under the External Species,
to give us occasion and advantage to exercise our Faith, which beholds you so
much more clearly, as you are more secretly and obscurely present. Again, on
the other side you manifest and show your self by innumerable effects of your
Grace and Divine Sentiments which you breath in the Soul; to excite and
exercise our Love. What can a Soul do, when she sees her self so prevented, so
convinced, so pressed by evident instances and experimental proofs of your
endless and unwearied Bounty? What can she do but Love, Love without stint,
render Love for Love? how many excellent things might be said upon this
Subject! But how can those Sentiments be expressed, that can hardly be
conceived!

CHAP. XI. The fourth Effect of Communion, is to Confer the highest Love.
OFtentimes before and after Communion, I was taken up with Contemplating the
Perfections of God. Which being one and the same in themselves, yet they are
different in our manner of conception, and the verity of their effects. Now
when any one of them discovers it self, it appears in full Beauty and Majesty,
and all the other seem to sink in to it, and lend all their Ornaments and
Excellence to increase its Luster. An instance hereof we have in the Blessed
Sacrament, where the Divine Love displayes all its Magnificence, and the other
Attributes contribute to that design the brightest of their Charms and
Perfections, Eternity, Immensity, Wisdom, Omnipotence, Justice, Mercy, and
whatsoever is most eminent and adorable in the Divine Nature, are present
there, and attend upon the triumph of Love.

Each of these Perfections espouse the Interests, and put on the Inclinations
of Love, which are Liberality and Magnificence, and accordingly operate in a
Soul, when Love makes his triumphant entry at the time of Communion. For Love
as its proper effect produces in the Soul a reciprocal Love; Eternity imprints
continuance and perseverance; Immensity spreads the Affection and gives it an
unbounded extent; wisdom sheds round about a Supernatural Light, to guide its
good purposes, and illustrate the ways of Virtue: Omnipotence inspires an
invincible strength to surmount all difficulties and obstacles. Thus in
Communion a Soul does not only receive the impressions of Love, but of Love
attended with the Luster and Excellencies of all the Divine Perfections.

It is observable, that Jesus Christ, together with his Eternal Father, sent
the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles to replenish them with Love; in the same place
where he had given them Himself in the Sacrament. So that this Divine Sanctuary
was chosen two several times to be the Theater where the two greatest Actions
of Love were represented, that ever the goodness of God exhibited, out of
himself. The first, in giving us his Son to reside in our Hearts, who from all
Eternity rests in his own Bosom, and thereby enabling us to live Divinely by
him, as he lives by his Father. The second, in sending on us the adorable
Spirit of the Father and the Son, to be the knot of the Eternal Espousals of
the Soul with her God, to Beautify her with his In created Light, to warm her
with his Sacred Flames, to animate her with his Heavenly Force and Virtue; and
in a word to render her entirely Spiritual. And both these Actions are
perpetuated in the Holy Church, when at the same time we are Feasted with the
precious Body of the Son of God, and inebriated with the Spirit of his Love.

O who can conceive the admirable Commerce and Caresses that are interchanged
between Jesus Christ and pure Souls in this Divine Sacrament! The World, which
discerns nothing but by meditation of the Senses, is too gross and stupid to
comprehend them. It thinks that Souls which are escaped from its snares, and
dis-engaged from its business, lead an idle and unprofitable Life; it fancies
they do nothing, because their Actions are not seen; that their Fire is
extinguished, because it does not blaze in the eyes of Men. But on the
contrary, they resemble those Mountains full of Sulpher, which carry vast
Globes of Fire in their Bosoms, though they break out but at certain times,
and then they are not only seen, but whole Provinces feel the Conflagrations*
Towns and Villages are Burned, and Fields covered with Ashes. In like manner
those retired Souls which burn inwardly with Divine Love, and for the most part
shine only to God and themselves, yet when the command and service of the Lord
excite them to External Duties, they produce such extraordinary Effects, that
numbers of Souls are set on fire with their Virtues, Example and Instructions.
In this kind we have had many great Servants of God, who having conceived a
thousand good desires in their retirement, and inflamed with Heavenly fire by
the frequent use of the most Holy Communion, issue from their retreat and this
Sacred Table, like Lions, breathing nothing but flames, and setting all on fire
about them. Such have made the great Conversions of Sinners, changed the face
of whole Provinces and Kingdoms; and all this performed only by one, or a small
number of such Servants of God, who appeared so powerful in Works and Words,
that all their Actions seemed to be so many Miracles.

Here we must observe that this Interior Fire in a person not sufficiently
retired within himself, or that from time to time is not careful to lay on more
Fuel to nourish it, I mean, to elevate his Heart by frequent Prayer to God,
and Contemplation of his Divine Perfections, or that dissipates his Spirit
abroad by the impulses of Nature, engaging himself in Temporal Affairs, without
being called thereto by the Inspiration and guidance of Grace, though something
of zeal appear in the thing, and (as one thinks) a good intention: I say, this
Interior Fire in such a Person, is to be compared to these Meteors or Lambent
Fires, which are carried about with every motion of the Air, and shine, but do
not burn.

CHAP. XII. The fifth Effect of Communion, is to give Strength and Perseverance
in the Service of God.
ONe day as I entered into a Church, I heard them sing these words in Honor of
the Blessed Sacrament; Ambulavit in fortitudine cibi illius usque ad montem
Dei. He walked in the strength of this Bread, even to the Mount of God. These
words affected me, and made me Hope, that notwithstanding my Miseries and
continual weakness, I might be so strengthened by receiving this Divine Bread,
that at last I might arrive to the Mount of God, might raise my self above the
low inclinations of Nature, and mount to the participation of the Spirit of
Jesus; and Perfection of a Supernatural Life; which Life is a high Mountain,
which no body can climb by the mere strength of Nature.

I observed before, that the peculiar intention of Jesus in Instituting the
Holy Sacrament, was to give us a foundation to Life and Strength; and for that
reason it is the only Sacrament that is given in the form of Nourishment. The
rest are prescribed by way of Remedy, to purge the Soul from Sin; or conferred
by Ceremony of Cousecration, to dedicate the Person to the peculiar Duties of
Religion and Holy Things, and so others respectively; But this is the only one
given by way of Heavenly nurture, to enable us to live by the Life of Grace, a
perpetual Life, over which the death of Sin has no power. For Jesus Christ,
among other effects of this Divine Food, assures us that it bestows Eternal
Life: Qui manducat hunc panem, vivet in aeternum.

And it seems very reasonable and conform to the Infinite Goodness of God, that
the most excellent of Sacraments should confer the most excellent of Graces,
which is that of Perseverance. A Grace so Sublime, so Divine, so precious, that
we cannot merit it by any or all the good Actions we can do. But how rare and
how noble soever it be, we have much subject to hope, that the Father of
Mercies, and God of all Consolations, will grant us it, since he has already
enriched us with that which is Infinitely more than this Grace, the Prefence of
his only Son in the Blessed Sacrament.

Corporal Nutriment is Elementary and Material, and therefore no better than
Corruption. Yet if the Body could take it always in a just proportion, and were
perfectly well disposed to draw the strength it affords, it would continue our
Natural Life, and we should never die. How much more would the Heavenly Bread,
the Living Bread, which contains in it self the ever-flowing sources of Life,
confer a perpetuity and infectibility of Spiritual Life by Grace, if the Soul
duly used, and were disposed to receive the abundance of Graces, Virtues and
Supernatural strength that this adorable Food brings with it? When we
Communicate, we drink of the same Fountain the Blessed do in Heaven. But to
them it is the Water of Life Everlasting; and what else can it be to us but
that of the Life of never failing Grace, which is the pledge and assurance of
the Eternity of Glory?

O my Soul, do thou think that any of the Blessed in Heaven, after they have
tasted the Delights of that Torrent of Pleasures, can be oloy'd with them, or
be contented to be deprived of that Divine and Happy Life? How then can thou
be so unconstant and irresolute in the way of Grace, and unfaithful in the
Union thou have contracted with God, who have drank the Waters of Joy from the
same Fountains of thy Savior? When he presents himself really and in Person,
and demands to be admitted into thy Heart, say not to him as St. Peter did,
Retire from me, O Lord; But breath out the Sentiments of perfect Love, saying
with the Spouse; Tenui eum nec dimittam: I will never abandon him.

O what a pleasant Society, how profound a Peace does the enjoyment of the
Sovereign Good bring to the Soul! But both imperfect, till they are finished in
Heaven, The fullest possession thereof she can acquire on Earth, serves only to
inflame her thirst more; the more she tastes God, the more she desires him; and
since there is no possibility of satisfying her desire in this Life, she
suffers a continual Martyrdom that makes her both die and live together, Her
pain is full of sweetness, and that sweetness begets a languishing and longing
after her Beloved. She is disgusted with all created things, and forceably
drawn off from them. Nothing pleases her in this condition, but that which
augments her flame. She cannot read with satisfaction, unless there be some
mention of her Beloved. All Conversation and Discourse are burden some and
tedious, unless the subject be his Love.

My God, you see the bottom of my Heart. I conceive things that I cannot utter.
It Is true I suffer, but I would not but suffer. I can do nothing but aspire to
a fuller possession of your Infinite Goodness. It Is very much that you
vouchsafe to give your self unto me in the adorable Sacrament with such an
immense Love; but still you give me only a hidden Treasure. I possess you
indeed; but do not enjoy you to my hearts desire. I am in the condition of Holy
Simeon, who held you in his Arms in the Temple, and yet dyed with a desire to
see you. It is time, O Lord, now permit my Soul to depart in Peace, and quit
this Mortal Life, because I receive within me the Spring and Source of
Immortality. I know for certain that in Paradise I shall obtain the perfect
accomplishment of all my Desires; yet I do not desire it till it be your good
will and Pleasure. Your Love makes me press forward and tend incessantly to the
Beatifical Union; but it is your Love too that stops my course, that draws me
back, inspiring me with the highest indifference and absolute dependence on
your Divine Will.

O Jesus how admirable is your Providence! you open my eyes to see the
comfortable and Blessed sight of the Power and Purity of Love which ought to
possess the Soul that has the Happiness to receive you often in the Holy
Communion. I relinquish and resign my self more than ever into your Divine
Hands, guide me as it shall best please you. There is nothing left to ask you
more, since you have (unasked) bestowed your self upon me, and crowned me with
Mercies, even beyond all my Hopes. My business is to remain annihilated in your
presence, and quietly receive your Divine In-actions, and fulfilling your
merciful intentions upon me, which are very great, and above the comprehension
of him that receives them. For who can comprehend how the Infinite Majesty of
God should lodge and be received in so vile, so straight, so unworthy a place
as the Heart of Man?

The coming of the Kingdom of God into a Soul, Sounds very delightfully, and
seems sweet; I, but the poor heart must first prepare to suffer the violent
pains of a continual Agony. The heart where God Almighty reigns, must bid adieu
to all Humane Life. She dies to all Pleasures, to all Consolations, even
Divine: She has no more support, no more relyance upon Creatures: even the most
Holy: The bent of Nature and all Humane Inclinations are extinguished in her;
she has no more a mind for one thing than for another, unless it be for a
Supreme Indifference; nothing but Abjections, Annihilations, Poverty,
De-reliction, are her Portion: She is not capable of any other knowledge than
that of Jesus Crucified; and her Wisdom is Folly to this World.

This is the manner I ought to depend on your Grace, O Blessed Jesus, and have
continual recourse unto you. For you are my Father, who nourish me with your
own Substance; you are my strength, and support my weakness: You are my Center,
where all my Agitations and Inquietudes rest, and are at an end: You are my
End, and utmost term of all my Desires. At present I have no clear sight of the
Purity of your Love; but only feel in my self forceable Instincts that incline
me to desire the Purity of Love, and make me frequently break out into such
Expressions as these: O pure Love! O durable Love! Happy is he that seeks thee;
more Happy he that has found and possesses thee; But ah! incomparably most
Happy, Happy beyond measure he that Perseveres with thee, and Dies in thy
embraces!

The End of the Fifth BOOK.
BOOK VI. Of Interior and Exterior Crosses.
CHAP. I. That we must have a high esteem for Crosses.
I Esteem it a great Happiness when we suffer any thing for Gods sake, there
being nothing on Earth, whereby we can better testify the Honor and Love we
have for him. It Is in this state we are in a capacity to offer up to the Divine
Majesty excellent Sacrifices, and render to him most signal Services. We cannot
do more for a Friend than to procure his Glory by our own Destruction, and make
our selves nothing to make him All. Hence it is that Saints have set up a
higher value upon their Sufferings in Prisons and Chains for the Name of Jesus,
than to be wrapped up with St. Paul into the third Heaven by Contemplation.

Be comforted then, O my Soul, in the different states wherein thou find thy
self, so it be that thou do suffer something for God, it is enough. If thou
have not the gift of Prayer, but art in in aridity of Spirit, suffer, and be
content; there is more merit in this, than in the most ravishing Contemplation.
Art thou afflicted with Sickness, and so deprived of hearing Mass, and
receiving the Blessed Sacrament? Suffer and be content; for it is better to be
in the rigours of the Cross, than in the sweets of Spiritual Exercises. If thou
can do nothing for the good of thy Neighbor, suffer, and be content, for
it is less meritorious to act for God, than suffer for him. If thy Exercises of
Devotion and good Designs do not succeed as thou expectest, suffer and be
content, for it is better to suffer, then to have all things according to thy
desires. If thou have any deformity of Body, or no great Parts of Mind,
provided thou suffer this Patience, no Person can do better, for this pleases
God. Believe me, the best Science in the World, the best Prayer, the greatest
Happiness, is to know how to suffer for Gods sake.

We have a very great esteem for the Wood of the Cross of Christ; we search
after it with no small diligence; no person can present us with a more precious
Relic; We Enchese it in Gold, we keep it near our Heart, we have a Veneration
for it, and preserve it Religiously; and not without reason, because it is a
small Relic of the true Cross of Christ: In like manner true Christians, the
Children of Light, do highly esteem those little Mortifications, whether active
or passive, they undergo, finding nothing more precious upon Earth; and a
greater gift cannot be presented to them, then the occasions to suffer and
mortify themselves, which they embrace with Joy and Love, and with great
respect cherish them, not near, but in their Heart; considering that the state
of Suffering is most agreeable to the dispositions of Jesus Christ, and some
small participation of his Sufferings. It Is as a little Parcel of the true
Cross, and the most precious Relic they can carry about them.

Let Us never be without having with us some of the true Cross; let us make much
of what afflicts us, and we have Relics thereof before we think on it. When we
examine our Conscience, let us ask our selves this question: Have thou, O my
Soul, any parcel of the true Cross? Any Relics of the Sufferings of Jesus
Christ? Happy are those who have some part of them, for they enjoy the
occasions of the great trials and proofs of their Love to Christ, as can
possibly happen. The flames of Divine Love burn brightest in the furnace of
Affliction. St. Paul had a good piece of the true Cross, when he said, He
carried in his Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus Christ; for his Sufferings were
indeed for Jesus's sake.

The most noble and glorious thing that Christ did upon Earth, was his Dying
for us on the Cross, a Death most Painful and Ignominious, that his Heavenly
Father might thereby be Infinitely Glorified; and he being thus exalted, might
draw the hearts of Believers after him, and more powerfully engage their
Affections to love and adore him.

A Soul that beholds Jesus on this Throne of his Ignominies, which indeed is
the Throne of his Grandeurs, desires here on Earth to be united to Jesus
Crucified, as the Saints in Heaven enjoy him Glorified* And thus she breaths
forth her Desires: True it is, I cannot have a full Fruition of my Well-beloved
in this Life; however this is my comfort, I can suffer for him. Enjoyment is
more sweet to the Creature, but suffering is more lovely to the Creator; and so
I find enjoyment of the Miseries of my Banishment.

When a Soul has no mind to suffer in this World, she has no mind to belong to
God: For seeing in this exile, we cannot be his by enjoyment, or but very
little, and being not willing to appertain to him by Suffering, we cannot
possess God: And being without God, we adhere to Creatures, and loose our
selves in disorder and vanity. God finds not out of himself a more pleasing
Mansion, than in a Soul and Body Mortified with Sufferings; there it is he
takes his complacency and delight. The Divinity reposed with Infinite joy in
the Humanity of Jesus Christ in his Suffering state: And a Soul never loves
more, nor renders a greater homage to the Divine Perfections, than by the Cross
and Sufferings, Sacrificing her self to Gods Interests and Glory. This then is
the Motto of a loving Soul, Aut pati, aut mori, Jesus let me suffer, or let me
die.

CHAP. II. That we must have a Love for Crosses.
A Life without a Cross, is a Life without Love. This Saying (too common among
us,) That we must live an easy Life; does not become the Lips of a Christian,
for it is all one as to say, We must live a Natural Sordid Life. Next to the
Divinity, nothing is more amiable than the Cross of Christ. We must either
enjoy with the Divinity, or suffer with the Humanity: and the more we suffer
with the one, the more we shall enjoy with the other. A Soul conducted by
enjoyments, must also participate of great Sufferings, for these make those
more sweet and pleasant.

We find by experience that the least contentment taken in Creatures, does
diminish Divine enjoyment; and therefore the Saints have been severe to
themselves, so as to allow Nature only what is purely necessary, by a resolute
denial even of Lawful Pleasures. We too often enlarge the Law of necessity, and
indulge our selves in our Refections and Recreations, and Accomodations. Nature
is content with little; but the clamours of others, and the fear of prejudicing
our Health, does us no small hurt in our way toward Perfection.

It Is a sign we march courageously in the way of the Cross, when we find in our
Souls such a Peace and Serenity, that does not indeed hinder Nature to feel the
bitterness of Sufferings, but inspires with a generous resolution to embrace
and cherish them; looking upon them as special favors from Heaven,
notwithstanding the regrets of Nature, to prove our Fidelity, and advance our
Glory.

It comes into my mind, that to take away the bitter taste of Crosses, we must
sweeten them with several Sauces, that is, with different confiderations.
Sometimes by accepting from Gods hand with a Spirit of Penance: Other times
with a Spirit of Sacrifice: And then again with the Spirit of pure Love:
Sometimes to be conformable to Jesus Christ in his suffering state; and besides
to do the Will of God, and submit our selves with all Humility to the Orders of
his Divine and Sacred Providence. Thus the Soul may make use of several
considerations to sweeten the bitterness of Sufferings; and so preserve a Love
of the Cross among all the repugnances of Humane Nature.

When God designs to advance Divine Love in a Soul, he affords her great
occasions of Suffering by the order of his Providence, and she contentedly
embraces them, though very bitter to sensual Nature. Such favors are precious,
and we ought to manage them with Prudence and Council.

It Is very true what our Blessed Savior says in the Gospel, Multi sunt vocati,
pauci vero electi: Many have calls to Perfection by Inspirations, Lights and
Motions of Grace; And yet they arrive not to it, for want of Fidelity, and
overmuch sparing themselves by too tender a love of their Body, Goods, Friends
and Relations, giving an ear more to Humane reason, than the voice of Grace.

Sometimes we persuade our selves that Devotion is a Life full of Peace without
Crosses; but we deceive our selves; nor ought we to enter into the Service of
God, without a disposition of Indifferency to all states; to be mortified
there, not as we would have it, but after what manner best pleases God, Crosses
from the immediate hand of God do much conduce to Sanctify us; but what arise
from our vanity, or too much love of the World, are for the most part
unprofitable, and rather a hindrance to the Soul in her way to Perfection.
Suffer we must, more or less, and what pleases God we must accept of with
contentation.

O how rare is it to find Souls truly amorous of Crosses? I am of Opinion that
the little love we have for Sufferings, is the only cause we so little advance
in the ways of Grace; and if we well examine our selves, we shall acknowledge
it. The love of Sufferings is quite repugnant to our Natural Inclinations, but
God can make that easy by Grace, which is impossible to Nature; and if we ask
this great Grace as we ought, we shall receive it as God has promised. Neither
does the Love of the Cross so much consist in great Corporal Austerities, as
embracing with an amorous generosity all those little Contradictions,
Mortifications, and Humiliations we daily meet withal, either from others, or
our selves, or by the secret orders of Divine Providence; and to make good use
of them for our Spiritual advantage, is not the work of Nature, but of Grace.

The more perfect our Virtue is, the more we have a love for the Cross, that we
may be more conformable to our Blessed Savior: Know we not, that they who will
live Piously in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution? They shall suffer indeed
on all sides, from the Flesh, from the Spirit, from the World; and God himself
will try them with Afflictions. This on earth is the high way to Heaven,
wherein Love must walk to come to Perfection; which can never be gained without
a labourious and courageous resolution.

CHAP. III. That we must have a great Love for Crosses.
WE must have a great Intellectual thirst to suffer all sorts of Crosses* This
is the Character of true Christians, this is the Mark to know that Jesus
Crucified is established in us. And this thirst ought to continue in us,
whatever our condition be, because it much augments our Enjoyments and
Consolations. The more the Soul enjoyes, the more she becomes thirsty, not only
of a more Savorous Union, but also of a more heavy Cross.

Jesus Christ did thirst after his Passion for us, and Dying on the Cross his
thirst Increased, being not quenched with all his Sufferings. We say we ought
to have the Image of Jesus Christ Crucified imprinted on our Souls; and what is
this but to have a thirst for Sufferings as he had? O how the cup of affliction
is pleasant to a Soul athirst for Sufferings? When some great Cross happens to
such a Soul, she finds comfort and satisfaction therein, as one enflamed with
heat, is refreshed with Drinking.

God has a strange thirst for our Sufferings, he is a thirst in us by the Fire
of his Divine Love, wherewith he loves himself and his Divine Perfections; why
do we not refresh him with our Sufferings? But alas! this Divine thirst is
little known to men, O how is it hidden from sensual eyes? O Jesus, how little
are you known! How little are you loved! These Proceeding of Jesus are not
understood by those who only follow the Light of Sense and Reason. Emitte lucem
tuam* Whence once the Spiritual man discovers this, nothing is more desirable
to him then Suffering.

The great desire of the Blessed in Heaven is Enjoyment; but we Travelers on
earth ought to desire nothing more then to suffer for Jesus. This Suffering
does mortify Old Adam in us by Holy Violence, makes us die to the World, and
separates from us whatever is Impure and Earthy, as Gold is purified in a
burning Furnace. Our Corruption cannot be ruined but either by Fire or the
Sword of Afflictions; which should induce us to embrace them with Contentment,
seeing the more we Suffer, the more we are Purified. Let us have an Honorable
esteem for the greatest Crosses; because they work in us the profoundest
Purity, and the purest Love of God, which is the Life of our Soul, and the end
of our Creation.

I am much pleased with my present state of affliction, seeing it is the
readiest way to form Jesus Christ in me, and make me a Perfect Christian; which
is the work of works, the highest Honor, the richest Treasure, and the
Sovereign Happiness of this Life. While we are Pilgrims on Earth, we are exiles
from Gods presence. Which must needs be a Cross to Souls that sigh after the
Beatifical vision. I know not how it is, but methinks, I see more Purity of
Love, of resignation, of Perfection in my present Suffering condition, then
what I have found in the joys of union, which puts my heart in repose and
quiet. It seems to me that I can say more truly than at other times, O my God,
what do I desire in Heaven or on Earth but you, who are my Portion, and my
Heritage for ever? My Life is Crucified with Jesus Christ, and altogether hid
with him in the good Pleasure of God.

To send us Crosses, and make us content with a Suffering condition, is one of
the choicest effects of the Providence of God. Seeing he has an Infinite Love
for himself, his will is, that all Creatures capable of his Love, should love
him also. To dispose them thereto the better, he sends them Crosses, which
purify our corrupted Nature, and produce in us dispositions fit for Divine
Impressions.

O Infinite Goodness, O merciful Justice, I return you Thanks with all my
Heart, that you have afflicted me, to make me love you. Losses, Contempts,
Poverty, Sufferings, come, you are welcome, my heart is open to give you
entertainment; Behold, I receive you with open arms, because you bring with you
Divine Love.

CHAP. IV. God is pleased to send us Crosses in the place of Persecutions, that
our Life may be a continual Martyrdom.
I Am much taken with this Saying of St. Clement of Alexandria; That seeing our
Love and Fidelity to God does not at present appear by shedding our Blood for
our Faith, the Persecutions of Tyrants being ceased, we must now manifest them
by making our Faith visible in all our Actions. To do the will of God is a
great testimony of our Love to him; but it is a far greater to suffer for him.
Souls loving God, and beloved of him, are careful to correspond to Divine
Graces, whether by acting or Suffering; and are so courageous in their
Resolutions, that no humane fears, though of loss of Life it self, is able to
stop the torrent of their Affections. Witness that good Religious man, who asked
his Spiritual Guide, whether it was not better to die, than complain of the
Infirmarian, who provided Diet not proper for him.

We now suffer more notably in some things, than the Martyrs of Old by Bloody
Persecutors. For our Crosses Interior or Exterior, being impressions of the
Divine Holiness, though they separate not the Soul from the Body, yet they
separate the Soul from the Love of all Creatures, to unite us to God alone.
This Holiness of God having an Infinite abhorrence of whatsoever is not Pure
and Holy, Delights to purify the Elect by Tribulations* as Gold in the Fire.
When therefore the Soul feels her self as it were nailed to the Cross, by
Derelictions, Aridities, and Interior Sufferings, let her not strive to free
her self, but continue in this Suffering contentedly, as long as pleases God,
because hereby she Glorifies him, and Purifies her self.

Seeing it is certain that the Cross is the Source of Graces and Purity, we are
inconsiderate to complain, and shun Afflictions, for we flee from our
advancement in Spirituality, and the Purity of Love; neither will we permit God
to accomplish in us his good pleasure. To die naked on the Cross is the
ultimate disposition of pure Love, It Is in vain to pretend to the Perfection of
Divine Love, unless with St. Teresa, We desire either to die, or suffer. The
Holy Martyrs could not attain it but by dying for God, nor we except by
Suffering for him*

When I am in Prayer in the Presence of God, I am much ashamed of my self, to
suffer so little, and with so much Imperfection, in a manner so different from
the Saints. I am in such confusion hereat, that I dare hardly stay in Gods
Presence, were it not, that to repair my Miseries, and make him satisfaction, I
offer up to him Jesus suffering, poor and abject for us sinners. And thereupon
I make resolutions to endure whatsoever Crosses happen to me with all the
Fidelity that Grace requires. It seems to me that a Soul can hardly be content
without some Suffering or other. I have had experience hereof in some little
tempest that now is over. And which is more, I cannot believe so much content
may be taken in limiting our sufferings, as desiring greater, if God thinks
good; because the Peace and Content of the Soul consists in Loving, and Love is
best satisfied with what most pleases God, and therefore in suffering for him:

From these words of our Blessed Savior, If any one will come after me, he
must deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me: I learn that the state
of this present corrupt Life requires that we must live in a continual dying to
the World, seeing the enjoyment of Creatures does too much work upon our
weakness, to bring us off from God. Our Corruption and the long habit of taking
Pleasure in the things of this World, makes it very difficult for us to live
this dying Life, which is a great Cross, and a long Martyrdom.

It cannot be denied but we must suffer much to arrive to the possession of God
in a Supernatural Life; however to taste the sweetness of God for one moment,
does Infinitely transcend the pains of gaining him. And when he hides himself,
and tryes us with Derelictions, what a Cross is it? It Is a state of great
Perfection indeed to be content without Comforts, both Divine and Humane. Many
Martyrs have suffered less in dying for God, then the Soul does sometimes in
this condition. Patience a little, and God ever long will sufficiently
recompense us with abundance of his Graces and Consolations.

Sometimes God seems to abandon his most Faithful Servants, as he dealt with
Holy Job, permitting Satan to assault them with several Temptations; sometimes
against Charity, sometimes against Chastity, and sometimes against Faith. It Is
true, these are Crosses and Cruel Persecutions, but if we bear them Faithfully
with Love, it is a Martyrdom pleasing to God, and profitable to us. The
Persecuting Tyrants tempted the Primitive Christians, sometimes against their
Faith, sometimes against their Chastity, which were Glorious Trials of their
Fidelity. O how Blessed a thing is it to fight for that Faith and Fidelity we
owe to God? O what lovely Charms are there in this Martyrdom, to those who
behold them with the eye of Faith?

CHAP. V. Of Exterior Crosses by the loss of Goods.
BEing in a Friends House who served God truly, news was brought me, that the
Soldiers had ceased upon all my Goods at home; and Blessed be God, it little
troubled me. But rather I rejoiced, and put my self into the Hands of God, to
do what he pleased with me, preparing my Heart to undergo greater Losses
contentedly. I was much comforted by my Friend, and I went home full of Joy and
Cheerfulness, accounting my self Happy that Divine Providence had brought me to
Poverty and Abjection. And I said with my self: Courage my Soul, our Blessed
Savior continues his Mercies; Poverty and Abjection will afford us wings to
flee to Perfection: Behold now is the opportunity to make great Progress in
Virtue, if we be but Faithful.

It seemed to me that at this time few Persons pityed me; and yet they talked
of my Affliction as no ordinary Trial. They blamed me in some sort of
Proceedings; and after all I found my self an Abject and little considered. I
could never consent to the Council of those, who would have me either yield to
anger, or discontent: For I always thought, I ought not to part with that
Meekness and Humility which becomes a Christian, for the greatest Temporal loss
that can happen to me.

I considered with my self that these little Crosses were hardly to be named
with those that they suffer, who are tormented with anguishes of Spirit, or
those who are Slaves under the Turk, or such who are put to Death with grievous
Tortures. That which I suffer is nothing in comparison of those poor Creatures.
For I, instead of being contristated by Suffering, found a certain joy to
possess my heart, and a greater desire to suffer more. Hereupon one told me,
That our Savior sent me Crosses adorned with Flowers; which, though they took
not away their heaviness, yet their Odours did refresh and strengthen me to
bear them.

This Persecution continuing, I found my self always disposed to suffer it with
great Interior Peace; and I kept my Soul from harboring any thoughts of
Bitterness against those who assisted my Plunderers. I Saluted them with a
Cordial Love, although Nature had a repugnance to their Proceedings. I beheld
with contentment the Fall of our Family, how our Friends did forsake us, and
some treat us very unworthily; and yet I could not think it a misfortune, but a
signal favor from the hand of Providence. And I did not complain, but digest
all this bitter Cup with Interior joy.

O bona crux! O good Cross! The words of St. Andrew seemed to me very true. O
how Crosses are good, though full of Bitterness? We ought to love what is good,
and make much of it: In reality, there is an exquisite goodness in Sufferings,
and the Fruit of the Cross is wonderful Savorous. For at last we shall find
that the degrees of Glory, shall be according to the measure of our Sufferings
and degrees of Love.

I was then told some means how to get out of this Suffering condition; Nature
began to resent this with some joy, but Grace repressed it, stifling this
emotion of Nature, that I might have no joy but in God alone, and in the
accomplishment of his good Pleasure.

CHAP. VI. Dispositions during Sickness, where the Body suffered and the Soul
rejoiced.
GOd has been pleased to make me enjoy, during my Sickness, an Interior Peace
so profound and great, that I was altogether astonished at it, considering my
Miseries and former Transgressions. I said within my self: What is this that I
find within me? How comes it to pass that so miserable a Creature should be
thus content and satisfied? For my Soul was in a perfect calm from all her
Passions, feeling nothing but a pure and total union to the good pleasure of
God, and an absolute abandon of my self to the conduct of Divine Love.

It seemed to me that some days before this Sickness, I was in a disposition
of extraordinary Peace and Tranquillity; and one day after Dinner I was taken
with a continual Fever, accompanied with much Head ach, and Pains throughout
all my Body. But Divine Love, methoughts, continued his operations, and set me
all a flame with Holy Fires. So that I often, cried out, O Love! O Love! O
Love! And could say nothing else.

When I seemed as a dying man, my Friends weeping about me, and every one
saying, I could hardly Recover; my Soul beheld all this without being touched
with any Sentiments of regret, or tenderness for my Friends, being wholly taken
up with Divine Love, which did so entirely unite me to the good Pleasure of
God, that methought I could never be separated from it.

'Twas no part of my care to beg for my Life; and one of my Friends proposing
to send me some Relics of Saints, which had done Miraculous Cures, I only
thanked him; for though I have no small veneration for them, yet I had no mind
to make use of them for my Recovery; but I would wholly put my self into the
hands of Divine Love, and leaving my self entirely to the conduct thereof,
whether for Life or Death, for Time, or Eternity.

In this extreme weakness of Body, my Soul found her self Victorious and
Triumphant; to see that fall of Pain, and her self full of Love; and instead of
being compassionate, seemed to me to smile at these Sufferings. This was an
extraordinary effect of Love, that in this great weakness of Body, my Soul kept
up her strength, and especially that the great Pains of my Head did not hinder
her Interior occupations.

This disposition of Love continued as long as my Sickness; and I entertained
my Friends with little consideration, and I believe with too much talking,
fearing now to have discovered then too much those Holy Fires that inflamed my
heart, and that Self-love made me declare too freely my inward feelings. My
thoughts now make me suspect this defect, but being inebriated with Love, I
said I know not what; being like a drunken man, that for a time forgets his
Poverty and Miseries. So in this disposition I forgot my Sins and extreme
Frailties, and cast my self into the Arms of Love, that I might be united with
my Well-beloved, and enjoy his Reciprocal embraces. I had a care to examine my
conscience, and confess my sins as a dying man, and set in order my Temporal
Affairs, to pass to Eternity.

Finding my self not able to give much to the Poor, it was a joy to me to die
in Poverty; and I was as well content to give nothing, as if I had been able to
bestow much on pious uses. The love of Jesus, poor and despised did deeply
pierce my heart, and to satisfy my self therein, I made them bring to me a
poor Infant, in whom methought I saw the Poverty of little Jesus, and kissing
his Hand, I rendered what homage I could, desiring to love poor Jesus to my last
breath. I acknowledge dear Jesus, that I am very unworthy of your Divine
states. But alas! must I die without entering effectually into the Poverty and
Abjection of your Mortal Life? At least, O good Jesus, I die with that Love and
Respect I ought to have for them; and be pleased to accept of that Conformity I
desire to have for them.

I remember that Praying on Sunday in the Evening, the day before I fell Sick,
at the Carmes Church, where I was at Vespers, our Blessed Savior put these
words into my mind, Christo confixus sum Cruci, I am fastened to Christ on the
Cross. Whereupon I felt an ardent desire to have not one moment of my Life
without being able to say, I am Crucified with Jesus Christ, I think this
Divine Love did then dispose me to be nailed on the Cross. And in effect, my
Sickness beginning with a grievous Headache, which made my eyes to be swollen with
pain, it came into my mind, that I might on this occasion Honor the crowning
of our Savior with Thorns. And it was some Contentment to me to have any
conformity to this dolorous state of Jesus. And as my pain did extend to all
parts of my Body, I imagined it had some little resemblance to the state of a
Body Crucified.

Thus you have an account of my dispositions in this Sickness, which I have
done in obedience to the command imposed on me. Perhaps they are explicated
with too much advantage, but the relation is true as to the substance.

Bless therefore with me the God of Mercies, who has been pleased to be so
bountiful to his most ungrateful Creature; but it be-seem'd his Goodness to
glorify his Mercies by the greatness of my Miseries. This then is my comfort,
and I cannot but declare his bounties to me, and say, Venite, and videte omnes
qui timetis Deum, quanta fecit Dominus animae meae. Come all ye that fear God
and see what great things he has done for my Soul.

CHAP. VII. Other Dispositions in the time of Sickness, where both Body and
Soul are on the Cross.
I Began to go out of that state, wherein I had been more than five Weeks. My
corruptible Body did bring down the Soul as it were to nothing; so that I had
much ado, either to know or love God; of whom, methought, my Soul had little or
no remembrance. Seeing my self in this state of Incapacity, I remained without
any other prospect but of my own nothing, and depth of my Miseries; being
amazed at the strange weakness of a Soul, when left to her self. This thought
which wholly took up my Soul, proceeded from a certain experience, rather than
any Light in the understanding.

'Till God brought my Soul to this point, she did not well know her own
weakness; but now she discovered a thousand false Opinions and vain esteems she
had of her self, of her Lights, Sentiments and Devotions. She saw now she had
some secret relyance on something besides God, which she did not perceive till
this state of privation.

What thus passed in me were the effects of a Natural Malady, which
nevertheless brought me to nothing, and much humbled me. For I was in so great
a forgetfulness of God, that you may be astonished at it; and I would have
hardly believed, that a Soul having received so many sensible testimonies of
the Love of God, could ever have so long a privation of actual Love, by reason
of her former negligence and Infidelity.

What vast difference is there between my former and this Sickness? In that my
Soul was all inflamed with Divine Love, luminous, vigorous, far above any
disturbance from the Body. In this she was cold and dark, yea darkness it self,
feeble, infirm, depressed and overburden'd with mortal flesh.

We discover our Nothing and Frailties in Prayer, but the Lights and Gusts that
we receive therein hinder us from being sensible of them; what makes us feel
them to the quick, must be some extraordinary affliction. It seemed to me that
nothing was then prevalent in me but Sentiments of Impatience, and inclinations
to Peevishness; but by the Grace of God I did not always consent to them,
though they often molested me.

I was somewhat encouraged by the Relation of the Happy Death of two Fathers of
the Society, who ended their days in the exercises of Charity, after they had
assisted the Soldiers many years, attending them in their Maladies and
dolorous Necessities, to help them to live well, and die Happily. At last they
died of the Plague; and desiring passionately to suffer, one of them gave great
Strokes with his Fist upon his Soar, to endure something more for Jesu Christ,
whom they both loved with most ardent Affections. It Is said our Blessed Savior
appeared to them at the point of Death, to Crown them and make them Happy with
his Presence; after which they died Smiling, full of Joy and Consolations.

This did much comfort me, extremely rejoicing at their Happiness; in that they
died in the Service of the Hospital for Soldiers, after they had continually
endangered their Lives, by exposing them to the Mouths of Muskets and Canons,
and a thousand Incommodities of Soul and Body, by the cares and solicitudes
incumbent on them. O how glorious was their Death? O the amiable Sufferings
that brought them to it? What are my little Sufferings in comparison of these?
What a shame is it for me to feel so much repugnance to endure them?

Alas! I consider that there is not a day in the year, wherein the Church does
not make particular Commemoration of many Martyrs, who have had the zeal and
courage to give up their Lives for Jesus Christ, who died for them, that they
might Honor his Sufferings by the Torments they endured for his sake. Some
have been exposed to be devoured by Beasts, others broke upon the Wheel, others
burned Alive, others nailed to Crosses, and all have been Miraculous, by
embracing with joy and cheerfulness the cruellest of Deaths that most barbarous
Tyrants could invent to make them miserable.

O good Jesus, I see all these go by the way of the Cross to come to the
Perfection of Divine Love; and I stay behind as one abandoned and unworthy to
suffer for you. What can I then do, O blessed Savior? For you have said, That
he who will not take up his Cross, to follow you, is not worthy to be your
Disciple. O Love, Crucify me, Burn me, Martyr me, Si non per Martyrium carnis,
saltem per incendium cordis, If not by Sacrificing my Body, yet by Sacrificing
my Heart. And let my affectionate desire to suffer, make my Life and Martyrdom
end both together.

CHAP. VIII. The Interior Crosses of the Soul in Obscurity.
THe Soul in the state of obscurity hardly knows her self, she is so changed
from what she was. For in the state of enjoyment, the Inferior part of the
Soul with all her repugnance to Sufferings is quite lost in her present
Delights; so that the Soul feels no pain at all, nothing hinders her repose,
she tastes nothing but sweetness, and has no Sentiments unless of Peace and
Tranquillity. But on the contrary in the state of Interior Suffering, the
supreme part of the Soul is as it were absorp'd in the repugnances and disgusts
of Nature: Her lights are so surrounded with Darkness, that she is left in
obscurity, and all her joy is taken from her.

Although she may be very well resigned, she imagines she is not; for her
Intellectual conformity is clouded from her: But she has always before her eyes
the revolts of Nature, and the contradictions she finds to Gods good pleasure;
and in a manner believing she has no intellectual Resignation, she becomes
doubtful of her condition; whereby she is much terrified and plunged in a Sea
of bitterness:

A Soul in this state of Miseries is well pleasing to God, but she not knowing
it, remains full of Doubts and Sadness. Yet if you ask this Soul, if she be
resigned to the will of God, she will readily reply; Yes, and that she had
rather dye than not will what pleases God. However this act of Resignation does
not free her from her Fears, because she wills this in a manner without knowing
it is her Will. Our Blessed Savior, by an admirable design of Providence, to
purify this Soul the more by her Sufferings, hinders her reflection on this act
of Conformity and Resignation; so that she receives no Comfort by this
Conformity, being in the dark, and yet is not altogether left in desolation.
But in this state she is pleasing to God, though she be much displeased with
her self.

It seems to me that a Soul in this state of Obscurity is more faithful to God,
than in abundance of Illuminations. To be thus in the midst of thick Darkness,
and believe the Perfections of the Divinity, and the Mysteries of our holy
Faith, as firmly as if they were cleared up unto us by the greatest Lights and
Illustrations, do testify an extraordinary Fidelity in the Soul to God, and an
annihilation of our Judgment, and a high esteem of Gods Veracity. What wonder
is it to see God and his Grandeurs in abundance of Light? But to do this when
the Soul is in Darkness, this is admirable. Happy are those Souls whom God
conducts in this way, let them not complain of their Privations, seeing this is
to the end they may more glorify God, and best testify their Fidelity*

O my Soul, let us be in an indifferency for any Condition, for a state of
Light or Darkness. Benedicite lux and tenebrae Domino. And if Divine Providence
tryes us with Obscurity, let us be comforted, and believe that God deals well
with us, esteeming this privation as a favor from heaven.

I confess it is a difficult matter to be as well satisfied in Darkness, as in
the Splendours of Paradise. But if we make serious reflection, that the
Perfection of Christianity consists in a life of Privation and Poverty of
Spirit, it will be no matter of Admiration. Behold S. John; lives he not in a
Desert, deprived of all things! his Delights are Austerities, Hunger, Poverty,
to be unknown to the world, and to lose his Life by the hand of the Hangman.
And which is more, he was deprived of the Conversation of Jesus Christ:

One of the greatest interior crosses is to lose the sight of our Eyes:
nevertheless there is something in this Cross that makes it lovely, in that it
puts us in a more absolute dependence on God. I have a devotion to be in the
Spiritual Life, what a blind man is in the Corporal. He goes and comes, he
talks to his friends, he does his little affairs, he eats and drinks; and all
this without seeing his way, or his friends, or the rooms, or Heaven, or Earth;
only he gives himself up to the guidance of his Conductor. It Is true to do all
these actions of our civil life in this sort is not so pleasing, but they are
as really done as in the Light.

So a Soul that is without light, does the actions of a Spiritual Life, not so
pleasantly indeed, but yet truly and perfectly; seeing she performs them in the
annihilation of her lights and proper satisfaction. It seems to me that a Soul
ought not to complain so much of the Lingrings of this our Pilgrimage, where we
live in the obscurity of Faith; and not so earnestly desire the dissolution of
this mortal body, under pretense to see clearly, and be united perfectly to the
King of Glory. For really I fear these complaints are not so innocent as we
imaging; seeing they may proceed from a disgust of Sufferings in a state of
Privation; and so we are more concerned for our own satisfaction, than content
with the good pleasure of God.

CHAP. IX. Of the heaviness of interior Crosses.
GOD sometimes treats a Soul in a manner as a Reprobate, banishing her from his
presence, and depriving her of all enjoyments, for more or less time, as he
thinks good* During this state to preserve a perfect Resignation to Gods will,
is to practice pure virtue, and those souls must be very faithful that are
capable thereof.

The Soul in enjoyments, is, as if she was glorified; she feels no trouble, her
Passions neither disturb her Peace, nor darken her Lights, she is full of
contentment delighting in God; the Creatures do not divert her from the
Creator; And if at any time they seem to stop her course, she presently doubles
her paces to hasten after her Well-beloved, being a tracted with the odours of
his Perfumes.

But in the state of Interior Suffering, the Soul becomes a Captive laden
with Irons, buffeted with Temptations, disturbed with rebellious Passions, lost
in extravagant Thoughts, so that she cannot draw near to God, but like a poor
Criminal lying in a dark dungeon, is left to her self without any sensible
Relief. This is her sad conditition in this miserable Captivity, without either
Divine or Humane Consolations, the influences of Heavenbeing withheld from her,
and the refreshments of Earth denied her, crucified between them both without
help from either.

In this state the Soul is in continual fears of offending God, and falling
from her Spiritual Exercises: that she seeks Comforts from Creatures, and is so
injurious to her Divine Center, from whom only she ought to receive Repose and
Contentment. However she may much honor God by these interior Sufferings, if
she thereby does homage to the dereliction of the Son of God, in his Torments
on the Cross.

The eminency of a supernatural Life finds matter of Practice in all sorts of
Sufferings, interior or exterior; but methinks the Soul can never be so
complete a Sacrifice as on the Altar of interior Crosses; whether they come
from the immediate hand of God, from others, or our selves: It matters not much
who makes the Cross on which we suffer, be they friends or enemies, God or our
selves; if we do but suffer it is sufficient; and we ought to be joyful, or at
least content to see our selves crucified some way or other. And as long as we
live Exiles here, we shall hardly be without some Crosses.

A Soul that has once tasted the sweetness of God, finds it a cross to be
taken up too much with worldly business; yea even to satisfy necessities
becomes troublesome to her. She finds a cross when she is put to appease the
sedition of her Passions, when she perceives the eyes of Contemplation darkened
by her Imperfections, when she is over-burden'd with the weight of her mortal
body tending to corruption: all these miseries are crosses to her, hindering her
enjoyments of God. But a saithful Soul to accomplish the will of God, does bear
them courageously.

It much concerns us to desire of God a particular Light and Grace, to see the
beauty of the Cross, that we may love to suffer. We complain of the miseries of
this life, and the rigours of our banishment, because we discern not that
secret virtue which Privations and Crosses have to unite us to God. It is great
and powerful, though little known, and less sought after, by reason it is not
so sweet and pleasant as that force which ceases our Spirits in the Lights of
enjoyment: But it suffices me, my God, that I am united to you, I desire not
the pleasing Sentiments of Union, because Purity there is not so eminent.

The Mercy of God does triumph in the state of Light and Sweetness, and this is
the time to glorify his Goodness The Justice of God appears more visible in
the state of Obscurity and Sufferings, and this is the time to magnify his
Greatness. And what contentment is it to a Soul to know, that let her condition
be what it will, the Divine Perfections may be glorified by her!

When God in a manner leaves us to our selves, our weakness appears so great,
that the least stroke of Adversity quite casts us down: at other times when we
are supported by the Almighty, an Army in battle array can never daunt us. Let
us follow the conduct of Grace, when she invites us to reflect on such like
dispositions; for the Soul will thereby know her extreme dependence upon God,
and her own infinite frailty, her confidence in God will be re-doubled, and her
diffidence in her self will be augmented; and she will know by experience, that
God mortifies and quickens when he pleases, and that he is our only Supporter.

To be then in continual union with God, the Soul must necessarily have a
perfect indifferency to every state, and a resolute will to be wholly for God*
Illustrations indeed make the Soul more attentive, but not more united: for a
loving Soul in Sufferings adheres to God more closely than in the greatest
Lights of Prayer. Let us not then measure the Union by Enjoyment but by
Suffering; for the more the Soul suffers for God, the more intimately is she
united to him* This is one of the Excellencies of the Supernatural Life, and
the only thing that can prevail with us to make Crosses, the heavier they are,
to be the more acceptable.

I know a Soul that suffers extraordinary pains of all sorts, but it is with
aridity of Spirit; seeing only the Will of God therein, without discovering the
Beauty of Sufferings, unless when they have left her, God being not willing she
should receive Consolations from such a sight, which might much diminish the
Purity of her Love.

CHAP. X. The great Fruit we may reap from Interior Crosses.
I Thought that on this day of particular Devotion, I should have been all on a
flame with Divine Love: But I have been in a manner always distracted in my
Prayers, though I had my Book in my hand, my Spirit not being in a temper for
Interior Exercises. To speak Truth, I found my self much changed, it pleasing
God, that having not corresponded to my state of Light and sweetness, his
Justice should put me into this rigor and obscurity, and blessed be his Name
for evermore.

What augments my sorrow, is, that I have not been Faithful to many
opportunities of practicing great Virtues. At other times I have found all
things helping me toward God, now every thing diverts me, insomuch that the
fire of Love is in a manner wholly extinguished with the waves of Temptations.
Methinks I find my self in an abandonment so great, as if I never enjoyed
consolations.

Being to begin any good work, I feel a tepidity and repugnance to it. The very
thoughts of Poverty did horribly afright me: To be despised, to want
accomodations, to suffer pains, was terrible unto me. It increased this
bitterness, in that the Servants of God did not comfort me as formerly; so that
it must go very ill with me, if some powerful hand come not into my succor.
And what makes my condition more deplorable, is that I am so sensible of the
privation of earthly things: For if it was the want of Gods presence and his
Graces that did afflict me, that methinks would afford some consolation. I now
in a manner make no Prayer, that is, my Prayer is as good as nothing: I am full
of Distractions when I Communicate: I am apt to fall into passion on every
occasion; the least thing does much trouble me. This day I had some good
Intervals, during which I was taken up with these thoughts.

What is man, O my God, when you cease to visit him? How great is his Poverty,
his Wants, and his Miseries? I should never have believ*d it, if I had not
known it by experience in this small time that you have left me to my self. O
my Soul, how great is thy weakness? How profound is thy own nothing, and almost
incredible? Lay it up well now in thy memory, and never forget it.

What can I do, O my God, without you? My Spirit is nothing but a dark Dungeon,
and my heart is a recepticle of all sorts of evil Sentiments and extravagant
Thoughts: No inclinations to good, but strong efforts to that which is evil.
Alas! it is now I find by experience the absolute dependence I have upon you,
more than a shadow on the Body, or the Light on the Sun, I was never so
annihilated and plunged in my own nothing as now. I can see no stability either
in my self or any Creature. The whole World cannot uphold him, whom you have
forsaken. O how vain is the consolation of Creatures, when that of the Creator
fails us?

Dare I hereafter think my self worthy of the least Sentiments of Grace, that
have had the experience of my excessive miseries? Verily, if God should plunge
me into Hell, I should not be astonished at it; but rather admire his Mercies
for bearing so long with so ungrateful a Creature. Neither am I at all amazed
at my failings for what wonder is it to see frailty it self frail? What most
humbles me, is to feel in my self so great repugnance to suffer so little. What
would become of me, if I should be charged together with Interior and
Exterior Sufferings? O how far am I from the Patience of Saints, and the Love
that they have for the greatest Crosses? Humble thy self, O my Soul, humble thy
self to the very center of thy own nothing.

Blessed is the man who always fears. God leaves us on purpose in this World
without a certainty of our Salvation, so that no person knows whether he be
worthy of Love or hatred. This uncertainty is a great Cross, and God to try us
by Sufferings, permits us now and then to fall into perplexing doubts
concerning our Interior state and dispositions; to which our Spiritual Guides
are as liable as our selves, and therefore cannot give us any Infallible
assurance? It Is no ordinary perplexity to travel in a difficult way, without
assurance whether we be right or wrong, to come to our journey's end. To doubt
whether we be deceived by the shadows of our ignorance, rather than conducted
by the Light of Grace, is one of the heaviest Crosses of a Spiritual Life: But
it is also most conducing to purify the Soul, and make her die to her own
Interest and Abilities; that in the midst of all her troubles she may cast her
self wholly upon God, and absolutely abandon her self to his Protection.

CHAP. XI. That we must bear Patiently our Imperfections.
COnferring about Patience with some Servants of God, we concluded that a Soul
ought not only apply her self to bear with the Imperfections of others, but
more especially her own. For after our failings, we must not with an impetuous
Solicitude search after the means to Cure an Evil, that oftentimes displeases
us rather for our own Interest, than the Interest of God. Nor is it prudential,
while we are in a heat, to resolve suddenly to make so many Examens,
Meditations, and undergo so many Austerities; but principally we must have an
eye to God and his Glory, and make an act of Contrition, to repair the injury
we have done him by our fault: And then practice Patience, whereby we shall
bear with Peace and Tranquillity the sight of our Misery, which too often makes
us sad and anxious. But this proceeds from want of Love for Abjection; for
whosoever can be content to be abject, shall never be disquieted, but will
enjoy a profound Peace in the greatest Humiliations. Discite a me quia mitis
sum and humilis cord, and invenietis requiem animabus vestris.

We must not then spend our time unprofitably after our failings, as we too
often do: But continuing in Peace of mind, and being humbled for our defects,
we shall be better disposed to return to union with God, where is the practice
of Virtue, without being too much dejected. In this state let us say with a
full confidence in Gods Mercies, Cor Contritum and Humiliatum, Deus non
despicies; A Contrite and Humble Heart, O God, thou will not despise. For he
that is contrite because he has offended his Heavenly Father, and truly humbled
for his Unworthiness, cannot but be Gracious in Gods fight.

This well understood, and faithfully practiced, leaves the Soul in great
Peace, makes her Humble and Patient to bear all defects with meekness and
compassion. But because we are more sensible of our own Failings, than those of
others, we have need of more Patience on our own behalf.

It Is an effect of pure Love to make the Soul displeased with our Imperfections
and Failings, without being disquieted at the Humiliation and Confusion that
attend them. We ought indeed to afflict our selves for offending God, but
rejoice that we are ashamed we have offended him; for this plucks down our
Pride, and repairs the injury done to the Divine Majesty. But if we refuse to
acknowledge our Failings, we are so much the more miserable, in that we will
not confess our misery.

Patience and Longanimity are very necessary for us to go fairly on in the ways
of God. Christian Perfection is not the work of a day; we must bear with our
Frailties and Imperfections many years. It Is a gross mistake arising from
Self-love, to think to march more speedily in ways of Grace than That enables
us to perform. From hence it proceeds that we are less taken up with the
thoughts of God, than of our selves and our own condition. We are full of
afflicting apprehensions that what we do in Gods Service is nothing worth that
the best things are bad as we use them, Imperfection and Misery being our
constant attendants. But this perpetual looking downward on our selves is
prejudicial to our advancement in Perfection; when we should principally look
up to God, and such as we are cast our selves into the Arms of Jesus Christ,
having an eye to him, and relying upon him.

When we are resolved to take up our thoughts with God, and put our confidence
in him, without so much ruminating on our own Failings, this will not bury them
in oblivion, but God will discover them to us in a way incomparably better,
than what we can know by our own endeavors; for all we can do is nothing in
respect of those helps we shall find in him, to advance us in Perfection.

What gain we by thus perpetually picking quarrels with our own selves? After
all, we shall never be without Imperfection. What can we discover in the ground
of our Hearts, but that Thorns and Briers do grow there daily, with a thousand
Failings, use what diligence we can to manure and cultivate it? As long as we
bottom upon our selves, we languish continually with Imperfections. Let us free
our selves from our selves as soon as we can; when we have once learned to be
more careful to please God then our selves, we shall go on much pleasanter in
the ways of God, and arrive sooner at the region of Peace and Tranquillity.

It Is the true course of a Supernatural Life to give our selves up to the
conduct of Grace; which sometimes puts us to combat with our Passions; at other
times tryes us with Interior and Exterior Sufferings; sometimes leaves us to
discursive Prayer, and then again elevates the Soul on the wings of
Contemplation, refreshing her with variety of Spiritual Dainties: Sometimes
makes all things easy to us without travel or difficulty; and sometimes to
feel a kind of tedious weariness in the ways of God. But in all this the Soul
that is abandoned to the good pleasure of God, keeps her self Peaceable and
contented, and indifferent to whatsoever God shall determine of her.

For my part, I too often feel the repugnances of my depraved Nature, but then
I endeavor to make this a matter of Humiliation. It Is a great Misery to be
always Imperfect, and not to be able to cure our Spiritual Maladies: But we
must as well practice Patience in these, as in Corporal Infirmities. I have a
mind to call my Hermitage the Hospital of the Incurable, and only to lodge with
me such poor Spiritual Christians, who have a good will to heal their
Imperfections, but yet still fall into relapses. At Paris there is an Hospital
for those who are Incurable in Body; But mine shall be for such in Soul.

The end of the Sixth BOOK.
BOOK VII. Of Ordinary Prayer and Contemplation.
CHAP. I. What Esteem we ought to have for Prayer.
WE must have a great care not to place Perfection where it is not, for this
will much retard us in the path of Virtue. We must not therefore have too great
an esteem for the Unitive Mystic way; not but that it is good, and very good
for a Soul that God conducts to Perfection by such extraordinary Elevations:
But we may safely believe the Unitive Practical way to be as excellent and more
necessary, seeing it is nothing else but the practice of a Christian Life; and
the other consists in Elevations and Unions of Spirit with God by Contemplation.

It Is observable that our Blessed Savior says, Whosoever will come after me,
must take up his Cross, and follow me. He says not, he must be Elevated in
Prayer, but he must take up his Cross; that is, he must practice the Maxims of
the Gospel. Happy then are those who suffer, although they be not elevated in
Spirit. And those who are elevated in Spirit, are not happy, but inasmuch as
they are conform to Jesus Christ Crucified, and by such Unions are more
disposed to the Cross and Sufferings. The Crucified Life is in a manner the end
of the Mystic Life, whose Gusts and Lights conduce to fortify the Soul, to
carry her Cross the better.

St. Teresa says, That it is a good sign after a Soul has been in an ecstasy, if
she find in her self extraordinary desires to suffer, in that she cannot return
from those Holy Communications with God but well instructed. For the Perfection
of Love here consists in Suffering for the Love of Jesus, and not enjoying him.
Let us not complain then, if we be not elevated by Mystic Unions, but rather
rejoice too see our poor Soul in Prayer among the Thorns of dryness and
aridities, than the Roses of a sweet and gustful Devotion. Interior as well as
Exterior Sufferings must be pleasing to us, seeing a true Christian ought to
Glory in nothing but the Cross of Christ. But that did extend it self as well
to his Soul as Body; for his Divine Soul was deprived of sensible succors in
this Dereliction on the Cross, and we must Love to be conform to him, and rest
content. Happy are those Souls that love Sufferings rather than Enjoyments; and
complain of nothing sooner than not to suffer.

A Soul which receives no great Light from God in Prayer, but is left in
darkness and Interior Sufferings, carries in reality a heavy Cross: But a Soul
illuminated in Prayer by illustrations from Heaven, endures another Cross more
intime and burdensome. For this Light discovering to her the great merit of pure
Suffering, it is a pain to her not to suffer; and so she remains without all
sort of consolation; seeing the state of Light and Sweetness appear to her not
preferrable to that of obscurity: And so tasting of those Sweets, they are not
now so pleasant, having discovered that the bitterness of Aridities is more
acceptable to a Soul, that desires nothing but the pure Love of Jesus Christ
Crucified, and that thereby may be more firmly united to her Savior.

When I am in Darkness and Aridities, I stand in need of an indifferency in
every state, that I may bear with Patience my Abjection and Poverty. I have
more need of Indifferency when my Soul is enlightened; which irradiations God
vouchsafes us to strengthen our weakness, and not, as I have thought
heretofore, to advance us in the practice of Divine Love, which is more eminent
in the contrary condition. I have stood in need of comfort in my Sufferings;
and I have stood more in need of it in a state of Joy and Sweetness. I said
heretofore when I abounded with Consolations, that I should never suffer again:
At present I think I shall suffer as long as I live, seeing I find Crosses in
every state; and I frame my self to an Indifferency to Gods will and Pleasure
in his dealings with me. Heretofore inebriated with Consolations, I said,
Fulcite me floribus, stipate me malis quia amore langueo, Surround me with
Flowers and Aples to augment my Comforts, and increase my Love: But now I say,
surround me with Crosses, Contempts and Sufferings, for languishing with Love,
I desire to Love Jesus better than ever.

It Is a wonderful thing that I should be more poor now, then when I was
deprived of all Consolation. I will not then too greedily seek after Light and
Sweetness, seeing methinks they make me poorer. I stand amazed to see a Soul to
find her self desolate by Consolation. In Desolations the Inferior part of the
Soul suffers, but in Consolations the Superior part, and more elevated, but
little known. I perceive that the Supreme part of the Soul cannot be content
and comforted but by the Death of the sensual part, and a separation from all
inordinate Affections to the Creature: I should therefore rather desire a state
of Desolation, and Fidelity therein, than all the Delicious gusts of Prayer,
though so elevated, as to bring the Soul to ravishing ecstasies.

CHAP. II. Of the different sorts of Mental Prayer.
I Find a comparison which explicates very well the difference of ordinary
Prayer and Prayer Passive. A man may see well enough the Furniture of a
chamber, and the riches of a Cabinet, by striking Fire and lighting a Candle,
to view the particulars: Or by the lighting of the Sun, when we have nothing to
do, but to open our eyes to behold those Objects. Meditation much resembles the
first way of seeing with a Candle: Perfect Contemplation the second way of
seeing by the Sun; because it is done not only without labor, but all at once,
and with delight. When the Light of the Sun fails us, we must supply it with a
Lamp or Candle: When God does not Communicate himself by Contemplation, we must
seek after him by Meditation, and be content with Gods Gifts, whatever they be,
with Peace and Humility.

When God withdraws his Passive Light, it is in vain to strive to retain it: We
must acquiess in his Pleasure 'till it return again as he thinks good. If God
please to leave us in darkness, without Sun or Candle, it is an opportunity to
practice Humility and Patience; for we must desire nothing but God alone, and
in what manner he thinks best. Let a Soul be never so perfect, she is never
continually elevated to a high degree of Contemplation, but more or less as it
pleases God, she must descend to the practice of Virtue, and exercises of
Charity, or to discursive Meditation, by Applications to God in the obscurity
of Faith. She must therefore keep her self in an Indifferency, rising and
falling according to the conduct of Gods Holy Spirit: Always esteeming her self
unworthy of the least Grace, and never pretend by forcing her Spirits to the
extraordinary favors of high Contemplation. But when she has a call to such
elevations in Prayer, the way to arrive thither is by a perfect death to all
things, and a Faithful imitation of Jesus Christ in his Crucified states of
Abjection and Poverty, with a Love of Solitude, as much as our condition will
permit:

There Is a great deal of difference between that Light and Fervor which is
imparted to a Soul in the elevations of passive Prayer, and that Light which is
procured by the ordinary Grace of Meditation. That is more in time and
piercing, and full of Heavenly Benedictions: This however suffices to acquire
Virtues, and serve God in the state of our Vocation. It Is our duty to attend to
our present condition with Peace and Humility, and submission to the Divine
Will, and let God alone to order, as he pleases the time of his Visits, and our
manner of Prayer. Sometimes this will be by simple Thoughts, sometimes by
Discourse, sometimes by Faith alone, and sometimes by passive Illuminations.
But whatever is given us, we must receive from the hand of the Divine Goodness
with great respect and Thankfulness, acknowledging our selves unworthy of the
least good Thought.

That which a Soul ought to do both in, and out of Prayer, is to be very
attentive to Gods Holy Inspirations, and follow them, with Courage and
Fidelity. If she find that God elevates her to extraordinary Contemplation, let
her yield to those Divine impressions: If she be kept in an ordinary way, let
her there abide: If she be left in Aridities, let her also sit down without
complaining. The great secret of a Spiritual Life, is for a Soul to purify her
self, so as to comply with the motions of God, who is our Alpha and Omega, our
Origin and final end.

There are things sufficiently declared, as the Commandments of God and the
Church, the Duties we owe to Obedience, Charity, or Necessity. There Is no need
to expect immediate Light from God for the performance of these things: But
only in such which are neither commanded, nor forbidden: And in these great
Purity of Soul is necessary to discern the motions of Grace, for fear we be
deceived by our own imaginations.

Those Saints who by the Impulses of Gods Holy Spirit have writ Spiritual
Treatises, to direct Interior Christians in the ways of God, oftentimes
affect us with their Thoughts and Sentiments, because they Pray in Heaven for
this Blessing on their labors on Earth; and therefore it is Beneficial to read
their Books to advance our Devotion. But do what we can, we shall never know
what that Prayer is by what those Books write of it, unless by the practice and
Light of the same Prayer.

We know well enough in general, that Prayer is the source of all Virtue in the
Soul; who leaves that off, falls into Luke-warmness, and Imperfections. Prayer
is a Holy Fire that warms the Heart and Affections, which without it must of
necessity grow cold in Devotion. In Health or Sickness, Joy or Sorrow, we must
always Pray, except we have a mind to fall from Grace to our utter ruin.

CHAP. III. That we ought to be indifferent to what manner of Prayer God is
pleased to give us.
WE ought to shun two Extremes equally vicious. The one is to covet more Grace
and Perfection than God intends us, so as to be troubled and disgusted to see
others more elevated in Gifts of Prayer than our selves: The other is not to
cooperate faithfully with the Grace vouchsafed us, either for want of Courage
in the Difficulties that occur in the practice of Virtue; or of Attention to
observe the Motions of Grace, or being observed, by too easily diverting our
selves to other matters, and so neglecting the Mercies of God.

When a Soul is well purified, and has experience of the Impulses of Grace in
her, and can distinguish them from the motions of Nature, she must give free
ingress to the rays of this Light from Heaven, that she may be thoroughly
illuminated and warmed in her Devotions. For to do otherwise under a pretense
of Humility and fear of deception, is not to yield to the Conduct of God's
Spirit, who inspires when, and whom he pleases. It Is then our Duty to be
entirely passive, that God may fully work his Will in us.

When these Divine Illuminations are withdrawn from a Soul, for the Glory of
God, and her good, and so left in darkness: or when her own Imperfections have
made her not so capable of supernatural Lights: she must rest contented with
these privations, till it pleases the Sun of Righteousness to shine upon her. A
purified Soul is satisfied and resigned on such occasions, because God only is
her joy, and not his gifts, which he by his infinite Goodness communicates to
her when he pleases. And this is the reason that she loves not her inward peace
and joy, when she is deprived of heavenly Irradiations and Gifts in Prayer.

He who gives himself up to his Prince for his sole interest and satisfaction,
without seeking his own peculiar concerns and contentment, does not much matter
what Service he renders, and what Rewards he receives, provided his Prince be
well pleased and satisfied. If he keep him near his person, to caress him, he
is content: not that he is caressed, but because it is his Princes pleasure. If
he employ him afar off in troublesome Affairs, he is content; not to be so far
from his Person, and in a hazardous Employment, but because this is the
Pleasure of his Prince, whose Content he only had an eye to, in giving himself
up unto his Service. This is the true case of a Soul that desires to serve God
purely for the Love of God. If God caress her in Prayer with Visits full of
Sweetness, she is content, because this is his Pleasure; if he affords not his
Presence but leaves her in Darkness, she is content, because it is the good
pleasure of God. If God call her to the exercises of Charity in a life more
active and laborious than the contemplative, she is content because this is the
good pleasure of God, which is the only thing she seeks and desires in his
Service.

This indifferency disposes a Soul to receive great Graces; for by this means
she sometimes arrives to a total oblivion of her self and all creatures,
without any reflection on her own Interests, Temporal or Eternal, having
nothing in her eye but the good pleasure of God, and desiring him alone:
insomuch that if any thing of self creep in at any time, as soon as she
discovers it, it is distasteful to her. This is a state of great Nakedness, and
entire Mortification, and a perfect disposition to most sublime Prayer; whether
God elevates a Soul, whom he sees ready to submit to the least degree of
Prayer, or Dereliction, if so he pleases.

It happens oftentimes that in a state of Privations, a Soul is so surrounded
with darkness, that she sees nothing of God, who seems entirely to be hid from
her: and that which augments this Cross, she is so wholly taken up with her
Loss, that she thinks not of the means to recover her happiness.

If in this state a Soul be content with this rigorous usage, with all humble
submission to the good pleasure of God, though she apprehends it not at
present, she is united to God in a transcendent manner, and possesses her
soveraign-Good, when she fears she has lost him. This is the pre-eminence of a
Soul, which is not wedded to one manner of Prayer more than another, but holds
her self in an indifferency to receive of God whatever he pleases. And let her
Prayer be what it will, she will be sure not to perform the Work of God
negligently.

CHAP. IV. That above all things it is necessary to practice Prayer.
WE must understand aright, that all our Perfection, and all the Glory we can
bring to God, lies in our Interior and not so much in our Exterior Actions.
Alas! we pass away our time vainly and unprofitably, both to God and our
selves. There Is nothing so precious as his Interior, nothing is to be
preferred before it, seeing thereby God is most glorified. And therefore of all
our Sacrifices the Heart is the principal, and none of our Offerings are
acceptable without it. Fili mi, da mihi cor tuum. It Is from the Interior
proceeds the pure Love of God, and of our Neighbor, the Purity of Intention,
the Zeal of the Glory of God, and whatever Riches the Soul possesses: And yet
we too often neglect this, to make a fair outward show in exterior actions,
which are ordinarily sullied with impurity, by a mixture with the Interests of
corrupted Nature.

Too many pass away the greatest part of their Life in Impurity and
Imperfections for want of Light: and they want Light, because it is not
ordinarily obtained but by Prayer: and they neglect Prayer under specious
pretenses of gaining time, to do good to others, and advance the glory of God;
and so want this Light, and thereupon fail in their corresponding to the Grace
of God. A Soul must be constant to her Times of Prayer, if she intend to
nourish the Life of Grace in her, and not to pray only then, when she has
nothing else to do that is good and commendable: which is but an artifice of
Satan, by other Exercises of Charity to withdraw well-meaning Souls from
Prayer; and this we must have a gseat care of, being a subtle Temptation. If
hereby he can weaken the vigor of the Soul, it is that he looked for, and then
he will soon induce us to fall into such Defects and Imperfections, which will
bring great Prejudice to a spiritual Life. How many Souls are there, who
endanger their Ruin even by Works of Charity, either by over-doing or not
doing them according to the order of God and Grace?

We must have a generous Fidelity to the Exercise of holy Prayer, by means
whereof we approach to the Divine Source, from whence the Soul rceives all
Strength and Virtue. Prayer is a holy fire to which who draws near has warm
affections for God; who shuns it, must of necessity fall into Tepedity and
Lukewarmness. Whatever our condition be, whether in Sickness or Health, in
Abjection or Honor, in Poverty or Abundance, let us never fail of our Duty to
God by Prayer, in the best manner we can, being the Powerful means to procure
and advance our union with God, our only Happiness. I cannot possibly wish a
greater Good to any person I love, than the Gift of Prayer; knowing that
thereby we enter into the Cabinet of the Secrets of God, and are made partakers
of his Graces

Prayer then is the Source of all Grace in the Soul, without which by degrees
she tends to ruin. No affairs whatsoever could ever hinder the Saints from
their constant Devotions. Jesus Christ himself has showed us this by his
example, spending whole Nights in Prayer and Contemplation. Our Disorders
proceed much by too lightly engaging our selves, for want of Circumspection, in
humane affairs, to which we have no Call from God, and therefore are not
favored by him with Success; whereby we fall into many Defects, and become too
often indisposed to Prayer; and Prayer failing us, we want all things.

The first Wheel that must set all a going in our Spiritual Life, is this
Maxim, That our perfection consists principally in our Interior. But it cannot
go well with our Interior without Fidelity to Grace, which works in us a Love
of Mortification and Austerities, an Inclination to Solitude, and a kind of
Abhorrence of Sensual Pleasures, and such Vanity as the World admires.

Now this Grace that brings forth these good Fruits in us, is not obtained but
by Prayer, nor ordinarily augmented but by Prayer, nor well known so as to
correspond to its motions but by Prayer. But it is very difficult and in a
manner impossible to preserve the Spirit of Prayer in the Multiplicity of
Affairs, which for the most part are instrumental to divert our Thoughts from
God: and so few Souls attain to Perfection, because few dispose themselves to
pure Prayer; neglecting it too much, under a pretense of gaining Time to do
good to others.

A Soul that would be wholly for God, must discreetly shun the Obstacles of
Perfections, though never so specious with Courage and Fidelity. Who is weak in
Prayer, must not lay out himself too much in Action; for then he will profit
little in the ways of God, and his Interior will not advance in Virtue.

When we see many great Servants of God to do glorious things, for the Love,
and Service, and Honor of their great Master, with high Commendation; this
sometimes raises an emulation in us to follow their Examples; but our Fidelity
does not consist herein, it being our Duty to make the best we can of the Grace
we have received, and admire without envy the Gifts of others.

Methinks I have a Desire to be but as God will have me, neither more nor less,
either interiourly or exteriourly, in Nature or Grace. I see others Perfect and
my self Imperfect without discouragement. I behold even with Content others
commanding their Passions, and my self fighting for Victory; others doing much
for God, and I in a manner doing nothing; others Strong and Courageous in the
Service of God, and my self nothing but Weakness and Misery.

I am comforted in considering the Designs of God concerning me, and acquiesce
in his good Pleasure. For God refuses us not sometimes to take unprofitable
Servants into his house, who only serve to set forth his Bounty and
Magnificence: as we see with us some great Persons do show their Grandeurs.
When we have nothing to do but only to pray, we seem to some to be but
unprofitable, and do God but little or no Service; but I rest contented herein,
seeing God hereby does magnify his Goodness and Mercy to me. I doubt not but
there are many Souls in Heaven, who have in the eyes of the World done little
Service for God; as Solitares in the Deserts, and many Persons without Talents,
and yet have high Places in the Mansions of Eternity. They spent all their Time
to purify their Interior, by being faithful to the Graces they have received
from the infinite Bounty of God, and the Service they rendered him, to the Glory
of his Name, is only written in his Omniscience; but will be laid open to the
World at the great Day of Manifestation.

CHAP. V. Of the Impediments of Prayer.
I Clearly see and know by Experience, that the temporal Affairs of our
Economy does not a little take us off from God. We do ill in it; yea, it being
our Obligation, it is pleasing to God to manage our Temporals with a good
Intention: though it would be better, if we can; to lay aside these Worldly
Distractions, to spend our time only in God's Service. And those who have a
Call from God, to attend on him alone, in a state of Prayer and Contemplation,
cannot without being unfaithful to his Grace, continue in the solicitous
Distractions of worldly Affairs.

I must needs say that Worldly Business darkens and hinders my Soul in her
Spiritual Exercises; and I would never spend time therein upon Humane
Considerations, but purely because God has so ordered it. However it must be
our care not to spend more time therein than necessity requires. Too delicate
Diet; though it may strengthen Nature, yet it weakens Grace. When the Body is
brought down by Abstinence, the Soul is more vigorous in her Elevations to God.
I find this true in me by Experience.

A Soul must be very well grounded in Grace, that among temporal Employments
and worldly Cares, can keep her self up in Fervor and Purity. She meets with a
thousand Occasions to move her to Anger, Impatience, Sadness, and vain Joy: and
though she do not give way to them, yet she is sensible of them, and this must
needs more or less disturb her Interior Peace, whereby she is united to God
her Happiness. A little thing will hinder a Soul from raising her self to
Contemplation, and a less matter will somewhat darken her when elevated;
because the least emotion of Spirit will indispose her to receive Divine
Impressions. Therefore a man of Prayer must be a man dead and mortified; for
that is not pure Prayer, which does not work in us a victory over our Passions
and Vicious Inclinations, and bring us to the practice of all Christian Virtues.

I see now more clearly than ever, that the Spirit of Prayer does not persevere
and gather strength, but in those who are dead to Sensuality, austere to
themselves, Penitent, and disengaged from whatsoever is not God. It Is true, as
for Corporal Austerities, a tender Complexion must follow the Council of a
Director: But commonly we are too indulgent to our selves, and far from the
practice of great Penitents, who were very severe to themselves, and also great
Contemplatives. We deceive our selves if we think to enter into a state of
Prayer, and take delight in Worldly things. Though in rigor this may in some
sort be permitted to Candidates of Devotion, yet not to Proficients, in whom
the Spirit of Prayer and Conformity to Jesus Christ Crucified ought to be
wholly predominant. For it is our Duty to live Conformably to that state where
God has put us.

Gerson says very well; If we refuse Exterior Consolations, we shall receive
Interior. The reason hereof seems to me to be this, because Interior
Consolations participate of the Purity of their source, which is the union of
God with the Soul, and will not permit any mixture with Impurity and
Imperfection. For sensual Joys and Consolations are Earthly, Impure, and
Imperfect, and consequently are contrary to the Spirit of Grace, which makes
the Soul pure and Penitent, and Mortified to the things of this Life. Moreover,
Interior Consolations are slender participations of those Infinite Delights
which God has in himself of himself; and he is jealous of such favors, not
communicating them but to a Soul entirely beloved, that takes no delight but in
him alone. But when earthly consolations enter into a Soul, they draw her
partly from God, and so God withdraws his favors from her.

For this reason the Saints who would be wholly for God, mortified themselves
without reserve, as much as humane weakness would permit; that no sensual or
Worldly Pleasures might have any part in their Affections, but God alone. Take
courage, O my Soul, let us embrace the Cross, and follow Jesus Christ, who will
conduct us through the garden of his Delights Let us not trouble our selves
with Worldly Affairs, unless we know it is the Will of God; for otherwise we
shall find affliction of Spirit, and decay in Spirituality. Thrice happy is he,
who shuns multiplicity, for this will dispose him to pure Love.

Many things seem to us necessary, which serve but to entertain the corruption
of Nature, still working in us. If God should severely examine all our Actions,
perhaps he would hardly find one in all respects well pleasing to him. We too
much follow Nature, and our Humane Inclinations, if Grace sets us a working, we
hardly go through with it, but Nature creeps in some way or other to sully our
Actions. What is purely Natural, cannot be Meritorious, all merit proceeding
from a Principle of Grace, and therefore no Actions but what have an influence
from Grace can dispose us to a union with God. O how rare a thing is pure
Virtue! That which seems best, is not for the most part without some blemish.
Those who have Illustrations from Heaven, discover these Impurities, others in
the dark see nothing but grosser Faults and Imperfections.

From all this we may conclude, that there are principally four great
Obstacles, which hinder for the most part the exercise of Prayer. 1. To engage
our selves in Worldly Affairs, more than the order of God requires. 2. To be
too delicate, and use very little Corporal Austerity. 3. To practice little
either Interior or Exterior Retreats, and to have no Love for Recollection,
and for Solitude. 4. Want of zeal and Courage in the ways of God, and so living
a Life merely Humane, by following our Naetural Inclinations.

But he shall never be a Man of Prayer, who does not live a Supernatural Life,
and practice all Christian Virtues with a Faithful and Generou Resolution. And
Blessed is he, who by his constancy in Spiritual Exercises has brought his Soul
to such a temper, that it is in a manner as easy for him to Pray as breath. Hic
accipiet Benedictionem a Domino; and Misericordiam, a Deo Salutari suo, quia
haec est generatio quaerentium Dominum, He that thus seeks God while he may be
found, shall enjoy him there, where he can never be lost.

CHAP. VI. Of the Means that facilitate the Exercise of Prayer.
WHosoever is resolved to undertake the Exercise of Prayer, must expect to
suffer all sorts of Temptations from Satan, who above all others, hate the
Praying Nation: And no less from Nature, which has strange repugnances to so
Crucifying a Life, and such Exercises as elevate her above all her Natural
Inclinations: And also from the World, which does not relish at all so much
Solitude and Mortification. But we cannot be true Servants of Jesus Christ
Crucified, without taking up our Cross to follow him. A Poor, Abject, Despised,
Suffering Life, contented with pure Necessities for Food, and Clothing, is a
good Disposition to Prayer.

It will very much dispose us to this Holy Exercise, to keep our selves in a
Conformity to the states of the Suffering Life of Jesus Christ, and in the
practice of pure Virtues on all occasions. To esteem the Sacred folly of the
Cross the greatest Wisdom, and correspond to the Inspirations of Gods Holy
Spirit, against all opposition whatsoever that thwart the Designs of God, and
hinders the operations of his Grace in us.

It Is a great help to Prayer, to make it our sole and only business; and
doubtless of high concern, seeing it is to do that on Earth, which the Saints do
in Heaven, to Contemplate and Love the Beauties of God. However, if we have
other Affairs, at least we must make this the principal, to which the rest
ought to give place; and not, as alas! too many do, regulate our Devotions by
our Secular Affairs. Why should we overcharge our selves with Employments, by
offering our service to others on the pretense of Charity? Martha who was very
busy about the Corporal Service of Jesus Christ, was reproved for troubling
her self with so many distracting Offices; and her Sister commended for
attending to the only thing necessary, the Love of God and Contemplation.

It Is a good help to Prayer, not to engage our selves in Worldly concerns, nor
in giving or receiving Visits without necessity, such as the Oblations of
Charity, or of our place and condition requires of us. If we be free, to shun
all entertainments that are dangerous, or unprofitable, and choose to converse
with such, who commonly discourse about the one thing necessary, which consists
in the Service of God, and the exercise of Prayer. But all this must be so
done, as our Discretion may not be called in question, nor Charity wounded.

It Is an important help to Prayer, to stand always upon our guard in the time
of Sickness, or Indisposition of Health, so as not wholly to leave off our
usual Exercises of Devotion. Under pretense to cherish the Body, we commonly
yield too much to Nature, and so sometimes in a short Sickness we loose long
habits of Mortification, which cost us dear in their acquisition. Prayer is not
to be laid aside at such a time, but we must endeavor to keep up our Union
with God by Interior acts of Virtue, which require no strength of Body, nor
gusts of Devotion, but agree well enough with a state of Trouble and
Dereliction*

It Is a very profitable help to Prayer, to accustom our selves to do nothing of
concern without a motion from God. The Holy Spirit is in us to conduct us, and
we may safely follow such a Leader. This keeps the Soul in great Purity, which
knows the Inspirations of Grace, by the Internal Peace, Sweetness and Liberty,
that always more or less attend them. And if she quit them to follow Nature,
the secret stings of Conscience tell her, she has been Unfaithful to Gods
Graces, and retarded her progress toward Perfection.

It Is a very necessary help to Prayer, for a Soul to get a habit of being so
dead to the World, as to live only to God, and in God, her only center and true
repose. This is the end of our Creation, and if she deviate therefrom, to take
a complacency in her self or any Creature, she falls short of the Designs of
God. I know well enough that in the beginning of a Spiritual Life, it is very
hard to bring our minds off from thinking on vain and Worldly matters, and to
habituate the Soul to strive against Imperfections, and adorn her self with all
Christian Virtues. However she must then reflect on her Imperfections, her good
and evil Inclinations, as she finds the motions of Grace to Dictate to her. She
is not as yet capable of a more elevated degree of Prayer, and so her Thoughts
are profitably employed in this lower exercise. But when God is pleased to
enter into her, as to make her enter into him by a more intimate Union, her
Thoughts then must be all upon God, and for him, seeing he is only her true
rest and repose.

Many Spiritual Persons fail herein not well observing the method and ways of
God in the conduct of Souls. They have not an eye severe enough on their
Interior, to discover all the motions of the Heart, to examine, and search,
and find out the least root of their Imperfections. This must be done, and is
good and profitable in its season. But when God calls us to higher elevations
in Prayer, we must follow the conduct of his Holy Spirit, or we shall never
advance in the ways of Perfection.

CHAP. VII. That we must not presume of our selves to attempt any manner of
Prayer but what is ordinary.
IN our Spiritual Exercises we must ordinarily prepare the Subject of our
Prayer and converse with God. This is the Practice of all holy Persons, and to
do otherwise, is to fail in our respect to the Majesty of Heaven. If we be to
speak to a King, or any Person of Quality, we think thereon aforehand; and
shall we not have consideration of what we have to say to the King of Glory?

This preparing of the matter of Prayer, must be done some little time, before
we set upon the Duty. Then we must lift up our Hearts to God, and desire him to
put into our minds what may be most pleasing to him in our Recollections; and
what ever it be, to entertain it in our Thoughts, and dwell upon it, unless God
inspire us with some other matter, that calls upon us for our Attention and
Fidelity. For to comply with this, we ought to quit the Subject we have
prepared for our Exercise. Let us not soar above our Abilities, but make choice
of such matters for Prayer as are most suitable to our Spiritual State, and we
find by our Interior to be most agreeable to the will of God.

Let us never begin our Prayers, without asking God pardon of our Sins, and
imploring his mercies. For to put our selves into his Sacred Presence, and to
converse with him, without a detestation of these Imperfections wherewith we
have displeased him, is to make our selves unworthy of his Grace and Favor.

It Is of very great importance to know how God usually conducts Souls to
Perfection, that we may the better comply with the Designs of his Grace. All
are not called to the same sort of Prayer: and without a special Vocation we
ought not to apply our selves but to the more ordinary way of Devotion: whether
we converse with God by discursive Considerations to raise our Affections,
taking some Book to our Assistance: or whether we call to mind some Subject,
wherein we formerly have found some Gust and Spiritual Advantage. Let this be
done with Humility, Dependence, and Fidelity; for a Soul having no Call from
God to a more elevated Prayer, if she cease her own Operations, she ceases to
Pray, and falls into Distractions, or is guilty of Idleness. But it is far
otherwise with her, when she is raised from Meditation by the workings of God
in her to Prayer of Contemplation.

It Is true, that a Soul having placed her self in the presence of God, and
thinking on the Subject she has prepared, ought to meditate thereon with great
attention of Spirit; but if God please to take her Thoughts up with something
else, she ought without any Disturbance, leave her own, to comply with the
Operations of Gods holy Spirit: For when God is thus pleased to possess a Soul
by the operations of his Grace, she ought to put no Obstacle thereto: which we
do too often by our Industries, which seem to us necessary, and without which
we believe we should do nothing: when as then we should give way to those
Divine Operations, to the end they may become more efficacious. Otherwise we
have less respect for God, than we would have for some earthly Prince, to whom
we speak with much Reverence, as long as he is pleased to give us Audience, but
as soon as he thinks good to speak, we presently are silent, and give ear to
his words with much Attention and Respect, not presuming in the least sort to
interrupt him.

Our principal affair is to serve God, the Vnum necessarium, recommended to us
by our Blessed Savior; and therefore it concerns us, not to distract our
selves with too many exterior Employments, though good and lawful. Because if
the heart be bound with a Chain of Gold, it is no more at Liberty to converse
with God, than if it was fettered with Links of Iron. Wherefore whatever we can
do for the Service of God, and Good of our Neighbor, let us do it with
Willingness of Heart, according to our Talents and Abilities. But above all we
must have an esteem of Prayer, and a desire to practice it; being firmly
persuaded, there is nothing whereby we can better serve God, or more profit our
selves in a Spiritual Life. For my part I in some sort more value Prayer,
though imperfect, than the best Actions that carry more of outward Splendor,
and and seem more Glorious in the eyes of men.

We must therefore never be disgusted with Prayer, nor quit the frequent
Exercise thereof, because we, to our thinking, make little Advancement therein;
but persevere faithfully to practice it in the best manner we can, and expect
with patience the good pleasure of God. If we do our Endeavors, we have
discharged our Duty and Obligation. The Servant that had but one Talent, was
blamed by his Lord, because he did not improve it by his Industry.

When my Soul is not in a temper for the Exercise of Prayer, I use short
Reflections to call to mind what is most distastful to me; and I make a
Resolution to do it, or set upon it presently, if I can: as to converse with
one, from whom I have an Aversion, or make some visit, where I know I shall be
much mortified; that I may conquer my self in those things, which raise a
continual War within me. I have oftentimes by this facilited the Exercise of
Prayer, God being pleased by so much the more to dispose our hearts, by how
much the more we offer Violence to our selves, to surmount all Difficulties.

CHAP. VIII. How to pass from Ordinary Prayer to Contemplation.
A Soul that does not nourish in her self any voluntary Imperfection, having
efficacious desires to live the Life of Jesus, ought to be passive to the
Conduct of God in Prayer, and aspire after great Simplicity, by giving a check
to the Discourse of her Understanding, and multiplicity of Acts in her Will and
Affections, I am not ignorant that she ought to exercise her self in Meditation
and a lower degree of Prayer, till God is pleased to raise her to
Contemplation: but withal she must elevate her self as soon as she feels
interior Attracts, and shun a false Humility, which hinders us to follow the
Motions of God's holy Spirit, who communicates his Graces to the Perfect, to
augment their Purity, and to the Imperfect, to purify their Souls from Terrene
Desires.

In my judgment it is of great importance in the Exercise of Prayer, to receive
with Humility the impression of the Rays of the Divine Sun who rides in the
Interior of our Soul. It Is he that can enlighten us without the Succors of
our Discourse: who inflames us with Divine Love, without troubling our Will
with the production of a multiplicity of Acts, and in a manner almost
imperceptibly makes all Virtues to grow ripe in us, and arrive to Perfection.
If a Soul makes it her work to mortify all her Imperfections, and desires to
live a suffering life, for Prayer she need not much trouble her self, God will
do her Work for her, and in a manner above her Hopes and Understanding.

God does not work this but in such a Soul that freely puts her self into his
Hands, with all submissive Humility, to be guided by Him. In this state of
Prayer, the subject prepared for our Exercise sometimes may be useful;
sometimes God suggests some other matter, as he sees best, and the Soul must
peaceably comply with his Communications. We cannot give certain Rules to such
who are in this state of Prayer, God working in them as he pleases, in
different manners. All the Counsel can be given, is, To keep themselves in an
entire Indifferency to Illustrations, or Privations, to Sweetness, or Rigor.

Nevertheless I believe, we may profitably descend to a lower Degree of Prayer,
when we have no Overture to one more elevated: but this is not to be done, till
we often knock at the gate of Mercy with a holy Importunity. But if the
Bridegroom of our Souls is not pleased to vouchsafe us a Kiss of his Lips by
Contemplation, let us keep our selves at his Feet by Conversing with him in
Meditation.

It will much conduce to elevate a Soul to a more perfect Union with God, to
have in memory many universal Verities of the Divinity and Sacred Humanity of
Jesus Christ.

1. As, That God is Omnipotent and an Infinite Goodness.

2. That his Love to us is from Eternity, and the Eye of his Divine Providence
is watchful over us to conduct us to Happiness.

3. That God being Love, requires nothing of us but Love and Affection.

4. That God is the Center of our Soul, which can find no true Repose but in
him alone.

5. That Grace and Truth is by Jesus Christ, there being no other Means to
attain Salvation.

6. That the Sacred Trinity, which consists in the perfect Knowledge, and pure
Love of the Divine Persons, is the true Model of Perfect Prayer. These deeply
considered, are very instrumental to elevate a Contemplative Soul, to so high a
pitch, that sometimos she in a wonderful manner participates of that Life
Eternal, which is in God himself.

I have made a Resolution to desire of God, that my Prayer may be altogether
Intellectual, to the end I may not feel such sensible Gusts of Heavenly
Consolations, which prejudice Nature. These are but sweet Bai^s for self-Love,
which sullies the Purity of Prayer, and diminishes the Contemplative Attention,
which continues more strong and vigorous, when kept on the point of the Spirit,
whereby the Fire of Divine Love burns brighter, and with more constant Flames.
This is that continual Union which is the Object of Perfection: and whatever
hinders this ought to be suspected, as are sensible Gusts of Devotion in
Inferior Nature.

O my Soul, let us therefore entirely give up our selves to God in Prayer, to
receive from him such impressions as he thinks best: let our chief care be
fully to submit our selves to him, and to be disengaged from all worldly
things, and accept with Thankfulness whatever he gives us. If he gives us
nothing, let nothing content us, and peaceably acquiesce in Union with his
Divine Will. A Soul faithful in the state of Privations, will sooner or later,
as God sees best, be raised to pure Union and Enjoyments, on the lofty Wings of
Contemplation.

CHAP. IX. Of the Prayer of Faith.
THis Prayer is a bare reflection or simple remembrance of God, who is believed
by naked Faith, as he is seen and known by the Light of Glory. It Is the same
Object here and there, but known by the Soul in a different manner. The way of
knowing God here, is but learned Ignorance. Earth is the Land of Believing,
Heaven of Seeing, To see God as we are seen of Him, and understand all Divine
Mysteries, is reserved for the Light of Glory; here we must walk by the
obscurities of Faith.

This Faith must be naked without Images or Representations, simple and without
Discourse, universal without a distinct consideration of particulars* The
operation of the Will is conform to that of the Understanding, Naked, Simple,
Universal, Spiritual, Independent on the Senses. We must expect great Combats
in this way from our Spirit, which will still be working, and rely on
Creatures. But though it be much distasted by the understanding part of the
Soul, yet she must strive to die to her own operations, and willingly entertain
what helps her in this Combat, as Aridities, Privations, Desolations, which at
last leave the Soul in exercise of pure Faith; whereby God is known in a higher
manner, than those Lights which serve as a Medium between God and the Soul, for
this Union of our Spirit with God by pure Faith is immediate, and so more
elevated. The Will also must die to what ever is not God. To live only in Him,
and to him by pure Love. For the Life of the Will is this Death; and this Death
is not ordinarily wrought but by Privations.

This kind of Prayer is uniform, and not much liable to alterations, nor brings
any damage to the Body. For Nature has nothing to do in it, being not
procurable by greatest endeavors of Humane Industry, but depending purely on
the Will of God, who alone gives it when and to whom he pleases. It Is true,
this pure and naked Contemplation of God by Faith is given but rarely, and to
those who have past through many Purgatories and states of Penance, to fit them
for it. In the beginning it darts into the Soul but Transient Irradiations,
like flashes of Lightning; if at any time they continue about half an hour,
it is very much: However they work in the Soul very great Effects.

One of the principal is, that this Light of Faith discovers to us the verity
of Divine Mysteries, Imperfections, and the Perfections we want, and practical
Virtues: And all this at once, not successively one after another by discourse,
which could never arrive to produce a knowledge so clear and universal. But
indeed the understanding, has much ado to die to its own operations, and not
act by Humane Lights, by being wholly given up to the obscurity of Faith.
However this must be done, to be rightly disposed for Divine Operations.

There are diverse degrees of Contemplations, but what God is pleased to give
us, must be received with submissive Thankfulness. While we live in Mortal
Bodies, we shall have always something to purify, and therefore always
something to suffer, Three parts of our Life pass away in a Suffering
condition. In a state of obscurity, the Soul is intimately united to God,
although she be not sensible thereof. I am much taken with the way of pure
Faith in Prayer, whereby the Soul knows God as much as she can do in this Life;
and though it be obscure, it matters not, being sure and certain. For my part,
take as much as you will of my Light of Reason, if the Light of Faith increase
thereby. O how Beautiful is pure and naked Faith!

It much conduces to Spiritualize a Soul, to live continually by Faith, to
esteem and love nothing, but what we ought to esteem and love. Man rarely will
relinquish his Reason, and nevertheless he must raise himself above it, or drag
on the Earth with Imperfections. Faith is a participation of the Eternal
Wisdom, she only conducts us with true assurance; for her Lights though dark,
are certain, and their obscurity does incomparably transcend the clearest
evidence of Natural Reason.

Moreover, to make Prayer more Intellectual, and that Nature may have no hand
in it, we must leave off some things, which usually did raise our hearts to God
with a sensible Devotion: As Music, Rich Ornaments, Devout Pictures in
Churches, and the like. This is good and profitable in the beginning of a
Spiritual Life, and some time after; but when a Soul has attained purity of
Prayer, there is no need to take her nourishment, that is, her Knowledge and
Love but from pure Faith and Supernatural Lights infused into her. When we take
not good heed, we keep not our selves sufficiently passive to the Operations of
God, but we go a beging for the Life of the Soul to sensible Objects, when God
himself would nourish her with more purified Knowledge, and Diviner Love:

Why should we hanker after sensible Gusts of Devotion, seeing Nature is
commonly too much taken with them, to the damage of naked Faith, and the
hindrance of our pure Union with God, which requires a total denudation of all
Creatures? Notwithstanding when God tryes us with Derelictions, and gives us
not admittance into his presence, but by things sensible and Discoursive
Prayer; we must humbly comply with this state, and not pretend to higher
elevations in our Addresses to him.

Yet if a Soul in this Interior Poverty and Dereliction finds that she has a
call to Interior Sufferings, she ought not to seek after sensible things to
raise her to God; but courageously bear this Interior Cross, as long as it
pleases her Divine Bridegroom to continue her Trial. This state is bitter
indeed, but withal purifying, and makes a Soul capable of more intimate union
with God.

CHAP. X. Of the Sacred Darkness of Prayer.
ON St. Mary Magdalen's day it seemed to me, that my Prayer changed, and became
more simple, more strong and elevated. My Spirit went on knowing God, not by
Lights or Gusts of Devotion, but by a certain Darkness, wherewith God is
surrounded as with a Cloud. This Darkness made me see that God cannot be known,
but is Infinitely above our understanding, which cannot better know him, then
by acknowledging we cannot know him as he is. At other times Gusts and Lights
were instrumental to unite me to God, but now this Darkness only was my Guide,
and my Soul finding her self lost in a profound Ignorance of God, yet seemed to
me to know him better than ever, and I had no difficulty to Contemplate God in
this manner; which leaving in me deep impressions of the Divinity, did also
augment my Interior dispositions of the Love of God, hatred of sin, and such
like matters.

It seemed to me that at this time my Prayer became more continual. And I was
much encouraged with that saying of St. Denis, That this ignorance is the best
and highest knowledge we have here of God. I therefore readily made my
Addresses to God in the aforesaid manner, understanding well, that the
knowledge we have of God by this way, is greater than that we learn by
discourse, or Lights, or Gusts in Prayer. To know we cannot know God, is to
know him as much as he can be known in this Life, his Grandeurs being
Infinitely above our Understanding. And that our Understanding may live wholly
to God, it must die to whatsoever is not God, whom we see by naked Faith in a
Luminous obscurity.

By this way God is more known and loved, than by many Lights and Affections,
all which are lost in the obscurity of this Sacred Darkness, which makes a Soul
see that the Perfections of God are incomprehensible. Many good effects arise
from hence: As a profound Joy and Peace of Conscience, a firmness in our good
Resolutions, and practice of Virtues, a great love of Self-denial, in imitation
of the unspeakable Humiliations of Jesus Christ.

One of the surest marks to know whether this Prayer of Darkness comes from
God, is to see whether it leave in the Soul the knowledge of our Miseries and
Infidelities: For the more we possess God, the better we see the least
Imperfections. As for example, whether our intention be pure, or Nature has
some Interest with Grace: Whether we too easily leave the presence of God for
other things: Whether we comply with Gods Inspirations, or commit Infidelities.
These and such like being clearly seen by this means, do much humble us, and
make us careful to amend them.

The Soul in this disposition knows nothing of God but that he is
Incomprehensible, and looses her self in this Darkness that surrounds his
Grandeurs. This view with a view sees nothing distinctly of God in particalar,
but is a knowing Ignorance of what God is in himself. For though the excessive
Glory of this Divine Sun makes his Light inaccessable to our weak eyes, yet
this Darkness pierces our Interior, and we know God in a transcendent manner
by strong impressions of the Divinity, and are raised to a most intimate union
with him. God requires of a Soul great Purity in this state.

This then is an excellent manner to take up our Thoughts with God in our
Addresses to him, by annihilating all our Lights and Knowledge, to get into
this Sacred Darkness that surrounds his Glory, that being thus dead to our own
Abilities, we may confess that God is as much above our Understanding, as he is
amiable above our Affections. Thus to know God, and confess he is above our
Understanding; and to love God, and acknowledge we cannot Love him according to
his Perfections, is to live dead to our Selves and our Abilities; and such God
Loves best and knows with Approbation.

CHAP. XI. Of the Lights of Prayer.
GOd sometimes in Prayer discovers himself to a Soul, as the Sun, filling her
with Light, by which and in which he is known, and all other things she stands
in need of, or which the Omniscient is pleased to manifest to her. We see well
enough this Light, by which we know God, but God himself is inaccessable: As we
behold the Light of the Natural Sun, and not the Body thereof, which blinds our
Eyes, and by the benefit of its Beams the things of this World are made visible
to us.

One born Blind imagins that if he could see the Light, he might see the Sun:
But he would find by experience, that this Light would only serve to make him
clearly see, that he cannot behold the Sun by reason of its excessive
Brightness. In the same manner when we are in Interior Darkness, we think we
can know God better in the Light, and when this Light comes, it only serves to
let us see, that God cannot be known by us in Mortal Bodies.

When in Prayer I have a view of God, or some of his Perfections, of Jesus, or
some of his Dispositions, or Maxims; it seems to me, that all these Objects
have a particular Light in them, which serves much to discover their excellency
to the Soul. But it seems to me that these Verities, namely, We must slay from
Evil, and do Good, hate Sin and embrace Virtue, and such like, as considered
barely in themselves have no particular Light in them, to manifest their
Goodness: But their Beauty and Excellency are discovered to us by help of the
Light of Faith: As those Bodies which are out of the Sun, see not themselves
but by the Light thereof.

For this reason I believe it is best for a Soul to take up her Thoughts with
God, and those Verities that regard him; or with Jesus, and Christian Truths,
as resident in this Sacred Breast. By this means the Heart and Affections will
be much inflamed with the Love of God, to adore and serve him, and imitate the
Perfections of Jesus Christ. This sort of Prayer is simple, and does not put
the Soul to the labor of much Discourse. For any Divine Perfection, and the
Exterior effects thereof, are seen by her at once, by a singular act of the
understanding. As she may consider the Omnipotency by its self, or together
with the Creation of the World, she may behold and adore the Divine Providence
by it self; together with its admirable effects in the Government of the
Universe. The Soul herein needs not multiply Discourses, but may behold all
this at one prospect.

When we meditate on any Christian Verity; as for example, the Excellency of
Poverty, without the Relation it has to Jesus, the Soul loosing the sight
thereof, falls into distraction, being carried insensibly to a different
matter: But when she considers Poverty as inshrin'd in the heart of Jesus, and
practiced by him, she is taken up with Jesus, which is much better. And so this
digression proves profitable, and she gains by this loss. It Is the same, when
we meditate on any Perfection of God, and falling from our first subject, we
are happily lost in the depths of the Divinity, where we find no Love but of
God himself. O Happy loss.

There Is no knowledge more necessary for us, than of our Miseries and
Imperfections, because that, or nothing, will well ground us in Humility,
without which we cannot raise Virtues to any height in a Spiritual Life. We may
get this knowledge two manner of ways: Either directly, by considering them in
themselves: Vir videns paupertatem meam; Or by considering the Divine
Perfections, in the Light whereof by reflection we discover our own Miseries
and Imperfections.

The first manner is somewhat like a Wintersday, wherein we feel nothing but
Cold, and see nothing but Sterility; yet it affords Light enough to work in us
a low esteem of our selves: But this Humility oftentimes causes in the Soul
disquiet, dependency, and discouragement. The other manner resembles a fair
Summers-day, which is more Warm and Lightsome, and full of Refreshment. The
sight of our Miseries by this way is more advantageous, and begets in us a more
generous Humility, and fuller of confidence in God. For the view of the Divine
Perfections, which is the chief and direct work of the Soul, raises in her a
Holy Fire, which inflames her Affections toward God in the midst of her
Miseries.

Behold now the reason, why it is a great secret in a Spiritual Life, to behold
all things of God, who is an Infinite Light; and never to forsake him, because
in him and by him we can best know and do our Duty.

After that a Soul is habituated to march through the ways of Faith and Purity,
she gets so great a Facility to converse with God, that it is a trouble to her
to descend to Creatures, knowing by experience that he only is her center,
where she finds true repose, and her only Light to conduct her to Happiness.
The Soul of Jesus Christ, our Grand Exemplar, did not only abide in God by
Apostatical Union, but all his Thoughts and Affections were absorpt in the
Divinity, which replenished this admirable Creature with Grace, Light, and
Truth, for the Execution of the Eternal Decrees of his Heavenly Father for the
Redemption of Man. He finished the Mysteries of his Mortal Life, but still
conversing with God, and plunged in the Divinity, wherein he beheld what he
came to do upon Earth.

Let us follow his example, that we may receive from God a Light to conduct us,
which ordinarily is communicated to us in Prayer. Accedite ad eum, and
illuminamini. Draw near to God, and ye shall be Enlightened.

CHAP. XII. Of Passive Prayer.
PAssive Prayer is after this manner. We take a view of God in his Perfections,
or of Jesus in his states, or of some Christian Verity, by the Light of Faith:
and then the Soul abides in a perfect repose, gently receiving the Divine
Impressions; which enter with so much Conviction, that she is presently warmed
and inflamed with all sorts of Virtues. And though she does not distinctly
practice their interior acts, yet she feels a delightful Joy by the sweetness
of those impressions, and finds her self well aispos'd to be faithful to them
on all occasions.

In Meditation God works with us, but we in a manner do all: in passive Prayer
we cooperate with God, but in a manner the whole work is his. We must not
easily believe that we are in a state of passive Prayer. To be disposed thereto
requires great Purity, and long Practice of Prayer, with the advice of a good
Director, and in the interim to exercise our selves in Meditation.

A Soul elevated to the state of passive Prayer, finds her self united to God,
without any Labor of her own, and receives from him many Lights and
Illustrations, Desires and Affections, according to his various Workings in
her. Then the Soul purely adheres to Grace, holding close to the Infusions of
God's holy Spirit, and follows the Divine Motions, by the Annihilations of her
proper Operations. When she is thus passive and dead to her self, her state
changes not, although her ordinary dispositions may alter; for then she
receives with equal Contentment from the hand of God, Darkness as Light,
Aridities as Comforts, Poverty as Abundance, in a firm Resolution to will
nothing but what pleases God, with an entire Indifferency, and a perfect Death
to her own Operations.

It Is observable in this passive state, that the Soul sometimes remains in
Union with God, and Contemplation of his Divine Perfections, keeping her self
in a profound Repose, as it were without Action: and at other times she acts by
her own Faculties, as it pleases God to excite her to these Acts, her only
business being to submit perfectly to the Motions of Grace, and she acting as
Grace excites her, does not leave her state of Passivity, seeing she only moves
her self according to the Motions of God's Spirit.

A Soul cannot arrive to this passive state, unless she be dead to her self,
unless she be advanced in Virtue, unless her Interior Peace be great and
stable, unless her Prayer be in a manner continual, and unless she be purifyed
from all voluntary Defects. For how can God in such a gracious manner visit a
Soul, which is free from Disquiet and Ordinary Imperfections? How can she hear
the Voice of God amongst the Noise of Creatures, if they live in her with any
Affection? To put our selves into the hands of God, to do with us what he
pleases in our Addresses to him, we must be exactly attentive to his Orders
which he will interiourly make known to us, either by Illustrations in our
Understanding, or Instincts and Motions in our Will.

Perfect Purity of Heart requires, that the Soul have no Eye to her own
Interest, but solely to do the Will of God. Her principal Care must only be to
regard him, to love and serve him, without curiously examining his Gifts and
Graces, she knows well enough that in passive Prayer there are many ways to
come to God, and diverse manners to sacrifice our selves to Divine Love. Some
spend themselves in doing Good to their Neighbor, others in Suffering for
their Faith by the Cruelty of Tyrants, some by Mortifications and Penances,
others by Ardours of Love in Prayer. The Soul must be indifferent to be
sacrificed by Love, what way best pleases God; the Divine will being the sole
Rule of her Choice, and not the Beauty or Perfection of the State; so that when
she knows it is God's Will, a less elevated Condition is pleasing to her.

God is our Father and Directour, operating in us in different manners.
Sometimes he infuses more Light into the Understanding, sometimes more Love
into the Will, so that one Faculty seems to be lost in the other, The Soul must
be content with either, as God pleases, and cease her own Operations, to be
passive to the Actings of God in her by his gracious Motions. A great deal of
Work is done for us by this means in a little time, toward Christian
Perfection.

The Soul that is in this state, must carefully shun two things: the Activity
of her own Spirit, and the Impurity of her Affection. As for the first, our
Spirit is very unwilling to die to it self, but will be acting and discoursing,
we loving much our own Operations: so that we have much ado to conquer our
selves, that we may enter into an entire Passivity, as to be only susceptible
of Divine Motions. The long Habitudes of acting with Liberty hinders this
Annihilation; but we must fight for the Victory, and Grace at last will make it
easy.

As for the second, the Impurity of Affection, we must be perfectly dead to
whatsoever is not God, so as to seek nothing but him, and his good Pleasure,
without any mixture of Self-interests. The infinite Love of God to us obliges
us to be faithful to him; and the Love we ought to have for our own good,
obliges us to spare no pains to attain to Perfection.

CHAP. XIII. Of Pure and Perfect Prayer.
IT much disposes a Soul to attain to pure and perfect Prayer, to give her self
up into the hands of God with an entire Submission to his holy Will touching
this Exercise, to bestow upon her what state he pleases. A Soul that finds
Attracts from God to depend on his Providence, the Matter and Manner of her
Prayer, must receive thankfully what comes from God, whether it be Contemplatio
or Meditation, be it with Delight or Difficulty, with Sweetness or Aridities. A
Soul so purely united to the Divine Will, and dead to all things else,
possesses God in a wonderful manner, not only in Consolations, but Interior
Crosses.

Purity of Prayer, as the present Light I have tells me, consists in a simple
View of God by the Light of Faith, without Discourse or Imagination. Reason and
Imagination have their part in Meditation, but not in pure Prayer. It seems to
me that the Soul ought to be absorpt in God, and remain there in repose, being
dead as it were to her own Operations. This Repose in God is by Knowledge and
Love, whereof sometimes this, sometimes that is more abundant, and affects the
Soul as God pleases.

When God elevates a Soul above ordinary Prayer, to converse with him alone,
she must make it her business to comply with him. The Virtues and Dispositions,
which another time would be the Life of the Soul, are not now, when she must
live no Life but the Life of God, that is of his sole Knowledge and Love,
without any Reflection on her self. God then takes the Care himself of such a
Soul, furnishing her with all necessary Dispositions. Think on me, and I will
think on thee, said Jesus Christ to St. Catherine. In Prayer God infuses into
her practical Lights of no long Durance, but efficacious: and out of Prayer she
receives the same, to be applied to the Practice of most excellent Virtues on
all occasions.

Pure and Perfect Prayer does not consist in Gusts of Devotion, but in the
supreme part of the Spirit in a peculiar manner, that is ineffable. For this
supreme Region of the Soul is the sacred Temple, where God is pleased to dwell,
where she feels and tastes a Sweetness above all created Entities. The Soul
conducted by Faith, and attracted by these Divine Perfumes, finds God in this
his Sanctuary, and converses with him with such a Familiarity, as astonishes
the Angels to behold it. It Is here where she makes pure Prayer, seeing there is
nothing but God and the Soul, without any Creature to interrupt this sacred
Interview, God working all that passes by Himself, without Representations, or
Discourses, or Gusts of Devotion. This supreme part of the Soul being not
capable of sensible Objects, God alone takes Possession thereof, communicating
his Illustrations and Sentiments, which are necessary for a pure Union with him.

Perfect Prayer then is a certain experimental Manifestation, which God gives
of Himself, of his Goodness, Peace, and Sweetness. An admirable Gift, that is
not imparted but to the purest Souls, and ordinarily is but of small
Continuance. But the Condition of Mortality will not permit of more, where we
must live in Humility, Patience, and Sufferings. The Soul returning from these
Divine Embraces, carries away with her great Love, and a high Esteem of God, a
profound Knowledge of her own Imperfections, and finds her self altogether
disposed to act and suffer, and practice pure Virtues on all occasions.

Few persons arrive to this Purity of perfect Prayer, because few make
themselves susceptible of those Divine Motions, by an entire Annihilation of
their own Powers. These great Favors would be more frequently bestowed, if we
had Hearts prepared to recive them; Favors which are of more worth than the
whole World, and cannot be known but by Experience. For my part, I know
nothing, I only have heard say, that in this pure and perfect Prayer, there are
admirable Unions, most intimate Embraces, Ardours of Love, so Pure, as may
almost compare with the Flames of Seraphims.

We come to a perfect Union with God by a perfect Denudation of all Creatures;
and this Denudation is acquired by continual Mortification, and sometimes by
Divine Infusion. We must therefore pray much, and dye daily to our selves and
all Creatures. Since that Original Sin has depraved our Nature, we cannot live
a Life of Grace, without dying a continual Death. When God acts with us in the
Practice of Mortification, we shall soon dye to our selves, for he breaks us
all to pieces on a sudden with wonderful Contrition of Heart, and kills our
Corruptions unknown to us: so that a Soul dies more in one day by the loving
Strokes of his powerful Hand, than she would in some years by ordinary
Mortifications.

Let us therefore adore this Divine and loving Hand which kills us, to make us
live; and never complain but of the little Returns we make for his gracious
Favors. The Loss of Goods, of Friends, of Honors, of Consolations, do much
conduce to bring a Soul to this living Death; for commonly we quit such
allurement, when we lose the materials of those Fetters.

In this Divine Exercise the Soul is wholly taken up with God, without
diverting her Thoughts on any other Object. And though then to reflect on the
effects of Prayer, would be a kind of Distraction, yet without her thinking,
God leaves powerful Impressions in her, and pregnant Dispositions to practice
great Virtues, and above all a love of the Cross and Humiliations, seeing he
cannot possibly please God more than by suffering for Him.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Hungring of the Soul after GOD, and of her being Satiated
with Him.
I Sometimes find my self in a Prayer of Desires, which I may call a Hungring
after God. For my intellectual Will had a strong Appetite for God, without any
Production of other particular Acts of Love or Complacency, etc. as when we
have a longing after Nourishment, without a Desire of this or that, but only we
have a hungry Disposition. In this state the Soul only Thirsts after God, as
known by Faith in a general manner.

This Prayer was very Intellectual, my Natural Appetite had rarely any part in
it; I neither sent up Sighs nor Ejaculations; and it seemed to me to be
compatible with some Affairs, and did continue though the Soul had Distractions
in the imagination and understanding. Methought this Prayer was wholly
Spiritual; for I know not how it came into my Soul, nor what it did there, only
I felt a Hungring and Thirsting after God; and it seemed to me, that I might
still hunger after him, though I did possess him. This Prayer may be of long
durance, without breaking the Brain, but we must be dead to Nature whilst it
continues:

I felt also in my self a Hungring after the states of Jesus Christ, the
possession whereof is absolutely necessary to the Purity of Love, and
Infallibly disposes us to it: Whosoever desires pure Love, must have a desire
of them also; the one not subsisting without the other. Therefore at present
instead of fearing Poverty, I desire it: Instead of Fearing to Suffer, I have
Inclinations to it. And my delight is, to take my Cross, and follow Jesus.

This kind of Prayer did appease Interior Combats and Struglings in me, and I
found in my self some assurance of a Suffering, Humble state, where God will
have us live purely of Him, and for Him. What is more purely for God, than that
which has nothing of self in it? Grace carries us to a Love of Poverty, and
what seems contrary to our particular good, which we relinquish voluntarily,
that we may advance the sole Interests of God. A Soul that lives this Life,
lives in Purity of Love, and participates of the pure Virtues of Jesus Christ.

O what generous Resolutions must a Soul have to Love God purely? She must deny
her self to please God only. There Is no living a Life of Grace, without a
continual violence to our natural Inclinations, by taking up our Cross to
follow Jesus. We confess, O good Jesus, that except your Grace always prevent
and follow us, we shall never relish well this Sacred Hunger of Sufferings, and
Humiliations, and Poverty; which is some small participation of your Abjections.

It often comes to pass, that God, who opens his Liberal hand to fill all
Creatures with his Blessings, is pleased to satisfy this hunger he has raised
in a Soul, by communicating himself to her in such a manner, that she finds her
self wholly contented; and full of God. This fullness of God being once tasted,
the Soul is ravished with Joy and Sweetness. This disposition sometimes so
totally possesses all the Powers of the Soul, Understanding, Will, Memory,
Imagination, that there is no room for other Thoughts to enter, being wholly
taken up with God. Prayer then is a feeling of God filling the Heart with Joy
and Contentment. O when will it please your Infinite Goodness to infuse into
Souls some little participation of this Fullness, that they may purely rejoice
in you who only can give us this satisfaction! This is a satisfying Fullness
indeed, that leaves no place for other desires.

This Prayer is rarely granted unless to Souls much mortified, and well
advanced in the ways of God. For a Soul must be emptyed of all Creatures,
before God can fill it. When a Soul finds her self thus satisfied with God, she
must yield her self passive to the workings of Grace, and she will feel in her
Interior such a content and sweetness, as will render disgustful to her
whatever is not God.

I find this disposition different from that which ordinarily we receive by
Union with God. This satisfaction being a more profound and intimate possession
of God, making all Comforts from Creatures, even most pleasing to us; become
distastful, in comparison of those Joys, that ravished the Soul in this
disposition.

This Satisfaction and Contentment does sometimes Exteriourly show it self, the
Senses being so affected therewith; that if such persons employ themselves
about any sensible object, they do it as if they were a sleep.

The Dispositions God is pleased to give me, increase in me daily a new desire
of Solitude and Contempt of the World; where I find nothing but Impediments to
my Union with God. And seeing all my desires tend that way, whatever diverts me
from it is displeasing to me.

It seems to me, I am now no more fit for Worldly Affairs, and I look upon my
self as an old piece of Household stuff, that is good for little or nothing but
the Fire; for methinks, God would have me do nothing hereafter, but burn with
the Sacred Fire of Divine Love. Or like a poor Criple, who cannot work for his
Living, I must die of Hunger: That is, my Soul having a continual Hunger and
Thirst after God, must die to all things but God himself, her sole repose and
satisfaction.

CHAP. XV. Of Infused Prayer.
OUr Blessed Savior has been so Merciful, as to give me, to my thinking, some
understanding and experience of infused Prayer. In my Morning Prayer I found my
self in the presence of God in silence with Admiration, Reverence and Peace.
This took me up a long time, and though some Temptations arose in Inferior
Nature, yet the Superior part of my Soul remained united to God, without any
prejudice to her Interior quiet. This Peace and Tranquillity was greater than
ordinary, more Solid and more Assured.

I conceive also that what God is thus pleased to infuse into us, be it Light
or Affection, Peace or Love, it is hidden from Deceits of Nature, the
Temptations of Satan, and the noise of Creatures. For God immediately infuses
it into the center of the Soul, without the Ministry of our Senses, and so is
not liable to their onfets and vicissitudes, but always remains entire, as long
as it pleases God to continue his operations.

I also conceive very well, that the Interior of Soul is a Sacred Mansion
where God resides, and does his works Independent on all Humane Industry and
endeavors. There he sometimes manifests Himself and his Perfections, sometimes
Christian Mysteries after what manner he thinks best. It seems to me that the
least Ray from his presence is enough to make known to us what he pleases.
Illuminet vultum suum super nos.

This is a very great favor for God to converse with the Soul alone in her
Interior. I am now no more astonished at what the Saints affirm, that their
heart is a Tabernacle, where God dwells with him, and they enjoy him in a
wonderful manner: Nor that Souls of much Prayer do this without labor, and
almost continually; for receiving so much, and laboring so little, I do not
wonder at the Facility.

The Soul thus conducted into the Cabinet of her Heart, receives a great
discovery of the motions of Nature and Grace, not only ordinary, but those
which are most hard to be discerned. Knowing very well that God Communicates
himself unto her by Infusion, she corresponds to his motions, and becomes
passive to his operations.

The Truths she sees by this infused Light makes deeper impressions, then when
discovered by Meditation. And the Soul conceives far otherwise of Virtues, of
Reformation of Manners, and how to Act and Suffer for God. It seems to her that
now she begins to quit her Natural Inclinations, wherein she continued with
much Imperfection; and becomes more strong and generous, and more resolved to
act for God.

Except I deceive my self, God has been pleased to put me in this state by his
actings in me. But withal he makes me know, that more Purity and Fidelity is
required than ever, by dying to our selves, and the World, to do his Will; and
more Humility by acknowledging our selves unworthy of his Graces; and to return
to ordinary Prayer, when he leaves us in Aridities, and to bear them with
content and resignation. I have seen but a small glimmering of this elevated
Prayer, to make me the more to aspire after a fuller view, to abandon all to
possess this entirely, to enjoy this Happy hour, one moment whereof is worth a
thousand Worlds. Seeing God is pleased thus to favor us, why should we refuse
his Mercies, by detaining our selves in lower Exercises?

I have now no more difficulty to understand, how the knowledge of many
Verities are imprinted in a Soul that is unlearned, and not verst in acquired
Sciences: And how by an Interior Light she sees things without her a far off:
And how she can know the Perfections of God, and her own Imperfections. Here is
the Cabinet of God, all the World does not enter into it, neither is the door
always open. Come my Soul, let us knock at the door thereof with an humble
confidence; if God is not pleased to open it, let us wait there with content
and quiet, and practice Patience. The times of Gods Visits depend only on his
good pleasure.

If the Interior of the heart be not well purified, it will not be disposed to
receive these Infusions and Divine Communications, for Purity and Impurity
cannot agree. I was never so convinced as now, that all things are to be
forsaken to attend to God alone; and for this end to love Contempts, Poverty,
and Sufferings; and that Grace requires of me to obey this Divine Call with
Fidelity, not fearing the Inconveniences of Poverty, but depending confidently
on the support of Providence.

After that a Soul has received the impression of the Divinity in Infused
Prayer, she sees and finds God every where, by a secret of Love, only known to
them who have experience thereof. Love has wonderful piercing Eyes, which rests
not on the outside of Creatures, but passes through to the Divinity that lies
there hidden.

In like manner when the Soul has impressions of Jesus in Infused Prayer, she
sees and finds him every where. For that intimate Communication which Jesus
makes of himself to the Interior Powers of the Soul, so takes them up, that
the Soul sees Jesus in all things, who is the only Object of her Love; to whom
she is so united, as never to suffer a separation. O how great is the Grace of
Infused Prayer, and how Happy is that Soul who is partaker thereof?

CHAP. XVI. Of Prayer of quiet.
BEhold what our Blessed Savior has made me understand by Experience of this
manner of Prayer. In my Prayer I found all my Powers in a Calm, and filled with
great Peace and Sweetness, which proceeded from the Presence of God in my
Interior, whom there I beheld residing and working many Graces. Whilst this
holds the Soul, as it were asleep, in quiet, she rejoices; and this Joy is
infused into her, and hardly knows how she rejoices, feeling only in her
Interior a Sweetness and delightful Tranquillity: yet well perceiving God
works this in her by his Presence.

God likewise gives her great Assurance of his Presence, and experimental
Knowledge that he is infinitely Good, Powerful, Merciful, her only Sovereign
and final Happiness. The Soul perceives well enough, that she now conceives
these things in a more eminent manner than by Discourse, being in a Region of
Light above her Reason. The sacred Repose she takes in God now present, gives
her such an Interior way of knowing and loving God, that she tastes his
Sweetness, and so finds by Experience what he is. A taste of honey teaches
better to know what honey is, than the most learned Discourses of its Nature
and Properties: so the Relish we have of God in this sacred Repose, makes us
know better what he is, than any Discourse in Meditation.

A Soul that has tasted the Sweetness of God, does not find a Relish in
Creatures as formerly. Whilst the Soul tastes the Creature, she ceases to taste
God, and this Cessation is troublsome to a loving Soul.

In this sacred Repose the Soul is taught efficaciously, how to mortify her
Passions, and practice Virtues, for the good of her Neighbor, when Charity
requires it. And it is no small Mortification to her to quit this admirable
Enjoyment to go about exterior Acts of Charity. The Soul that does not taste
the Sweetness of God, knows not this kind of Mortification.

In this state, where the Will is taken Captive, as St. Teresa says, the Soul
fears nothing more than to return to her Liberty. And I can truly say, I know
it is a Punishment, that does not a little affright the Soul. In the Sweetness
of this Prayer of quiet the Soul learns a sublime way to embrace the Bitterness
of Sufferings; to become indifferent to Peace, or War; to Action or
Contemplation; in a word, to desire nothing but God alone: So that other
things, though good and convenient at other times, now are troublesome unto her.

She conceives that these words in the Canticles, Do not awake my Spouse till
she please, do signify thus much, as spoken by Jesus Christ to a loving Soul,
Do not put my Spouse out of this sacred Slumber into which she is cast by my
Presence. And though she much desires the Continuance of this sacred Quiet, yet
it is with a perfect Resignation to the Will of God, to do with her what he
pleases. What she fears most, is least for her Infidelity God should leave her
for another Lover.

When thou feel, O my Soul, God thus working in thee, infusing his Sweetness
in a plentiful manner, dilate thy heart to receive it, and be respectfully
attentive to his Operations in thee; for it is then he is pleased to treat thee
magnificently, and of thy Miseries to make a Throne for his Goodness and
Mercies.

The sensual man has no Experience of these Mercies; he may indeed have some
Idea of them in his Fancy; but they are real things in a well disposed Soul,
and produce in her admirable effects. To have tasted of them once or twice, is
sufficient to make her rich, by infusing into her Understanding a certitude of
the Mysteries of our holy Faith, and inflaming the Will with ardent and solid
affections to practice Virtue. And thus she knows more of God in a Moment, than
before she did in many Months.

By these extraordinary Graces a Soul is more convinced and disposed to suffer
Contempt and Poverty, and leave all things to follow Christ, than by a thousand
discursive Meditations. However God does not cease to communicate these effects
by other ways, as by spiritual Lectures, holy Conferences, Meditations, etc.
But when God is pleased to work all by himself in a Soul, he does much for her
in a little time.

One of the principal Virtues that this state imprints in the Soul, is, To draw
her to God, and keep her with him, so that she is more in Him than her self;
Divine Love being a weight, that always carries her to her Well-beloved. Amor
meus pondus meum.

If a great Prince should send some magnificent Present to one of his poor
Subjects; this would give him more Knowledge of his Prince's Royal Grandeurs
and Bounty, than to send him all the Orators of his Realm, to set forth his
Greatness by their Eloquence. So a Soul knows more of God by the aforesaid
Favors, than by the large Discourses of Famous Preachers.

These extraordinary Favors are not necessary to Salvation, nor yet to
Perfection, but very advantageous to confirm us in Grace. For these more
special Communications work in the Soul this admirable Repose and sweet
Calmness, to dispose her for the Receipt of great Graces, which bring her to a
more intimate Union, wherein she sucks from the Bosom of the Divinity a
Sweetness ineffable, Strengthening, Purifying, and Comforting.

When the Soul is not in this Quiet, let her do what she can, no endeavors of
her can procure it. If God sends it, let us receive it; if he send it not, we
must be patient, and prepare our selves thereto, by the exercise of
Mortificacation and pure Virtue according to the Grace betstow'd upon us:

Having been in this Prayer of Quiet many days, it seemed to me to be taken
from me, for contesting a little with my Friend, to persuade him to prevent
another with a charitable courtesy. O my God, how nice and delicate a thing is
Grace? and the greater the Grace, it is the more delicate. I learn by this
Substraction how poor a thing a Creature is, how unable we are of our selves to
retain Your Graces; and to see that this also proceeds from Grace. I will
hereafter make it my work to love pure Virtue and practice perfect
Mortification.

CHAP. XVII. Of the intimate Union of the Love of the Soul with God in Prayer.
THe wonderful Secrets of this Disposition of the Soul in Prayer can hardly be
expressed, only we may call it The Prayer of Unity of Love; because herein the
Will feels no other Love in her Affections, than that which God has for
Himself. One only Love seems sufficient for God and the loving Soul; it being
enough for her to adhere to him with great Simplicity and Unity with this only
Love, which God has for his infinite Beauties and Perfections.

The particular Love of the Soul is absorpt like a Drop of Water in the
infinite Ocean of his Love by a Union inexplicable; and being so lost is found
more perfect: as a Spark of Fire in a little Coal, cast into a Furnace, gives a
heat infinitely greater, than what it had of it self alone. It seems to the
Soul that she does not love, but God loves himself in her; and in this manner
her Will having such Impressions of the Divine Love, has no other Sentiments
nor Interior Dispositions, than those which God has for Himself. When she
loves God in this manner as he loves Himself, she also hates Sin in the same
manner as God hates it, by this ineffable Union.

In this state of Prayer the Soul receives wonderful Discoveries of the
admirable Wisdom of God, in his Proceedings about the Redemption of Mankind, by
the Life and Death of his Son, so full of Sufferings and Abjection. God loving
Himself, cannot but love the Cross, which satisfied his Justice: and the Soul
cannot but have a Will to suffer, seeing she is in the Unity of Love with God;
which Unity must needs elevate the Soul above Nature. And as the Soul of Jesus
wholly absorpt in the Love of his Father, did rejoice in his Sufferings and
Humiliations: so if we be in the Unity of this Love, Contempts and
Mortifications, Dolours and Death it self will be lovely and desirable, though
quite contrary to our Natural Inclinations:

This Unity of Love does so powerfully constrain us to love Sufferings, that I
make little difference between Love and the Cross: and I see so clearly, that
all the Counsels of Jesus Christ, do so wonderfully advance the Purity of Love,
that no natural Aversion shall deterr me from them. I find in my Heart a tacit
Consent of Love, to abandon my self to Divine Providence, and not to disquiet
my self about Perfection. For I must pacify all the Emotions of my Heart, as
well good as bad* to be in so profound a Peace as to attain this Union.

When God is pleased to communicate to a Soul this Purity of Love, he disposes
her to so great a Favor, by some Sufferings, Crosses, and Humiliations. He
that knows the Riches of true Love, knows these also; for they are inseparable,
so that he who will not suffer, cannot arrive to Purity of Love.

My Prayer then tends to unite me intimately and continually to the only Love
wherewith God loves himself; and my Soul has at present Attracts to nothing
else. In this Love it seems to her she finds the Practice of all Virtues, in a
more excellent manner than in themselves. I know very well that Love is a
weight that continually carries the Soul toward her beloved Object: and my
Will bending always toward God, it moves thither by a longing Inclination,
full of Love and Sweetness.

It seems to me that my Understanding herein, does not with its Lights assist
my Will; for I find my Affections all on fire, and panting after God without
any previous Illustrations. I found me thought Divine Love immediately working
on my heart by such most secret Touches, as put me in a state of perfect Union.

I find nothing to explicate this better than a Needle touched by the Adamant;
which then turns continually by a secret Virtue to the Pole, and is unquiet
till there it fix. Thus it stands with my Soul, being touched, I know not how,
by Divine Love, having no repose but by fixing on God; and parting with all
Creatures, she gently tends to her Divine Center without any Violence, being
sweetly attracted to a perfect Union.

My Understanding in this state sees well enough what passes in my Will and
Affections, but it seems to me to contribute nothing, to work this amourous
Tendency toward God. Not but that sometimes it presents some excellent Truths
to quicken Love, but yet that Truth was there without it. I admire that after
the Visits of Friends I always find my will converted to God, the only center
of my Soul, and I know not how this amourous Inclination is entertained and
preserved in me.

I find by Experience that in this state my Soul is well disposed to practice
all sorts of Virtues, though she make thereof no formal Resolution. After the
Exercise of this Prayer the Soul is extremely in love with Mortification and
Self-denial, desiring nothing but God alone. She understands also, that she
cannot persevere in this happy state without a constant Love of the Cross, of
which she daily becomes more amorous.

I begin this Exercise of Prayer without any other Preparation than Purity of
heart, as soon as I find my self in such a Disposition; for God loving the
Soul, does sometimes prevent her before she perceives it. I continue herein, me
thinks without any Industry or Trouble, provided my Soul be but amorous of
perfect Purity, and faithful to the Practice of Mortification. If I deeeive not
my self, God has been pleased to vouchsafe me this Mercy, and it concerns me to
be thankful, and desire the Divine Goodness to assist me with his Grace, that
my Infidelities may not deprive me of this State and Favor.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Interior Silence, where God speaks, and is heard.
WE can never arrive to this Happy state of Interior Silence, where are the
most secret Communications between God and the Soul, except we pass through
three trials, wherein we find much trouble and bitterness:

The first is the Death of the Exterior Senses, whereby all Sensible Objects
become in a manner distastful to the Soul; for as long as she does amuse her
self with any Sensual Delights, she can never arise to this Elevation. This
general Mortification is so difficult, that the greatest part of Devotes suffer
themselves to be conquered herein, and pass no further.

The second is the Annihilation of the workings of their Interior Senses,
wherein we have such difficulties to conquer, that unless God, who conducts
Souls by his Divine Motions, does strengthen them in this Combat, and bring
about this Interior death by the secret workings of his Grace* they will
quickly loose courage in this attempt.

The third trial is yet more laborious, for we must mortify the operations of
our Spiritual Faculties, the Memory, Understanding, and Will, then which
nothing is more difficult. It Is a long time before the Soul can understand how
this must be done, and longer before she can bring it about. And except God be
pleased to withdraw from the Soul those helps she receives from her own Lights
and Affections, she will never compass it.

In this Combat the Soul meets with a thousand Temptations: As, that we do but
loose our time; that it is no better than pure idleness; and much hinderance
sometimes from Directors, who having no experience of this way, cannot
understand it, much less approve it. Happy is the Soul that meets with a
Director, to strenghthen and encourage her in the difficulties of this passage;
otherwise she will never arrive to this Sacred Silence, unless by some
extraordinary Grace and Favor.

The Soul then thus dead and annihilated, enters into this Sacred Silence; the
beginnings whereof are somewhat bitter, though with a mixture of sweetness, by
a certain experience of the presence of God in the Soul. Which being elevated
above all natural Lights, to behold God by the single Light of Faith, is
assisted by another Light, that seems to participate of Faith and Glory. For it
has something of the Rays of Glory: Not that it is really either this, or that,
but a resemblance of them.

Wonderful are the effects which God produces in the Soul in this state of
Interior Silence. For he deals with her as a Painter does with a Blank
prepared for his Work, where he draws diverse lines as seems best to him. God
sometimes makes a silence in all the Powers of the Soul, keeping them bound in
the dark, but in a disposition to do whatsoever he pleases with them. The
Spirit is a little busy to see what is doing, but being checked, is quiet; and
the Soul having nothing to rely upon, being annihilated in her self, rests
solely on God, reposing her self in him with Patience and Humility. Otherwhile
God puts the Soul without any operation of her own, in great repose and quiet,
neither willing, nor applying her self to any thing in particular, but in a
readiness to do whatsoever God manifests to be his Will. And this seems to me
to be the most usual disposition of the Soul in the state of Interior Silence.

At other times the Soul feels such a Fullness of God, that she seems wholly to
possess him; insomuch that the Senses are partakers of the gusts and sweetness
communicated to them: the Soul in the Interim wholly Mortified, by a constant
readiness to be Sacrificed to the Will of God.

At other times the Soul is wholly taken captive by Divine Love, which giving
her a relish of her Sovereign good, all other things, how excellent soever they
may seem, are but bitter to her.

The understanding here makes no use of the Light of Reason, but God is pleased
to infuse certain manifestations quick and sudden, which work so secretly such
changes in the Soul, that she cannot perceive 'till they are done. At other
times when the Soul is in doubt, or troubled with some disorder, or discouraged
by her own weakness, she finds God showing himself present with her, to
instruct, to quicken, to strengthen, to succor her, according to her present
necessities.

The Soul in this state is disposed to whatsoever God pleases, desires nothing
required of her. God works his will in her, and she is Humble, and Faithful,
and altogether submissive and pliable to his operations. Thus the Soul must
stand affected in respect of God; but she can never come to this without great
Combats continual Deaths, and long Sufferings. However all the Crosses can be
endured in this World, are but a cheap rate to purchase the enjoyment of God
but for a moment.

In this state of Interior silence the Soul cannot prescribe any Law to her
self in her Spiritual Exercises, but wait with all Humility to receive what God
shall give her, and be Faithful in corresponding thereto. Sometimes she
Suffers, sometimes she Acts, either in this or that manner, according to the
Nature of the Divine Impressions.

CHAP. XIII. Of most Purified Contemplation.
ON St. Alexius's Day, our Savior gave me knowledge of a state of Prayer,
wherein at present I must constantly exercise my self, as some Servants of God
advise me, but the reason they tell me I understand not: My Prayer then is a
denudation of all Creatures, where the Soul, as it seems to her, does nothing
but enter into possession of God in a peculiar manner, who works in her what he
pleases, without her knowledge or discovery.

Before the Soul can fix in this state, she must suffer much from her
imagination, which will be still proposing her Representations, Lights, and
Sentiments, according to her usual practice; but the Soul must quit all these
to yield her self passive to the operations of God. Yea, even Spiritual Lecture
at this time proves hurtful, because it keeps up the ordinary way of working in
the Soul. Neither is this to tempt God, seeing he will have the Soul to treat
with him in this manner; and her present disposition thus requiring, she ought
to be Faithful in complying with it.

There be many degrees of this denudation whereof I speak. The first takes from
the Soul what Lights and Affections she got discursive Meditations, to give her
in lieu thereof a more noble knowledge and love of God. The second evacuates
this knowledge, by infusing particular and distinct notions of God. The third,
after our way of conception, is a pure and general knowledge of God by Faith.
The Soul must pass through these several dispositions, as it pleases God to
conduct her therein, and remain in a perfect denudation, adhering only to God
and his good Pleasure:

We must not be discouraged at the difficulties we shall meet with in this
sublime exercise, but prepare our selves to bear the Cross they must endure,
who are called to this state; and contentedly loose our selves, to be found in
God, Doubts frequently arise; for although the Soul in this Prayer has often
assurances of her well doing; yet this sometimes does not appear, and the
humane Spirit, which is wholly blind herein, is much terrified. But when the
Soul thus dies to her self and the World, not by her own, but the operations of
God in her, she is not idle, as she may fear, but disposes her self to receive
the Divine enactions, altogether extraordinary and Supernatural, which are
hindered in her by her own operations. For the Humane Spirit must die, before a
new Supernatural Life can arise in her.

The Soul begins this passive Prayer by having an eye to God in himself,
confused and general: After which she receives Divine Infusions, as God sees
good, or remains suffering in a total denudation, desiring nothing else but to
suffer, seeing she finds at present that this is the will of God. The Soul
cannot well give an account of what passes in her in this state of Passivity;
God working in her and by her what she knows not: Only she sees obscurely, that
all goes well with her in her Interior, and that God is hers, and that
suffices.

And indeed she need not fear, seeing a Soul thus passive, and given up totally
into the hands of God, is more under the Sacred wings of his Protection than
ever, and belonging in a singular manner to his Providence. Nor is it expedient
the Soul should always know this work of God in her, who would but hinder it by
her reflections and complacences; and therefore God keeps often from her
knowledge for her good.

This passive Contemplation cannot be understood but by experience. For God
takes posseossin of the Soul in a much other manner than in active Prayer? It Is
God that works his wonders as he pleases, and the Soul receives the Divine
operations, cooperating therewith in a sort very sublime and Spiritual. For
the Soul is not idle, but acts with a real activity, elevated above her
ordinary manner of working. This is possible, for the Blessed in Heaven are
perfectly passive, and yet very active, their Powers working in a most sublime
manner. By how much the more our Prayer is pure, it appears more passive in
respect of us, who apprehend not things Spiritual, but by the service of our
Senses.

The Soul in this state has daily experience of Divine impressions, not only in
Prayer, but in many other matters; according to that of St. Paul, Spiritualis
homo judicat omnia. The Spiritual man discerns all things. And this is wrought
in a different manner; for sometimes God immediately infuses his Light and Love
into the Soul, without any previous disposition, sometimes by the looking on an
Image; sometimes by bringing to mind some passage in Scripture, we have read
before; sometimes by a Sermon, sometimes by Conference, etc. But it is God
always who works powerfully in the Soul, these Exterior things being only
subservient to his Grace.

The Soul then makes no Acts, but is wholly taken up with God, and his
Perfections, or with Jesus and his states, or the subject given her in Prayer.
I understood not this before this Light was Infused into me, and now my former
Exercises in Prayer seem nothing in comparison. What is it that the Soul
pretends to by her Meditations and Affections, but to unite her self to God?
But when she does already possess him, she needs not but to repose her self in
him, and live in him, and of him, as she desires. And all the Sacraments,
especially the Holy Eucharist, serve only to establish and plunge her more
deeply in God.

Oh, how rarely does a Soul free her self from all her own operations? And yet
that hinders her perfect union with God. She leaves him, to come to him again,
when she had nothing to do but to keep close to him. I observe, that upon my
waking, my Soul has an eye to Jesus Christ, and reposes her self as in his
bosom, by whom she finds her self attracted to the Contemplation of the
Divinity by the Light of Faith. This Divine Idaea of Jesus Christ eclipsed all
the Images of Creatures; and at last my Soul was insensibly lost in a general
and amorous knowledge of God; and afterward she perceived no more of what God
wrought in her, being then environed with Darkness, which clouded the Light of
her understanding.

I also laid aside all Exterior occupations, except such as I saw clearly God
required of me: Spiritual Entertainments, Actions of Charity, Visiting the
Poor, etc. To intermedle much with such like things, does take up the time for
Prayer and Contemplation; which is my chief and principal affair. And as I
ought to serve God in a denudation of all Creatures, so I ought to be
dis-engaged from too many Exteteriour occupations, to treasure up time enough
with Mary Magdalen for the one thing necessary. And because Solitude and
Retirement from Worldly Conversation do much cherish this manner of Life, I
must embrace it as much as possible: But however with a high esteem of the
Exercises of the Active Life, which are excellent in the order of Divine
Providence.

Sometimes the string is to be slakned a little, to divert my Thoughts by
Recreation, or Exterior Actions. I have known Solitaries that have done so,
for the preservation of their Health, and advancement of their Spiritual
Exercises. I know very well that my Life has been too much taken up with
amusements, and therefore now I ought to be more Solitary and retired;
otherwise I shall not be Faithful to the Grace of my Vocation, nor conform my
self to the Will of God. If I have not a great care, the Devil will deceive me,
and make me delay to my own ruin.

CHAP. XX. Of the different Caresses God vouchsafes a Soul in Prayer.
THose who practice Prayer, know by Experience, that God unites Himself to the
Soul in different manners, all most intimate, most pure, and full of Sweetness.
Oftentimes by the pleasing Attractions of his Goodness and Mercy, so delightful
to the Soul, that for the time she in a manner enjoys a Heaven upon Earth*
Sometimes God unites Himself to the Soul by the Rigours of his Justice, trying
her with interior and exterior Sufferings; so that only the supreme part of
the Soul remains united to God, the inferior part being in a Suffering
condition.

Sometimes God unites himself to the Soul by his Sanctity, his Bounty, Power,
and other Perfections; and to the end all these Unions may be pure, it suffices
that the Soul render her self passive to the Operations of God in her; whether
sweet or bitter, comforting or afflicting, with Respect and Affection.

It Is observable, that to live this Divine Life, it is not necessary to find no
Repugnance from sensual Nature; it suffices, if we continue firm in this state
by the Superior part, whether Grace could only advance us, and where we cannot
subsist, but by being dead to all Creatures. He that will live this life, must
resolve to suffer.

All the Interior Commerce between God and the Soul, passes principally in the
Will; the Understanding is not so capable thereof: but the Will receives the
more intimate, more pure, and more perfect Communications, being more proper
for it. The Understanding herein is more liable to Illusions, the Will is more
assured in her way, and the Devil cannot counterfeit what passes in her in the
feelings of pure Love. For the Soul that has experience of the effects of pure
Love, cannot easily be deceived.

From hence it comes, that the Purity of the Will is the principal Disposition
for the Prayer of Union, be it ordinary or more sublime, by the powerful
influences of preventing Grace. This Purity is altogether necessary, God being
not pleased to work these Wonders, but in a purified Soul. And this Purity
consists in willing nothing but Gods good pleasure, being dead to all other
things, contenting her self with the orders of Providence.

God finding the Soul thus purified, especially in her Will, takes up his
mansion in her Interior, where he exercises his Divine Operations, putting her
into diverse states, acording to the different Designs he has upon her.
Sometimes he is pleased to inflame her Affections with Divine Love, and to
kindle this holy fire in her Breast, manifests to her his Divine Perfections.
Other times he puts her upon the Cross, and exercises his Justice for her
greater good. Sometimes he hides himself, the more to purify her, and make her
dye to whatever is not God Otherwhile he gives her Councels to advance her in
Perfection; and then if she has not been faithful to his motions, he gives her
interior Checks of Conscience. Sometimes he enlightens her Understanding to
inflame her Will; and the Soul being retired within her self, finds her Divine
Bridegroom working something in her, to which she is to be purely passive, and
adhere in all simplicity of heart to his gracious Operations.

Being thus retired into the Cabinet of her Heart, she is elevated above her
self and all Creatures; and being united to God, though he send her Sufferings,
she is not taken up with them, but Divine Love: she feels his Caresses, is
inricht with his Gifts, and imploys all her Intellectual Powers to Love and
Glorify her Well-beloved. Here is her ordinary abode, from whence she descends
not to her inferior part, but for necessity, and enjoying the Embraces of her
Divine Bridegroom, she adheres to him by pure Faith and Love, without being
diverted by her Imagination, in intellectual Contemplation.

I cannot but think, that a Mistress of a House, that had a King and Queen in
her Closet, willing to converse with her, would have a care not to divert her
self by other matters, and quit them to wash dishes in the Kitchen. What
strange Incivility would this be? yea, what Infidelity would it be in a Soul
that is honored with the Presence of God in the Cabinet of her Heart, to have
her near himself, to converse with her, and to ravish her with these Spiritual
Delights which are ineffable? Souls that are thus favored of God, if they quit
him for exterior Employments, and temporal affairs, neglecting the Presence of
the King of Glory for some inconsiderable Business, by this strange Neglect or
Contempt of his special Favors, must needs be guilty of deep Ingratitude

O my Soul, be thou faithful to the Divine Calls; thou art too much favored of
God, considering thy too frequent not complying with his Graces. He calls thee
to himself, his Attracts are powerful and sweet; let us quit Temporal things,
and leave them to who will take them: fear not, we shall want nothing having
God in possession. If Divine Providence dispense to us with so liberal a hand
the great Favors of God's Spiritual Graces, let us not think he will deny us
his lesser blessings, which concern the Body, and are as nothing in comparison.
Let us betake our selves to Prayer, and never leave it, for that is our great
and sole Affair.

The End of the Seventh Book.
BOOK VIII. Some Maxims of great Importance to conduct us in a Spiritual Life.
CHAP. I. To have above all things an extreme Horror of Sin.
THere is nothing of greater Concern to us in this World, than to manage well
our Love and Hatred, to which Passions our Will principally owes her Motions.
Our Love ought wholly to be fixed on God, who is an infinite Good, and our final
Happiness. Our hatred ought to have no other Object but Sin, which is an
infinite evil and utter ruin of our Souls. Love makes all things easy, and
what is done with great Love, is of great value in the sight of God. Who knows
to love cordially, knows how to do whatever God requires of him, seeing Love
includes in it all Perfection. Hatred also makes all things easy, for from a
torrent of Hatred commonly flows, an inundation of evils. He who really and
from his heart hates an infinite Evil, that is, Sin; will be revenged on
himself by severe Penance, and fly from it with such a Horror and Detestation,
that he would sooner cast himself alive into Hell, than commit a Sin that
breaks Friendship with God.

A Soul that sees clearly the enormous Malignity of Sin, and how it fights
against the great God of Heaven and Earth, to annihilate Him, if it was
possible, will easily conceive an implacable Hatred against Sin, and abhor it
to the utmost with an irreconcilable Enmity; knowing well, that Sin can only
separate her from God her final Happiness. This hatred ought to possess the
Soul with permanency and such extensions, as not only to preserve her from Sin,
but even from Passions and occasions thereof, and whatever may induce us to
evil. In a word, we detest Sin above all things detestable in our selves and
others also, interiourly bewailing the Unhappiness of our mortal Condition, in
which we so often offend God, and are in danger to lose him. I knew a virtuous
Soul, whom God had made so sensible of the horror of Sin, because injurious to
God, that she perfectly detested it, with ardent Desires never more to commit
any. She did with continual Prayers and Tears, implore the Divine Majesty to
preserve her from it; offering her self to suffer any thing, yea, the pains of
Purgatory, or Hell it felf, if it was necessary, rather than commit a Mortal
Sin, to which no evil can be compared. She understood that Sin is a Rebellion
against God, and injurious to him: but that all the Pains we can endure, either
in Time or Eternity, are but evil to the Creature; and all Creatures being as
nothing in comparison of God, all the evil of Punishment they are capable to
endure, has less Malignity in it than one only Sin.

And seeing the Divine Justice has not ordained the pains of Purgatory or Hell
but for the Chastisement of Sin committed, she desired they might work in her
this good effect, as to serve her for a Remedy against Sin, so as never to
commit it, saying to God: Lord, you justly punish Sinners, because they have
offended your infinite Majesty; punish me in mercy, that I may not offend you.
In others the pain is the Punishment of Sin preceding, and the greater is the
Sin, the greater is the Punishment; but dear God, of your great Goodness grant
me this singular Favor, that the pain in me may prevent Sin, so that the
Chastisements which I should have deserved for my Offenses, if I had committed
them, I may suffer before hand; not because I have committed them, but to
preserve me from offending your sacred Majesty.

By this means, O my God, your Interests are secured, you shall receive neither
Offense nor Injury; the Creature only shall suffer something. But what is all
the Interest of the Creature in comparison of yours? If the pains be too few
which such Sin would have merited, inflict on me what Punishments You please,
provided you preserve me from falling into Sin so injurious to You.

This so noble and generous a Resolution could not proceed but from the pure
Love of God, and from the perfect hatred of Sin; and in both respects must
needs be in a high degree well pleasing to God, and we may very well believe,
that God bestowed on such a Soul very wonderful Graces.

CHAP. II. To keep an even pace with Grace, neither out-running it, nor
following too slowly.
IT is our Unhappiness that either we do not act answerably to the full power
of what Grace we have received, by the repugnance of our Sensuality, or by our
natural Levity and Inconstancy of Mind: or on the contrary, when the Heart is
heated with the Fervor of Devotion, we will force Grace beyond her strength,
by undertaking extraordinary Exercises and Austerities prejudicial to us. It Is
our duty to shun both these Extremities, to correspond faithfully to what the
Grace we have can do: and also to be humbled in consideration of that little we
have received, offering up to God those motions of natural Love, which carries
us to things extraordinary above our Abilities. Not but that we ought daily to
desire the Increase of Grace and Divine Love in us, but it must be with
Humility and Resignation, without Interior Disquiet, well knowing that we can
never advance in Grace by the strength of nature.

What hinders us from fully corresponding to the motions of Grace, are some
secret attaches to Creatures, our affections being not thoroughly purifyed. For
when Grace acts in a Soul wholly dis-ingaged from the world she gives up her
self fully to God's Conduct, and moves toward him as her Center with more
violence than a stone held in the Air, being let go, would descend to the Earth
I say with more violence; for God being a Center of Infinite Goodness has more
powerful attractions, than the finite Center of the Earth. The nearer any thing
approaches to its Center, the faster it moves: so the Soul hastens to the
greatest Union with God, by how much the more she approaches to him with
inflamed Affections.

But we must have a care not to advance too speedily to the elevated states of
Perfection, whether as yet the Grace we have does not invite us. Oftentimes we
would rather regulate our selves by the Graces we see in others, than our own:
for observing them do wonderfully well in perfecting themselves, and profiting
others, we will needs follow their example; and this may sooner proceed from a
natural desire of our own excellence and esteem, then from a motion of Grace,
and to please God. And so we put our selves out of the way, going rather back
than advancing, we will be following their ways, and not walk in that where
Grace has put us. It concerns us therefore every one to observe and follow
faithfully the Attracts of that Gracethey have received; for what have we to do
with the Graces of others which make a glorious show, and to which we have not
a Call from God?

The Beauty of Christianity is not in the Outside; for the greatest Saints seem
sometimes more despicable than others, but interior Graces, Omnis Gloria
Filiae Regis ab Intus, which working wonderfully in them, makes them in love
with Contempt and Poverty, with Pains and Sufferings, whereby they become like
to Jesus, poor, despised, suffering and forsaken. Behold herein the Essence,
Life and Heart of Christianity. For it is in his Suffering Saints that God works
the most admirable effects of Grace; and he takes the greatest delights in
them, because they are so many Copies of his Well-beloved Son in small
Characters. But here lies the mystery, that a Soul suffer her self to be in the
hand of Grace as soft Wax, pliable to her Impressions, and faithful to follow
her Directions. To be faithful, I say, to be faithful to the Motions of Grace,
is all in all in a Spiritual Life.

CHAP. III. That a Soul must wholly give her self up to God.
IT highly concerns us to keep close to the Conduct of God's holy Spirit; and
not confide in our own abilities, which may quite destroy the work of God in
us: What can a poor creature do, if the Sovereign Creator work not his will in
us! All the Solicitudes and Contrivances on our part are not so prevalent, as
to abandon our selves wholly to God, by whose Grace we are what we are, and
without which we are nothing but Frailty and Infirmity. It is best with us,
when we have in our Prospect and Affection God alone and his good Pleasure,
being content with whatever he pleases to give, either for Soul or Body.

In this state a Soul goes on very well in all affairs, for an indifferency to
the good pleasure of God, does not at all hinder her Cooperation, whether it
be to act with God in Prayer, or exterior Employments. God by this means works
in the Soul a disposition to enjoy or suffer, of Action or Contemplation, of
Darkness or Light, as he pleases. For then she desires to do nothing of her
self, but to follow entirely the Attracts and Motions of God's Holy Spirit.

A Soul that sets her self a work without an eye to God and her Interior, is
imprudent, for what she so undertakes, is of no value, in that she does not the
will of God; but withdrawing her self from her necessary Dependence, endeavors
as it were to conduct God, when she ought only to be conducted by him. If we
were sensible of our misery herein, we would be afraid of our selves,
Self-confidence is a thing so formidable, and we should discover a continual
disorder in all proceedings, except in those wherein we have an eye to God, and
are industrious to conform our selves to his Divine Pleasure.

When a Soul has fully given up her self to God, she receives Interior
Irradiations from Heaven, by which she discovers what she ought to do, and what
God requires of her; and so is not disquieted with solicitous Thoughts, but
walks on securely in the ways of Perfection. For this Abandonment preserves
this Interior Light, which daily directs her in the Knowledge of God's Will,
to do her Actions with Interior Purity. As the Light of the Sun guides us in
our ways, without which we should take one thing for another: so the rays of
Grace discover to us what God would have us do, and if the Soul should not be
thus enlightened, she would wander in the dark, and our poor Life go on without
the Conduct of God in Mysts of Misery and Infidelity. The common Life of
Christians is more guided by the Light of Reason, than the Light of Grace; but
those that live by Faith are Interior Christians.

CHAP. IV. We ought to make it our Business to be content to Suffer.
IF we will follow the ways of Virtue in this earthly Pilgrimage, we must be
content to suffer continual Mortifications, lead what Life we will, be it
Active, or Contemplative. In the Active Life spending our selves for the good
of others, if we be not in a Disposition to sacrifice our own Wills with a
Spirit of Resignation, while we would profit others, we shall endammage our
selves; for we must expect to meet with Crosses and Occasions of Patience, for
which if we be not prepared, we shall without doubt fall into many
Imperfections. Yea, in the Sweets of Contemplation we shall find some Thorns as
well as Roses, to put us in mind of our Suffering Condition. In a word, the
Union with Jesus Christ crucisyed is the perfectest Union we can attain in this
Life.

When Jesus Christ conducts his Saints to Mount Tabor, they in a manner are out
of themselves being ravished with the Glimmerings of Glory, but upon Mount
Calvary they receive the best Impressions of Perfection. It Is requisite a Soul
should have a view of the Beauties of Jesus, before she see and feel the
Horrors of the Cross, lest she should be scandalized at this last state, and
her Palate should not relish the bitterness thereof. Spiritual Infants stand in
as much need of Milk as Corporal. Our heavenly Father does not take his
Children from the Breast, 'till he sees them strong enough, and capable of more
solid Food. He lays the first Dispositions of a Spiritual Life in the Sweetness
of Enjoyments; but he compleats it in the Bitterness of Sufferings. That which
makes us professed Christians, is Faith and Baptism: but the Cross and Sufferings
make us practical Christians: and the greater they are, being born with the
Christian Patience and Resignation, they advance us higher in Perfection.

We ought not then to fear Crosses and Sufferings, but rather embrace them with
Peace and Affection. And we must hold this for a Maxim, that we advance in the
way to Perfection, according to the Degree of Mortification and Self-denial,
which we cannot attain but by a Suffering Life. Let us therefore above all
things abandon our selves to the Divine Providence, desiring nothing but by the
pure will of God, without troubling our selves at what happens to us.

It Is no just matter of Astonishment to see in this world the ways of the Just
beset with Thorns and Briars of Affliction, and the wicked to abound with
worldly Comforts in Beds of Roses. Those who will have no portion in the Joys
of Heaven, have refreshments in this world, and find here their Paradise, to
recompense that little good they have done among those many evils they have
committed. But such who are preserved from Eternal Pains, have their Souls
purifyed in this Life in the Furnace of Affliction, from those stains they have
contracted, which else would somewhat darken the Beauty of their virtuous
Actions. Thrice happy are they, who by the Sufferings of this Momentany Life,
have just Cause to hope they shall never suffer everlasting Burnings.

CHAP. V. To renounce our selves wholly, and strive against our proper
Inclinations.
WHosoever designs to be wholly for God, must likewise endeavor to curb the
Motions of his Interior and Exterior Senses, which have not their Rise from
Grace, but Nature: yea all such like Thoughts and Desires, and the Objects of
our own Will, which we in Prayer mingle with those Communications God is
pleased to work in us by heavenly Visits. But above all we must have a care to
desire nothing without an entire Resignation and Submission to the Will of God,
which ought to be the sole Rule of all our Actions and Intentions.

Hence it proceeds that we have no Will to serve God, but as he pleases,
according to the manner and designs of his Providence; and when God will
vouchsafe us nothing extraordinary in a Spiritual Life, we sit down content
with Peace and Humility. For we are dead to our Selves, to be living only to
God's good Pleasure, which is the Soul of our Souls, our Riches, our Grandeur,
our Perfection and Blessedness.

To renounce our own Will, and all means which our own Industry presents as
most excellent, and give our selves up purely to the Divine Guidance, conduces
very much to Perfection. To renounce our Judgment, and follow the sentiment of
others as better in works of Piety, so as voluntarily to act but with
Dependence, is a means to mortify by degrees, our own Will and Affections. If
we be content that our Defects should be made known, we shall glorify God with
the Love of Abjection. We get no good but rather hurt by our Defects concealed,
but we may draw much good by their Manifestation, if so be they work our
greater Humiliation.

We ought to remain in a Disposition of Selfdenyal and Humility in the Presence
of God, and desire nothing but the pure Ordination of his Will, who can make us
poor or rich in Grace as he pleases. A Soul that receives excellent Graces and
Gifts from God, ought not to rejoice in the abundance of such Favors, but her
whole content ought to be in the pleasure that God takes to be so bountiful to
his Creatures so unworthy of his Blessings.

Wretched is that man, who has less care of his Soul than his Body, loving more
to follow the Inclinations of Sensuality, than the Inspirations of Grace.
Wretched is he who is all for the good things of this Life, a good House, good
Apparel, good Provision, etc. and is content to have a bad Soul. Wretched is he
who by his vicious Course of Life makes himself the most contemptible thing of
his whole Family. For he who forsakes God to follow his Sensuality, is in worse
state than the meanest Creature. O sad condition!

Believe it is far more easy to command our Passions than obey them, to conquer
our natural Inclinations, than to satisfy them: and therefore more pleasant to
walk in the ways of Salvation than Perdition. It Is a wonderful Punishment to
suffer the continual Lashes of a guilty Conscience: an unspeakable Torment to
have our Hearts always terrified with the Judgment of God hanging over our
Heads, with the fears of Death which is uncertain, and the horrors of Hell,
which cannot be avoided by such who neglect the Service of God, and die in
their sins. To become slaves to the World and our passions, and vicious
Inclinations, most cruel and ungrateful Tyrants, and to have no repose, nor
contentment, not one only moment of true solid joy, is to suffer a Hell in
time, before that of Eternity.

We shall find nothing to be compared to the way of Heaven; the yoke of our
Blessed Savior is Easy, his Burden Light, his Will is Lovely, his Helps are
Powerful, and the Consolations wherewith he refreshes the Souls of his Servants
so abundant, that they are far more Happy with their Crosses, than Carnal Men
with all their Worldly Delights and Pleasures.

CHAP. VI. How to Comport our selves well in Superiority.
JEsus be your Light, and your guide, and your support in Superiority. To be in
this condition seems to some troublesome and insupportable; because things do
not succeed as they desire, but believe themselves to be a hindrance to the
increase of Grace in the Souls of their Subjects, who might have been better
governed by a Person more capable and advanced in Perfection. It Is indeed well
said, and the pretense is specious; and yet notwithstanding all this may
proceed from Self-love, and desire of our own excellence. Prostrate thy self at
the feet of Jesus Christ, and if he dart into thy Soul Divine Irradiations,
thou will discover the Truth of what I have said herein. That little
resignation we have to the Ordinations of God, create these troubles in us, God
only expects from us such a certain measure of Glory, and we are for rendering
more than he requires of us: It Is our Happiness not to conform our wills to
Gods good Pleasure, touching the manner of Glorifying himself; what pleases
him, does not content us. He will have us glorify Him by Suffering, and we are
for Action; We are for giving Alms, and He for receiving; in a word, we do not
entirely conform our selves to the pure will of God.

We ought not to perplex and disquiet our selves with the Defects and
Imperfections of those with whom we live, and are under our charge. They are
Mortal and infirm Creatures, and not Angels, and to expect they should be
faultless, is to look for Impossibilities, and flatter our Impatience, which
would have no occasion of displeasure. This is but to afflict our selves for
the loss of our own esteem, which appears by our ill conduct in such small
matters: And yet we pretend only to seek Gods Honor, and the good of Souls.
Those who truly seek the Glory of God, sometimes are troubled; but it is a
displeasure joined with Peace and Tranquillity, yea, abounding with influences
of Heaven and Divine Love. A displeasure that rather increases than takes away
the Peace of the Soul, and disposes her to a perfecter union with God, and to
the practice of all Christian Virtues.

I know no better means to be humbled in our own eyes and in the sight of
others, than the miscarriages that arrive by our manifold Imperfections. If I
do a good Action, for which others think the worse of me, I shall not seem so
to my self: But if I shall fall into a gross Imperfection, which neither I, nor
others discover, how shall I be ashamed, and learn thereby a lesson of
Mortification? When Nature is surpised, and as it were amazed to see her own
Frailties, what prop can she find to uphold her Ambition? She must needs be
humbled by this means, and so draws much good from evil.

Who are we that we should presume to think that out pains and industry can add
any thing to augment God's Glory? Know we not that he is Self-sufficient by
reason of his Infinite Perfections, and therefore so replenished with his own
Glory, that all the Glory Creatures can render to him is nothing in comparison?
Alas! the greatest Saints in this respect can truly say they are unprofitable
Servants All Creatures are obliged to serve their Creator, it is their Duty, and
not to do it, makes them guilty; but this brings no profit to God, who is no
less nor more Happy in Himself thereby; but only from hence it proceeds that he
bestows on his Servants great and glorious rewards.

For my part I would never afflict my self, nor be discouraged for not doing
all the good I desire and ought to do in the charge incumbent on me; but
instead of being troubled with my own Insufficiency, I would rejoice in the
All Sufficiency of God. O my God, what complacency do I take to see you so Rich
and so All-sufficient! I am well content with my weaknesses, seeing they make
it more evident, that you stand not in need of your Creatures. O beautiful Sun,
enriched with an Infinite Light live Happy in your self, absorp'd in your own
Beams, nothing can alter your Felicity. For all the Sins of Men or Devils,
though they offend you, yet do not hurt you; no more than dirt cast against the
Sun, would darken his Splendors in his Highnoon Glory. When I consider the
defects in my self, and the faults I have not hindered in others, either for
want of zeal or capacity, I will exercise my mind in such Thoughts as these: O
my God, your Beauty is not Sullied hereby, nor your Glory darkened, nor your
Mercies diminished, I know it is my Duty to be sorry for what Sins offend your
Majesty: But likewise I ought to rejoice that you are immutable in your self,
and your Blessedness cannot be disturbed by our Iniquities.

CHAP. VII. That we ought to have our Intentions Purified from all
Self-Interest.
THe Soul that seeks purely to please God, ought to be content with all designs
of Providence whatsoever, whether of Mercy, or Justice, giving her self up
wholly into the hands of God, to deal with her as seems best pleasing to him.
For ought she knows, it is best for her to be afflicted, and therefore she
willingly submits to Gods chastisements, rejoicing thereat, and Blessing him
for them: Yea, if she may but bring Glory to God thereby, she is content to be
cast into Hell. In this state her Love is wholly centred in God; and she gives
her self up to the rigours of Justice, that she may be entirly Sacrificed to
Gods Glory, which is an Intention pure from all Self-interest.

An indifferency to any state does possess that Soul which has a well purified
Intention, with a perfect resignation to the good pleasure of God, to remain
content with her present condition, being satisfied with whatsoever portion of
Grace she has received with profound Humility and Mortification. Being thus
disposed she has no mind to any thing but what pleases God, and does that
Faithfully; and by this means obtains wonderful Peace of Conscience, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.

To Will nothing but what God Wills, requires a great degree of Mortification
and being dead to all Greatures; for this is the highway to the Purity of
Divine Love. What did the Ancient Hermits search for in the Deserts, but by a
perfect denudation of all Creatures to arrive to the Perfection of Divine Love?
Let us fear and sigh to see our selves so engaged and beset with several
Temptations in the World. It Is a hard matter but some or other may cease upon
us, and rob us of that perfect poverty of Spirit, which puts us in full
possession of God alone.

It Is a special favor of God to have a vocation to the Poor and Abject states
of Jesus Christ: And it is no small Grace, when God conducts us to them by a
Happy necessity, with little noise or stir to call the eyes of others upon us.
It Is well enough if the Soul consent purely to the Ordinations and events of
Divine Providence.

CHAP. VIII. A Conference clearing many difficulties touching Prayer.
Qu IN what consists precisely good mental Prayer? I find many sorts thereof in
Books. The Saints have practiced it with much difference, and yet all so good,
that I am taken with them. To which of them shall I betake my self?

Ans. The ways of Souls in Mental Prayer are so wonderful various, that it is
best for every one to hold to that which they find most proper for them: Or
else they will loose their time in a wilderness of Thoughts without Spiritual
profit. Hence it is that in Mystical Authors we seldom meet with what is proper
for every Soul. And though we find very sublime and solid Verities concerning
Prayer in the Writings of St. Teresa, Blessed John de la Croix, and others; yet
they have but described their own experiences, and not how the case stands with
other Souls, unless a light discovery in some things agreeable to their
illuminations. Such Instructions are good to read, but not exactly to be
followed, so as to conform our selves entirely to their manner of Prayer. We
shall find in such Books matter very profitable, and it is time well spent in
Spiritual Lectures, and not without delight to Virtuous Souls.

Qu. From whence proceeds these different manners of Prayer, seeing there is but
one Sovereign and single Verity in God to be known, one Sovereign good to be
Loved; and Charity being of the selfsame Nature in all Souls, one would think
there ought to be a great conformity among all those who know and love God.

Ans. That which makes so many different manners of Prayer arises from the
different manner of knowing God: Some conversing with him by Meditation and
humane Ratiocination: Others receive from God Heavenly irradiations above the
Powers of Reason, by which he manifests himself immediately to the Soul, as the
Sun by his Beams: Others contemplate God by the obscure Light of Faith in an
ineffable manner, which is a kind of feeing him without seeing him. These
different manners of treating with God, make not only different manners of
Prayer, but cause also much diversity in every manner. For example, in the
Prayer of Faith, which seems more simple than the other, there are many degrees
which represent to the Soul different views of God and Divine matters. When
Faith is seated in an understanding well purified from Images and alien
Representations, she then discovers God more sublimely, as he is in himself,
though but in a manner negative, general and confused, yet efficacious to work
in the heart a great esteem of God, and ardent Charity.

All Books, and Sermons, and Conferences, will not satisfy a Soul advanced to
this kind of knowing God: For those manners of speaking and conceiving God,
seem to her too full of Imperfection. Faith wholly purified, contents her self
with having an eye to the Light of Glory, which discovers God in his Infinity,
although but obscurely; and according to the measure that Faith is more or less
pure and simple, these discoveries are more or less perfect.

Qu. Are all sort of People capable of these sublime manners of Prayer, and if
any one desire to attain them, by what means must he go about it?

Ans. The gift of Prayer is not proper for all People; yea, some great Saints
have never had it; as some good Servants of God, who have become Holy in the
Exercises of an Active Life, which would not afford them much time for
Contemplation, and accustomed themselves to the ordinary method of Meditation;
which is good and advantageous for such Souls, whom God calls not to a more
sublime way. Those whom God favors with the extraordinary gift of Prayer, do
possess an inestimable Treasure, and with this only Grace, which is the source
of many more, they are rich enough; though never so poor in things of this
Life. But seeing it is the mere gift of God, I account it Folly and Rashness to
think we can bring our selves to the sublime state of Contemplation, unless God
elevate us by his immediate work and special favor. All that we can do
therein, is to dispose our selves by corresponding Faithfully to the motions of
Grace, by dying daily to our Natural Inclinations in the practice of
Mortification, and leave God to do the rest. Except God build the House, they
labor in vain, who think to raise the Edifice by their own Abilities.

Qu. A Soul established in a sublime manner of Prayer, and that has a long
time practiced it, can she easily fall from this state?

Ans. If such a Soul gives her self over to her Sensual Inclinations, and
commit gross Imperfections, becoming Faithless to Gods Holy Inspirations, she
may fall from it. But it is very credible, she will return to it: For she cannot
long endure the loss of so great a Happiness, without forcing her self by her
Humiliations and Penitences to recover her former state: And as much as she
dies to all Creatures, so much she advances to God. But she can never attain it
without Practice a Fidelity; and therefore it highly concerns her to free her
self from too many Worldly Affairs, and love Retirement. Notwithstanding those
which God requires of us, as belonging to our Duty, will not hinder us from
arising to such a degree of Prayer, as God has prepared for us from all
Eternity.

Qu. The most elevated and perfect Prayer is not without Darkness and
Privations, and sometimes perplexed with Interior Crosses and Desolations: But
is there not a state of Light and enjoyment to be attained here, wherein the
Soul may possess God clearly and peaceably without any disturbance?

Ans. No, the permanent state of Enjoyment is reserved for Heaven. In this Life
indeed we are visited without Divine Irradiations, and Glimmerings of Glory,
but they are only now and then, and transient. The term of this Life is working
Time, and not of Rest; for acquisition, not possession; where the Soul may
daily purchase new Graces, and advance her self in Prayer, according to her
progress in Virtue and Purity, by being Faithful to the Calls of God on all
occasions. Gods usual way is to make Souls pass through Darkness, Temptations,
Derelictions, Desolations, Exterior and Interior Sufferings, to come to a
good Stock of Virtue, and a higher degree of Purity, which raises them to a
more sublime state of Prayer. And being exercised some way or other to raise
them nearer to Heaven by Spiritual Ascensions, they at length leave Time to
meet with Eternity. Neither must we wonder to see the ways of the Just thus
beset with Thorns and Briars; for this is expedient to advance them in
Perfection and Divine Love.

Qu. How much time must we employ daily in Prayer, if we mean to Profit
thereby, so as to attain Perfection?

Ans. We cannot much advance in Prayer without a long and constant usuage of
this Divine Exercise; it is not enough to do good Works, but we must spend some
Hours in our daily Devotions. It Is by Prayer we advance in the ways of God, and
not otherwise. We must be careful to employ much time in the Exercise thereof,
if God calls us to it, and not apply our selves to the Active way: Let us not
be too Sollicitous to discharge our other Obligations; for a Soul in the state
of continual Prayer, performs readily what she ought on all occasions. When the
time comes for Confession, she is presently all dolorous Love and Contrition.
When she Communicates, she is all Humility, all Desire, and flaming Affection.
When she is to correct, she is all Sweetness and Charity. When she is to help
her Neighbor, she is all Zeal and Love. When she must act for God, she has an
intention purified from all Self-Interest. And all this she performs in Virtue
of Prayer, as it were without distinct Acts, but habitually and in an excellent
sublime manner, by the special operation of Gods Holy Spirit; and not by
Meditations or Considerations, which are means only to find God. A Soul that
thus once has laid hold on God, does take her repose, and rest in him, making
it her only business to Love and Worship him in Spirit and Truth.

FINIS.

