A SERMON Preached before the CONVOCATION OF THE Bishops and Clergy OF THE
Province of Canterbury at Westminster, November. the 18 th. 1689. By WILLIAM
BEVERIDGE, Archdeacon of Colchester.

Printed in Latin By the Bishops Command.

Made English by J. G. a Member of the Church of England.

Let ancient Customs still take place. Syn. Nic. Can. 6. Licensed and Entered.

London, Printed for N. R. and J. Bullord at the Old Black Bear in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

Dr. BEVERIDGE's SERMON Before the CONVOCATION ENGLISHED.

TO THE AUTHOR.
Reverend Sir,
PERVSING your Learned Discourse, lately Preached before the Sacred Synod, and
finding in it such admirable Matter, so harmoniously handled, and so suitable
to this present Age, wherein the best Church, and Religion in the World would
be in great danger of being Crucified, like their blessed Author, were they not
maintained, and defended by such Props, as You, I thought 'twou'd not be amiss
to render it into English for the benefit of those, who understand not the
Latin Tongue, and being well assured, 'twou'd be very acceptable to the English
Reader, as coming from You, whose known Candor, and Sweetness of temper (I
doubt not) will pardon my presumption in this Attempt, which I fear, has not
escaped the too common fate of all such sublime, and excellent Subjects, which
is, to be foul'd, and sullied by ill Version. However such as it is, it is
humbly presented by him, who is

SIR, Your most devoted Servant, J. G.

A SERMON Before the CONVOCATION, etc.
1 Cor. XI.16. But if any Man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God.
WITH what, and how great Controversies the Church of England now adays is
exercised, and with how potent, and likewise malicious Enemies surrounded, we
all indeed see and grievously resent; but no wonder, considering we are well
assured, that this has been almost the constant, and perpetual fate of Christ's
Church, wheresoever constituted. For if we peruse all the Ecclesiastic
Histories, derived down to us from the very times of the Apostles, we shall
find no Age, wherein the Catholic Church has not been molested, either by
Heretics, or Schismatics, or both together. That is to say, Tares are sown by
the Enemy near the Wheat in the Lord's ground, and they will grow together till
the harvest. But truly such is the love of our God to his Ground, such the
benevolence of the Almighty toward his Church, that he will never permit the
Wheat to be suffocated by the Tares, the Evangelical Doctrine by Heresy, and
Discipline by Schism. And therefore we have no reason to fear our Church's
sustaining so many Assaults of its Adversaries, seeing it is buoyed up by an
omnipotent God, as a pure, and sound Member of his Universal Church. But truly
the purer, and sounder our Church is, and therefore more acceptable to God, the
more, and fiercer Enemies it has among Men, who from one side to the other set
themselves wholly against it, and if they cannot destroy, at least Endeavor to
disturb it. For on the one hand Popish Priests, on the other Sectaries traduce,
slander, and wound it in their words, and actions; they try all ways to obtrude
their new Fangles and Ceremonies on us, and that so they may either utterly
pull down, or corrupt our Church.

But we in the mean while relying on Divine assistance, fly to God alone, daily
beseeching him in the name of his only begotten Son, that he would vouchsafe to
defend, and maintain a Church of his own making. And he has been so propicious
to our Prayers, contrary to our Deserts, in wonderfully delivering Us at least
from one sort of our Adversaries, to wit, the Popish Recusants, and has given
us reason to hope, that they will never be capacitated again to molest our Church.

But even now one part remains, who though seemingly of the same Faith, and
Doctrine, yet being seduced either by Ignorance, or Error, or peradventure some
scruple of Conscience, allege I know not what crimes against the Discipline,
and Rites of our Church, and for that reason refuse Communion with us in God's
Worship. And it is strange, how great mischiefs may arise from this apparently
small beginning? For hence it is that Altars are erected against Altars; hence
proceed Factious Tumults, and Mutual Hatreds among Brethren; hence it is that
God's Worship is neglected, and the very Sacraments, one being thrust into
corners, the other seldom celebrated; hence it is, I am amazed to speak, that
impious words are rashly spoken against God, and against all Religion, as if it
rather did afford matter for Discord, than Peace; hence lastly those popular
calamities, which threaten both Church, and State, and thereupon perpetually
disquiet both.

Now that some remedy at length may be opportunely applied even to these
diseases, His most Serene Majesty has been pleased, doubtless by Divine
inspiration, to assemble the Bishops, and whole Clergy of this Kingdom, that
they may consult by what methods these pernicious differences may at last be so
composed, our Church loosing nothing of its Purity, and Glory, nothing of its
Authority, and Right, that they who dissent from us, may be reduced to our Holy
Communion, or at least remain for ever destitute of all reasons, I don't say
just, which they never had, but of all specious colors, which hitherto they
have pretended for their Separation.

I confess, that this is a great, and very difficult undertaking, but as pious
as necessary, and therefore worthy of the utmost endeavors of our Clergy. And
how great soever the Labor and Work may seem, although not less than to strive
against the Stream, yet we must not despair, if so that God be present, and
influence our undertakings? And indeed we have so ofteen experienced his
singular Providence in defending our Church, that we have no reason to doubt,
but that He will be present and propitious to our Importunities for it; whilst
all things are directed according to His Divine Will revealed to us in Holy
Writ: Which both we and our Dissenting Brethren hold to be the Supreme Rule,
whereby all Ecclesiastical Controversies are to be judged.

Now if we consult these Sacred Oracles, we shall find all things in them
necessary for the obtaining Eternal Salvation. But not so many things touching
the external Polity of the Church, much less particular Rites necessarily
requisite for it: For truly God has left these to be used in every particular
Church, according to those general Rules he has delivered in the Holy
Scriptures for that purpose: Such are, Let all things be done decently, and in
order; Let all things be done for Edification: And others of the like nature,
with which the usual Rites of our Church exactly agree. But what if a
Contention should arise between two Provincial Churches, or between diverse
Members of the same Province concerning any Ceremony, have we no Precept nor
Example in the Holy Scriptures to stifle it? It Is true, we have an Example,
which should indeed have the force of a Precept, in as much as it is prescribed
by the Holy Spirit of God; and upon this account committed to Sacred Writ, that
it might be observed by all. But lest I should seem to speak this for nothing,
I think 'twill not be amiss to explain briefly that of the Apostle, which we
just now cited; especially since nothing can be of greater use, and more
necessary to be observed in all such Controversies as are to be decided by this
Sacred Synod.

Therefore in the first place you are to take notice, That there were among the
Disturbers of the Corinthian Church newly settled, those who held it decent for
Men to be conversant in Public Meetings, with their Heads covered, but Women
uncovered: Now the Apostle in this Chapter, from the First to the Sixteenth
Verse, copiously reasons against this Custom, which some at that time began to
introduce; and shows that the contrary ought to be observed every where. He
argues first from Divine Testimony, not indeed directly, but by implication,
for as much as it appears from the Word of God, that Man is the Image and Glory
of God, and the Head of the Woman, but the Woman the Glory of the Man, made of
Him and for Him. The Apostle largely handles this Argument to the Twelfth
Verse, and then takes another from the Law of Nature, and the common Customs of
Men. Judge in your selves says he, is it comely that a Woman pray unto God
uncovered? Does not even nature it self teach you? etc.

But in the last place, he produces his clearest Argument comprised in these
words, But if any Man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither
the Churches of God.

Which is the same as if he had said, But if any Man is so contentious, as
notwithstanding these Reasons, still to contend, that it is lawful for a Man
even covered, but a Woman uncovered, publicly to pray unto God; yet there is
one Argument behind, by which both he and all Christians must of necessity
confess themselves convicted, which is this, That we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God: Now amongst us and all other Churches, the quite
contrary Custom has obtained, whereby Men are taught to uncover, but Women to
cover their Heads when they join in the Service of God.

I know that these words of the Apostle are interpreted a little otherwise by
some: as if he affirmed thus, ( viz.) That neither they nor the Churches of God
have such a Custom, to contend about Matters of this nature. But besides that,
admitting this Exposition, the Apostle would contradict himself, because in
this very place he sharply disputes with the Corinthians: Again, if we should
grant, that the Words may be thus expounded, it equally makes for our side;
because it is evident, even from this very sense of the words, as well as the
other, which is the true and genuine, and so conspicuous and manifest, that it
requires no further explication, that the Apostle disputing concerning an
Ecclesiastic Ceremony with the Corinthian Church, appeals to the Custom of the
other Churches of God. Nevertheless, this one thing we may note, That these
words, (...), are read in some Greek Manuscripts in the singular Number, (...),
as the Syrian Interpreter has it: Which are also the words of the Vulgar Latin
Version; and the same is to be seen in St. Cyprian, and other Latin Fathers.
But the sense is all one. For (...), in the plural, tho indefinitely put,
signify all the Churches of which the Universal consists. Therefore both ways,
recourse is had here to the Universal Church, and the Argument is drawn from
her Custom. For this reason St. Theodoret says of it, (...). This Argument is
sufficient to confute even the most contentious; For the Apostle shows, That
not only he, but all the Churches of God think the same: So that he that acts
contrary, opposes (...), the Universal Church, as Theophylact, and before him
St. Chrysostom, comments upon the place.

These Words of the Apostle being thus concisely explained, fore-shew a plain
and safe way to us by which we may proceed in the determination of all such
Cases. But if any Rite used by some Provincial Church, is controverted, we must
make a diligent Enquiry into the Sentiments of all other Churches, and see
whether the same has been approved by them. For the illustration whereof, we
must observe, That in all Ages even from our Savior's Passion, several
Provincial Churches have been constituted in the greatest part of the World;
which all together make that one Church, which we therefore commonly call
Catholic or Universal. Which doubtless, must be computed from all the
Churches, not only those that exist at one and the same point of time, but that
ever had a being.

Moreover, all these in all Ages, and at all times, have agreed with the Church
in necessary Articles of Faith. Now as to the Rites, they have been partly
proper, and peculiar to particular Churches, partly common to all. Rites that
are proper to one or two Churches, may be abrogated, or retained by the same,
or admitted by others at pleasure. For they put on the nature of things
indifferent, and therefore are of no force, unless what they received from that
Church by whose Authority they are established. But Rites that have been always
common to the Universal Church, that is, to all Churches throughout all Ages,
or which is all one, to the greatest part of them, the very same ought still to
be observed by every particular Church. For neither is it in the power of every
particular Church, either to reject Rites when observed, or observe them when
rejected by the Universal Church. If any of these shall do either of the two,
it is Schismatical, disjoining it self from the Body of Christ, at least in that
particular. But that every Church may be rightly constituted, so as to be made
a sound Member of the Catholic, it is absolutely necessary for her to conform
her self to that in all things, as long as it may be done, and religiously
embrace her Discipline and Rites, as well as her Doctrine. Which, lest I may
seem to speak without reason, I Will confirm with the following Arguments.

These very Words of my Text supply us with one. For certainly the Corinthian
was a Provincial Church, into which some endeavored to bring new Rites. The
Apostle being ascertained of this, disputes against it in this place; and
proves that that Church could by no means admit of it. And his last and chief
Argument he draws from the Custom of the Universal Church, as we observed
before: Forasmuch as all other Churches should have no such, but a quite
contrary Custom. But if any man, says he, seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom; neither the Churches of God. From which words I thus argue:

What Is contrary to the received Custom of all the Churches, ought not to be
admitted by the Corinthian.

But this is contrary to the received Custom of all the Churches.

Ergo.

Now if the Church of Corinth, was not obliged to accommodate her self to, and
observe the Rites of all the other Churches, this Argument of the Apostle would
be of no weight. For by this supposition, that Church might have admitted that
Rite, notwithstanding 'twas contrary to a Custom Universally received: And
therefore the major proposition would be false. But undoubtedly the Apostle
argued rightly, being divinely inspired when he penned these Words: Which is a
cogent reason, because he could not deceive by the Argument, nor be deceived in
the manner of arguing. And therefore a principal reason obliges every such
Provincial Church, as the Corinthian was, diligently to observe the Rites of
the Universal. For if any neglect the observance of them, he is by this
infallible Argument, convinced of a grievous Error and Schism. Neither is it
possible for him to defend himself by any Pretense: since God himself dictated
this Argument to the Apostle, and from thence it necessarily follows, That it is
the Will of God that every Provincial Church should conform to the Universal:
And also that we always use this way of arguing which he has taught us, to
determine all Controversies of the like nature.

Moreover, the same appears from the very nature and notion of a Church: For
the Church generally so called, is a vast Society, or Congregation of Men
professing the Christian Faith in all parts of the World: Whereof all
Provincial Churches are so many Parts or Members. Now in all such Societies
every Part ought to agree with its whole: And consequently the lesser with the
greater.

Reason tells us this; The Law of nature commands it; and the Universal consent
of Mankind judges it necessary. So that, if any thing enacted by the greater,
obliges the remaining part, much more what is ordained by the greatest part of
each Society; which it ought to observe if it would continue a member, and
enjoy the Privileges of the same Society. Which rule, since it prevails in all
manner of Societies, ought much more in the Church; which of all things should
be the most Regular.

Accordingly Christ himself is the head of this Church, called Universal, who
equally diffuses his Spirit through all its parts. The Apostle in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, and elsewhere in many places explains this idea, or notion of
the Church. Seeing therefore the Spirit of Christ himself is diffused through all
the Members of this Body; and both guides, and governs them, whatsoever is
performed by these Members let it be (as it ought) ascribed to his Holy Spirit.
For although each Member is able, perhaps to suffer some humane affliction, which
yet all have done conjointly at all times, it could scarcely proceed from any
thing less than a common (if I may so say) Principle of all things, namely, the
Spirit of God which generally actuates all things. And therefore it cannot but
be necessary to be still observed (as much as may be) by every Member.

The next Argument on this occasion is fetched from the Apostolical Institution
of all such Rites, which are observed by the Universal Church. For whatsoever
the Apostles in the first institution of the Churches delivered for their
observation, is undoubtedly necessary to their legitimate constitution. For
otherwise they must have appointed something superfluous, which cannot be
alleged against the Apostles, considering that they have instituted nothing in
the Church, but what was enjoined them by Heaven.

Which since all Christians believe, they agree in nothing more, than that the
Apostolical Institution of the Churches is a Rule, and Measure, according to
which every present Church is to be modeled. So that no Constitution of any
Church can be accounted Legitimate, unless it be consonant thereto. Now this
being granted, it follows that no particular Church is lawfully constituted,
unless it observes all the Rites of the Universal. For whatsoever she has
observed in all ages, must be of Apostolical Institution. For how is it
possible for any one to imagine, that all the Churches dispersed over the face
of the Earth should every where use the same modes, unless they received them
together with their Faith by Apostolic Tradition?

It Is very clear, that the Apostles went about almost all Parts, and appointed
Churches, where ever they came: It Is clear that they were conducted by the same
Spirit: And lastly it is clear, that they endeavored Uniformity in all
Churches. And therefore it is no wonder, if they have every where ordained the
same Rites: 'Twou'd have rather been a wonder, if they had done otherwise. Now
if such general Rites were not by Apostolic appointment, how could they every
where come into Chucrhes so far distant from each others? Could they from
General Councils? For that indeed remains to be spoken to. For they must of
necessity either be ordained by the Apostles, or by Ecumenical Councils, as
Saint Augustine observes in his Epistle to Januarius, wherein he says, We
preserve things not written, but delivered, which are indeed observed all the
World over; whereby we may understand, that things recommended, and decreed
either by the Apostles, or General Councils, (whose authority the Church
venerates) are retained. Now we in this place speak only of such Rites, as were
observed by the Universal Church before General Councils had their being, and
which for this reason could not be instituted by them. It remains therefore,
that we attribute them only to Apostolical Institution, according to that
common rule of the same Learned Father, who says, That the Universal Church
holds not what is instituted by Councils, but always retained, which being
delivered only by Apostolical Authority, is truly believed.

Therefore since it is necessary to legitimate the Constitution of every Church,
that the Rites instituted by the Apostles be retained: And since all the Rites
of the Universal are appointed by the Apostles themselves, none can doubt, but
that the observing the same is necessarily required to the Legal Constitution
of every particular Church.

And this indeed is not my private Opinion, but is, and ever was the common
Sentiment of all Christians, especially the Primitive. This appears from hence,
that in times past, if any Controversy arose concerning any Ecclesiastical
Rite, which some peculiar Church had received, 'twas always customary to
enquire into the Practice of the Universal; and her constant usage touching
that Rite, and afterward to give in their Verdict. Examples are very obvious,
how ever I Will choose one for the present. The Primitive Church, you all know,
was long perplexed with a grievous Contention concerning the time of the
celebration of the Passover. For the Church of Asia contended with the Jews,
that 'twas to be celebrated on the fourteenth day after the appearance of the
Moon, let it fall on whatsoever Holy Day of the Week it would. Now all other
Churches were wont to fast, and celebrate that Feast only on the day of our
Lord's Resurrection. This controversy continued for many Years, till at length
'twas complained of in the general Council held at Nice. Where 'twas proved,
that all other Churches, except that of Asia, used to celebrate that Feast on
the Lord's day, and for that reason all the Fathers, that were present at that
Synod, thought it fit, and reasonable, for the Asian Church to celebrate it on
the same day: As the great Emperor, Constantine, expressly asserts in an Epistle
to the Churches by whose command that Synod was summoned. From whence it
appears that the Nicene Fathers used the same arguments against the Asian
Church, that the Apostle does against the Corinthian, which he deduces from the
Custom of all the other Churches. Also St. Cyprian has the same against
Novatian, and St. Augustine against the Donatists: But Epiphanius brings it
against all Heretics, and likewise Schismatics, condemning them all of
Heresy, that either in Doctrine or Discipline Apostatize from the Universal
Church. I might seem too prolix, and tedious, if I should but point out all the
Councils, and Fathers, that have used this argument; and therefore our
Proposition may well be inferred from them. For this Argument, which the
Catholic Church has always used, takes for granted, that it is at least just,
and rational, that all her rites should be every where retained.

Upon which account we have more largely prosecuted this subject, because
hereby we may the better, when occasion serves, repress all the adversaries of
our Church; even the Romanists themselves, who assuming the Name of Catholics,
do insolently Glory in it. For the Romish Church whose Faith, and Customs all
Papists are solemnly engaged to maintain, has invented so many new Tenets, and
lately innovated so many superstitious Ceremonies, either rejected, or unknown
to the Universal, and is at this day so imperious in her commands, that she
only deserves the name of a most corrupted, much less Catholic Church. For she
has nothing common with the Catholic, nothing with all other Churches, but
rather all things Dissentaneous, and Repugnant, excepting, wherein she agrees
with ours.

But omitting these things, as not pertinent to this place, let us rather
advance those things which we have hitherto discoursed, that we may the better
accomplish the Business in hand.

Now then it is apparent from what we have already premised, how expedient it
is, that Ancient Rites and Manners observed hitherto by the Universal, that the
same should also now be observed by every particular Church. Just so it is even
in Bodies Politic. As for instance, in this very Kingdom there are diverse
Corporations, Buroughs, and other inferior Fraternities, all which are
empowered to give Laws to themselves, and to their Members; Provided always,
they neither do, nor enact any thing Contrary to the Statutes of this Realm, or
(as we say) to the Common Law, or any ancient Custom, that has been introduced,
and received in this Kingdom time out of mind, and so has obtained the force of
a Law. Almost after the same manner it is with the Universal Church, which is
the Kingdom of Christ. For this has it is Decrees written in the Word of God,
and also has as it were a Common Law consisting of some certain Rites. Which
though they be not expressly, and in just so many words, commanded in the said
Decrees, yet are so adapted (if I may so say) to the general design and purport
of them, and so useful for the Propagation, and Establishment of that Religion,
which is instituted there, that they have been observed at all times, and every
where throughout the whole Christian World, and for that reason are still to be
observed by all Churches, that are desirous of holding a firm Union, and
Communion with the Universal. For if any Church shall abolish any one of these
Rites, or constitute any thing contrary to them, the same will thereby be
deprived of that Custom, which all the other Churches of God enjoy. Which thing
indeed the Apostle charges the Corinthians with as a fault. And deservedly too.
Because it cannot possibly be deemed a lesser Crime to disannul the common Rites
of the Universal Church, than to violate the Common Law of the Realm. That this
is great, it is generally acknowledged, and some to their own Cost have found it
so. But perhaps some will judge me guilty of a fault, in pleading hitherto for
Rites, and not showing what they are, or how to know them. But truly this don't
belong to me, who have hitherto designed nothing more, than to demonstrate, how
just, and equitable it is, that (for instance) our, or any other Provincial
Church, should religiously observe all such Rites, which, it is certain, all
other Churches have observed: Now what peculiar Rites ought to be ranked here,
and from whence that appears, I leave undecided to your Judgments. Perchance
some of them will be debated here before you: For that reason I Have forbore
mentioning the least of them in this place, for fear I should seem to
anticipate your more discerning Judgments in these Affairs. But there are some
general Institutions of the Universal Church, which (if I mistake not) are
indisputable, and yet seem momentous to the determining such cases as will be
laid open, in this Sacred Synod: Therefore I cannot quite pass them by, lest I
should seem to fall short of performing the duty laid on me.

First, Therefore all the Churches of God have this Custom, and always had,
that in whatsoever Province they are placed, the Bishops, and Pastors of that
Province, as often as occasion requires, and opportunity permits may summon
Synods or Conventions to deliberate, and consult about affairs relating to the
Church in the same Province. Which Synods therefore are called Convocations, or
Provincial Councils. This sufficiently appears from those huge and numerous
volumes of Councils, in which you may see several such like Councils held in
all Ages, and all Provinces over the whole Christian world. And far more,
doubtless, are celebrated, that are neither extant there, nor in any other
place at present. Which, I thought fit to note here, that any one may plainly
see, that this our Synodical Convocation is no Innovation. Because nothing was
ever more usual in all the Churches of God than the celebration of such
Provincial Councils.

Add to this, that all Churches every where so Synodically congregated, were
always used to create such Canons, or Ecclesiastic Laws, as they judged to be
Expedient for the better administration of the public Worship of God, his Word
and Sacraments, and the Discipline of the whole Church. This also abundantly
appears from the said Acts of Councils: In which there are diverse Canons set
forth by every Provincial Church, as proper, and peculiar to itself. For though
all the common Churches of God have scrupulously retained the rites of the
Universal; yet they were always forced to add others to the Canons of the
Church, that were adapted to the form and modes of that Kingdom or Province
wherein each Church was situated: Otherwise it were almost impossible for any
Provincial or National Church to subsist long in Peace. From hence also a
common Custom has obtained in all the Churches of God, when all such Canons,
and Laws are Constituted, to have regard not only to the well-being of any
private member, but also to the Peace, and Tranquillity of the whole Church.
And indeed many things are necessary to the procuring this that are not to our
obtaining everlasting felicity. For which reason almost all the Canons,
published hitherto by Provincial, or General Councils are instituted only for
such things, that make for the external Discipline, and Peace of the Church.
And hence it is also, that never any Church was extant, which did not register
several things amongst their Laws, not against, but besides those things, which
are contained in holy Writ. Which is so clear, and perspicuous, that I cannot
enough wonder, how any one can doubt of the truth thereof.

Besides it is customary in all the Churches of God to ratify such Canons, as
they make, with Ecclesiastic Penances, to prevent impunity, when they are
violated. This likewise appears from the Canons of all the Councils, upon which
a man can scarce cast his eye, but presently at the first sight see Suspension,
or Deposition, Anathema, or Excommunication against Laymen, if they shall act
otherwise. For neither has the Church ever esteemed those worthy of the Sacred
Ministry, nor these of her Communion, who refuse to obey Laws written as well
for theirs, as its own advantage.

Further it is evident out of the aforesaid Collection of Councils, that all the
Churches of God were wont so to frame, and temper these Laws, which they
thought necessary for themselves, that they might be advantageous to, and
edifying of the whole Community, and as much as possible, inoffensive. I said,
as much as possible, by reason their ignorance is such, that they scarce are
sensible of any thing: Such is the perverseness of others, that they wrest all
to the worst sense. And truly it is hardly possible for any Civil Law, much less
Ecclesiastical, to be so made, as to be approved by all. Therefore there is no
reason, that the Church should be sollicitous for this sort of men, unless
perhaps, that they may be better taught in discipline and manners by the force
of the Laws. Again, others there are, who endeavor to serve God piously, and
devoutly, and to direct their lives according to his Commands, and yet are of
so weak, and Scrupulous a Conscience, that nothing almost can be done, that
does not prove offensive to them, and that too (as we should charitably
believe) not from an obstinacy of will, or stiff inclination to any Faction;
but from some pious, though groundless fear, lest it should be displeasing to
God. And truly these men are to be taken into consideration before Laws are
confirmed, especially Ecclesiastic, lest, instead of eradicating old Scruples,
we should implant new ones in their minds. And that also, whether they, who are
thus troubled in conscience, wait on God's Altar together with the Church, or
separately from it. For both are to be taken care of; these, that they may
persevere in the Communion of our Church, the other, that they may be brought
back to it. And certainly this is a work, and labor, deserving the cares and
studies of us all. Which nevertheless is to be so enterpriz'd that nothing, for
their sakes, may be omitted, that shall redound to the Interest of the Church,
nor admitted, that shall prove detrimental to the same. For neither reason nor
the perpetual Custom of the Church suffers a part to be preferable to the whole.

We may add further, That nothing has been more usual amongst the Churches of
God, than to change Laws, that they have made, to abrogate ancient ones, and to
substitute others, perhaps quite different, in their room, when a necessitous
time requires it. None conversant in Ecclesiastic Histories can be ignorant of
this. For you can find no Church throughout the World, that has all the same
Laws now, which it formerly had. Doubtless, all such Laws of Provincial
Churches, whereof we now speak, are constituted pro hic and nunc, (if I may be
allowed to speak barbarously here) that is, with respect to time, and place.
When these are changed, the Laws of Necessity must be changed for their
accommodation to the present Customs of every Age and Place. But truly no
Church ever did, or must do this without cogent Necessity. For every
unnecessary alteration in Ecclesiastic Laws, stigmatizes the Church with
inconstancy; and too much derogates from the Authority given it by our Blessed
Savior; it makes Profane Wretches call Religion into Question, whether or no
it depends on the Will of Man? It sets several together by the ears; and keeps
more still in a dubious expectation of some new attempt: It renders the minds
of others doubtful, and uncertain what to do: It stirs up outrageous Tumults,
often disturbing the Public Peace. Neither also is any one so Skilful in the
disposal, and provision of things, as to be able to foresee by any Art, what,
and how great Miseries may be arising even from the mutation of Laws
incommodious. And therefore the changing of inveterate Laws for others, is at
all times dangerous, unless such Necessity may compel, as is otherwise
insuperable, and which is so manifest and apparent to the Eyes of all, that
none may see a change, without seeing great Reason, and Necessity for it. Now
if there be such a Necessity, all those Calamities will be averted, that
generally attend on unnecessary change. Our Church will not lose a dram of
Honor or Esteem, that is due to her. For she, and her Authority will be the
same. And all things will appear more peaceable, calm, fixed, and quiet in her,
than if they had kept their former State. All the Churches of God are taught
this by Experience: And for this reason they never Scruple to abdicate Laws of
their own Constitution, and to Confirm new ones, as often as they see occasion.

Now whether our Church be obliged by such a Necessity to alter any thing
that is settled by her Laws, belongs to Wise Men, not me, to determine.

This only I Will presume to say, that, if it be necessary, to bring back
wandering Sheep to Christ's Fold, if necessary, to remove Scruples from the
Consciences of weak Brethren: If necessary to extinguish Hatred, mitigate
Anger, and reconcile all Differences, as far as possible about Religion: If
necessary to restore Ecclesiastic Discipline to its pristine vigor: If
necessary to defend, and maintain the best Church on Earth against the Efforts
of Men, and Devils: I say, If any one thinks these necessary, certainly he must
likewise think it necessary to admit of such Alterations as in his Opinion are
most conducive to this purpose: Whilst only those things are changed, which our
Church has constituted by her Authority, not those, which the Universal Church
has Established by her Common Law. For all the Churches of God, and ours too,
have always religiously forborne, (let the pretense be what it will) the least
Alteration in these Laws. For to abolish, or reject what has been always, and
every where observed, is not only to change an Ecclesiastic Rite, but also the
Church it self, and render it different from all the Churches of God. Which yet
never could, nor, I hope, ever will be said of our Church*

For truly such was the care, and diligence of our Reformers, (whose happy
memory we can never sufficiently extol, and reverence) such their Piety and
Religion, such their divinely inspired Prudence, that, thinking it as necessary
to keep firm Communion with the Catholic, as to recede from the Roman Church,
renouncing all her Superstitious Innovations, they themselves religiously
preserved whatever had been approved by all the Churches of God; and so
ordained it in our Church, the most illustrious Image and Resemblance of the
Catholic. And hence it is that our Church has always been the envy of the
Roman: But so great an honor to all the Reformed Churches, that I don't doubt,
but that they would imitate her pious Examples, were it in their power: So that
we must not impute it to them, but to the necessities of time, and place, that
they are not in all things agreeable to us.

Since therefore God has committed such a Church to our care; and since his
Vicegerent here has now given us an opportunity to prosecute all things, that
may tend to the peace, and advantage of his Church, let us employ all our
powers and faculties for its accomplishment. Let us leave no means unattempted,
to make all Englishmen to be of the Church of England. Let us endeavor all we
can, to make her Faith, her Worship, and her Discipline, if possible, the
wonder of the whole world, and she her self perpetual, by whose guidance we of
this Kingdom may obtain everlasting Salvation through Christ, till his second
coming. That all posterity may laud, and magnify our God for moving so
religious a Prince to assemble this Sacred Synod, and assigning such a
preparation for it to the advantage of this our Church. If this Convocation
shall be so pleased, to whose disposal all things are left. But whilst we are
considering of these things, we call to mind the ancient Customs observed by
all God's Churches, in the calm and sedate Celebration of their Synods: And let
ours take example by that. Let us throw off all prejudiced Opinions,
presumptuous Suspicions, and litigious Contentions, which only confound and
disturb such Sacred Councils. But let all be done with that agreement, and
consent, as becomes Christians, Clergymen, and more especially all us of the
Church of England, when we consult about the Establishment of her Peace.
Whatsoever we do, let it be done by universal Approbation, That in this we may
truly say with the Apostle, If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God.

But whatsoever pains we take for the good of our Church they will avail not,
unless adorned with good works: Wherefore most Reverend Fathers in Christ, and
dearly beloved Brethren give me leave to beseech you in the name of Christ, so
to comport your selves, as Becomes Fathers, and Sons of so holy a Church: Let
your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify
your Father in Heaven? Let all see and admire the eminent Sanctity of the
Church of England in producing men most holy. By this means we shall engage not
only men, but God to be of our side. Who alone is able to defend, and for ever
preserve a Church first of his own building, and then restoration, from all the
Machinations of its enemies.

Let God therefore arise, and his enemies be scattered. God grant that our
Church may flourish and increase daily more and more. God grant that the Gates
of Hell may never prevail against it. Lastly God grant, that his most holy
Spirit may guide this Sacred Synod assembled in his name, and lead them into
all truth, that whatsoever they do, may end in the glory of God, the good and
settlement of the Universal Church, and more especially, this of England,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and holy Spirit be
ascribed all glory, and honor now and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

