THE Present Interest OF ENGLAND STATED.

BY A Lover of his King and Country.

LONDON, Printed for D. B. 1671.

THE PREFACE.
INterest is a word of several definitions, but that which in Creatures, having
reason, or sense, is preservation and propagation, is that in a State, which I
mean by Interest: and this is either Domestic looking inward, as relating to
the particular frame and kind of government, or foreign looking outward, as
regarding such alterations abroad, as may be of good or evil consequence to a
State; and such counsels, deliberations, or actions, as may improve good, or
prevent evil, are, according to the Interest of a Nation, and the contrary
against it. And taking the words thus, the prosperity, or adversity, if not the
life and death of a State, is bound up in the observing or neglecting of it is
Interest. For as no Country was ever unhappy, that followed it, so none ever
prospered (except by chance) that forsook or missed it; and consequently, it is
matter of the greatest concernment to a Prince, to study, and make himself
Master of it, that in keeping his Counselors in awe, by his own knowledge and
experience, in matters of State, he may have his affairs the better and
faithfuller prosecuted; but in searching for his Interest, he ought to be
exceeding careful, of not being misled by former examples, which are to
Politicians, as of old, the Stars to Navigators, rightly understood, the best
guide, and mistaken, the most dangerous. For Interest in all Countries is
changeable, that which was in one Age, not being always the same in the next,
as the Crowns of Spain and France do sufficiently evince. For Spain being by
corruption in Counselors, and Ministers of State, fraud, oppression, and
cousenage in Officers, and Servants, with persecution in the Church, and
severity in government, causing several revolts, brought at this time low, and
into a languishing condition, the Interest of the European Princes, is changed
from that of being against the house of Austria, and for France, to that of
being for it, and against France, the latter being at present, under more than
suspicion, that having now got the advantage of Spain, they intend to improve
it to an universal Monarchy, as Spain formerly designed. But as a Prince ought
to be studious in discovering of his Interest, so to be solicitous in examining
the Integrity of Counsels given him, lest by corrupt Counselors, he should be
put (for private ends) upon designs prejudicial, if not contrary and
destructive to the Interest of his Country. And because the wisdom, or
defects of Princes, appears much in their choice of Counselors and Ministers
of State (who under them, are the managers of their Interests) there ought to
be in the Election of such, a special eye to their principles, as well as
abilities, avoiding with care, all avaricious persons, as men, who for
advantage, will upon all occasions, forsake, and desert fidelity, the chief
ingredient of a good Counselor. For when men have parts without honesty, they
are but the greater instruments of mischief; and we find that little more than
common parts assisted with integrity, industry, and diligence, have done, and
do the greatest things in the world: Nay, that ordinary parts, with such
qualifications, do more, than the sublimest without them, the art of
Government, not being so misterious, as State Monopolists would make it,
honesty (as King James used to say) being the best policy, and surely, that is
the best Government, that provides most for the employment of the honestest
men. For as no State can flourish, where their Interest is not pursued, so
public Interest will never be the rule, where Counselors are not faithful,
and when public principles do not govern men, private Interest will, and
render their Country as Merchandise for the highest Chapman; so that although,
the Notion that Interest cannot lie is true, yet it is not (in Subjects) singly
to be trusted. For since private, worldly, and carnal Interest (which in
persons wanting honesty is always mercenary) may be changed by the bribing
bounty of other Princes, or States; it is a great error in those, understanding
their Interest, to rely upon their Counselors, or Officers, without examining,
whether their counsels and actions are pursuant of, and consonant to their
Interests; or yet in great trusts, to presume upon any other qualifications in
Counselors, and Civil and Military Ministers, then either truly religious, or
truly honorable moral principles, which cannot change, as private simple
Interest, not bottomed upon the one, or the other principle, will surely do
according to the greatness of temptations: and therefore, as upon good or bad
Counselors, and Ministers, depends the happiness or infelicity of a Prince,
and State, Sir Walter Rawleigh affirming, that a Commonwealth is more secure
where the Prince is not good, then where the Ministers are bad, so they cannot
show more wisdom, then insignally rewarding, and encouraging the former, and
exemplarily punishing the latter. I know that Counsels are not always to be
judged of, according to success, it being possible, that honest and well
grounded counsels may miscarry, and to punish men in such cases, were to
discourage the ablest and most virtuous Persons from serving of their Prince or
State; but sometimes designs are written in such large characters of
selfishness and corruption, the foundations of them being laid in lies, and
forgeries, as is legible to every impartial eye; and when such appears, by a
true discovery upon inquiry, the Criminals ought to be made examples to
posterity.

Formerly the affairs of Christendom were supposed to be chiefly swayed by the
two great powers of Austria (wherein Spain is understood) and France: from whom
other Princes and States derived their Peace and War, according to the several
parties they adhered unto. But now the puissance of the former being so much
abated, that it deserves no rank above its Neighbors, France of the two,
remains the only formidable Potentate, of whose greatness, all Princes and
States are as much concerned to be jealous, as formerly they were of that of
Austria. For, considering the French King, in relation to France, stored with
good Officers, Men, Money, and Ammunition, to his several augmentations gained
from all his Neighbors, by conquest, exchange, or purchase (as from Spain,
Italy, Germany, Lorrain, and the Spanish Netherlands) giving him free passage
into their several Dominions, and to his present Naval strength, increased
lately by an unhappy accident, The late Dutch War.
he is accommodated for any design, his ambition shall prompt him to, or at
least, should the sickly and weak young King of Spain dye childless, to dispute
uncontroulably, his right to all the Countries in Europe belonging to that
Crown, as also to contend for the Imperial dignity, should be survive the
present Emperor, if he stays till then: and if his aims may be guessed at by
the writings of his Subjects, which are commonly the the transcripts or
presages of their Princes sense and mind, he pretends to all the Lands, lying
on his side the River Rhein, as belonging to the ancient Kingdom of Austratia
(his supposed inheritance) which caused a learned man of Strasbourg (who
suspected their Commonwealth to be struck at) to maintain in writing (some few
years past) the Rights of their City against all pretenders. And thus upon the
whole, considering France furnished with a King, not wanting high thoughts or
activity, less cannot be expected from him, than to design an universal
Monarchy, which consequently makes it the common Interest of all European
Princes and States (as they value their own safety) to unite, for the keeping
of him within bounds and limits.

And now as England is not the least in the general concern of Europe, and
because seated by it self, and divided by Sea from all other Nations, I shall
begin with it.

December. 27. 167^
THE PRESENT INTEREST OF ENGLAND STATED.
HOlding it necessary in the Discoursing of England, to consider its Domestic,
and foreign Interests severally; I shall observe that method, and handle them
distinctly, beginning with the first.

The Isle of Great Britain, of which England is the most considerable part, and
that which is chiefly taken notice of in the World, having the advantage of an
Island, in being divided from all other Countries, by the Ocean; Narrow and
Northern Seas is not subject to those incursions that Contiguous Countries are,
not being in danger from abroad whilst its Naval strength is preserved, by
keeping their shipping in good repair, and their Mariners encouraged by good
usage: Neither is it fit for foreign acquisitions, in regard of the uncertainty
of wind and weather, and chargeableness of transportation; but contenting
themselves with the bounds that providence has given them, making it their
defigne to improve their advantage for trade, to increase their greatness at
home, is their first Domestic interest; for as self defense is the chief
interest of every Creature, Natural or Politic, and as without trade, no
Nation can be fomidable, especially at Sea, nor able to maintain a sufficient
Navalguarde, or desend themselves against their powerful Neighbors; so Trade,
must be the principal Interest of England. And this Nature seems to admonish
them unto, prohibiting their affecting Foreign Conquests, by placing them with
advantages as they are an Island. First, for preservation, and without much for
augmentation. Secondly, for viewing the actions of their Neighbors, and
qualifying them with might, and strength sufficient to render them arbitrators
in their differences. And thirdly, for advancing both their Home, and Foreign
traffic, in endowing them with Natural helps for Trade beyond all other
Countries: As with plenty of staple Commodities, incompassing them with
profitable, and rich Seas, convenient and safe Havens, and Bays, bold Coasts,
Rivers and good Ports, all affording matter of encouragement for foreign
Commerce, incomperable means in their many harbors for increasing of their
Navigation, and great invitations to strangers to make use of these advantages
in trading with the Country. And yet besides these Natural helps, England has
further the advantage of all other Countries, in some customs, and practices:
As in that of breeding the younger sons of Gentlemen, and sometimes of the
Nobility, to the Ministry, Law, Trade, and Physic, without prejudice to their
Gentility, their Heralds not requiring so much as any restoration in such
cases; although it frequenly falls out, that Gentlemen, during their
Apprenticeships to Trades, come by the death of their elder Brothers to be
Barronets. In which particular, England may well be said to come nearest unto
ancient Prudence, and right Reason, of all other Nations. For if no Country
can be rich or flourish without Trade, as indisputable it cannot, nor be more
or less considerable, but according to the proportion it has of Commerce; and
that anciently men were esteemed, honored, and dignified according to the
benefit, and commodity their Country had recieved by them; the Traders of a
Nation ought to be most encouraged, and Trade accounted the most honorable of
all professions. Secondly, by their greatest Nobility, marrying with all
degrees, where fortunes answers their qualities. Thirdly, in his Majesty's
Prerogative, for dignifying men of acquired estates, as he sees cause. And
fourthly, in that the single possession of estates, renders in reputation the
owners of them Gentlemen, all being vast benefits to the Nation (which other
Countries are strangers unto) in preventing idleness in their numerous Gentry,
and encouraging industry in all sorts of people. In Germany, Denmark, Sweden,
and Poland, it is esteemed below the quality of a Gentleman, to be bred to
either Trade, Law, Ministry, or Physic: (except that among the Papists, some
are bred to the Church to get great estates, that leaving no known posterity,
they may thereby advance their families, as they many times do in Germany,
Italy, and other places.) Neither will the greatest fortunes tempt them to
marry into the families of any of those Callings, they choosing to live
miserably, as many of them do, rather than to match under their degree, or at
least, not into such, as they esteem noble. And indeed, they cannot well do
otherwise, without danger of degradation, one of the reasons, for the
deposition of Errick King of Sweden, Uncle to Oustavus Adolphus, being the
undervaluing himself in his marriage; and if the Emperor, or Northern Kings,
conferr honors upon any of their Subjects, not of ancient descent, they
seldom last longer in esteem, than the first Generation, the families of these
Countries being so stated, as makes it almost impossible, upon any account to
introduce a new lasting Race of Gentility, save that in Sweden they have in
these latter ages allowed a general command in their Armies, the faithful and
prudent discharging the employment of an Ambassador extraordinary, or the
election into the Senate, which consists of 40 persons, to be a good original
of new Nobility or Gentry. In the United Netherlands, the Gentlemen are much
upon the same punctilio's, except that in marriage (for good fortunes) they
would mix; but that the trading party, not valuing Gentility, without
proportionable estates, seldom, or never, willingly do it. And from hence it
is (in a great part) that Gelderland, and Overyssel, two Provinces that abounds
in number of Gentry, are so poor, whilst Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, the
first, and last, having few ancient Gentry; and the second, none but the Prince
of Orange, are so rich. France is not so strictly tied up by these rules, as
the preceding Countries are, their Nobility marrying any where for money, as
the Nieces of the last great Cardinal shows, besides that they allow of estates
got by Trade, to be laudable foundations for new raised families, in both which
principles, they are surely wise, and thrive the better, whilst other Countries
are kept low by their contrary practices; for were it not for the benefit that
that Country reaps by the encouragement which is given there unto Trade, it
were impossible for them to subsist under their great burdens; but no people
comes so near the English, in the chief of these circumstances, as the wise
Venetians, Genovesers, Lucresers, and the Florentines, who all allowing the
exercise of Traffic in their Nobility and Gentry, reap the benefit of such
prudence, as appears in the three first, exceeding their Neighbors much, in
prosperity and wealth, and the Prince and People of the last, being abundantly
the better by it; for were it not for their principle of Commerce, encouraged
by some Liberty in Conscience, connived at in Leghorne (the only Port-Town of
Trade under that Prince) the people would be as poor, as they are thin, not
able to live under the severity of that Government: but if these Instances be
not sufficient to prove the profit that accrews unto a Country, by a trading
Gentry, there needs no further traveling for demonstration, than England,
where before the reformation of Religion, that Gentlemen had idle Convents to
put their younger Sons into, Trade was there so small, that the Customs
amounted not to 10000 l. per an. whereas they are now, or have been lately,
more than fifty times as much; which proves, First, the advantage that Trade
brings both to King, and People; and Secondly, that Trade has been much
increased, by taking younger Brothers off from their sloathful way of living,
and applying them, with their Patrimonies to Trade, and Commerce. The
experience of this, may reprove those, who both in State of England, page, 434,
435, 436.
discourse, and writing, plead for the vain ancient custom of Idleness, in the
younger brothers of England, as if they preferred being their eldest brothers
servants, with the privilege of filling up the lower end of their Tables,
before the present laudable practice, and incumbant duty of industry, inabling
them to live in equality with their eldest brothers. And surely, it is the
glory, and not shame of England (as our new pretenders to Politics would have
it) that by Commerce, they have made themselves so formidable in the world,
whilst all other Northern Countries (the United Netherlands as to their Gentry
not excepted) by their superstitious adhering to their old customs, are so
inconsiderable. And certain it is, that England could not have had those great
things to have boasted of at Sea, as now they have; nor could they stand before
their Neighbors, were it not for Traffic, which is the only thing that makes
a Country rich, -- Law, and Physic, by great Fees, and corrupt Practice,
having a great share in impoverishing this Nation, but none in the enriching of
it, fees to both Professions being in all other Countries very moderate,
compaired with England; a Physician, in no other place, having for a visit
above 18 d. star. except at Venice, where it is 2 s. 6 d. and in some places,
as at Newport, and Lisle, in Flanders, etc. but 6 d. and even at Amsterdam, and
at Antwerpen, the first equal to any place for wealth, and the latter next
considerable, not above 12 Stivers, which is about 13 d. and Lawyers 2 s. 6 d.
for their opinion, and as much an hour, for a business that requires long
consultation and work, much of their pleading being cast into that price; so
that England may be reckoned to exceed in their fees to both Professions, ten
times the rates of other Countries. But if the benefit of Commerce be not
sufficient to convince the enemies of trading Gentlemen, peradventure the
impossibility of reducing the Gentry and Nobility of England, to the mode of
other Countries, without utter ruin to them, may do it, and therefore, they
may do well to consider, that to answer other Countries in their Rules,

First, All the Families of the Gentry must be so stated, as that no way (not
even by desert) may be left for increasing the number of them.

Secondly, None descended from them, either Males or Females, must marry any
but such as are of those Families.

Thirdly, None of their Sons must be bred to any Callings, either the Ministry,
Law, or Physic; nay, nor be Court-Officers, except such as they account Noble:
(which are not many, Secretaries not being in that number) they reckoning all
Callings a debasement of Gentility, as well as Trade; and he that marries with
the daughter of any person of a Calling, to deserve the punishment of
degr^dation; And therefore, should Trade be maintained in England, in such a
way, as the riches got by it, would remain in the Trading party, the Gentry
would consequently be poor, compared with the Trading-Families; and as honors
and respect will follow Estates, so the Gentry would be little regarded, whilst
the Traders would carry away all Interest, and esteem in their Countries, as
the Trading-Families of Holland do at present, from the poor Gentry of
Gelderland and Overyssel, two provinces of the United Netherlands. But if these
new Statists shall still desire the want of Trade, with poverty, rather than
riches, with the practice of that they call the debasement of Gentility, they
ought farther to consider, that the Case of England is not the same with other
Northern Nations; for Denmark, Sweeden, and Poland, being all upon the same
Principle, of despising Trade in their Gentry, are alike poor, wanting
Commerce, and so under the less danger one of another: But England, having rich
and potent Neighbors, Trade is absolutely necessary for their preservation, in
rendering them equal in power, both at Sea and Land, to their great and opulent
emulators; so that in true English, they that plead for less plenty in the
People of England, do no less in effect (though in Charity I will hope they
think not so) than argue for exposing them as a prey to their enemies; but
these principles are not strange in them, who, in pleading for keeping the
people low, seem to have lost all Natural affection to their Country, in
accusing the Commons (by which I suppose is meant the Yeomandry of England,
who, without ostentation, may be called the best of their kind State of
England, pa. 60. 61, 62.
in the world, the Pesants of other Countries being Brutes in Religion, good
Nature and Civility, compared to them) of being the coursest Bran, and the
worst of People, etc. saying, they are so distasteful to their Gentry, that
they wish their Country less plentiful, or more burdened with Taxes, as the
way to refine the manners of the Common people. But, although the Competitors
with England in Trade, may be glad of having a Confession of Pride, Insolence,
and ill Conditions in the English, from one of themselves, to make use of
abroad, for their own advantage, and to the prejudice of the English Nation;
yet if it be believed by any that know England, they must have changed their
observations of it, that people, having never lain under such a censure until
now, that it is untruly, maliciously, and imprudently clapped upon them, by, I
may say, a degenerate Countryman, who, in his reproaches, shows little of
that natural affection, that every one owes to the Land of their Nativity, nor
suitableness to the Care his Majesty and Council take for promoting Trade, by
several Councils appointed to that end, but what use soever Foreiners may make
of these accusations against the English Traders, and Merchants in other
Countries. I suppose the new Philosophy of Poverty, and the transplantation of
all Non-conformists, called the Sons State of England
of Belial, (the ready way to penury) being best for a Nation, will have but
few disciples; for though all is thought to be made good, by accusing the
People of England of want of that humble respect, and awful reverence to the
Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, that is due to them, those to whom the Commons of
England are not strangers, know that they are not wanting in good nature, or
due observance, to any of the three Orders, where there is Justice, and not
Oppression, in the two first, nor Cruelty, Ignorance, Profaneness, or
Debauchery in the last; for although Greatness may procure Fear, nothing but
Virtue, Honesty, and Justice, can Love, and true Reverence. It may well be
questioned, who it is, that the men of these principles aim to gratify by
them? for nothing can be more prejudicial to His Majesty, than publicly to
maintain, that Plenty in his people, is inconsistent with Peace and good Order
in his Government, or that reducing the people to a complaining condition, is
the way to make them happy, as this Gentleman insinuates.

This seeming digression, is necessitated, for Trade being the true and chief
intrinsic Interest of England, without which it cannot subsist, thus much
could not well be avoided, in the making out, that as well by some
Constitutions and Customs, as by its Native Commodities and Conveniences, it
so far excells all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths in worldly advantages;
that Providence may be said to have lest nothing more to the People of England
to do, in order to their earthly felicity, than desiring of it; the matter of
Trade being naturally so prepared and fitted for them, that it may even be a
reproach to them, not to advance Trade, though no great glory to do it;
nothing, except some accidents extraordinary, or violent obstructions, (as
imposing upon Conscience, etc.) or want of good Laws, or the execution of them,
being capable of hindering the increase of it. And now, as from the growth of
Trade, there does naturally arise, not alone riches to the Subject, rendering a
Nation considerable, but also increase of Revenue, and therein power and
strength to the Sovereign; so it is the undoubted Interest of his Majesty, to
advance and promote Trade, by removing all obstructions, and giving it all
manner of encouragement.

As First, By lessening the overgreat Impositions upon Native Commodities, and
upon such, as are necessarily imported to be manufactured in England, or to be
again transported.

Secondly, By causing the Native Commodities to be faithfully and truly made,
and ordered.

Thirdly, By laying all Companies open, or at least, by leaving them free, for
all to come in to them that please, without fines, more, than a small
acknowledgement, tying them, in such case, from burthening their own
Manufactures with Taxes, as they usually do for the raising money to spend
profusely and wantonly: what objections may be made against this general rule,
in reference to the East-Indi's Joynt-Stock, I know not; but this I am sure may
be said for it, that the Hollanders, driving their East India Trade by a
Joynt-Stock, is no argument for England to do the same: for they having by the
public purse of the Company, purchased and conquered several Countries, and
petty Kingdoms, which ingageth them often in Wars with their Neighbors, and
necessitateth them to keep up a standing Militia of 30 or 40000 men, with many
Garrisons, and 100 or more Ships, equipped as well for Men of War at Sea, as
for Merchants use; the carrying on of such a Government, and desraying the
charge of it, is no otherwise feasible, than by a Society and Joynt-Stock, the
maintaining of their propriety being impracticable by an open Trade; but the
case not being the same with England, they having nothing in propriety, save
the insignificant Castle of St. George, upon the Coast of Cormandel, their
Trade being all by Factories, there is not that reason nor necessity upon them,
for a Joynt-Stock, as upon Holland: and Societies, in restraining the number,
both of Buyers of the Native, and Sellers of Foreign Commodities, must
consequently tend to the abating the price of the first, and inhancing the rate
of the latter, nothing being more plain to reason, than that the fewer buyers
of Native Commodities, the cheaper they must be, as the sewer sellers of
Foreign, the dearer they must be; and that which abateth the price of Native
Commodities, and raises the price of Foreign, must be against the Interest of a
Nation: and theresore the Netherlanders, who certainly understand the Interest
of Trade, equal to any people living, though by making the Interest of Trade
matter of State, they have an eye of regulation upon it, yet admits of no
restraining Companies, as in England, except in their East and West India
Trades, where they have great possessions in propriety,

Fourthly, By carefully protecting Merchants abroad, from the wrongs and
injuries of other Nations.

Fifthly, By making the transferring bills of debt good in Law, it being a
great advantage to Traders (especially to young men of small Stocks) to be able
to supply themselves with money, by the sale of their own bills of debt.

Sixthly, By constituting a Court Merchant, after the example of other
Countries, to prevent tedious and chargeable Suits in Law, taking men off from
their business, and in making the advancement, and protection of Trade, matter
of State.

Seventhly, By having Registers of all Real Estates, as is profitablie
practiced in other Countries, and in this, within the Jurisdiction of Taunton,
which in a natural way, will abate the Interest of money, and make Purchases
certain; for it is no little prejudice and blemish to England, that of all the
Countries in Europe, there is none, where Purchasers, or Lenders of money upon
Land, are upon such uncertainty in their dealings, as in England.

Eighthly, By taking away all privileges (except of Parliament) from persons
and places, tending to the defrauding Creditors of their debts, and extending
the Statute of Bankrupt, against all persons not Trading, as well as Traders,
it being but equal Justice, that all men should be a like liable to the
payments of their debts.

Ninthly, Banks (not Bankers, but) such as are in use at Venice, Amsterdam, and
Hamburg, where the States are security, keeping particular accounts of Cash,
for all men, desiring it, are of great advantage to Merchants and Traders, in
securing their moneys from many casualties, and making receipts and payments,
speedy and easy; besides, so certain, without the danger of losing
acquittances, or the death, or want of witnesses, as takes away all occasions
of suits about them, Bank accounts being allowed for undeniable testimonies in
Law; but of these, I confess there are no thriving and flourishing examples,
save under Republics.

Tenthly, By making Free Ports (which England of all Countries in Europe, is
most proper for) giving liberty to Strangers, as well as Natives, upon payment
of a small duty, to keep Magazines of goods ready for transportation to other
Countries, according to the encouragement of Markets abroad, are great
increasers of Trade and Navigation, and so of riches; as appears, not only by
Holland, which is a Commonwealth, but also by St. Mallows, under the Monarchy
of France, and Leghorne, under that of Tuskanie; the first, for its bigness,
which contains but thirty six Acres of ground, being the richest City in
France; and the latter, all the places in that Princes Dominions, which,
compared to former times, can truly be said to flourish.

Eleventhly, Making business at the several Offices for Custom and Excise, and
in all other places, as easy, and as little vexatious as may be, in employing
such persons of honesty, integrity, and discretion, as will not abuse their
trusts, no more in insolency than falseness, is a great encouragement to
Traders; as also, making passing in and out of the country by Strangers and
Travelers, untroublesome, is a motive and inducement to them, to satisfy
their curiosity in visiting the Kingdom, and spending their money in it. For
to object, that the incivilities travelers meet with in going in, and coming
out of France, hinders no resort thither, is more than can be proved; besides
that, admit it is not, yet the like usage in any other country, would be a
prejudice to it, and would be surely so to France, were it not the humor at
present of this giddy age, to run a madding after them; and certainly, the
facility that is in doing business in Holland, and the unmolested egress and
regress that Strangers and Travelers meets with there, is a great benefit to
them.

Twelfthly, Would the Trading Corporations, choose after the example of London,
and according to their own Interests, and reason of their institution, their
members for Parliament out of themselves, the Interest of Trade would probably
be better understood, and faithfullier prosecuted than it is, and it cannot but
be a prejudice to Commerce, that they generally send Courtiers, Country
Gentlemen, or their Recorders, to Parliament, who will be sure to prefer their
particular Interests before that of Trade, it being natural to all men, to seek
their own profit, before that of others.

Thirteenthly, As England has some beneficial Customs, which other Countries
are strangers unto, so it has others, as prejudicial, not known to Foreign
Governments; as the great expenses of Corporations, undoing many Citizens and
Townsmen; a Freeman of York, or Southampton, not being able to go through all
their Offices, according to Custom and expectation, in the first, under seven
or eight hundred pound; and the latter, six or seven hundred; which may well be
judged one cause, why York is so poor, and the other thrives no better; and the
like observation may be made of the most of the other Corporations: The great
charge of Sheriffs of the Counties, has decayed, if not ruined many Families;
and the expense of Barristers, at their Readings, is a provocation to them, to
increase their sharking, and growing upon the people; all which bad effects,
are to be wished were remedied, so far as taking away these unnecessary
expenses will do it: for I am not of their opinion, who think popular feastings
and good fellowship, called Hospitality, to be the Interest of the Nation,
because it consumes the growth of the Country; but on the contrary, that it is
altogether against it: For, besides the provoking of the Judgments of God by
such inordinate living, Excess weakens men's bodies, spends vainly their time,
dulls their wits, and makes them unfit for action and business, which is the
chief advancer of any Government, and to supply the want of people in any Land,
by a riotous wasting the growth of it, is, at best, but a bad effect, of a bad
cause, and against that rule which forbids doing evil, that good may come of
it; and therefore, the true Interest of any Country is, by immunities,
privileges, and liberty of Conscience, so to encourage, and increase the
number of people, as they may rather be (in a sober way of living) too many,
than to few for their provisions: and we do find, that in former times, when
Hospitality was in England, much greater than at present, and that merely in
the expense of their own provisions, without French dishes, or much of either
Spanish or French Wines, the Country was poor to what it now is; and that it
has been the increase of the Trade and People of that Nation by Liberty and
Privileges, indulging tender Consciences, that has advanced them. And (as to
the retrenching of expenses) this seems to be agreeable to the principles of
that wise and great Statesman, Sir Walter Rawleigh, who says, that taking
away all superfluous charges and expenses, as well in Hospitality as in
lessening the fees, allowances, and wages of Ministers of little necessity, as
also of pensions, rewards, entertainments, and donaries, to be a laudable
parsimony used by the Romans, and other well-governed States.

But, fourteenthly, imposing upon Conscience, in matters of Religion, is a
mischief unto Trade, transcending all others whatsoever, for if the Traders and
Manufacturers be forced to fly their Countries, or withdraw their stocks, by
vexatious prosecutions, the having Natural Commodities in a Country, or no
great impositions upon them, will signify little to the Prince or People; And
Liberty of Conscience is not only the Common Interest of all the Nation, but
especially of his Majesty, in that,

First, By it he obliges all his Subjects equally to him, no man having just
cause to be offended at another man's liberty, since he enjoyes the same
himself; and more particularly, he obliges all the Non-consormists to him, who
can have no other Interest than his, that in grace and favor gives them
Liberty; securing thereby, in an especial manner, all the several persuasions,
from agreeing upon any thing, to the prejudice of their Common friend, whereas
the Papists have, as others may have, other Interests. And, although a Prince
arrived to that height which is above Envy, and all sear from abroad, may
sometimes adventure in imposing in matters of Religion, it is not in any kind
excusable in them, that are not in such a condition, but that stands in need,
in reference to the potency of their Neighbors, of the hearts of all their
people, especially in this age, when the large experience the world has had of
the insuccessfulness and evil of it, has made, (even) in the greatest
Potentates, a general abatement therein, and now, when it is too late, they
grow weary of their rigor. The last Pope, as is affirmed, having dissuaded the
French King, from attempting Geneva, when he thought to have obliged the Church
of Rome, by reducing of it. And oh that England, whilst they have time, would
be warned by the miseries of others, to avoid the rock they have split upon.
Had the former Kings of Spain used in any degree, the lenity that that Crown at
present practices in their Netherlands, where now a known protestant may
obtain his freedom of several Cities, without having his Religion enquired
into, as at Bruges, Newpart, etc. those Countries had not been so thin of
people, nor Spain so depopulated as they are, nor yet the whole house of
Austria so low, as it now seems to be. Nay, had the Pope made formerly so
little use of his Inquisition, as he does at this time, few places being less
inquisitive after men's belief, than Rome, where one may be as good as he will,
and spend all his days without being proceeded against, either
Ecclesiastically or Civilly, for not coming to their Churches, Italy had had
more people than it has, and been more considerable than it is: The French
could never advance by Massacres, of which, they are reckoned to have had
thirty or forty, at several times, in several places, nor yet get forward in
power and greatness, until they laid aside Persecution; confessing, as Lewis
the 13th. did at the taking of Rochell, that although it would rejoice him to
have all his The History of the Siege of Rochell.
Subjects of the same belief with himself, and that he should use all sweet
means possible to draw them to it, yet since the experience of times past, had
sufficiently made France to know, that Religion is not to be planted by the
Sword, but (to use his own words) that it is God alone that must incline the
heart, and illuminate the understanding with his knowledge; he assured them he
would never use Violence in matters of Religion, and to give that King his due,
he truly inherited the merciful good Nature of his incomparable Father.

Secondly, It may be concluded to be the Interest of the King and Kingdom of
England, to grant Liberty of Conscience, because by a general consent of
Nations, liberty in ceremonies, invented by men, seems to be accounted
necessary for the good of humane society. For I believe I may without boldness
affirm, that England is singular in prosecuting them, who are one with them in
Doctrine, for differing only in ceremonies, no other Christian Church that I
know of, doing the like. In Germany, the Lutherans have scarce, in any two
Cities, or Countries, the same ceremonies; Nurenburg, and Leipsigg, having
almost as many as the Papists, and yet differ in them; Hamburg has fewer, and
Strasburg none at all; and so it is through all the Lutheran Cities and
Countries in the Empire, and yet agreeing in Doctrine; their differing in
circumstantials, make no breach of charity amongst them, although at the same
Communion. I have seen some receive standing, as others have kneeling. The
Church of Rome, in their using the inventions of men, in the worship of God,
seems (their Principles considered) to act rationally, because they pretend to
the assistance of an infallible Spirit; but for the Reformed Churches, who do
not pretend to any such help, to maintain that the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
who is so jealous of his own worship, that under the Law, he severely
prohibited the adding to, or diminishing one little from, what he had
commanded, and under the Gospel, gave no other Commission, than to teach
according to what he had commanded, that he has left his Worship to the
inventions of corrupt, frail man, inclinable above all things to superstition
and idolatry, and who are by nature, endlesly various in their imaginations,
sense, and understandings, seems to be irrational, and to accuse Christ, of not
having been, as a Son, so careful of his Church, as Moses, a Servant, was of
the Church of God under the Law: for had Christ intended to have left his
Church under a negative obedience in worship, making all things lawful that he
had not forbidden, the command had been as readily made, to do whatsoever he
had not prohibited, as it was to do whatsoever he has commanded; And that the
Church of Rome, who pretends to infallibility, should not exact Conformity in
Ceremonies, where there is an agreement in Doctrine, as they do not even in
Rome it self, (where they might force it, without prejudice to Trade, having
little to obstruct) there being in that City several Popish Churches, differing
from one another in Ceremonies, and all abundantly from that properly called
the Roman Church, and yet agreeing in Doctrine, have public toleration,
without exceptions; The Grecian and Armenian Popish cong^egations, etc.
And yet that the Church of England, who pretends not to infallibility, should
to their civil prejudice, be rigid in imposing them, upon those that agree with
them, not only in Fundamentals, but in all material points of Faith, Worship,
and obedience, with punishment for denial, I cannot conceive the reason, except
without Ceremonies, to administer matter of employment, in punishing tender
Consciences, they think they should be without work, in any kind adequate to
their great Revenues, and that they dread the consequent of uselesness.

Thirdly, Liberty of Conscience to all Protestant Non-conformists, is the true
Interest of King and Kingdom, in that it is absolutely and indispensibly
necessary, for raising the value of Land, which at present is miserably mean
and low, and advancing the Trade and Wealth of the Kingdom.

First, Because imposition upon Conscience, hinders the resort of Strangers,
and so the increase of people, whereof England is greatly wanting, coming so
far short of Holland in numbers, (whereby that Province alone, is made more
considerable than all the other six) that whereas they are calculated to have
six Souls for one Acre of ground, England, I fear, has hardly one for ten, and
the riches of Holland, under such multitudes, as the provisions Interest of
Holland.
of their own Country, are said not to be sufficient to nourish above an eighth
part of their People (all the rest being supplied by the Sea, and Trade with
other Countries, argues Plenty of Inhabitants to be a benefit to Trading
Countries, and Foreign Conquests or Plantations, exhausting men and money,
where there is not an overplus of both, a prejudice which ought to be avoided.

Secondly, Imposition upon Conscience, drives the soberest, and most
industrious sort of Natives into corners, leaving trade into too few hands, and
to a kind of people that do but rarely mind it; amongst whom, though there are
some that get large estates, it is not the thriving of a small number, but
diffusive wealth, that makes a Country rich. And, as most of the Corporations
in England have declined in their flourishing condition, since many of the
soberest, and public spirited Citizens and Townsmen, have, by the imposition
of Oaths they could not comply with, been barred all share in Government, so
the influence would have been the same, upon the whole Nation, had not His
Majesty wisely considered the good of his Kingdom, in expressing his sense for
Liberty, and in some kind, conniving at it. And if men, setting aside passion,
would but seriously remember, and ponder the sad consequence of ancient popish
Episcopal Persecutions, in the deaths (by several brutish ways and torments)
of many millions of precious Christians, in France, England, Netherlands,
Germany, the Alpine Valleys, Italy, and Spain, producing no other effects, than
the depopulating of the two last, and increasing the number of Dissenters in
all the rest, besides the irrepairable damage of this Kingdom, in their former
Bishops, driveing the woollen Manufactures back into the Netherlands, (as the
King of Spain had before driven them into England) by Persecution, where they
have ever since increased, and where they now remain, sad Monuments to this
Nation, of the impolitick severity of those times, they could not but be
convinced of the vanity and wickedness of such practices, as well as of the
civil prejudice they bring to Nations, in destroying of their people, and
therein depriving them of the benefit of Industry, thinking charitably of that
saying, which was anciently in Voge, and is still in some places remembered,
that when a Bishop is created, the Devil enters into him, and makes him his
Executioner; which as it had its original in times of Popery, so it concerns
their Bishops only.

Fourthly and Lastly, As it is the King and Kingdom of Englands Interest, to
give Liberty of Conscience to all Protestant Dissenters, so it is not only to
deny it to the Papists, after the example of other reformed countries, as
Denmark, Sweeden, several Princes in Germany, and the reformed Cantons in
Switzerland, but also to take care to prevent the growth of them, and that upon
a civil score; as first, because they own a foreign head upon the account of
their Religion, in which, they are carried on by such a blind zeal, as cannot
render them less, than Spies, and Intelligencers for that Interest, and ready
upon all occasions to appear for it. And even the wisest Popish States,
acknowledge the reason of this principle, Sir Walter Rawleigh affirming, that
the Venetians, as not holding it safe, to have any in their Counsels, who have
dependence by Oath, Homage, natural Obligation, Pension, or Reward, when their
Senate is Assembled, causes Proclamation (before shutting of the doors) to be
made, for all Priests to depart, and he who in this Commonwealth, is called the
Divine of the State (an Ecclesiastical Person, to be advised within matters of
Religion) is commonly chosen such a one, as is reputed the least Bigot in that
Religion, as in the memory of some living, Padri Pauli, and after him
Fulgentio, both Successively performed that office, and were esteemed favorers
of the Reformation, and corresponders with Diodati of Geneve, and if Papists
dare not trust their own Clergy in their Counsels, upon the account of their
foreign dependence, Protestants upon the same account, have no cause to trust
Popish Subjects in their Countries, longer, than until they that are now
living, die away, and that they can breed their Children to the Protestant
Religion: I am not ignorant, that there are a sort of men, who, with the Author
of that Book, entitled The State of England, seek to infuse a belief into the
people, that the dispensing with the Laws against the Papists, is necessary for
the prevention of persecution to Protestant Subjects, by their Popish Princes;
but the imposers of that opinion, persumes more upon ignorance, and easy
nature, in the most of men, than upon any strength there is in their arguments:
for this suggested danger, must referr to Spain, Italy, the Emperor, or the
French King; and for the two first, they have by former Persecutions, (though
not without depopulating of their several Countries) left no Native Protestants
in them; so that however England shall deal with their own Papists, the King of
Spain, nor the Pope, have any Protestant Subjects, to use better, or worse, and
for the few reformed Merchant-strangers that are among them, they must (for
their own Interest, in reference to Commerce) suffer them to enjoy a trading
liberty, without having their Religion inquired into, and more than that, they
are never likely to have. And as to the Emperor, he being through facility of
Nature, acted by the Church, has (to almost the ruin of himself, as well as
his Protestants) spent all his Reign hitherto in a grievous and sore
persecution of the Reformed in his Hereditarie Countries (having no power over
them in other places of Germany) for by it, he has lost a great part of
Hungaria, and in a fair way of losing the rest, besides that, he has thereby
much prejudiced Trade, and lessened his people: for even the Protestant Gently
and Nobility, who, by birth, have great Immunities, and ought not to be imposed
upon in matters of Religion, were (lately) some forced to leave their
Countries, and others who stayed, to entertain none but Papist Servants in
their Families, so that England by no kind of treatment of their Papists, can
increase the Emperors persecution (which is already so high) of his protestant
Subjects. And for the French King, he cannot persecute his Reformed, without
breach of the Edict of Nantes (their Magna Charta) The Edict of Nantes granted
by Henry 4th. 30 April, 1593.
and several other Laws, giving them as good a right to exercise their
Religion, as the Papists have for theirs, making them also capable of all civil
offices, privileges, and preferments equal with Papists, and that upon
consideration of having been always loyal and faithful to The Edict of Nantes,
confirmedly Lewis 13th. the 22 May, 1610. and again 10 Nov. 16^5. and by Lewis
14th. the 8 July, 1643. confirmed in Parliament, 3 Aug. 1643. and again
confirmed by the said Lewis 14th. this present King, the 21 May, 1652.
the Crown, so that there is no parity betwixt the French Kings Arbitrary
breaking of his Laws, against the reason of them, which has not yet been
forfeited, and which were made (with acknowledged gratitude) for the
preservation of the reformed. And the King of England, with the continued
reason of his Laws (witness the Massacre in Ireland) his keeping, and executing
them against his Papists, but further, those that observe any thing of France,
must confess, that that King, in matters of Religion, regards no examples of
others, or any thing but his own designs, as in his present persecution of his
reformed Subjects, he may well be judged to aim at the advancing of his
reputation, with the Church of Rome, as a means to help him forward in his
aspiring designs; for but few years since, when the Papists were under the most
severity in England, the Protestants were under most liberty in France, and now
they enjoy the greatest liberty in England, the Reformed are the most
persecuted in France: but besides these circumstances, it cannot but be of evil
consequence, and a lessening unto Sovereignty, to own the having an eye to
other Princes, in the execution of their Laws, for nothing can be more
dishonorable to a Prince, than to be under the awe of Foreign Potentates in his
administration, within his own Dominions; but this Gentleman does not always
ponder what he writes, for when I consider his sharpness against the
Presbyterians etc. in England, calling State of England, pa. 50, 56, 60.
them Mushromes, Tares, and the Sons of Belial, insinuating the transplantation
and extirpation of them, I cannot but wonder he should have so much concern for
the reformed abroad, who are the same with the Presbyterians of England, and
therefore must judge it to proceed from favor to the Papists, toward whom, he
so tenderly avoids all reflections and severity, as if he thought the revolt of
a Presbyterian, etc. to Popery, to merit a pardon from transplantation or
extirpation, and not from any kindness he can have for the Protestants in other
Countries. Nor do I know how to reconcile his boasting of the transcending
Charity of the Church of England toward other Churches, with his accusing them
of looking upon the Non-consormists of England as bastards, or making no
account of any other Interest in them, than a man makes of the Vermin which
breed out of his excrementitious sweat, or those Ascarides, which comes
sometimes in his most uncleanly parts; but for such homely expressions, surely
the Church of England will not think themselves beholding to him, no more than
for rendering them so charitable to those that differ from them both in Doctrine
and Discipline, as the Papists do, who are the Church he must mean, and so
uncharitable to those that agree with them in all material points of Doctrine,
and differ only from them in circumstantials, as the Non-conformists do.

Secondly, The growth of Papists in England, ought to be prevented, because
there is a kind of natural unaptness to business in that Religion (compared to
the reformed) as Italy, and Spain, where they are the greatest Bigots, do
evidence; besides, that the same seems to be made good in England, in that for
one Papist stranger of business, that is in it, there is thought to be fifty
Protestants, or more, though, I fear, that the difference in the number of the
one and the other Religion, is not much, and the fewer idle, and unprofitable
persons any Country has, the more prosperous it must needs be.

Thirdly, Because the vast sums of money that go out of England, sent by
Papists, to such uses, as they call pious; for putting young Gentlewomen into
Nunneries, and breeding Gentlemen's sons in Popish Schools and Universities, is
a great impoverishing of the Nation, and so a prejudice to Trade, the School at
St. Omers having seldom less than an hundred and twenty English youths, and the
College at Doway, eighty or more Students, besides their other Schools,
Universities, Convents, and Nunneries, scattered over all the Popish
territories, (sounded on purpose to increase that Interest in England, corrupt,
and pervert their Gentry) which are too many to enumerate.

And lastly, Because the multitude of lazy Priests and Jesuits, sent as
Emissaries, to seduce Protestants, and encourage Papists in their errors, are
a vast charge to those of that Religion, and in them, to the Nation, without
contributing any thing to the good of mankind: And if the French King thinks it
his Interest, in order to the rendering himself Protector of the Romish
Religion, to suppress his Protestant Subjects, who, by Law, have a right to
Liberty of Conscience, equal with the Papists, who own no other Head but their
Native King, and who were so faithful to him, that when reduced to the greatest
extremities at Rochel, and forced to implore the assistance of England, yet
would never depart from their Allegiance, in putting themselves under England,
when solicited to it; The King of England has much more reason to think it
his Interest, in order to his safety, and making himself Head of the Protestant
Party, to suppress the Papists, who own another King James his Proclamations,
22 Feb. 1603. and 10 Janu. 1606. and the preamb. of the Stat. of 35 Eliz. cap.
2.
Head, and so have a Foreign Interest, and who are bred to Principles which lead
them to a restless plotting against their Sovereigns, if contrary to them in
Religion, never joining with such, but upon design for themselves, holding the
murder of King and people, rebellion, or any thing else, which they judge may
tend to the propagating of their Religion, lawful, in the case of such as they
call Heretics, as those who have conversed with Papists abroad, where they
sometimes speak their hearts, and own their principles, do know, as well as the
Gunpowder Treason, the Massacre in Ireland, and the many plots in Queen
Elizabeth's days, (which cannot be forgotten) do sufficiently witness: In
contemplation whereof were (I suppose made those wise Statutes, enacting, that
the Popish Recusants, shall 35 Eliz. chapter 2. and 3 Jacob. chapter 5.
be restrained to their private houses in the Country, and not at any time
after to pass, or remove above five miles from thence, upon pain of forfeiture
for life, of all lands, goods, and chattels; That none of them, convicted, or
to be convicted, shall remain within ten miles of London, nor come into the
Court, or House, where his Majesty, or Heir apparent shall be, nor have in
their own houses, or in the hands or possession of any others, at their
disposition, any Arms, Gunpowder, or Ammunition whatsoever; and by the Book of
Thanksgiving appointed for the fifth of November, set forth by King James and
the Parliament, it is enjoined to pray upon that day, for the strengthening of
the hand of the King and Magistrates of the land, to cut off with Judgment and
Justice, those workers of iniquity, the Papists, whose Religion is Rebellion,
whose Faith is Faction, whose practice is the Murdering of Souls and Bodies,
and to root them out of the Confines of the Kingdom.

And now, since the wisdom of the Nation has judged the Papists so dangerous,
it may seem strange, that putting the Laws in execution against the
Non-conformists, should be thought a good reason for the prosecution of them,
and be none against the other, of whose dangerons principles there has been
such large experience; some observations here may peradventure be thought
strained and new, as that is a kind of Natural unapness in the Popish Religion
to business, whereas, on the contrary, amongst the Reformed, the greater their
zeal, the greater is their inclinations to Trade and Industry, as holding
Idleness unlawful, but experience in most places makes it good: as in Spain and
Italy, no one City can boast of any great Trade driven by their Natives, the
greatest part of their Commerce being carried on by Protestant strangers,
Amsterdam alone, having more Trade than all the Sea Towns of Italy and Spain
have, put together: but to come closer to the Observation; In Germany, even in
those Cities where they are Papists, without toleration to any other, there the
Reformed may be said to carry all the Trade, as at Colne, in other Towns where
they are Lutherans, with a public toleration to Papists, which is denied to
Calvinists, there the reformed carry the Trade clearly from both Lutherans and
Papists, the latter having little, as at Frankford, upon the Main. In other
places, where the Cities are half Papists, half Lutherans, without toleration
to any other, there the latter have the Trade, as at Augsburgh. In France, the
Reformed, for their number, are the greatest Traders, though that people, being
looser from the Bishop of Rome than Spain or Italy, are more given to Industry,
than either of those Nations; but yet, that the Reformed are by much the more
Industrious, appears, in that they have no beggars amongst them, though
calculated to exceed three or four millions of souls; it having been observed
by one that traveled France round, and crossed it several ways, that in all
his travels in it, he never met with one Protestant beggar, and yet the
multitudes of Popish, are such, that it has upon trial been sound, that in
going from the City of Rouen in Normandy, to the Protestants Church (two
English miles and an half out of town) to give every beggar but that which they
call a double, (hardly the sixth part of a penny) will cost a Lewis d'or, which
is at least 17 s. sterling. These Instances cannot be denied by any traveller,
that has been curious to enquire into the condition of these places; and
examples are the same in Politics, as experience is in Naturals. Upon my own
observation hereof, being inquisitive after the reason, a person of Quality,
and Minister of State to one of the Electors of Germany, with whom I had the
honor to be acquainted, granted the truth of these things, but went no farther
for the reasons, than that the Religion of the reformed, was an argument of
their wit, and that their Understandings made them the abler Merchants.

And now, upon the whole, since it appears that Trade depends much upon Liberty
of Conscience, the suggestions against it, either from unexperienced, or
concerned persons, are not to be regarded; Country Gentlemen, bred only at
home, to a Religion which exacts little from them, besides, Conformity to
humane Ceremonies, with opposition to every thing that is contrary, being
tenacious of that which is so pleasing and grateful to snail Nature, are not
generally competent Judges of this Interest, nor yet any sort of people, who,
having spent their days in studying Books, more than Men, or Things, employing
themselves more in punishing tender Consciences for not obeying in the Worship
of God, the Commandments of men, than in the weightiest duties of their
Callings, as in suppressing Papists, ignorant, debauched and scandalous
Ministers, rendering their actions thereby to proceed more from Self-interest,
than an enlightened and sincere Conscience, are not in this case against
demonstrations to be harkened unto.

And indeed, it is a work most suitable unto Sovereignty, the Grand child of
Henry the great of France, and the large experience of his Majesty in cases of
Religion in other Countries, to surmount all selfish opposition in this matter,
for the advancement of his own Interest, and the good of his people, which
whatsoever flatterers may suggest to the contrary, are bound up together. I
know that the enemies to Liberty of Conscience, do impose upon the world, an
apprehension of danger in it; but the position has no foundation in reason,
presidents, or any thing else, save a confident running down of truth, for
their own advantage, it no where appearing, that ever Protestants dissenting
from their National Church, having Liberty of Conscience given them, did rise
up against their King, or disturbed the quiet of their Country, as those of
the Romish Church have in all Ages, and Nations, done. For as the Reformed
Religion obliges its Members to worship God according to his will revealed in
his word, so keeping good Consciences in that, it teaches them obedience to
their Sovereigns, in civil commands. It is confessed, that the old Waldenses,
Subjects of the Duke of Savoy, have sometimes fled to Arms for defense of
themselves, in the exercise of their Religion; but although the advantages they
have often had of their Princes, have been great, yet no sooner was ever
Liberty granted them, then they laid down Arms, returning again to obedience,
in which they always continued, until their Articles were broke, which
(contrary to Faith) was frequently done: and the like cannot be denied unto the
Protestants of France, Hungary, and other places, whereas on the contrary,
ancient and modern Story, afford us plentiful relations of those of the Romish
Religion, rising up against their Kings, when they have had full liberty in
Religion, and no restraint upon them in their worship: as who were greater
Instruments in the Barons Wars in England, against their Kings, and in the
changes that followed thereupon, than the Church in time of Popery; were not
the many Tragedies, acted anciently in Scotland, in such times, when they were
all Papists? Did not the Romish Catholics in France, notwithstanding theirs
was the National Religion, depose, and degrade, their lawful Sovereign Henry
the 4th. the Parliament of Toulouse, in his absence, arraigning, and condemning
him to death, executing him in his Effigies by Harquebushes, Duke of Rohan his
Memoires.
none of which Traitorous and Rebellious usage, did that great and excellent
King (Grandfather of His Majesty of England) although he recovered all by force
of Arms, in the least revenge; by which generous, as well as politic carriage,
he added to the Conquest of his Country, the conquest of the hearts of all his
people, reconciling at once all the animosities and factions, which had been
the product of near forty years civil war: Are they not Papists in Spain and
Portugal, where, in our time, have been so many revolts and mutations, with the
deposition, or confinement of the present King of Portugal; the late
Confederates in Poland against their King, were all Papists, and of a Country
where Popery is the National Religion. The present French Kings danger, in
1650, etc. was from his Popish, and was delivered chiefly by his reformed
Subjects. The Papists in Ireland had (as none can deny) liberty for exercise of
their Religion, exceedingly above what the Non-conformists had at that time,
when they committed that not to be parallelled bloody, and more than barbarous
Massacre, in the year 1641. Nay, the steadie greatness and quiet of Sweeden, is
of no elder date, than since they cast off Popery, pulled down their Bishops,
and embraced Protestantism, the Church, having been, until then, the occasion
of much trouble unto that Kingdom. And none of these particulars, being
deniable, the Papists cannot, without great impudence, boast (as many of them
do) of their fidelity to their Princes, accusing the Protestants with want of
it, and especially since if these instances were not enough to make good the
assertion, that the Protestants are the best, and Papists the wo^st of
Subjects, the like might be observed of every individual Country and Nation in
the Christian part of Europe, in the times of Popery; but supposing these to be
sufficient, I shall not give my self any farther trouble, upon this point, or
other domestic concern of England, but proceed to the external importances of
that Kingdom.

And first, As the Foreign Interest of a Nation looks outward, and in order to
its good and preservation, regards the actings and designs of Foreign Princes
and States (especially their Neighbors) endeavoring to reduce them to that
which may most agree with their own good and safety, so it is the Interest of
the King and Kingdom of England, to make use of the advantages their strength
and situation gives them, in weighing the Imperial powers of Christendom,
keeping the balance, by adding to, or diminishing from any of them, as best
suits with Justice, and their own Interests. And as undoubtedly His Majesty
has done more than any since good Queen Elizabeth (if for a short time a sort
of people not fit to be remembered did not the same) in hitting upon his true
Foreign Interest, in that triple League of which he was the Author, and into
which he has, with so much wisdom and prudence lately entered, for opposing
all growing greatness by Sea or Land, in the French, they being already too
potent for their bordering Neighbors, so constantly and effectually to adhere
thereunto, in joining with all others to that end; and particularly with Spain,
with whom England has a much more profitable Trade than with France, is
(according to present affairs) the same; For should France, by the acquisition
of those convenient Provinces and ports of the Netherlands, become Competitors
with England in Trade, (to say no worse of them) they would, in a short time,
make good Sir Walter Rawleighs Character of them, in Sir Walter Rawleighs
Cabinet Counselor.
being false, insolent, and covetous neighbors.

Secondly, As England and the United Netherlands (which are, in ordinary
discourse understood by the name of Holland, that Province, by way of eminence,
giving denomination unto the whole) are the two great Masters of Naval
strength, and seated with such advantages for assisting each other, that whilst
a true intelligence is preserved betwixt them, it is not in nature for all
their enemies, combining together to prejudice either of them, so it is the
true Interest of England, to maintain a firm and perpetual friendship and union
with them; and that,

First, Because as the Netherlands are naturally strong, so they are above all
other Countries, fitted by situation, for the use of England, to give check to
any aspiring Prince, and be as invincible bulwarks, against the all devouring
designs of the French King, in being able at any time, with the countenance of
England, to destroy him at Sea, who being brought down there, and so in his
Commerce, will soon abate of his power at Land; and surely nothing can be more
for the security of Europe, than to reduce the Naval strength of that
threatening King, within former bounds, for the world found, that until the
Spaniard lost his Maritime force, in the year 1639. which he never after
recovered, he maintained his design for the Universal Monarchy, very
vigorously, and never sunk till then.

Secondly, Because it is equally their Interest, with England, in reference to
their Navigation, to keep the balance betwixt the Northern Kings and
Sovereigns, not suffering any of them to engross that Sea, because Naval
Commodities coming thence, neither of them can be safe, longer than the Sea
remains divided among several Princes and States, whose general Interest it can
never be to deny them necessaries for their shipping (the chief walls of their
several Countries) or a general Trade with them, as a Monarch, he being sole
Master of the whole, would peradventure, in some cases, judge it his, and
presume to refuse them all accommodations; and this principle, the States of
Holland, have wisely, in our days, several times owned, as in the years 1643.
in siding with the Crown of Sweeden, when the Danes would (had not the States
assistance been in the way) have run them down at Sea; as also on the contrary,
in the year 1658, in taking part with the Danes, when the Swedes had otherwise
done the like by them, by which means, both the Crowns are preserved, and kept
within tolerable limits and bounds.

Thirdly, Because that as Providence seems to have placed them with
conveniences for joining with England, in keeping all other Maritime Princes,
or Powers, in order so, without any capacity of being dangerous to their
Neigh-Neighbours, their Constitution being such, as will not well admit of any
further acquists.

Fourthly, Because as England and Holland, are of one and the same Religion,
save in some Ceremonies, so it would be of great encouragement, and countenance
to all the Protestant Countries, to have a firm League betwixt two such for
midable Powers, of their own belief, and as great a trouble and disturbance, to
all the Popish Counsels.

Fifthly, Because the world having had such large experience of the happy
success of their Conduct, in being principal Instruments in preventing the
House of Austria in their grand design for the universal Monarchy, and
consequently, in the propagation of the reformed Religion, as well as at
several times, in preventing both Dane and Sweed, from either of them devouring
the other; it were surely high impolity, as well as in some degree ingratitude,
to suffer such useful instruments and allies, to whom this Generation is so
much obliged, for their wise and excellent management of the general Interest
of these parts of Europe, to be destroyed.

These States I know have many enemies, some envying their Trade and Riches,
others their revolt from the King of Spain, as of bad example, and the Church
of Rome, their established National Religion, as that which is past shaking;
but because none of these arguments can be plausibly made use of against them
by the Papists, who dreads the conjunction of England with them, nor by those
Princes, and States, who assisted them in their revolt, the grand reason for
subducing of them, is made the greatness of their Trade, which being destroyed,
would be divided amongst their Neighbors, loading them sometimes untruly, with
accusations of unjust dealings, exactions, and falseness; to which I shall only
answer this, that although I have no cause to become an Advocate for them, from
any advantages or benefit received, yet having traveled their Countries,
observed their Manners, and read their Disputes, and Transactions with other
Nations, I think it but an Act of Justice to acknowledge, that in the
generality of their Morals, they are a reproach to some Nations, (and
particularly, in so little using that art of over-valuing their Commodities in
their selling to France, who so shamefully use and practice it) and as to their
Treaties, and Alliances, after which I have been inquisitive, I have sometimes
found them wrongfully charged with breach of Articles, and do not find cause to
accuse them of having been in the observance of Treaties, less candid, or
faithful, than other Countries, and I cannot think, their Trade, or Wealth,
(although I believe, that Holland singly taken, is the richest spot of ground
for its bigness, that ever was since the Creation) to be a good or honest
foundation of a quarrel: for their Commerce being alone the effects of
Industry, and Ingenuity, it is no reason for any to be angry with others,
because they exceed them in these Virtues; but besides, that the destroying of
the Netherlands, would be the shaking the safety of these Northern Regions, the
increase of Trade to other Countries, so much promised by some in their
destruction, would surely fail; for were Trade ruined in Holland, as less
cannot be the effects of Conquest and Slavery, the example and emulation of
their Trade, which has been the great increase of it in other Countries, being
taken away, and Trade fallen to a sort of people of less concern for it, men
would grow lazy and weary of Commerce, every one thinking they did well, so
long, as they were upon equal terms with their Neighbors; so that the
subversion of Holland, would be no benefit to any, save to the French King,
into whose mouth their Country would most fall, who wanting nothing for the
making of him uncontrollable, but Havens and Ports to harbor Ships, nourish
and breed Seamen, would find supply there, and whose Kingdom, being
over-stocked with people, would be able to spair men to plant an un-inhabited
Country, as would certainly be the fate of Holland, under a Conquest and
Arbitrary Government, as it has been to all the free Cities in Tuscany and
Italy, since they lost their Liberty; whereas England wanting neither Havens
nor Ports, nor having an overplus of people, it would be a damage to them in
the loss of their Inhabitants, and an unprofitable charge to maintain Foreign
Colonies, where the Seas must be perpetually crossed for supplying of them with
men, money, and necessaries; insomuch, that the Netherlands, under such
circumstances as they would be reduced unto by subduing of them, would not be
in the hands of the English, so much for their own security, as in theirs that
now possess them, for restraint and freedom makes so great difference in
prosperity, that less than Liberty, encouraging Trade and Industry, would never
be able to maintain their Walls against the Sea, which are kept up with
incredible labor, charge, and ingenuity, but expose those parts lying upon the
Sea, which are many times more considerable than all the rest, to be devoured
by it, or laid much under water, and so rendered inconsiderable. And the truth
of this principle in thus much advancing the benefit of freedom above Arbitrary
Government, which would be the lot of Holland under any Conqueror, may be
observed by the two Cities of Wesell and Mastrick, which whilst in the hands of
the Spaniard, were without Trade, miserable, wretched, and poor, many of the
houses of the latter being left in ruins by the Inhabitants, as wanting
ability to repair them; and now in less than 38 or 39 years, that the States
have been Masters of them, they are both become flourishing places, the latter
being in a great part new built, with one of the fairest and best new public
Townhouse that is ordinarily met with, next Amsterdam, and Augustbourg in
Germany. But if there were not these considerations in the case, as well as
that of the advantage that the fall of Holland would be to the French, which
alone is sufficient to engage England to support them, it could no way be the
Interest of England to ruin them, to the end to increase their own Trade,
because if their aims be only traffic, the world affords matter enough to
satisfy both Nations, and that England has so much the advantage of Holland
in natural helps for Trade, that if they do but improve them, they cannot miss
of exceeding all others in it; and if they will be careless of their common
concerns, they ought not to draw an argument from their own neglects and sloth,
for the envying other men's activity and diligence.

And lastly, so long as a firm Peace and amity is maintained by England with
the Netherlands, they may look upon them as the outworks, which must be first
taken in by any invader that will attempt them, for as it never can be the
Interest, or in the power of Holland, to invade England, so their Interest in
reference to Religion, as well as Civil security, will always oblige them not
to suffer any others to do it, or to endanger them, in whose safety they can
only be safe, it being the clear Interest of England not to suffer any other
Potentate to subvert their Government: So that upon the whole, since the
subduing of Holland cannot be a benefit but loss to England, and may be of
great advantage to France, and the Church of Rome, against which they are
impregnable Fortresses; with some smaller profit to other Popish Sovereigns
bordering upon them; as to the Elector of Colne, and Bishop of Munster, etc. It
must be the chief Foreign Interrest of England to support the present
Governmeut of Holland.

Thirdly, It is the Interest of England to hold a good Correspondence with
Spain, not only because that People being little inclinable to Commerce gives
a Trading Country the more advantage in their Friendship, but also for that
that Crown is necessarily to be made use of, for the ballancing of France.

Fourthly, and lastly, as the French King striveth for the Protectorship of the
Romish profession, so it is surely the King of England's Interest, to render
himself (wherein he can have no opposition) the General Protector of the
Protestant Religion; whereby he will become more formidable, and glorious, then
he can by other means: For as Queen Elizabeth, adhering thoroughly, and
cordially to that Party; advancing the Religion, holding intelligence, and
taking part with them in all their engagements, and considerable treaties; was
not only able in the infancy of the reformation in England, to maintain the
reformed in Scotland, France, and the Netherlands, against their Enemies, their
then seveveral Sovereigns, but also, at last to bring down Philip the second
of Spain (one of the wisest, and greatest Kings they ever had) and in him, the
whole Popish Party; by which her memory is made famous unto posterity; so his
Majesty having many less difficulties, to struggle with, than she had by
espousing the same principles, cannot fail of the like glorious success.

And now, to sum up the Domestic Interest of England, it lies in the
advancement of Trade, by removing all obstructions both in City and Country,
providing such Laws, as may any way help it, and make it most easy, especially
in giving Liberty of Conscience to all Protestant Non-conformists, and denying
it to Papists; In not covering Foreign Conquests, which have always been
prejudicial and can never be of advantage to them: and retrench the
unreasonable Fees of Lawyers, Physicians, and Officers, as they are great
iimpoverishers of the Nation: And as to the Foreign Interest of England, that
may be calculated, to be in keeping the balance among their Neighbors, and
other European Princes, being in order thereunto, firm to their present tripple
League, and in that especially to Holland, in holding a good correspondence
with Spain, and in being jealous of all growing greatness in the French,
keeping the Baltic Sea open, in His Majesty's making himself Protector of the
whole Protestant party, and as Peace is the adadvancer of Trade, to seek it,
and not war, except an inavoidable necessity require it. And thus I shall
conclude this Chapter, and in it, the Interest of England, with begging pardon
of the Author of that Book, entitled, A Discourse of Ecclesiastical polity,
for my Nonconformity to his Doctrine, which teaches, That it is safer for a
Prince to allow Vice and Debauchery, than Liberty of Conscience, whereby he
prefers the breach of the ten Commandments, and that which the whole Word of
God, the Old and New Testament, the Law and Gospel, so dreadfully threatens,
and declares against, before that, which neither the practice of our Savior,
nor his Apostles, nor any Text in Scripture forbids, or at least, himself being
Judge, not positively, and indisputably, as they do the other; wherein, I
confess, I am so far from agreeing with him, as also in many of his other
railing principles, not much better, that I think the Church of England has
reason to wish his Book had been writ by some of another Coat, and of a more
remote relation to the Church, then the Author is reputed to be, by reason of
the advantage that their enemies may have, of drawing arguments from it, to
prove their old Charge, that the power of godliness is so far from being held
out, in the Lives, Conversations, and Principles of many of their Priests, that
they rather seek to debauch, and make the people wicked and profane.

This is all I have at present to say of this Country, besides adventuring to
Prophecy, that when England, (neglecting Church Politics, which are commonly
founded in passion, revenge, and self, and Lawyers Divinity, which is generally
collected out of their own Books, more than the Books of God) will effectually
pursue their true Interest, they cannot fail (their natural advantages for
trade considered) of being more great and glorious than any other Nation.

FINIS.

