THE REVENGE: OR, A MATCH IN NEWGATE. A COMEDY. As it was Acted at The Dukes
Theater.

LONDON: Printed for W. Cademan, at the Popes head in the New Exchange. 1680.

Actors Names.
(...) Sir Lyonell, Father to Marinda and Diana. Mr. Smith, Wellman, In love
with Marinda. Mr. Williams, Friendly, His Friend, in love with Corina. (...)
Sir John Empty, Lover of Diana. Mr. Bowman, Mr. Shatter, Lover of Diana. Mr.
Jevorn, Trickwell, A cheating Gamester. Mr. Lee, Mr. Dashit, A Vintner. Mr.
Bright, Glisten, A Goldsmith. Captain, Jervice, His man. A Boy, Sam, Dashit's
man, Mumford, Jack, The Barber's man. Mrs. Barry, Corina, The Whore. Mrs.
Butler, Marinda, Mistress to Wellman. Mrs. Price, Diana, Loves Friendly.
Anybody, Ample, Their woman. Mrs. A. Lee, Mrs. Dashit, Wife to Dashit. Mrs.
Norice, Mrs. Dunwell, A Bawd. (...) Constable. (...) Watchmen. Boys, Fiddlers,
Watchmen


ACT the First.
SCENE the First.
A Street. Enter Sam with Torch, Dashit raving, followed by Mrs. Dashit. Mr.
Dash. RUN, you Rogue, run, raise the Street, you Son of a careless Whore: Cry,
Stop Thief, stop Thief!


Sam. Which way, Sir?


Mr. Dash. A Pox of ways: Sirrah, cry, Stop Thief, I say.


Sam. So we may stop honest men, Sir.


Mr. Dash. There Is no such thing within the Walls of London, ye Rogue; there is
nothing but Knaves, Cheats, Cuckolds and Traitors, Thieves and Pickpockets, tho
I be one of the Livery. A Pox of Honesty, my Plate's gone, the Reckoning
unpaid, I Am cheated and undone! therefore run, ye Dog, run.


Mrs. Dash. Good sweet Husband, have patience.


Mr. Dash. Patience! yes, so you advised when I found the Alderman and your
Ladyship in a civil posture on the red Couch in the Swan. Patience quotha! Pox
of your Remedies. Get ye in, here is Company.


Enter Footman with Flambeau, followed by Friendly and Wellman. Well. When! how
now, Mr. Dashit, what enraged in Rancor, and the Beauty of the London-bars,
your Lady too, in Tears! What Is amiss? unfold thy dismal story.


Mr. Dash. Only cheated, robbed, abused, and undone, Sir: that is all, that is
all.

[Weeps.
Well. As how, man! Come, advance thy comely Countenance, and do not let thy
sorrowful Snout bedew thy reverend Jerkin. The reason, my hardly honest Dashit.


Mrs. Dash. Oh Si^, Mr. Trickwell that Knave is this night run away with our
great Gallon-Tankard, six silver Boats, a great Salt, besides Spoons and Forks.


Mr. Dash. Oh, for some wise man that would but find 'em out presently!


Well. Yes, if a wise man could be found out presently.

Friend. How was this Plate lost? how escaped he unseen with it?


Mr. Dash. Why, an't like ye, Sir, thus: As I understand, that man, man, quoth
I? no, rather Monster, that t'other-end-of-the-Town-Villain, nay, I believe
that Jesuit in disguise, sent from beyond Sea to ruin honest Citizens; I say,
this Heathen Trickwell comes me into my house the evening with a great
two-handed Gentlewoman, or some Priest in Petticoats; they call for a Room,
pretend to send a Porter for some Ladies of delight, bespeak a Supper, but no
Ladies came.


Mrs. Dash. My Cockie forgets to tell your Worships, that our house being full,
we had no Room empty but the great Parlor below stairs.


Mr. Dash. Hold your peace, hold your peace, I say. Am I a Common-Council-man
like to be of the City of London, and cannot tell my Tale my self? Get ye in,
I say, and look to what is left.


Well. Well, Sir, on with your Relation.


Mr. Dash. Well, Sir, a noble Supper they had of the best in season; I came in,
cried, Your servant, Gentlemen; asked 'em how they liked their Wine, and
departed civilly: Then entered a blind Harper, crie^, Do ye lack any Music,
Sir? He cries, Play: The Harper uncases, the Drawer is nodded out, who obeys,
believing he would be private with the Gentlewoman; and it is Sam's part, you
know, Sir, to wink at things.


Well. Right and civil.


Mrs. Dash. Aye, aye, but he shall answer for that winking at the last day,
I Will warrant him.


Mr. Dash. Well Sir, having eat the Supper, and Trickwell perceiving none in
the room but the blind Harper, whose Eyes Heaven had shut up from beholding
wickedness, opens the Casement to the street, very patiently packs and pockets
up my Plate, unnaturally thrusts the woman out of the window, and himself most
preposterously with his heels forwards follows. The Harper plays on, bids the
empty Dishes much good may do 'em, and plays on still. The Drawer returns,
cries, What do you lack, Gentlemen? but out, alas, the Birds were flown, Sir,
flown. Laments are raised.


Well. Which did not pierce the Heavens.


Mr. Dash. Sam cries out; my Wife in the Bar hears the noise, and she bawled
out; I heard her, and thundered; the Boys flew like Lightning, and all was in
confusion.


Well. Well, this must be for some great sins committed; the sins of the Bar
and Sellar, unmerciful Bills, and suffisticated Wine, my honest damned Vintner:
-- Repent, oh repent and mend, and be sound.


Mr. Dash. Well, I will hang that Rogue Trickwell, and there is an end on it:
I Will do it; and so Good night to you, Gallants.


Exit Dashit and his Wife, as into their house. Well. Well, dear Jack, Good
night: I have a Visit to make before I sleep, and will take my leave of thee. A
found Wench, soft Sleep, and pleasant Dreams, bless thee, my dear Friendly.


Friend. Not so, I Will see thee safe at home; I dare not leave ye to your self
so late; you are warm with Youth and Wine, which may direct you to the undoing
of that body of yours which shortly must be blessed with chaste embraces. These
common women will ruin thee, Frank; Faith leave 'em in good time: come, you
shall not to a Bawdy House, I hate 'em.


Well. I pray for their continuance and increase ere since I thought of
Marriage.


Friend. Prithee why?


Well. A married man ought to love a Bawdy House, as Englishmen love Flanders;
wish war should be maintained there, lest it should be brought home to their
own doors.


Friend. Thou art a worthy Lad, and brave; but this damned Lust has been thy
constant daily vice, the only one you are given to.


Well. Prithee call it a nightly one: But not to trifle with thee, Faith I am
going the way of all flesh.


Friend. To a Whore?


Well. One thou call so, a very Publican and sinner.


Friend. And can thou, having such an Object before thy eyes as the fair, the
chaste Mirinda, whom you are to marry, give thy self up to the loose, the common
arms of one who loves thee not but for her interest? Damn her, thou shall not
go. I hate, I nauseate a common Prostitute, who trades with all for gain; one
that sells humane flesh, a Mangonist.


Well. Poor Devils, what would you have 'em do? would thou have 'em get their
living by the Curse of man, the Sweat of their Brows? Egad they dearly earn
what we give 'em. Is Charity grown a sin, or relieving the Poor and Impotent,
an offense? And Faith, Franck, where can we bestow our Money better? In Land
the Title may be cracked, in Houses they may be burnt, in fine Clothes they will
wear out, in Wine, alas, our Throats are but short, and our heads weak; but
woman, oh dear lovely woman's the lasting true pleasure! Lay it out upon woman,
I say, and a thousand to one, some one of them will bestow that on you that
shall stick by you as long as you live: They are no ungrateful persons, they will
give Love for Love; do you protest, they will swear; do you vow, they will lie; do
you sigh, they will weep; do you give them English Coin, they will repay you with
the French -- And they only sell their Bodies: Do not some of our Sex sell
their Souls? nay, since all things have been sold, Honor, Justice, Faith, even
Religion, pray where is the dishonor of selling the Pleasures of a woman's Bed?
Who is it would live and toil, but for a woman? who fights, lies cold and hard
in open field, but to gain Wreaths to lay at a woman's feet?

And it is a truth can be denied of no man:

All things were made for man, and man for woman.

-- Give me my Fee.


Friend. Well, Sir, I see you are resolved, and I can only boast I love Diana
better than you do her Sister Marinda.


Well. Come, will thou go with me?


Friend. Whither?


Well. To this house of Salvation.


Friend. Salvation!


Well. Yes, 'twill make thee repent. Prithee go to the Family of Love, I Will
show thee my Creature, my Natural, my Mistress, my pretty blue-ey'd Wanton, my
honest fond self-hearted Flatterer, my fair-fac'd, sweet lip'd Rogue, that has
Beauty enough for her Virtue, Virtue enough for a Woman, and Woman enough for
any reasonable man, in my knowledge.


Friend. What to a Bawdy House, to visit an impudent Prostitute? Pox on it,
'twill make me hate the Sex. The worst Object the world can show me, is an
immodest vulgar woman.


Well. No matter, thou shall go; go as thou love me.


Friend. Well, Sir, I Will go to bring you safely back.


Exeunt. SCENE draws to a House.
Enter Mrs. Dunwell, and Trickwell drunk. Trick. Nay, Moll, unreasonable Mary!
when, the whole Prize was not above forty pound; and have thou the conscience
to snack ten only for a good word speaking, a little holding the door, and
bawding? The device was my own too, the hazard mine, and the hanging may be
mine, whilst thou securely filchest under my conduct. Come, the nest of Cups is
fair, you Bitch, be contented; you were drunk too into the bargain, Moll. Come,
bear a Conscience, Moll, and Heaven will bless our endeavors: besides, Moll,
thou have an honest Calling of Bawding, which brings thee in a pretty
Livelihood, Moll; when God knows I trust to nothing but my own indurious slight
of hand. Come, give me back the Salt.

[Snatches the silver Salt.
Dun. By Yea and by Nay, Trickwell, I am afraid thou will play the Knave, and
restore 'em.


Trick. No, by the Lord, Aunt, Restitution is Catholic; and you know Oracles
are ceased. Tempus praeteritum. -- Do hear, my necessary Evil? -- Thou
ungodly Fire that burnt Diana's Temple, do hear? make Corina civil, or by the
Lord, Bawd --


Dun. Fire! Gad you are the foulest mouthed son of a Whore, the profanest
railing Raskal, call a woman the most ungodly names! I must confess we all eat
of the forbidden Fruit; and for my own part, though I am, as they say, a Bawd
that covers a multitude of sins, yet I trust I am none of the wicked that go to
Steeple Houses with profane Organs in 'em, ye scurvy saucy Jack.


Trick. Who, I rail at thee, my industrious Moll, my subtle Procurer? I rail at
thee, my necessary Damnation? I Will make an Oration in praise of thy Modesty,
thou flower of thy Function.


Dun. And I think I have deserved it at your hands, Mr. Trickwell; for I have
assisted you early and late, up-rising, and downlying.


Trick. Thou have; therefore listen: A Bawd for her Profession is the most
honorable of all the 12 Companies; for as that Trade is most worshipful that
sells the best Commodities, what must the Bawd be then, my little Moll? For
where others sell silk Clothes, Gold and Silver, Pearls and Diamonds, thou
sellest divine Virtue, Virginity, Modesty, Maiden-heads, Youth and Beauty:
And who are her Customers? not Cits, Grooms, Mechanics, and disbanded
Soldiers; but Gentlemen of the best Rank, Knights, Lords, Dukes, and Squires.
Thus she lives, keeps the best Company, eats and drinks of the best, and
domineers when she is drunk, reigns Queen, Moll, over her adoring Subjects. But
hold, here is Wellman and Friendly! what a Pox does his Gravitie in a
Bawdie-house?


Enter Wellman and Friendly. Well. Come along, yonder is the Preface to my
Mistress, her Matron, or Bawd, or what you please. Mrs. Dunwell, your servant.


Dun. Your servant, sweet Sir: Ah, you're a pretty man, to neglect a Creature
that loves you thus; in troth you are -- But well, I Will fetch her to you, Sir.
--


Exit Dun. Well. Do so, sweet Mrs. Dunwell. -- What, Mr. Trickwell, does your
Knaveship dare walk the street? Look to it, Mr. Dashit lies in wait for you.


Trick. The more fool he; I can lie for my self: A Pox of the rich Raskal, it is
no deceit in me to cheat him; he has cozened me of an Estate of some two
hundred a year, with his damned Reckonings, and then who but honorable Mr.
Trickwell, the noble Squire, and soforth, till he had got all my Land in
Mortgage; then took the forfeiture, and turned me (...) of doors. I Will plague
him for it. But I interrupt your diversion, and will kiss your hands, my noble
Patrons.


Exit Trick. with the Plate. Enter Dunwell and Corina, she kicking her. Well.
See, Sir, this the ugly thing you so despise!


Friend. This!


Well. This very thing: it is but a Dowdie -- but she serves. --


Friend. A Whore this! Virtue defend me, what a lovely woman it is!


Well. Salute her, man, salute her.


Friend. Salute her! yes, and leave my heart upon her lips.


Well. Go, salute my friend; this is my friend Corina.


Cor. I care not for you nor your friends; I Am sure you use me scurvily,
because you know I love you: but I shall learn those Arts you men are practiced
in; and scorn, and hate, and hide it, when it serves my turn, as you can do. --
I shall -- but yet I Am true, true as my Virtue when you first seduced it, false
as you are, -- and yet I love you strangely. --


Well. Salute my friend, I say -- go, you fond fool, clasp his neck round, and
press his cheeks to yours; kiss him as you do me, as soft and meltingly: go,
you coy tit, I say you shall.


[Kisses him. Friend. She'as fired me with that touch: -- there is Witchcraft
in it.


Well. Come, kiss her again; by Heaven thou shall, I Will not be jealous on it:
kiss her more ardently -- So, thou will learn in time. Go fetch your Lute, and
let him hear ye sing to it.


Cor. I Am all obedience, Sir, when you command; but I have something heavy at
my heart that makes me wish you would excuse me now.


Well. Go too, I say -- what can sit heavy there? I love thee, love thee
infinitely, in faith I do, Corina. Here, here is Gold for thee; the Summer's
coming on, and thou perhaps wants Toys, as Gowns and Points, and Petticoats.
I Will have thee show, Corina, with the best, splendid and gay, my Girl, as is
thy Beauty.


Cor. I Will take this Gold, but it is not that I want: methinks of late there is
a strange decay of Passion in you; you're not so dearly fond as you were wont,
supplying still your want of Love with Gold; your Mirth is forced, your Visits
cold and short, as Winterdays; and when you speak of Love, you do it with
caution. There Is some reserve hid in that generous breast, which I would be
acquainted with, yet tremble lest you should betray't too soon.


Well. Corina, you mistake my heart, it is thine, entirely thine; but when a
Lover's sure, as I am of thy heart, those little assiduities are neglected
which only hoping Lovers use to pay. I am happy now, and have no need of Vows
but those of Constancy. Go to your Lute.


Cor. And have ye none you do design to marry?


Well. Fie, you're a fool to think I be so weak; Marry! I scorn that slaverie,
whilst I possess all the delights of it with thee, without its plagues and
care. -- Go to your Lute. [Exit Cor.] Well, Frank, and how do thou like my
Mistress? is she not charming? do you blame me now? In Troth I loved her dearly
once, till my Soul showed me the imperfections of my body, and placed my love
on a more worthy object, my fair Marinda; which if this Baggage knew, there
were no being for me, she would so rave: But faith I think I Am not so criminal
as you imagined, hah?


Friend. Yet she is a Whore!


Well. A Whore! Oh call her a Miss, a Lady of the Town, a Beauty of delight,
or any thing. Whore! it is a nauseous name, and out of fashion now to call
things by their right names. Is a Citizen a Cuckold? no, he is one of the
Liverie: Is a great man a Fool? no, he is weak, or led away: Is a Person of
Quality pockie? no, but is not well, has got a Surfeit, or so. Come, she is a
Mistress, -- but hark, she sings!


A Song within to a Lute, after which, enters Corina. Friend. She Is all a
perfect Heaven! Oh I adore her!


Cor. To obey your commands, I sung, my Love, but I had rather you had pardoned
me.


Well. You are a simple Chit; go, get you gone, and let me go; it is late, and I
am sleepie.


Cor. This Language was not wont to come from thee; take heed, and do not cheat
my easy Faith: for if you do, perhaps 'twill make me mad; and in my wildness
some strange things may do, may ruin both our lives. Take heed; for now I love
ye much above 'em both. Come, you shall stay with me to night.


Well. By no means, my Dear; this Gentleman has vowed to see me chastely laid.


Cor. And so ye shall: the Play of Infants shall not be more chaste. I have no
wish to make him break his Vow, and he shall have a Bed.


Well. Peace! that offer will offend him; he is a modest man, one of a professed
abstinence. Good night.


Cor. And must you go?


Well. I must.


Cor. And will you come to morrow? But oh I did not use to ask such Questions.
Will you be sure?


Well. I will: when did I fail? Good night. Boy, your Flambeau. Good night,
Corina.


He goes out, Friendly stays. Cor. Why stay you, Sir? you see your friend is
gone.


Friend. Madam, if he knows not how to prize Heaven, I do; and cannot leave the
pleasure so soon, at least if you would give me leave to gaze, I dare not say
possess, that were a blessing fit only for the Gods; nor knows man how to calm
it. -- That you should throw away such wondrous beauty on the remiss, cold,
and insensible!


Cor. Who is it, Sir, that is so insensible?


Friend. Death, whither does my passion hurry me? I shall betray friendship of
many years, for a flame which a new lust has kindled in a moment.


Cor. Heavens! are you silent, Sir? what made ye talk of one remiss and cold?
who mean ye? Wellman? Oh, if you did --


Friend. I meant mankind; for none can merit you. -- Is she unchaste? can such
an one be damned? Oh Love and Beauty, you two eldest seeds of the vast Chaos,
what strong right ye have even in things divine, our very Souls!


Cor. Why do you stifle what was so well begun? Unfold; I know you have some
meaning, Sir, in what you have to say: Concerns it Wellman?


Friend. No. Answer me one thing, Madam.


Cor. I will: for you have something to relate, which I must hear. Demand; I
listen.


Friend. The Question is but rude.


Cor. I care not. -- What means he?

[Aside.
Friend. Are you -- You pardon me?


Cor. I do. There Is something in his heart that I must flatter thence. Be
confident.


Friend. And are you then -- a -- Whore? You said you would forgive.


[Bows. Cor. I did: and though that question, yet 'cause I know thou have some
reason for it, I Will answer thee directly, That I am.


Friend. Are Prostitutes such things, so delicate? Can custom spoil what Nature
made so good? I never saw a sweet face vicious: it might be proud, inconstant,
wanton, vain.


Cor. Oh leave, Sir, to philosophize on Beauty, and tell me why you do so.


Friend. Heavens! why could not thou be constant?


Cor. Constant! to what? to whom?


Friend. To Wellman: he has all the Charms of Nature; and to be false to him,
was such a sin --


Cor. Oh Heavens! what base flatterer has traduced me? tell me; who dares
report I am not true, not true to Wellman? I have been false to Virtue, false
to Honor, false to my Name and Friends; but was to Wellman what Heaven is to
the Just and Penitent, all soft, all mercy, all complying sweetness.


Friend. By Heaven, I do believe it; and nere heard a breath that could
profanely say thou were not: But oh, I thought with reason, if 'twere so, I
could not slightly part with such a Jewel, or, Indian-like, barter this real
Gold for shining gingling Bawbles. Marinda! Heaven, you are an Angel to her!


Cor. Enough: I know my doom; that word's enough; and I Am betrayed to ruin!
[aside.] I will: My heart, thou shall dissemble this -- Go, base false man,
that with the name of Friend has played the Traitor to the best of men. I know
thou injur'st Wellman; or if true, 'twas not thy part to tell it: had thou
license for such a cruel Tale, thou should have spared it to her that loved
thy friend. Be gone, I hate thee, and whatsoere thou meants by such a Lie, I
scorn thee for it, and think thee much unfit for any gallant friendship: I know
it is truth, and with the fatal knowledge instruct my heart to break.


[Aside. Goes out. Friendly musing alone, enter peeping Wellman. Well. Tho I do
not care for this woman now, yet some dregs of the old haunt of Jealousy
remain about me still; and I must see what use my friend and quondam Mistress
makes of this kind opportunity. -- Hah! alone, and musing!


[Listens. Friend. 'Twas not well done, indeed, to tell her; but Love was
raging in me, and I believed I should insinuate with that secret.


Well. By Heaven, he is caught! Eternal Laughter seize me.


Friend. 'Twas Love! the very first effects of Love were treacherous and ill:
Heaven guard me from the rest. Yet I must on:

Let Wintered Age dully pretend to prove

That Love is Lust; I know no life but Love.


Well. Is it so, Sweetheart? how is it? what, is the worst sight the world can
produce, a common woman now?


Friend. Hah! will you go home, Sir? it is high bedtime.


Well. With all my heart, Sir; only do not chide me. I must confess. --


Friend. A wanton Lover you have been.


[Shaming. Well. When Love was raging in me.


[Shaming again. Friend. Oh leave your rallying; will you be gone?


Well. Let Wintered Age dully pretend to prove That Love is Lust; I know no
life but Love. Go thy ways for an Apostate; I believe my last Garment must be
let out in the seams for you: Is It not so? But come, I must go serinade
Marinda; but take this certain rule along with thee:

Of all the Fools that Ignorance ere nursed,

He that against Nature would be wise, is worst.


Exeunt. ACT the Second.
SCENE the Second.
A Street. Enter Wellman and Friendly, with Footmen with Lights, and men with
Music; as under Marinda's Window. Well. WEll, Gentlemen, here is the Window of
my dear Marinda: it is here, my friends, resides that lovely Maid, whose beauty
chaces away those lesser fires that did infest my heart. Come, gently touch
your strings, and call her forth to bless me ere I go to rest: I Am not half
sanctified without a sight.


They play a little, then a Song. Enter Marinda above, in Night-dress, and
Diana. Mar. Who Is there, my dear loved Wellman? This was kind.


Well. My generous Marinda! when did I ere approach thee but with kindness, the
fondest tenderest part of kindness too? and when I cease to do so, Heaven
neglect me.


Mar. And me, when I but fear the contrary. Would I could let thee in; but oh I
dare not: my Father nicely careful, tho you are mine, mine by a solemn
Contract, yet forbids me to entertain thee with that freedom yet.


Well. But, my Marinda, it is a heavenly night, such as was made for Lovers,
still and calm; and I have such soft things to whisper to thee, as pains me to
conceal. I long to touch thy hand, to catch thy sighs, and lean my head upon
thy rising bosom. A freedom now methinks you might allow me: it is very hard.


Mar. It Is so; but yet a little suffering, and we may meet with lawful freedom:
till when, continue to be true and kind.


Well. By Heaven, by all the Stars that shine above, and by thy brighter Eyes,
I will be ever true.


Mar. I must give faith to what you say; and prithee since, easy Maid, I do
believe so soon, in pity do not cheat me. Here, wear this little Ring; a dying
Brother gave it, and bad me never part with it but to him that Love had made my
Husband: Wear it thou; for you are my Souls best choice.


Takes it in his hand, and kisses it. Well. Which when I part from, Hope, the
best comfort of my life, forsake me.


Dian. Heavens! what a long tedious Tale of Faith and Troth's here! Could I
once see the man I liked, I Would have done a thousand fine and more material
things by this time.


Well. Madam, here is a Man, whom if you could but pity --


Dian. What, my grave Lover Mr. Friendly, who hates a Wencher! no by my Troth,
I Am for no such dull Ingredience in a Lover: I love a man that knows the way to
a woman's bed without instructions. Besides, what should we two do together, get
Fools? no, I hate 'em.


Well. You may be mistaken in your man.


Dian. I wish I were: Let him but bring it under the hand of any woman who has
been kind to him, and I Will believe him fit to be beloved by me; till then, I
am obdurate.


Friend. Well, Madam, I Will endeavor to obey you.


Dian. Let it be quickly then, I hate delays, you know I Am stored with Lovers,
Sir John Empty will be beforehand with you else; you know he is a spruce Spark,
and cannot long lay siege before a heart, but he will force an entrance: he is
of my humor too, gay, loves Fiddles, Wine and Women; a fool and rich, oh
heavenly Quality! Be wise, Sir, and consider 'em, and learn to whore betimes;
you know not what you may come to. Farewell, the day begins to break, and the
old man will wake. Good morrow, modest Mr. Friendly.


Exeunt from the window. Well. Good morrow, mad-cap: Come, shall's go to bed?


Friend. No, I cannot sleep; I Will walk a little.


Well. And meditate? Farewell, Sir, I Am for rest.


Exeunt all but Friendly. Friend. This woman yesterday was charming to me, and
now all that she said, seemed dull and tedious. What a strange change is here!
The light comes on; hark how the freeborn Birds chant forth their untaught
Passions, and in those pretty Notes express their love. They have no Bawds, no
mercenary Beds, no politic Restraints, no artful Heats, no faint Dissemblings;
Custom makes them not blush, nor Sham afflicts their name. Oh happy Birds, in
whom an inborn heat is held no sin! how vastly you transcend poor wretched man,
whom national custom, tyrannous respect of slavish order fetters, calling that
sin in us, which in all else is Nature's highest Virtue. But a Whore! now shame
forsake me, whither am I fallen, one that my friend has had, to live to be a
shameful talk to men!


Wellman returns. Well. I have a mind to know whether Friendly goes to Corina;
when I am absent, it is with some regret I think he should; but present, it so
pleases me to see his modesty in love, I Am ready to resign her. -- He Is here
still! Good morrow, Friend, I cannot leave thee thus dissatisfied; what art
thou studying on?


Friend. Love; but it likes me not.


Well. Why?


Friend. She is not honest.


Well. What then? should we hate all that are so, some men would hate their
Mothers and their Sisters; a sin against kind.


Friend. Is it a wise man's part to be in love?


Well. Let wise men alone; 'twill beseem thee and me well enough.


Friend. And shall I not commit a sin against friendship?


Well. What to love where I do? By Heaven, I resign her freely to thee: the
creature and I must grow strangers; and by this time she has heard of my
design to marry, and swears and rails, and cries, and curses me. Come, faith I
will resign her, and you see Diana will like thee nere the worse for it.


Friend. I Will but embrace her, hear her speak, and at the most but kiss her.


Well. Oh hark, he that could live upon the scent of Meat, would live cheaply.


Friend. I shall never become heartily a man of the Town, a kind of flat
ungracious Debauchee; an unsufficient dullness reigns about me.


Well. This Italian breeding has spoiled thee, and stiffen'd thy behavior.
Come, come, thou shall to her, and she shall like thee.


Friend. But if she should not, Friend!


Well. Fear her not, it is her Trade, and what she'as practiced long with many
Lovers.


Friend. Was she not true to thee?


Well. I do believe she was, whilst she was mine.


Friend. Was she a sinner ere you saw her then?


Well. Oh a very Strumpet! Pardon me truth. Come, have a good heart, and thou
shall possess her, since you are so in love.


Friend. Death, man, it is Destiny, I cannot help it.


Well. Nay, I hope so. Come, come, she sells but flesh; so that even in the
enjoying thou't regain again thy freedom. Go thy ways. [Exit Friend. Enter
Trickwell.] How now, Raskal! what make you up so early?


Trick. He that will thrive, must be early stirring, Sir: I am going to get the
Penny, Sir; Aye, Heaven has endowed me with industry, I thank it.


Well. And what good Acquaintance have you, Sirrah? no handsome women?


Trick. Faith, Sir, yes, some do start up now and then; but a Pox on it, when
they have run through all the Trades and Degrees of the City, they pass at the
other side of the Town for new Faces, and are caught up by your Courtiers for
innocent and honest, though the Citie-Surgeon have had good Customers of 'um;
and by my Troth, Sir, I hate to cheat a Gentleman with false Ware. But last
night --


Well. What last night?


Trick. I was horrid drunk at Supper with one Sir John Empty, a brave young
fool for my purpose; I brought him a Wench, one Betty Cogit; a Pox on her, a
pretty drunken Whore it is, and handsome: if she can serve you, I can bed my
Knight with any other.


Well. Away, you're a Rogue; I Will talk about it another time. Farewell: Have a
care of Mr. Dashit, Sirrah.


Exit Well. Trick. Let Mr. Dashit have a care of me; I Will take care he shall be
cozened most plentifully. Now for some new device! what shall it be?


Enter Jack, a boy with Barbers things. Jack. Pray, Sir, which is the way to
Cheapside, to the Sun-Tavern?


Trick. Sun-Tavern, Child! what would thou do there?


Jack. When, Sir, I am sent for to trim Mr. Dashit; and tho he be my Godfather,
I know not the way to his house.


Trick. Why, art thou a Barber?


Jack. A Barber-Surgeon, Sir.


Trick. To what Bawdy House does your Master belong? and what is your name?


Jack. John Scowre, an't like your Worship.


Trick. John Scowre! Good Mr. John Scowre, I desire your farther acquaintance.
Nay, be covered, my dainty boy. Is thy Master at home?


Jack. My Father, forsooth, you mean; but he is dead.


Trick. And laid in's Grave, good boy?


Jack. Yes, Sir, and my Mother keeps shop.


Trick. A good witty boy; thon't live to read a Chapter to the Family, and
write Sermons, John, in time, wo't thou* not?


Jack. In grace a God, Sir.


Trick. And whither art thou going now, John?


Jack. Marry, forsooth, to trim Mr. Dashit the Vintner, He Is my Godfather, I
told you, forsooth.


Trick. Good boy, hold up thy head. Prithee do one thing for me; my name's
Hazard.


Jack. He! good Mr. Hazard!


[Bows. Trick. Lend me thy Barbers Implements.


Jack. Oh Lord, Sir!


Trick. Well spoken, a fine boy! What are they worth, child?


Jack. Oh Lord, Sir, worth! I know not.


Trick. A witty child! Here Is a shilling for thee. Where do live, John?


Jack. At the three Washballs, forsooth, in Mincing-lane.


Trick. Aye, I know it; a delicate boy! I have an odd Jest in my head, child,
to trim Mr. Dashit: It Is for a wager, boy, a humor; I Will return thy things
presently. Hold, let us see --


Takes off his Apron, and takes his things. Jack. What mean ye, Mr. Hazard?


Trick. Nothing, child, but a Jest. Go drink a flaggon, and I Will return
presently.


Jack. Pray, Sir, do not stay.


Trick. As I Am an honest man -- The three Washbals, John?


Jack. Aye, Sir.


Trick. Good: And if I do not shave Mr. Dashit, my ingenaity wants an edge. Let
me see, a Barber! My villainous tongue will betray me; I must step in and
disguise a little. For my speech, what if it be broken French, or a Northern or
a Welsh Barber? Good, the Widow Scowres man: good, newly hired a Journeyman;
very well: I have my Cue, and will proceed, happy be luck --


Exit. Trick. SCENE changes to Corina's house.
Enter Corina with her Hair loose, raving, and Mr. Dunwell. Dun. Nay, dear
sweet child, do not torment thy self thus violently: say Wellman be to be
married, are there no more young Gentlemen, no more both handsome and rich?
Come, come, you could not expect to build Tabernacles with him.


Cor. Damn your sententious Nonsense, let me go loose as the winds when mad,
when raging mad. 'Twas you, Heaven curse ye for it, that first seduced me, swore
that he loved me, would eternally; and when my Virtue had resolved me good,
damned Witch, whose trade is Lying and Confusion, you hard besieged it round
with tales of Wellman, repeated all his Charms so often over, my Heart began to
yield, and Virtue fade like flowers with too much heat; which when you saw; a
Curse upon your Tongue, you told him where the part was feeblest here -- told
him my strength, and how he best might conquer: and he, oh lovely Tyrant, found
it true, and never ceased till he had vanquished all. Leave me, thou Witch, that
have reduced this soul, this body too, to nothing but a Grave.


Dun. To nothing! Marry and that is not my fault; I have made as many proffers
of your Virginity since he ruined it, as if you had been my own Daughter a
thousand times, so I have; but you were so peevish, you ever stood in your own
light; nothing would down with you but Wellman.


Cor. Hell take thy tongue, or blast it.


Dun. Aye, for God forgive me, it has been a thousand times forsworn for you,
and yet I Have brought you to nothing. Have I not brought you English and French
Merchants of the best Rank, Jews of the richest Tribes, Irish Lords, Scottish
Earls, and lastly, the Dutch Agent, who offered ye a Tun of money? and is all
this nothing? Come, come, had you had grace, you had made something of all
these; but nothing but Wellman was regarded.


Cor. Oh that hated Name, like some black Charm it curdles up my blood.


Dun. And yet, a'my conscience the Gentleman's an honest Gentleman, and one you
have got fairly by; I hope him to you, and have I this for my labor? Well,
Mary Dunwell, [weeps] go thy ways; Mary Dunwell, thy kind heart will bring
thee to the Hospital.


Cor. I Will be revenged; nothing but dire Revenge shall satiate my Rage.
Methinks I am inspired with manly strength, a bloody courage swells my rising
heart, and I shall act some wondrous dismal mischief. And yet to see him
bleed, he that has sworn so many tender things, and breathed 'em all in kisses
on my bosom; but now all those, and thousands new invented, he pays another
Mistress more beloved. I die, I die, and cannot bear that thought, by which I
find I Am feeble woman still. Why did thou? tell me, for I Will here begin, why
did thou praise this Monster? -- To my soul.


Draws a Dagger and takes hold of her. Dun. Heavens, Madam, hold and hear me: I
did praise him, I confess; I said he was a fool, a lavish fool, one that loved
women more than his Religion, that he kept high, and loved most ardently: but
what of this? the wind you see is turned.


Cor. Turn all then to confusion; turn, thou Witch, it is I will play the Devil.
Heart, resolve, and set down this decree, never to rest till thou have made him
equal to me, wretched.


Enter Boy. Boy. Madam, Mr. Wellman and Mr. Friendly are below, and desire
leave to kiss your hand.


Cor. Oh he is grown ceremonious in his Visits. No more, I will be calm, as if
my fortune knew no change; I will dissemble, smile;

I Will show my self all woman in my Art, Puts the Dagger and Pistol in her two
Pockets.

But be a very Devil in my heart.


Enter Wellman and Friendly. Well. How now Corina, what disorder's this?


Cor. Oh my dear life! this woman has displeased me; but one kind look from
thee chases all other thoughts out of my soul.


Well. But what is the matter? do not dissemble with me.


Cor. With thee! far be such art from thy Corina's tongue; you have taught her
truth with love. What else should such a Master teach a Mistress? Come, I
forgive her now: Alas, she'as lost the little Dog you gave me. Would it not
grieve one to loose ought of thine?


Well. Fie, fie, cry for a Dog! what would thou do for me that pay'st such
tributes to a poor worthless Animal?


Cor. For thee, weep tears of blood; but it is impossible I could be robbed of
thee by ought but death. I know thy noble heart -- to be a Traitor.

[Aside.
Well. Thou art so fond, thou mind'st nothing but me; sees thou not my friend?


Cor. Yes, and love him too, next to thy self, by Heaven; for he is as great a
Villain, being he is man. Come, Sir, you must not be so sad; I Will sing and
dance, do any thing to make you gay and smile: for trust me, Sir, I hate sad
Company. Heavens, what ails you, Sir? have you the Toothache, Sir? I Have many
remedies for that.


Friend. No, my pain is at my heart; have you a Cure for that?


Cor. A thousand. Kind Eyes, soft Sighs and Kisses well applied.


Friend. 'Twill but increase the pain: 'twas so I caught it.


Cor. Alas, I Will sing then; I have a thousand Songs, so pretty and so loving.
--


Friend. Still that but hurts me more.


Cor. Then I Have no Remedies. [sighs.] Hah, what Ring is that? I like it, and
must have it.


Well. No you must not, Love.


Cor. Fie, you call me Love, and cry I must not! I say I will. How now, who
is it commands where I am?


Well. You entirely; but this Ring I cannot part with.


Cor. It Is my Rivals: Rot with his finger, how it fires my blood, and the red
flame kindles about my face, and will betray my heart! Come, it is a trifle.


Well. I care not for the value.


Cor. Has it a worth besides its own intrinsic one?


Well. Nay, you're of late so peevish and so jealous, that you grow troublesome.


Cor. Jealous! by this dear mouth not I. [Kisses him.] Come, give me the Ring;
by all that is kind, you shall: By all our Loves, and by all those soft
Embraces when in my Arms you swore eternal Love, eternal Faith, I do conjure ye
give it me: I never used to beg such Toys in vain.


Well. Thou art uncivilly importunate. Go, fool, thou shall not have it; I care
not for thee nor thy Jealousy.


Cor. He speaks his soul in that, which from his mouth destroys all my
dissembling. I know that Ring, thou falser than the Devil; I know it is
Marinda's, your new Mistress: tak^ her, but take her far from me be sure; keep
her as thou would secrets that would damn thee; for if she take but Air, she
is no more; it will be all infected with my Sighs and Curses, and 'twill be
catching, Sir: look to it, it will.


Well. You Are grown a hectoring Whore!


Cor. Leave me, or such another word from thee will put thee into danger.
Dare thou upbraid the faults thou have created? Furies possess me, that I may
encounter the like Fate or killing Blasts! Oh I could rave to think I want that
power that might destroy thee!


Well. Do not turn Witch before thy time, Corina.


Cor. I would I were, that I might be an age in damning thee: But words are Air
that blow above thy head, and cannot wound nor blast.

[Sighing.
Well. Nay, if you rave, I Will leave ye; fare ye well. -- You will not go.


[She catches him. Cor. And is it true, have thou abandoned me? Can thou
forget our numerous Blisses past, the hours we have wasted out in Tales of Love,
and cursed all interruption but of Kisses, which 'twixt thy charming words I
ever gave thee; when the whole live-long day we thought too short, yet blessed
the coming night? Have thou forgot, false are thy Vows, all perjured, and thy
Faith broken as my poor lost forsaken heart? and would thou wish me live to
see this Change! Could thou believe, if thou had hid it from the talking
world, my heart could not have found it out by sympathy! A foolish
unconsidering faithless man!


Well. This is as troublesome as Rage to me.


[Breaks from her. Cor. Some comfort that thou do confess you are base; and
this last blaze of my departing Love, has but a minutes light, and now it is
gone.


Well. It went in fume, and leaves a scent behind it which does offend my
sense: Farewell.


[Goes out. Cor. Farewell. And do thou think I Will part with thee thus tamely!
Faithless unthinking fool, by Heaven, no other woman shall possess thee; the
perjured heart you gave, thus I demand: [Takes a Pistol out of her pocket,
fires it at his breast; it only flashes in the pan: Friendly runs to her; she
throws it away.] Oh damn this treacherous instrument, false as the heart 'twas
aimed at: But since, like Coward States, I wanted courage to attack the Foe,
I Will turn my Fury into civil Broyls, and hurl all to confusion here within.


[Offers to stab her self; Friendly runs to her, prevents her, and she seems
fainted a little while in his arms. Friend. Pray leave her, Sir, your presence
but inflames her.


Well. I will: look to her, prithee. I was too rash, and mist from too much
violence and rage -- I might have more securely done the business. [aside.]
Pray leave me, Sir, I cannot go, a fire in my blood confines me here: It Is not
a virtuous flame!

No, raging Lust my wilful fate does move;

The Gods themselves cannot be wise and love.


Cor. This man whom I abhor because his Friend, through all my rage, I see has
passion for me, raise it, ye Powers, till it become so high to be employed to
any use, I Will put it to a fatal instrument of my Revenge. [Aside.


Friend. Loveliest of all your injured Sex. --


Cor. You're charitable to the forsaken, Sir, but it is alas all thrown away on
me; for I can never more believe there can be honesty in man, since Wellman is
all Vice.


Friend. What Devil, envious of his glorious Choice, contrived to make him
faithless to such Beauty! Had I that Blessing, which I dare not name, hardly
dare wish, it is so above my merit, I should despise, as useless and
unnecessary, all the vast Joys besides Heaven has in store, and at thy feet lay
all my Fortunes down, and set up my eternal rest with thee.


Cor. Just so he spoke, and I fond fool believed, and tired him out with love;
but you're all false, inconstant, faithless Tyrants, and betrayers even in that
very minute that you gain us; we forfeit all our hopes in you for ever. I can
believe no more.


Friend. Silence and Modesty were wont to be my two accustomed Virtues; but my
Love grows high and rages in me like a storm: Would you would believe my Vows; but
you have been deceived that way already: therefore, thou dear, thou lovely
injured fair one, credit my plain Sincerity. I love, and to be short, would
have thee pay my flame, I will be grateful in what way you please. Take me to
your Embraces, to your Bed. I am not used to ask such Questions, Madam, and
want terms fit to dress 'em in.


Cor. And do you take me then for such a Creature, that have no sense but
Appetite, the Brutal part of Love? Forbear to name it to me, you offend me.


Friend. Forgive me; I would have you love me too: and if I have too hastily
run over what ought to have been said of my vast Passion, and came too rudely
on the wisht-for part, it is the effects of youthful ignorance, of hot desire,
and eager to be happy.


Cor. How shall I fain to yield! [aside?] There Is such a seeming honest
plainness, Sir, in what you say, in spite of all my grief, I listen to your
Language. Could you be true, could you convince me thoroughly that you loved!


Friend. [kneeling.] What Art will do it? what Vows, what Protestations, what
Proofs, what Gifts, besides a faithful Heart?


Cor. Shall I, or can I trust again? Oh fool, how natural it is for women to
believe! But when you have gained the utmost that you ask, will you not then grow
cold?


Friend. As soon the Sun shall lose its native heat, denying warmth to Flowers.


Cor. I must have more than this: Can you believe this heart that has been used
so ill already, can you trust on feeble Vows? Can you be bravely kind, resolve
a Deed would shake a Soul that is not fixed in Love?


Friend. Is it a Deed that I may do with honor?


Cor. I did not study that; but if there be any thing that stands in
competition with your Love, it is not worth my owning.


Friend. Be it what it will, it is for so rich a Prize, without demanding what,
I Will vow it done.


Cor. I hate this Wellman: You may guess the rest. Good day to you.


Friend. Leaving me! by Heaven we must not part: Love and Desire are madly
raving in me; my impatient Heat admits of no resistance: I cannot-live, without
you grant me instantly that which I dare not ask.


Follows on his knees. Cor. As long as Wellman lives, I Have made a Vow never to
love again; yet am I understood.


Friend. Will you be mine when Wellman is no more?


Cor. By all my hopes, by my last best of wishes.


Friend. Be mine, and only mine, for ever mine?


Cor. Inviolably yours.


Friend. Then hear me, on my knees I make this Vow: Wellman shall die before to
morrows light. Now may I hope my Bliss?


Cor. Yes, when the Deed is done. And for a Token that you have dispatched him,
bring me that Diamond that he wears, and which he did refuse me. -- Do you
pawse --


Friend. Only the manner, Sweet --


Cor. Oh you may pick a sudden Quarrel with him, word it to blows, and then
take all advantages.


Friend. And will my Vows to kill him, merit nothing?


Cor. No, I have vowed, and if you love, you will yield to it.


Friend. Enough: Farewell. She goes out.

Delays in Love's the Lovers only Hell. Going out hastily stops. Hah! whither
would my hasty steps misguide me! was I not rushing on to kill a Friend? to
kill a Friend, oh it is to kill my self! Passion, how hellish art thou? oh how
vile, to kill a Friend to gain a sinful woman for Appetite, for sensual end,
and momentarie pleasure;

And Vices like to swelling Rivers flow,

The further that they run they bigger grow.

Heaven! how near was I to being undone! I Will fly, lest the temptation
overtake me.


Exit. SCENE changes to Dashit's house.
Enter Mrs. Dashit with a bag of money, Mr. Dashit following.


Mr. Dash. Well, is the money right?


Mrs. Dash. Just fifty pound, Honey, in good hard Half-crowns.


Mr. Dash. Well, Mr. Trickwell, it is your confounded Worship puts me to this
Charge; but an I catch thee, an I do not charge thee with as many Irons, may
thou cozen me again, Knave, may thou cozen me again. Well, Wife, is the
Barber come? I Will be trimmed, and then to my Neighbor Glistens the Goldsmith to
new furnish my self with Plate.


Mrs. Dash. Truly Husband, surely-Heaven is not pleased with our Vocation; we
wink at the sins of our Customers, our Wines are merely Protestant, and I now
speak it with grief of heart, we fry Fish with salt Butter, to the burden of
my Conscience, calling our Wines by forty heathenish names to disguise truth.


Mr. Dash. Hold your prating; a Pox of your Conscience, go mind your business
in the Bar, score double, and mend the matter with a vengeance.

[Exit Mrs. Dash* lays the money on the Table. Enter Trickwell dressed like a
Barber. How now, Friend, what are you?


Trick. A Barber, Sir, the Widow Scowres man, an't like your Worship; my name's
Timothy Hazard, Sir.


Mr. Dash. Very well, very well; and how does my Godson, Timothy?


[Dash. sits down in a Chair, he puts the things about him. Trick. Very well,
an't like your Worship; he is gone to trim Parson Cuffett.


Mr. Dash. And how long have you been a Barber, Timothy?


Trick. A Year, an't like your Worship, come Christmas.


Mr. Dash. What, what, and a good Workman, Timothy? And may I trust my self in
thy hands, Timothy?


Trick. Oh doubt me not, Sir, I Will shave your Worship as cleverly, as your
Worship shall confess, by that time I Have done. -- Hah, it is Cash!

Feels the Money-bag.
Whilst he is washing him they talk. Mr. Dash. Well, Timothy, and what is the
News, Timothy? You Barbers are notable News-mongers, good Commonwealthsmen: You
--


Trick. Marry, Sir, I know none but of the Speaking Child and the Monster.


Mr. Dash. How, the Monsters! what Monsters, good Timothy?


Trick. Has not your Worship heard of the Monster, the Gravesend-Monster?


Mr. Dash. By my Troth not I.


Trick. Why, Sir, there came ashore last night four and twenty huge horrible
monsterous devouring --


Mr. Dash. Bless us! what?


Trick. Whales, Sir; which no sooner came ashore, but they turned into fearful
Elephants that roared, then into Cockatrices that crow'd and frighted all the
Judges out of Westminster Hall.


Dash. Good Lord!


Trick. And in a moment these Cockatrices were turned into so many huge Giants
in Scarlet, with Triple Crowns on their heads, and forked Tongues that hiss so
loud, the noise is heard to the Royal Exchange; which has put the Citizens into
such a Consternation, that it is thought the world's at an end.


Dash. Good Lord! And what may this portend, Timothy?


Trick. Portend, Sir, Popery, Sir, Popery; and these Monsters are called the
four and twenty Whores of Babylon.


Dash. Oh monsterous! Four and twenty Whores! the Nation will be overrun with
Popery indeed, Timothy: Bless us, what monsterous things are these Popish
Monsters! Well, in grace of God my Wife and I will go see these four and
twenty Whores. Nay, nay, God bless little England; this must portend rightdown
Popery, that is certain. Well, and have thou no merry News, Timothy?


Trick. Faith, Sir, they say that there is five and twenty couple of Bears are
to dance a Dance in Paris-Garden before the King; and four and twenty couple
of French Apes play to 'em upon Flute doux.


Dash. Oh Pox, Timothy, this must be a lie, Timothy; and this be not a lie, I
am an Ass efaith: Four and twenty Bears dance to Flutes douxes! Ha, ha, ha.


Trick. It Is credible reported, Sir. -- Shut your Eyes close, Sir, closer yet,
Sir, this Ball will make 'em smart.


Dash. Aye, aye, Timothy, I do wink.


Trick. Hold, Sir, your head will take cold; [Puts on a fools cap. I Will put on
your good Worships Nightcap. So, now I Will shave you, Sir. This must ^^ong with
me, this Beaver too, and now adieu, worshipful Mr. Dashit.


Leaves him in the Suds, the Basin in's hand, and runs away with the money.
Exit. Dash. Ha, ha, ha! Four and twenty couple of English Bears dance to the
Music of French Apes! Ha, ha, ha! in faith, good Timothy, thou make my
Worship smile, -- But hark ye, Timothy, do know one Trickwell? a villainous
Rogue, Timothy, cheated me last night of Fifty pound in Plate; but I Will Plate
him, with a Pox, an I catch him. Come, haste, good Timothy. Art thou free,
Timothy? I am one of the Common Council, Timothy, and may do thee good shortly.
Why Timothy! Timothy! do leave me in the Suds? Why Timothy! I shall be blind
with winking. [wipes his Eyes.] Timothy! Hah, you -- Wife, my money, Wife!


Enter Mrs. Dashit. Mrs. Dash. What Is the noise here? you are always bawling.


Mr. Dash. 'Owns, ye Whore, where is Timothy?


Mrs. Dash. What Timothy?


Mr. Dash. Why the Barber, Jade, the Barber.


Mrs. Dash. The Barber! I saw him go half a quarter of an hour since. Why, are
you not trimmed?


Mr. Dash. Trimmed, a Pox trim ye; where is the money, the money, the money, ye
Jade? I am trimmed with a vengeance!


Mrs. Dash. What Is the money gone! the whole Fifty pound in the bag!


Mr. Dash. I have winked fair, in the Devils name.


Enter Jack. Kneels. Jack. Pray, Godfather, give me your Blessing.


Mr. Dash. A Pox of Blessing, I am Cursing, Rogue: where is Timothy, thy Mothers
man Timothy?


Jack. My Mother has no such, forsooth.


Mr. Dash. My money! my fifty pound! A Plague of all Timothies; who was it
trimmed me?


Jack. I know not, Godfather; only one met me and borrowed my Furniture, for a
Jest, he said.


Mr. Dash. What kind of Fellow was it? Oh --


Jack. A little slender nimble well-spoken fellow, Sir.


Mr. Dash. Oh it is Trickwell, that Rogue Trickwell! a black Hair and Eyebrows,
and gray Eyes?


Jack. Yes, Godfather.


Mr. Dash. Aye, aye, it is he. Raise the street upon him; I Will hang him if there
be Law for money. Oh I shall faint! Wife, wife, fetch me the Rosa solus.


Mrs. Dash. Good Husband, take comfort in the Lord, I Will play the Devil but
I Will recover it; have a good heart, it is but a weeks false scoring in the
Parliament-time.


[Fetches the bottle, he drinks. Mr. Dash. So, some comfort: Wife, when Wife, I
say, is there any Music in the house?


Mrs. Dash. Yes, Sweetheart, Mr. Squeeks Noise.


Mr. Dash. Bid 'em play then: And John come kiss me now, now, now, and John
come kiss me now. [sings.] Bid 'em play; laugh thou and be merry, for I Will go
dance, cast up my Accounts, and hang my self presently. I will not curse, but a
Pox on Trickwell, he has shaved me, he has trimmed me! I will go hang my self;
but first let us have a Dance.


Exeunt dancing with the bottle in's hand, and sings, John come kiss me, etc.
ACT the Third.
SCENE the First.
Enter Marinda, Diana, Ample. Mar. COme, prithee Ample, sing the Song Wellman
made upon the Kiss I gave him.


Dian. No, prithee don't, my stomach turns against kissing extremely.


Mar. Why, Diana?


Dian. By the faith I have in this Beauty, it is the most unsavorie Ceremony,
the most saucy Custom to Ladies; every Fellow now-a-daies with greasy sweatie
Faces, stinking Breath, and nastie Teeth, must take a body over the Lips with
such familiarity; nay they think it is grateful to us too. Lord, there was an
old Judge laid me over the face last night, and did so squeeze his grizly
Brissles through my Lips, I Would as live a kissed a row of Pins with the points to
me; and yet I was forced to take it, take it with a Curtsie too: for my part I
had as lieve they should belch in my face.


Mar. Fie, what a Comparison's there!


Dian. Suitable to the beastly Complement; and yet I love kissing too, if I may
choose my man and place.


Mar. Fie, if any one should hear ye!


Dian. Let a thousand, I Would not be ashamed; it is not those that talk roguishly,
that are to be suspected: you shall have a hypocritical holy Sister mince that
publicly, that she will receive with open arms privately: For my own part, I
consider Nature without Apparel, without disguising; I give thoughts, words,
and truth, a modest boldness; I love no prohibited things, and I would have
nothing prohibited but by Virtue.


Mar. But we must consider the world, who thinks severe modesty a woman's
Virtue.


Dian. Fie, fie, Virtue is freedom, handsome, cheerful mirth; I hate a severe,
froward, ignorant, ill-bred behavior in a woman; it is uncivil, hanged, I Will
have none on it. Ample, what think you?


Amp. Faith, Madam, I can only stand up for Kissing; I never ventured farther,
tho I would fain.


Dian. Thou art not of my mind; for I Will nere marry.


Amp. Marry God forbid! what will you do then?


Dian. Ene strive against the flesh: Marry! no, faith, Husbands are like Lots
in a book, one may prick a hundred times and find all blanks. A Husband! a
Hangman: a careless domineering insolent thing, that grows like Corral, whilst
under water, soft and tender; but married, and above the waves, hard, stubborn,
not to be bowed nor managed: whilst your humble servant, Oh how assiduous,
troublesomely officious and busy; but wed, the worstbred Tyrant and Sloven in
nature. No, no, I Will live my own woman, I -- and let the worst come to the
worst, I had rather be called Wanton than a Fool.


Mar. Oh but a virtuous Marriage!


Dian. Virtuous Marriage! there is no more affinity between Virtue and
Marriage, than a man and his Horse: Wedlock may manage Virtue in the right way,
but it is oftener loose and unbridled. I hate restraint upon my Virtue, or to owe
it to the honor of a Husband; yet I like thy match well enough, a handsome
man, good humor, witty, and wild; but my Sir John is such a tool, fit to
make nothing but a Cuckold of. See if they be not here.


Enter Sir John Empty and Wellman. Well. My sweet Marinda!


Sir John. Good morrow, my little Sooterkin; how is it, my pretty Life? -- Nay,
I call all my Mistrisses so.


Dian. Indeed! How many Mistrisses have you had?


Sir John. Some Nine, or thereabouts.


Dian. Then you have had nine lives, like a Cat.


Sir John. Mew -- you would be kissed for that.


Dian. Yes, if I liked the mouth that offered it.


Sir John. By my troth, that must not be mine; I do not love to endanger my
back with stooping so low: if you would wear Chipeeners, much might be done. --
Nay, let me alone to find a Rowland for your Oliver.


Dian. Your pestilent wit will never make me ashamed of my shortness: the
faults I can mend my self, I blush at; but those which Nature made, let her
bear the shame for me, I have nothing to do with it; but you never forget to be
witty on my Beauty, Sir Knight, I shall be even with you.


Sir John. Nor remember, by my troth, but as I do Religion, for Controversy
sake only, no hurt.


Dian. But, Brother, for I Will now call you so, since my Father this night
resolves to contract you -- Shall we not have Fiddles and dance? Sir John I Am
sure will make one, and my City Lover the Aldermans son, Mr. Shatter, he is a
most spruce Dancer of the first bench in the School, I Will promise ye.


Sir John. Fore Gad, and well remembered, he borrowed a Diamond-Ring of me last
night to make a Visit in to a Lady; and was it you? The Devil take me, an I had
thought that, he should nere a had it. Adsbud he is here!


Enter Mr. Shatter. Shat. Good day to my fair Mistress.


Dian. Good morrow, sweet Mr. Shatter.


Sir John. Sweet Mr. Shatter! Pox on him, is he a Rival now?


Dian. You're fine to day, rich in Jems, Mr. Shatter.


Shat. A Toy, Madam, I bought to please my finger.


Dian. I am more precious to you than your finger; why not to oblige me? Come,
I Am no professed beggar, you know.


Shat. Faith and troth, Madam, as I hope to be saved -- Oh Lord, as the saying
is -- I protest upon my honor.


Dian. Do not pawn it for such a trifle.


Shat. As I Am a Gentleman, as God shall sa' me, I Will give a --


Dian. Is this yours to give?


Shat. Oh Lord, Madam, that is such a thing now, why should your Ladyship --
you're the strangest Joker, I protest. --


Dian. Hum! now I remember, I think I have seen this on a persons hand, an
humble servant of mine, one Sir John Empty.


Shat. Pox of her memory! a such another Madam. When, what a Devil's he to her
now?


Dian. Nay, I Am sure this is it.


Shat. Troth, it is, Madam: the poor fellow wanted a little money to treat some
women last night, and so he pawned it to me. It Is a Pawn, good faith, or else
you should have it.


Sir John. Hark ye, thou base lying son of a cheating Cit, how dares thy
impudence hope to prosper? Were it not for the respect I bear this noble
Company, I would so bang thee! --

[Pulls him aside.
Dian. How now, what is the matter here?


Shat. Nothing, Madam, nothing. He was a little uncivil with me last night; for
which, because I should not call him to an account, he desired to make me any
satisfaction. The Coward trembles at my very presence; but I have him on the
hip, I Will take the forfeit of his Ring.


Sir John. Hark ye, Sir, what is that you whisper to her?


Pulls him aside. Shat. Nothing, Sir, but to satisfy her that the Ring was
yours, not pawned to me, but lent to grace my finger; and so I told her I
begged your pardon for being a little too familiar with your Reputation.


Dian. Yes indeed, he did; and said you would make him any satisfaction for a
rudeness you did him last night, but he would take the forfeit of the Ring
for it.


Sir John. How now, ye base Scoundrel!


Takes him roughly. Shat. Hold, hold, my Mistress does but rally, faith.


Dian. Thy Mistress! I disown thee; you are a child, I Will give thee to my
woman. Come, Sister, let us make us ready for the Ball anon. Come, you shall be
friends.


Sir John. He shall renounce you then, and restore my Ring; Adsbud he shall.


Shat. With all my heart, to do you service, Sir.


Gives him the Ring. Sir John. And here I make an offer of it.


Dian. Well, I Will take it, Sir, to make me thine to night. Farewell, Brother,
till anon.


Exit Mar. Dian. Sir John, and Amp. Well. To be huft thus by a Coward, a beaten
Coward, what madness has possessed thee?


Shat. Aye, but how the Devil did I know he was a Coward? could not you have
whispered me that?


Well. Well, Sir, I Will try to make your peace with Diana. Leave me, I Have
business now. [Exit Shat. Enter Friend.] How now, my friend! what news from
Love? is the Lady of sin kind? prithee say how; in faith I Will not be angry.


Friend. Oh, Wellman! no Age did ere produce so damned a Creature so fair, and
yet so false: had I been vicious, what a desperate wretched thing I Would been!


Well. Prithee what is the matter?


Friend. Heaven! I have been tempted to thy death.


Well. What is the Fury mad?


Friend. Most damnable!


Well. Hearing I Am to be married.


Friend. She raved at first like winds let loose to ruin, But fixed on this
resolve, she calmed again, And listened to my love, my eager love; which when
it urged her to create me happy, she pressed me to this Murder, as the way, the
only means to gain her heart for ever. Mad with my flame, I could deny her
nothing, and then my lawless lust, not I, protested, confirmed it with a
thousand Oaths to kill ye, and bring this Ring to witness you were dead; and
then her lovely body was my hire.


Well. Horrid! nothing's defamed but by its proper self: Physicians abuse
Remedies, Lawyers spoil Law, and woman only is a shame to woman. You Have vowed
to kill me?


Friend. Most solemnly; for, friend, I must enjoy her. Oh that a man of sense
should fancy pleasure in one whose soul's so black and infamous; but it is my
fate, and I must bow before it.


Well. Thou shall; I will contrive the means to satisfy thee. Come, I give a
Ball to night to my Marinda; thou shall be there: and by the way, I Will tell
thee what we will do to make a seeming Quarrel, that all the world, as well as
this Corina, may think I Am killed indeed, whilst I, lodged in some place
obscure, may give thee time to cool this feavourish blood. Show her this Ring,
protest me surely dead; and when you are satiated, we'll laugh at folly. Come,
let us go.


Exeunt. SCENE changes to the street, a shop-door.
Enter Mr. Glisten and Dashit, with a great silver Basin or Punch-bowl. Enter
Trickwell in the habit of a Peddler with a box with Trinkets before him.
Jervice. Dash. Well, Neighbor Glisten, I am beholden to you for this credit
till next week, and I am pleased in my choice of this piece of Plate; a
Punch-bowl is a most fashonable thing, now French Wines are prohibited: I know
'twill please my Wife. Well, I am forty pound indebted to you for it, honest
Mr. Glisten.


Glist. Your word's sufficient, Sir, an 'twere for a thousand pound.


Dash. A Pox of the Rogue that robbed me! Well, I shall catch him; and if I do,
he shall half rot in Fetters in the Dungeon till he despair; then I Will hire a
Parson on purpose that shall persuade him he is damned; then after see him with
my own eyes hanged without singing any Psalm: Lord, Lord, that he should have
but one neck!


Glist. Oh, Neighbor, you must use a Conscience in all things; but do your
will. You Will command me no farther?


Dash. No, only lend me your servant to carry this Bowl home to my Peg; I am
to step into Leaden Hall.


Glist. Willingly, Sir: Here, Jervice, carry home this Plate.


Dash. To my Wives own hands deliver it, good Jervice.


Jer. I Will warrant you, Sir.


Dash. To her own hand, honest Jervice.


Jer. I have delivered better things than this to a woman's own hand, Sir,
before now.


Exit Jer. with the Bowl, and Glisten in. Trick. Monsieur, please you to buy a
very fine delicate Ball, a sweet Ball, a Camphere-ball.


Dash. Prithee away.


Trick. One a Ball to shave, one a Ball to scowre.


Dash. Name 'em not to me, talk not of shaving; a Pox of the Rogue, I have been
shaved, I have.


Exit Dashit. Trick. I Will shave ye smoother yet: That Bowl, that delicious
Bowl, I must be drunk out of; I have a fancy for it, it is too good for
cheating Vintners: I say it must be mine; therefore, my worshipful Dashit, look
to it: What tho there be rounds in a Ladder, and knots in a Halter? hang the
Devil, I Will do it; I must draw a Lot for the great Punch-bowl.


Goes out. SCENE changes to Mr. Dashit's house.
Enter Mrs. Dashit and Jervice with the Bowl. Mrs. Dash. Nay, Jervice, stay and
drink, good Jervice; and how does Mrs. Glisten? I knew her well, she was a very
good patient Creature, efaith; she has born, and born, and bore again, good
woman, as well as I, with a bad Husband; yet I can find no fault in Mr.
Glisten: Here Is to him, Jervice, he knew me before I was married; an honest man
he is, [drinks] and a thriftie, I Will warrant him; and his Wife's a proper woman
as any in Cheapside.


Jer. Yes, indeed forsooth, so she is.


Mrs. Dash. She paints now, and yet she keeps her Husband's Customers still.
In Troth, Jervice, a handsome Wife in a fine carved seat, is the best Ware in a
man's shop.


Jer. Yes, indeed forsooth, so it is.


Mrs. Dash. But well, Jervice, remember me to your Master and Mistress, and
tell 'em I acknowledge the receipt of this, acknowledge the receipt. -- This
it is to have good Education, and to be brought up in a Tavern; and though my
Husband be a Citizen, all London knows I keep as good Company as any she
within the Walls. Good day, honest Jervice.


Exit Jervice. Enter Trickwell dressed like a Prentise, with a Jole of Salmon.
Trick. Fair hour to you, Mistress.


Mrs. Dash. A pretty Complement! I Will write it down: A beautiful thought to
you, Sir.


Trick. Your Husband and my Master Mr. Glisten has sent you a Jole of fresh
Salmon, and they intend to come both to Dinner presently to season your new
Bowl, forsooth, which your Husband entreats you would send back by me, that his
Arms may be engraven on it, which he forgot before.


Mrs. Dashit. Are you sent by no Token? Nay, I have a wit.


Trick. Yes forsooth, by the same Token he was dry shaved this morning.


Mrs. Dash. A sad Token, but true: here, pray commend me to your Master and
Mistress, and tell 'em I expect 'em impatiently.

Gives him the Bowl, takes the Salmon. Exit Trick. Impatient was well again!
Sam! why Sam, I say!


Sam. Anon, anon, forsooth.


Mrs. Dash. Come quickly, spread the Table, lay Napkins, and do ye hear?
perfume the Room a little; it does so smell of this profane Tobacco! I could
never endure this ungodly Tobacco, since our Doctor told me 'twas a bane to
Propagation. -- So spread handsomely: Lord, these Boys do things so
arsie-versie! You show your breeding. Well, I am a Gentlewoman by my Sisters
side, I can tell you: so -- methodically. Hum! I wonder where I got that word!
Oh 'twas Sir John Empty bid me kiss him methodically; it is a sweet man!


Enter Mr. Dashit. Mr. Dash. Well, Tony Dashit, be not discouraged, be not
disheartened, thou will recover all.


Mrs. Dash. Oh are you come, Husband? where are they?


Dash. How now! how now! how now! what, a Feast toward! and in my private
Parlour! Who treats, who treats, Peg?


Mrs. Dash. Prithee leave fooling; are they come?


Dash. Come! who come?


Mrs. Dash. Lord, How strange you make it!


Dash. Strange! what is strange? is the woman mad!


Mrs. Dash. Aye strange: You know of none that sent me a Jole of Salmon, you --
and said they would come dine with me!


Dash. Hah, fresh Salmon! peace, not I; peace, the Messenger has mistaken the
house: let us eat it up quickly, before it be inquired for. Come, come, Vinegar
quickly, Sam. -- Some good luck yet, efaith; I never tasted Salmon that relisht
better in my life. Well, it is a rare thing to feed at other men's cost.


Mrs. Dash. Other men's cost! prithee did not you send this Salmon?


Dash. No, I say, no.


Mrs. Dash. By Mr. Glisten's man?


Dash. I say no.


Mrs. Dash. Who sent word that he and his Wife would come to dinner with me?


Dash. No, no.


He eats like mad all this while. He lays down, his knife and starts. Mrs.
Dash. And hancel my new Bowl.


Dash. Hah, Bowl!


Mrs. Dash. And withal, commanded me to send the Bowl back.


Dash. Hah, back!


Mrs. Dash. That your Arms might be put on it.


Dash. Oh!


Mrs. Dash. By the same token that you were dry shaven this morning.


Dash. Oh!


Mrs. Dash. And thereupon I sent back the Bowl: nay, and I bear not a brain --


Dash. And is the Bowl gone? is it delivered departed? defunct? hah!


Mrs. Dash. Delivered? yes sure, it is delivered.


Dash. I will never more say my Prayers; and is the Bowl gone?


Mrs. Dash. Gone: God is my witness I delivered it with no more design to be
cozened on it, than the child unborn.


Dash. Look to my house, I am haunted with Evil Spirits: hear me, thou Plague
to man, thou Wife thou, if I have not my Bowl again, I will go to the Devil;
I Will to a Conjurer: look to my house, I Will raise all the Wise men in London.


Exit in rage. Mrs. Dash. Bless me, what fearful words are these! I trust in
God he is but drunk sure.


Enter Trick. as before. Trick. I must have my Salmon, I cannot afford the old
Rogue so good a bit; I must have it to season my Punch. Now for a Masterpiece:
Fair Mistress --


Mrs. Dash. Oh have I caught ye! Sam, shut up the doors, Sam.


Trick. Peace, good Mistress, I Will tell you all: A Jest, a mere Jest; your
Husband did it only to fright ye: the Bowl's at my Masters, and thither your
Husband's gone, and has sent me in all haste, lest you should be over-frighted,
to invite you to come to dinner to him.


Mrs. Dash. Praise Heaven it is no worse!


Trick. And bad me desire you to send the Salmon before, and your self to
follow: My Mistress will be very glad to see you.


Mrs. Dash. I pray take it. Well, I was never so out of my wits in my life:
Pray thank your Mistress. [Exit Trick. with the Salmon.] How my heart beats
still, beshrew him! Sam, my Hood, Sam, and Gloves, and Scarf, quickly.


Enter Dashit. Dash. How now, whither are you janting, hah?


Mrs. Dash. Come, play the fool no longer, will you go?


Dash. Whither, in the name of Madness, whither?


Mrs. Dash. Whither! why to Mr. Glisten's to eat the Salmon. How strange you
make it!


Dash. Your meaning, Jade, your meaning.


Mrs. Dash. Lord bless me, did not you send for me and for the Salmon, by the
self-same fellow that came for the Bowl?


Dash. It Is well, it is wondrous well! and are you in your right wits, Jade,
are you?


Mrs. Dash. An you make an Ass of me, I Will make an Ox of you, I tell ye that.


Dash. Nay, Jade, be patient; for look ye, I may be mad, or drunk, or so; tho
you can bear more than I, I do well: I will not curse; but Heaven knows my
mind. Come, let us go hear some Music. I will never pray again, that is
certain: Let Us go hear some doleful Music. Nay; if Heaven forget to prosper
Knaves, the Citie's like to thrive: I Will go hang my self out of the way.


ACT the Fourth.
SCENE the First.
Enter Sir Lyonell, Mr. Wellman, Friendly, Sir John Empty, Mr. Shatter,
Marinda, Diana, Petronella, and other women and men; with Music. Sir Ly. MOre
Lights there, Boy, more Wine and Lights. -- Come, come, son Wellman, for so I
must call you now; in troth you are not merry, Sir, not heartily merry: Come,
we'll have the other Dance, efact we will, Mr. Wellman. Diana, when Girl, I say!
Adsme you're all out of sorts; I thought thy Tongue and heels could never have
been idle: Come, come, hands, hands, for shame.


Sir John. Come, Mrs. Diana, I Am your man at this sport; I never stand out at
these businesses: Your hand, fair Mistress.

[Snatches her hand.
Friend. You lie, Sir.


Sir John. Do I, Sir? I vow to God, I ask your pardon, Sir; I durst to have
sworn I Would been in the right.


Dian. What, quarrelling about the Spoil before the Victory!


Sir John. Nay, Madam, as for that matter, I Am a man of Reason, and Frank
Friendly's an honest fellow, and my friend.


Friend. You lie again, Sir.


Sir John. Well, well, Sir, you are disposed to be merry, or so, but there be
more Ladies -- When, what the Devil ails he, tro?


Shat. Pox on it, how rarely he huffs now! Well, it is a most admirable thing
this same Courage, if a man had but the knack on it!


Sir Ly. Come, Zouks, you're tardie, villainous: Young Men and Maids, to it,
to it, I say, and do not idle time. Come, Minstrels, play away, efaith my
dancing-days are not done yet.


Music plays, they dance, at the end of which, Well. speaks. Well. Friendly,
you're out.


Friend. Death, you lie!


Strikes him, he draws, they pass, the Company puts in all but Shat. and Sir
John, who run in corners. Sir Ly. The Quarrel, Gentlemen, the Quarrel! efaith,
here is fine doings!


Friend. Oh, Sir, you have the advantage of the place.


Well. I do believe I have; and you're not safe here: I Will meet you, Sir, anon.

Whispers.
Friend. Do so. Farewell.


Mar. For Heavens sake, Sir, come back -- what would you do? if there be ought
that you take ill from Well man, declare it here, and let us end the Quarrel. I
know it is some mistake; I know he loves you: let not a trifle set such friends
at odds. Speak to him, Sister.


Dian. Why how now, Sir, is this the proof you give me of your Love! Oh you
have showed your self a gallant Spark! I thought it Jealousy, and took it
kindly your rudeness to our Knight here; but to a friend, at least the man you
call so, gives me some cause to fear you're angry at his Contract with my
Sister. Be friends, or I Will believe so.


Friend. Do so, I care not.


Dian. Hah! do you not love me? Do not make me serious, I shall be out of
humor if you do; and Heaven knows what a strange thing I may prove then; I
never tried it yet.


Friend. I care not; pray unhand me.


Dian. I will, in spite of all that would detain thee. I never found my self
thus much concerned.


Sir Ly. What sudden flaw is this?


Well. By Heaven, I know not, Sir, unless some hidden flame for thee --


Mar. It cannot be, I never saw a glance, a look, or smile, could be suspected
Love: it is some old Grudge. Dear, do not follow him, my heart presages
something that is fatal. [weeps.] Good Sir persuade him. To Sir Lion.


Sir Ly. Away, ye fool, persuade him not to fight! away, a Coward! hanged, he
were not worth thy love then.


Well. Honor, my Deer, obliges me to go. Would have the man that has thy
heart in keeping, be pointed out for Cowardice? Away, thou needst not fear, we
shall at most only exchange a Wound. Thy sacred Image guards my heart entire,
and keeps it safe from danger. Go to the Banquet, entertain the Ladies, and be
merry.


Sir Ly. By Cocks bones shall she, and be very merry, to think she is like to
have so brisk a Spark to her Bedfellow. Go thy ways, William, and God's
blessing go with thee, Boy: if thou wants a second, I can push yet, I Am not so
old efaith.


Well. I humbly thank ye, Sir; we shall think better on it perhaps before we
fight.


Dian. Or shall Sir John go? he is a man of mettle, I assure you, Brother.


Sir John. What the Devil do ye mean! I have mind to take this opportunity to
be with thee, thou little wanton --


Friend. Fear not, Sir, I Will excuse ye.


Goes out bowing to Mar. Sir John. You little amiable mischievous Ape you, what
a seurvie malicious Jest did you break upon me, to make the Proverb good, You
had rather lose your Friend than your Jest?


Dian. A Jest! it was a parlous true one then: I said you were all Mettle; A
brazen face, a leaden brain, and a copper nose and beard.


Sir John. Wit, Lightning, and Quicksilver, thou little more than Dwarf, and
something less than woman.


Dian. A Wasp, a Wasp! Your Wit stings, Sir.


Sir John. You Are plaguie sharp; pray God thou be'st not too far gone in Love;
if thou should, I must be forced in honor to marry thee, tho introth't
would be hardly brought about.


Dian. No matter, Sir; things got by struggling, bring the greater pleasure,
when dull Consent but palls the Appetite. Then you are a fool too, the most
admirable necessary for a Husband in the whole Creation, and the best Block to
carve a Cuckold in.


Sir John. When, what a tart Monkey's this! By my troth if thou had not so
much wit, I could find in my heart to take thee for better for worse; for I
find thou could bear me with all my faults.


Dian. Bear with thee! I wonder how thy Mother bore thee nine whole months
about her, when I Will be sworn I can scarce endure thee in my sight an hour.


Sir John. Alas for you, sweet Soul, good lack! A pox of your Wit: By the Lord
Harry, you are the proudest, scoffing, scurvie, idle, fantastical, whimsical --
Ads nigs, because you have read St. George for England, Amades de Gall, and the
Legend of Lies, you are licensed, forsooth, to abuse all the world: Egad, Sir
Lyonell, your Father shall know it.


Offers to go out. Dian. He must not tho -- Nay, do not go in Rancor, good dear
Knight; for I must confess a secret to you; which if you knew my heart, you
would believe there were nothing so cruel there as you imagine. I speak very
kind things of you between my Maid and I anight as I am going to bed, and next
my Prayers too, Heaven forgive me! I spoke things of you that I would not wish
you should know.


Sir John. Nay, look ye, for my part, if I have not most religiously vowed my
heart yours, been drunk twice a day to your health, swallowed Fire and inches
of your Cuff-strings, eat Candles, pledged your health in Chamber-lie, run Pins
into my Arms, and done all manner of gallant and heroic actions, I Am the
veriest son of a Whore breathing; and yet to tell me after all this, I have a
brazen face, a leaden brain, and a copper nose, [weeps.] it is most intolerable,
insupportable, and prodigious, I Will be sworn.


Dian. And de ye love me so indeed?


Sir John. Love you! 'Sbud, whosoever says I do not, and honor you too, Egad;
nay, and if you would, would marry you, is a son of a Whore, and a Scoundrel,
by the Lord.


Dian. And let me tell you in return, that -- Heaven forgive me! And my Sister
knows I have took drink and slept upon it, that if ever I marry, it shall be
you; and I will marry, and yet I hope I do not say it shall be you neither.
Come, let us to the Banquet.


Sir John. Oh, dear Creature, I do not say you do: Lord, how was I mistaken in
thy heart! But will you hereafter cast a kind look at me, to put me in
countenance before Company? That I would be at now.


Dian. Much may be done. Come, let us to the Banquet.


Sir John. And will you, my pretty little Darling of mine eyes, marry me? As
I hope to breath, my Purse, Body, Soul and all, shall be thine.


Dian. Most affectionately spoken! Well, get my Fathers consent, and as for
mine -- the Devil take me if ever thou gets it.

[Aside.
Sir John. A Kiss, and it is a Match. Thus Hymen should begin; A falling out,
sometimes proves falling in.


Exeunt. Enter Wellman and Friendly, as in the street. Well. Well, my dear
friend, tell me with open heart, has not my Reasoning reclaimed thy Folly,
preserved thy falling Virtue, and secured it?


Friend. There is no Virtue in Blood, no Reasoning in Desire: But shall I not
in this fond act of Love, do that which will to thee render my name abhorred,
and make thee hate me?


Well. By Heaven, no.


Friend. And shall I then? may I enjoy Corina?


Well. Thou shall, by all our Friendships. Here, take this Ring, show it to
that fair Devil, it will confirm me dead; which rumor, with my absence, will
make good -- Possess thy Love, grow weary in her Arms, then be thy self again.


Friend. But if Report grows strong, and I am seized, where shall I find thee?


Well. At Glistens my Goldsmith in Cheapside, to whom I Will tell our business
and design.


Friend. Thither I Will come and tell thee how I thrive. Till when, farewell.


Goes out. Well. When woman's in (...) heart, the soul's all hell. Now
Repentance, the after-clap of ^ools, light on thee; I have an Art left that may
reclaim thee yet. I Will make thee fall into the vilest dangers, even worse than
woman's Lust. No Goldsmith will I see, or tell my story to, but in some sit
disguise I Will hide my self impossible to be discovered, and leave thee to two
friends, a Whore and Law, that will be plague sufficient for one man; but is
this friendship in me? [pawses.] No matter:

No man is purely virtuous, no Virtue purely kind;

The end being good, the way is well designed.


Goes out. SCENE changes to Corina's house.
Enter Corina in anger, followed by Trickwell with Plate, and Mrs. Dunwell.
Cor. Oh, impudence, am I then fallen so low to be solicited by Pimps and
Panders! Hell take the trade, if this be the effects on it.


Trick. Madam, whatever you may think of me, my Present has the show of
Quality; here is Plate, a Present that a Lord might make ye; and I was once a
Gentleman, tho I am fallen so low by faithless Vice, yet tho undone, poor and
deprived of all, I have a heart and will, that still remains, and fain would
venture on when Beauty calls. And if I have a stock, which Heaven and my own
industry has lent, I must employ it still to that dear use. Take first this
little Tribute of my conquered heart; I may in time increase it: were it
Crowns, here they should all be offered.


Cor. And thus I Would spurn away: Base servile Villain, who live by Noise and
Riot, spunging upon the drops that fall from Gentlemen, can thou believe that
after Wellman's love, I could receive a Raskal to my Arms?


Trick. If I were there, you would find but little difference; and possibly the
next they entertain may fail to pay this price I offer ye. This Raskal and that
beauteous haughty thing, bating the Sex, differ but very little. I live by
Brauls, by rapine, and by Spoils, in Fears, Vexations, Dangers, so do you; I
eat when I can get a fool to treat me, and you can do no more: Pox of your
pride, methinks we two might understand each other; you have no Gallant to take
your Quarrels up; you reigned when time was, and I Will do so now, for you have
known my love, shall find my power, tho yet I nere durst tell you so.


Cor. Nor shall not yet; for tho that Lover's gone, who but to look on would
have made thee tremble, I Have Beauty still that may command another Beauty
whose very glance should make thee bow: Gods! and has it lost its awe?


Trick. It has, and I Am resolved upon a Conquest.


Cor. Death, Sir! stand off, and view my fatal hand, it carries death to the
bold Ravisher, that dares approach unreverendly. A Whore! what tho to her that
bears it it is a shame, an infamy that cannot be supported? to all the world
besides it bears a mighty sound, petitioned, su'd to, worshipped as a God,
presented, flattered, followed, sacrificed to, Monarch of Monarchs, Tyrant of
the world, what does that charming word not signify! And dare thou raise thy
hated eyes so high to gaze on such a Constellation! No, be gone, with all thy
base-got worthless Trisles, quickly pack up, and hence, or I will kill thee.


Goes out. Dun. So, Sir, you had better have looked no higher than Mrs. Mary
Dunwell, who can down with you when money's low; but when once a little in
Pocket, you are for high feeding, forsooth. Go get you gone, I may chance take
pity on you when her passion's over, and do you some service.


Trick. No, by Heaven, I Will try my chance this very minute, throw my last Cast,
for the great Stake is set, and will enjoy her now.


Goes in and knocks. Dun. Hah! here is somebodie I hope will interrupt you.

Opens the door. Enter Wellman disguised. What would you, Sir? would you have
ought with me? A proper handsome fellow, but ill dressed.

Aside.
Well. Madam, I am a Gentleman grown poor, decayed by fortune, and would gladly
serve: I can obey, could you direct me where.


Dun. This fellow would serve my turn most admirably! but if I could -- you
would grow proud with feeding well and clean Linen.


Well. I am not bred so ill, but I can tell how to be grateful to you.


Dun. In Troth he apprehends most discreetly -- but you're too big to wear a
Liverie.


Well. Not at all; it is the fashion now for Ladies to keep tall men in
Liveries: your Page is out of fashion, and your stripling Footman.


Cor. [within] Help! help! undone! Oh help!


Well. Hah, what noise is that!


Draws, and runs in. Dun. Heavens! the Rogue sure was ravishing her.


Enter Wellman dragging in Trickwell, Corina follows disordered. Well. Damned
saucy Villain, what was thy pretense?


Trick. What Is that to thee, bold interrupting Slave, sent by the Devil to
hinder my delight?


Well. Dog --


Going to kill him. Cor. Hold, do not kill the Raskal; it is enough you have saved
me from his mischiefs: pray let him go.


Well. It Is pity, but I will obey. Take that, and that, that, ye Mungrel Cur;
Dogs should be used so. [Kicks him out.] Death! what a very wretched thing's a
Whore, that every Raskal dares approach with Love!

Aside.
Cor. Who are ye, pray, to whom I Am so obliged?


Well. One that would gladly serve in any quality.


Cor. I Will do thee good; take that. [Gives him money.] I will prefer thee to
some man of Quality: Mean time make this your home.


Well. I wonder whether Friendly has been here!

Aside.
Dun. Madam, one knocks; shall any have admittance?


Cor. Only false Wellman's Friend. You may retire, and wait my farther
pleasure.


Exit Dun. Well. I Will over-hear ye too.


Exit Well. Enter Dunwell and Friendly. Friend. Now, my dear Mistress, Soul of
my desires, I come with all the Spoils of conquering Love, to lay 'em at thy
feet. My Stop is dead, the Stop of all my ravishing Happiness; and here is the
witness of my Victory.


[Kneeling presents her the Ring. Cor. Dead! Wellman dead! Oh thou inhumane
friend, that borest that title only to betray him! Dead! and by thee! Heaven,
can you let him live! Support me, or I fall to earth with this sad killing
news.


Seems to faint. Friend. Heavens, Madam, what do you mean? or shall I vow to you
he is not dead?


Cor. Hah! not dead!


Friend. What would you have me do? When I confirm him dead, you grow enraged;
and when I say he lives, you kill with frowns.


Cor. Traitor, and have thou then deceived my hopes? and is not Wellman dead?
Hell, what is man! how did thou swear, how did thou prostrate lie, and
begged to give me any proof of thy false Passion? I asked thee this; and is it
thus you give it! Oh for a quick revenging Power to kill thee!


Friend. Calm that dear angry face, and tell my Love which way it best shall
please.


Cor. Is It in thy choice, perjured, forsworn, and false, to tell me either?
Damn thy double Tongue, and all this Beauty that misled thy truth, if thou
had ever any in thy soul.


Friend. Then since it is my destiny to offend, which way soere I take I Will
follow truth, and tell you, Madam, all your strict Commands I did obey, and
Wellman is no more.


Cor. No more! why what had thou to do with my Commands? Oh thou have killed
all that my soul could love! Tho I commanded, yet he was thy friend, and that
in generositie should have saved him. Go from my eyes, far from my thoughts
remain.


Friend. Is this then the reward of all my Love? What have I done, but been
obedient? Had I prized my Friendship above that Love, would you have took it
well? Yes, I will be gone, and to the judging world

Prove who is the greater Criminal you or I:

I killed a Friend, you make a Lover die.


Cor. I must not let him go, till I Am revenged. Stay, I relent; Oh stay, and
give my heart a little time to take leave of its old acquaintance, ere it'go to
make a new and unknown choice again. Alas, I loved this Wellman, loved him
dearly, more than my life.


Weeps. Friend. Why did you kill him then?


Cor. Why, in my own defense; he gave the first, I fear the mortal wound.


Friend. Then think it just, and think of him no more, but of the dear reward
you are to give for all my service. Come, will you not?


Cor. I will; but you will receive it decently, and not with hands distained
i'th'blood of him that lately was so dear to me?


Friend. Still on that subject? do not put me off; I Have left the business of my
life undone, and had not power to go about my Pardon, so hasty for the dear
reward I was; and is it thus you treat me?


Cor. You Will find me all you wish, give me an hours time to compose my self;
and all this upon my brow is but a modest decency; one hour of joy will chase
it all away.


Friend. Do not you dally with me?


Cor. No by Heaven, when you return I Will give ye your reward, and what you most
deserve -- a Halter it is, [Aside.] false and perfidious wretch.


Friend. Here, keep this Ring, and think each minutes absence is a long year in
love. Farewell.


Exit. Cor. Farewell, vain credulous treacherous fool, farewell. Mischief inspire
me now with all your Arts; methinks the sight of this instructs my Soul in a
most noble piece of Villainy: I will to fair Marinda with this Ring, and frame
a story of so cunning mischief, shall stab her through the ear into the heart.
By Heaven, it is greatly brave, and I Will begin it: Then when this false believer
does return, I Will be prepared for him -- What, Hoe, who waits?


Enter Dunwell and Wellman. Well. Now what a Devil is this woman grown!

Aside.
Cor. My Hoods and Fan, and call a Coach immediately: [Exit Dun.] and you, Sir,
I must beg to wait on me.


Well. Where ever you command. -- This was happy!


Ex. all. SCENE changes to Sir Lyonell's house.
Enter Sir Lyonell, Marinda, Diana and Maid, and Sir John. Mar. Nay, good Sir,
be not angry that I sent; I was afraid some harm would come of it, and so I
fear there is.


Sir Ly. And did no one hear of him?


Mar. None; pray Heaven he be well; my heart misgives me.


Sir Ly. Well, if he be lost, there is a brave fellow gone, and in a time the
King had need of Soldiers; there is idle Husbands enough for you, Baggages.


Dian. I have a little kind of a scurvie pain too, which I do not use to feel
about my heart, for Friendly -- but none shall see it in my troubled looks: not
that I care who knew the loving secret, but I Will not be laughed at.


Sir Ly. Leave your whimpering, do: Would thou had a heart like thy Sister
here. When would she cry for a man thus?


Dian. Faith, Sir, when I have as much need of a man as she, that is, when I
want one, I cannot dissemble.


Sir John. Look ye, Sir, she has need enough, and thanks to fortune she is
provided for, with your good liking, noble Sir Lyonell.


Sir Ly. Come, Sir, let us have one Marriage well over, before we think of
another. Would we could hear of these Sparks too; it is almost midnight: they
might have staid till daylight, and have killed one another like Christians
decently, not by dark, as Cats and Dogs worrie each other. I know not what to
think on it.


Enter a Boy. Boy. Here Is a Lady in a Coach below desires to speak with you.


Sir Ly. A Lady at this hour! she shall be welcome; old as I am, I Will not deny
a Lady.


Exit Boy. Enter Corina and Wellman disguised. Sir Ly. I hope your business is
with me, fair Lady.


Dian. 'Twou'd be but ill dispatched then.


Cor. I know not, Sir; first let me crave your name, or are you Father to the
fair Marinda?


Sir Ly. I am, fair Mistress, for want of a better. By the Mass she is very
handsome! [aside.] This is the Maid you name.


Cor. My time's but short, and what I have to say I must dispatch. Madam, you
had a Lover once, Young Wellman!


Mar. Had! (good Heavens!) I hope and have.


Cor. No, Friendly has basely killed him.


Mar. Oh wretched lost Marinda!


Swoons. Sir Ly. Look to my Daughter!


Cor. Madam, look up; this great concern he merits not: 'twas pity brought me
here to undeceive ye; his Vows and Soul were mine, entirely mine.


Mar. Why did thou call me back to life again, or say in pity that you
undeceived me? If you knew Wellman false, why did you stay me? You should have
let me di'd, 't had been more charitable; but if, as you affirm, he loved you
best, which I believe from that fair form of yours, whilst I remain I needs
must love you too.


Dian. This must be malice sure!


Cor. Madam, do ye know this Ring? he gave it me, and told me such things of
your tiresome Passion, as gave us cause of laughter all the evening.


Mar. I cannot blame him that he loved me not, when so much Beauty as appears
in you, gave him permission to adore it: but methinks 'twas ungentile to make a
sport of me; he should have pitied follies he created: he loved me first; alas,
I sought him not. [weeps.] Help me, Diana, for I feeble grow! To morrow should
have been my Wedding Day, now I invite you to my Funeral; bring Flowers and
strew the way to my cold Grave, and lay me down in peace.


Sir Ly. Lead her in, and be careful of her; but, Madam --


Talks aside. Well. I cannot hold, I must reveal my self; [going stops] Yet
stay, Heavens, shall I suffer her to die* so good, so gentle, and so sweet a
Mistress? Were there but three such women in the world, two might be saved. --
Yes, I Will have patience yet to see the utmost that this Devil aims at.


Sir Ly. Confessed it, said ye, Madam? and to you? on what Acquaintance, pray?


Cor. He was in love with me; and seeing no hope of gaining me whilst Wellman
was alive, he picked a Quarrel with him, and dispatched him, and vaunted of the
Villainy to me. Please you to go where I Will direct you, Sir, he shall confess
the Murder.


Sir Ly. Madam, I Will go; and you, Sir John must bear me company.


Sir John. With all my heart, Sir.


Sir Ly. Madam, your hand. Roger, go you to Mr. Constable, bid him be ready if
I have occasion, and careful who passes the streets to night.


Exeunt all. SCENE the Street.
Enter Dashit and Sam. Dash. Say thou, Sam, at one Mrs. Dunwell's house? when,
she is a Bawd.


Sam. Yes, Sir, or my intelligence is false. There lies a Lady, Sir, with whom
he is desperately in love; and having no purchasemoney, it is thought, hires the
Bawd at the price of's own body, to get the young Lady, Sir: They call her
Corina.


Dash. Lord, Lord, what will this wicked world come to! And there thou say I
may be sure to find this villainous Trickwell.


Sam. He never lies from thence all day, Sir, as I am informed; it is now about
his hour of departure, and this way he must come.


Dash. Get ye home, Sam; I Will ene take Mr. Constable and a Watchman or two, and
fall to searching. Get ye home, Sam, thou shall have a new Suit for this,
honest Sam. [Exit Sam. Well, if I catch the Rogue, he shall be hanged in lousie
linen: I Will hire a Priest to make a Papist of him before Execution; and when
he is dead, I Will piss on's Grave. --

Enter Trickwell in a C^oke. But stay, who comes here? this may be he.


Trick. Damn this Corina, this proud scornful Beauty, whom I must humble and
enjoy. I know I am a Rogue not worthy of her love, a Raskal that have no one
Good about me, but that I love: And this damned Bawd, to keep me to her self,
disgraces me to Corina.


Dash. Aye, aye, this must be he -- Ware shaving, Sir: What ho, the Watch! the
Watch! Takes hold of Trickwell' s Cloak.


Trick. Death! it is Dashit's voice! [Gets from him, and runs out, leaving his
Cloak behind with Dashit.

Thieves! Thieves! stop Thieves!


Runs out, Dashit after. Enter the Watch after, met by Trickwell. Constable. Who
goes there? come before the Constable.


Trick. Death, you are a pretty fellow of a Constable, to represent the King's
Person indeed! here is a Watch for the Devil! honest men are robbed under your
Noses. A Raskal in the habit of a Vintner set upon me, cried stand and deliver,
in the Kings Highway; he would have had my Purse, but that my heels saved it:
Yet he got my Cloak of rich Camlet, I Will be sworn, new and fair this morning.
If you light on him, seize him, and keep him in the Stocks till the Cloak will
hang him.


Constable. Doubt not our diligence, Master, these dangerous times.


1 Watch. Something to drink, Master, we that take pains for the good of the
Nation.


Trick. Honest men, watch and sleep not. Good night.


Goes out. 1 Watch. Well, Master, we must watch better indeed. Is It not strange
that Knaves, Rogues, and Thieves, should be abroad, and yet we of the Watch,
Scrivenors, Exchange-men, and Tailors, never stir a foot!


Enter Dashit running with the Cloak. Constable. Who goes there?


Dash. An honest man and a Citizen.


1 Watch. The Knave's drunk, and speaks Riddles.


Constable. Come before the Constable; what art thou?


Dash. A Vintner.


Constable. Bring him near: Hah, what is here, the Cloak?


1 Watch. Oh, Mr. Vintner! is it you? Hold, a rich Camlet-Cloak; it is the same.


Constable. Oh thou Varlet, does not thou know the Wicked cannot escape the eyes of
the Constable?


Dash. What means all this? as I Am an honest man and a Citizen, I took the
Cloak --


Constable. As you're a Knave, you took the Cloak; we are your witnesses for that.


Dash. But, Neighbors, hear me, hear who I am.


1 Watch. A Thief you are, we know.


Dash. My name is Dashit.


Constable. I, I, we'll dash ye: in with him to the Stocks there, and lock him fast
till morning, that Justice Lackbrain may examine him.


Dash. When, but hark ye --


Constable. Away with him.


Dash. Mr. Constable --


Constable. In, I say.


Locks him in the Stocks. Dash. Am I not stark mad yet, not quite an Ass?


1 Watch. You may be in good time, in grace a God, Sir. Well, what would this
City do, if 'twere not for-such necessary Tyrants as our selves to ride the
freeborn Jades, and humble 'em?


2 Watch. Prithee hold thy prating, mind our-duties, and let us go sleep in the
fear of the Lord.


[Ex. all but Dash. in the Stocks. Enter Trickwell. Dash. Who Is there? So ho!
so ho! [to him Trick. like a Bell-man. I shall be mad, lose my wits, and then
be hanged. Who goes there I say? thou may approach without fear, I Am fast by
the heels.


Trick. It Is Dashit!
Rings his Bell. Maids in your Night-rails,
Look to your light Tails,
Keep close your Locks,
And down your Smocks;
Keep a broad Eye,
And a close Thigh.
Good morrow, my Masters all, good morrow.


Dash. A Pox of Eyes and Thighs! When, Bell-man.


[Trick. comes to him, holds his Lanthorn. Trick. [Through the Nose.] Good
lack, good lack, Mr. Dashit! when, what does your Worship in the Stocks? pray
come out, Sir.


Dash. Out, Sir! when, I tell thee I am locked.


Trick. Locked! Oh Men, Oh Manners! Oh Times, Oh Night! that can not discern
gravitie and wisdom, in one of the Common Council too! When, what is your Worship
in for?


Dash. For? a Plague on it, suspicion of Felony.


Trick. Nay, an't be such a trifle, Lord, I could weep to see your good Worship
in this taking: Your Worship has been a good friend to me; and tho you have
forgot me, I have found your Worship's doors open, and I have knocked, and God
knows what I have saved; and do I live to see your Worship stockt?


Dash. Hah! alas, honest man, thou knows me then: Prithee call the Watch, and
let the Constable know who I am, prithee do; and here, I have some money about
me.


Trick. It Is more than I deserve, Sir; let me alone for your deliverie.


Dash. Do so, honest Bell-man, and then let me alone with that Knave Trickwell.


Trick. Maids in your Night-rails, etc.

Crying and ringing. Going out, enter Constable and Watch. Mr. Constable, who is
in the Stocks?


Constable. One Dashit, for a Robbery. Dashit he calls himself: do know him?


Trick. Know him! -- Well, Mr. Constable, what good have you done the City!
Know him! a most notorious Thief; his house has been suspected for a
Bawdie-house many a year; a harbourer of Cut-purses and Night-walkers; he has
been a long time in the black blook, and is he taken now?


1 Watch. How? Burladie, Neighbor, we'll not trust the Stocks with him; we'll
to Newgate with him to rights.


Constable. Well moved, Simon. Come, Sir, come, Sir, out with him.


Dash. Oh, does your Raskalships know me now? I thought you would know me in
the end.


Constable. Yes, the end of your worship we know.


Dash. Aye, here is an honest fellow can inform ye.


Constable. Yes, we thank him, he has informed us you are a Pimp and a Thief. Bind
him fast, and to Newgate with him.


Dash. To Newgate! why Bell-man, Rogue, Raskal? To Newgate, amongst the
profane Jesuits too? oh, oh!


Exit the Watch with Dashit. Trick. So, thou art like to thrive in thy
Knaverie: Roguerie prospers with thee. To morrow is the Sessions at the
Old Bailey; I Will make him shrink with fear, ere I have done. Could I but be
revenged on this Corina,

I should be prosperous indeed;

Some little Devil help me at a pinch at need.


Exit. ACT the Fifth.
SCENE the First. Corina's House.
Table and Lights. Enter Sir Lyonel, Sir John, Corina and Wellman, disguised.
Cor. THis is my Lodging, Gentlemen; where, if you will please to wait a little,
you shall both see and hear the truth of what I Have told you.


Sir Lion. But, Madam, Did he tell you he had killed his Friend? tell you
himself, it is strange!


Cor. Sir, If you find I wrong him, let me dye. He came all breathless, panting
to my Chamber, his Sword all bloody, prayed me to conceal him, for he had
murdered Wellman.


Sir Joh. Under favor, Madam, what quarrel had they, said he, it is a most rare
Creature, I Am half in Love already.


Cor. Innocently was the unhappy cause; they loved me, both were Rivals in my
Favor, nor knew I which my heart inclined to most; Wellman had Wit, Youth,
Gaity and good Humor, lovely, well made, fit to engage a heart; and Friendly
too was handsome, very discreet, very Amorous, soft in his Language, modest in
his Actions; and though their Charms were different, yet 'twas hard to say who
was the greater Conqueror; so I by favoring both, made either jealous.


Sir Joh. S'bud, would I had shared of that without the danger?

[aside.
Sir Ly. But Wellman was to have married my Daughter Marinda; to morrow was the
day.


Cor. To please his Father, Sir, he made you think so, he has often with sighs to
me confessed he could not love Marinda, I hope she will believe, and dye in
rage, and then I should lie contented in my Grave.

[aside.
Sir Ly. I pity thee, in troth now; but he was such a Villain, that but for his
Fathers sake I Would let him dye unrevenged -- but Sir Jeffery Wellman's my Friend,
and therefore I Will be disposed by you.


Enter Dunwell. Dunw. Madam, here is the Villainous man come -- as gay as a
young Bridegroom.


Cor. Pray Sir retire with these Gentlemen into my Closet, and you shall hear
he will confess the murder, and having witness, you may apprehend him, and do
you the while prepare the Watch, and let 'em wait below.


Well. With what a Fury is a Whore enraged?


[Puts Sir Lyonel and Sir John into the Closet, and Wellman and Dunwell go out.
Cor. So now my Revenge grows high, could I but hang this Friendly, which I
would because 'twas Wellman's Friend, and make Marinda mad,

Oh! with what Joy I Would follow -- for it is I

Must end the last Act of the Tragedy.


Enter to her Friendly fine. Friend. Now, my Corina, now, my Heavenly Fair,
I come to take that Joy which from thy Eyes
I find thou will allow my panting heart --
And here upon my knees receive my Vow;
If ever I prove false to so much Beauty
May I be ever scorned by Men and Heaven!
Oh! the excessive Joy that fills my Soul
With thought of my approaching happiness.
Come, lets draw nearer to our bliss, thy Chamber --

Cor. But stay --


[Draws him near the Closet. Fri. Oh! do not kill me with that fatal stay.


Cor. You have not told me yet how you killed Wellman.


Fri. Oh! name him not, some fit of Love or Rage will seize thy Soul at naming
him, and ruin me. My dear Corina, Mistress of my Life, name him no more.


Cor. Now, on thy Life, by all I hold most dear, now Wellman is no more, the
repetition will be wondrous grateful. Prithee, how fell the perjured faithless
man? tell it me over again, and I Will resign my self for ever to thy Arms.


Fri. Tell thee and take thee! Were each word Blasphemy, would every Syllable
betray my Life, I Would have to utter it for that Reward: though I can tell no
more than what I Have done already -- that we met at a Ball, prepared for the
contracting of Wellman to Marinda; where I being out in a Dance, or I at least
pretending so, I struck him, we drew, but being parted there, I challenged him
out, and it being late, we fought in the street, where I had the Advantage of him
and killed him.


Cor. What did you with the Body?


Fri. Dragged it into Fleet Ditch, with the next Tide to flote where Fortune
pleased, and slew my dear Corina --


Cor. You shall dye for it, fond easy Fool --


Enter Sir Lyonel, Sir John, and lay hold of him: Wellman from below with
Officers. Sir Ly. Seize the Murderer, Oh wicked Villain, base and treacherous!


Fri. Base and perfidious Woman! hold off your hands, and let me ask this
Devil, why she does thus.


Cor. Ah fool! that could believe my Love so slight to let thee live, that
murdered him I lived for.


Fri. Well ye Gods! you have reclaimed my Wildness, and brought me back to man,
-- and now I see the Strong Deformity of sinful Passion.


Sir Ly. Come, Come, Sir, we came not here to talk, it is Morning already, carry
him directly to the Old Baily, the Sessions is now, and let him be hanged out
of the way.


Fri. You Have Reason Sir, and deserve this Usage, but yet unhand me -- thus I Would
been served had I indeed killed Wellman! but Sir he lives, lives at his
Goldsmiths, one Glister in Cheapside.


Cor. Heavens! Lives! Lives to be married! Oh --


Sir Ly. We are not to believe that Sir, to Prison with him till* he can prove
this true.


Fri. No rudeness Sir, I Will go unguarded -- Death! what a vile, poor,
degenerate thing, a Mercenary Woman is --


Sir Joh. How, a Mercenary Woman? Where the Devil have I lived, and how past my
time, I knew her not before -- this is her Man -- I must get acquainted with
him, -- Friend -- a Word I pray.


Sir Ly. How Sir, this Woman set you on! nay then Mr. Constable, pray lay hold
of her, and see her forth coming.


Cor. With Joy, since Wellman lives, and lives to be perjured, no matter what
becomes of poor lost me.

[weeping.
Fri. No Sir, let me instruct you, take my Word I am a Gentleman, and known to
you, she shall be forth coming if there be an Occasion, though she be false she
is a Woman still, a beauteous lovely Woman -- come Sir I Will follow you.


[Dunwel leads in Corina. Well. I Have yet a little Pity on my Heart, and that
forsaken Beauty I have ruined.

[and looking on.
Sir Joh. But Sir you do not mind me.


Well. Said you Sir?


Sir Joh. I asked you Sir, who this Lady was, to whom I perceive you belong;
whether a man may be welcome for his Money -- you conceive me.


Well. Sir?

[Angryly.
Sir Joh. Nay Sir, I ask your Pardon Sir, no Offense I hope; I Am a Knight by
Birth Sir, and have Sir, some sixteen hundred a year Sir, no contemptable
Fortune for a Gallant.


Well. A Gallant Sir?


Sir Joh. When yes Sir, a Gallant Sir, when what a Devil, I speak no Treason I
hope in the Lord.


Well. But Sir you do as bad, this Lady is of Quality, and has a Fortune too,
or if she had not, she has Beauty sufficient to entitle her to be a wife.


Sir Joh. Say you so Friend, I must confess I am very much taken with her
Beauty, but that I have a sort of an Engagement upon my Person, to Mrs. Diana
now, but I like this better by much Sir; and if she can but clear her self of
the Business of this Murder, and has but any reasonable Fortune -- and I get my
self off this Diana --


Well. Who is she Sir?


Sir Joh. Sir Lyonel Worthy's Daughter Sir, a little learing Titt as any's in
England.


Well. Sir to serve you, could you help me to the Speech of her, I would do
much, and have some artful Cunning.


Sir Joh. Help thee, when I Will carry thee immediately man, but do it so, as she
may be very willing to part with me -- or else, poor thing, twill grieve me to
disappoint her.


Well. I Will warrant you for doing that; and clearing this Lady, and securing
you a Portion.


Sir Joh. E Gad, and I Am a Man made then -- come along thou shall have a
handsome Reward for thy Pains too.


[Exeunt. SCENE Sir Lyonel's House
Two Chairs, a Table. Enter Marinda, and Diana, and Maid. Mar. But Sister is it
a Sin to hang one's self?
Is it a Crime to dye when Life's a Torment?
Methinks Heaven should forgive it.

Dia. Prithee leave these Disputes, ye make me sad,
A Humor that I hate, and yet for Friendly,
I Have tried to weep and sigh, and have attained to it
With very much ado.

Mar. Oh thou art happy, would I were unconcerned,
An even brutal Temper that no Miseries
Could touch, nor Mirth could elevate.

Dia. Call you that brutal, give me that solid one;
I hate your thin and unsubstantial Soul
That every ject or small Assault of Grief,
Breaks through and makes ridiculous Mirth and Rage,
For every petty accident: Give me a Soul,
A Humor that is in Grain, not one that
Fades like Colors in the Sun, and changes like
Your Cheeks now pale, now red, and tells the World
The Secrets of your Heart; and yet I must confess I Am
Grieved for Friendly, for you know I loved him,
Yet not so much to whine or dye for him.

Mar. It Is true, when I consider he was false, methinks I should not dye.


Dia. Nay, as for that I think you are mistaken, I believe him true enough, and
that was some insensed Mistress, some of his Family of Love, that envyed your
Happiness only, and came to put you in Despair, and I believe Wellman is not
dead, nor can I think Friendly could be so base upon any account to kill him;
he is virtuous, has some Religion in him, and much honesty, prithee be pacified;
come sit, you have not slept to night, sit and lets sing to you, and I dare
hold you my Diamond Pendants to fifty Guinneys Wellman is alive. Come Ample,
sing a Song.


Enter Wellman and Sir John at the door. Sir Joh. Look ye, Sir, I have brought
you in, now lay your lies as close together as you please, do you my business,
and no matter how: I must to the Sessions house this morning to give my
Evidence against Friendly.


[Ex Sir Joh. Ample sings a Song. Mar. Away! I Will hear no more! I cannot sleep!
Alas, there is no Music like my sighs and groans; leave me, and let me go --
to rest, and Wellman!


Dia. Ample, she swoons, help, help --


Well. By your leave, sweet Creatures.


Dia. Uncivil Sir, what are you?


Well. One that brings comfort: hah! the Lady dying! stand off, I have a
Cordial in my Voice -- oh! she is gone, cursed be my Trial! See, it is Wellman
calls.


Dia. Wellman! ha, ha, ha! Sister, look up, he is here.


Well. She stirs, give her more Air.


Mar. How have I slipped off Life! where am I, hah! in Heaven sure, and this is
Wellman kneeling: Art thou an Angel there?


Well. I would not wish it yet, no; we have an Age to come in love e're we
arrive to that.


Mar. You live then! [softly] I shall die with Joy else.


Well. Call back the Blood into thy paled Cheeks, thou Miracle of Women! I made
this trial only to secure my Faith, and I believe you love, and I am happy; by
all that is good, I never was unjust; that Woman, that beauteous Sinner whom you
saw, I Have been to blame with, but you must forgive the Errors of my Youth.


Mar. I do! and her! and must love whom you have loved.


Well. I thank thy goodness, but it shall not need, hereafter I Will tell thee
all my Life, but now my time is short, and I must yet remain in this Disguise
'till Friendly's Tryal's past; for he shall suffer to the last degree, for
leaving thee, Diana, for another.


Dia. And has he been so wicked?


Well. Yes, but is now reclaimed, but 'twas but in obedience to your Commands,
you would have him try to lose his Maidenhead, and he forsooth fell desperately in
love, but I Will return the Penitent into your Arms again.


Di. Faith Brother, I do love the Fugitive, that is flat: and if my Father
please, will marry him; but he is for Sir John Empty.


Well. But Sir John Empty is not for you, his heart's engaged to this Corina,
my quondam Mistress, she strikes all dead that look on her, and I Am to get your
consent he may leave you.


Dia. Alas! pray tell him though 'twill break my very heart; yet what must be,
must be, Marriages are made in Heaven, and so forth.


[Enter Sir John running. Well. Let me alone: but see where he comes breathless.


Sir Joh. News, news, news, news!


Dia Mackerel, Mackerel, Mackerel, fresh come ashore.


Sir Joh. When, how now, Mrs. Marinda! when, you look blithe and brisk upon it.


Dia. When ay, is not that better than louring, and pouting, and puling, which
is troublesome to the living and vain to the Dead? for my own part, let my
Husband laugh at me when I Am dead, so he smile upon me whilst I live: I love a
cheerful countenance in all conditions.


Sir Joh. Ay, but to see a Woman whine, and yet the Devil a tear falls; mourn,
and yet keep her cheeks full.


Dia. Ay, there is the Devil.


Sir Joh. And yet I was heartily afraid y faith that I should a seen a Garland
on that Beauty's Hearse; but Time, Truth, Experience and variety, have great
power over Womankind.


Dia. Well Sir, but to the business, the News you were so big with?


Sir Jo. Why, it is this: the Public Sessions this day holden at the Old Baily
has condemned poor Frank Friendly.


Well. Hah! When Sir, he offered to produce Mr. Wellman at one Mr. Glisters a
Goldsmiths.


Sir Joh. That Is all one, when it came to the test Glister denied he ever saw
or heard of him, and his own Confession hangs him without more witness, and
with him Dashit the Vintner is condemned for Robbery, and several others.


Well. How? Dashit for Robbery? and was it proved against him?


Sir Joh. Only shrewd suspicions, it is thought he will have a Pardon: a Cloak was
stolen, that Cloak he had. The Justice was in Drink that committed him, the
Judges severe and in haste, the Jury hungry, and so the Knave was cast; but
hang him, he has cheated me with many an unmerciful Bill: but, Lord, to hear
his moan, his wishes, his curses, his prayers, and his ill-timed Zeal, by my
troth, they would have made a Comedy. But, Sir, the Lady, the poor Lady you
serve, and who betrayed Friendly, is sent to Newgate; Well, I Will take my Oath
it is a lovely Gentlewoman, it is a thousand pities; they say she must be tried
the next Sessions.


[Wellman joggs Diana, and whispers. Dia. Let me alone for a neat and
seasonable lie; [aside. -- how Sir, a Lady, pray, who mean ye?


Well. She that was here, Madam, and gave an account how Wellman was killed.


Dia. Heavens, his Sister! Mean you Wellman's Sister Sir?


[to Sir John. Sir Joh. How, Wellman's Sister?

[aside.
Well. Wellman's Sister, Madam?


Dian. Can you do less for an abandoned Mistress than tell a handsome lie to get
her a good Husband? Say it is so, or I Will make mischief.

[aside.
Well. The Gentleman knows it is so: I told him she was of Quality.


Dia. A very virtuous Maid; Heavens! that I had but a Brother that would marry
her, and take her part in defiance of the World! Nay Sister, we must in Honor
visit her: poor Innocence!


Sir Joh. Hah! Wellman's Sister? When, look ye Madam, though you have not a
Brother, I would have you to know you have a Lover, that will do as much to
serve you as any Lover in Christendom, and as for marrying her, for your sake,
Madam, and to do the Lady good, I Would venture as far as Hercules, de ye see, or
Alexander the Great, that I would.


Dia. Most Heroically spoken, the Contents do almost break my heart, yet, Sir,
to let you see I scorn to be outdone in Bravery, I Will -- give you leave -- to
marry her; and I think that is a bold word.


Sir Joh. Egad and so it is.


Mar. Nay if you are so resolved, and keep that Resolution, 'twill not be hard
to bring the Lady off, so many Friends joining to her party.


Dia. For my part I Will dye to serve her.


Sir Joh. And so will I in blood, now I Am set on it,


Dia. Come then, without Delay let us visit her,


Mar. Where? At Newgate Sister?


Dia. At Newgate: Oh let not that Word fright you, because so many have gone
to the Gallows from thence! martyred Innocence does often dye where Thieves and
Robbers do; a Gallows may be sanctified, why not a Prison? Come Sir John your
hand.


Mar. And Sir I must beg yours.


To Wellman, Exeunt. Great-gate. SCENE changes to the Front of Newgate at the
Grate two or three Prisoners, one a beging, a Box hangs out. [To them Shamock
[Begs in a low Voice, and cries the while. 1 Pris. Pray remember the poor
Prisoners, the poor Prisoners, pray remember the poor Prisoners. ho, ho, ho!


Sham. Dam ye for a Son of a Whore, how sneakingly do you beg -- Remember the
Poor -- ye meeching Bitch, is that a Voice to dive to the Bottom of a Usurers
Pocket, and fetch out Money in despite of his hardened heart? -- Remember the
Poor? Pox of your snivelling, stand by ye Dog, and let me come to the Grate.


1 Pris. Alas, Mr. Shamock, me thinks we should have little Stomach to beg, I
hear our Reprieves are out of Doors, and they talk of a Warrant for Execution,
so that we may be hanged to Morrow.


Sham. Why you whining Cur, be hanged to Morrow? when then we have the more need
to beg hard to day, that we may drink at parting; Sirrah beg me heartily and
with a good impudent Grace, I Will beat out your Brains with your own Fetters.


1 Pris. Oh! hold, hold, spare my Life good Mr. Shamock.


Sham. So, I see thou bear a Conscience, and wo't not cheat the Gallows of
it is due.


1 Pris. Oh no Sir, I have too much Repentance to wish to dye so wickedly, as I
have lived; I would go out of the World like a good Christian however.

[Crying.
Sham. Was there ever such a chicken-hearted Son of a Whore? thou were ever a
lazy Rascal, and I remember when we were getting a painful Living on the Kings
Highway, would sleep the while, yet wake to share the snack, and to be drunk
for Joy of the Prize: Stand away and observe me now, with what a laudable Voice
I Will move Compassion:

[Pulls off his Periwig, turns his Cravate behind, thrusts out his Head and
begs in a canting Tone. Christians pity the poor Prisoners of this loathsome
and dismal Dungeon, and 'twill be restored unto you in tenfold; drop your
Bounty into this little Box, the only Support, Relief, and Comfort of twenty
wretched Souls.

[Enter Sir Lyonel. Noble Sir, Remember the poor Prisoners:

[Enter Parson. [He pulls out a long Purse and puts in a twopence. The Lord
reward your noble Charity, and restore it to you forty and forty fold.

[Pulling up the Box. it is an old Oliverian twopence, a damned Commonwealths
pair of Breeches, confound the mark and your good Worships Bounty, was this all
the large Lethern Purse and your more large Conscience could produce, would I
were worthy to have a Dive or two at your reverend Pockets, I would ease 'em
for you with a Pox.

Hah! Ladies alighted --

[begs again. Most beautiful Ladies, dispense your noble Charity amongst twenty
miserable Wretches, oppressed with Hunger and Cold: Merciful and fair -- pity the
Miseries of unfortunate young men; whose few short hours of Life they have left,
shall be employed in Prayers for you our noble Benefactors: Oh remember the
Poor!

[They give'em Money. Sweet Lady, Heaven reward your Beauty with eternal Bloom
and numberless Adorers.

[Pulls up the Box, they go in. Hah Gold! it is Gold by Jove.

Nay, now a short Life and a merry, we will have it all in drink Boys, and when
the Hour comes, dye like Hero's, sing the Psalm merrily, and then -- be hanged
till we are sober.


1 Pris. Ah! Mr. Shamock it is a long Nap we shall take e're we wake again.


Sham. No matter, then we shall not be dry next Morning.


1 Pris. Oh this is sad jesting -- Oh, Oh, Oh!


Sham. Here Is a cowardly Rogue, now Plague on him, he is a shame to the noble
Function of Padding: Sirrah, you shall have no Drink, it is thrown away upon the
Rascal.


3 Pr. Drink? rot him, let him lap salt Water from his Eyes, like a mangy Dog
as he is.


Sham. Come, come, lets in and drink.


Enter Keeper. Keep. Mr. Shamock, you must come down to your Devotion, here is a
Parson come; Mr. Ordinary's sick; come away.


Sham. Pox of your Ceremonies, a man cannot be hanged in Peace for your Parson,
and your paultry praying -- but come, hanged since we must obey silly Customs,
let us down, and then -- to drink, my hearts -- go, get ye down.


[sings. [Exennt. SCENE the inside of the Prison.
Enter Friendly in Irons, with Sir Lyonel, Mr. Dashet in Irons, Mrs. Dashet
weeping by him, Nan and others: Trickwell disguised like a Parson, seeming
exhorting 'em: Corina and Mrs. Dunwel snivelling. Friend. No Sir, I do not
blush, nor are my cheeks grown, pale, though I Am condemned to dye a shameful
death.


Sir Ly. No kind of Death is shameful but the Cause.


Friend. Which I well know is none, Heaven is my witness, none.


Trick. Ah! you are happy Sir! -- happy to quit the World in Innocence, for
Innocence -- is a most heavenly thing -- for Sir, Innocence is all in all;
Innocence is --


[picks both their pockets. Friend. Very impertinent in your mouth, Sir, -- you
ought to have the manners to believe a dying man has other business -- than to
give ear to what you say; go preach to the Rabble, Sir, I Am not at leisure.


Trick. Ah! -- what is sinful man -- speak to him, Sir, to think upon his Soul,
his precious Soul; ah, his too precious Soul --


Friend. Perhaps I Am not of your persuasion, Sir.


Trick. Hah! Heaven forbid -- I hope you are not a Papist Sir.


Friend. If I am, Sir, what then?


Trick. What then? when then Sir, guilty or not guilty, you deserve to dye, and
I Will prove it, and stand to it.


Friend. Prithee leave us, we are serious.


Trick. Leave ye, yes faith, 'tis-time: you are not worth a Groat.


Friend. But is there Sir no hopes of a Reprieve?


Sir Ly. I Will warrant you Sir, I Have Interest enough for that.


Friend. Upon my Honor, Sir, Wellman is but mislodg'd, and l've already
satisfied ye how I came to say what I did of his Death to that fair false one,
-- sure some Lethargy has seized him, that he appears not, or else he is mad, it
cannot be unkindness, and it would grieve you, Sir, to see me dye, and after
find me innocent.


Sir Ly. By the Mass, and so it would, Sir; therefore I Will to Court about your
Reprieve immediately; nor need you doubt my Diligence or Success; -- but why,
thou beauteous Hypocrite, did thou betray him thus?


[to Corina, who stands sullenly by. Cor. I will not answer thee: I own my
guilt, and am ashamed and angry at my Destiny: Were Wellman dead, I could
endure the rest, but would not live to see him live another's.


Sir Ly. Well Sir, fare ye well till anon.


[go's out. Friend. Oh! how I hate what once I so adored!
He that is born well, and Nobly Educated,
Blessed with an honest Fame, and worthy Friend,
And would with desperate oversight love all
And land himself upon this fatal shore,
Let him never kill, or steal, but love a Whore.
Enter Wellman, Marinda, Sir John, Ample and Shatter, Diana. -- hah! -- what do
I see?
Now everlasting Darkness cover me
From that dear injured killing sight, Diana.

Dian. Nay, do not hide your Face, or turn away -- I Am wondrous glad to know
where a Maid may find ye when she has need of you; and though these Chains are
something easier than those of Matrimony, yet, like a malicious Woman, I am for
proposing a change; faith, what do you think on it? dare ye venture? methinks
'twere no ungrateful Leap from the Gallows into a fair young Ladies Arms? --
would you not rather cry, Drive away Carman?


Fri. Oh! do not mock my miseries, Diana!


Dia. By this hand, not I; You may remember, I swore never to marry, till the
man I liked could give me proofs he was a man; you bowed, and blushed, and
talked of Maidenheads, and modestly protested your Virginity; oh, filthy in a
man! a man of sense too! -- but you are improved, I hear, grown wise of late, and
given me proofs you are no Block-head; and I, to keep my word, am come to
challenge you; -- and to put you out of all these hanging apprehensions, know
Wellman's alive.


[Wellman discovers himself, they embrace. Sir Joh. How! Wellman alive?


Friend. My dear, unkind, have you dealt well with me?


Well. I was resolved I would be quits with you for getting my Mistress from
me; which by the way I beg you would forgive. I Have a Design to marry her to
Empty.


Fri. She is a Woman, and I scorn to injure her.
-- And can you, Madam, except this Criminal in Chains?

Dia. The sooner for that reason, with my Father's leave, I have a good hank
upon you when you're insolent, to upbraid ye with the place from whence I had
ye.


Mar. He cannot but commend your Passion for him.


Fri. I am ashamed to be so much obliged.


Mar. Nay, leave the shame to her.


Dian. Shame, I laugh at it, and would have believed none to have married
Friendly under the Gallows -- therefore take my hand, and bind the bargain.


Fri. Thou art a Noble Creature, and I am thine forever.


Well. By Heaven, Corina, it was not want of Love, my Fortune did depend upon
my Marriage, but when I saw the Woman destined for me, I must confess I felt
new flames possess me, without extinguishing the old, and I resolved to love
her virtuously, and hold an honest Friendship still with thee -- to raise thee
up above the Worlds contempt, the fickle favors of unconstant man, and love
thee as my Siste.


Cor. What powerful Charms dwell in thy tender language! thou melt'st my rage
with every softening look, and lead'st me a tame Captive to thy will; -- I am
still all thine, dispose me as thou please.


Well. This Knight, Corina, then resolve to marry, I Will make thy Fortune equal
to his Quality, the man is honest, young, and Master of himself. He thinks thou
art my Sister -- nor will I ever undeceive him.


Cor. Well -- since I must lose you, and am by your Commands obliged to Life,
no matter how forlorn and wretched it is --


Dun. By my troth, Sir, you have left her like a man of Honor.


Well. Sir John, you are my Friend, and this my only Sister, for whom I know
you have a Passion; and since Mrs. Diana is disposed of, I am resolved you
shall not be disappointed of a Lady. Take her, and trust my Friendship for her
Fortune, 'twill not be inconsiderable.


Sir Joh. Fortune Sir! I scorn she should owe her Ladyship to any Fortune but
what my single Honor can give.

-- therefore Madam, I am your Knight, your Champion, your most humble Husband
and obedient Servant, John Empty, Baronet: but good Brother, let us make haste
out of this scandalous place, it puts me so damnably in mind of mortality, it
will spoil my Wedding-night.


Well. Ay Sir, as soon as Friendly's discharged.


Marin. You must give me leave to call This while Trickwell is seeming
exhorting the Prisoners, and picking their pockets, Sir John. and Wellm.
looking at Trick. and the Prisoners. your Sister too, for I must love and serve
all that love Wellman.


Cor. Madam, the Generous Pattern that you have set me, I shall be proud to
follow.


Well. Hah, Sure that Wench I know, -- it is she -- when how how now, Nan, what
brought thee hither?


Nan. Before Gad even my kind heart, Mr. Wellman, Love, villainous Love!


Sir Ioh. Hah, Love! when, what a pox, is that become a hanging matter in our
Age?


Nan. If 'twere, your Neck's in no great danger.


Sir Ioh. Good Lord, what I warrant you think I was never in love then? yes
faith have I, and have felt your Flames and Fires, and Inclinations, and
Wamblings, as often as any He that wears a head.


Nan. Then you are the first Fool I ever knew inspired.


Well. spare him Nan, he is my Brother, but prithee say how came Love to bring
thee to this fatal end?


Nan. Fatal! it is my Glory -- and egad my Statue and History ought to be added
to the Gallery of Heroic Women -- why you have heard I suppose, that my
Husband was condemned last Sessions, Mr Shamock.


Well. What the famous Padder? is he thy Husband?


Nan. Yes Faith, he had a Reprieve, but now the Warrant's signed for Execution,
and he is to be hanged to morrow.


Well. Well what is that to thee?


Nan. When faith, we have lived lovingly hitherto together, and we'll e'ne dye
as lovingly, for I am resolved to be hanged honestly with him.


Sir Ioh. Honestly hanged -- how so?


Nan. When I Will tell you Sir, when the Tidings came to me of poor Iack's being
apprehended, I soon knew which way the World would go with him; I never
snivel'd and nouted like a feeble Woman for the matter, but e'ne resolved
bravely to take a Turn at Tyburn with him.


Sir Ioh. Lord have Mercy upon us.


Nan. In order thereunto, what does me I, but hearing of a Fellow that had lost
a parcel of Goods of value, but goes my ways to him, accuses my self for the
Thief, was sent to Newgate, and to my great Joy and Satisfaction, was condemned
with honest Jack efaith: On my Soul, Mr. Wellman, I trembled for Fear I thou would
have been acquitted, but the honest Jury took Pity on me, and brought me in
Guilty. When the Devil would any of your Wives of Quality have showed this
conjugal Constancy?


Sir Ioh. Lord deliver me, what a wicked World is this, that People should have
the face to confess their Villainies! she confesses all now, and some are
hanged and confess nothing.


Well. And wo't thou be so good natured to take a Turn with him at the Gallows?


Nan. With as much Joy as e're I kissed him.


Well. When this is the most admirable Proof of Love, I ever heard off.


Sir Ioh. Proof of Love, proof of the Devil, Man, what to be slain at Tyburn
for Love? when it is most damnable and as nonsensical as to be hanged for
Religion.


Nan. I find by your Principles that you will keep out of Harms way.


Sir Joh. Nay of my Conscience, I shall never increase the Number of the noble
Army of the Martyrs.


Enter Shamock chained. Sham. Nan, where are you, here is the Fellow has brought
home our Coffin.


Nan. Let him bring't in my dear, you shall see Mr. Wellman, what a Device I
have found out, never to part with dear Jack: I have bespoke a Coffin to hold
us both.


Sir John. How a Coffin? Lord have Mercy upon's, how great the Devil is with
this Woman! but what care have you taken of your Soul all this while?


Nan. That Is the Business of Mr. Ordinary, he has so much a year allowed him
for managing that Affair, and has undertaken mine: Come bring in the Coffin.


Enter Fellow with a Coffin, They look on it. Sham. When, what a Coffin's here?
Is this a Coffin fit for Christians? -- Do You see, and all pitched within too,
ye Dog, we shall stick to it, a pox on ye for a nasty Son of a Whore.


Sir Joh. Bless me, sure these Reprobates never think of going to Heaven.

[To Wellman.
Nan. Ay! I gave him two broad pieces in hand too, and two more I have in my
Pocket to give him --


Trick. Which I must be acquainted with.

[aside.
Nan. But he shall be damned e're he be so well paid.


Sham. Besides, Sirrah, you might have had the Manners to have lined it with a
little Bays this cold Weather, but you have neither Conscience nor forecast.


Sir Joh. Lord! Brother Wellman, I believe some Priests have been tampering
with 'em, they are so wicked.


Well. Ha, Ha, Ha! a notable Observation.


Sham. I Would forgot too, I Will lay my Head to a Halter, this Coffin will not hold
us both.


Sir Joh. Hark ye Friend, don't lay with him, for he is oth' surer side.


Nan. Yes my Dear, as for that I believe we may make Shift, it is but my laying
my Arm under thy Head, and thou thine over my Breast, and we shall lie as snug
these cold nights --


Sir Joh. When the Devil's in these People.


Nan. But I have a cursed Misfortune befallen me.


Sham. What Is that, my dear Betty?


Betty. The Whore the Laundress, who had all the Linen I was to be buried in,
like an ungrateful Baggage, knowing I was to be hanged, and she to have no more
of my Custom, has pawned all, my laced Linen too; so that, dear Jack, I shall
come to thy Arms but scurvily equipt to morrow.


Sham. Lets arrest her. Lord, Lord, that People should have no Conscience nor
Honesty in 'em: what will this wicked World come to.


Sir Joh. Ay! and to rob the Gallows too, unmerciful Tyrant.


Trick. comes up to ker. Trick. Young Woman, young Woman, this is no time to
think of Trifles, and gew gaws; the best dress is that of Repentance, let your
Conscience be clean and neat within, and no matter for Lace and Tawdrums; dress
up your Soul I say.


[Picks her Pocket. Betty. When what a Pox have we here?


Trick. One who has preached better Doctrine to your Ladyship e're now, [and]
one who am appointed to put you in mind of your long home.


Betty. When ye Fool you, have I been taking such pains to prepare my self for
this Journey, and need your Advice in the Devils name? get ye gone ye canting
Rascal, here is honest Jack can teach me how to dye worth a Legion of you formal
Gown-men.


Sham. Gad you are a noble Lass.


Sir John. In Troth and so she is, it is Pity she should be damned.


Trick. goes to Dashet, Betty to the Joyner. Betty. Well Sirrah, here is your
two pieces more, because I scorn to be worse than my word -- [Feels in her
Pocket. hah! my money's gone -- what is the meaning of this? I had 'em and the
two pieces for Jack Catch too in my Pocket when I came down.


Sham. When what a Pox have we Thieves amongst our selves? this is fine doings
efaith.


Betty. Hanged let it go, they are some poor Devils that wanted it: go out and
wait till I go up, and I Will pay you.


[Exit. Joyner. Sir Joh. Or let him call again to Morrow in the Evening --


Trick. talking this while to Dashet, he making Grimaces of Woe, and crying and
wringing his hands, Mrs. Dashet crying by him. Mrs. Dashet. Well Husband, this
is a very comfortable man.


Dash. He is so. But, good Mr. Parson, leave my Soul a little while to it self,
I pray, and let us have a little of your counsel concerning my Body. I owe Mr.
Glister the Goldsmith 40 l. and suppose, Mr. Parson, when I am going to
Execution he should be so unneighbourly as to set a Ser jeant upon my back --
'twas for a Bowl --

[bursts out into loud crying.
Trick. Ah! trouble not thy self, my Christian Brother with transitory matters,
but have an Eye -- an Eye I say to the main chance -- [picking his pocket. I Will
warrant your shoulders; but as for your neck -- Plinius Secundus, or Marcus
Tullius Cicero, or some body says; that a threefold Cord is hardly broken.


Dash. A very Learned man this -- well, I am not the first honest man that has
been hanged, and I hope shall not be the last.

[crying still.
Trick. True Sir, therefore have a righteous Stomach: for you perhaps may sup
in Heaven to morrow.


Dash. Alas, Sin! I have no stomach to it at all Sir, -- please you to take my
Trencher, I never eat at night.


Mrs. Dash. Ah, Husband, I little thought you should have had need to have
thought of Heaven so soon: oh! -- had you been hanged deservedly 'twou'd never
have troubled me: for there is many an innocent man has been hanged deserv'dly,
-- but to be cast away for nothing -- oh, -- oh. --

[bawls.
Trick. Comfort your self, good Mistress, moderate Grief is decent, you will
shortly be a Widow, and I Am a Bachelor; I Will come and visit ye, and give you
Christian consolation.


Mrs. Dash. Ah, Sir! you shall be heartily welcome, and pray make haste. -- oh
-- oh --

[crying still.
Dash. Well, -- I do here make my Confession before all good Christian People,
and do declare -- that if I owe any man any thing, I do heartily forgive him.


Sir Joh. In truth, Religiously spoken. When, this is something.


Da. But -- but, if any manowes me any thing, let him pay my Wife.


Sir Joh. A good reason too y faith.


Da. There -- are -- the Writings of that Rogue's Estate who has brought me to
this untimely End -- dear Writings to me, God knows.


Mrs. Dash. Where had you these?


Dash. I took 'em out yesterday, thinking to have carried 'em to my Lawyers, in
order to taking the forfeiture of 'em: now thou may do it.


Mrs. Da. Ay, ay, Husband, I Will warrant'ye, I shall be diligent.


Dash. And now, good Yoke Fellow, take leave of thy honest and true Dashet.

[weeping.
Mrs. Dash. No, Husband, an't please the Lord I Will not leave you now, -- I Will
see you hanged first --

[cryes.
Trick. Hah, my writings! now for a trick of dexterity to retrieve those, and
I Am a man again -- [aside] but Brother, you must remember your sins too, and
iniquities; you must consider you have been a Broacher of profane Vessels, you
have made us drunk with the juice of the Whore of Babylon: for whereas good
Ale, Perry, Syder, and Metheglin, were the true Ancient British and Trojan
Drinks, you have brought in Popery, mere Popery -- French and Spanish Wines, to
the subversion, staggering, and overthrowing of many a good Protestant
Christian; -- oh! remember the Sins of the Cellar, beloved, the Midnight sins
that have been unsavory to the tastes of your Customers, when you put the
change upon 'em: remember your double scorings and long Bills, ah, remember
your long Bills.

[this while he picks Mrs. Dashets pocket of the Writings.
Well. This is that Rogue Trickwell.

[aside.
Dash. Ah! I confess, I confess, and forgive. [cryes. -- has any heard of one
Trickwell?


Trick. Trickwell; yes, I know him well: a very honest Religious man, and an
unright Dealer with his Neighbors, and their Wives speak well of him.


Dash. I Will take it upon my Death he is the cause of my hanging, but I heartily
forgive him; and if he would but yet come forth and save me, I would set him
free from the Law, and discharge him for injuring me.


Well. And would you from the bottom of your Soul forgive him all his cheats
and Rogueries?


Dash. I would, and be bound in a thousand pound Bond to save him from the Law:
ah! but it is impossible --

[cryes.
Well. Why look ye, Sir, -- behold, your worshipful Friend and humble Servant
Thomas Trickwell.


Trick. Hah! discovered by Mr. Wellman.


Dash. Trickwell!


Well. Now bawling Mr. Dashet.


Dash. Who would have looked for a Wolf in Sheeps clothing? or a Knave in a
Parson's Gown?


Trick. No railing Dashet, if you do, I Will swear against you yet.


Dash. Ay do, and damn your Soul.


Trick. What with a little Perjury? the Lord have Mercy on our Age then: No, no
Sir, I Will retrieve you from the Gallows, but as for your Goods and Moneys it
must go toward the use of my two hundred pound a year, which you have kept me
from this two years, and of which now, thanks to my Dexterity, I stand again
possessed.

[shows the Writings.
Dash. How my Writings gone?


Trick. Thank God you're so rid of them, for I had been an eternal Rent charge
upon you else, if I had not hanged you: you know you had 'em for a little
damned ballderdash Wine --


Dash. Well, I Would better loose my Writings than my Life.


Well. Hold Trickwell; -- yonder Woman I have been obliged to, and you have had
Relief from -- no Writings nor Pardon under marrying Mrs. May here --

[pointing to Dunwel.
Trick. Lord, Sir, what a Bawd?


Well. The better Sirrah, she has a good Calling then, when all fails.


Dun. Gods Blessing of your heart, Sir.


Well. No grumbling, do it or I Will deliver: -- remember Sirrah how you used my
Mistress last night, and had the Impudence to rival me --

[aside to him.
Trick. Well Sir of two Evils I Will choose this -- give me thy hand Moll, thou'st
been a loving Soul I must confess.


Dash. So there is some Revenge, I could even cry for Joy now,


Mrs. Dash. And so could I too, if I knew for what.


[Enter Sir Lyonel. Sir Ly. Here, where is Mr. Friendly -- here is your Reprieve
Sir, Hah! Marinda and Diana!


Dia. Yet with their Husbands Sir.


Sir Ly. How, How? -- hah! Mr. Wellman alive? and with Mr. Friendly -- God
bless ye, God bless ye all, I Am glad on it.


Sir Joh. Ay Sir, and I am married to this Lady.


Sir Ly. I Am glad of that too.

[Enter Keeper with a Reprieve. Here Mrs. Betty, where are you? Here Is a
Reprieve come for you:


Betty. Hah a Reprieve! What Devil owed me this malicious Spite, a Reprieve --
dam thee, thou ill, thou ominous looking Dog, ever the Messenger of Hellish
Tidings: Oh! I could tear thy hated Tongue out -- Rogue --


[beats him. Sham. Nay, dear, better be patient, and if we must part. --


Betty. Art thou turned cruel too, and preachest Patience?
Patience with Life -- no, I defy my Fate --
Scorning to live without thee thou shall see,
I Will find a thousand ways to dye with thee. --

[Led weeping with Sham. out. Sir Ly. By 'th Mass a hearty Wench I Will warrant
her, but come let us away: good Boys let us home and Dance, but first give Money
to these poor Wretches.

[Throws his long Purse amongst 'em. From this dire place many to Death have
gone,

But to be married, very rarely one.


FINIS

