Slingisby Bethell, Esquire HIS ENQUIRY AFTER WILLIAM BALY, The only WITNESS
against him, upon the TRIAL of the RIOT, at GVILD-HALL, on the 8th of May, 1683.
WHereas on Tuesday the 8th of May, 1683. At a Trial held at Guild Hall London,
Several persons were by a Jury found Guilty of a Riot, committed on the 24th of
June, 1682. In not departing from the said Hall, upon the Lord Mayor his
adjourning there by Proclaimation, the Pole, which was then on Foot, for the
choice of Sheriffs for London and Middlesex for the year ensuing.

And Whereas Slingisby Bethell of London, Esquire is named in the Information as
guilty of the said Riot, in not departing from Guild Hall, after the Lord Mayor
his said adjournment by Proclaimation; And whereas upon the Oath of one, by the
name of William Baly, that the said Bethell did not depart according to the
Proclaimation, but stayed there after the same, he was found guilty by the said
Jury. Now the said Bethell, not only knowing himself not guilty, but being also
able to prove the same, and by several credible Witnesses, that he was at the
time of the Adjornement in another place, and from thence went home, without
ever coming at Guild Hall or the Yard that Evening, has endeavored by all
manner of ways to find out the said William Baly who swore against him, but
cannot learn from whence he came, nor whither he is gone; he the said Bethell,
does therefore hereby Challenge the said William Baly to appear, and either to
make good his Oath against him in the Face of the World, or confess his
mistake, and clear him thereof; and in order thereunto, to leave word where he
is to be found, either at the House called Garraways Coffee-House in the
Exchange-Ally, or at Kid's Coffee-House, both near the Royal Exchange;
otherwise the said Bethell will hope to be reckoned guiltless, and the said
William Baly to have rashly sworn that which he was mistaken in, and cannot
Justify.

And now upon the whole, it may be observed, that there being at the aforesaid
Adjournment (as is thought) at least One thousand persons in the Hall, whereof
several Hundreds of them, may well be supposed to know the person of the said
Bethell, especially the Lord Mayors Officers, and Servants, by his having been
lately Sheriff of London and Middlesex: If he the said Bethell had been really
in the Hall or Yard, at, or after the said adjournment, there could not have
wanted a Crowd of Witnesses to prove the same, instead of having the Proof
thereof, to depend upon the Testimony of a Single person, that is not to be
found.

SLINGISBY BETHELL.

LONDON: Printed, by J. Grantham, Anno. Dom. 1683.


