CHRISTIANITY The Great Mystery.

IN ANSWER to a late Treatise, Christianity not Mysterious: THAT IS Not Above,
Not Contrary to Reason.

In opposition to which is Asserted, Christianity is above Created Reason, in
its pure Estate.

And contrary to Humane Reason, as Fallen and corrupted: and therefore in
proper sense, Mystery.

Together with a Postcript Letter to the Author, on his Second Edition Enlarged.

By T. B.

DONDON: Printed for W. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-Street: And John
Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street. 1696.

TO THE Truly Christian Readers.
I Have (I hope through the Grace of God) with a sincere Christian Zeal,
desired to Argue for the Glory of the Truths of the Gospel, under the
Honorable Title of Mysteries, (as they were, once for All, delivered to the
Saints,) according to the best Methods of Discussion, and Ratiocinative Debate
from Scripture Reason: But behold, I first show to my self, and to you, a more
Excellent, or Transcendent way: That is, Receiving the love of Truth, or Truth
in the Love of it; and with those mighty Energies, and Efficacies of it upon
the Heart and Life. David observing Men making void the Law, that is, the whole
Doctrine of God in his word, was Holily Enflamed upon it; Therefore I love thy
Commandments above Gold, yea, above Fine Gold; Therefore I esteem All thy
Precepts concerning All Things to be Right; and I hate every false way. The
best Antidote against the Poison of an Infectious Air, or Age is the inward
Experimental Sense, that God has chosen us to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. The most distinguishing
Test of Truth, that it is of God, is self-Resignation and Obedience in doing
the Will of God; The Witness of the Father, the Word, the Spirit, when we have
it in our Selves, can alone enable us to set our Seal to that Truth; The
Conscience purged from dead Works to serve the Living God, by the Blood Offered
by the Eternal Spirit; and the Blood of the Everlasting covenant, making
perfect in every Good Work to do his Will, and working in us, what is well
pleasing in his Sight, are the most Assuring Seals of the Eternal Godhead of
our Lord Jesus Christ in such an Antichristian Time; The Gates of Hell, All the
Reason, Policy, Wit, Authority of it, cannot prevail against a Christian so
founded on that Rock: The Work of Faith with Power, according to that History
of Believers, Heb. 11. does above All, display the Mysterious Efficacy of it,
which none know, but they who have it. That it gives a presence of its Objects
above all, that Sense can do, of its proper Objects; and a Demonstration of its
Idea's, above all that Reason is Able for; For it can prevail Above both, when
they would carry contrary to its Scope and End, and Impowers to Action far
above them, by virtue of that Hypostasis, and those its Demonstrations: Let us
therefore Bow our Knees mutually, that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
would grant us, according to the Riches of his Glory, to be strengthened by his
Spirit in the Inner Man, that Christ may dwell in our Hearts by Faith; that we
may comprehend with All Saints, the Heighths and Depths, the Breadths and
Lengths of what passes Knowledge; That we may be filled with All the Fullness of
Him, who can, to perfect Mystery, do above All we can ask or think; and yet to
show it no Blind Chimerick, or Imaginary thing; By a Power that Works IN us;
To Him be Glory in his Church by Jesus Christ throughout All Ages, Amen.

And in Regard of so many Antichrists, Enemies to the Glory of Christ and of
his Gospel in this Age, and in the midst of us; Let us Hereby know to our
Consolation, It is the very Last of the Last Time, the Time for God to Work for
the Consuming the Grand Antichrist, and all the Lesser Antichrists, that come
out of his Smoke with Him.

The Lord Hasten it in this his very Time; So Join, I beseech you in
Supplication with your most

Humble Affectionate Servant In our Lord Jesus T. B.

THE PREFACE.
THere has Lately Appeared in Print, A Book Entitled, Christianity not
Mysterious; And It Undertakes to Show, There is nothing in the Gospel, Contrary
to Reason, or Above it; And that no Christian Doctrine can be called, A Mystery.

The Writer Conceals his Name, and I do not desire to make Enquiry after it;
For it is not a Name, but Truth, and Weight of Discourse I would Insist upon;
Nor would I, if I could, make Any Reflection upon Persons, Having All Reasons in
my self for Humility, in Regard both of Consciousness of my own Weakness, and
also of Unworthiness: I would deal only with Things, and Treat them, as They
Require to be Treated; That All may Rest on the Merit of True Reason, according
to the Word of God, and not on Sallyes of Wit, or Satyr; And, that All may be
Managed with a Gravity Condecent to the Mysteries of Christianity, and with
Reverence of Scriptures, as All, who Discourse in their Defense, ought to Speak
and Write: I desire to observe the Apostolical Rule, To give the Apology of the
Hope of Christianity to Those, who Ask for it, with Meekness, and Fear; and, in
Meekness to Instruct, If Any oppose Themselves; If God Peradventure will Give
them Repentance to the Acknowledging the Truth.

I could Have Heartily wished, that even the Writer of the Treatise, I Design
to Review, had Avoided any thing, that Looks so Like Ridiculing, and Exposing,
as that Dialogue between the Doctor and Parishioner, p. 112, etc. and Left his
Reader to Bow before the Majesty of Evidence, (as He expresses it) wherever he
Found it: and had Forborne that, as Least Indecorousnesse of Expression, toward
Persons of so Great Veneration for their Accomplishments of Holiness, and
Learning; as also their Early Profession of Christianity; I mean, The Fathers,
whom He calls, p. 5. The Herd of the Fathers; as if because of Their Reverence
of the Mysteries of the Gospel above the Pretensions of Reason, They were to be
Looked upon as Irrational, not to say Worse: A Vein of clear, unsullyed Reason,
especially Bowing before a Greater Majesty, then what we are too suddenly prone
to call Evidence; I mean the Authority of God in his Word; I value above All
Flourishes, tha serve the Reader's Diversion and Airyness, rather then his
Instruction, and Benefit.

I am glad to find so many Reflections on the Mystery of Iniquity, and the
Depths of Satan, as I hope they will shortly be Universally deemed, and spoken
of; I mean That of Popery, or Antichristianism, so Great an Eclipse upon the
Glory of True Christianity; because Scripture has so often Doomed it to
Impenitency, and Perdition: But I cannot but look upon it, as most Injurious,
to Parallel, in any Degree with it, those Forms of Sound Doctrine, so often
Reproached under the Name of Systems, or Systematic Theology; wherein any have
taken care to keep, especially Close to Scripture; and those Intellectual
Exercitations upon them are suited to Men of Thought and Contemplation, though
not so Familiar to Common Readers, or Hearers; who may yet have those
Difficulties Masticated, and Prepared for them, by more plain Discourses.

I do not yet Plead for Binding Men's Faith and Consciences to any Words, or
Form of Words, that do not, especially in Christian Mysteries, Keep, as close
as may be, not only to Scripture-Sense, but to Scripture-Expressions, with as
little variation as is possible; Comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual; and
that they who do this, come nearest to the Thing, as the Author speaks; though
with what Design, in his Explaining of those Words, p. 5. I will not undertake
to Judge; Let him therein Stand or Fall to his own Master.

The Things that give me Scandal in the Treatise, are; First, The Boldness, and
Insolency of the Frontispiece, so very Contemptuous, and even Contradictory to
the Constant Language of the New Testament, Styling the Gospel, Mystery, and
its Truths, Mysteries; whilst that openly Bears out, Christianity not
Mysterious; this savours of Too mean an Esteem of the Sacred Stamp, and
Superscription, and the Images it gives of Things, and Highly Countenances
Antioscripturism, which yet the Writer would Appear not to have any Favor for.

I look upon it, as a Just Occasion for a Christian Zeal against it; That the
Deists, as the Men of Reason, and Virtuoso's, as they would be Thought, in
Religion, Take the Pretensions of this Treatise, as Service to Themselves;
Finding so much settled, in what, They Account Their own Territory, and
Demesne; Reason, and Free Will; And, in the mean time, they Act the Part of
Ananias, and Saphira; They Keep Back, or Withdraw, some Noblest Principles of
the Gospel on these very Interests; To which Secret Service, one cannot, but
Suspect, this Discourse is Devoted.

I cannot but be Troubled; The Observing Atheist, with whom the Deist is in a
Close Alliance, Rejoices to find his Account in this Suppositing a Dead Child
of Reason, and Free Will, as they now go amongst Men, in the Room of that
Living Spirituous Christianity of the Scriptures; or at least, That it is
Divided between a Nominal Faith, and a Philosophy, that is indeed Vain, and
Science, Falsely so Called.

The Beaux-Esprits, The Men of Air, and Wit, are pleased with Meeting the
Sacred, and Awful Mysteries of Christian Religion under Burlesque, and
Railleny: which ought to Affect the Sincere Lovers of it with Sadness, and
Lamenting such a Profane Temper of the Age.

I will not Deny, That some, not to be Looked upon with so Ill an Eye, as the
Former, who do not Closely Inspect, nor Penetrate the Scope, and Tendency of
such a Discourse, but suffer Themselves to be Imposed upon by Palliations, and
Pretenses, think it Innocent: But even this Deserves Lamentation, as showing a
Soft, and Tame Surrendry of the Faith of the Gospel, or a Gallio-Like Spirit,
that does not Generously, and Genuinely Care for these Things.

But All, who more Wisely and Discerningly Consider such Dissertations in their
Spring, and Issue, are Aware, How Destructive to, and Subversive of the
Doctrines, Life, and Power, and even of the Profession of the Gospel, they are.

On the Whole, therefore I make this Solemn Profession, with Appeal to Him, who
Searches Hearts, That I have no other Design in this Answer, but the Glory of
God in the Blessed, and Glorious Gospel of his Son; the Salvation of Souls,
That they may Buy the Truth, and not, on Any Fair Glozes, Sell it. And
therefore I can with All Humble Supplications, and Assurance, Commend the
Undertaking to the Divine Acceptance, in, and through the Mediator, and to His
Blessing upon it; to the Approbation of Sincere Christians; and to the very
Reason of the Adversaries between God, and their own Consciences.

THE SCHEME OF THE TREATISE, Christianity not Mysterious; and of the Answer to
it.
THE Fairest, and Clearest Method for the Attaining Truth in any Debate, is the
Plainest Laying Down the State of it, or Giving a Scheme of what is Agreed on
Both Parts; of what is mainly in Difference; and of the Principal Topics of
Argument on each side. These therefore I would lay down in one View.

P. 40, 4, etc.
1. There is an Acknowledgment on Both Parts of the Divine Original of the
Gospel, and of its Truths; That They are from God: The Advantage of which in
Deciding this Controversy, is; That whatever is regularly Argued from
Scripture, and from the very Stream, and Current of it, is to be Owned,
Received, and Rested upon as Truth by each Party; and is undoubtedly Agreeable
to Right Reason, and Right Reason to it.

2. There are yet Truths of the Gospel, P. 40, 41, etc.
that could never have been Found out by the Truest, or even the Highest
Created Reason, seeing they are the Deeps of God, and can be known only by
Revelation from Himself. The Advantage of this Acknowledgment is; That in
Regard of the Original of the Truths of the Gospel, whatever of Adorableness,
and Exciting Profoundest Reverence is Imported in Divine Mysteries, is for ever
due to the Truths of the Gospel, as in their Unsearchable Spring, and Origin:
And this certainly ought to have Moderated a Zeal without Knowledge, or Due
Consideration of All, that do but Acknowledge so much, in De-Mysterizing them
(if I may so speak) or Laying them Common; This should Conciliate to them most
Humble Veneration, and Love, as Inestimable Pledges of the Good Will of the
Supreme Being, to such Unworthy Despicable Creatures, as we the Children of Men
Are, to whom the Gospel is Vouchsafed; and even of Condescension to Angels,
whom Sacred Writing shows to have an Interest, at least of Beholding with
Admiration, and Delight.

And besides this, there are Reasons, as will appear, that what is so
Originally Mystery, should be always so, till such a State of Perfect
Comprehension, as wherein All Mystery shall be Finished.

3. It is Acknowledged, That the Gospel is prepared, Sect. 2, 3. Chap. 3d.
and even Gloriously Accomplished to Inform, and to Illuminate; And that it was
Attended with an Undoubted Evidence, and Demonstration of the Power of God in
Miracles, that might give All Assurance, and Satisfaction to the Reason, and
Mind of Man; That it was, and is from God.

The Advantage of this Acknowledgment on Both Parts is, That hereby, First,
There is an Unpassable Gulf Fixed between the Great Mystery of Godliness, and
the Mystery of Iniquity, which is a Mystery of Darkness, as Darkness it Self;
and its Miracles Lying Wonders, that is, Wonders of Darkness, Like only to the
Foul Idolatrous Mysteries of Paganism, and its Fables, as Scripture continually
shades the one by the other.

Let there therefore be no shade of Reproach cast on the Gospel Notion, or
style of mystery, from the mystery of Iniquity; seeing the One is separate from
the Other, as Light from Darkness, or as Heaven from Hell, and that by
Scripture it self; which, (though it uses the word mystery, so continually, as
a Vessel of Honor, and Proper to its own Divine Truths,) has yet set
Antichristianisme, the Counterfeit of Christianity, under the Title of a
Counter-mystery also, the mystery of iniquity.

4. It is from hence Agreed on Both parts, that Faith is no Implicit,
Sequacious, Blind Assent; but a Grace of Greatest Wisdom, and Understanding,
Full of Clearest Light, and Perceptions of Truth, Able to be the (...), the
very Presence, or Solid Argument of Things not seen; the (...), the
Demonstration of Things Hoped for.

The Advantage of this Agreement is, that, if notwithstanding this, There shall
be Found some Intimate, and even Essential Reason, why mystery should be
Acknowledged mystery; and that even because Faith is so wise, and Intelligent a
Grace; It will then come home to the Decision of the Main Point, whether
Christianity be mysterious or not, and it will be Decided for it.

5. We are Both One, That we have not Adequate Ideas of the Truths of the
Gospel, nor Behold the Essences of the things therein, no more, than we have
Adequate Conceptions of the Divine Being, or Attributes; or can Behold the
Divine Essence: Nor have we so much, as Adequate Conceptions of Things in
Nature, nor can behold their Essences: The Advantage of this Acknowledgment
lies in this, That one Undeniable Sense of mystery, viz. Some Kind of
Concealment, and Reserve is Found in the Truths of Christianity; There are such
Secresyes in them, that we cannot by our selves have Proportionate
Apprehensions, nor Adequate Ideas of; and yet, that this cannot be a sufficient
Reason of mysteryzing them; But if there may be Reasons given, why their
Hiddennesses should be called mysteries, and the Secrets of Nature not on those
Reasons, styled mysteries; Yea, if some Reason of Great Value may be given, why
the Truths of the Gospel may be called mysteries more particularly, then the
Divine Being, and Attributes, which yet cannot be Found out to Perfection; This
Acknowledgment may be very serviceable, and conduce much to the Stating the
Principal Point now in hand.

6. It must of necessity be Agreed by All, that have Reverence for the Gospel,
and the Revelations of it; That there are no Real Contradictions therein; All
such are to be Removed into the mystery of Iniquity, with All Things, that
would come within the Verge of Religion, and are of a Trivial Nature; or which
Falling under a Contradiction in the very Judgment of Sense, can be likened to
a Ball, White and Black together; or a Square that is Round; or a Cane without
Two Ends. For all the Truths of Christianity are not only Free from
Contradiction, but known to be from God, by the Heavenlyness, Dignity,
Salutariness of their Nature, Tendency to the Glory of God, and to the
Salvation of Souls.

But as to seeming Contradictions, where the Seemingness is the Effect of the
Weakness, and Darkness of our Intellectual Powers, and that are Dimmed with the
Vapors of Corruption, and Steams of Lust; and where the Objects are Pure,
Spiritual, Sublime, and we do not in our Grossness Comprehend them; Herein a
more strict Account is to be taken, than the Author has given.

6. That to Understand the Truths of the Gospel, so as to Receive Them; the
Prejudices of a Carnal Mind, and all Lusts are to be Removed: Men must be
Humble, not Proud; Considerate, not Hasty; Diligent in Search after Truth, not
Slothful, or Careless; They must use their Reason, and Intellectual Faculties
aright: The Advantage of this Acknowledgment on both sides is, That it lets us
into a Great Reason, why the mysteries of the Gospel are to be Allowed
mysteries; Because there is a necessity of Divine Grace to Enlighten, and
Conform the Mind to the Obedience of Faith.

7. There Is a Supposition in the Treatise of Supra-Intellectual Truths, that
none can understand, except their Perceptions be Communicated to them in an
Extraordinary Manner, as by New Powers and Organs. And, by the same Favor
these Truths are Communicated from One to Another in the Preaching of the
Gospel; Now this Supposition, I mean, of Supra-Intellectual Truths, and a
Supernatural Manner of Communication, at a Distance, and so Coldly Supposed is
That, which I would endeavor to make good to be the Constant, and Uniform
Sense of the New Testament; as appears by those Expressions of the Spirit of
Wisdom, and Illumination (of which the Author himself takes notice)
Regeneration, and Renovation of the Spirit of the Mind; And I see not what
Absurdity, or Unreasonableness the Author can charge upon it; since he owns;
There are Men Taught of God, and that God wants not Ability Rightly to Inform
them, as necessary to such Communications, p. 132.

That he Himself does not suppose Absolutely New Faculties, or Organs, but as
by New Faculties, or Organs: I look upon as a Great Truth of the Gospel: In
this Supposition therefore, the Word of God, which is sharp, as a
Two-Edged-Sword, seems to me, to have met him, as the Angel of the Lord did
Balaam in the way, with a Drawn Sword, Warning him, that his Reasoning is in
the Sight of God Perverse, and to be cut in pieces by it.

Lastly, Herein I am of the same Mind with this Treatise, and the Author of it,
as that on which he Builds his Discourse throughout, if it be but Explained
Aright; and That Aright (as I suppose) he will allow, viz. For any thing to be
mystery, is to be Above our Reason, Acting according to our Innate Ideas; those
that may be supposed to be Concreated with us, or that we have a Natural Power
to Form, and to Reason according to in our present state. And whatever is not
Above these Ideas, and our Reason acting upon them, is not mystery, though we
have not Adequate Ideas, or Perfect Conceptions of Things, or Intuition of
their Essences.

Now if Reason be taken in this Limited Sense, there may be, and, as things
are, there must be mystery; But if in a Supreme Absolute sense, it is certain;
As there can be no Truth Above Divine Reason, so there can be no mystery.

Contrary to Reason can only be supposed of any Truth, as Corrupted Reason can
be called Reason; Or, as Men will obstinately hold their Measure of Reason to
be the Standard; so that whatever is Higher or Deeper, Longer, or Broader then
that Measure, or Standard, is not Reason, but Contrary to it: Now either of
these is so Falsely called Reason, that they have very little Interest in the
strictest Consideration, I confess, of mystery. But seeing This Corruption of
Reason, or Adherence to any Short Measure, of (though True) Reason be now a
Depravation Immedicinable, but by the Lifting up of the Mind above it self by a
Supernatural Power; The Truths of the Gospel may too Truly be said to be
Contrary to Reason, and so mystery; even as, and more then if they were Above
Reason only.

The Advantage of this Accord in the Description of mystery is, That hereby a
clear, and distinct understanding of what is principally in Difference, is
attained, viz.

On the Side of the Treatise, it is affirmed by the Author; There is no
Doctrine of Christianity, that can be properly styled a mystery; that is; above
Reason, or contrary to it.

In Answer to the Treatise, I Affirm; There are Greatest Truths of the Gospel
Above Reason, though not considered, as Corrupt; and many more; Yea, the whole
Tenor, and Frame of the Gospel, as it comprizes the Redemption of Man Fallen,
by our Lord Jesus Christ, is Both above and contrary to it, as Corrupted, and
so mystery.

And according to the Measures of Reason, so are the Powers of Free Will to be
Arbitrated, and Estimated, as shall be seen, through the Assistance of God, in
the Following Debate.

The Topics, or Seats of Argument, on which the Author, and his Treatise Rely,
are,

1. That when the Truths of the Gospel are once Revealed, the Mind and Reason
of Man is able, by its self, to Form Ideas of Them, according to Revelation; so
far as is necessary to our Advantage, however not Adequate; and by Former Ideas
Implanted, to Judge of them, as from God, and according to Truth; Else they
could be nothing to us any more, than if never Revealed; nor could we else
distinguish them from Falsehood, and Delusion, so proper to the Mystery of
Iniquity; And that Man has a Power of Free Will Obedientially to Answer the
Ends of such Revelations, if not wanting to himself; Else he could not be
justly Condemned.

2. That the Gospel is prepared and Addressed to the Minds and Wills of Men,
according to the former Hypothesis, or Argument; and not, as if it were Mystery.

On the Contrary Part, to show, the Gospel is Mysterious; I will endeavor,
after the Closest Pursuits of the Nature of Reason, and of Revelation,
according to both Scripture and Reason, and the Intimate Sense of Awakened Mind.

From Both these therefore Compared, we shall Attain the Knowledge; How the
very word Mystery came into the use of the Gospel, and Adjust thereunto the use
of it in the Impure Mysteries of Paganism, and Antichristianism; and the Common
use of it in ordinary Concernments; and for what Excellent purposes it is to be
Zealously Contended for in Divine Things, till All Mystery be Finished.

And to Exemplify Gospel Reason, and Mystery, I will do it in Him, who is
indeed the Highest Exemplar of Both; The Eternal Logus, or Reason, and the
Mystery; as he is Christ in us the Hope of Glory. And hereby we shall be led
into the Supreme Mystery of the Father; The Word; The Spirit.

And all along, in Answer to this Treatise, I would remove the Scandals and
Reproaches cast upon the Truths of the Gospel, Asserted to be Mysterious; and
the Faithful Stewards of those Mysteries, as if they had any Symbolism with the
Mystery of Iniquity; and show how they differ as Light and Darkness.

In the Last Place, Any Objections I can Derive from the Treatise, that can be
supposed to be made against the Mysteriousness of Christianity, as it shall be
made out in the Answer, shall be throughout it, as particularly as may be taken
into Just, and Equal Consideration.

According to this Scheme I shall, by the Assistance of God, not only endeavor
a Scripture, but a Rational Conviction, that the Doctrines of Christianity are,
and must needs be in Truest Sense Mysteries.

I Conclude therefore this short Scheme with Applying that Grave Observation to
the whole; It is said; A little Knowledge in Nature makes Men Atheists; But a
Deep, and Well-Ballasted Knowledge more strongly Roots Them in the
Acknowledgment, and Adoration of the Divine Being; So Superficial Tinctures of
Reason give Men occasion to Deny the Mysteriousness of Christianity; but the
Juster Presences of it in the Mind give Fullest Assurances; It is in All True
Senses Mysterious, even the Adorable Mystery of the Divine Wisdom and Grace.

A Discourse of the Mysteriousness of Christianity, in answer to a treatise,
Christianity not Mysterious.
CHAP. I.
Of the close and strict consideration of Reason.

IN speaking of Reason, The Introduction to that Head, The close pursuit after
Reason.
I cannot acquiesce to the singling out of that compare, and ballancing of the
Idea's of the Mind, and Arguing from them, in finding out Truth, assigned in
this Treatise, to be a sufficient Representation of Reason; but that there
ought to be as just an Animadversion, on what the Author does indeed Represent;
which ought to be taken in, viz. the Mind, the Idea's of the Mind, the
Evidences the Mind has of Notions, or Propositions immediately, and as issuing
in Full Demonstration: And also what the Author takes no notice of, viz. That
Holiness, Purity, Righteousness, Universal Goodness and Probity, inseparate
from True Reason; That Inward; and Prophoric, or outward, (...), Speech so
Essential to Reason and that Energy, Vigor, and Power of Imprinting it self
upon Rational Beings, so immediately resulting from Reason, according to the
Excellency of the Reason, from which it flows: For thus I find Scripture does
extend it self, with Relation to what is to be Discoursed upon, (...).
as Reason, viz. Spirit, Mind, the Understanding, the Discursive Mind, Wisdom,
Knowledge, Truth; The Wisdom, that is the Fear of the Lord, the Knowledge of the
Holy, The (...), the Law Written in the Heart. The speaking in the Heart, or
Communing with it; The Tongue of the Wise, of the Learned; a might and power,
an Authority of Teaching. But were it not that in one peculiar case of greatest
moment (as shall be set out, but deferred till what is more universally
agreeable, have made the way to it.) I should have no favor for the word
Reason, on a Religious Account; as being a word taken from the Pride and
Supercile of Philosophy, and not from Scripture; but set in opposition to the
Spirituality of the Gospel: But seeing it has pleased the Spirit of God to
single out that word, that all the Great Men of Reason have expressed it by;
viz. (...); and to apply it to the Son of God, (...), the Reason, as Scripture
is, The Writing; therein Sanctifying the Learning of Egypt, (...) so
Transcendent a Revelation, and so plainly pointing upon the sense of that word,
we are to be upon, in styling that (...), the Light of Men, as Reason in the
General Acceptance is; and the Light, that Lightneth every man that comes
into the World; I shall generally adhere to it in the following Discourse, and
have an especial Regard to it, as it must needs be understood in this Debate,
viz. That Reason, or Reasoning Understanding planted in the Mind, or
intellectual Spirit of Man, constituting such an Intellectual, Rational
Creation; although in this Fallen Condition of Man, there are only some Reserves,
or some Mentions and Ruins of it.

. 1. IT is agreed on both parts, as is acknowledged in the Scheme Foregoing;
That to be Above, or not above Reason, determines Mystery, or no Mystery; it is
most necessary therefore to Examine, wherein the true nature of Reason
consists, ascending up to the Supreme and Eternal Reason, and coming down by
the several Scales, and Degrees of Created Reason, and in Created Reason to
consider it as Upright and Entire, and as Fallen and Depraved. To make
therefore the Exactest enquiry after the Scripture-notion of Reason, comparing
it with the intimate sense of Mankind (if that sense be duly Reflected upon)
shall be the first part of my undertaking.

. 2. The very force and weight of the word Reason, and so of Wisdom,
Understanding, Truth; leads to some supreme wisdom and reason; for every name,
and pretense to these high and excellent things, cannot be themselves; And yet
one pretense would be as good as another, and the loudest sound, like the
strongest sword, would carry it, were there not some Absolute Wisdom, and
Reason, by which all the various pretensions are to be Tried and Determined.

. 3. We find among Men, There are various Degrees and Elevations of Reasons and
Wisdoms (as we may style them) or of Understandings; some Higher, and some
Lower, and we Naturally Appeal from the Lower, to those we judge Higher; till we
come to what we esteem Highest; And if those various Understandings, or Reasons
are at difference among themselves; we cannot but acknowledge our selves
obliged, and we do necessarily acquiesce in what we judge the Truest, and the
most excellent Understanding; If we are sincere in our Search after, and desire
of Truth.

. 4. It is true, this is, because we do; if we do, as Intellectual Beings
Ought; Try and Examine, and reduce all to some infallible Standard, in which we
can acquiesce, and of which we have a Sense within our selves; And He, Or that
which we find comes nearest to that Standard, we most defer to, and acquiesce
in, and cannot but do so; which Argues, we have all a Sense, or Consciousness
of some Absolute perfect Standard of Wisdom or Reason; without Agreement with
which, what would be Reputed Wisdom, is Insipience or Folly; what would be
reputed Reason is Irrationality, and Absurdity.

. 5. This Infallible Standard, if we make a curious and home Reflection upon it
in our selves, we cannot conceive of, as One Abstracted Norma, Rule, or Line of
Wisdom and Reason, that does not know it self, or does not it self know, that
it knows, or understands; That does not Judge so, as to know, that it Judges,
and That cannot pronounce and declare, according to it self; and know it does
so; For this were such an Allay and Degradation of its excellency, as is most
intolerable once to suppose: It must be therefore some Living, Self-knowing,
Self-intelligent Being, He, or That which teaches Man Knowledge, shall not It,
or He know? Even All Perfections of Being, Omnipotence, Omnipresence, Eternity,
necessarily lead to that Self-knowing, Self-intelligent Living Being, who is
all those Perfections: And in Universal Sense and Character of Language is the
Divine Being, GOD, who is All these, and knows he is all these; and who is
Able, even by the very Perfection of his own Supreme Wisdom and Reason,
uncontrollably to know, even by that very Reason, that he is that infallible
wisdom, Reason and Understanding; and All who reason cannot but acknowledge he
is so; but if there were any such Abstracted Dead Law, styled wisdom or reason,
God derived the Rule and Measure of his Understanding, and Actions from, and
referred them to; that were not Himself, and his own Being; He were not then
Supreme, but Accountable; and Apostate Spirits might maintain an Everlasting
and Undecidable Plea against God, whether God, or they themselves came nearest
to that Rule; but the Glory, Luster and Claritude of his Being declare him that
Supreme wisdom, and reason, and the Rule of it; and Devils Believe and Tremble:
Here then is the First, and most Fundamental Notion of reason or wisdom; The
Father of Lights, the Father of Spirits, with whom is no variation, nor shadow
of Turning, is the Supreme, Absolute, Infallible Reason or Understanding; and
to speak of Reason, and not to Acknowledge him Supreme, it is not to know what
we speak, nor affirm.

CHAP. II.
Of the Excellencies that are to be Attributed to the Infinite Wisdom and
Reason, and that we Know cannot but be so Attributed.

. 1. WIth this Eternal Wisdom and Reason, are all Idea's of Being, not only
Existing, but possible to Exist in the Pure and most Exquisite Truth of each,
who gives a possibility of Existence to them, if Infinite Being pleased; For
Infinite Understanding, and Reason is the Origin, and Exemplar of all Ideas,
the Test by which they are Tried, the Beam at which they are weighed; whether
Just and True, or Counterfeit, False and Light; and the Immense Repository from
whence they are Derived; Even as Infinite Being is the Source and Fountain of
all Being; and thus this Eternal Spirit, Mind and Reason Sees by, and in it
self, or in its own Spirit, its own Infinite Being; and in that Infinite Being
all Beings that have been, are, and ever shall be; or that if he had pleased,
might have been, or may be, if he pleases to have them be; according to their
several Natures, Distinctions, and the Ideas of them. He holds all in himself,
as the Fountain of Being, and according to his own will concerning them All
these are Held.

. 2. Hence arises that great and excellent word, and notion, Truth; which is a
Correspondence between Being or Reality, and an Understanding, Beholding, and
Looking upon it with Judgment; any pretended Idea's that are not according to
Things, are Fantoms, and not Idea's; all other Apprehensions, Conceptions,
Notions, Conclusions, that Created Understandings can Form, are nothings, if
taken out of the Understandings that Formed them; Because Created
Understandings cannot touch them into Being, as Increated Can; and not only so,
but Reality and Truth Rushing against them, breaks them to nothing, even within
the Understandings that Formed them, finding things so much otherwise: And
which we ought well to consider; Truth and Reality take hold of Those, who had
no Idea's of them; and, to their Full Perfection of those, who had only
Inadequate Ideas of them; as the words of the Dead Prophets took hold of the
Jews, Zach. 1.5.
because from God, however Insensible of them; of the Fathers who heard them,
and Believed them not; and of their Children, who were not Born, when they were
spoken: Now Truth is Infinite, even as the Divine Being and Understanding is;
and of unexpressible multiplicity, as the Divine Displayes in the Works of
Creation and Providence are; Deep, unfathomable, and unsearchable, as the
Counsels of his Will are, till Revealed.

. 3. The Relations, Aspects upon, mutual Respects, Proportions, Operations
between Being, and Being, with their whole state, from the Infinite, Increated
Being, to the Highest Created Being, and so from one to another to the very
lowest of Beings, are next to be Considered; some of which are Evident to
Reason by Sense, some by an immediate, intuitive Act of the Mind, or Reason;
now herein, even in these mutual Propositions, and Respects Resides a second
Apprehension, or Notion, of what we mean by Reason: And all the Reason we have,
will defer to the Infinite Reason to be the infallible Standard of Reason and
Truth herein; For, who, as he can discern all the strait, and direct, the
Branching out, and Transverse Lines in Created Beings from one to another; and
the immediate Influences from himself to all Created Beings, in whom all Beings
have their Being; even as they that Live, and Move, have their Life and Motion
in him; for all these he holds Originally in Himself, and continually sustains,
and guides by himself; even as he drew them out with so admirable Mathematics,
that the Secrets of Wisdom herein are Double to all that is known to the wisest
of Angels, much more to the most Curious Human Investigator, of what we call
Nature: And from hence arises an inexplicable multiplicity of Truth, and so of
the activity of Reason concerning it.

. 4. The Trains, Deductions, Connexions and Inferences that may be made from
one Branch of Being, and the Truths arising from it, to another Branch of
Being, and the Truths Arising from That, and so throughout from the several
Connexions and Enterweavings of one with another, come next under Account, and
are very particularly to be considerd; For from the comparing and ballancing
these one with another, and the Idea's of them one with another flows, what we
properly call Ratiocination, or Argument of Reason. Now all these sees and
beholds by one Intuitive Act of Seeing, the Eternal Understanding, or Reason;
and no understanding can see, or behold them, but in his Light, and according
to his Infinite, and Infallible Standard of Ratiocination; nor can any
Ratiocination upon them be Right, but as they agree with, and are according to
this Infinite and Infallible Standard of Ratiocination; who holds in himself,
and continually derives from himself those Bonds of Union, and Links of
Connection, things have one with another, on which Ratiocination and Argument
are founded; and therefore cannot but know, to Infiniy of Certainty, and
exactness; for what we see, but one after another, and not with a Just
Equality, he sees together, and with a just Poize of Each; the want of which
presence of, and regard to all Idea's, and the Equipoize of them, was the Ruin
of Angels: What trust then can be to our due Congregating, Compare, and
Balance of Ideas one with another; when we either leave out altogether, or do
not Righteously weigh some principal Idea; as most certainly befell Adam in his
Deception and Fall; and yet herein, even in this Ratiocination, or comparing,
and librating Ideas one with another, The Author of this Treatise places
Reason; and it is certainly the Fort-Royal of it, although what went before, and
what is to follow, ought to have full consideration in our Estimate of Reason.

. 5. In those Accounts of Reason before insisted upon, we may, and I have
endeavored to Argue from the little of Reason in our selves, to the Infinity
of Reason in the Infinite Reason, Wisdom, Understanding, and Truth; But in the
Account I would now give of Reason, I shall Argue from the Infinite Reason to
all Finite Reason; That no Reason, Wisdom, or Understanding can be according to
Truth so, that is not entirely Holy, and Good; and although we want this
excellency of Reason yet we cannot but acknowledge it the excellency of Reason,
and Ascribe it to God the best of Beings, and Reasons; That Reason then is not
to be acknowledged Reason, nor worthy Trust in any Enquiry after Truth, that
can betray its Trust so Far, as to Resign up the Will to any sin; which
according to the Law of Creation, it has in its Conduct and Power; if
therefore the Understanding and Reason did not turn away from good by Darkness,
or not brightning its own Beams, but Receiving an even voluntary Eclipse upon
them, no Evil could be Admitted; For it is indeed certainly true, the Will of a
Rational Being is one with its Reason, and the Reason with the Will; when ever
one Errs, the other Errs: The wisest of the Fallen Angels is but a Prince of
Darkness, held in Chains of Darkness; and his Fundamental Wickedness is in an
Apostate, Rebel, Disloyal Reason, Judging that Holiness, Conformity with,
Obedience to the Supreme Being is not Good for him; and so it is in us sinful
Men, and our sins; and yet because There is Will in this Reason, it is under an
everlasting righteous Condemnation: But The Infinite Reason is Infinite
Holiness and Goodness; He cannot be Tempted of Evil; Jam. 1.13.
neither can he Tempt any one. If it were not thus, he could not have made
weights for the Winds, nor weighed the Water by Measure: Job. 28.23.
He could not have made a Decree for the Rain, Prove. 3.19.
nor a way for the Lightning of Thunder: By the Wisdom of Infinite Holiness he
Founded the Earth; by an understanding of Infinite Purity he Established the
Heavens; by a Knowledge of Infinite Freedom from, and distance from sin, the
Depths are Broken up, and the Clouds drop down their Dew; All the Ordinances of
the Creation are settled, and so kept in Order; There are the same Mathematics
in one, as in the other; if the Creator could have Erred in the one, he had in
the other also; and if he could now so Err, the whole Course of Nature would
fly in Pieces, as the Apostle James intimates it endangered by the Wickedness
of the Tongue. And so it is in every Created Reason, and particularly in Man,
if he can so mis-judg, that all Circumstances laid together, it is not best for
him to be Holy, Righteous, Good; his Reason is not to be trusted for any thing,
because it is his; Upon his Credit, that two and two make Four, is not to be
Received: The Mathematics of the whole Creation are Violated in him: For when
God made weights for the Winds, Job 28.28. Romans 2.14.
etc. He said to Man, he fixed him, as a Being of Reason in this; The Fear of
the Lord, That is Wisdom, To depart from Evil, that is Understanding; This is
that (...); that In-Written Law in the Heart of Man. If he does not so Fear, so
Depart, Reason, as it is his Reason, is worth nothing. Prove. 3.8.
The Wisdom that Founded the Earth, etc. Is to hate Evil; It understands
Righteousness, Judgment, and every good Path: The Wisdom that can entertain
Evil, is then of no Value, nor to be trusted in any thing, as it is such a
Wisdom; For the whole of such a Reason is spoiled.

. 6. I know it will be objected; Are not Evil Men great Philosphers,
Mathematicians, Politicians and Statesmen; but the Answer is: The Infinite
Reason Holds in it self the Truth of all Natural, Prudential, Political Wisdom,
and Understanding; and so far as it appears by the Evidence of things
themselves, that there is truth, so far they are to be received: But the Reason
transposed, perverted, distorted in the Love of Evil, is in nothing to be
confided in for its own sake; nor is a whole Council of sinful, Fallen Men to
be confided in, in any one Point; because they have Failed in so Radical a One,
as to have sinned; they may not attend to some one great Principle, that bears
up such, or such a truth; Even as in that Radical One: And though they may
Acknowledge and Subscribe to many Holy Rules, and Live in Obedience to some; yet
this, as shall be further offered, flows from Grace toward some, and in others
from a Righteous Judgment of God; who as he holds fast all Holy Truths in
himself, so Demonstrates them by others as he pleases Variously; But it still
remains, no such Judgment or Understanding, or Reason, is to be trusted on its
own Account; And all the Truth and Good that is in the World, is to be Ascribed
to other Springs, as we shall see.

. 7. We know in our selves, as we are Beings of Reason; Every Intellectual
Being has an Internal Annunciation to it self, and within it self, according
to its comprehensions of Reason, that is even Consubstantial to it self; and
according to which, it Declares it self to other Intellectual Beings, by
external Enunciation or Elocution: And these are so much reason that both the
inward, and the outward are expressed by Reason it self; (...): They are the
great Distinction of Man, the Creature of reason, from Creatures of no reason;
That Angels have within Themselves such Internal Notices of their own
Comprehensions, we are most assured by our own Experience; and that they have
Enunciation to other Intellectual Beings of their own order, we cannot doubt,
in. Allusion to which, the Apostle speaks of the Tongue of Angels; The
Excellency of God's Internal and Declarative word, I will Discourse on another
Head, but to speak of what will not be denied by any who acknowledge God, and
Scripture the word of God; it is this; That if Infinite reason, Wisdom and
Truth, has condescended to speak, there is no such speech in the whole
Creation, as His Word, and the Records of what he has spoken; to contain in it
self, and to Reveal Mystery; and no other but his Word can be proper for
either. Seeing External Speech is Governed by inward Intellectual Power of
Enunciation; as the one Excells, so does the other; If therefore the
understanding, and reason of God be the only Infallible reason, his Enunciation
and Declaration can be only Infallible; Reason in us was his word, and would be
so, if it were the same he gave; But it is now fallen: And this Assures the
Excellency of the Word of God spoken or written; There is a Declaration or
Voice of God in the Creation, declaring his Infinite Wisdom, and Understanding,
to the Intellectual Creation, according to their First Creation; but the word
of God declares the Counsels of his Will in Receiving of Fallen, Psalm. 12.6.
Prove. 30.6.
and Lost Man. Every word of which is pure as Silver tried in a Furnace of
Earth, purified seven times; and whosoever dares to add to it, of his own, as
if it were the same, or equal, will be found a Liar, that is, a Forger, and
Deceiver; or a Reason falsely so called.

. 8 Every rational Being, or reason, has in the motions of reason, a Force,
Might, Spirit of reason, or presence of it, active in himself, and impressive
on those to whom he declares himself, according to the Degree and Excellency of
his reason, and by which he looks back upon himself, and is Conscious of the
reason that mooves in and from him; and knows that he knows; and this gives
Life to the inward Notions, and Notices, or that inward word of reason; and to
the Communications, or Enunciations of reason to other Intelligent Beings: This
assures there is in the Divine Being, the infinite reason, an Infinite Spirit,
and Power of Wisdom, and Understanding; of which in its highest Excellency, I
will further speak by his own Assistance; But in general Apprehension, Job.
36.22. Job 32 8.
God Exalts by his Power, none teaches like him. There is a Spirit in Man,
but the mighty Breathing of the Allmighty gives him Understanding; a mighty
Energy, or Spirit from God, the Supreme reason, and Understanding: This we
cannot but acknowledge, and Ascribe to the Supreme Understanding: For if we find
it in such Reasons, as we are, one toward another, a Communication with some
peculiar Efficacy, according to the Reason, that does Communicate, or the
Reasons that Communicate one with another; How much more is it to be
acknowledged to the Infinite Reason Teaching man Knowledge; and therefore how
can any Gracious Aproaches, by his Spirit, to the Souls of his Servants,
Inlightning, and Teaching them be Denied?

CHAP. III.
Of Created Reasons, and their various Orders, and References one to another,
as Beings of Reason, and of their upright and Fallen Estate, and the great
difference of their Reason therein.

. 1. I Have thus far considered the Paramount, and Transcendent Infinite Being,
Wisdom, Truth, Reason, By those Tracings of Reason, as in Us, not only Finite,
but Degenerate Spirits, or Beings of Reason; that whatever true Lines thereof
are Discoverable in us may lead us up to the Infinite, and Infinitely Pure
Original; and show us the Immenseness of his Perfections; For it is certain
Intellectual Spirits cannot be made such, or continue in any Activity, as such,
but that God the Infinite, Intellectual Object, and most Intelligible, must
needs be seen by them in his Great Perfection, and Attributes: But I would now
consider Created Intellectual Beings, and such, as we cannot, but by our
Reason, Divine, are of a Higher Sphere, and Order, than our selves; and
Scripture makes known to us, as Seraphic, Angelic Beings, and among them
Thrones, Principalities, Dominions, Powers; and so come down to Human Spirits
in Bodies, and observe upon these, and the various Elevations of them (and All
in their State of Integrity, and unfallen) what may Direct us in our main
pursuit after Reason.

. 2. All Created Spirits, of what Order soever, are Beings, or Spirits Begotten
by Creation of the Father of Lights, the Father of Spirits in his own Image,
and Likeness; and so are Intellectual Spirits, and Beings of Reason by their
very Being, and Descent; And in their first Creation they bear a Resemblance of
the Eternal Wisdom, and Reason in every one of the forementioned particulars;
as has been already sufficiently to the present purpose Remarked concerning
them: And as there is an Original Begetting, Breathing, or Creation at First,
so there is a continual sustentation of Intellectual Beings, so far, as they
are in their First Estate, or are but preserved in any Remains of it; and
according to the Degrees of their Creation, and Sustentation, or (as I may call
it) their Reservation in an Intellectual State, Jude 6.
notwithstanding their Leaving their First Estate, and Forsaking their own
Habitation, They are in Dependence upon their Supreme, a Standard of Wisdom,
Reason, and Truth to themselves, within themselves; Psalm. 36.9.
yet so that in the Original Light, Truth, Wisdom, Reason they see this Light,
and enjoy this Privilege; that is, they are Intellectually Seeing, Discerning
Spirits, Beings of Reason; As the Spirit of a Man is the Candle of the Lord, a
Light shining in his Light; Prove. 20.27. Job 35.11.
who Teaches Man Knowledge, more than the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of
the Air: Thus, as before-said, There is a Spirit in Man, and the Breath of the
Almighty gives him Understanding.

. 3. But yet, it is always to be Remembered; In their very Original Creation,
without the consideration of any after Abatement, or Diminution; they are but
Finite, and cannot see beyond the Limits and Bounds of their Creation, either
to Find out, or Judge of what is Above, and beyond Them: Any more then the Eye
of the Body, because it is a seeing Organ, and the Light of the Body, can see
at too great Distance, without the help of Telescopes; or when the Object is so
Great, as not to be measured by it, but by the Help of Mathematic Instruments;
or so Minute, as not to be Discerned, but by the help of Microscopes.

. 4. Of Intellectual Spirits, There are by the very supreme Dispose, and
Arbitration of the Infinite Understanding, and Reason, various, Spheres, and
Orbs Higher, and more Ample; Lower, and more Narrow; One Star differs from
another Star in Glory: There are Intelligences Angelic, and Human. In the
Angelic, the before observed Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, which
Eminencies Arise from different Glories of Understanding; and so we know, there
are different Elevations of Human Understanding, whether by the Immediate Hand
of the Father of Lights, and Spirits, or the Disposes of Providence in the
Fabric of the Body; or the Opportunities of Education, State and Condition in
the World; ^r^v. 18.1.
Separation to Intermeddle with Wisdom through earnest Desire; But no
Intellectual Created Spirit can, by virtue of its being Intellectual, Transcend
its own Sphere. The highest Created Spirit cannot Approach within any distance
of the Increated; or be supposed Infinite in its Reason, because a Spirit; For
God is, The only Wise, and his Understanding is alone Infinite. Psalm. 147.^.
That therefore which is clearly known, and within the compass of the Reason of
Intellectual Beings of a First Magnitude, may be above the Reason of those
Below Them, and so successively and Subalternately, till we come to the Lowest;
but to the longhtyest Seraphic Understanding, There are in the Divine
Understanding, Truths, and Deeps of Counsels, that are above the Reason of it;
so that it can be only said of the Infinite Understanding, There is nothing
above Reason, that is, above it self, nor contrary to it, that is Reason and
Truth.

. 5. But how much more must many, and those very great Truths of God be above
Reason to Fallen Lost Man, so depressed and abased by sin, that he cannot lift
up himself, but with great Difficulty in any Act of Understanding? and whose
Reason, as has been before more fully Argued, can be of no Reputation; because
it can, upon all circumstances considered, give its ultimate Vote, or Dictate
for Sin: For now the Intellectual Spirit being under an Aversion from the
Father of Lights, distorted by Lust, and Love of Evil, is easy of Access to the
Father of Lies, Blinding and Bemisting it, to whom it is now Turned; How then
can it form Idea's of Divine Things? Behold the Proportions, and true Respects
of Things one to another? Judge of Good and Evil, of true Pleasure, or Grief,
and Pain, in a Moral Sense, of Happiness or Misery? How can it make true
Inferences, or Conclusions? Rise up to the Holiness of the Law of God, or
receive his Manifestations of himself, or submit to the Energies of his Grace
it self, so corrupted? What was not Above it before Corrupted, is now become
Above it; How much more Supernatural Revelations! Nay, They are contrary to
Reason so Corrupted, and Reason Corrupted to these Truths of God; against which
it moves in Array, as Black Clouds and Vapors against the Sun, and its Light:
So do Intellectual Spirits (Angelic become Diabolic) Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, and Degenerate Human Spirits against the Light, and Truths of God,
and of his Word.

. 6. If it be said, The Lusts of Men are not Reason; It is True; but as the
Enquiry is in Job; Where is wisdom to be found, and where is the Place of
Understanding, viz. in its Purity? seeing it is hid from the Eyes of all
Living: Even as it is kept close from the Fowls of the Air: Death and
Destruction have heard the Fame of it with their Ears: God alone understands
the way thereof: And if Man has lost, what God said to Him concerning it, (and
is under Conviction, how much it is Lost) by Creation; The Fear of the Lord,
that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil, is Understanding; Wherein can his
Reason be Now Accounted of? All must be Resolved, into what Solomon only found,
Counting Men one by one; God made Man upright; He made him him an entire
Reason; but he has sought out many Inventions, carrying a show of Reason, but
Reason is lost: A Distorted Reason is not to be confided in: Such is that of
All men; In one Man only, viz. The Second Adam, Reason is found, Eccles. 7.27.

. 7. If it be further said, Shall we Allow no Reason, nor Truth in the World?
Is It no Test to Try True, and False, Good and Evil by? And if it be, why may
not Reason be Trusted in every thing? And if it be not, How shall we secure our
selves from being imposed upon? The Answer shall be given in its proper place,
under the Head of Revelation to each of these Enquiries by way of Answer to
them as Objections.

. 8. But seeing this Treatise makes acknowledgment of Scripture by so many
References to it, I think to sum up this head, viz. The Pursuit after the true
Notion of Reason, according to Scripture, and our Inward Sense, and Experience,
by giving the general Sense of Scripture upon the present State of Human
Reason, Wisdom, and Understanding in our Fallen Condition; that we may see how
far, in the Judgment of That, it can be thought of Value to Decide Truth by,
viz. This Above, or contrary to Reason; that is, to Human Reason; yea, we might
Ascend higher, even to highest Created Reason, the Reason of Unfallen Angels;
in whom God puts no Trust, tho his Servants Fulfilling his Will, and the
Ministers of his Pleasure, but charges with Folly, comparing them with his own
Holiness, and Understanding, which is Infinite; and therefore they cover not
only their Feet, but their Faces, their highest Perfections before him: For
these Stars are not pure in his sight; but as to the present purpose of Human
Reason, Zophar, so near the beginning of the World, takes notice; Job 11.12.
That vain man would be wise; He Aspires to the Reputation of being so; tho he
be Born like the wild Ass Colt, the most Undisciplinable of all Animals, so
silly and so wild, and yet the Emblem of Human Wisdom: Notwithstanding this,
every Age has Risen up in this presumption upon their own Reason; This is that
Gnosticism of every Age: The Apostle says, we know that we all have Knowledge?
that is, we take upon us to have so; 1 Cor. 8.2.
But he adds, If any man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he
ought to Know; and therefore he prefers the Love of God, and being known of him
to our Airy Knowledge or Reason. 2 These. 4.2.
He looks upon them, as Men of no Topics? that is, of no Reason, who have not
Faith; who are not instructed of God by his Spirit in his Word: Yet we Dwarfs
of Reason, of a Span long, and Hand Breadth, dare to measure Reasons with the
Almighty, Col. 2.18.
vainly pufft up in our minds, which are but Carnal, while we think them so
sublime as to measure Divine Things; In the wisdom of God, the World by wisdom
knew not God: The Lord knows the Thoughts of the wise, that they are vain,
even the Discursive reasonings of the wise. 1 Cor. 1.20, 21. c. 3.18, 19, 20.
The wisdom of this world is Foolishness with God. Let a man become a Fool,
that he may be wise: With innumerable such Scriptures that would put an humble
Christian quite out of conceit with his own reason, and make him rather cry out
with Solomon, All this have I proved by wisdom, I said, I will be wise, but it
was far from me: That which is far off and exceeding Deep, who can find it out?
Eccles. 7.23. Prove. 30.1.
Surely I am more brutish than any man; I have not the understanding of man;
viz. In his first Creation. I neither learned wisdom, nor know the knowledge of
the Holy. Romans 12.3.
The Great Wisdom is not to be wise above what is written; but to be wise to
Sobriety: So little in all this, and much more, that might be Collected of the
same Sense, does Scripture set by above, or contrary to Human Reason, as now
current among Men: For what the Reason of Man condemns as the Foolishness of
God, or Foolishness in Divine Things, that do not commend themselves to Reason,
or the Wisdom of Men, is yet wiser than that Imaginary Reason or Wisdom, of Men.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Second Head proposed in this Discourse, An Enquiry after the Nature of
Revelation, with an Answer upon it to Former Objections.

THere needs no Introduction concerning the word, or sense of the word
Revelation; For it plainly signifies the uncovering and making plain, visible,
and open, what was before Covered, Veiled, Hidden, and Concealed: And this is
the Apocalypsis every where spoken of in Scripture from God and his Spirit; and
herein the Discourse, Christianity not Mysterious, agrees, and acknowledges
Mysteries before Revelation, as being of the Deeps of God, which no Man can
know, seeing not the Deeps of a man: But it is supposed that Revelation is
recommended to Reason, and is no more than Information, or Testimony from any
other Hand; the certitude only of Divine Excells; For in Human Information
Reason Judges of the Credibility, and if it finds cause, disallow the Veracity
of the Testimony, and rejects the Things; but in Divine Information, it allows
the Testimony; but if it cannot receive the things as credible in such an
appearance, Reason changes them by Interpretation, into other appearances,
wherein it can allow them; although it be never so plain by compare of Scripture,
and Reason guided by it, Scripture intends what Reason Rejects; but I shall
endeavor to make plain by Scripture, and true Reason, according to it, and the
consent of Experience; that this is a wholly mistaken Expedient, as I go on
thus to Remonstrate.

. 1. REvelation is a Manifestation of God to his Intellectual Creatures from
the Secret of his own Purpose, and the Deeps of his Counsel toward them, or
any of them, above what was made known to them, or might be found out by them
according to their First Creation, or Establishment; but they being from an
Holy, Wise, and Infinitely Gracious Being, They are and cannot but be in every
one of these Regards like to himself; and as they are super-induced to
Creation, they are of Further and higher Grace; for whatever was necessary to
the First Creation, was given, and made known by the Infinitely wise and good
Creator; who yet being Infinite, and Infinitely Free, had more to give than he
gave at first, but was not obliged to Give all at once: Now these things could
not be known but by Revelation, For what man knows the things of a man, 1 Cor.
2.11.
but the Spirit of a man, that is within him: Even so the things of God knows
no man, but the Spirit of God: The Gospel on this Account is so often Styled,
The Mystery hid in God, kept secret since the World began; hidden Wisdom, the
wisdom of God in a mystery; Angels therefore, Principalities and Powers could
not by their Higher Light, than that of the human Creation, find it out; but
learn it by the Church: This is indeed Agreed, but yet ought to be set in its
clearest, and fullest Light.

. 2. The Intellectual Eye was in Creation enabled to see, and behold only the
Objects proper to such a Creation, as it was Created; even as the Beasts of the
Field, and Fowls of the Heavens have no higher a Light, than that of sense, as
proper to their Creation: So have the Higher Creations, each in their Class, a
Light Proportionable to such, or such an Elevation of Creation; For else such
higher Light must be supposed to have lain Superfluous, or might have known the
mind of the Lord, and been his Counselor before Revelation, or could, at
least, have immediately comprehended the secret Counsels of God, whenever
Revealed; But Angels Learn, and Desire to Look into them Further and Further;
and undoubtedly partake of that grand Privilege of the Church, the Spirit of
Revelation to Enable them; That which puts the matter out of all doubt, is;
that the Apostle joins, and so Scripture throughout, the Spirit of God Given,
and Received; that we might know and Discern: Now the Spirit is not an outward,
but an inward Revealer, and Elevator of the Spirit of a Man; as Elihu speaks in
Job, God Exalts, Job 32.26.
lifts up by his Power the Spirit of his Creatures whom he Teaches; who,
therefore Teaches, like him: The Spirituality of this Higher New Creation, is
as much above Rationality, as Rationality above Sense; herein therefore differs
Divine Teaching from all Created Teaching: If any of the Angels be supposed,
the Higher to Reveal to the Lower, or to men, what they Know by the much Larger
Sphere of their Creation, and what is Mystery to those, that are of a more
confined compass, and below them; they may Congregate, and stir up by
Reasoning, and Instruction all the Light, such had before, and extend it as far
as it can be extended under the Manutemency of the Eternal Light, and Reason
sustaining and acting, both the higher and lower Intellects; but they can give
no Inward Supernatural Light, when what they find is not sufficient; That is
the Glory of the Father of Glory, and of Lights; The Exalting Spirits by his
Spirit is his Prerogative alone; and what has been said of Light, may be much
more affirmed of Grace, Love, Holy Conformity of the whole Spirit to Revealed
Truth; That is from the God of all Grace by his Spirit; so that the Author of
the Treatise Saw, and yet would not, or did not see in seeing the Renewing the
Faculties by the Spirit of God, Given now; and of the very Organs in the
Spiritual Body, a Body fitted by the Quickening Spirit, at the Resurrection, and
the Finishing All Mystery, to see things above Reason (as was before observed
in the Scheme) which Scripture every where Teaches, is done by the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation. And yet the Dignity of the First Creation is herein
still affirmed, That the Father of Spirits has given the Immortal Spirit of
Man in his own Image; so that it is capable of the Inhabitation of his own
Spirit, as an Higher Spirit in it; and has also Engrafted, and
notwithstanding, sin Reserved, such Principles of Truth, that are of Great
Service, and Use in the Renovation, as shall be more shown.

. 3. If now the Light of Creation be so unable, without an higher Illumination,
and Grace; tho considered without any Loss, or Abatement of it self; not only
to find out, but to receive Revelation; much less can it be a Standard to it,
when it is but a Partial Light, and not Adequate to Truths above its Sphere;
what shall we think then of a Broken, Shattered, Shipwrack'd Reason, whose
Light is Darkened in its very Heavens: For that it is so, is Evident, not only
by all the Difficulties of attaining Wisdom, a far off and Exceeding Deep in
all kind of Knowledge; but the Imperfections, many Mistakes, and Presumptions,
not born up by Truth; so that when we say, we will be wise, it is far from us.
All these plainly show a Degraded Reason. But that which I look upon, as the
most Pungent Demonstration to every Man's Conscience, is, that however we may
be, or are convinced of Godliness, Righteousness, Soberness; yet Reason is not
Able to give its last Positive, Peremptory, and Conclusive Dictate; That these
are best for us in all our Actions: This shows some Vertical Point in all
Probity, Reason in this State it is now in, does not see: Now this is the
principal Point of Wisdom, and of Reason; And it was given in Creation, when to
Man, he said equally with making weights for the Wind, The Fear of the Lord,
That is wisdom; and not only to know, we ought to do it, but Actually, to
Depart from Evil, is Understanding; And Any Reason that does it not, is Laesum
Principium, a Reason Broken, and out of Joint; For if it were not, it would
Operate true to the very utmost Point of All Goodness; even as all other Laws
of Creation are observed, so had that Law first Given of the Fear of the Lord,
and Departure from Evil in Man. The Reason of Man is now like the Failure of an
Instrument, or an Engine of the Virtuosoes in Experimental Philosophy, All
seems to be set Fair, and True, and Right; But it misses in the last point of
Effect: And therefore notwithstanding all Probabilties, and handsome
Appearances, it is not to be trusted Thus the present Reason of Man Judges for
Piety, Justice, and: Temperance, and so seems Right for its Purpose, and End,
but it miscarries in the Doing; It is not Blessed in the Deed, and so is not
for its own sake in any thing, to be Trusted: The Reason of the First Man did
not thus start aside as a broken Bow just at the Mark, before his Sin and Fall:
If you say then, How did Sin Enter? The Answer is plain; Adam Luxated, and
strained his Reason in Judging by it, of what was above it; matter of
Revelation; of becoming Like God more than he was by Creation, not Acquiescing
by Faith in the Will of and Grace of the Creator, and obedience to his Command
in not Eating; and so was Deceived, and Disobeyed, and Ruined Himself and His
Posterity by the Righteous Judgment of the All-mighty, whose ways are past
finding out by Reason; for they are above it. And yet by Trusting in our
Bankrupt Reason, we daily more Entangle our Selves. Can we think the Fallen
Adam was to be Trusted, for not the Finding out (that may be Allowed in the
Negative) but for the Judging of, or Receiving a Revelation of the way of his
Recovery by a Reason that had so foully miscarryed in Reaching beyond it self:
And how much less is ours to be confided in, as to what is above it, which does
so daily fall short of what was at first placed in a Just Level to that Reason.

. 3. The grand Revelation of God in his Word, and Gospel is the Recovery of
Lost Man by his own Begotten Son; who came from Heaven into that very Lost
Nature, and Redeemed from Death, Hell, the Curse, the Wrath, and Justice of God
by his own Death, and by the Sacrifice of Himself, and by His Mediation, and
Intercession at the Right Hand of God; and appearing at last in the
Resurrection of the Dead Bodies of his Saints, and the Glorification of the
whole Man, is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to All that Obey Him, Heb.
5.9. Herewith Fall in All those Truths of the Gospel, attendant hereupon, and
that concenter with them: Even the Godliness, Righteousness, and Soberness,
that the True Reason has Lost, are hereby Restored, and Brought to Light in a
much Higher Luster, and Spirituality, with a greater Efficacy, and more
Indefeizable certainty, That they shall not be Lost, when the Spirits of those
Redeemed by Christ are Redintegrated in them.

. 9. This is now such a New Heaven and Earth of Things, that the Reason of Man,
if it were whole, and entire, as in the First Creation, could not, by it self
Judge of, nor Try in its own Beams, the Supreme Excellencies and Splendors of,
but would be Oppressed with the Glory, and Dazzled with the Brightnefs; however
in some, as it were Back-Parts, it would see a Divinity in them; As to those
Glories, that may be styled the Face of them, it must, even as Angels, submit
it self to the Paramount and Infinite Reason, and shut its Mouth at, as at
that, which Had not not been Told it, and that It had not Heard, in first
Creation; How much less then can the Decayed Reason, those Poor Relics,
Fragments, and Broken Pieces of Reason judge of them! But through that Sin and
Impurity, that has United it self therewith, the more it endeavors to Rally,
and Reunite it self (because of that Corruption wherewith it is so Tainted,
and Defiled, that even the Mind and Conscience of the Unbelieving are Defiled)
Not only the greater Ignorance, and want of Skill, but the greater Enmity and
Hatred to such a Superior Light, stirred up, as well as blinded by Satan, It
Discovers and Detects it self of; And all Directions, Advices, or Commands to
Separate it self from that Corruption, are but Prescribings to the Blackamore
to change his Skin, and the Leopard his Spots. For this Corrupted Reason it
self Teaches so (and can do no otherwise) to Refuse Divine Truth. Jerem. 13.23.
Hence have sprung all those Bold and Daring Efforts of pretended shrewdness of
Reason, and Argument; Insolences of it in Scorn and Raylery against the Purity
of the Doctrine of Christ; That Arch-Fallen Reason, the Devil, Turns himself
into all shapes, sometimes as a severe Rationalist, sometimes as a Sarcastic
Scoffer, and sometimes is Transformed into an Angel of Light, and as a Zelot
for the Honor of Christianity; and therefore it is no wonder, 2 Cor. 11.13.
etc.
if his Ministers are Transformed so also, and even, as the Ministers of
Righteousness: And all these very Shapes has The Treatise, we have to do with,
put on.

. 5. It will be said, If Reason be not in a Capacity to Receive Revelation,
what shall Receive it? Is it to be swallowed in Ignorance, and Blind Obedience,
or by an Implicit Faith? the Answer is: The Infinitely, Only Wise God, Romans
16.27.
(as the Apostle Adores him upon the very Account of the Gospel, the Mystery,
kept hid, and Revealed after for the Obediente of Faith) has prepared a New
Creation, a Regeneration, a Renovation of the Spirit of the Mind, viz. Faith, a
New Understanding, and Light; a Grace of great Wisdom and Intelligence; and
were it not for Confounding it with the Exploded Fallen Reason; as men are so
inclined to do, who are so Desirous to be Teachers of Reason, but not
Rationally, as the Jews were of the Law, but not Lawfully; not Knowing what
they say, nor whereof they affirm; It might be called, 1 Timothy 17.8.
a New Reason, that sees in, and by, and is wholly guided by Revelation, in,
and from the word of God, Dwelling richly in it, in All Wisdom, and Spiritual
Understanding; And in this Light it Proves and Examines all Things, and holds
fast that which is good; And that which is Above All, In this New Creation, and
Faith the Light of it; The great Redeemer by his Spirit, Unites himself to the
Renewed Spirit, and Dwells in it; which is a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation,
Ephesians. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.12.
and so Reveals the Deeps of God, that we might know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, and the Things, that are freely given us of God.

. 6. If it be further Demanded, Is the First Creation, and the Reason of it
wholly Antiquated, and Removed in the New Creation? The Answer is, All the
unchangeable and unmovable Parts of it are comprehended, and taken into the New
Creation, and much Exalted; And even, as to men Unrenewed, and before
Renovation, The Great Redeemer has laid hold upon, and made a Reserve of some
great Principles of Truth, and Reason, or Re-imprinted them in the Minds of Men
in General; and the Law is Written in the Heart, Romans 2.14.15
even of the Gentiles, for many Great and Wise Ends of the Government of the
World; And that These may give Testimony to the Holiness, Purity, Diviness and
Wisdom of the Truths of Revelation; They are a kind of Rude Draught, or
Indentings, which the New Creation takes hold of in the Minds of Men, that they
may know by them; The Light of the Gospel is from Heaven, and of God: And on
the Account of this, They are Righteously Condemned, who do not Receive the
Truths of it, so far, as these Impressions of Natural Light Lead; and it is
certain here is the Condemnation of men, that They have not Believed in the
Name of the Son of God; Joho 3.18.
because they loved Darkness, rather than Light; and that because, Their Deeds
are Evil: And on this Account also, even in Devils, and Lost Spitits, those
Principles of so Great Light given in the first Creation are Preserved by God
in Highest Actuation, that do, what they can, They may Glorify His Justice in
their Condemnation; Thus is his way in the Sea, and his Path in the great
Waters, and his Footsteps cannot be Traced as yet, or in the way of his
present Government of the World; He, who is Light, and in whom is no Darkness
at All, Causes Light to prevail to Condemnation, where it has not, and does
not prevail to Conformity, and Obedience to it; But in the New Creation;
Behold, all things become New. 2 Cor. 5.17.
There is Inward, Supernatural Illumination, and the Power of Grace, and
Holiness Conforming the whole Intellectual Spirit to it; and Comprizing also
within it self the First Illumination; so that it is known to be that First
Illumination, that Revelation has yet taken wholly into it self, that there
may be no mis-judging by a Partial Light, and yet the Testimony of that Light
preserved, Steered, but Exalted Far, above it self.

. 7. It may be largely Remonstrated upon, how great Affiance there is due to
the Light, and conduct of Reason, in the Government of States, of Families, of
Human Affairs; in all Sciences and Arts, Astronomy, Physic, Mathematics,
Music, Agriculture, Architecture, Navigation, Manufacture; and how certain,
and evident the conclusions, that are made according to it are; and what Trust
therefore may be given to it in Religion? But on the other side, we ought to
consider, How much Darkness and Ignorance there is; How difficult and slow the
Seize of Knowledge are; How many things yet unknown; How many Errors, and
Mistakes, hardly found out, and more hardly Corrected; what great Differences,
and Disagreements of Judgments in most things pretended to be known; And we
shall have great cause to Resolve all the Honor and Glory, we think so due to
Human Reason into the Glory and Praise of the Infinite Reason, Wisdom,
Understanding, Truth and Goodness; who holds All Beings and Truths together in
his own Understanding, even as in his own Uochangeable, and Immense Being; else
all had been soon Dissolved; and who, for his own Glory, and Government of the
whole Creation, gives such, and such Degrees of Assurance to the Understanding
of Man in so many Things; and yet Humbles it under so many, and so great
Failures; That it may not presume upon it self, especially in things relating
to himself, being convinced of its own shortness, in what, it is more easily
sensible of: Of all which Those last Chapters of God's Expostulation with Job,
are so great an Admonition, I need enlarge no further upon it.

S. 8. It may, in the last place be urged, what security have we against all
the Impostures of Paganism, Antichristianism, Mahometism, and other Portentous,
and Monstrous Opinions, that may be imposed upon us under the Sacred Name of
Revelation, and things above Reason; and not to be Examined by it? If we have
not such a Faithful Test, as our own Reasan always present to us, and that may
guide us out of All these Mazes and Labirinths; But on the other side, It is a
very great disreputation to Human Reason, that so great Parts of Mankind have
been Involved in these so Horrible Delusions; and that it has not guided them
betterr; and it leads us to the Profoundest Humiliation under the Sense of the
Righteous Judgment of God upon his Intellectual, Lower Creation, fallen from
him by Sin, and so abused and deceived by That higher, Angelis Apostate Nature,
called Satan; and to earnest Supplication to him through the Redeemer, That,
that Blessed Time may come quickly, when the Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord,
Esaias. 11. Hab. 2.14.
and the Knowledge of the Lord shall fill the Earth, as the waters cover the
Sea; and also to Adore him, that we have the Light of his Gospel a much surer
Guide, than our own Reason, as it is now; and a much higher Light, than it was
before its so great debasement by Sin; in which we find all the true, pure
Reason that we have Lost, or that we have any Sentiments, Footsteps, or
Remains of in us; or that we can find in our selves; that may assure us, as far
as Reason can assure us, It is of God; and in which, the things that are most
above our Reason shed yet such Beams of Light upon our Understanding, and
truest Reason, as Assures; They are from the Father of Truth, and not of Lies,
awakening and Enlightening Reason, while it raises us far above our Reason; and
wherein we have above all, that Highest, most Assuring, Sealing, Holy and
Comforting Spirit, the Spirit of God; the only Paraclet, the Advocate of truth
within us, promised to us; for which we should always Pray with an Importunity
that will not be ashamed, that it may be given given to us; and in which it is
much better to Trust, with all our Hearts, then to Lean to our own
Understanding; Tho they were as the Understandings of Angels, Luke 1.5. Prove.
3.5.
in which so great a Number of them trusting, and not in that Higher
Understanding and Spirit Fell, and are in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of
the Great Day: So little Encouragement have we to trust in Created reason.

CHAP. V.
Of the third Head Proposed, viz. The Nature of Mystery.

THE two main Hinges of this Debate, viz Concerning Reason, and concerning
Revelation, as Above, The Introduction of the 2d Head concerning Mystery.
or Contrary to Reason having been so far Treated of; The further Discourse of
Mystery may seem unnecessary, seeing it is on both Parts agreed; Above, or
contrary to Reason, demtermines Mystery, or not Mystery: But because Mystery,
or not Mystery bears the Face of the whole matter in Dispute, and especially,
because Reverence of the word of God, and of the Truths of it (as an Ark or
Sanctuary of, and for which, the Spirit of God has Separated, and Sanctified
the Word, Mystery) It calls for a particular Research, how, and to what Truths,
and for what Ends It has so Consecrated it: The Sense or Significaaion of the
word it self may be derived from the Old Testament, where we meet with the
plain notion of mystery; the Mosaic Types are presented, as mysterious by the
Veil thrown over Moses's Face, even as the Apostle calls them Figures; so we
read of Secret Things, Things kept secret; The secrets of Wisdom; Proverbs, and
the Interpretation of them; Parables; Dark Sayings of the Wise; Prophetic
Visions; All in Figures; some of them Interpreted, others left under their
Veils: This Original of mystery is worthy to be preferrd as most Pure, and
Divine; And there is a Hebrew word of very near found, comporting with the
Sense; though never so applied by the Sacred Text; viz. (...), which easily
passes into the Greek, (...): And yet it might fall in herewith; The word
mystery was a word known to the Gentiles, to signify the Secresies of Pagan
Devotions, Communicated only to their mystae, peculiar Devoted Persons;
However, those Rites were fowl, and Idolatrous; The Spirit of God was pleased
to take it from those impure uses, as the Merchandise and Hire of Tyrus, to be
Holiness to the Lord; to convey the Apprehension of the Secrecy of the Truths
of the Gospel, as Revealed in it by himself at that Time, that had been hidden
before, and at that very time, from those who Believed not; the hidden Wisdom
of God spoken to them, who were the Perfect, or the Consecrated Mystae of it;
Thus as God was pleased to separate the Gentiles, Romans 15.16.
and Sanctify them, as an Offering to Himself by the Holy Spirit, through the
Preaching of the Apostles, who were before as Unclean; so he pleased also to
Hallow this word mystery, however impure in its former use, and to appoint it a
Vessel of Honor to himself. Let us now consider the importance of it in the
Sacred Writings of the New Testament with the Reason of things that shall be
Discoursed out of it, and Universal consent of Language in it.

. 1. The Spirit of God makes use of the word mystery, in speaking of the whole
Frame, and Complex of the Gospel; the Preaching of which is said to be the
Revelation of the mystery, which had been hid in God; Romans 16.27. 1 Cor. 29. c.
4. 1. Colos. 1.26.27.
The Preachers of the Gospel are called Stewards of the mysteries of God; It is
styled the mystery of Christ, the mystery of Faith, the hidden Wisdom of God in
mystery, Ordained to the glory of Saints, to whom it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God. This mystery: Now this so often Repeated
Denomination of the Gospel by mystery; not only, as before, but since the
Rrvelation of it; and without any mention of Revelation, together with the
calling it mystery, shows. It is an Appellation the Spirit of God much Delights
in, and has made (as one may say) the very Title of the Gospel; It is
therefore very amazing; Any one who professes a Veneration of its Records,
should be so Industrious and Buisy to tear it off, and pull away this Seal: It
is most true; Revelation has much changed the State of mysteriousness in the
Gospel, but has not so Removed mystery from it; but that there is principal
Reason, that even surmounts the Clearer Revelation of it in the New Testament;
why the Title is still continued: For it is plain, mystery may be in some sense
Revealed, and yet be mystery still, notwithstanding that Revelation;
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream was in it self a Revelation from God to that Proud
Monarch; Dan. 2.12.
and yet was mystery, till Expounded by Daniel, because not understood: So
Daniel's Visions, when he himself understood not; The Prophets Researched upon
the things Revealed by God to them, what the Spirit of Christ in them did
signify, and did not think it concerned them not, because they wanted Idea's of
what they understood not; Christ Taught by Parables, which were yet mysteries,
till opened by him, and to all but those to whom he opened them. The Book we
call the Revelation; is still mysterous. This I urge, that the joining the
mystery of the Gospel with Revelation, may not be looked upon as proof
sufficient, it is no longer Mystery.

. 2. There are particular Branches of Evangelical Truth, to which the Spirit of
God is pleased peculiarly to apply mystery; the first Scripture of the New
Testament, in which we find it used, Matthew. 13.11. I reserve for after
consideration, Colos. 2.2.
viz. The mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; so of the mystery of God and of
the Father, and of Christ; Of which I will give a further Account in the close
of the Discourse. The Mediatorship of Christ in the various Progresses of it to
highest Glory, shall remain without Controversy, the great mystery of
Godliness, till his Return in Glory; wherein It is most manifest, as there are
some Points very Indisputably, deeply mysterious, 1 Timothy 3.16.
as God manifested in Flesh, Justified in Spirit, So others more plain, as
Preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the World, that, as to their out side,
were plain matters of Fact. Yet these, as well as the others make up the great
mystery of Godliness; which shows there is some deep Reason in the Eye of the
Divine Spirit, why the Notion, and Word, mystery, should be applied to each
truth of the Gosyel, though some of those truths are more plain, Ephesians. 5.26.32.
than others: the Union betwixt Christ and his Church; and so with every
Believing Soul is, what will be mystery, till he present it to himself in every
particular Member of it, a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle; Rev.
19.7.
which The Revelation styles the Nuptials of the Lambs Wife, and the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb; For who can declare this Union, rather inwardly perceived,
than possible to be Expressed yet? The Final Recapitulation of all things in
Heaven, and Earth in Christ, that shall be Happy and Blessed, is styled the
mystery of the Divine Will, and it is to be done in the grand Economy of the
Fullness of Times, or of all Time, when mystery shall be Finished; and before
which, it shall not be Finished, but Remain mystery till then, according to the
Sense of all Scripture. There are some great Propheticks of Scripture, as the
Fullness of the Gentile Churches, or their coming to a fuller Light after the
Eclipse of the Apostasy by Antichrist, Romans 11.25. Ephesians. 3.3. 1 Cor. 15.51.
Rev. 1.30. c. 10.7. 1 Cor. 13.1.2.
together with their whole number coming in, and making one Body with the
Israelites, or rather a Joint Body; The mystery spoken of the Changing of the
Living Saints at the coming of Christ; the mystery of the seven Stars, and
seven Candlesticks, and the mystery of God Finished; of which, I fear, there
are yet so low Idea's in the general Professors of Christianity, that if ever
they were mysteries, they are so still; as particularly, to Instance in that of
the Living Saints Changed; which we generally look upon, as if it meant no
more, than the suddenness of a change equivalent to Death upon those Saints,
who shall be Found Alive at the Coming of Christ; which is so far from a
mystery, that it cannot be otherwiie; the Coming of Christ being so
Instantaneous, as Scripture every where declares it; which Assures, there lies
a much deeper sense under those words; as comparing them with The Living, The
Remaining, or rather, Reserved, twice used, 1 These. 4.15, 17. will assure them,
who closely consider it; But I think it unseasonable any further to engage
herein; only to observe the Importance of the word Mystery, in Scripture, to be
That what it Reveals, as in the Sum and main Substance, has yet unconceivable
Recesses, and Retirements of Truth; which we connot yet comprehend, or find
Ideas of, and yet what it does Reveal, is of great moment to us; and ought to
fill us with a desire of Fuller Comprehensions of; as perfective of, not only
of our Understandings, but making blessed our whole Man.

. 3. There is yet remaining one use more the Scripture makes of the word,
mystery, in what, it does not own, as mystery of, or from it self; but Blazons,
as Counter-mystery, to it self; and so far as we suppose, the Holy Spirit
transferred the use of the word mystery from Pagan Idolatrous Impurity; it does
in this one Instance Refund it, and place it on its own Base; And this is the
mystery of Iniquity, of which the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 2.7. And after leads
us to the Land of Shinar, as the Base of it, Babylon the Great, on whose
Forehead was written great mystery, Rev. 17.7. And herein Scripture on one side
teaches us the Sense of mystery; that it signifies Coverture, and Concealment;
For tho these two mysteries differ, as Heaven and Hell; for in one we have the
Deeps of God; In the other are hid the deeps of Satan, though under the Name of
a Catholic Church; Antichristianism under the Name of Christianity; It teaches
us therefore to Abhor, to Ascribe to Gospel Mystery, any of its Cheates, or
Lies; But in that this Mystery of Iniquity is not Consumed but by the Breath of
Christ's Mouth, and the Glory of his Appearance; It shows the Gospel shall
continue Mystery, while this Counter-mystery is sufferr'd to Endure.

. But while we thus according to the Gospel it self speak of it, as mystery,
and that the mystery of Iniquity is a counter-mystery to it; we Exalt the
Wisdom of it, as the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, only Wise, Just, and
Right, Prove. 8.6 etc. 1 Samuel 2.3. 2 Pet. 1.16. c. 1.4. 1 Timothy 5 4. c. 4.7. c.
6.20.
the words of whose Lips are All in Righteousness, and there is nothing
Froward, nor Perverse in them; His mouth speaks Truth, Wickedness is an
abomination to his Lips. He is a God of Judgment; and by him All things are
weighed: Nothing of Jargon, or Chymere; The Gospel abhors Fables, either those
cunningly devised, or Old Wives Fables, Endless genealogies, oppositions of
Science falsely so called. All these are peculiar to the mystery of Iniquity,
its Lies and Delusions after the manner of Satan, the Liar from the beginning,
and the Father of Lies, the Baalzebul, and Baalzebub, the God of Dung, and of a
Fly; but the mysteries of the Gospel are all of greatest weight, substance, of
Wisdom and Truth; and hereof it gives assurance to all Believers, who are not
Blind Devotionists, Colos. 2.2.
but have All Riches of the Full Assurance of Understanding, even in the
mysteries of the Gospel, that are most sablime; although it be an Understanding of
Faith, as has been already, and shall be further shown; yea, even those, who
by the Assistances of its General Grace, apply themselves with Humility, and
sincere desires of its Truth to the Word of God, find great Sweetness, and
Satisfaction, and an unusual Light arises in Opposition to Darkness; The
Entrance of thy Word gives Light, it gives Understanding to the Simple; Psalm.
119.13. Eccles. 5.1. 2 Timothy 3.7.
nothing is more Abhorred by it, than Superstition, the Sacrifice of Fools, the
sillyness of even Women, ever Learning, never able to come to the Knowledge of
the Truth. All these things are to be remanded to Paganism, and
Antichristianism, and are the Characters of the mystery of Iniquity. Nor do the
mysteries of Christianity consist in dark and cloudy Speculations, or thorny
Scholastic Disputes, those oppositions of Science Falsely so called. They are
rather the Boldnesses of Reason, that would bring down the mysteries of the
Gospel under it self, and the Artifice of Satan so to entangle them: whereas
in their own pure Fountain, the Word of God, They are all profitable for
Doctrine Reproof, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. Romans 15.4.
Instruction in the ways of Righteousness, and that through the Patience and
Comfort of the Scripture, we might have hope; and they make often an outward
Reformation, where they have not the full saving Effect; Gospel mysteries are
not therefore the Monopoly, or the Engrossment of a Profession, Heb. 5.12. 1
Cor. 4.1.
or a Priestcraft; every Christian ought to Aspire to be a Teacher; and the
Faithful Stewards of these mysteries, to use utmost Diligence, they may be so,
as the greatest Seal of their own Ministry: Acts 20.26.27. Col. 1.18. Jud.
12.13.
And woe to them, if they shun to that end, to declare fully the Counsel of
God, Teaching every man, and Warning every man; that they may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus; Not Wells without Water, or Clouds without Rain. It is
only for Order and Government sake, and in Trust that this grand Office may be
certainly Discharged, that there is a distinct Presbytery who are only worthy
of double, or of any Honor at all, but upon their Labor in the Word, 1 Timothy
1.17. v. 13.15.16.
and Doctrine, and watching Night and Day, to save themselves, and those that
hear them: who might attend on this very thing, and give themselves wholly to
Reading and Meditation for general Profit. A Guild for mystery is only proper
to the Craftsmen of Diana, the Merchants of Babylon, the Priests of Antichrist;
False Apostles, whose Reproach thrown upon the Gospel, Their Lord will Return
upon them, and the Blood of Souls lost by their Unfaithfulness in the discharge
of their Duty; and to conclude this Branch, Gospel Mysteries shall not be
mysteries for ever, but the perfect Comprehension of them is Ordained for the
Glory of Saints; and the Knowledge of them, tho not perfect here, yet shall end
in the brightness of the Firmament to all the Wise in them; and They who
Instruct in them shall shine as the Stars; whereas the mystery of Iniquity
shall be consumed by the Brightness of the appearance of Christ, and the
Ministers of it go into Perdition; those Planetory Stars are They, for whom is
reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever, Dan. 12.3. 2 These. 2.8.
Jud. 13.

. 5. The Reason therefore of so close adhering to the word, and notion of
mystery, is that high Reverence due to the very word, the wisdom of the Divine
Spirit has chosen, 1 Cor. 2.13. c. 1.10.
who compares Spiritual things with Spiritual; if Christians should speak the
same thing, as the Apostle Admonishes, who would not desire to speak the same
word, the Spirit of God has so often used! This is an Honor due to Scripture,
and to the Holy Spirit the Author; but beyond this, the Gospel Notion of
mystery Keeps up the Reverence due to these great Truths, for the sake of that
Abyss of Wisdom, Love and Grace, from whence they Flow, and puts us in mind
always of their Original, and that Riches of Compassion, making known what had
else for ever lay hid; The sense hereof keeps always low all proud Reflections
on our own Reason, and Holds in a constant dependence upon the Enlightening
Grace of God; This keeps the Divine Life at the due Elevation, being laid up in
Divine mysteries, and Issuing from them by the Enlivening Spirit of God, not
Prostrated to Fallen Reason, and its Power of Free Will, as at the Highest, but
a more exalted Ethics, or Moral Philosophy. Hereby the Truths Revealed in the
word are kept safe from Sacrilegious Violation, or being Condemned at the
Tribunal of corrupt Reason, but Enthroned in mystery far above reason; this
Gives the Adequate Account of miracles, not only to assure, the Revelations
they Sealed, were from God; but to show a Supernatural Power, like themselves,
necessary to Enlighten the Understanding, and to Sanctify the whole Spirit in
conformity to them: This gives Reason to an Earnest Desire of that Eternal Life
and Happiness, the Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory, shown to be
Incomprehensible, as the Truths in which they are contained, and that lead
thereunto, and which cannot be comprehended, till that finishing of mysteries
in that Everlasting Kingdom. Now all these Reasons of Holding Fast the
Evangelick word, and Notion of mystery, are as so many Countermines to the
Artifices of Satan, and his Instruments, to Deprive us of the Real Benefits of
it, and therefore we ought to be Jealous over them for our own, and others
sake; least, as the great Engineer of false Reason beguiled Eve with it, 2 Cor.
11.1.
so our minds should be Corrupted from the Purity of Divine Truth, as It is in
Christ. For thus Antiscripturism and Superstition mutually circulating one into
another, by the Help of Human Reason and Imagination have produced Paganism,
Antichristianism, and Mahometism, of which Intimation was before made.

. 6. To conclude then the whole concerning mystery, as above Reason; that is,
above our Fallen, Cor^upted Reason; That great Oracle of our Lord, of which
intimation was before made, gives us the sum of the matter; Mat. 13.11.12. etc.
he speaking to his Disciples, says to them; Unto you it is given to know the
mysteryes of the Kingdom of Heaven; To others it is not given: This is the
First occasion, the Spirit of God was pleased to take, to make use of the word,
mystery, in the New Testament: and it was before the calling of the Gentiles;
which gives a more Heavenly, and Divine Descent to the use of the word mystery,
than the taking it from the Familiarity the Gentiles had with it, Psalm. 49.4.
Psalm. 78.2.
and accommodating the Language of the Gospel to them; For it alludes to that
of the Psalm; I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings of
Old. And it is applied by Christ to the distinguishing Grace of God, giving to
some to know these mysteries, and hiding them from others; To them it is not
given; which is the most proper notion of mystery in all Languages; the word
mystery Importing in universal use, a Knowledge in any thing peculiar to some,
and not to others; and so this use of it by our Lord gives a principal Reason
why Scripture chooses this word; viz. to Magnify this very Grace; For if these
Truths were in our Power, under our Command, or under our Reason, what
necessity were there of giving to know, and how to some, and not to others? Who
have yet the same things laid before 'em, but in seeing, see not; even as the
Parable of the Sower which our Lord makes a Figure and Type of this
distinguishing Grace: It was equally Offered, but Expounded Apart to the
Disciples: To those to whom It was not Expounded, it was mystery, because they
had the outside, but seeing and hearing, saw not, heard not, to them It was not
given; To the Disciples, to whom it was Expounded, it was still mysterious in
one great sense, because they held it by the Tenure of Grace; they did not
attain by their Reason, but to them it was given. The Ideas were kept for them
in the word of the Kingdom, and from thence still given them afresh: to him
that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: The Spirit of God,
as a higher mind, as that Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, upholds the Spirit
of the Mind, Sanctified and Renewed in the Understanding; Ballancing, Applying,
Arguing, Inferring and Producing into holy Action; declaring within themselves
and to others in words, and giving them an Utterance, 1 Cor. 1.1.
an Elocution proper to those Spiritual things, those Truths; as he is called
the Spirit giving utterance; Acts 2.3.
And thus in highest Sense, those Truths are mysterious, even according to the
Sense of the Treatise, as being above Reason; For all those, that attempt this
Circuit by their own Reason, and Judge and Condemn by it, and will have the
whole within the Cognizance of their Reason, are so Dazzled and amazed, that
even the Advantages of the Reason, reserved by general Grace, are taken from
them; and they become despisers, deniers, professed Enemies to those Truths,
(...), men of of Soul, Reason, that is, not having the Spirit; and so according
to that severe Doom, That is Taken from them, even which they had; and what was
above their Reason, thus becomes contrary to their Reason. And this is the
conclusive Reason, why the Understanding, humble, Christian can never part with
mystery, Gospel-mystery; what is held in mystery is held by Grace, and not by
Reason; and Grace is their Title; how then should they part with mystery!

CHAP. VI.
Of Reason and Mystery united in their highest Elevation, in the Eternal Son of
the Father; The Reason, The Mystery.

I Have intimated before, The Introduction into this chapter.
I should have abandoned in Sacred Discourses, the so much abused word, Reason;
were it not not for one transcendent Scripture; in which I am sully persuaded,
the Divine Spirit has on purpose singled out that word, the Philosophers, Joh.
1.1. etc.
the Reputed Princes of the wisdom of the world, among the Greeks (whom the
Apostle Remarks for seeking after wisdom) have unversally Expressed it by; that
is, (...), now of this the Evangelist John in Spirit makes choice to Express
the only begotten Son of God, by; and I shall endeavor to make plain, by this
word, he intends Eternal Wisdom, or Reason in the first place: and because this
Sonship of the Eternal Wisdom or Reason is highest mystery, the same Apostle
Rev. 19.12, 13. is Inspired to join the Name, he has written, which no man
knows, but He himself, with the Name whereby He is called, The Reason of God.
So uniting Reason and Mystery in him; as Solomon says, what is the Name of God,
and what is his Sons Name, if thou can tell? the Father and the Son dwell
alike in the Light, to which none can Approach. To show therefore how in the
highest Reason the highest mystery concenters, shall be the undertaking of this
chapter; that I may bring Reason and Mystery to the happiest Conspiration, and
no more dispute between them; I know the undertaking is high, and difficult,
but by the Assistance of The Wisdom, The Reason, of whom I am to speak, I will
proceed.

. 1. The Wise of the Pagan Nations had not two greater Notions, or words, than
Reason and Mystery; the one expressing Natural Wisdom, or Religion; and the
other as Communicated to their peculiar Followers, or Disciples, and wrapped up
in secret Figures, or Cabalas; Supernatural Wisdom, and manifestation from
their Gods; In both they were extremely Foolish, and Deceived; as also
dreadfully Corrupted, and Defiled: These two, yet the wisdom of God and his
Grace in Jesus Christ, has laid hold upon in the Gospel, according to some
former delineations in the Old Testament; yet taking in those Gentile Notions,
and words also as suited to them, when Grace broke out upon them in their
Calling; as has been already shown in mystery, and now shall be in Reason; and
then both Applied to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

. 2. That the word, (...), is in our Translation given, and Received, and by
long use settled [The word] is so known, it may seem a Boldness to offer at
such a change as to Interpret it, [The Reason] but besides, that Grave, and
Learned Interpreters have not differed much, as shall be after shown; and that,
there shall also be due Reverence in the Progress, given to that Translation
[The Word] I do with greater Authority so Expound, sustained therein by a
parallel of the Beloved Disciple with Solomon the Jedidiah, Prove. 8.22. etc.
or Beloved of God; the Expressions are Uniform, as from the same Spirit
intending the same Truth; yet making more Full, and plain by the Latter, what
was not so fully made known by the Former; as the New Testament in its
Parrhesia, Plainness, or openness of Speech, as in clearness of Light, excells
The Old Testament.

. 3. That Wisdom and Reason differ only in sound, or some very thin Distinction
one from another, I think none will deny; who will not allow, the wisest Man
has, and is the greatest Reason? or that he who has the most, or best Reason,
has the most wisdom, and is the wisest man? The same things then, that
Solomon, ascribes to Wisdom, The Evangelist John by the same Spirit,
attributes to the Reason; The Wisdom speaks of it self, as distinct from God,
and yet, as has been shown, Supreme, Abstract, Infinite wisdom, cannot be
divided from God; It must be on with him: The Reason is spoken of by the
Evangelist John, as distinct from God, and yet was God; The wisdom speaks of it
self, as in the Beginning, from Everlasting, before the Creation; The
Evangelist John speaks of The Reason in the Beginning; and necessarily before
the Creation, because All things were made by him, and without him was not any
Thing made, that was made. The wisdom speaks of it self, possessed by God,
close by him, with him; The Reason was with God, The same was with God; The
wisdom speaks of it self, as brought up with God, a word of highest Sense,
expressing the same Life; The Reason, as before, was with God, was God; In him
was Life; The Wisdom speaks of it self, as United with God in the Creation, The
Lord by wisdom Founded the Earth; By understanding he Established the Heavens;
Prove. 3.19.
The wisdom was there, when he set a compass on the Face of the Deep; Of the
Reason it is said as before, All Things were made by him; and without him was
not any thing made, that was made: The Wisdom speaks it self, as brought
forth, set up; Of the Reason It is said; we Beheld his Glory, as the Glory of
the only Begotten of the Father, full of Truth, that is, wisdom, as before
Explained; The wisdom says of it self, I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him: The Gospel says several Times of the Reason; This is my
Beloved Son, In whom I am well pleased. The Wisdom says, Rejoicing in the
Habitable Parts of his Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men. Of the
Reason it is said, He was made Flesh, and came, and dwelt among us; all these
Paralellisms plainly show; this Wisdom, and this Reason are the same; And He is
That Word, who is said to be Living, Powerful, sharper than a two edged Sword,
etc. Heb. 4.12. Rev. 1.16.
And that awful Person, That He, with whom we have to do, as he has it, and it
comes out of his Mouth, so it is the Sword with two Edges, so sharp as to
divide between the Sense and Spirit; and all things are immediately open and
manifest and naked in its sight, because in his sight, whose word it is, and
who is himself, the supreme word and wisdom.

. 4. The word of God, as spoken, and written, and given out from Eternal Wisdom
and Reason, gives together with those truths, that are above the Illumination
of the First Creation, and therefore Mysteries, All those Truths, that are so
just, and level to the Intellectual Nature of Man, as he was made in Knowledge,
Righteousness and True Holiness; that tho they are much obscured, and effaced,
and many of them lost, and the Ability to Form Idea's and Apprehensions of them
in some almost, and in some altogether extinguished; Yet partly by the Reserve,
Jesus Christ, as the Eternal Wisdom, and the Son of the Father in Love and
Grace, as well, as Truth, and as the Redeemer has made; and partly by the
Enforcing, and Invigorating that Light, Those Truths cannot, but be
acknowledged by the Mind, and Conscience of Man; so far as to condemn the
Violation of them by Evil Practices, and to Restrain those Evil Practices, and
to make better Human Conversation, and Manners: Therefore they appear
absolutely necessary for Human Society, and to pass into Laws; but that
excellent and Illustrious Light in which they at first shone out, so as that
the Mind and Spirit should taste the full sweetness, and perfectly resign to
them, is not Restored, but by a Supernatural Re-Illumination, and Renovation;
in which regard even those Truths, whose Implantation, and the Power of Forming
Ideas of them, were at the first Natural, are now become Supernatural and
mysterious, and require a new Writing in the Heart, as to the first Excellency
and Spirituality of them.

. 5. The Eternal Wisdom, Reason and Word by the Light, and Spirit, with which
they are given, gives Testimony to those truths of the First Creation in the
Heart of Man, so far as they are reserved, sustained, enforced, according to
the First Implantation or Writing in the Heart; and then it receives Testimony
from them to those supernatural Truths, that it delivers together with them; As
he it is that Finds out the Knowledge of witty Inventions; As Letters, writing,
Printing, the Compass, etc.
All that we admire so much, and that have obtained general Approbation, and
Use; and make so honorable the memory of the first Inventors in what Science,
or Art soever, are from him, as the Supreme Original: In all these we hold our
Reason by Him, who is above our Reason, even him, who has that Name, which
none knows but he himself; who is therefore supreme Mystery, we hold all by
Grace from him, how unthankful then is it to hold up our Reason against the
Grace, against him by whom we hold it? or against the Mystery of Him, and His
Grace? For there is not an Idea rightly Formed, nor one true Ratiocination, not
one witty Invention for good use; not one Righteous Law, or wise Decree; but it
is, (as things are now,) by Grace through the Mediator, and from him, as the
Savior thus far of All Men, and in these Regards, Tasting Death for every Man;
but though the World was at first made by him, and is yet upheld; yet this
great Light Shines by his word in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it
not, knows not him from whom it comes: No, not although the First Engravings of
the Law on our Hearts are so far, as they are, Reserved, or Re-enlightened by
him; and tho with such a variety, and free Dispose to some, and not to others;
Yet They to whom greatest measures are given, except a higher Grace be given
also, through the great Degeneracies of Human Nature, lift up those higher
measures of Reason, highest against him; which plainly shows how little Reason
can effect by it self in things above such an Illumination, as is given to it.

. 6. As our Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Wisdom and Reason of the Father is,
as in all Intellectual Beings, Reason is, an Essential word within the mind it
self; and as he Declares the Father by Inspirations of Creation, and Mediatory
Sustentations of all Intellectual Beings in their Intellectual Irradiations,
and Motions; so he in a Supreme Government, and Conduct by his Spirit, has
Issued out into all those Declarations by his Prophets, Apostles and other
Servants of his, peculiarly Employed by him, which when spoken, and as now
Collected into Scripture, we call the word of God; the subsistence to which the
Eternal Wisdom and Word of the Father gives; Christ yesterday, to day, the same
for ever. And as he is in that word, the supreme Self-subsistent Word, so he
has made known all Supernatural Truths, Truths of the New Creation, and
flowing from Redemption by his Declarative Word in the Scriptures, the same
word that gives the first, gives the other also; and the very Truths themselves
of that Supernatural Elevation and Excellency have bright Beams of those first
truths, essentially united to them, throughout shining within them, Sparkling
out of Them, and round about Them; by which they may be known to be of God, and
are by their Weight, by their Purity, by their Heavenlyness, by their entire
Excellency Distinguishable from the Mystery of Iniquity: Thus we find the
Gospel of Christ, as full of Supernatural Truths, Phil. 4.8.
so full of what ever is Lovely, True, Honest, Virtuous, of Good Report, worthy
of Praise; even whole, universal most unspotted Morality; and the Supernatural
Truths themselves are Orient with the same, far every way above the Faded,
Blasted, Withered Ideas, or glozed Semblances of those, who have spoken most
Excellingly of them without that Light: And herein is the Condemnation, that
men receive not supernatural Truths; They Recoile, not from the
Supernaturalness, but from the very Holiness, Strictness, Purity, they are
dazzled with; even that, which was Implanted in First Creation; They Love
Darkness, John 3.19.
rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil; and make a pretense of
Prejudice against the Supernaturalness, and that they have not Assurance such
Truths are from God, to shelter the Evil Works, to which they adhere, and upon
which these Truths Shine so warm and bright, and so sharply Reproove; And thus
the Gospel of Christ first gives Testimony to all Implanted Truth, showing to
Man all that was written in his Heart; fills up the Vacuities, and Empty
Spaces; gives new Light, and Beauty to the Defaced, and lost Characters; so
that men may know in their own Consciences, It is that First writing Restored,
and they find it so undeniably within themselves to be so, that they cannot
deny it: And then Supernatural Truths so essentially united to Implanted, and
Both so Circulating one within another, Supernatural Truths Receive Testimony
from those Implanted Truths, that if the one are so undoubtedly from God, the
other must be also; and no one can reject revealed Truth, but he must first
disobey, and Rebel against Natural, and therein is Justly and Righteously
Condemned.

. 7. Upon the whole then, we may from Jesus Christ the Sup^eme Reason, Wisdom,
and Word of God, and the Supreme Mystery derive this T^ain, and connection of
Truths. 1. That Godliness, Righteousness and Soberness, being in the most
inward Sense of Man's mind, the principal Points of true Reason; where ever they
are found at fullest Dimensions and strongest Excellency, Three is highest
Reason now, in the clearest Light, and Harmony, and the proper Language of it;
These are so found in the word of God, above the (...), the Natural Implanted
Knowledge of God, now so obscured, and ecclipsed by man's sin, and Fall; and
above that excellent Light Creation Gives, as David, Psalm. 19. upon the compare
gives the preference to the word of God above the Knowledge given from the
Speech of Heaven and Earth. 2. Who ever therefore is the Author of that Word is
the Supreme Wisdom, Reason and Word of God; and that is Jesus Christ the Son of
the Father in Truth, Full of Truth; the Living Word of God, whose Name is
called, The word of God. 3. That he, who is the Supreme Reason, Wisdom, Truth
and word of God, as He is He by whom All was made, so He is He, by whom all is
Conserved, and Restored; The Son of the Father in Love, as well as Truth, and
full of Grace, as well as Truth. 4. He therefore, Gal. 3.23.
as he is himself Supreme Mystery, and is therefore called Faith, which is the
Reason Supernaturalized for Mystery; so he Reveals the Mystery of the Counsel
of the Independent Will and Grace of the Father. 5. He Reserves and Continues
all the Light of the First Illumination by Creation, that is found, even where
there is no Knowledge of Him; All the Learning in Arts, Sciences, and witty
Inventions; He Dispenses All that Light, and Knowledge, Receiving for, and
giving Gifts even to the Rebellious, under the Profession of his Gospel, Psalm.
68.18.
that the Lord God may have a Tabernacle among them. 6. But Especially, He as
the Truth, and Mystery Instructs Savingly all his own Servants, and by inward
Light, and Truth communicated to them, Transfers, by his Spirit, from his word
Supernatural with all Natural Truths into their Hearts; so that they are at
once, The only true Men of Reason, and the Mystae, the (...), the Instructed in
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: So that as in Christ himself Supreme
Wisdom, Reason, Truth, and Supreme Mystery, (whom none Knows but the Father,
and they to whom the Father Reveals Him) Reason, and Mystery are United; so in
All true Christians Reason, and Mystery dwell together; All Natural and
Supernatural Truth according to Godliness, but Supernaturally given, and
Communicated by an Illumination after the manner of the Communication of
Mystery. 7. Through the Delusion of Satan under the Vizor of Christianity has
sprung up by falling from the Supreme Word of God, and the True Mystery, the
mystery of Iniquity, and Antichrist the Son of Perdition; as the Pagans of old,
Fell from Natural Truth, into Idolatry.

. 8. But because He, who is the Supreme Wisdom, Reason, Truth, and by whom all
things were made, and whose Name is the word of God, has a Title written on
his vesture, and on his Thigh; King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; There shall be
a Kingdom of Highest Illumination, and Reason, the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light, a Kingdom of Redemption, the World to come of the second Adam, wherein
all mystery, Natural and Supernatural shall be Finished, or fully laid Open,
and Understood; and then the mystery of Iniquity shall be wholly Destroyed;
when not only the Faculties of the Mind shall be Perfectly Restored by
Renovation but the Organs of the Spiritual Body, fitted to the Action of the
Spirit; and the Divine Being shall be seen in the Eternal Son, Emmanuel, in our
Nature, so far as it is possible for a Finite Being to comprehend an Infinite;
John 17.21.23.
to which also in and by him Saints shall be United.

. 9. Thus all Wisdom, Reason and Truth circulates with it self in the Eternal
Reason, and all his Economy in his making the World; in the Government of it;
in the Reserves of Truth and Reason in the mind of Man in any Degree now; in
the perfect Purity of the Word of God; and in the World to come, or Kingdom of
the Eternal Reason and word of God; so that we may Argue from the one to the
other with great Assurance: If there be Wisdom in the Laws of Creation, and
Providence there are certainly Laws of Holiness, Righteousness and Soberness,
every way corresponding them; the Fear of the Lord in man; Departure from Evil
cannot but answer the Ballancing the Clouds, and the weights for the wind, etc.
If we have any such Laws of Wisdom, and Equity in either Kind, there is an
entire System and Complex of Each, if an Infraction had not been made by Sin.
On the other part if there be a Renovation of the Laws of inward and outward
Holiness, in and by the Redemption of Christ, and the New Creation in his
Redeemed; The Restitution of the Creation, wherein soever it Groans, and
Travels in Pain until now, and the Administration of its Government shall be as
Glorious; when it shall be Delivered from the Bondage of vanity and corruption,
whereunto it was, Rom 8.20.
and yet is Subject, by Reason of him who so Subjected it in Hope, into the
Glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

. 10. As every Reason and Wisdom, together with the Speech and Expression, it
has, and makes of it self, has a certain Energy and Force, or Spirit, that it
powerfully sends forth and works on others by; so it is Attributed to the
Eternal wisdom, Reason and word of God to Power out his Spirit, Prove. 1.23. c.
14. Joh. c. 15.16.
to send the Paraclet, or Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father sends in
the Sons Name, who is called the Spirit of that Word, by whom the world was
made, the Spirit of Wisdom, of Revelation, The Spirit of the Son, The Spirit of
Christ; and which was given upon the Glorification of Christ, John 7.30.
the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets, and whom Scripture Introduces on all
Accounts, as the Spirit Breathing in, and with the Declared Word of God; and
Revealing the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, that cannot otherwise be
knwon; and yet this Spirit none can know but they who have it; John 14.17
Thus in all things appears the Happy Union of Reason and Mystery in the
Supreme Reason and Mystery and Word,

CHAP. VII.
Of the Mystery of the Father, The Word, The Spirit, In whom the Gospel gives
the most Explicate, and Consummate Manifestation of Eternal Wisdom and Reason.

THE former Parts of this Discourse concerning Reason and Mystery has
necessarily led to the distinct consideration of God; The Father of Lights and
of Spirits; The Introduction.
All Beings of Reason descending from Him. Of The Son of the Father in Truth,
viz. The Eternal wisdom and Reason; and in Love; The Word declaring the Father;
Full of Grace, Full of Truth; Of The Spirit of wisdom, of Holiness, of Power;
The Spirit giving Utterance; The Father, the Word, (who is the Son,) and the
Spirit are plainly Assured to us in Scripture to be ONE: Herein is highest
Mystery; as a conclusion therefore of this Discourse, Let us in very Brief
consider them so; and the rather, because One cannot but suspect, This Jannes
and Jambres Treatise, Christianity not mysterious, 2 Timothy 3.8.
was designed to Resist this great Truth; The Discourses of which, however
keeping close to Scripture, it Styles p. 25. Extravagancies about the Trinity;
and that Period, page 29. Savors strongly of the fame Leven: But what do they
mean by Consisting with themselves, yet not with our common Notions? Four may
be called Five in Heaven, but so only the Name is changed; the thing remains
the same: And since in this World, we cannot know any thing, but by our common
Notions; How shall we be sure of this Pretended consistency between our present
seeming Contradictions, and the Theology of the World to come? In Answer
hereunto in this great point, let us consider.

. 1. It is certain, an intellectual Spirit cannot be made such, but that the
Infinite, Intellectual Object, and most Intelligible; GOD; must needs be seen
in his great Glory, and Attributes of Perfection by it: But he cannot yet be
found out to Perfection, but still dwells in that Light, to which no one can
Approach, both in regard of Infinity, and Infinite Holiness and Spirituality;
Job. 4.3.
so as to Charge purest Created Beings with Folly; to put no Trust in the
Holiest of his Servants; and the Stars are not pure in his sight: The most
Blessed of Created Spirits cover not only their Feet, but their Faces, and cast
their Crowns before him: Even those who are not (...), Isa. 6.2. 2 Pet. 3.17.
Jud. v. 13.
Defirmamented; nor (...), wandering Stars. Who have not Left their first
Estate, nor forsaken their own Habitation; They dare not stand on their
Intellectual, or Moral Accomplishments: How much less they who dwell in Houses
of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, who are but worms. The Author of the
Treatise we are upon, acknowledges, we have not Adequate conceptions of the
Divine Being, and yet denies Mystery, because not above Reason; not
considering, That we must now by Faith, that Intellectual Grace of the New
Creation, and of Divine Illumination, and therefore necessarily above the
Reason of the First Creation, if entire; much more, as fallen, come to God;
Believing, He is, and is a Rewarder of them, who Diligently seek him: That is;
To know him in the Mediator, and in the Light of his Divine Spirit, according
to the Revelation of his Word.

. 2. This Revelation of Scripture is so clear and full throughout, especially
the New Testament, that it cannot be Denied: There are so many, and so distinct
Namings of them, both apart, and together: The Father, The Word (who is the
Son) The Spirit; They are so Distinguished One from the Other, and yet their
Union one to another, is most Illustriously made known; as in this one
Instance; the Spirit is Styled, The Spirit, who proceeds from the Father, John
14. c. 15. c. 16.
whom the Father sends in the Sons Name; Now the Father, as he is the Father,
cannot be the Son; SO the Spirit is styled, The Spirit, whom the Son sends from
the Father; The Spirit who Glorifies Christ; The Spirit of the Son, The Spirit
of Christ; And we know, The Son cannot be The Father, as he is the Son; when
therefore, as the Apostle Expressly Affirms, The Spirit is the One and the Self
Same Spirit; and he is continually styled, the Spirit of God, whom most of the
Adversaries acknowledge one with God, as the Spirit of a man is one with
himself; and that yet the Spirit is the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son,
It is absolute Scripture Demonstration, that the Father, the Son, the Spirit
are both most distinct, and yet most truly, The One true God; Their Attributes
are Distinct to Each, and yet the same Divine Perfections shine out alike in
All; Their Acts of Love and Grace in the Salvation of man, are so distinct, and
yet proper only to the One Eternal Being, as the Fountain of them; That they,
from whom those Emanations are, cannot but be understood, as Distinct, and yet
but One. The acknowledgments, and Returns, that are called for from, and made
by Redeemed Saints, unto the Father, the Son, the Spirit, are such as can only
be Required by the most High God to himself, nor without Horrible, and
Abominable Idolatry yielded to any other: The Gospel is so Abundant in all
these, and makes this manifestation of God so principal an end, and scope of
all its Discourses, and places so much its Glory in it, as in what it most
designs to declare; That if we own it to be a Revelation from God, it is as
great an Injury either to reject or to interpret it contrary to it self herein;
(because our short and corrupt Reason cannot allow it) as to impute any
monstrous Thing to it: For it must be supposed either to Reveal some such
Portent as cannot be Believed; or that it knows so little how to express it
self, that wherein it speaks, as fully as plainly, without a Figure, as
constantly as may be, it must yet be overrul'd by Interpretation, and Taught to
Speak; or else it would speak so, as to ^un men into Idolatry, and Blasphemy
against the One true God.

. 3. If then, the Father, the Word, the Spirit be a Revelation of the Divine
Being to us from it self; we dare not but Acknowledge it Infinite Wisdom and
Reason, because we acknowledge the Divine Being to be so; and because the very
Titles, and Essential Attributes of each are so; the Father of Lights is he,
with whom is no variation or shadow of turning; the Eternal Wisdom, Reason, and
Word the Son is he, in whom is Light, the true Light, the Truth: The Spirit is
the Spirit of Truth, of Wisdom, of Holiness; and because from them is the
Manuduction into All Wisdom, and Truth; Every Good and Perfect Gift comes from
the Father; The Son is, the true Light, the Light of Men; the Spirit leads into
all Truth.

. 4. Yet is this great Truth of the Ineffable Union, and Communion, and yet
Distinction, Profoundest Mystery; in Regard of the Revelation of such a Deep of
God; the Imperfect Knowledge we have of it; and the necessity of Divine
Illumination, and Sanctification unto Adoration, Love, Service, Obedience of
Faith, suitable to it.

. 5. Yet it is not to be Reproached, as Jargon, or the Chymera of
Transubstantiation, or other Antichristian Falsehoods; For the Saints and
Servants of this great Truth have a full assurance in it, tho a Mystery; and
whereas it seems to encounter the Unity of the Divine Being, or the Notion we
have of One and Three; Faith Enlightened by the Divine Spirit sees so many more
great Principles of Truth and Holiness Centring in it, that it considers we are
no more able to Judge of Unity in Him, (who is All, and not a poor, single
Unite,) than a Child is able to know, an Unite is the Beginning and Fountain of
Number; nor according to our Low Arithmetic, to judge of the Application of
Three to the Father, the Son, and the Spirit the One God; so Supreme, Glorious,
Remoov'd from All Approach of Created Being; than a Child can work by the Rule
of Three; Only we know in him, it must be Perfection of Being, and Operation.
And as Abraham, in the Sacrificing Isaac, was taught to overballance that
Natural Principle of Parental Affection, and even of Oracle; Heb. 11.17.18.
In Isaac shall thy seed be Called; by that therein more Paramount Light of
Faith; God was able to raise him from the Dead, from whence he Received him in
a Figure: So are true Believers by that great Light of Faith enabled in those
so Resplendent Beams of Revelation before mentioned, to Adore the One God in
the Father, the Son and the Spirit; tho they understand and speak but as
Children, and see through a Glass Darkly, till they come to see Face to Face;
and to know, as they are known, or shall be then made to know; and if there are
those Sons of Anak in Reason, as they seem to themselves, that cannot receive
it, we Adore with the Son of the Father in our Nature; I thank thee, Oh Father,
Lord of Heaven, and Earth; that thou have hid these Things from the Wise, and
Prudent, Luke 10.12.
and have Revealed them to Babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. Lord open thou our Eyes, that we may behold the Wonders of the Mysteries
of the Truth. Psalm. 110.18. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Now to the King, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be Glory for Ever.

FINIS.
A LETTER In POSTSCRIPT TO THE Author of the Treatise on his Second Edition,
with Enlargements, and the Addition of His Name.
SIR,
JUST, as the very last of the preceding Discourse was Printing off, your
Second Edition came to my Hand with your Name prefixed; which to me, makes no
Alteration; it being the Name of a Person wholly unknown to me; nor do I desire
(as I said at first) to make any Enquiry; For, be it never so Great, it can add
no weight to the main importance of the Debate, which is a pursuit after Truth;
nor can any supposable Diminution (tho I suppose none) Abate the Intrinsic
value of Any Argument: I leave that therefore to its Just value with any, that
know it; The Regard, and Deference, The Book may seem to h^ve Right to, on the
Account of a Second Edition, in my Judgment, depends wholly on the Sterlyn
worth of the Discourse it self; For if that be Massy, and of the Alloy of
Truth; it is an Honor to those, who have so great a Gust of it, as well as to
the Discourse, that so well Deserves; If That, being on so High a Point, have
not just Merit, it is only a Character of the Degeneracy, and Irreligion, as
well, as the Insipience of the Many of the Age: Leaving therefore those things
that have no Interest in the present concern, I come to what is more material.

And in the first place, I would, with all due modesty Remonstrate to you the
method, I have observed in order to the Answer of your Treatise; which has not
been I confess, to Follow you, as they say, (...), or Paragraph by Paragraph;
that I might avoid any small insignificant Remarks, and the Tediousness
Consequent thereupon; as also, because there are many Tendencies of your
Dissertation, that I exceedingly concur with you in; As the Detestation of what
ever comes near, or has any Alliance with the Mystery of Iniquity, or what you
call Pr st Craft, and Secular Interest in the Ministry of the Gospel; whatever
shelters Ignorance, or Sloth, or Covers Implicit Faith and Blind Obedience in
the Professors of Christianity: All that speaks Humblest Adorations of the
Divine Majesty, and gives Glory to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
the Supreme Light of it; and the True Reason Flowing from Him, the Sovereign
Reason, in and throughout, I most Humbly Join in; Tho I acknowledge there is
great Reason of Caution when the Designation of Gospel Truth is not Universal,
and Uniform; Least there be an Advantage given to the Prince of Darkness or any
of his Artifices, because of some Flashes of an Angel of Light from Him: Or a
bidding good Speed to those, who Bring not this Doctrine; viz. of The Son of
God, as the Apostle styles it. 2 John 10. Lastly, I have not been Minute in the
Prosecutions of your Periods, because there are many things, that fly off from
the Principal Matter; And it is of no concernment to what is Principal in my
Eye, whether they are one way, or other.

I have therefore made it my Aim, and I hope, it has been my Business to
Discover (as I may say) the Foundation to the very Neck. And in these Things I
have Especially placed my main intention, and my Argumentation.

1. To uphold the Honor, Glory and Authority of the Style of the New Testament
in the word, Mystery: Fitted by it self to its own Revelations; and that it may
not be waved or removed from upon any Foreign Suggestions; nor particularly on
that very weak one, pardon me, in so plainly Expressing it; that because it
Names the Mystery of Iniquity; and that on the Forehead of Babylon, there was
written, Mystery; Note, that Mystery is made the Distinguishing mark of the
False or Antichristian Church; and therefore; that as Far, as any Church allows
of Mysteries, so far it is Antichristian, and may with a great deal of Justice,
tho little Honor, claim Kindred with the Scarlet Whore: If this be not the
Argument of one Driven to Shifts I know not what is! Who must not of necessity
infer, if the once mentioning the Mystery of Iniquity, and once more, Mystery
on the Forehead of Babylon, can be so supposed to the Disadvantage, and
Dishonor of Mystery, the so often Recording it for the Honor of the Gospel,
and of the Doctrines of it must not be much more to the Glory of the Word and
Thing, Mystery? and that the other Naming of it, was not indeed to the
dishonor of it, but of that Iniquity only, to which it is Joined: And further,
Is it not plain? That the Mystery of Iniquity, is a Counter Mystery to the
Mystery of Godliness? And that the Counter Mystery were nothing, if the Grand
Mystery, did not super-Exist to it; Even as Antichrist is to Christ, and
Antichristianism is to Christianism; so is the Mystery of Iniquity, to the
Mystery of Godliness; Antichristianism has not so much as a shadow of
Appearance without that great Substance, Christianity; nor Antichrist without,
The Christ; the Former infers the Latter; and it might be as well said,
Christianity is a Note of a False Church, because Antichristianism has any
Alliance of Sound, or so much, as that sound implies of Relation to it; or that
it were the Note of a False Christ; That Antichrist has the last Syllable of
his Name from Christ, as that the mystery of Godliness is so, because the
mystery of Iniquity is out of all doubt the mark of the False Church. Whereas
indeed, the dark side of the Pillar in Each, is a demonstration of the other
side full of Light, and Glory: This therefore could no way deserve to be among
the Enlargements of the Second Edition which ought to be upon Refinement of
Thoughts; and yet it is found, p. 107. of the Second Edition.

2. I have been so zealous of mystery, least any of the Great Doctrines of the
Gospel should be Clandestinely withdrawn under the Pretension of Christianity
not mysterious; that is, If Reason, as it is now so Fallen, Co rupted, and even
Detruncated (but as Restored by the Supreme Reason) cannot please it self in
any of the great Truths of the Gospel, It should be Rejected; and herein I have
especial Regard to that great Doctrine of the Father, the Word, (who is the
only Begotten Son of the Father) the Spirit, Who are One, The One God; and to
the Redemption of Jesus Christ by the Sacrifice Offered by the Eternal Spirit.
As I have at more full debated in the Answer.

3. I have especially desired, that the Scripture Word, and Notion of Mystery
may be Considered, as it shows the necessity of Dependence upon the Divine
Grace, upon the constant Superintendency of the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation; For that being always in the Hearts of his Servants a Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation, Enlightening them into the great Truths of the Gospel;
they must according, even to the Acknowledgment of the Author be Mystery,
because a continual Internal Revelation is necessary not only to the First
Reception, but to the Progression of Christians; their growing in Grace, and in
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Which great consideration I
would most Humbly, and yet mosi Affectionately Recommend to the Author, with
All his Favorers; That seeing they seem to Re-due so much to Sacred Oracles,
They would with all seriousness consider these great Words, Grace, Free Grace,
Gifts from above, Wisdom from the Father of Lights, and Exchange that so
Admired Word, Reason, as it is now, or as Human, for that Adorable word, Grace;
that they would Attently Contemplate the Censure of the Holy Spirit in his Word
upon all Human Intellectuals, till there be a Renovation in the Spirit of the
mind; and this would most easily Conciliate to Them the True Scripture-Notion
of Mystery: And seeing the Author has Promised an Undeceiving of those whom he
supposes Deceived, concerning the Illumination, and Efficacious Operation of
the Divine Spirit; I desire of Him to have a Particular Regard herein to my
self, how Triflng or Absurd an Adversary soever I may appear to him; And that
he would do it in the meekness of the Spirit of Christianity, respecting only
the Substance, and Merits of the Point, and of what I have said; I find nothing
further in the Enlargements of the Second Edition, that I have not considered
in the Answer to the First; and therefore beseeching the conducts of the Spirit
of Truth into All Truth; and that the Greater Proportions of Reason, or
Intellectuals, and Elocution, the Author, or any of his Friends have; the more
they may ascribe, and dedicate themselves to the Supreme Reason and his Grace,
This shall be the Prayer of,

SIR, In All Truly Christian Offices, Your Friend and Servant, T.B.

Pardon some smaller mistakes, particularly, P. 1. Margin, read (...), l. ult.
(...), p. 14. after Egypt, put in to. P. 16. l. 23. before Affirm, put in
whereof they. P. 46. r. (...).


