IMPRIMATUR, Luculentissima haec Concio in Epiphaniam Christi, per Eruditum
Virum, RICHARDUM BERRY.

March 7. P. M. Archiepiscopo Dubliniensi a Sac. Domest.

A SERMON UPON THE EPIPHANY, Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH, IN THE CITY of DUBLIN,
1672.

By RICHARD BERRY, M. A.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild in Castle-street. M. DC. LXXII.

A SERMON Preached at Christ-Church Dublin, upon the EPIPHANY. 1672.
MATTHEW. II. VER. 10, 11. When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding
great joy. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child
with Mary his mother, and fell down and worshipped him: and when they had
opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts, gold, frankincense and
myrrh.
TO discover the sweet consent and harmony betwixt the Old Testament and the
New, in relation to the most efficacious and universal Redemption of all
Mankind, by the coming of Christ into the world, it is enough to consider the
Types and Prophesies of the one exactly fulfilled in the other. The miraculous
call of the Gentiles unto the profession of the Christian Faith under the
dispensation of the Gospel, was not only foretold by Prophesies, but likewise
prefigured in several Types in the Writings of the old Law. Amongst the
Prophesies, we find one most eminent Recorded, Genesis 9. 27. where righteous Noah
then languishing under the burden of an old Patriarchal age, and variety of
Paternal cares, filled nevertheless with the sacred and vigorous Instincts of
the Holy Ghost, who at a long prospect discovered unto him the large extent of
a spiritual Kingdom by the Messiah; in this his Prophetic Vision, cries out,
Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell
in the Tents of Shem. In which Prophecy, we find two things remarkable, to
make our way more easy for this ensuing Discourse.

1. Here is a tacit promise of God's erecting a Tabernacle amongst the
posterity of Shem, i. e. That Shem, with his successive Issue, should become
the chosen people of God, with whom he would enter into a Covenant of Grace and
Mercy; which promise he made good afterward unto Shem's posterity, the
Children of Israel: For the Israelites, through God's miraculous mercy, being
delivered out of the Egyptian Bondage, and conducted through the Wilderness
into the promised Land, put off the Tabernacle of the Covenant, in which the
glory of the Lord appeared, and forth with God began to talk with them from
amidst two Cherubins; afterward, that portable Tabernacle was changed into a
fixed and magnificent Temple, erected by King Solomon in the holy City. This was
the noble and only Prerogative of the posterity of Shem, the Glory of the
Children of Israel.

2. We are given to Note here another Prophecy concerning Japhet, That he
should inhabit the Tabernacle or Tents of Shem. The meaning whereof is this,
That the Gentiles to be born in time of the Seed of Japhet, were to be called
into a close fellowship and communion with the Church and People of the Jews,
under the new Economy of the Gospel. And many other Prophesies of the like
nature there are up and down extant in the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and
Prophets, that bear Testimony to the matter in hand.

As for the Typical Representations, for our further confirmation in it, there
are many of them also; as particularly, We have the Marriage of the Saints
under the Old Law: Moses took unto Wife an Ethiopian woman. And David took unto
him two. Ahinoam the Jezreelite. And Abigail the Carmelite; which (according to
the judgment of the soundest Divines) Typified, That our blessed Savior, the
Son of David, according to the flesh, should unite in that one body of the
Church his Spouse both Jews and Gentiles. Likewise we have the Emblem of it in
the Monarchical Government of King David, who extended his Empire over the
Idumaeans, Philistines, Moabites and Syrians, as well as over his Native Body
Politic of the Jews. We have the same no less prefigured by the Queen of
Sheba's advancing out of the South, to behold the Greatness of Solomon: viz.
That through the sound of the Gospel throughout the World, the Nations which
were afar off, should flock in, and voluntarily submit themselves to the
Scepter of their heavenly Solomon.

By these, and many more such like Prophetic Oracles, and Typical
Adumbrations, the holy Men of old times beheld the dawning of this day, which
sixteen hundred years ago, and upwards, was the most Illustrious that ever the
inferior World was blessed with by the gracious Heavens; the Constellation of
all whose greatest Luminaries in their full splendour at once, if compared with
it, were but as the light of a Candle to the Noonday; for this day was
illuminated by the Son of Righteousness incarnate, and it is Illuminations
augmented by the kind influences of an extraordinary Star, inviting the Eastern
Magi to come forthwith, and pay a proportionable Homage to their new born King.
A Star of wonders! that discovered Heaven it self amidst an earthly House, an
House more glorious (for the Guest's sake) and more clearly seen, than the
Twelve imaginary Houses of the Astrologers in the Celestial Spheres; for so it
follows, And lo, the Star which they saw in the East, went before them, till it
came and stood over where the young child was: And when they saw the star,
they rejoiced with exceeding great joy, etc.

This Day, commonly called by the ancient Churches, The day of holy
Illuminations, or Feast of Lights, has been held famous for three Things,
under that one name of Epiphanies, or Three manifestations of Christ to the
World after diverse manners.

First, As he was made known to the Wise men, Strangers and Gentiles by a Star,
called properly (...).

Secondly, To the Jews, when he was Consecrated in Baptism, at which time the
Holy Trinity appeared; the Father in his voice, the Son in the flesh, the Holy
Ghost in the form of a Dove, thence called (...).

Thirdly, To his own Countrymen of Galilee, in that house of Nuptials where he
showed his first Miracle of changing water into wine, thence called (...). All
Three Commemorated upon this Day. The first, in the Gospel; The other two, in
the two second Lessons for the Day. Upon which account, it is storied of Julian
the Apostate and Emperor, That least he should be detected for an Idolater,
whereof he was ashamed, he was minded to appear in public this Day, which, in
the month of January (says he) the Christians solemnize, and call by the name
of Epiphanies.

For the prosecution of the ensuing Discourse sutably to the Solemnity of this
Festivity, I shall represent unto you: First, Some Observations upon the Star
in the Text. Secondly, Some Historical Notices concerning the Magi. Thirdly,
Some practical Inferences and Meditations upon both, in order as they come.


First, We will take into our consideration the Nature and Qualities of this
Star. If we consult Astronomers, some of them will tell us, That it was one of
the real prime Stars for Luster in the Firmament; which, though common to the
view of All, yet, as to its Prognostics and Effects, understood only by these
Persian Sophi.

Others say, That it was a sydereal Constellation, or a Concourse of several of
the most resplendent Stars, or biggest Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, and the rest
in the superior Orbs.

Others there are, who will not rank it amongst the Celestial, but Elementary
fiery Meteors or Impressions, termed second, or false Stars. St. Chrysostom and
Theophylact upon the place, hold it to be that Angel which appeared unto the
Shepherds near Bethlehem, telling them the tidings of our Saviors Nativity.
And they have some color for it, for it was an usual way with the Angels under
the Old Law, to appear in the Radiations of Light, or the Vibrations of Fire:
And besides, under this quality they are described, Psalm. 104. 4. He makes his
angels spirits: and his ministers a flaming fire. In such a similitude then, it
is not altogether improbable, that an Angel might appear to these Magi, viz. in
the shape of a flaming Star.

Lastly, Some are of this Opinion, That it was the Holy Ghost, who now might as
well transform himself into an indulgent Star, to direct the Wise men in their
way to the Newborn Jesus, as afterward he was pleased to descend upon him in
the form of an innocent Dove at the time of his Baptism; as also long after
that, at Pentecost, he descended again on his Apostles and the Brethren
assembled together, in the likeness of Cloven fiery Tongues. But waving all
these Conjectures and Probabilities, we may confidently affirm, That it was not
only a new and real, but a miraculous and only Star, in opposition to all
other forementioned Opinions. An Angel it could not be, because of the express
word of the Evangelist, who calls it a Star. And that it could not be one of
the Comets, or falling Stars, it is as clearly evident, because both of their
different motions and significations from what this had: Those being generally
portentous of the death of Kings, and mighty men, the change or downfall of
States and Kingdoms, and of those dire Calamities that befall Mankind for their
Outrages and Enormities: But This big with nothing but Peace, Happiness, and
eternal Salvation to the sons of Men. That it could not be of the number of the
first Stars or wandering Planets, is as evident as the former; for then
certainly after such a long Tract of Time and Revolution of the Heavens, from
the fourth days Creation unto that of its appearance, it must needs have been
seen. But all the Astronomers and Historians in the World, from the beginning,
unto this day, are altogether silent about it (as to its appearance) save only
at that time. Neither indeed, could it in reason be one of the natural Stars of
the first Creation, because of their periodical courses, and limited
progressions from East to West, from which they can never err. Nor
consequently a Comet can it be, which (according to Natural Philosophy) does
generally obey the motion of that Star which inflamed it. But this salutiferous
Star deriving not its designs from Nature, passes from Jerusalem toward
Bethlehem, i. e. quite contrary from North, to Southwards, according to the
intention of it is Maker, which was, That it should make him manifest unto these
hopeful Princely Pilgrims, to their great joy at their Arrival. See see! how
constant and concerned this new made Luminary is, in accommodating it self to
these earnest Travelers! It neither hastens, nor slackens its pace; neither
does it in the least decline the direct way, turning either to the right hand,
or to the left; but with all the circumstances of obsequiousness, accompanies
them in their progress upon the Road. This heavenly Candle, like the Soul of
Man (which Solomon terms the Candle of the Lord) as if possessed with such a
Soul, gives light all along to these noble Souls, conducts them to that very
spot of ground where the sweet Babe lay, the very center of their aims and
desires.

Besides all this, for further proof, we may consider its situation, that it
was not in any of the Celestial Orbs, but in the Air, and that in the lower
Region of it too; by which near distance (which cannot be supposed of the
created Stars in the beginning, because of their vast remoteness from the
earth) commodiously leading them on their way by Night, and failing not in the
diffusion of its beams by Day also (probably that they might see how to take a
shorter cut unto their journies end) until it made a stand over the very House
where they were to congratulate their New born King. And after all this, when
it had performed the Office designed by the All-wise Creator of it, it ceased
at once to illuminate and exist; being dissolved at last by the same hand that
made it into that primitive matter out of which he produced it.

But how should this speechless Star (may some say) be able to teach these Wise
men so great a mystery (hidden from the Ages) as this of the Nativity of the
worlds Savior? Was there nothing more in the matter think ye, that should
occasion them to take so tedious, so difficult a journey (as this must needs
be) and to prosecute with so much eagerness of mind, a thing, which on the Jews
part at least, if not from others, must needs create unto them a great deal of
Envy and Detraction?

Yes doubtless; This saving knowledge of God Incarnate, was taught them
inwardly, by the Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, as well as outwardly by the
light of a star. That supernatural light within them, taught them all things of
him, who was to be afterward a light to lighten the Gentiles, as he was then
the glory of his people Israel. Who knows but that they might have had the view
and perusal of the five Books of Moses, as probably as Plato, Plutarch, and
several of the Roman Poets, Gentiles as well as they; of which last, the
Learned do affirm that they had. Supposing which, or supposing it not, they
might nevertheless, by the gracious Dictates of the Holy Ghost, be told of a
certain Prophecy of one of their own Countrymen, Balaam by name, famed over
all the East for a great Diviner, as you find it Recorded, Numb. 24. 17. There
shall come a star out of Jacob: Which Prophecy does so exactly agree with the
Wise men's question and reason (Where is he that is born King of the Jews, for
we have seen his star?) that these two Stars, these two Texts, do seem wholly
and directly to face and enlighten each other. There goes a Story therefore to
this purpose (which I shall leave to your grave Judgments to think of it (as
you please) as to its Credibility) That the Persian Magi elected out of their
own number Twelve, which year by year were to go up to the top of the Victorial
Mountain so called, and there abiding three days, were wont to wash themselves
over, and pray to God, that he would manifest unto them that Star of which
Balaam had prophesied. Upon the day of the Nativity therefore abiding upon the
Hill full of expectations, the Star appears unto them in the shape of a fair
lovely Boy, with a Cross shining over his Head, and saying, Make all the haste
you can into the Land of Judaea, and there you shall find that King whom you so
greedily look after. Whether there be any Truth in this story or not, it
matters not much: We cannot but blame however the vain and profane Confidence
of impious Astrologers, in avouching, That the Wise men attained unto the
knowledge of Christ his Nativity, by the Rules and Methods of that their
Science, which is chiefly conversant about the natural and ordinary Stars: For
never was it heard of, that any other Star but this, did ever signify the
Birth of Christ Jesus. Neither can it be believed, that this it self could do
it effectually of it self, unless the Holy Ghost had infused into their minds
at the same time the true Notions of this heavenly knowledge, and had sown in
their hearts the seeds of a sound Faith, that they should believe it. But not
to be beholding to any the least suspected Author, we have besides a very
ancient and authentic one to enlighten us about this Star, Chalcidius by name,
a Platonic Philosopher, who lived and wrote a little after Christ. He
Commenting upon Plato his Timaeus, after he had recounted many strange
portentous things about the Stars, subjoins a relation of this at last: Est and
alia sanctior and venerabilior historia, quae perhibet ortum Stellae insolitae,
etc. There is (says he) a more holy and venerable story which gives out the
rise of a new Star, not foretelling Mortality, or any fatal Accidents to
Mankind, but the descent of God Incarnate, for grace and salvation to sinful
Mortals. The observation of which by the Chaldeans they verify, who presented
the same God-man with gifts of Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh.

Having now given you a sufficient account of the Star in the Text. Our
Meditations, as to practical Inferences, shall fix and expatiate themselves
thus.

You have taught us, O ye wise Princes of the East, or rather that Star that
taught you, has instructed us to sympathize with you in the real manly
expressions of an exceeding rejoicing and triumphant joy. We fall down
therefore, and with humble adorations congratulate the riches of thy mercy, O
Lord of life, for that thou wast pleased, through the miraculous conception of
holy Mary, to give unto us the assurance of eternal happiness, by the word
Incarnate; and to declare the same, by the apparition of a new created Star, to
those first fruits and forerunners of us miserable Gentiles: From the conduct
of whom, by the light of this material One to thee, O holy Jesus, who art that
Star of Jacob foretold, that bright morning Star, acknowledged from thine own
mouth, Rev. 22. 16. We who are of the same stock and lineage, as we do share in
the same privileges by faith, so do we exult with an equal gladness, and
unspeakably great joy. For, that a Star should be lighted up on purpose, a Star
that portends not only temporal, but everlasting happiness to the forlorn Souls
of Rebel criminals, and such a Star as leaves them not, till it have brought
them to the child Jesus, even to God himself; This affords matter sure for
exceeding great joy. For if we are bound to pay unto God all cheerful homage
and adoration for that his general providence over us, in making the ordinary
Stars to dance attendance upon us, to shine, to lead, to fight sometimes in
their courses, to effectuate health in our bodies, and fertility in the Fields
for our sakes (Which made holy David contemplating that spangled Canopy, now
our covering, hereafter to be our Footstool, in an holy ecstasy to cry out,
Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man, that thou
thus visitest him, visitest him with Stars!) What a noble joy and gratulation
should the consideration of God's especial Providence over us Gentiles, produce
in our Souls, in sending us a Star, in setting up for us a Standard of light,
to invite and guide us, to warm and cherish us, to support and replenish us
with the All-healing Benedictions of a far more glorious Star, our Sun of
Righteousness. How exactly (to our great comfort be it spoken) do the Type and
the thing Typified agree! In that God, who of Old was pleased to lead the
children of Israel through the Wilderness into the Regions of the Gentiles, by
the pillar of a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night: here now in like
manner, he leads the Magi the Forefathers of the Gentiles, into the Land of
Judaea, by the conduct of a Star: To show, That both people, as well Jews as
Gentiles, must become one sheepfold under Christ the one great shepherd of
their souls. Neither is the Prediction, Isa. 60. 1, 3. less clearly verified,
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising.

Alas! what were we? we were a people sitting in darkness, and might have
continued unto this day grovelling in the thick darkness of Ignorance,
Infidelity, and horrors of Idolatry! Was it not now a manifestation of
miraculous mercy, a matter of superabundant joy, that God should thus
discriminate us of the latter Times, from Nations far more worthy than our
selves, pulling us like Brands out of the fire, and setting us above others, as
a Candle upon a Bushel, and enkindling this Candle with a Star! When we lay
stinking dead in Trespasses and Sins, he said unto us, Awake, and live by the
light and life of this Star. When we were without hope, and without God in the
world, as the Apostle tells us, strangers to the Covenant of promise, Aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel, wild Olive Trees, Dogs under the Table (in our
Saviors terms) poor, blind, miserable, and naked Orphans; even then was he
pleased to espouse us unto himself in the bonds of an everlasting kindness, and
to make us the subjects of the liberal effusion of his graces, and the sweet
influences of a saving one, pointed at by a material Star. By the light of
this, we are surrounded with all other pure, profitable, benign, and pleasing
lights: with the splendor of Christ Jesus his personal excellencies, with the
pure luster of God's holy Word to guide our Feet into the ways of peace, with
the refreshing Rays of supernatural grace, faith and hope through his merits;
with the quickening virtue of his Ordinances, Sacraments, Letanies and Prayers
of the Holy Church. All which make up a Constellation of sweet Influences of
the power of God unto our salvation. O Sun of Righteousness! O brightness of
the Eternal Father! Rise thou upon us with healing under thy wings! Display the
beams of thy saving countenance upon our souls! Dispell the dark mists of Sin
and Infidelity which overcloud our minds and wills! Dry up the damps of
Original Concupiscence in our hearts, by the warmth of a mighty grace, as these
earthly ones are done away by the heat of that burning fiery Globe above us.
That at the last, becoming the sons and daughters of Epiphanies, we may walk as
becomes Children of the Father of Lights, and as Brethren of the Son and Heir
of Lights, shining in all manner of Purity and Integrity throughout the whole
course of our Conversations.

Secondly, Now follows as a second Branch of my propounded method, that in the
same order by way of Historical Narration, and profitable Inferences, we speak
somewhat, and more briefly of the Persian Magi.

Of these early Votaries, and true Converts to the Son of God, and Discipline
of his Kingdom, there is a great Controversy amongst the most eminent of the
Fathers, whether they were Kings or no. But, though the late Learned Dr.
Hammond be for the Affirmative, following St. Augustine, St. Jerome and
Tertullian in this point, yet waving Disputes of this nature, we may take it
for granted, That they were men of Princely dignity at the least. For the name
of Magi both in Persia and Arabia, was a name of men highly eminent for their
extraction, as well as for profound Learning and Employ. That in general they
were Princes and Philosophers of the highest rank, it seems to be clear, from
the Character that Cicero gives them in his learned Book de Divinatione, where
he says, Nullum Persarum Regem esse potuisse qui non ante Magorum disciplinam
scientiamque percepisset, i. e. That he was utterly incapable to be King of
Persia, who had not been in some good measure experienced in the Discipline and
Wisdom of the Magi. And that they were men of the greatest state and place, if
not Kings themselves, yet Kings Privy Counselors, he assures us by another
Character that he gives them elsewhere in the same Book, Sine auctoritate and
consilio Magorum (says he) constat ne ipsis quidem Regibus quicquam agere
licere. Without the counsel and authority of the Magi, even unto Kings
themselves, was it never permitted to act in any important matter whatsoever.
And again, magnifying another high qualification in them, he gives their name
of ((...)) to denote not only a peculiar sort of Wise men thoroughly instructed
in all the Liberal Arts and Sciences (as was said before) but who had likewise
a grand Concern about Sacred Things: Magus altissimarum rerum Cultor and
Interpres habetur. Doubtless they were profoundly skilled in Mathematics and
Philosophy; great Inquisitors into and Interpreters of the Phenomenon of
Nature, of the Nature and Counsels of their Gods, of the Causes and Events of
Things: The only Curators of Religious Matters in Doctrine, Worship, Vows,
Prayers, Sacrifices, and of whatever else appertained thereunto. They were
briefly the same in their Country; what the Gymnosophists were amongst the
Indians, the Philosophers amongst the Graecians, the Wise men amongst the
Latins, the Druids amongst the Gauls, the Chaldaeans amongst the Assyrians.
Therefore does our Holy Evangelist entitle them with the name of (...) upon
these forementioned accounts of their eminent Birth, Office and Learning; and
not from their illusive dealing with King Herod in not returning unto him
according to his Injunction, as some do imagine. It is the judgment of St.
Chrysostom, That they had this name given them from those unlawful Arts, which
he supposes them to have practiced; and as we are apt to call in our Tongue
(but in the worst sense) your wiser sort of men Wizards and Magitians. But if
such these men were, we are bound the rather to admire the goodness of God, who
was pleased to call at so great a distance, and from so deep an abyss of
Impiety and Hell, the very Priests and Votaries of Devils, the Forerunners and
First fruits of us (once such sinful Gentiles, or worse happily) to the adoration
of his Son but just new born, and that too by the imperious message of a
new-made Star. And thus much may suffice as touching their persons, and
personal perfections, which may minister unto us several good Documents and
Consolations.

1. In that they were Gentiles, once a despised people, we are given to
understand, that it is Gods free grace and mercy through them, to open unto us
a door of life, and having pulled down that partition wall, to give them and us
a free entrance into the promised rest.

2. And if Gentiles, then sinners too. From hence springs light and comfort to
all disconsolate Souls, languishing under the burden of their sins; for if
Heaven, notwithstanding our deep defilement by original and actual
transgressions, vouchsafe to favor us with a gracious look, nor they, nor we,
nor any Nation or person need fear to be excluded the Kingdom of God, if they
obey the call.

3. Great Personages, they were foretold in Psalm 72. under the notion of the
Kings of Arabia and Saba bringing gifts, as most interpret that place of them.
Our Saviors Question, How hard is it for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of heaven? And St. Paul's Negation, That not many mighty, not many noble of
this world are called, might well enough startle and confound the hopes of all
the great men of the earth, were it not for this particular instance of
Free Grace; that the Persian Magi, great Princes of the East, rich and
honorable, may claim an Interest in Christ's Star, as well as the poor, and
those that are termed the Off-scowring of the World.

4. Nor does their great Learning, or mysterious knowledge, any way debar them
from being Proselytes to Christianity. The Apostles Intimation of, not many
wise, not many learned, might well again amaze and deaden the hearts of great
Scholars, were it not, that these accomplished Heroes of Learning, had a portion
in the Star that leads to Christ; as well as they had an accurate knowledge of
the Stars above them, to gratify the nobler senses of their intellectual
Faculties, as one day they shall have them under them, for the glory of their
whole beatifi'd Beings. The knowledge of natural things, and natural reason it
self, was first set up in the Soul, as a Star or Candle of the Lord, to lead
man to the admiration of his Divinity. And these Renowned Princes, who had the
full use and benefit of the same, employed it wholly to the right end. But such
(alas!) is the Corruption of these last Ages of the World, That instead of
coming unto God and Christ by Faith and Obedience (Things consentaneous with
reason advanced to the highest pitch) our gallant Atheists do (as much as in
them lies) endeavor to depart from them, not only by their vicious Lives, but
to banish also the very existence of a Deity out of their Thoughts, and at the
same time reason out of their Souls. So that quite contrary to our New-quaking
Luminaries, who do so highly magnify and extend the Light within them, these
dark Souls labor to put out all manner of Light both within and without them.
And however these new Anarchical Lights may account of Princes, and great
Learned men, as Enemies unto him who was represented by this Star, nevertheless
this Star shines unto them with as benign and efficacious Influences, as unto
any; nay, with more than unto the Inferior Orders of men. Mean and ordinary
Capacities, such as Women and Shepherds, must have suitable Guides to lead them
to Christ. It is for Kings, and Learned Sages only to be led by Stars, and
Tokens of stupendous Providence to the veneration of the Christian Faith* Their
hearts are larger, and their mental strengths are greater, and their examples
of greater force, to capacitate them for greater Impressions, and to advance
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus by their exemplary Conformity, as much as to
enlarge their earthly Empires by Conquest or victorious Policy. So as what one
said of Government, That it was the best, when Kings do Philosophize, and
Philosophers Reign: I will say the like of both, with this reciprocal
Inversion, That it is the best of Governments, when Kings and Philosophers do
submit unto Christian Laws, and when Christian Laws are supported and defended
by the secular power and policy of such great men. And thrice happy is such a
people, whose Supreme does defend the Faith with his pious Life, as much as
with his Sword and Shield.

Secondly, In the next place we are to consider, 1. These Wise men's advancing
on their Journey. 2. Their Deportment, They fell down and worshipped. 3. Their
Congratulatory Accostment, They presented him with offerings.


1. Of the first of these. Rowz'd up by the inward Inspirations of the Holy
Ghost, and outward sight of this inviting Star to wait upon their spiritual
King; for the quicker dispatch they call forthwith for their Dromedaries, and
away they come. Many a weary step had they trod, many an unprofitable Question
had they ask't, but neither yet do they break off their pace or expectations.
They knew full well, that it would prove a long Journey from their Homes to
Jerusalem, and a troublesome one too; as being to pass through the Wildernesses
of Arabia Deserta, and over the Rocks of Arabia Petraea. The uncouthness of the
way, the danger of the narrow passages infamous for Robbers, and dreadful for
Precipices, the Inconveniences of the Journey, nor yet the uncertainty of it
(because of the disappearance of the Star for a season) could no whit deter
them from their design. For Faith and Love brook no Impediments, know no
Difficulties in the search after the beloved Jesus. To have made many such
Journies, to have enlarged their Empire, would have been grateful to ambitious
minds: but this is none of their ambition; and if it had been, they had just
reason to say, What would it profit us to gain the whole world, and to lose our
own souls? or rather, to lose the sweet Jesus, who is the life of our souls.
What a reproach now must all this be to the Christians of our days? How many
trivial excuses shall scare many of us from adhering to that Faith we do
profess? It Is a fashion now adays to reason our selves out of our Devotion and
Religion, and to object any thing to save our pains in the great Concerns about
Christ and our Souls. The extremity of a little cold weather, or the dampness
of a rainy Morning, the cold Snow under our Feet, or the Wind whiffling about
our Clothes, shall easily keep us off from coming to the House where Jesus
delights to dwell, from coming out to worship him in his Sanctuary. But what
strikes deeper at the root of Religion, is, the vile reasonings of reprobate
minds against Christian Obedience. Some of whom plead against the necessity of
it: Because the Gospel, say they, is a message of peace and rest to their
souls, and thence they think themselves wholly disengaged from all kind of
duty. Others will tell you of an utter Impossibility to perform the Commands,
because they are weak and impotent Creatures by nature, and therefore they can
do nothing at all of themselves, and the best righteousness that they have, is
but as menstruous Rags in Gods esteem. The Well besides is deep, and they have
not wherewith to draw. A third sort there is who are much aggrieved at the
bitterness of it, saying, These Laws are troublesome and unsavory, full of
sadness and melancholy, void of good fellowship and recreation, and subject to
continual afflictions and anxieties of mind. These pious Magi met with no such
Bugbears, made no such Demurs upon the way: They had more generous
Apprehensions, and more inflamed Affections toward Christ and his Discipline.
Ah! Let us make these Wise men our pattern and example; the Wisest men in the
World for this one Act of coming unto Christ, though they had been mere Fools
in all other respects whatsoever. Nor could they themselves but confess, That
they carried back with them a far more nobler wisdom, and more costly treasures
by infinite degrees, than they brought with them; and instead of porishable,
they returned with immortal Diadems in their Crowns.

Come away then readily without pretenses or delay, with the eye of a strong
Faith, and the motions of a pure love, and pay your homage to the holy Jesus.
The rising Sun, we are told, is the Persians God; and these Wise Eastern
Votaries now much wiser than before, do but Translate their Adoration from one
Sun unto another; from that material but perishable Sun in the Firmament, to
this material but immortal Sun of Righteousness Incarnate. And this prostration
of the Body, it is the first part of their Worship. A lesser Adoration would
not have been proportionable to so great a Blessing, as the sight of a Savior.
For it seems most reasonable, That his assuming of a Body to his Divine Nature,
should challenge the humble obeisance of our whole bodies now; his coming down
from Heaven, our falling down upon the Earth; his so great Humiliation, the
greatest expression of our Humility. And this we shall do, though not in
posture, yet in a spiritual sense the same and in effect, if we keep our bodies
vessels of honor, pure and untainted from the lusts of the flesh, and offer
our members as instruments of righteousness unto holiness. Now this bodily
prostration is not wholly and truly Adoration of it self; It is the Intention
of the mind that turns this outward expression of the body into Adoration: and
it is the Soul that specifies the Worship, and gives it both its nature and its
name. The Soul then consecrates its self with all its Faculties unto God in all
Acts of Devotion and Adoration at the same time with the Bodies humiliated
prostration. The Apostles Exhortation therefore may happily refer to this,
Therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls, which are Gods, 1
Cor. 6. Otherwise to fall down in humility with the body, and lift up the soul
with pride; to give him an outward respect, and inwardly to slight him, is to
use Christ as the Soldiers did, worship him in a mockery, saying, Hail King,
and smite him.

Now Lastly, After that we have considered how the Princely Magi have made a
twelve days journey out of the East, of an 150 German, 600 of English miles,
according to the Computation of Geometricians and Divines, posting it all along
with Dromedaries laden with the costly wealth of the Country, to make Presents
thereof to the King of Glory; What shall we think of our selves, if we should
come empty-handed, to congratulate the same our King? Open therefore the
treasuries of your souls, dear Christians I beseech you, and see whether they
will not furnish you with presents of gold, frankincense and myrrh: for with
such presents God is well pleased, whether it be as to the congruity of our
apprehensions of him, or the nature of that spiritual homage we pay unto him.
For, as to the first, in offering gold, we acknowledge him to be King, and so
pay Tribute unto him. In offering frankincense, we confess him to be God, which
is the oblation of the Altar. And in offering myrrh, we profess he should dye
like men; for myrrh is generally made use of in Sepultures and Embalmings.
This for the Theological sense.

2. If we look upon the moral sense of this Allegory, we may affirm, That they
are the several Christian virtues that are represented by these material
Emblems, in the practice of which we make him most acceptable Presents. For God
looks upon us as offering him gold, if we patiently and constantly suffer for
the Faith, which according to the Apostle St. Peter, is far more precious in
his eye, than gold that perishes, though it be tried seven times in the fire.
The same we do, when we keep his Commandments, which according to the Psalmist,
is more desirable than gold, yea, than much fine gold. And no less we do, when
we relieve the poor, feed the hungry, and cloth the naked; in doing which,
though the distressed receive the benefit, yet the offering is made unto God,
and he takes it as done unto himself; for to do good, and communicate, with
such like sacrifices God is well pleased.

2. We offer up frankincense unto him in our daily prayers and devout
ejaculations: in our hopes and sure confidence in his mercies: in our humility
and obedience to his holy Laws: which (as frankincense is binding and
restringent) are the only binders and restrainers of our inordinate wills and
passions.

3. Lastly, If we mortify our Affections upon the earth (for myrrh has a
quality in it of killing worms) if we keep our bodies chaste and pure (for
myrrh is a sovereign antidote against all impurities, and the insiliences of a
wanton mind) and if in the bitterness of our Souls repent us of all our past
sinful Extravagancies (for myrrh is of a bitter nature) then do we truly
present him with offerings of myrrh. Thus the Persian Wise men did; and if we
their Offspring would maintain the reputation of Wise men, let us do so too.

FINIS.

