THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD, OBSERVED THROUGH Several Ages, TOWARD THIS NATION, In
Introducing the True Religion: AND THEN, In the Defense of that, preserving the
PEOPLE in their RIGHTS and LIBERTIES, whilst other KINGDOMS are ravished of
theirs, as our COUNSELORS designed for US.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1691.

TO THE READER.
THERE being found amongst us a certain sottish Generation, who out of Love to
Slavery, and Hatred to our Legal and Natural Rights, do disown any Miscarriage
or Error in the Ministers and Instruments of the Two last Reigns; I thought it
necessary to make some Observations upon the Transactions of those Times, to
the end to raise our Hearts to a thankful Admiration of God's Grace and
Goodness in preserving us in our Privileges by his overruling Hand of
Providence, through many Ages, whilst other Kingdoms have been ravished of
theirs; and to discourage the like Attempts against us for the future, by Men
of ambitious, selfish and depraved Principles. And because I know this will
meet with many Enemies, who, as concerned will be ready to cavil at it, I have
for the farther Proof of the Subject Matter relating to the Two last Reigns and
the Inquity of them, annexed hereunto two Affidavits, which together with the
uncontradicted Information of that eminently honest Captain Henry Wilkinson, a
true Son (though no Bigot) of the Church of England, will, I suppose, be
sufficient to make good the Truth of what is here suggested. And if any desire
farther satisfaction concerning the Four last Kings, I referr them for James
the First to that Book called, The Court of King James, writ by Sir Anthony
Welden, who being a Courtier, writ his Knowledge and Experience. For Charles the
First, to Rushworth's Authentic Collections. For Charles the Second, and James
the Second, to that Book called, The Display of Tyranny, where you will find
named the Judges, Juries, Witnesses and Council, made use of in several Trials
upon Life and Death, as well as for pretended Misdemeaners; some of which
Verdicts have been since reversed by Act of Parliament declaring several Men
murdered; and some of the Verdicts for Misdemanors, reversed by Judgment in
the House of Lords, to the Credit of the Sufferers, but little to the Credit of
those Juries, who found them guilty, etc.

THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD OBSERVED THROUGH Several Ages TOWARD THIS NATION.
AS it is the duty of Man to contemplate the various Dispensations and Workings
of God in the World; so no Country under Heaven affords more Matter than
England, for raising our Souls to the highest admiration of his Greatness and
Goodness, and that as well in reference to Civils as Spirituals.

To look no further back than William the First, who some call Conqueror, the
Mercy of the Lord toward this Nation has ever since been to a Miracle in
preserving their Rights and Privileges through so many Ages and Reigns of
covetous and ambitious Princes, who never wanted evil Counselors to join with
them for Arbitrary Power and Government, they knowing that he that makes no
Conscience of cousening the Community for whose good he is ordained, must
suffer them in their degree to cosen him, as he does the other; and though we
find, they have for the most part first or last, failed in their Attempts, it
has not frightened others from the like Designs; the Examples of Gavestone,
Lord Spencers, etc. in former times; nor of Strafford and Laud since, being
any caution to those whose Pride and Covetousness overballanceth such
Presidents; and it is no wonder, that all times should furnish bad Kings with
evil Counselors, there being more Men in the World of Parts without Honesty
than there are of both Parts and Honesty, and more of Honesty without Parts
than of the other two; whose weakness the first makes use of to support
themselves in their tyrannical practices; and though through Mercy we do at
present enjoy our Liberties, the preservation of them, from the First William
down to this time, has been almost by perpetual Contests with our Kings and
their pernicious Instruments.

In times of Popery, the Clergy (who are always governed by their separate
Interest) owning the Pope for their Head, were tenacious of their English
Privileges, equal to any, and from thence were the greatest supporters of
them, and the greatest Checks to our aspiring Princes, for which reason they
were then so much honored and adored; but since the Reformation in Religion
has changed their Interest, in making them dependent upon the Crown, from
whence issues all their Preferments, they have been the greatest Flatterers of
our Princes, and Enemies to our English Liberties; it being hard for a
Flatterer to be an honest Man: And this may be made an additional Reason to Dr.
Itchards several Causes of the present Contempt of the Clergy; for as it is
natural to Mankind to reverence those from whom they receive good, so on the
contrary, to have an aversion for those from whom they derive their miseries;
and tho Statists would monopolize beyond contradiction, all knowledge in
Government to themselves as a defense for their evil practices. The wiser sort
of Men, of both Parts and Honesty, see easily thorough their tricks, and the
rest feel where the Shoe pincheth; and in truth, Politicians without Honesty
are but like Mountebanks on a Stage, to cheat the Ignorant: For as King James
the First used to say, Honesty is the best Policy; and whether he had the
Virtue to follow his own Maxim, he was able to judge of what was good and
virtuous; and surely all Governments thrive best, that make Honesty the rule;
not only as a blessing of God may be expected from such proceedings, but also
from Natural and Human Reason, the worst of Men liking Honesty best in others,
though they do not practice it themselves: And therefore all Virtuous Princes
will be careful to make choice of Counselors of upright and just Principles,
as such may be well known by their Creatures; for if their Favorites are Men of
Immorral, depraved and debauched Lives, as to Tyranny and Oppression, they must
be the same in their own Nature; and who they are that are such, the late Times
have so sufficiently discovered as is beyond concealing.

And now, as this may serve to raise our hearts in a thankful remembrance to
Almighty God for Temporal Mercies, so I shall observe that which is of greater
concern, our Eternal Being, which requires our most serious Meditation, as,
That the Lord by his overruling Hand of Providence should make a professed
Enemy to the Truth, Henry the 8th, his first Instrument of bringing us out of
Darkness into Light, cannot be sufficiently admired; who being followed by that
Miracle of Piety, especially for his Age, Edward the 6th, he made so grounded a
Reformation in his short time, that his merciless and persecuting Successor of
the Popish Communion could not get totally over in her Reign, but was forced to
leave in a great measure his Pattern of Church Government for Queen Elizabeth
to proceed upon; which had he lived, would in all probability have been more
perfect, he seeming to have been inspired with an Holy Spirit for Reformation,
in purging the Church from all the fulsom Dregs and Rubbish of Popish
Superstition and Idolatry; and the cutting so early the Thread of his Life,
before he had accomplished his Design, gives us great cause to reckon it a
Judgment of God upon this Nation for their Sins; and we have the more reason to
believe his pious Intentions, because Dr. Heilin (a late Champion for the
Church of England established by Law, and Bishop Laud's great Creature) tells
us in his Preface to his Church History, (at least to this Effect) That it was
a great Mercy to the Church that he was taken away, otherwise he had surely
reduced Episcopacy to Primitive Institution, etc. and since the Doctor could
not be ignorant that the Papists were violently suspected to be the Authors of
his Death, we may by this, observe the Doctor and his Patrons Inclinations.

Queen Elizabeth's Preservation in the Tower, in the time of her Imprisonment,
is a remarkable Providence not to be forgot, that when her bloody Sister had
designed her Death, she should be preserved by King Philip (Queen Mary's
Husband) who had not at that time (besides his Queen) his Fellow in Christendom
for Cruelty and Persecution of the Reformed, and was moved to the same, not by
Bowels of Compassion, but upon a Politic account, That should Queen Mary dye
Childless, as it seems he feared, Queen Elizabeth being out of the way, the
Queen of Scots* a Papist, would come to the Crown, who being inseparably joined
in League with France, they both might be too hard for Spain; and that his
Lenity toward Queen Elizabeth could be upon no other score, appears by putting
his Eldest Son to death for no other cause, than being too mercifully inclined
toward the Protestants in the Netherlands. And thus the Lord wrought for us
when we could not help our selves, in bringing her to the Crown, and preserving
her thorough her whole Reign against the perpetual Plots and Endeavors of the
Papists for destroying her.

Queen Elizabeth having in her Fathers and Sisters Times (tho averse to the
gross Idolatry of Rome) imbibed too great a liking of the gaudy Splendour of the
Church, insomuch that the pious Reformers of that Age could not bring her to
that height of Reformation they desired, as appears by Dr. Burnet's (now Bishop
of Salisbury's) Letter from Zurick in Switzerland, had it not pleased God in
his Providence to furnish her with wise and moderate Counselors, as Sir Thomas
Smith, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Burley, Sir Francis Walsingham, Earl of Essex
and Sir Walter Rawleigh, etc. she might have proved more severe against the
then Dissenters than she was; but having had a true Love to the People of
England, and particularly to the City of London, which scarce any of her four
Successors have since had, she reigned moderately, some of those Acts of
Parliament made in her time, and since wrested against Dissenters, being
intended only against Papists. Piety was by her and her Counselors encouraged;
all Debauchery, Blasphemy, Atheism and Profaness discountenanced; Honors,
places of Profit or Pensions never bestowed otherwise than for Merit, by which
all sorts being provoked to the study of Virtue and generous Actions, Gentlemen
were in that time in higher esteem and of greater Interest than many Noblemen
at this day; the benefit of which we found in a Blessing upon all our
Undertakings, the Nation not suffering the least dishonor in any of their
Actions during her Reign, tho engaged in war upon the account of Religion with
all her Neighbors; with Spain in defense of the Protestants in the
Netherlands, with Scotland in the behalf of the Reformation there, and with
France in the assistance of the Reformed in that Kingdom; in Ireland against
the Rebels there, and at home in suppressing the perpetual Plots of the
Papists. And having prevailed in all places with a small but well managed
Revenue; extravagant Sallaries, Fraud and Cousenage, unnecessary Pensions,
multiplying Offices and Officers to gratify a Party for Popery and Arbitrary
Government, not being then known, her and her Peoples interest being reckoned
one, and not separated as our Courtiers have since done, she became glorious
through the World, so far as the Name of England was heard of; insomuch, that
in honor of her, the Emperor of Muscovia did voluntarily bestow extraordinary
Immunities upon the English Nation.

When this Queen died, the Renown of England seems to have died with her; for
since her time, we have gone backward in Honor and Reputation, having received
many Eclipses: None of our four suceeding Kings, nor even Cromwell in his almost
five years Usurpation, having any one glorious Action to boast of, save the
concern the last had for the Protestants Liberty in Piemont, which I confess,
ought not to be forgot, tho his War with Spain and joining with France is his
Reproach.

James the 1st was a Scholar qualified for an University to make Harangues in
the Schools, but had nothing besides to brag of, save Dissimulation, which he
called King-Craft, but was really his blemish; in that by it he so far lost all
Reputation, except that of a Pedant, that no Princes or States could confide in
him, and for all his boasted Cunning was ever worsted in Foreign Treaties; as
in that with Spain about the Infanta; with the Emperor about the Palatinate;
with Holland about the cautionary Towns, not in delivering them up, for that
was but Justice, but in the sum due to us for them; and as a proof of his great
Wisdom, he spent that in fruitless Embassies, which good Queen Elizabeth did in
glorious Achievements. And therefore our flattering Clergy (for their own
ends) stiling him a Solomon, was groundless, none ever having deserved it less;
his Diversions wherein he spent his time, not being the Care of his People,
according to the duty of his Calling, but in Hunting, Masking and Drinking, and
to please the Ecclesiastics, by making their Sabbath-days-work easy; in
promoting the Profanation of that day, in inviting the People by a Declaration
to Sports and Games, when they should have been either at Church or at home
better employed; as if the way to fit a People for Arbitrary Government, was
first to make them godless, which Maxim has been since improved.

This King was no sooner removed to England, than forgetting the Methods of
Church and State, he had been bred to in Scotland, aspired as much to Arbitrary
Government as if he had never heard of any other Principles, as appears by his
hectoring Speeches in Parliament. But it was the happiness of the People, that
his Bravery lay only in his Tongue, and that the Nation was not then overrun
with the Leprosy of Luxury and Lincentiousness; nor the Ecclesiastics and
Judges corrupted as they have been since; so that tho no means or tricks were
neglected for compassing his Ends, through Providence he failed of his Design,
his tossing of Parliaments by Prorogations and Adjournments for bringing them
to his bow, not doing his work, he projected for raising of Money (to supply the
want of Parliaments) the Dignity of Hereditary Baronets; and to induce
Gentlemen of the best Quality to give Credit to this pernicious Invention by
accepting of it, he gave them Precedence of all merely Knights of the Bath, and
singly Knights Batchelors, not being the younger Sons of Barons, of whom they
have no place; but to make the Title more valuable and desirable, he engaged
that the number should not exceed two hundred. And all this under the Romantic
pretense, that every person accepting hereof, should be obliged to maintain a
certain number of Soldiers in Ireland to defend the Protestants against the
Papists in that Kingdom; and as a badge of their Duty adds a bloody Hand to
their Coat of Arms; yet with this Condition, that each paying 1000 l. into the
Exchequer, they should be excused from that Service; for notwithstanding the
pretense in the Patent, it was merely a trick to get Money without Parliaments:
As was the conferring Titles upon Women; Scotch and Irish Titles upon Persons
not having any Lands in either Country, a thing not practiced before: And as to
the Title of Baronet, it may be observed, that tho it is pretended against
Papists, those of that Religion were as forward to buy this Honor as others;
and thus he defrauded the People of the benefit of Parliaments, by exposing
(for raising of Money) this and all other Honors to sale, which has been ever
reckoned a mark of a depraved and corrupt Government. And thus begun our
governing by tricks (hardly known before) which continued till our present
happy Change; but this according to the Maxim of our Law, That the King can do
no wrong, must refer to his evil Council, and not to him.

This new Honor of Baronets was struck at by several succeeding Parliaments as
illegal in the Institution, as well as the end; the first in being hereditary
without annexing it to some place, and the latter in depriving the Nation of
their Security in the use of Parliaments: But in a little time the Interest
increased so much in the increase of their Number, that nothing could be done
to disannul this Project; for notwithstanding the cajoling promise of not
exceeding two hundred, no limitation was observed, the Number (by falling the
price to less than half, tho obliged to have a Receipt out of the Exechequer
for the whole 1000 l.) being increased to near, if not 1000.

And in these and such like ways this celebrated Solomon spent a Reign of two
and twenty years, without bringing any Honor to the Nation; but on the
contrary, through evil Counsel a Diminution of it to a great degree; and when
he had finished his Course, left his Presidents to his Son Charles the 1st.

This King, as no Man can deny, followed his Fathers steps, and in an higher
degree affected absolute Monarchy, wherein being obstinate, it was fatal to
him; he was free from that open dissoluteness his two Successors have been
since guilty of; for the Nation not being then arrived at that impudent
Profaness it is now come to, the People were then modest in their Vices,
compared with these times; yet Lewdness then, as it has ever since, increased
more and more, helped forward by Bishop Laud's Advice, in discouraging Piety
and giving encouragement to Debauchery by aspersing sober Men with Nicknames,
as Puritans and Precisians, etc. promoting Arminianism, the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistance; and then, seconding this King's Father, in
publishing another Book of Sports, giving Liberty on the Lords Day for all
manner of Games, as Football, Cudgels, etc. injoyning the reading it in the
Churches, to the great grief of all serious Christians fearing God.

His Carriage in the State was as offensive as in the Church; he called
Parliaments merely to serve his own turn, without any eye to the Public; and
when they did but enquire into any grievances, as the Death of his Father, who
was violently suspected to be poisoned, etc. they were readily dissolved. And
in Ann. 1628. he forbid by Proclamation the speaking of Parliaments (a high
Arbitrary Act) he passed indeed the Petition of Right asserting the Peoples
Liberties; but had no sooner given his Consent than he broke through all the
Bonds of it, illegally forcing the Payment of Tunnage and Poundage, Ship-Mony,
Coat and Conduct Money, Knighthood Money, imprisoning Members for speaking in
Parliaments. To increase his Revenue, monopolized (contrary to Law) most
Commodities, made an extrajudicial use of the Star Chamber to the fining, and
otherwise punishing of Gentlemen without cause, removing them for their greater
vexation, out of their own Counties, to Prisons in other Countries; and to
prevent Complaints had no Parliaments in twelve years, nor then, till compelled
by the Troubles in Scotland to call one: For though that Book falsely entitled
this Kings, for which his Admirers Saint him, begins with his spontaneous
calling of the Parliament in 1640. that Chapter made one of his own Party, upon
the reading of it, throw the Book away, saying, If it begun with so known a
Lie, nothing less could be expected in it, and therefore would not read it.

This Expression ought to be pardoned, the King not being concerned in it, both
his Sons, the two last Kings, having confessed to the late Earl of Anglesea,
that their Father did not write the Book, but that it was writ by Dr. Gaudin,
afterward Bishop of Exeter. He wrested the Statute for Forests, to the Ruin of
many, by the enlarging them; his Court was filled with Priests and Jesuits: He
caressed the Heads of that horrid and odious Rebellion in Ireland, clapped up a
Peace with them in order to bring those Cutthroats into England. His Son
Charles the 2d confessed that the Marquess of Antrim (reckoned one of the
massacring Rebels) acted by his Fathers Commission, and upon that account, he
had his Estate restored him by the Court of Claims; he solicited the Duke of
Lorain to bring his more than ordinary rude and wicked Army into England; and
all this, besides his deserting Rochel after he had stirred them up to stand
upon their defense, promising them Relief, to the ruin of the whole Protestant
Cause, as appears by the History of the Siege of Rochel.

These are but hints of some few of the Practices in his time, which if not
sufficient to suspend (according to the Romish Rule) the Sainting him till
after an hundred years, that his Virtues may be forgot; Those that read
Rushworth's Collections, will find enough there for deferring the Solemnization
thereof: His Reign was so Arbitrary, that I remember it was commonly said, that
the studying Proclamations, which made a Volume as big as a Church-Bible, was
more necessary for Lawyers than their Books: His endeavoring to impose a more
superstitious and approaching Liturgy to Popery upon the Church of Scotland
than ours in England, was the beginning of his Troubles; wherein he was as much
out in his Politics as in any of his other Actions; for it could not be well
expected, that they, who had swept their Church as clean from all the Rubbish
of Rome, as Geneva it self, and more zealous and refined in their Doctrine than
they, would be easily imposed upon in Matters of Religion: But it was the Pride
of Bishop Laud, who was ambitious of being the Founder of a new Popery, and of
seeing it accomplished in his days, by driving too furiously, that prevented
the designed Mischief; and so we find it confessed by our Queen Mother, in
Monsieur Siries Mercury, the French Kings History Writer for the Affairs of
Italy* who tells us among many other things concerning England* That when the
Parliament in 1640. met, the Pope had three Agents in England negotiating the
reconciling our King to Rome, (viz.) the Count of Roset, Seignior C^^ and
Seignior Pausa^i^: reciting Roset's Remonstrance delivered the King to prove it
his Interest to turn Papist; whereupon the King asking, if the Pope would
dispense with his Subjects taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; she
was told that if ^e would be a Catholic i^ must be without Conditions* But the
Parliament getting a Sent hereof^, (...) clo^e, that Roset was forced to be
confessed, whilst disguising himself, and then fled for Ireland* a little
before the (...), where it is said he died. And it may be observed, that at this
time this King's Chief Counselors (...) Strafford and Laud, were such as
whilst living were suspected, and at Death declared themselves Papists, (viz.)
Thomas Earl of Arrundle, Lord Cottington and Sir Francis Windibanck Secretary
of State, and Laud's Kinsman; and not long before Treasurer Weston died of the
same Communion.

And the same Author, where he writes of the Affairs of England tells us
further, that Bishop L. and Bishop N. by which must be meant the two
Archbishops, Laud and Neal, proffered the Pope to leave England, and go to Rome,
and for the Credit of that See declare themselves Papists, provided the Pope
would allow them at Rome the value of their English Bishoprics, which they
computed each at 16000 Crowns per annum; but received for answer from the
Pope's Nephew, Chief Minister of State, who at that time was (as I remember)
Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, reputed a great Statesman, that if their
Conversion were real, they might at Rome live comfortably of so many hundred
Crowns per annum. For the Cardinal was jealous, that the bottom of Laud's
design was a Patriarchal Popedom for England, which would have been a bad
Example for France and other Popish Countries. If any are curious to know
further concerning the Affairs of England at that time, I refer them to the
aforesaid Mercury, which is writ in Italian.

In the succeeding eighteen years interval, this Nation received not the least
dishonor, save what happened at Hispaniola, in War with Spain, during
Cromwell's Usurpation: For the greatest part of the rest of that time our
Neighbors trembled when we frowned; tho since that, the Catastrophy has been
such, that we have trembled at their Frowns, occasioned by the misgovernment of
Charles the 2d. who yet came to the Administration of the Crown most
advantageously, not an Enemy daring to show his Teeth (excepting that mad freak
of the 29 Fifth Monarchy Men) he seeming to be the universal Delight of the
People. At Breda he promised Liberty of Conscience to those dissenting
Ministers, that were with others, sent by Parliament to invite him into
England; and at his arrival made show of being true to his Word, by appointing
at the Savoy; in order thereunto, a Conference, betwixt the two Parties* the
Conformists and Dissenters; but the latter being under hand discountenanced by
him (who was a great Minister of King James the First's Art in King-Craft) it
came to nothing more than making their Burdens the heavier; so that in a short
time, the Presbyterians, who had been the chief Authors of his Restoration
(his own Party being then so inconsiderable, that they cannot be said to have
contributed more to it, than as Servants to the other) were most ungratefully
used; their Ministers turned out of their Livings; their Families exposed to
live in a great measure upon Charity; and that by him whom they had brought
from that Condition himself, to the enjoyment of three Crowns.

His first Parliament acted regularly with an eye to public good and quiet;
passing an Act of Indemnity for all, save some few excepted; which he seemed
to approve so much of, that in his cunning and cajoling way, he gave them the
name of the healing Parliament, and then dissolved it, calling another more to
his purpose; after which, how he kept his Indemnity appears by his usage of
the great and incomparable Sir Henry Vane, Alderman Ireton, Mr. Samuel Moyer,
Major Gladman, etc. taking away contrary to Faith, the Life of the first,
imprisoning others without cause, till they redeemed their Liberty by great
Sums, like Slaves in Algiers; others standing it out till the Habeas Corpus
Bill came in use, after the withdrawing of Chancellor Hide (which for seven or
eight years had been denied, or from the Iniquity of the Times, durst not be
moved for) were freed by Law without Fines.

He pretended great zeal for the Reformed Religion with an Abhorrence of
Poperty; yet in favor of the latter, endeavored to set the Conformists at the
greatest difference with the Dissenters by several Acts against the latter, and
severe Prosecution thereupon. And this, whilst at the same time, all
proceedings against the Papists in the Exchequer upon Conviction were stopped,
to the preserving of them, when Protestant Dissenters were many of them ruined
by close Imprisonments, where they died; he designing all a long no less than
Popery and Slavery, even when he pretended the contrary. His two unjust, costly
and causeless Wars with Holland, being in order thereunto; as was the burning
of London, and the Popish Plot discovered by Dr. Oats; yet rather than be
thought to have any hand in the latter, he suffered about twenty persons which
he is strongly suspected to have employed in it, to dye for it.

When the burning of London, the frequent subsequent Fires in Southwark, St.
Katharines, and several parts of the City, etc. would not serve his ends, he
contrived a Protestant Plot for murdering of himself, and (as he untruly
suggested) introducing a Commonwealth; and as the most probable Instrument (as
he thought, tho therein mistaken) Mr. Clapol a Son-in-law of Cromwell, must be
charged with it, and without the least ground clapped up in Prison, in the
closest way; and had not the real Popish Plot broke out, he had surely been
sacrificed to give Credit to the Forgery; but Mr. Capol's unsuitable Principles
to such a Design was enough to detect the Fraud and Villainy, he having been in
the Civil Wars, reckoned all a long a Royalist and Anti-Republican: And thus
ill Men are sometimes caught in their own snares, as this King was by his
mistake in this person.

This King having by turning and changing, got Judges and Counselors to his
purpose, corrupting by Pensions, etc. a Majority in the Parliament, carried all
things as he pleased, till at last he lost his Credit by the odiousness of the
Popish Plot, and his Compliance with France, to the advancing that King to what
he is now come to; teaching him, (compared to what he knew before) to build
Ships, man, victual and sail them; nay even to fight and sound our Coasts and
Rivers; which was done in the time of his unhappy Administration, especially in
the year 1672. in joining with him against Holland, when none of his Ships were
suffered to fight, but stand by and learn, that one French Commander that did
engage, being as its said, at his return clapped in the Bastile for it, which
we never heard was complained of by us, nor excused by them: Nay, not to be
wanting in any thing toward the advancement of the French King, we gave him
Canada, that necessary place for our Newfound-land Fishery; (our chief Nursery
for Seamen) for an insignificant part, compared to Canada, of the Island of St.
Christophers, which had belonged to us, under pretense, that he had taken it
from us in our former War with the Dutch, when he sided with them against us
and served them as he did us, never appearing with them; making use only of his
Declaration of War for them, to the end, to set us together by the Ears; that
so he might have the better opportunity, to set up himself, and worm us (as in
a great measure he has done) out of our Newfound Land Fishery, and has taken
it to himself; whereas formerly they used to pay us a kind of Tribute for
Liberty of Fishing there; but now through our favor and carelessness they are
arrived to that height of Fishing, that they are said to employ so many Men in
it, as produces them five thousand new Seamen yearly; so that by the Conduct
of our Counselors this King is since 1662. when he had hardly 20 Men of War
great and small, come now to be Master of 150 at least: But tho by his wise
management of Affairs and our bad, he has rid this Summer in our Channel
without control, I hope he will never do so more, nor ever be encouraged to
entitle himself to the Dominion of the Narrow Seas; except God for our Sins
gives us over to be again betrayed by our Counselors as formerly; for tho
Kings themselves may be ill Men, yet without the like Counselors, they cannot
perpetrate their evil Designs.

This Government of ours has been by our late Kings carried on by tricks,
which our Statists valued themselves upon, as the effect of their great Wisdom;
whereas it is truly nothing more than the transendency of Immorality, in which
honester Men have not a latitude. To enumerate their deceitful Artifices is
hard, they are so many. This King at his Restoration in 1660 made a League
with the States General in design to prepare for a War with them, having then
found his Naval Forces very low.

In 1664. he began to quarrel with them without the least cause, and against
their real endeavors for preventing it: But Downing being Envoy Extraordinary
at the Hague, to remove their Jealousy of us, which was great, gave them
according to the Policy of those Times all assurance of Friendship, telling
them, that if their East India Ships then expected, were above London Bridge,
they would be as safe as in their own Harbors; yet their Merchants Ships to
about the number, as it is said, of 120. were upon frivolous pretenses, first
stopped as they came into our Channel, till at last some Months after, without
Declaration of War or any causes shown, they were confiscated; and at the same
time their Smirna Fleet was fallen upon before Cadiz; whereupon Downing thought
fit to make a hasty Retreat by Mazeland-Sluce; and this Action was as little to
our honor as profit; for tho we sunk one or two of their Ships, to their great
damage, we took none; and for those seized at home, our management was so
commendable, that upon the sale of them, as I have heard, the King was made
Debtor: And thus this War began, which prospered in our hands according to the
Justice of it.

The first year of this War, the Dutch East India Fleet coming home by the
North of Scotland, upon the King of Denmark's promise of Security, or at least
relying upon their League with him, put into Bergen in Norway; where they were
presently blocked up by our Fleet under the Command of the Earl of Sandwich,
who sent in some Ships to seize them, and had had them delivered, had not the
Currier with Orders from Copenhagen come too late to the Governor; Sandwich's
Ships being beaten off and retired with loss, before the Orders came; for our
Agent in Denmark had agreed with that King concerning them; but Sandwich not
having notice of the Treaty, the design was lost by falling too soon upon these
Ships.

This War lasted near three years, reckoning from our first seizing of Their
Ships: The third year the King had give^ him 1250000 l. for that Summers War;
but it was the Wisdom and Honesty of our Counselors, out of good Husbandry, to
save the Money, by not setting forth a Fleet, which gave opportunity to our
Enemies to burn our Ships in Harbor, for which we made an horrid Outcry
against them as treacherous, in doing it in the time of our Treaty with them
for Peace at Breda, falsely adding, That it was contrary to a Cessation agreed
upon; whereas when a Cessation was desired by us, they positively denied it,
which is sufficient to vindicate the Integrity of their Proceedings, in answer
to ignorant popular Clamor: And indeed, tho our Counselors might be willing,
for their Defense, to have the People understand this disgraceful Affront to
proceed from Falseness in the Dutch, I never heard, that they at any time did
publicly accuse them of breach of Faith in this matter or Action.

Being thus worsted, it was pretended that want of Money was the Cause, tho upon
examination of the Accounts, by the Commissioners appointed by Act of
Parliament to that end, there was not much above half spent, of what was given
expressly for that War, which evinces our Miscarriage to proceed from Corrupt
Counsels, want of Conduct, and not Money.

A Peace being concluded, to be revenged on the Dutch for what was our own
Fault, we invited them, and the Crown of Sweeden to a Triple League with us
against France, for restraining that King in his aspiring Designs, wherein the
Dutch were real, when our Design was only to render them odious to the French
King, and enrage him against them, that by our then joining with him, we might
both together destroy them, and in them the Protestant Chief Bulwark.

Accordingly in 1671. at the Interview at Dov^^ betwixt Charles II. and his
Sister the Duchess of Orleance, (...) agreed to break the Triple League, to
join with France against the Dutch; and to satisfy the Swede for this Breach
Mr. Henry Coventry was sent Ambassador to that Crown, who procured from them
the Dissolution of the League. When this was done, and we had recovered Breath,
after the Disgrace we received in the former War, to have a Pretense for a
second: One of our Yachts was ordered, in her coming from Holland, to steer out
of her Course, and through the States Naval Fleet, then riding at Sea, that in
case the whole Fleet did not strike to our Boat, we might make that the ground
of a Quarrel.

That great Commander de Ruyter, then Admiral, not thinking their Articles of
Peace could be understood to reach such a little Circumstance, did not answer
our Demands or Expectation, and for not doing it, together with some Trivial
Medals and Pictures, which that People are much addicted to, was made the Cause
of a Quarrel-without Remedy, and Dr. Stubbs, as a fit Man for the Work, was
sent for out of the Country, to maintain by Writing the Justice of our Cause,
which for 400 l. he performed the best he could, by two large Pamphlets, in the
latter of which having been too free, in his magnifying the wise and excellent
Management of the War against the Dutch, in that time called a Commonwealth,
when we first made known unto the World our Greatness at Sea in beating them
when in their Zenith, (which cost, with the Ships in that time Built* 210000
l.) this Pamphlet was for some time stopped, till there being a necessity for
it, that it passed; and when Stubbs was by a Friend of mine questioned, how he
could in Conscience write so falsely and injuriously against the Dutch? He
confessed, He could write much more for them, than he had done against them, if
he would.

After a Pretense for War was agreed on, the next thing requisite was to find a
Fund for the Charge, which was very difficult; for the Parliament having by
woeful Experience felt, from ill Conduct, the Burden of the first War, was
unwilling to engage in a second; but at last the new made Lord Clifford, with
the help of his Friends, projected the stopping of all private Payments in the
Exchequer, for which, as a Reward, he had the Treasurers White Staff given him;
the Fund gained hereby being about 13 or 1400000 l. which was a loss to
particular Creditors, many of them (...) ruined by it, so that from the
Immorality of the Project, the Author of it deserved rather another Reward,
than that he received.

The War was commenced without any previous Declaration, by falling upon their
Smirna Fleet in the Chanel (as we had done in the first War before Cadiz) as
they were upon their Voyage home, wherein we miscarried, as well to our
Dishonor in being worsted, as in beginning the War by Surprise. In this War we
should have had the Assistance of France, and had a Squadron of that Kings
Ships joined us, but in design only to teach them to fight, sound our Coasts
and not help us; for (as it is before mentioned) that one Ship which from
ignorance of the Intreague, did fight, the Captain of her at his return home
was (as is reported) clapped up in the Bastile for hazarding his Masters Ship.
The Parliament perceiving the drift of the French to be the weakening of both
Parties, that at long run he might become Superior to either or both, pressed
the King to a Peace betwixt us and the Dutch; which he (tho) unwillingly,
consented to; for not knowing how to deny so just a request, a Peace was
concluded.

Now new measures were taken, and a new Minister of State made choice of, one
entirely devoted to the Kings Will without reserve. To gain the Kings ends, a
Majority of the Members of Parliament was corrupted by Pensions, which were
liberally bestowed upon such as were of depraved Principles, fit for any
mischief, by which means, every thing, during some time, brought barefaced into
the House of Commons, and afterward by sidewinds, for the Kings particular
Designs, passed currently; until the Court going too high for a standing
Revenue, the Pensioners suspecting, that when that was gained their Pensions
would cease, they turned readily against the Court; which caused them for
gaining Money from the Parliament to pretend a quarrel to France, and in all
haste to raise an Army to that end; and to procure belief of their real
Intentions, a Book under the Title of Christianissimus Christianandus, writ by
Dr. Marchemond Needham was published, rendering the French King so scandalous in
all his Ways, Actions and Designs, as cannot be thought would have been writ,
without having first that King's Leave for writing it.

The Parliament, to take away from the King all Pretenses of Complaint, gave
him a Supply, by which he raised an Army; but finding in the Issue, that he was
not real in his Pretensions for a War, by refusing to declare War, they pressed
him to disband his new-raised Army; and to effect the same, gave him Money to
do it with; appointing Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Thomas Player, Col. Whitley,
and Col. Birch to see it done; who discharged the Trust reposed in them with
all Fidelity and Honesty.

These Arts or Tricks used for the Service of the French King, by which our
Parliament was disobliged, our King had no Cause to doubt but that that King
would hold himself obliged to assist him; and therefore he was applied to, and
probably he had gained from him a stipend of 300000 l. per Annum for some
Years, had not the Duke of Buckingham prevented it: and upon what other
Account, than of being a Friend to his native Country, is unknown: However, he
did not only thereby irrecoverably lose the Favor of the Court, but also drew
so much the Hatred of it upon himself, that he was prosecuted for a Crime,
which, tho the Authors of the Prosecution made little Conscience of the thing
themselves, they hoped by it to have taken away his Life for being instrumental
in preserving the Life of the Nation.

The Discovery of these, and other pernicious Designs, begot (not without
cause) a great Jealousy in the Parliament, of the Court and their Party; which
carried them on to the Addressing the King against some considerable Persons,
as evil Counselors; which was for some time avoided by Adjournments and
Prorogations of Parliament, till the horrid Popish Plot breaking out, those
Tricks could not longer hinder the impeaching several of them in Parliament for
the highest of Crimes, bringing one of them to the Block; as had not
Dissolution of Parliaments prevented it, the rest in all likelihood had had the
same Fate, all of them having been arraigned at the Bar of the Lord's House,
where some pleaded Guilty in pleading the King's Pardon; by which, Time being
got for arguing the Point, till by the Dissolution of several Parliaments,
(which was on purpose to prevent Justice) they were unduly preserved, for no
such Pardon (as the Lawyers say) against an Impeachment in Parliament is
valuable in Law; and the King having no power to pardon Offenses, where in the
Indictment he is not made a Party, as he is not by Impeachments in Parliaments,
they being by the House of Commons, in the Name of all the Commons of England.
The Dissolution of Parliaments does not give Prisoners at the Suit of the
Commons the privilege of being bailed, no inferior Court having by Law any
such power; especially the fault of their not being brought to Trial not being
in the Parliament, but in the King, in not suffering them to sit till they had
cleared, or passed Judgment upon them, as he ought to have done.

This King, an Artist in King James I's King-craft, observing his Conduct to
have lost all Reputation, confessed by a Declaration his Error, in governing
his Affairs by Cabals, and not by Parliaments, and his Privy Council, by whose
Advice he had always thriven best; resolving for the future to be ruled by
them, without Cabals: And in Conformity thereunto, he dissolved entirely, by
the said Declaration, his Privy Council, and chose another, under the notion of
a new Council, into which was taken some of the most popular and honest Members
of the House of Commons; as the good Lord Russel, the then Lord Cavendish, Sir
Henry Capel, Mr. Powle, etc. but the Majority being of the old Leaven, they
soon found that the design of bringing them into the Council was merely to give
Credit to their sinister Proceedings; which made them as soon unanimously
withdraw, rather than be in the least accessory to their unwarrantable and
destructive Counsels and Actions. So that tho some will have the small time
these Gentlemen were in Council, to have been a great advantage to the Court,
in their Reputation, and blame them for it, I am of a contrary Opinion; and
that there could not have been a greater, and more prejudicial Affront put upon
a Prince, than that by such an unanimous and public Leaving of his Council, in
a way that amounted to no less than a Protest against his Proceedings; which
could not but make a more disadvantageous Impression on the Minds of the
People, than so short a Continuance with them could be of advantage to the King.

Now new Measures were again taken, and with them a new Minister of State
chosen; several Parliaments are dissolved, and new ones called, in hopes of
getting one at last to serve their turn; but the People growing more and more
sensible of the Growth of Popery and Slavery, sent such suitable Members to the
Condition of the Nation, that they were almost as soon dissolved as assembled,
for three Parliaments successively; and then, to be revenged of the
Corporations for sending such Members, and of the Members themselves for being
averse to the Destruction of the Nation, Quo Warranto's, by the Advice of a new
Set of evil Counselors, were brought, to take away the old, and give them new
Charters, that might subject them to the arbitrary Will of the Prince; (illegal
in the highest degree.) Nay, Buroughs by Prescription were destroyed, and
Charters imposed upon them, to the infringing of their Privileges. Hereford, I
think, was the first that had a new Charter imposed upon them, by which all
Power was so reserved in the King, as an Example for those that should follow,
that one might have thought should have wrought an Hatred in all true English
Men, to the Authors or Abettors of such Counsels.

The Charter of London, by many Acts of Parliaments, and in the comprehensivest
manner confirmed, was so gallantly defended by the City, nothing material being
against them, as appears by the learned Arguments of the Lord Chief Justice
Pollixfen, and Mr. Attorney General Treby, that one may wonder there should be
Lawyers found to plead against it; and that such were found, is a Reproach upon
the Persons for being too mercenary.

As Quo Warranto's were for being revenged of the Corporations, so a Protestant
Plot was contrived, as well to stifle the Popish Plot, as to destroy such
Gentlemen as were thought to stand in the way of Arbitrary Power and Popery, by
false Evidence, leaving treasonable Papers at their Houses (as was done at Mr.
Dubois's House in London;) or putting them into their Pockets, and then seizing
them, (of which Mr. Fitz-Harris gave my Lord Shaftsbury warning:) Which made
those that knew they were under the Envy of the Court, when they were to come
into Crowds, to sow up their Pockets, to prevent practicing such Tricks upon
them.

Fitz-Harris, whose Province it was to act in these ways, to get or make
treasonable Lampoons, to trepan Persons falsely judged to be of Antimonarchical
Principles, for not playing his part well, and fearing his Discovery, according
to his Promise to the then Sheriffs, of the Popish Plot, had a Rope for his
Reward, being Drawn, Hanged and Quartered; but, as a Gratuity for his weak
Endeavors, his Head and Quarters were given to his Wife to bury. Soon after he
was dead, an impudent, false and lying Confession was made for him, as is fully
demonstrated by the published Answer of those concerned in it, under the Title
of Truth vindicated, in reference to the Aspersions cast upon Sir Robert
Clayton, etc. published in the name of Dr. Hawkins, as Edward Fitz-Harris' s
Confession. As also, the falseness of this Confession appears by the last
Actions of his Life, (viz.) the Paper he read at his Execution, which was
printed; and his giving the Sheriffs Thanks for their Civility and Kindness to
him, which were his last Words; and yet by his Confession, he is made to
complain of them.

The design of this Confession, and publishing of it, was by it to vindicate
the Guilty, and accuse the Innocent; for certain Persons being determined for
Destruction, it was thought fit to make them hereby odious to the People; that
when they should be murdered by Form of Law, their Deaths might be the less
resented.

To give an Instance of the Evidence made use of in these Times, the Witnesses
against my Lord Shaftsbury were so scandalous, as Ages to come will not believe
that such should be offered against any Man, much less one of his Quality: As
Booth, a Minister of the Church of England, and Parson of Ogle, in
Northumberland; well known to be an infamous Rascal, and violently suspected
for the Murder of one of his Servants, to conceal his Clipping of Money, of
which he was (notwithstanding) convicted; and condemned, and had been hanged,
had not the Duke of Newcastle, who gave him his Parsonage at Ogle, begged his
Pardon. And I have heard an honest Divine of the Church, who had known him from
his Youth, say, that he could write a Volume of his Rogueries: So that nothing
less than shameless Impudence could have produced him against the Life, Honor,
or Estate of any one. The rest of the Witnesses were not better, as the
Affidavits hereunto annexed do evince, Barry, or Narrative- Smith being one,
etc. And that such Evidence might pass with the Grand Jury, both they and the
Witnesses were heard in Court, that the first might be brow-beaten, and the
latter countenanced, and hear what one another said; (at least an unusual
Method, if not contrary to Law.) And to help all forward, the Lord Chief
Justice told the Grand Jury, that they were not to enquire into the Credibility
of the Witnesses; whilst the Law, in express Words, speaks the contrary. And to
make all sure, that none should escape, whom the Court at Whitehall would have
destroyed, the Witnesses to an Indictment brought against a Combination of
Rogues, for Perjury, and Subornation of Perjury, to disable them for taking
away the Lives of the Innocent, the Lord Chief Justice refused to swear them,
because against the King's Evidence, except the Attorney General would give
leave; who, he could not but know, was too much of the Court-Faction to do it:
By which means those Villains escaped Conviction, and left at liberty to hang
whom they pleased. And tho Mr. Bethel, then Sheriff, complained publicly in
Court, that he had Affidavits to prove his Life so far designed against, that
those profligate Rascals offered (in August, 1681.) to lay Wagers of Ten to
One, that they would hang him before Christmas following, he could not procure
any Proceedings against them: But it is believed that his Complaint had this
Effect, that it hindered the Attorney General's producing a Bag of Indictments
he had then ready against several honest and innocent Persons, against whom
these Varlets should have been made use of. And this was the Consequence of the
Courts turning out and changing Judges, till they had got Men for their turn,
who would make any thing Law the Court would have; and who having by Pensions
and Rewards, got Witnesses to swear accordingly; and by packing of Juries, got
such as would find what they would have found, it was in the King's power to
hang whom he pleased; and that of a large List of Persons marked out for
Destruction, there were no more murdered, must be ascribed to the overruling
Hand of Providence. The Lord deliver us from the like Times, when Judges,
Juries, Witnesses and Council, all strive who should most signalize their Zeal
for Tyranny, by strains of Wit, and wresting of Law; as appears by Mr. Hawle's
Remarks upon some of the Trials of those Times. Besides, ambitious Citizens,
Officers in Places of Profit, Pensioners, and Suitors for the like, were all
the same; insomuch that it might in some measure be said, that all Flesh had
corrupted their Ways, and if we should again hunt with the same Dogs, they
would start the same Hare.

The Parliament by several Acts has judged the Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney,
Alderman Cornish murdered, voted Sir Thomas Armstrong the same, reversed
several unjust Verdicts to the perpetual Infamy of all those Juries, and yet
have pardoned most of the Murderers and Oppressors by an Act of Indemnity;
which may well be feared, will encourage the like in the future against all
that shall stand in the way of Arbitrary Government, if we have a King that
shall affect it.

The corrupting and viciating the Nation had been long designed, as necessary
for introducing Popery and Slavery; for whilst Men are virtuous, and not afraid
of the Laws, they will expect and contend for the benefit of them; but when by
Debauchery and Immorality they stand in need of Indulgence, for encouragement
of their Lusts, they will be careless of their civil Rights; and therefore the
lewdest Examples were thought fit to be given them, with connivance at their
Practice, as in swearing, whoring, drinking, atheistical and blasphemous
Drollery, discouraging all Religion, save what consisted in mere formality,
without discouraging dissoluteness; some of the worst of Men being made choice
of to gratify with Honors, Pensions and places of Profit: But of all the
odious ways used to gain a Party, none like that of teaching Youths to drink
Healths with Huzzaes, crying up the breach of Laws for Loyalty (when nothing is
such, but Obedience according to Law, the contrary being Disloyalty) as was the
public feasting of the Apprentices of London with the Kings Venison, not
leaving it in the power of their Masters, without making themselves obnoxious,
to forbid them that School of Virtue, or command obedience in contradiction
thereof; and that this should be projected by the greatest of the Court, who
graced their Society with their presence, may be reckoned, for all their Wit,
an Error in Politics, in courting in such manner the Mobile, or rather Rabble
(as it was no less;) in whom there is no constancy; for being acted by present
apprehensions or humor, they are as uncertain as the Wind; nothing being to be
relied upon, save honest unselfish Principles, for such will in the end prevail
in spite of all the Devils in Hell; and in the Faith of this I shall dye, tho I
may not live to see it.

These and such like courses, which most of our Conforming Parsons teaching
from their Pulpits, in Taverns and Coffee-houses, the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistance without limitation, has so poisoned the Nation,
that without an extraordinary Work of God, a Recovery cannot be expected; for
tho I think, the good People of England of all Communions are the best, I
believe the Profane as they are by ill Examples of late years brought unto, are
the worst of Men, exceeding all others in wicked and immoral Practices, which
we owe chiefly, to the two last Kings Examples, their evil and pernicious
Counselors and Favorites.

It is a Maxim in our Law, that the King can do no wrong, which must refer only
to Matters of State, and not personal Actions; for that it cannot be denied,
but he that lies with another Man's Wife, or kills his Neighbor, etc. does
them wrong: but as the King, in other cases must act by Instruments; so it is
but reasonable, they should be answerable for miscarriages in Government;
because being free Agents, what they do is of choice, the Service of Princes
being sought and not compulsed; and were it not for evil Counselors, Princes
would no be so bad as they often are. Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory, her
Virtue appeared, not only in her natural, just and equal Principles, but also
in the election of suitable Counselors, Men at least morally honest, aiming
more at public than their own private Benefit; she encouraged Virtue, making
Honor the Reward of it, and not of pimping and all manner of Vice; she
reproved her great Favorite (that unhappy) Earl of Essex, whom she made
General in her Expedition for Cadiz, for conferring the honor of Knighthood
upon some few, whose Service at that time, he judged deserved it, when she
thought a less Reward might have served. In her time, Knighthood was not
expected voluntarily by any Citizens, save the Lord Mayor; nor was it thought
of by the two succeeding Kings, till Charles the First, at his Return from
Scotland in 1641. after failing in his design there against Duke Hamilton,
Marquis of Argile and General Lesly, etc. thinking it a convenient way to
corrupt a Party for his intended quarrel with the Parliament; that he Knighted
several Aldermen of the City of London; and after that, both he and his Son
Charles the Second made liberal use of their Sword in dubbing all that came
near them, from whom they could hope, for the least assistance, in their design
for Popery and Slavery; the deliverers of Addresses, abhorring petitioning for
Parliaments, as likewise those giving thanks for dissolving the best of
Parliaments, etc. being procured by the Emissaries of Charles the Second, could
not in the opinion of those that hated Parliaments, deserve less than a
Knighthood, to the encouragement of others to follow their Example. It may be
the Enemies to this good Queen will object that she had some angry fits; to
which may be answered, that they were born with, as Children at such times do
with their Parents, being satisfied that she had a true and sincere love for
the Nation; upon which account some little Passions subject to her sex might
very well be endured.

The Estates, that have by corrupt ways to advance the Prerogative, been
raised, and Honors conferred in the four last Reigns, especially since the
Restoration, exceeds I believe above forty times those in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; and yet the number of years of all their Reigns, abating the
eighteen years interval, comes a quarter part short of doubling hers; She made
few Lords, about four or five; very sparing of Knighthood, and never conferred
any, but (as is before noted) for Merit; and accordingly she thrived in the
Love of her Subjects at home, and Honor abroad. In her time the Nation was
famous for glorious Action, as before mentioned, in relieving the oppressed
Protestants in France, Scotland and Holland, which she could not have done, had
she been tied up by the late devised Doctrine of Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance; besides subduing her Rebels in England as well as in Ireland,
and pulling down, when none else could do it, the proud House of Austria,
designing then the universal Monarchy; whereas I do not find one generous or
honorable Act to be boasted of, during the last four Reigns.

There are two ill Notions in behalf of Statists, which to the prejudice of
Mankind have prevailed in the World, the one the calling Knavery Reason of
State, by which they excuse all their sinister and wicked designs, as if God
had left us without honest means for preserving our selves; the other, that Wit
and Parts do alone qualify a person for the service of his Prince in his
weightiest Affairs: It Is true such qualities are ornaments and with Honesty
without Debauchery (which provokes God's Judgments) are fittest for public
Employment, and below Adoration cannot be too much magnified and applauded; yet
good ordinary parts with Diligence and Integrity, is much beyond the highest
flowen parts without the other; and we find great things have been done, by
such as have not otherwise exceeded than in Uprightness, Industry and
Sincerity; for without these Virtues Men are but like the Devils, the worse for
their Wit; and therefore of all Men, as to public Employments, Men of depraved
Principles are to be avoided, and they may infallibly be discovered, if
formerly employed by their Actions in those times; for if they have been wicked
in one Reign, they will be the same in another; except there appear in them, a
signal Testimony of Repentance and Reformation; and besides, they may be known
by their Favorites; for he that makes choice of such for his Confidents, as
are of Immoral Principles, formerly guilty of Injustice, Oppression and
Cruelty, may well be concluded to be of the same Principles himself; for Birds
of a Feather flock together, and that Proverb seldom fails, That a Man may be
known by his Companion.

The Spirit of God says, Take away the wicked from before the King, and his
Throne shall be established in Righteousness; But our last Kings did so little
regard this Divine Exhortation, that when the Commons in Parliament (who ought
to be accounted good Judges of Men's fitness for State Employment) have in
discharge of their Duties, endeavored to follow this Advice, by addressing
against obnoxious persons; tho they were never so vile, it was the way to
advance them in their Princes Favor, as Sibthorp and Manwaring, etc. to the
dignifying and farther rewarding them with Pensions or places of Profit; and
then to protect them by Adjournments, Prorogations or Dissolutions of
Parliaments, to which we owe the diminution of our Glory abroad, and the
exaltation of our lately become great Neighbor.

Now if any of these persons be in being, tho upon some accounts they may merit
a pardon for former Crimes, it cannot an opportunity of acting over again, what
they have been already guilty of, to the prejudice and danger of the Nation,
but of being disabled of all farther Employments, either Ecclesiastical, Civil
or Military.

The Iniquity of the late times was so grear, that nothing that could help the
introducing of Slavery was left unattempted, insomuch, that we owe our
Deliverance merely to the Providence of God. The giving Power to the King, to
levy Money in the Interval of Parliaments upon emergent occasions, which he was
to be Judge of, was projected by our Counselors, for the perfecting our
Slavery; and to get a Majority in the House to effect it, all ways possible
were used; as the buying the Votes of Members of Parliament, by Pensions (the
highest of Treasons in the Judgment of that great Oracle of the Law, Sir John
Mainard) maintaining Tables at the public Charge; managed by some Members of
the House, that what could not be done by dry Money, might be by Debauchery,
highly odious, as well in the Executors as Designers; both proceeding from
fordid, slavish and unmanly Principles: And so many Members had by these means
listed themselves against Magna Charta, that had they not feared the selling of
the Nation, would have proved the selling of their own Stipend or Wages, all
had gone; which leaves us without being indebted in the least to our Trustees,
for refusing to give us up to Arbitrary Power and Popery. But I do not in this
deny, but that there were a considerable number of worthy Patriots, that would
rather have suffered death, than have sold the Rights and Privileges of their
Country, (whose Names deserve to be writ in Letters of Gold to Posterity,
whilst the other to be obliterated or marked with Infamy) had they not alas
been over voted by a corrupt and depraved Party, which must raise the
Indignation of all true freeborn Englishmen against those in the late times,
that have had any hand in plotting, projecting or abetting the betraying of
their Country, if still they continue the same Principles without remorse.

Besides the ways used, as is before mentioned, for the introducing of Popery
and Slavery, it may be observed, That whereas the Designs of good Queen
Elizabeth were against the Pope and his Adherents, the Designs of our late
Governors have been for him and his Friends. All the little tricks serviceable
therein having been made use of; as the imposing Consuls upon our Merchants
abroad, in places where they had never been before, merely at their charge, to
gratify and oblige to them the worst of Men; giving them Patents to levy Money,
under pretense of their Office, upon the Subjects without their consent,
contrary to the fundamental Liberties of England, as was done at Amsterdam,
etc. And the like vigorously endeavored in behalf of a professed Papist at
Roterdam, but by the suddenness of our Revolution they failed in that. And also
another approach to Arbitrary Government, was the passing by the Rules,
directed by the Law, for choosing Sheriffs for the Counties, and taking them at
large, as might be most serviceable to unlimited Will and Lust, etc. And such
Practices as these were so many, as are hardly to be enumerated; and now having
remembered these, they with what goes before, and our League with France, for
exalting him in order to his humbling and bringing us low, one may think are
enough to render those times, and the Actors in them, odious and unfit for
future Trust; nothing that comes from such, tho never so plausibly delivered,
but the Integrity of it ought to be suspected: For as formerly they cried out
of 41 as a Scarecrow, that Notion being now worn threadbare, they have taken
up that of a Commonwealth and the care of the Church, to cosen the good People
of this Nation into a jealousy of their best Friends, whilst their Enemies
work their ruin; but it is hoped that experience has made them wiser, than to
be so imposed upon by misapplying of Names.

The Word Commonwealth, tho the Language of the Law was endeavored to be made
an obnoxious Character of all such as should speak of Law, or expect the
benefit of it; and it is to be feared, that the same Projectors do aim at the
same Design, in adding to the word Commonwealth, the Care of the Church;
because a plausible Notion, when it is in no danger, except of reducing them to
a more sober and virtuous Life and Conversation; otherwise they would think it
for the honor of the Church, to have Men of Sobriety and Morality, accounted
Members of it; and yet they will not allow any to be of the Church of England,
tho such as were never at a separate Congregation in their Lives, and as ready
and perfect in their Responses, as any Cathedral Man whatever, if free from
Immorality, and for ruling according to Law.

But it is no wonder, that our Bigoted Churchmen (who are the only Men I mean)
should be willing to forget Forty one, and in place thereof, to take up an
outcry for Care of the Church; because about that time, the Committee for
scandalous Ministers appointed by Parliament, discovered great Lewdness and
Ignorance in many of the Clergy; and had not the War prevented their
Proceedings, they had at that time, purged the whole Kingdom of insufficient,
Popishly affected, superstitious and debauched Ministers; but having no Command
over any, (by reason of the War) save such as were near hand; they could not
receive Information from above six or seven Counties, which afforded them,
according to my Information, not above three Centries; the first of which
(having escaped the Flames of London) is to be bought at Mr. Millers,
Bookseller near Paul's Church; by which it appears, they were so horridly
scandalous, that the Parliament could not have exposed the Church; and therein
the Bishops of those times, for want of care in their Visitations, had not
Complaints from Oxford, for having unjustly deprived them, forced the
Parliament for their own Vindication, to make the Names of the particular
Ministers with their Crimes known by publishing them in Print.

And if by the outcry of having a Care of the Church, is meant the having such
another Inquisition, all sober Men will readily agree to it; and if in the time
of Charles the First, of so celebrated a memory for Piety, there was need of
such an Inquiry into the Lives, Conversations, Popishly affected and
Sufficiency of the Clergy; it may well* be thought much more needful, after the
several Reigns of his two Sons; besides, if they be not prevented, they may as
they have already begun, go on in taking upon them the Legislative Power, by
farther Impositions in the Worship of God: For though the Act for injoyning the
Book of Common Prayer forbids, both affirmatively and negatively, any other
Method or Form of Service, Rights or Ceremonies than is there directed, they
are great Non-Conformists, in disobeying that rule, in several additions in
approach to Popery, as in their second Service, etc. as also in being
superabundant to Popery, in endeavoring to make a superstitious fashion, to
sit bare during Sermon, which is but a new thing in England, and not known in
any other Christian Church; for tho the Papists are bare in their Church out of
Service time, whom we endeavor to imitate in that circumstance, yet they are
covered during Sermon, wherein we outgo them; the reason for which I leave to
themselves, confessing I never understood any for the one more than for the
other, and if it be objected, that our Church does not command being bare
during Sermon, yet they do it in making it uncivil to do otherwise. And the
Minister of Finchly, not long since, caused one for being covered, whilst he
was in his Sermon, to be committed; who bringing his Action against the
Justice, for false Imprisonment, recovered good damages of him; which tho
sufficient to prove the Churches Usurpation in this matter, they do
notwithstanding go on in it, as a part of that new Popery formerly intended by
Laud, in his time.

This may perhaps be thought Severity upon the Church, but there is no general
Rule without an Exception; and I believe there are many good Men to be herein
excepted, tho the Generality are guilty, and so bigoted, that there is no
obliging them, or Quarter to to be had with them, by any, but such as
themselves; which is the unhappy Cause of our great Divisions at this time,
especially in the City of London; and that which is worst of all, without
Remedy, so long as nothing less than the Denial of Sense, Reason and Morality
will be allowed by our Bigots, (the Persons I only complain of,) as the
Conditions of Union and Conversation; and these following Instances may well be
thought, in some measure, a proof hereof: As, The Lieutenancy refusing a
Captain, because it was objected against him, that he had, sixteen Years
before, heard that eminent Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Jenkins, (now with God,)
preach a Sermon: As another was refused by one of their Captains, being his
Lieutenant, for answering to the Question of What Minister he heard? That he
heard such an one, a moderate Churchman: Upon which he was told by the Captain,
that Moderation would not serve at this time; and therefore rejected him, as
not for his turn: Whereupon, the Party that should have been his Ensign being
by, and hearing it, moved with Indignation thereat, rejected him for his
Immoderation, and denied to serve him; and all this since the Act of
Toleration. But this Spirit reigns so violently in them, that they are now
feared to be more ready than formerly, should they, by Sheriffs like themselves
be called upon Juries, to murder and undo, by false Verdicts, all that shall
be known to own King William and Queen Mary to be King and Queen de Jure, as
well as de Facto.

And now I leave Charles II. whose Council and Favorites left nothing undone,
which might perfect the Destruction of England, save the Selling Tangier to the
French; which that they did not do, is one of the Wonders of this Reign. There
needs no other Character of this King, than his Answer to one, who desiring him
to have regard in his Deportment, to his Memory after Death, (viz.) That Let
not Men speak ill of him whilst he lived, and he cared not what they should say
of him when he was dead.

How he was taken away is in the dark, but vilely suspected: His Successor may
be said not to be so Godless as he, tho not less cruel; but from what Principle
is not to be determined, unless it was from being both equal as to Fear, from
whence Cruelty does generally proceed. I know, all the ill things done by the
eldest Brother, is ordinarily laid to the Charge of the younger; wherein I
differ from that common Opinion, believing that Charles II. was never imposed
upon by James II. but the first having the Master-wit, and with it great
Cunning, was willing his Brother should have the Name of any thing offensive to
the People, when even it was that himself desired most to have done. And thus
ends the Reign of Charles II. whose Practices for arriving at Arbitrary Power
and Popery appear, in some degrees, over and above what is before mentioned, by
the Affidavits hereunto annexed, with Captain Wilkinson's Information; which
show the Subornation of Perjury to have been used by his Ministers, for taking
away the Lives of Innocent Men.

James II. who succeeded his Brother Charles II. sending two Men to Amsterdam,
when Duke of York, to burn their Ships in Harbor; who being taken, and at
Execution confessing the Fact, it sticks much upon him in that Country, as do
several other Actions in this, which, for the sake of his virtuous Successors,
ought to be forgot, were it not necessary to give some Hints, for the
vindication of the present Government, and justifying the late King's
Abdication. The Burning of London, and the many Fires since at St. Katherines,
and Southwark, etc. belonged without doubt, to the Popish Plot; and how far the
then Duke of York was concerned therein, Coleman's Letters, in print, in some
kind show.

But to pass by all other things before his coming to the Crown, he no sooner
arrived at the Throne, than he declared himself a Papist; a Name (in favor of
that Religion) out of fashion ever since the Restoration; but being the
Language of the Law, I think fittest to be used. At his first appearing in
Council after his Brother's Death, which was as quick as could be, he promised
to rule according to Law; and yet, in two or three Days after, commanded by
Proclamation the Payment of Customs, before given by Parliament, which is
contrary to Law; and from that time forward went on in the same way, going
publicly to Mass the first Lord's Day, of which Religion the bigoted
Churchmen (who will never believe any thing till it be too late) would not
before own him to be.

His Brother died on the Friday, and Saturday-seven-nights after was in the
Evening privately buried. Before the Burial he knighted Sir Peter Rich, and
soon after did the same by Sir Roger L' Estrange, and made Sir George Jeoffreys
a Baron; none of which three, as may be observed, would King Charles II. so far
dignifie, tho he had made them his Tools to serve the worst of Turns. The now
Sir Dudley North was knighted in his Sheriffalty, and possibly for the sake of
his Family; for Sir Peter Rich, his Partner, who joined with him in appointing
the Jury that found my good Lord Russel guilty, and brought him to Execution,
was passed by till James II. came to the Crown, and judged him worthy of the
Honor of Knighthood.

This King called immediately a Parliament, and thought he had by his Influence
so packed one, that there were not thirty Members that would not do as they
were bid. They gave him great Supplies of Money, and were as severe against the
Duke of Monmouth, as himself was by his Instruments, Kirk and Jeoffreys,
against all in the West, supposed to be of his Party; contrary to the Mercy of
former Times, when the Suffering of a few attoned for the rest. But when Popery
came upon the Stage, this Parliament would not serve the turn; which caused the
Adjourning and Proroguing of it from time to time, hoping in the Intervals to
have molded it to his purpose; but that not succeeding, at last he dissolved
it, and then betook himself to Popish Counsel, Petre the Jesuit bing made one
of his Council, and of his Cabal, not only contrary to Law, but also to the
practice of most, if not all other Popish Princes. For tho the Jesuits make it
their Design to skrue themselves so far into the Favor of Princes, as to
become their Confessors, that having Opportunity of infusing wicked Principles
into them, and by knowing their Secrets, may have the greater Advantage of
doing Mischief; yet are seldom or never admitted Members of their Councils. The
wise Venetians banished them their Territories, for their pernicious
Principles, until, in requital of the Pope's assisting them in their Wars
against the Turks, they were received into the City of Venice, Anno 1664. but
are by the People, who hate them, very inviduously looked upon there. Nay, Rome
is so jealous of their Immorality, (as may be presumed) that they rarely admit
of above two, or three at most, to be at one time of the Consistory, the Pope's
Council, which consists of Seventy two Cardinals, when all are there, which is
seldom, or never.

These Men hurried this King into all Extravagances, and the highest Invasion
of the Rights and Liberties of the People that had ever been attempted. The
Corrupting of our Mercenary Judges, to the making any thing Law he would have,
for taking away the Lives of innocent Men at his pleasure, and giving him the
Dispensing Power: The setting up extrajudicially Ecclesiastical Commissioners,
to turn Men out of their Free-holds at their pleasure; as at Magdalen-College
in Oxford: The erecting Popish Schools, Chapels, Convents and Seminaries; all
expressly against Law: The Breach of his repeated Promises, and Coronation Oath:
These, I say, were all but Trifles, compared to his personal Endeavors of
overturning our Foundations, in going from Town to Town, to discourage those
Magistrates that would not engage to send such Members to the Parliament, (he
then intended,) as would repeal the Test and Penal Laws, and cajole those that
would: His turning out the Mayor and best of the Aldermen of York, and choosing
Papists in their room, had not the Commission been defective as to the filling
those empty Places; so that that City was without a Mayor, till His present
Majesty restored them to their Rights: As also his Commissionating others,
under the Name of Regulators, to reform (as they called it) other Corporations;
and all to the End of having the Test removed, (the only Obstacle,) that the
Way might be open for an entire Popish Parliament, who would have been sure, in
twelve Months time, to have made new Laws against all Dissenters from Popery,
and have persecuted them for the same with Fire and Faggot.

As to the propounding an Equivalent, or a new Magna Charta for establishing
Liberty of Conscience, which should be unalterable, that was so vain and idle,
as could not expect Belief or Regard from any, save Men of little Wit or
Prospect; for it ever will be, as it ought to be, in the power of succeeding
Parliaments, to repeal the Acts of former: And therefore, tho the King might
promise he would not consent, during his Time, to any Alteration, he could not
promise so much for his Successors; and farther, as to himself, his Steadiness
to his Engagement herein (after Breach of his Coronation Oath, and re-iterated
Promises of Ruling according to Law) might well be suspected. Besides, had he
really intended to make good his Promise, the Church of Rome (which, by his own
Principles, is his Superior) would have forbid it: And he that is not ignorant
of their murdering Doctrine and Practices, in case of Disobedience, durst not
have disobeyed, for fear of a Dose, or a Fig. So that it is no less to be
admired that the Papists should make such ridiculous Propositions to a knowing
Protestant People, as that there should be found any among them who would give
heed to the least thing of this nature, coming from their implacable Enemies.
There were in a few Days two Proclamations of Pardon published, the latter
excepting some that had been pardoned by the former, when the Parties being
beyond the Sea, could not be guilty of new Transgressions, not hearing of the
one before the other, the distance of Time being too little; and, as it is
said, one or both was not sealed, designedly neglected by Jeoffreys, that
Engine of Cruelty, and Monster of Impudence. Nay, it is said, that the King,
upon hearing of the Prince of Orange's Expedition for England, ordered the
Restoration of the Fellows of Magdalen-College in Oxford; and upon the News of
his Disaster at Sea, gave presently contrary Order. All which is a clear
Demonstration of his Principles, and how little his Promises or Pardons are to
be relied upon.

The Arts and Tricks his Predecessors had made use of, for Oppression and
Injustice, (as by Innuendo's, etc.) to take away the Lives and Estates of
honest Men, were by his blood-thirsty Instruments illegally improved; as the
Deaths of Alderman Cornish, and Mr. Charles Bateman, and the barbarous and
inhumane Proceedings against Dr. Oats, do sufficiently evince; he having been,
without President, so cruelly and unmercifully used, as may charitably be
concluded, was intended by that way to have murdered him, because they could
not have the least Color of Law for doing it otherwise; and that he outlived
the Barbarity of it, he has reason to acknowledge a Miracle of Mercy from God,
and for it walk thankfully before him all the Days of his Life. But besides
this, this whole Reign was no less than Violence and Cruelty, as appears by
excepting about One hundred and eighty Persons by Name, out of his Pardon, upon
the Duke of Monmouth's Invasion; and by Qualifications, scarce any that were
not professed Papists, or as bad, were left unquestionable; especially if ever
they had crossed the Seas, by that Exception of all Treasons beyond the Seas.
Some of those excepted were Girls at School, from seven, to ten Years of Age,
for giving Ribbonds to a few of the Duke's Soldiers; and they, with the rest,
were, by Order from the King and Council, prosecuted for Rebels, by the King's
Envoys Extraordinary with the States General, upon pretense of their Articles
of Peace. To that End, supposing them all to be fled into their Countries, and
the Faith of the Nation being engaged for the truth of it by the Envoys
Averment thereof, the States not thinking it decent to question the Validity of
the Accusation, gave Sentence of Banishment, upon pain of Death, against the
whole Number, (save two or three that had bought their Pardons, the Children
being included,) that should come into their Territories: Yet had all that was
in any of the Countries under their Dominions been brought to a Trial; it was
but a few which had been with the Duke of Monmouth that could have been found
guilty of Rebellion, according to the Process; however, could they by this
Means have got them all sent home, they would there, right or wrong, have been
murdered, as was Sir Thomas Armstrong. But the Injustice of this ought to
reflect only upon the King's evil Council, for the Violation of the Faith of
the Nation with a Foreign State, (which ought to be sacred;) and not upon the
States for giving Credit to the Information, which, according to the Rules of
Nations, ought to have been authentic; and being false, it was highly
injurious to the States, of which, had they known, they might well have
complained: But the King, for the Immorality of it, etc. has received his
Reward, (tho the rest escape,) in a just Abdication; and we the Benefit, by an
happy Exchange for the better: The Lord grant we may not sin away our Mercies.

After twenty eight Years industrious Endeavors to debauch the Nation by
wicked, profane and Atheistical Examples, which prevail more with corrupt
Nature than Precepts, this King, who by adding of Papists in all Employments,
having brought the Judges, Garrisons, Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace
throughout all the Nation to his devotion, and got a standing Army of Six and
thirty thousand Horse and Foot, every way well accommodated, wanting nothing in
the Eye of Reason, we were left without the least hopes of Recovery, the help
of Man seeming to be in vain; but then, when he said in his Heart, All was his
own, and none should control him, it pleased God in his Providence, for the
Good of his People, to infatuate him, in setting up a supposititious Prince of
Wales, to dis-inherit his own Children, and the Heirs to the Crown; which when
nothing else in humane Prospect could have done it, this opened the Eyes of all
sober Protestants, to the seeing his Design of leaving us and our Posterity
under Popish Idolatry and Thraldom; from whence arose an Agreement for forcing
him to rule according to Law, as he was by Oath obliged; which causing him to
abdicate the Government, in running away, and applying himself to the great
Tyrant of the Earth for Help, gave the People the Opportunity of asserting
their natural Right, in providing for their own Security, by choosing King
William and Queen Mary for their rightful and legal Sovereigns, whom the Lord
in Mercy bless with a long and prosperous Reign over us; and whilst we give due
Honor to the Instruments, let us not forget ascribing the Praise and Glory due
to Almighty God, as the Author and Principal of our Deliverance, and have
always in a thankful Remembrance this, and all other his saving Providence
toward this poor Nation, through several Reigns and Ages.

Whilst the Church of England was under Persecution in the Persons of the
Bishops, the President of Magdalen-College in Cambridge, and the President and
Fellows of Magdalen-College in Oxford, they were full of Compassion and
Brotherly Kindness toward Dissenters, and ready to join with them for Redress
of Grievances, by the help of the Prince of Orange, now King of England, etc.
but were no sooner freed from their Fears of being superceded by Priests and
Jesuits, than headed by some who stood in need of a Party to render them
considerable, that thereby they might blot out the Remembrance of former
Crimes; than they forgot former Professions of Moderation, and the Afflictions
of their Brethren; and to that degree, that they caballed for increasing their
Burdens, and monopolizing all Employments to themselves, by continuing the
Sacramental Test, though to the fatal detriment of the Kingdom; for had not
that Bar for trusting Dissenters been in the way, Ireland (in the Opinion of
those that best know that Country) might ever this have been reduced, to the
saving most of the Blood and Treasure that has been spent upon it; and I fear,
the Blood so needlessly spilt will lie at their Doors that were the Authors of
it.

It was the Dissenters that saved Londonderry, and in that preserved Ireland;
for tho by the Artifice of some eminent Conformists, the Honor was ascribed to
Mr. Walker and his Party, (for which he got a Reward he did not deserve,) it
appears by the Narrative of that Siege, writ by Mr. Mackenzy, Chaplain to a
Regiment during the Siege, and writ with that Candor and Faithfulness as
carries its Testimony with it, the Applause and Reward belonged to the
Dissenters; for even the Answer to this Book, in behalf of Mr. Walker, does no
way detect, but rather gives it Credit: But Mr. Walker being dead, I shall
forbear all farther Reflections upon him, he having been a good-natured Man,
and what he did amiss being from the influence of others: He confessed there
were four Nonconformists in the Town for one Conformist; and some say, eight
for one; but the Authority being in the Churchmen, who were timorous, if not
worse, you will find by Mr. Mackenzey's Relation, that it was the Mobile, who
were Dissenters, that saved the Place, against the Will of the rest.

Now I suppose I may be censured, as being discontented for want of Employment,
as not being able to qualify my self. To which I answer, That those that know
me, know I never sought any Employment; and if I had, I have a Latitude to
qualify my self: So that I may truly affirm, that what I here write, proceeds
purely from Affection to my Country, and the Cause of God.

The Town of Londonderry was at last relieved, and as is said, might have been
six Weeks sooner, with less difficulty, and the saving of four or five thousand
Lives, which in that time died of Famine. After the Relief of it, Colonel
Murrey and thirteen Troops of Horse, who had done the greatest Service in
defending of the Town, were reduced, and greatly suspected, for no other Reason
than because Dissenters, and free from Debauchery; tho we may observe, that
after Relief of the Town, little of moment was done, till His Majesty's happy
Arrival, save what was done by those called Inniskilling-men, who tho not all
Dissenters, are much of their Judgment, Friends to them, and joined with them;
which one would think, might have recommended the rest of that sort to
Employment in these difficult Times.

I do not aim herein at reflecting upon the Conformists in general, for it must
be confessed that there are many sober, virtuous and religious Persons of that
Judgment, as London has experienced, in being, contrary to what was designed
by others, providentially preserved by them, as appears by the Opposition the
present worthy and most deserving Lord Mayor has met with from those that were
Hectors for delivering up of Charters, and joining with Jeffreys, etc. in all
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Ways; and for no other Reason that we know, than for
his being, next under God, and Her Majesty, by his wise Conduct in the Absence
of the King, the Preserver of this City and Nation in Peace and Safety; for his
Opposers were no sooner delivered by the Act of Grace from fear of Punishment
for former Crimes, than they returned with the Dog to his Vomit, and with the
Swine to the wallowing in the Mire of their corrupt Principles; insomuch, that
I think one may, without breach of Charity, say, That there is none, who are
not guilty of great ignorance, that is for turning out the present Lord Mayor,
but such as would, if they could, turn out the King.

But I would not be understood in this, to complain of any, save the Bigots of
the Church, such as will not allow of any to be of their number; who have
Charity for those that are not of their Communion, and have not the same
Latitude in all Immorality, as they have even to the taking away the Lives and
Estates of innocent Men, that are not of their minds, by false Verdicts, when
it shall be in their power; and that they may reach their own Members, that
exceed them in Virtue and Sobriety, they nickname them with the Name of
Commonwealths Men; for since, they cannot call them Drunkards, Swearers nor
Whoremasters, they will call them something, to render them, as they think,
odious to the People; and tho they have reason to know, that from the
experience, the People have had, of their Integrity and Uprightness they are
not be cozened by injurious Names; yet from Machivel's Rule, That by
calumniating boldly, something will stick, they continue their Reproach, tho
contrary to sense or reason. Every Englishman, that is not Knave or Fool, being
as much a Commonwealths Man, as those they mean, who are no more for a
Republic, than Magna Charta makes them.

But it has had this effect, to hinder the most useful Men from serving their
King and Country, to the great damage of both, if it prove not their
destruction; in keeping up the way for advancing Folly, Ignorance and Knavery,
by a bare restraining the choice of Officers to one Party, which, if continued,
must undo this Kingdom. And for preventing the same, it were to be wished, that
as in a great measure, the Bigots of the Church have had the Conduct of Affairs
this two years, with ill success; that the moderate Men of all sides might be
tried, whether Affairs will prosper better in their hands: By moderate Men, I
mean those of both Judgments; that are free from gross and open Scandal, which
are the persons upon whose endeavors, we may most reasonably expect a Blessing
from God; for from the contrary qualifications, it is not to be hoped. And
therefore, till Men of Religious, or at least, Moral Principles, who shall
serve their King and Country, not from self ends, but from a true zeal for
Civil as well as Religious Liberty, be employed, (as such are to be had) it
cannot be expected that England should prosper; for common Swearers, Drunkards,
Whore-masters, who impudently carry their Whores into the Field and to Sea, to
corrupt, by their Examples, the People; nor those for King William, as King de
facto only, will ever do the Work. And the Bigots of the Church cannot with so
much reason, call those of their own Communion, Dissenters; because they have
Christian Charity for Non-Conformists, as they themselves may be called of the
Church of Rome, for declaring they had rather be Papists than Presbyterians, as
many of them do; when their difference with the Papists, is upon fundamentals,
which concerns their Salvation; and with the Presbyterians, by their own
Confession, but about things indifferent, which ought not to be imposed,
according to that Scripture; For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to
lay upon you no greater burdens than these necessary things. Acts 15. ver. 28.

And farther, to enforce this Argument, (which I know will be little regarded
by Church-Bigots and Formalists) it is to be observed, that it was, until the
King's Arrival in Ireland, those of Religious Principles, there, as also in
Scotland and Piemont, that has done any thing of moment; and it is not without
strong suspicion, that those two excellent Gentlemen, Lieutenant Col. Cleland
and Major Henderson was deserted, who to save the Life of their Country, lost
their own; and that the relieving of Londonderry in Ireland, was delayed, both
in design to reduce those over-sober Men, as of too virtuous Examples for those
Times: And as to Savoy, that Duke whose Family has from all Antiquity been
great Persecutors, is now come totally off from that Hellist and Devilish
Principle, in usurping the Prerogative of God, who only has dominion over the
Conscience, and is willing to receive the Assistance of his reformed Subjects
without debarring them by a Sacramental Test, the benefit of which he has
already sufficiently experienced. And to this may be added, the Example of
Spain, as a warning to all of undepraved sense, to avoid Persecution upon
account of Religion; for that Country when under Paganism, Mahometism, with a
mixture of Jewdaism, was populous, rich and flourishing, beyond all or most
Countries, is now under Christianity, by Persecution become dispeopled,
beggarly and of little account, compared to others formerly of no consideration
to them. And it may be foretold, that our great Neighbor, who by Liberty in
Religion first raised himself to that height he is now arrived at, shall by his
late contrary actings, lose his Grandeur, have all his Honor laid in the dust,
and brought as low as he is now great.

I think no sober person, but will after the perusal hereof, own our two last
Reigns to have been cruel, unjust and oppressive to the last degree; and that
such Guilt could not be contracted, by our Kings, without Instruments employed
by them, who by Law are answerable for miscarriages in Government. And as
Oppression is a crying Sin, that pulls down Gods Judgments upon a People, if
not repented and reformed; so there is a Duty incumbent upon us, to answer the
Rebukes we have lately met with from God in our Affairs, by a speedy and
thorough Reformation, not deferring it till times of Peace; the want of
Reformation being generally the occasion of War: And God seems to call for it,
by the little use he has made of our Immoralists, either at Sea or Land, other
than as a scourge for our Sins. His Majesty has a great Reputation for a
professed Enemy to Swearing, Drinking and Cheating, etc. And if those, whose
Calling makes it their Duty to promote Reformation, be the Obstructers of it,
Flattery, which never proceeds from a sincere Heart, will not defend them
against the Almighty; to whom I leave them, with putting them in mind, that an
Instance might be given of a Reformation that was made in the height of a War,
which never had success till then.

The way to appease God's Wrath, is to inquire after Men of debauched Lives,
and avoid them; after the Authors and Abettors of our former Grievances, cause
Restitution to be made to sufferers, by those that did the Wrong; and to
disable, for the future, all Offenders therein from bearing any Office, either
in Church or State, in whom does not appear, a true change in practice, and
espousing honest Principles, to the end, they may have no more opportunity for
acting their Mischiefs over again.

The Lord seems to have done his part in punishing the Principal, leaving the
Instruments to us; for it may be reasonably thought, that had it not been for
evil Counselors, our Kings could not alone have projected or endeavored the
ruin of our Nation by introducing Popery and Slavery, as was without
contradiction intended.

By what goes before, together with what may be farther observed, it will
appear, that the Preservation of our Rights and Liberties has to a miracle,
been solely from the Providence of God, viz.

1. That the late King James, in favor of Popery, should set up a
supposititious Prince of Wales to disinherit his own Children, and all the
Heirs of the Crown; whereby he alienated the Hearts of the People, when nothing
less could have done it, was a great Providence.

2. The King (when Prince of Orange) his disaster at Sea, upon his first
setting sail, causing the late King James's recalling his Order, for restoring
the Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, was a Providence, in that he thereby
convinced the People, that there was no relying upon his Promises, which before
they were ready to do.

3. That when the Prince was designed for the North, he should change his
Course, for the West, where the Wind and Weather was miraculously serviceable
to him, was a saving Providence.

4. That the late King James's Naval Fleet which might with ease have destroyed
the Fly-Boats, which transported the Prince's Army, and did not do it, was a
signal Providence.

5. That the late King James deserted his Army at Salisbury, when half of it
was more than sufficient, to have fought the Prince, was a Providence not to be
forgot.

6. That the late King James abdicated the Government, when otherwise, we must
have been all in Blood, some of the chief of the City showing so much fondness
of him, that with speed they with Tears for Joy, congratulated his Return after
his first leaving of the Town, was a Mercy.

7. That Londonderry, a little insignificant place without regular
Fortifications, should with so much Misery and Hardship defend themselves; and
in that, preserve Ireland against the late King, who was said to have 60000 Men
in Arms, and to lose 8000 before it; and this done by the Mobile, headed by
some honest Officers against the good Will of those in Authority, was a
Providence, which in after Ages will hardly be believed.

8. That the French had surprised us, whilst at anchor, had not the Wind
providentially turned to our preservation, was a Mercy that ought not to be
forgot.

9. That the French should not understand the advantage Torrington gave them at
Sea, in retreating before them; and that they should neglect the opportunity of
intercepting, at the Mouth of the Channel, our several Fleets of Merchants
Ships, then expected from several Parts of the World, and no care taken by us
for their Preservation, was an unexpressible Providence. For if those Fleets
had miscarried, the trading Party of the Nation had, in a great measure, been
ruined: So that upon the whole, we may say, we have been preserved by the
Providence of God, against our own Wills, whether we will or no. But this
miraculous Deliverance gives us no Warrant to rely upon Miracles for our
Preservation, but is a Caution to us for the future, to be careful in the
choice of Officers of Trust.

I know it is ordinarily pleaded, in the behalf of Favorites to Princes, That
the Complaints against them are from Envy, and not Justice; but in
contradiction to that, it may be answered, that the Counselors to good Queen
Elizabeth, were, for ought we find, free from all Complaints by the People in
Parliament. Nay, Lester, who had much of the Queens Ear, being an ill Man, or
none of the best, could not influence her in what was not good; nor prevent her
Reproofs, when guilty of Miscarriages, which obviated Parliaments Complaints.
And I think, it may be relied upon, that the Commons in Parliament will never
complain of any, who seek not themselves, but the good and true Interest of
King and Country. And as the ways for Kings to gain Love and Honor, and be in
Safety, is to make the Law their Rule, and not as the two last Kings, without
regard to their Coronation Oath, setting all Law aside, and acting Arbitrarily;
as in their pricking of Sheriffs for the Counties, not out of those presented
to them, as the Law directs, but taking them at large, as they please or
corrupt Interest directs. For to govern well, (which is a Security beyond Arms,
Oaths or all the tricks of ill Men and Favorites) so it is the Interest of
Favorites, tho they seldom believe it, to make public Interest equal (if not
superior) to their own private; for we do not find, the Families raised
formerly, by evil Counsel given to their Princes, to have been of long
continuance.

Our Divisions at present are deplorable, and far be it from me to desire the
widening of them; but they may be said to arise from Selfishness in the Clergy,
and some Criminals, who joined with them, to make a Party for their own
particular Interest and Preservation, against the true Interest and Sense of
virtuous and honest Men; so that in this distracted condition we are divided
into those for the present King, and those for the Abdicated King; these latter
being irreconcilable to all that are not of their Opinion, and the former
subdivided into those that are professedly for King William, as King de Jure,
and those for him only as King de Facto; whereby the latter making the King no
better than an Usurper, must themselves be little less than Jacobites, whose
Actings gives us cause to have sad Thoughts of Heart, in seeing some of the
late ways or proceedings put in practice with improvement.

I do not remember, any formerly taken up and imprisoned, without pretended
Proof of some Crime against them, or at least of pretended great Suspicion; but
of late, we had Persons freest from suspect, first seized, and then their
Studies and Writings searched, to get matter to justify the Seizure; which
leaves all Men unsafe, as well in reference to their Estates (from the danger
their Writings are thereby in) as in reference to their Liberty. And herein
they showed their Spleen against such as are for the present King, as King de
Jure; for of any other Crime, one lately imprisoned, could not be suspected,
having expressed himself, sufficiently in Print, against a Commonwealth, a
Notion out of hatred to Liberty (our natural Right) lately started, to render
all those obnoxious, that are for Common Freedom. Our ancient Government,
according to Law, knowing, that in a corrupt and factious Age, the honestest
things may be blasted by misapplying of Names, as in calling Evil, Good; and
Good, Evil; Disloyalty, Loyalty; and Loyalty, Disloyalty, etc. And this, whilst
de Facto Men can hardly (in some Men's Opinion) offend in any thing they do or
say. But his Majesty, being now through Mercy, returned in Health and Safety
from Ireland, we hope, that Men sincerely honest, real and faithful to him,
without reserve, in reference to any Pretender, will be as well in Security, as
Enemies, or those that are no farther for his Interest, than may render them
meritorious. Should the Abdicated King return, from which good Lord deliver us,
and from all such, whose Design is to justify the two last Reigns, by
disowning any Fault in them (save the endeavor of introducing of Popery, of
which they make the King soly guilty) that by his Instruments and such like,
they may the more plausibly play the same Game over again.

As there is no perfection in this World, so there is nothing good, but as it
is compared with worse. The Reign of good Queen Eliz. who was a true Lover of
her People and Country, may perhaps be liable to some exceptions; but being a
Reign of glorious Actions, of impartial Justice, not murdering and otherwise
undoing innocent Men by corrupt Juries, Judges and suborned Witnesses; so free
from tricks for plundering the Subjects Purses to spend viciously and
profusely, to make a Party for Arbitrary Government, that when Money has been
given her for certain Occasions, the Cause being taken away, she returned the
Money to her Subjects. This Reign, I say, compared to the four succeeding
Reigns, chargeable with all that is contrary to these Excellencies, may
comparatively be reckoned perfect.

The Counselors and Favorites of this great Queen may have had some Errors in
Politics, tho unknown to me; yet having made the end of all their Counsels,
the Honor, Prosperity, Safety and joint Interest of the Queen and Country
without separating them; I say, those Counselors and Favorites compared with
those of the four last Reigns, whose Counsels and Actions have been
diametrically opposite to theirs, may comparatively be said to have been
unblameable.

Tho the Church, in good Queen Elizabeth's Time, never wanted some of
persecuting Spirits, yet those being over-ballanced by the Piety and Zeal of
some of the then Guides of the Church, not encouraging the Profanation of the
Lord's Day, nor discouraging Preaching twice upon that Day, nor yet putting
down Weekly or Monthly Lectures. Tho that Reign may be said, not to have been
totally free from profligate and ill People; the generality was sober and
virtuous, compared to the succeeding Reigns, especially the two last, so
overrun with Debauchery and all manner of Profaness.

And now, being freed from the Grievances of the four last Reigns, it might be
expected, that all should hate the remembrance of those Times, and never more
hanker after the like; the doing of which cannot proceed from any thing less,
than in some, a depraved, slavish Nature, delighting in the Barbarity of the
Eastern Countries: In some well meaning honest Men, from Ignorance, not
understanding their true Interest; in others, from a hatred to common Freedom,
being content to be tyrannized over by their Superiors, so they may but do the
same over their Inferiors: And in others, who understand the true Interest of
the Nation, from preferring an Opportunity of cozening, cheating and advancing
themselves to Honors and Dignities to all other Considerations whatever. And
from hence, together with Selfishness and want of Integrity in some, professing
Honesty, thereby deceiving the weak and credulous, whilst they pursue their own
Interest without regard to the Public, proceeds the Misery of Mankind.

I take no pleasure in remembering the Vices and Enormities of our Country, but
am greatly troubled to hear of the horrid Debauchery, that is amongst us; and
to observe, how this Nation is degenerated from a Land formerly famous for
Piety, to that, of all manner of Profaness, against which, I have thought it my
Duty, thus to bear my Testimony.

The Information of Thomas Samson, Gent. taken upon Oath before Sir Thomas
Alleyn, Knight. and Bt. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of
London, this 24th Day of November, Anno 1681. at Seven of the Clock in the
Morning.
Who says,

THAT John Mac-Namarra told this Deponent, that Edward Ivy and Bryan Haynes
agreed together, in April last, to swear Treason against the Earl of
Shaftsbury; and the Bill being found against the said Earl, that they, with
John Smith and Turberfeild, did intend to swear Treason against Sir Patient
Ward, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir Thomas Player, Sheriff Bethel, Col. Mildmay, and
all others as should come in as Witnesses against their Designs, or in the
behalf of the abovesaid Gentlemen. The Treason which they designed to swear
against the said Earl was, That the Earl should say, that our King deserved to
be dethroned more than Richard II. and that the said Earl would dethrone the
King, and make England a Commonwealth.

This Deponent farther says, That the said Mac-Namarra told this Deponent the
28th of July last, that Edward Ivy had often Conference with Mrs. Cellier, and
the Popish Priests in Newgate, and had received Money to sham the Popish Plot,
and to swear to a Protestant one.

This Deponent farther says, That the said Mac-Namarra, two Days before he
went to Oxford, to Colledge's Trial, told this Deponent, that he knew the
Design against the Protestants, and that he would say something against them,
to please Justice Walcop, to get some Money: But he, God damn him, if he knew of
any Treasons by any Protestants, or knew of any Plot but the Popish Plot, or if
he ever would swear to any such thing: And at the said Mac-Namarra's Return
from Oxford; he swore the same to this Deponent, in the presence of others.

This Deponent farther says, That the said Mac-Namarra told this Deponent,
that he the said Mac-Namarra had been often with the Earl of Shaftsbury, with
Haynes and Ivy; but this Deponent telling him that the said Earl never
discoursed any alone, the said Mac-Namarra told this Deponent, that the
Occasion of their speaking with him was, for that they discovered to him the
said Earl, some Persons that intended to murder him; Mac-Namarra saying, that
himself and Ivy took distaste for that the Earl would not discourse them alone;
in as much as Ivy therefore contrived to swear High Treason against the said
Earl.

This Deponent farther says, That Mr. Turberfeild told this Deponent, at the
Sign of the Cock, by the Pall Mall, two or three Days before Colledge's Trial,
of this Design against Protestants, but, with solemn Protestations, swore that
he knew nothing of any Treasons against the Earl of Shaftsbury, the Lord
Howard, or any Protestants; only of Colledge's idle Words, and of Rowse's
keeping the Charity of the City from the Evidences.

This Deponent farther says, That on the 23d of September last, John Smith,
Stephen Dugdale and Turberfeild sent for this Deponent, to the Three-Tun-Tavern
in Hungerford-Market, and there drinking, the said Smith began the Duke of
York's Health: He swore, God damn him, he drank his Health because he was a
Papist, and therefore he loved him.

This Deponent farther says, That the Money which was gathered in the City, for
the Maintenance of the Evidence, was gathered on their Petition to the Common
Hall, and by the Evidences special Instance to the Lord Shaftsbury, and others,
to interceed for them to the City, it being directed to the City, by the House
of Commons, to take care of them, until the Parliament sat again, and procured
a Maintenance for them.

This Deponent farther says, That the Answer which John Mac-Namarra made, on
Oath, to the Grand Jury, at Rowse's Trial, viz. being questioned how he was
maintained? Who answered, that he then rented 100 l. per Annum in Ireland, was
false.

And Edward Ivy at the same time saying on his Oath, that he came not over to
England to discover the Popish Plot, was also false; for that he had 20 l.
allowed him by the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland for the same. And whereas the
said Ivy then swore, that What Information he made, touching the Popish Plot,
was dictated to him by the Earl of Shaftsbury, and that a Reward for the
Swearing of it was promised by Rowse, was also false; for that this Deponent
saw the Information in the said Ivy's Hands before he knew, as he said, the
said Earl, or Rowse, and the Day after he came to Town.

This Deponent farther says, That himself, with others, have heard Dennis
Mac-Namarra say, that he would swear any thing that his Brother John would have
him to swear.

And this Deponent farther says, That the Earl of Shaftsbury advised this
Deponent, Mac-Namarra and Ivy, not to go to Oxford, until the Parliament sent
for them to give their Evidence touching the Popish Plot; and, on our Request,
the said Earl promised that he would move for Money to bear our Charges thither,
and to supply our great Necessities.

This Deponent farther says, That Justice Walcop often solicited him, with
Promises of Reward, to be an Evidence against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and
others of the City; and that John Mac-Namarra told this Deponent, that the said
Justice Walcop did the same with him.

This Deponent farther says, That he has not, to his Knowledge, received any
Money of the City, or borrowed any, to the value of Five Pounds, since the
Parliament at Oxford, or had any Reward for making this Affidavit; but has
done it to satisfy his Conscience, and to prevent any that should swear falsely
against himself, or others: And farther says, that he is no Petitioner to the
City. To all which this Deponent swears particularly, the precise Days only
excepted.

Tho. Samson.

The Information of William Shown, Jun. of the Parish of St. Mary Magdalen
Bermonsey, in the County of Surrey, aged Twenty Years, or thereabouts, as
follows.
THIS Informant makes Oath, That on Thursday, the 9th Day of this Instant
Month of August, 1681. he being accidentally in the Company of Mr. John
Mac-Namarra, Mr. Peacock, (whom they called Alderman of Durham,) and Mrs.
Teresia Peacock, his Daughter, (who was Fitz-Harris's Maid,) Mr. Everard, Mr.
Moubrey, and others, at Godfrey's Musick-house, in Lamb's-Conduit-Fields, in
the County of Middlesex, and they occasionally falling into Discourse
concerning Mr. Mac-Namarra's marrying Mrs. Peacock, the aforesaid Mac-namarra
told this Informant, that his Reason for marrying her was, that he might get a
new Race of Evidences, against the Old should fail.

And this Informant farther says, That the aforesaid Persons then discoursing
together concerning Mrs. Peacock's Marriage-Portion, Mr. Peacock, Father of the
said Teresia Peacock, clapping her on the Back, said, Girl, I am the chiefest
Evidence, and thou the second; and there will be 100 l. apiece for us to swear
home at Oxford, (having been discoursing before concerning College,) and thou
shall have them both, and I will settle 100 l. a Year more on thee. To which
Mr. Mac-Namarra, Mr. Roger Godfrey, and Mr. William Godfrey (upon this
Informant's asking them, if Mr. Peacock was a Man of an Estate) answered, that
he rather stayed in Town to get part of his Daughter's Money, than to give her
any thing.

And this Informant farther says, That Mr. Turberfeild and Mr. Mac-Namarra
then told this Informant, that they had Pensions, as well as Oats; and said,
that was no sign of small Respect to their Evidence; and that they received
them at Sir Lyoline Jenkins's House. And this Informant farther says, that he
had several times seen them go into the Secretary's House, and once saw Haynes
coming thence. And farther this Informant says, that on the 10th Day of this
Instant August, the said Mac-namarra coming to this Informant's Lodgings, at
the Golden Posts at Charing Cross, this Informant enquired of Mac-Namarra
wherefore he went so often to Sir Lioline Jenkins's House? Upon which,
Mac-namarra put his Hand to his Pocket, and shaked his Money, making no other
Answer.

And this Informant farther says, That afterward, viz. on Thursday, the 11th
of August, he being in the Company of Mr. Everard, Turberfeild, John
Mac-Namarra, John Smith, Mr. Haynes, and Captain Barry, at the House of the
aforesaid Roger Godfrey, at the Golden Posts at Charing Cross; the said Persons
discoursing concerning their going for Oxford, about Colledge's Trial, this
Informant asking them what they thought of College, they generally answered,
that they questioned not but they should get him hanged.

And this Informant farther says, That then and there the Company falling into
Discourse of Slingsby Bethel, Esquire one of the present Sheriffs of the City of
London, Mr. Mac-Namarra and Mr. Turberfeild proffered to lay Wagers, Ten to
One, that Sheriff Bethel should be hanged before Christmas next: But, said
Turberfeild, we have little against him as yet. To which Mac-Namarra replied,
What of all that? We have time enough either to get or make more. The like
Wager, at the same time, they proffered to lay concerning Mr. Wilmore, the
Foreman of the late Grand Jury, and several others of that Jury, whose Names
they then mentioned, but their Names this Informant remembers not. The like
Wager they offered to lay against one Mr. Best, an Hop-Merchant, in
Thames Street, of whom Turberfeild said, he had received some Guinea's; and
that he would go thither again, and see if he could get more; and if he would
not give him any, he would swear that against him that should make his Heart
ache.

And this Informant farther says, That Captain Barry did frequently call Mr.
John Smith Namesake; and this Informant enquiring of Mr. Mac-Namarra wherefore
Barry called Smith Namesake, he answered this Informant, that Smith was an
Irishman, born in Connaught, and that his right Name was Barry.

And this Informant farther says, That then Turberfeild, Haynes and
Mac-Namarra said, they would take several others of the Irish Evidence along
with them to the Amsterdam-Coffee-house on Tuesday come Seven-night next, and
there pick a Quarrel among themselves; and in the heat of their Quarrel they
would take Sheriff Bethel by his Chain, and lead him from thence, to
Bow-Church: And Turberfeild asked the Question, whether it would not do well to
kick him at parting?

And this Informant farther says, That on the aforesaid 11th of August,
Turberfeild said, they had Bands and Cloaks; by which distinguishing of
themselves, they said, they could discover factious People, they taking them
for some of their own Mould. And Turberfeild, soon after this Discourse, left
the Company, and in about half an Hour returned, dressed up like a Presbyterian
Minister.

And this Informant farther says, That on the same 11th Day of August, and
place last mentioned, Mr. Smith, alias Barry, asked Mr. Mac-Namarra where he
was so long in the Morning, that he could not find him? To which Mr.
Mac-Namarra answered, He had been with Sir Lioline Jenkins. I Will warrant you,
replied Smith, you have had a long Lesson, you stayed so long. Mac-Namarra
answered him, As long as it was, I have learned it. And then they entered into a
private Discourse.

This Informant also says, That they usually spent high at Dinner, 10 s. each
Man being their common Ordinary. They also commended their Trade to me, and
told me, that if I would come to Oxford, I should hear how they would swinge
the Fanatics: And they said farther, that they would procure me a Place to
hear the Trial; and that they were assured, that tho the Grand Jury of London
should come down to confront them, they should not be admitted.

And this Informant farther says, That Mr. John Smith then said, that if he
had but Knowledge of Mr. Jenks the Draper, as Mac-namarra had, that he would
not fail to swear that against him, which should not fail to take him from
being the Head of a Party of Fanatics. And that there were several others, who
had traduced him, whom, if he knew, he would make Examples.

And this Informant farther says, That Mrs. Peacock said, that Mr. Fitz-Harris
was gone to Windsor to discover a new Popish Plot, so that she was not certain
whether she had not best side with her Mistress: And speaking to Mac-Namarra,
he answered, that Man and Wife, Mistress and Maid, were best to be all of a
Mind.

Sworn before Sir George Treby, Recorder of London, Sept. 1681.
The Information of Captain Henry Wilkinson.
Imprimis, I the said Henry Wilkinson do declare, and am ready to swear, That
on Saturday, October the 8th, 1681, about Five of the Clock in the Evening, one
Mr. Walter Baines came to Mr. Adams's Seller in the King's Bemch Prison, and
sent for me, out of the Garden in the King's Bench; who, upon sight, told me,
he was sorry to see me in that place, and afterward engaged me to accept of a
Pot of Beer or Ale. In the time of its drinking, Mr. Baines showed and
expressed the greatest Kindness that could be expected from a Brother; which
made me believe he had some Design. Then he desired to know what sort of Wine I
would drink: I told him, not any; besides, the Cellar had none: But he then
called for Brandy, which we had. Then he told me Mr. Brownrig was sent Prisoner
to York-Castle for Treason, and for appearing for my Lord Shaftsbury. And also
the said Baines said, he had sent a Note to my Lord Shaftsbury, to demand fifty
Shillings, for Service and Charges that was due to him, done for the Lord
Shaftsbury at my Request, as he pretends; and that my Lord sent him word, it
was a Sham and a Cheat put upon him, and therefore he would pay him no such
Bill.

At the same he told me, I could not but know much of the Lord Shaftsbury's
Designs against the King, and that I might do well to discover it to him, who
was ready to do me any Kindness, and desired an Opportunity. Also that he had
been lately with Mr. Graham, and that he had a great Interest with my Lord
Hyde. (All this time I understood what was designing for my Kindness.) I
constantly and truly told him, I knew nothing of my Lord Shaftsbury's Designs
against His Majesty: Only this I did know formerly, from Mr. Baines, about
three Months ago; That he was then of an Opinion that Mr. Brownrig could
discover some unlawful Practices against the Lord Shaftsbury, which, I confess,
I did wish might be discovered; for although I have served His Majesty in
England, and beyond Sea, (and no other Interest,) and was as instrumental in
His Majesty's Restoration as any Person of my Fortune could be; so I am for his
Continuance by all lawful Means, and never to study the Destruction of his
Friends or Enemies by unjust Designs. I have cause to believe my Lord
Shaftsbury loves His Majesty, for he always was pleased to show me Respect, for
that I had served His Majesty.

Now Night drew on for Mr. Bains to be gone; all the time he stayed was spent
with a great deal of Zeal upon me on the same Subject. He told me, I should
have a Pardon, and need not to fear it: I would not deny his profer. But he
farther told me, I should be considerably rewarded: Neither did I deny that,
but told him, When I was requited for my former Service, I would serve his
Majesty in what I could* I saw here was a design laid; and although I had
reason to take it unkindly to have any thing fixed upon me, or to make me an
Instrument beyond my Knowledge yet I was resolved to humor the Business. Upon
which Mr. Baines took his Leave this Night, and told me, at parting, he would
in a few Days see me again, but left me with such Promises as at present I
cannot express, not much questioning my Knowledge.

Item, That on Tuesday, October the 11th, 1681. I was sent for to Mr. Weaver's
House, near the King's Bench, to Mr. Booth; who told me, he was glad to see me,
but sorry to see us both in that Condition; for he was a Prisoner, as I was. He
told me, he had removed himself last Night from one of the Compters. I required
of him, how he came to be at a Waiter's House? He told me, it was not denied
him, although I could not be admitted one Night. I understood he was engaged in
the Design; I considered he had been a Man of bad Principles, therefore I was
resolved to stand upon my Guard. Presently he told me, he was to tell me, I had
an Opportunity to be a better Man in my Fortune than ever I was before, and
that now I had an Opportunity to make my Fortune; and that I might have Five
Hundred Pounds per Annum settled upon me and my Heirs, or Ten Thousand Pounds in
Money, which I pleased, if I would discover what I knew of my Lord Shaftsbury,
and his Design in changing the Government to a Commonwealth, and witness
against him. I replied, and told him, No Body would believe I should be made
privy to such a Design, (if such a thing was,) being I had served His Majesty
in England, and beyond Sea. He answered, I was the likeliest Man to know; for
he knew I had served the King, and had been slighted and neglected. I told him,
That was true. I answered him again, I never desired any thing of His Majesty
for my Service, but that which would cost him nothing; but only to have the
Preference of others, that never had been concerned in His Majesty's Service,
by way of Farm on part of His Majesty's Revenues. He told me, His Majesty knew
me, and that he was sensible of my Service and Sufferings, and desired to
gratify me; for he often told me, Now was the time to do something which would
advance me; for it must now be a King, or a Commonwealth; for the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Party would but only make use of me, to slight me when their
Business was done. I told him, I was with my Lord Shaftsbury the Night before
he was apprehended, and that Sir Thomas Armstrong was there; a Person I knew
out of Favor, on purpose that he might speak out his full Mind; but still told
him, I knew nothing of any Design. I also told him, I would say nothing, nor
appear at Court, until I was considered for my Sufferings, (a thing I never
expected;) and as for going to Court, I never intended it: But the more I told
him I knew nothing of a Design, the more he put me in mind of what Reward I
might have, in such Words, that I ought to swear to it, whether I knew any
thing or nothing of the Business. Now I fully saw the Design; and though I
stayed late, at my Return I began to consider who I should make this Business
and Design known to, being a Stranger in the King's Bench. I observed one, who
appeared to me to be a sober and sensible Person; that Night I repaired to him,
and (lest I should be tempted with what Offers were made) I told him, that I
had a Design to commit a Secret to him; whereupon I told him, and desired him
to put the same in Writing; and that if I ever declared more than what I did
then to him, (that was,) That I knew nothing of any Plot or Design against His
Majesty, intended by my Lord Shaftsbury: I told him this, and declared in the
Presence of God, that if ever I should be tempted to swear more than this at
any time, it was for Reward; and that I desired him to witness the Truth of
this against me, and that I would daily give him an Account of what passed for
the future, which I desired him every Day to put into Writing, which I believe
he has done; as also the constant Invitations abroad, and the Visits they gave
me here; which were so frequent to me, as nothing could be more.

Mr. Booth told me, I must appear at Court, and I should have an assurance of
my Reward from some Persons of Honor: I told him, I would not trust any
Courtier I knew, for a Groat; I am satisfied he was put upon this, but by whom
God knows, I am assured not by his Majesty.

That on Wednesday October. the 12th, 1681. I was invited by Mr. Booth to dine
with him that day at Mr. Weaver's House, which I refused, (although he sent a
Waiter, and promised him satisfaction for his Attendance.) After Dinner he sent
again; I went, and found Mr. Baines with him, both rising from Dinner; I was
most kindly received with Wine and good Words, working upon me to come in a
Witness against my Lord Shaftsbury's designing to change the Government;
declaring, I had an opportunity to make my Family and Friends, as they had
expressed formerly. I told them, as I had done before, until I was satisfied for
bypast Services, I would not be concerned any way at Court. They told me, I
might be assured of what I would desire from my Lord Hallifax and my Lord Hide.
Mr. Booth required what would satisfy me; I told him, if they would give me
two thousand Guineys toward the Injury I had received, and my Friends upon my
account, I would discover what I knew. Mr. Booth told me, a greater thing was
intended me, for I was five Hundred Pound per Annum, or ten Thousand Pounds in
Money: But I still told them, I knew nothing of any Design by my Lord
Shaftsbury. The more I declared I knew nothing, the more Mr. Booth urged the
Reward. I told him (when he was so earnest) when I had that Money and a General
Pardon, I would then do any Service I could; but I would not trust the Promises
of Courtiers. Mr. Baines told me, as to a Pardon, I might have it in two or
three days: He desired to know my Christian Name, which I conceived was an
intention to get a Pardon, a thing never in my thoughts; but Mr. Baines
formerly mentioned it to me; and truly I did not know what I might stand in
need of, or what they would fix upon me in our discourse.

Mr. Baines told me, he had the night before been with my Lord Hallifax and my
Lord Hide; now they thought they had prevailed with me, and were mighty
cheerful: Before I parted from them, my Wife coming to me, told me; Mr. Booth
had been mighty urgent with her, to engage me to come in a Witness; and then
told her, I should have five hundred Pounds per Annum settled upon me; but what
grounds he had for this, I know not; for all Persons that know her, knew her to
be a person of unquestionable Repute. Nor did I question the performance, for I
thought, what I could say, would not deserve; neither could I tell, why they
should think me such a Man, as they would have me to be; for I ever hated to be
a Witness or a Jury-man all my time: I conceieve Mr. Booth thought I might be
wrought upon, because I had great Misfortunes, and that this was a ready way to
repair me.

October. the 13. 1681. This day I had a Waiter sent me, about eleven a Clock, to
desire me to go to Mr. Weaver's House, which I did; there was Mr. Booth and Mr.
Baines, who told me, they sent for me to dine with them: I had no desire to
have any Table-talk with them, I desired to be excused, and also promised to
see them after Dinner. Mr. Baines told me, Mr. Graham was not far off, and
would be there, and that he was sent by some of the Council to discourse me:
Mr. Baines told me, on Tuesday night he was at Court with my Lord Hallifax, and
Lord Hyde, and the two Secretaries of State, and that they enquired who knew
me: He replied, Mr. Graham, who was sent for; they asked him as to my
Reputation; they asked him if he knew me, and how long; he said, about twenty
years: they enquired of him concerning me. He told me Mr. Graham answered, I
had served his Majesty and his Father in England and beyond Sea faithfully, and
that I was very honest Man, and also that I was a great Sufferer, and that I
had received great Disappointments, and had been ill dealt with by some that
belonged to the Court, as, in particular, Mr. Edward Progers; and that they
engaged Mr. Graham to come over to the King's Bench, and to assure me, that I
should be requited for my Sufferings: Also to take me over with him to the
King, where I should have the Promise of His Majesty for the same, and the
opportunity to declare my former Grievances, and receive His Royal Word and
Promise for my Reward and Sufferings. After this Discourse, Mr. Graham came in,
who told me the same things as above, and that I might be assured of those
things from the King; also that he had an Order to carry me to His Majesty. I
told him, I could say nothing, neither would I go to Whitehall; for I had taken
a Resolution against going to Whitehall. I was hard pressed for my going
thither. I desired to be excused; for if I could say any thing, I must be
guilty my self: But he told me, whether I was or not, I might be recompensed
for my Sufferings: Upon which I took my leave, and went away not well pleased,
that for my Requital I should be thought an ill Man or a Traitor.

That on October the 14, 1681. Mr. Booth came to me about Eleven a Clock to the
King's Bench; we walked in the Garden about an Hour. His Business was to know my
Mind, whether I would go voluntarily to the King or not. He also told me, That
Mr. Wilson, my Lord Shaftsbury's Secretary, that was in the Gatehouse, had sent
to the Council to inform Them, That if he might have his Pardon, he would come
in, and declare his Knowledge; and therefore he would have me to have the
Honor to be the First Discover. I told him, I had no Business at Whitehall.
Then he told me, it was intended that Mr. Graham should be at his Lodging this
Afternoon, to see if I would go to the King; if not, my Lord Chief Justice's
Warrant would be sent to compel me to appear at his Chamber, where there would
be some of the Council to examine me and swear me. He also told me, That the
Duke of York had a great Estate in Ireland, and that he would give me Five
hundred Pounds per Ann. there, besides all former Promises, to be settled upon
me and my Heirs, if I would come in a Witness against my Lord Shaftsbury. I
told him, they might meet with many Persons in this Age, that would accept of
such Offers. I told him, if I had any thing to say, it was the most proper time
in Court, for me and Witnesses to speak their Knowledge. I told him, I did not
know, but the Presence of a King and his Promises, might make a Man say more
than what was true* or than he could say fairly in a Court. Mr. Booth asked me,
if I did not ride with my Sword and Pistols out of Town with my Lord
Shaftsbury, when he went to Oxford? I told him I did, I could not do less than
wait upon him out of Town, who had been so kind, with the rest of the Lords
Proprietors, to do me the Honor to make me their Governor for the Country of
Carolina. He then told me, I must needs be privy to this, That if His Majesty
would not pass Three Acts, One, for Excluding the Duke of York; the next, for
making void the Act of Queen Elizabeth against Recusancy; and the third, for
Uniting Protestant Subjects; then by force of Arms he was to be compelled. He
told me, all the Council was satisfied I knew this, and as much as any Person,
in regard that both my Lord Shaftsbury and my self was disgusted at Court. He
said, the Council knew I was a Soldier, and was satisfied I was to act in that
Concern. I begun now to consider what a Fortune was now promised, and what a
good Addition this Five Hundred Pounds Additional from the Duke of York would
make to the former Promises; and after he was gone, I acquainted my Wife, and
told her how great a Person she was like to be: But this was no News to her;
for Mr. Booth had often been desiring her, for her own good, to engage me in
this Honorable Service. Thus these things in our Troubles served us to be
merry with, to consider how easily we were like to leap into an Estate: But all
this time we were out without fear and danger of enjoying it, or any part of
it, much less of intailing it upon our Posterity:

October the Fifteenth, 1681. This day, about Eleven a Clock, Mr. Booth came
again to me to the King's Bench, to know of me, if I yet would go to Whitehall:
I demanded, For what? He told me, To Evidence against the Earl of Shaftsbury. I
told him, I had nothing to say against him. He importuned me not to lose this
great Opportunity I now had. Before we parted, Mr. Baines came to us; I desired
to know why they should be so urgent to have me a Witness. He told me, there
were none but Irish Witnesses yet to come against my Lord Shaftsbury, and they
were not Persons of Credit; but if I would come in, although I had been
unfortunate in my Private Concerns, yet I was not blemished in my Credit. Mr.
Baines told me, if I would not go to Whitehall, the Marshal had an Habeas
Corpus from my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, to carry me. So we parted.

About Four a Clock in the Afternoon, the Marshal came with Mr. Booth and Mr.
Baines to require me to go along with him. I demanded, Whither? He told me to
Whitehall. I demanded to see his Warrant. He showed it me. Now I was forced to
obey. After my coming thither, in a little time I was called into Mr. Secretary
Jenkins's Office, where he and my Lord Conway was, who strictly, but very
fairly and honestly, Examined me about my Lord Saftsbury, and what I knew of
any Design against His Majesty. I told them, as I did to the former Attackers,
I knew nothing. Great Arguments were used; but I could give no satisfactory
Answer, as was (I conceived) expected. After this, His Majesty came into the
Office; when He saw me, He was pleased to do me the Honor, to say, He knew me
well, and that I had served His Father and His Majesty faitfully, and He hoped
I would not decline my Obedience. To which I answered, I never deserved to be
suspected. His Majesty was pleased to tell me, He had not had the Opportunity
to serve His Friends, but hoped He might: He was pleased to promise to consider
me for my sufferings. Then his Majesty began to Examine me, (If I had been
exhorted by the best Divine in England, he could not have said more than His
Majesty) in telling me, what Kindness was intended me, was not with a design to
invite me to speak a Word but Truth it self; and that if He knew I did, or any
other Person, His Majesty would never endure them. Then His Majesty demanded,
What I knew of a Design against His Person and Government? I truly told His
Majesty, That I knew nothing of any Plot or Design against His Majesty or
Government; that I admired why I should be suspected, that had served His
Majesty and His Father in England and Beyond Sea, and was as Instrumental as
any Person in His Majesty's Restoration: But some Persons had possessed His
Majesty, I was deep in some Design against the Government, and knew much of my
Lord Shaftsbury: So His Majesty seemed not to be satisfied, but still pressed
hard upon me. To all His Majesty's Questions, I could give no Answer that would
satisfy. Then His Majesty was pleased to tell me, If I would say, As I hope to
be saved, I knew nothing of any Design against His Person, He would believe me;
which I did say, in those very Words, which His Majesty seemed to wonder at.
Then I was left to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, who was pleased to use such Arguments
as he thought fit. I told him, I knew my Duty to His Majesty, I would not draw
a Sword against Him; but I could freely do it against some of the Court, that
were Enemies to His Majesty and His Friends; and so I was dismissed out of the
Office. Then I was carried into another Room, where His Majesty, my Lord
Chancellor, Lord Hallifax, Lord Hyde, the two Secretaries of State were, and
the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton; where I was Examined, Mr. Graham, Mr. Booth,
and Mr. Baines present. My Lord Chancellor was sharp upon me with several
Questions, which I could give no Answer to. Content thus I was to run the
Gantlet from one place to another. My Lord Chancellor would not believe, but I
must be guilty of knowing great things against my Lord Shaftsbury. I told him,
If I could not be believed upon my Word there, if they pleased to bring my Lord
Shaftsbury upon his Trial, I would declare it in open Court upon Oath what my
Knowledge was, without any hopes of Gain or Advancement. My Lord Chancellor, I
thank him, did me that Equity, to tell me, There were two sorts of Advancement;
I need not give my self that trouble, for I was like to come to my Trial my
self before my Lord Shaftsbury. My Lord Chancellor demanded of me, If I had no
Commission for this New Service against His Majesty. I told him, No. Then he
told me, I was to have a Troop to consist of fifty Men. I told him, That was a
small Troop: I hoped, that if ever I had a Command of a Troop, it should be a
better than that. But I desired to know who gave that Information. He told me,
Mr. Booth; who was by, and was listed under me. I desired Mr. Booth to tell me,
if he had given this Information, and made this Oath? He told me, Yes; and it
was true. I was unconcerned, and am, knowing my self not guilty: For I protest,
in the Presence of Almighty God, by whom I expect to be judged, I never had a
Word with Mr. Booth, or any other Person, in my whole Life, tending to any such
thing. For at the same time that he said this was to be, which was when the
Parliament was to be last at Oxford, I had taken, on a Ship for Carolina, where
I was to go Governor, a Business more to my Content than any Military Employ;
especially against His Majesty, and the Government. But I conceived this was in
hopes of Reward, and to show his Loyalty; for which, I believe, he will neither
be regarded, nor rewarded. I told the Council, if they had such another
Witness, they might do my Business. I thank God, I am not afraid of him, nor
twenty more such Witnesses, if they come against me; for, it is well known, he
has been accused and condemned for Clipping and Coining, besides Murder; for
which he had His Majesty's gracious Pardon, as I have been informed. I am glad
I live in such Days, wherein Juries conceive they are Judges as to Matter of
Fact; for if they were not, I am satisfied, in this Swearing Age, many an
honest Man would be forced to march before they know either Rank or File. At
the same time I told my Lord Chancellor, if any honest Man would come and
witness against me, I would never desire His Majesty's Pardon, or ever will.
Let all the World judge how unlikely it is, that I should be thus concerned,
when I had about twenty eight Menservants, four or five Women-Servants,
besides my Wife, three Sons, (of which, two had been in His Majesty's Service
at Sea,) and one Daughter, all the Children I have, prepared, and lay at my
Charge, intending for Carolina, and thought my self happy; and was resolved to
leave England, with a Resolution, to see if I could find a People that had less
Wit, and more Honesty, than I have found in my own Country; where, I must needs
say, I have found very unfaithful Dealings amongst such as account themselves
Persons of Honor and Quality. But truly, when I thought I had made my self
almost ready for my intended Voyage, I found my self like a Man betwitched,
that could neither budge, nor stir; until, at last, some Debts that I was bound
for fell upon me, and others of my own increased, being burdened with a great
Charge, which unexpectdly put a stop, at present, to my intended Voyage. I did
always intend to leave England honestly and honorably: Those things fell so
unexpectedly, that my self and Wife concluded there was a Divine Hand in it.

The Information of Jarvis James, Gent.
I Jarvis James, Gent* do declare, That the abovenamed Captain Henry Wilkinson
came to me upon Tuesday the 11th of October, 1681. in the Evening; and did
then, and likewise every Day, from time to time afterward, make me acquainted
with the several Treaties and Transactions between him the said Captain Henry
Wilkinson and Mr. Baines, Mr. Booth and Mr. Graham, and the several other
Persons in this his Information mentioned; and that they were the very same in
substance, with what he has herein set forth, and declared; for, at his
Request, and for my own Satisfaction, I kept a daily Journal during the time of
their Treating. All which shall be attested upon Oath, when required.

The Information of Mrs. Susannah Wilkinson, Wife of Captain Henry Wilkinson.
I The said Susannah Wilkinson do declare, That on Wednesday, the 12th of
October, 1681. I went to the King's Bench Prison, to speak with my Husband;
(where I met with three Carpenters, which were entertained by him, as Servants
for Carolina, and who had waited a long time; and not finding him likely to
proceed in his Voyage, they desired to be discharged;) but not finding him in
the King's Bench, I went with them to Mr. Weaver's House; where I found him in
Company with Mr. Booth, and one Mr. Baines, (who were very largely treating my
Husband with Wine.) My Husband went out to persuade the Servants, and
discoursed them: Then Mr. Booth took an Opportunity to speak to me, and told
me, my Husband was a most obstinate Man, and Mr. Booth desired me to persuade
my Husband to be guided and persuaded by him the said Mr. Booth. And he said,
the King would do more for my Husband, than ever the Lord Shaftsbury would; and
that the King was sensible of my Husband's Service, and Sufferings; and if my
Husband would be persuaded by him, the said Mr. Booth, to appear against the
Lord Shaftsbury, he was sure my Husband would be the most happy Man in the
World, and that he should have 500 l. a Year settled upon him and his Heirs for
ever.

That on Friday, October the 14th, 1681. I was with my Husband, at the King's
Bench Prison, when Mr. Booth came into our Room. Mr. Booth took an Opportunity
to speak with me, and desired me, for God's sake, to persuade my Husband to be
ruled by him; which if my Husband would, he might be an happy Man, and the Duke
of York would settle 500 l. a Year in Ireland upon my Husband and his Heirs;
and very much entreated me to persuade my Husband to what he desired. All which
shall be attested upon Oath, when required.

FINIS.

