THE INTEREST OF PRINCES AND STATES.

LONDON, Printed for John Wickins at the White-Hart against St Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet, 1680.

THE PREFACE.
INterest, is a word of several definitions, but that which in Creatures,
having reason or sense, is preservation and propagation, is that in a State,
which I mean by Interest; and this is either Domestic looking inward, as
relating to the particular frame and kind of Government, or Foreign looking
outward, as regarding such alterations abroad, as may be of good or evil
consequence to a State; and such counsels, deliberations, or actions, as may
improve good, or prevent evil, are according to the Interest of a Nation, and
the contrary against it. And taking the words thus, the prosperity, or
adversity, if not the life and death of a State, is bound up in the observing
or neglecting its Interest.

For as no Country was ever unhappy, that followed it, so none ever prospered
(except by chance) that forsook or missed it; and consequently, it is matter of
the greatest concernment to a Prince, to study, and make himself Master of it,
that in keeping his Counselors in awe, by his own knowledge and experience, in
matters of State, he may have his affairs the better and faithfullier
prosecuted; but in searching for his Interest, he ought to be exceeding
careful, of not being misled by former Examples, which are to Politicians, as
of old, the Stars to Navigators, rightly understood, the best Guide, and
mistaken, the most dangerous.

For Interest in all Countries is changeable, that which was in one Age, not
being always the same in the next, as the Crowns of Spain and France do
sufficiently evince. For Spain being by corruption in Counselors, and
Ministers of State, fraud, oppression, and cousenage in Officers and Servants,
with persecution in the Church, and severity in Government, causing several
Revolts, brought at this time low, and into a languishing condition, the
Interest of the European Princes, is changed from that of being against the
House of Austria, and for France, to that of being for It, and against France,
the latter being at present, under more than suspicion, that having now got the
advantage of Spain, they intend to improve it to an universal Monarchy, as
Spain formerly designed.

But as a Prince ought to be studious in discovering of his Interest, so to be
solicitous in examining the Integrity of Counsels given him, lest by corrupt
Counselors, he should be put (for private ends) upon designs prejudicial, if
not contrary and destructive to the Interest of his Country. And because the
wisdom, or defects of Princes, appears much in their choice of Counselors and
Ministers of State (who under them, are the managers of their Interests) there
ought to be in the election of such, a special eye to their principles, as well
as abilities, avoiding with care, all avaricious persons, as men, who for
advantage, will upon all occasions, forsake, and desert all fidelity, the chief
ingredient of a good Counselor. For when men have parts without honesty, they
are but the greater instruments of mischief; and we find that little more than
common parts assisted with integrity, industry, and diligence, have done, and
do the greatest things in the world: Nay, that ordinary parts, with such
qualifications, do more than the sublimest without them, the art of Government
not being so mysterious, as State Monopolists would make it, honesty (as King
James used to say) being the best policy, and surely, that is the best
Government, that provides most for the employment of the Honestest men.

For as no State can flourish, where their Interest is not pursued, so public
Interest will never be the Rule, where Counselors are not faithful; and when
public Principles do not govern men, private Interest will, and render their
Country as Merchandise for the highest Chapman; so that although the Notion,
that Interest cannot lie, is true, yet it is not (in Subjects) singly to be
trusted. For since private, worldly, and carnal Interest (which in persons
wanting honesty is always mercenary) may be changed by the bribing bounty of
other Princes, or States; it is a great Error in those, understanding their
Interest, to rely upon their Counselors, or Officers, without examining,
whether their Counsels and Actions are pursuant of, and consonant to their
Interest; or yet in great trusts, to presume upon any other qualifications in
Counselors, and Civil and Military Ministers, than either truly religious, or
truly honorable moral principles, which cannot change, as private simple
Interest, not bottomed upon the one, or the other principle, will surely do
according to the greatness of temptations.

And therefore, as upon good or bad Counselors, and Ministers, depends the
happiness or infelicity of a Prince, and State, Sir Walter Rawleigh affirming,
that a Commonwealth is more secure where the Prince is not good, than where the
Ministers are bad; so they cannot show more wisdom, than in signally rewarding,
and encouraging the former, and exemplarily punishing the latter. I know that
Counsels are not always to be judged of, according to success, it being
possible, that honest and well grounded Counsels may miscarry, and to punish
men in such cases, were to discourage the ablest and most virtuous Persons from
serving of their Prince or State; but sometimes designs are written in such
large characters of selfishness and corruption, the foundation of them being
laid in lies and forgeries, as is legible to every impartial Eye; and when such
appears, by a true discovery upon inquiry, the Criminals ought to be made
examples to posterity.

Formerly the affairs of Christendom were supposed to be chiefly swayed by the
two great powers of Austria (wherein Spain is understood) and France: from whom
other Princes and States derived their Peace and War, according to the several
parties they adhered unto. But now the puissance of the former being so much
abated, that it deserves no rank above its Neighbors, France of the two,
remains the only formidable Potentate, of whose greatness, all Princes and
States are as much concerned to be jealous, as formerly they were of that of
Austria.

For, considering the French King, in relation to France, stored with good
Officers, Men, Money, and Ammunition, to his several augmentations gained from
all his Neighbors, by conquest, exchange, or purchase (as from Spain, Italy,
Germany, Lorrain, and the Spanish Netherlands) giving him free passage into
their several Dominions, and to his present Naval strength, increased lately by
an unhappy accident The late Dutch War.
, he is accommodated for any Design his ambition shall prompt him to, or at
least, should the sickly and weak young King of Spain die childless, to dispute
uncontroulably, his right to all the Countries in Europe belonging to that
Crown, as also to contend for the Imperial dignity, should he survive the
present Emperor, if he stays till then: and if his aims may be guessed at by
the writings of his Subjects, which are commonly the transcripts or presages of
their Princes sense and mind, he pretends to all the Lands, lying on his side
the River Rhein, as belonging to the ancient Kingdom of Austratia, (his
supposed inheritance) which caused a learned man of Strasbourg (who suspected
their Commonwealth to be struck at) to maintain in writing (some few years
past) the Rights of their City against all pretenders. And thus upon the whole,
considering France furnished with a King, not wanting high thoughts or
activity, less cannot be expected from him, than to design an universal
Monarchy, which consequently makes it the Common Interest of all European
Princes and States (as they value their own safety) to unite, for the keeping
of him within bounds and limits.

And now as England is not the least in the general concern of Europe, and
because seated by it self, and divided by the Sea from all other Nations, I
shall begin with it.

Advertisement TO THE READER.
ALL these Discourses save the last, being the result of the observations made
by the Author long ago, in the time of his Travels, and writ some Years since:
If the Reader shall find any discrepancy therein to the Present Times, either
in the Age, or Decease of Princes, or other persons, or in some little Change
in Territories, Affairs, or Governments, he is desired to impute the same to
the Mutations, which have since happened in several Kingdoms and States, and
not to the Authors neglect or oversight, who has throughout, with all
Integrity, endeavored nothing but Truth in matter of Fact. And he does
reasonably hope, that those Alterations which will be found, are not so
material, as to lessen the value of the Deductions and Conclusions, which are
offered by this Treatise.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
1. THE Interest of England Page 1. 2. The Interest of Spain Page 74. 3. The
Interest of Portugal Page 93. 4. The Interest of the United Netherlands Page
100. 5. Observations upon the Government of the United Netherlands Page 119. 6.
The Interest of Germany, the Emperor and Empire Page 139. 7. The Interest of
Switzerland Page 169. 8. The Interest of France Page 178. 9. The Interest of
Geneve Page 195. 10. The Interest of Italy Page 208. 11. The Interest of the
City of Venice Page 219. 12. The Interest of the City of Genoua Page 230. 13.
The Interest of Denmark Page 247. 14. The Interest of Sweden Page 259. 15. The
Interest of Poland Page 270. 16. The original, growth and decay, of the
Reformed in France Page 275. 17. The most material Debates in that pretended
Parliament, called by Richard Cromwell. Page 331.
ERRORS.
PAge 158. line 28. read Evangelical League. p. 262. l. 13. r. as Usurpers.

THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND STATED.
HOlding it necessary in the Discoursing of England, to consider its Domestic,
and Foreign Interests severally; I shall observe that method, and handle them
distinctly, beginning with the first.

The Isle of Great Britain, of which England is the most considerable part, and
that which is chiefly taken notice of in the World, having the advantage of an
Island, in being divided from all other Countries, by the Ocean, Narrow and
Northern Seas, is not subject to those incursions that Contiguous Countries
are, not being in danger from abroad whilst its Naval strength is preserved, by
keeping their shipping in good repair, and their Mariners encouraged by good
usage: Neither is it fit for Foreign acquisitions, in regard of the uncertainty
of wind and weather, and chargeableness of transportation; but contenting
themselves with the bounds that providence has given them, making it their
design to improve their advantage for trade, to increase their greatness at
home, is their first Domestic Interest; for as self-defence is the chief
interest of every Creature, Natural or Politic, and as without trade, no
Nation can be formidable, especially at Sea, nor able to maintain a sufficient
Naval-guard, or defend themselves against their powerful Neighbors; so Trade
must be the principal Interest of England. And this Nature seems to admonish
them unto, prohibiting their affecting Foreign Conquests, by placing them with
advantages as they are an Island. First, for preservation, and without much for
augmentation. Secondly, for viewing the actions of their Neighbors, and
qualifying them with might and strength sufficient to render them Arbitrators
in their differences. And thirdly, for advancing both their Home, and Foreign
Traffic, in endowing them with Natural helps for Trade beyond all other
Countries: As with plenty of staple Commodities, incompassing them with
profitable and rich Seas, convenient and safe Havens and Bays, bold Coasts,
Rivers and good Ports, all affording matter of encouragement for Foreign
Commerce, incomparable means in their many Harbors for increasing of their
Navigation, and great invitations to strangers to make use of these advantages
in trading with the Country. And yet besides these Natural helps, England has
further the advantage of all other Countries, in some customs and practices: As
in that of breeding the younger Sons of Gentlemen, and sometimes of the
Nobility, to the Ministry, Law, Trade, and Physic, without prejudice to their
Gentility, their Heralds not requiring so much as any restoration in such
Cases; although it frequently falls out, that Gentlemen, during their
Apprentiships to Trades, come by the death of their Elder Brothers to be
Baronets, and sometimes Barons. In which particular, England may well be said
to come nearest unto ancient Prudence, and right Reason, of all other Nations.
For if no Country can be rich or flourish without Trade, as indisputably it
cannot, nor be more or less considerable, but according to the proportion it
has of Commerce; and that anciently men were esteemed, honored and dignified
according to the benefit and commodity their Country had received by them; the
Traders of a Nation ought to be most encouraged, and Trade accounted the most
honorable of all professions. Secondly, by their greatest nobility, marrying
with all degrees, where fortunes answer their qualities. Thirdly, in his
Majesty's Prerogative, for dignifying men of acquired Estates, as he sees
cause. And fourthly, in that the single possession of Estates, renders in
reputation the owners of them Gentlemen, all being vast benefits to the Nation,
(which other Countries are strangers unto) in preventing idleness in their
numerous Gentry, and encouraging industry in all sorts of people. In Germany,
Denmark, Sweden, and Poland, it is esteemed below the quality of a Gentleman,
to be bred to either Trade, Law, Ministry, or Physic: (except that among the
Papists, some are bred to the Church to get great Estates, that leaving no
known posterity, they may thereby advance their Families, as they many times do
in Germany, Italy, and other places.) Neither will the greatest fortunes tempt
them to marry into the Families of any of these Callings, they choosing to live
miserably, as many of them do, rather than to match under their degree, or at
least, not into such, as they esteem noble. And indeed, they cannot well do
otherwise, without danger of degradation, one of the reasons for the deposition
of Errick King of Sweden, Uncle to Gustavus Adolphus, being the undervaluing
himself in his marriage; and if the Emperor, or Northern Kings, confer honors
upon any of their Subjects, not of ancient descent, they seldom last longer in
esteem, than the first Generation, the Families of these Countries being so
stated, as makes it almost impossible, upon any account to introduce a new
lasting Race of Gentility, save that in Sweden they have in these latter ages
allowed, a general command in their Armies, the faithful and prudent
discharging the employment of an Ambassador extraordinary, or the election into
the Senate, (which consists of 40 persons) to be a good original of new
Nobility or Gentry. In the United Netherlands, the Gentlemen are much upon the
same punctilio's, except that in Marriage (for good fortunes) they would mix;
but that the trading party, not valuing Gentility without proportionable
Estates, seldom, or never, willingly do it. And from hence it is (in a great
part) that Gelderland, and Overyssel, two Provinces that abound in number of
Gentry, are so poor, whilst Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, the first, and
last, having few ancient Gentry; and the second, none but the Prince of Orange,
are so rich. France is not so strictly tied up by these rules, as the
preceding Countries are, their Nobility marrying any where for money, as the
Nieces of the last great Cardinal shows, besides that they allow of Estates got
by Trade, to be laudable Foundations for new raised Families, in both which
principles they are surely wise, and thrive the better, whilst other Countries
are kept low by their contrary practices; for were it not for the benefit that
that Country reaps by the encouragement which is given there unto Trade, it
were impossible for them to subsist under their great burdens; but no people
comes so near the English, in the chief of these circumstances, as the wise
Venetians, Genouesers, Lucesers, and the Florentines, who all allowing the
exercise of Traffic in their Nobility and Gentry, reap the benefit of such
Prudence, as appears in the three first, exceeding their Neighbors much, in
prosperity and wealth, and the Prince and People of the last, being abundantly
the better by it; for were it not for their principle of Commerce, encouraged
by some Liberty in Conscience, connived at in Leghorne (the only Port-Town of
Trade under that Prince) the people would be as poor, as they are thin, not
able to live under the severity of that Government: but if these instances be
not sufficient to prove the profit that accrews unto a Country, by a trading
Gentry, there needs no further traveling for demonstration, than England,
where before the reformation of Religion, that Gentlemen had idle Convents to
put their younger Sons into, Trade was there so small, that the Customs
amounted not to 10000 l. per an. whereas they are now, or have been lately,
more than fifty times as much; which proves, First, the advantage that Trade
brings both to King and People; and Secondly, that Trade has been much
increased, by taking younger Brothers off from their sloathful way of living,
and applying them with their Patrimonies to Trade and Commerce. The experience
of this, may reprove those, who both in State of England, page 434, 435, 436.
discourse, and writing, plead for the vain ancient custom of Idleness, in the
younger Brothers of England, as if they preferred being their eldest Brothers
Servants, with the privilege of filling up the lower end of their Tables,
before the present laudable practice, and incumbent duty of industry, inabling
them to live in equality with their eldest Brothers. And surely, it is the
glory, and not shame of England (as our new pretenders to Politics would have
it) that by Commerce, they have made themselves so formidable in the World,
whilst all other Northern Countries (the United Netherland as to their Gentry
not excepted) by their superstitious adhering to their old customs, are so
inconsiderable. And certain it is, that England could not have had those great
things to have boasted of at Sea, as now they have; nor could they stand before
their Neighbors, were it not for Traffic, which is the only thing that makes
a Country rich, -- Law, and Physic, by great Fees, and corrupt Practice,
having a great share in impoverishing this Nation, but none in the enriching of
it, fees to both Professions being in all other Countries very moderate,
compared with England: a Physician, in no other place, having for a visit above
18 d. star. except at Venice, where it is 2 s. 6 d. and in some places, as at
Newport, and Lisle, in Flanders, etc. but 6 d. and even at Amsterdam, and at
Antwerpen, the first equal to any place for wealth, and the latter next
considerable, not above 12 Stivers, which is about 13 d. and Lawyers 2 s. 6 d.
for their opinion, and as much an hour, for a business that requires long
consultation and work, much of their pleading being cast into that price; so
that England may be reckoned to exceed in their fees to both Professions, ten
times the rates of other Countries. But if the benefit of Commerce be not
sufficient to convince the Enemies of trading Gentlemen, peradventure the
impossibility of reducing the Gentry and Nobility of England, to the mode of
other Countries, without utter ruin to them, may do it, and therefore, they
may do well to consider, that to answer other Countries in their Rules,

First, All the Families of the Gentry must be so stated, as that no way (not
even by desert) may be left for increasing the number of them.

Secondly, None descended from them, either Males or Females, must marry any
but such as are of those Families; whereas with us a Yeoman, or one who is no
Gentleman, marrying one that is a Baroness by Inheritance, the eldest Son of
such a Bed Inherits all the Titles descended upon his Mother from her Ancestors.

Thirdly, None of their Sons must be bred to any Callings, either the Ministry,
Law, or Physic; nay, nor be Court-Officers, except such as they account Noble:
(which are not many, Secretaries not being in that number) they reckoning all
Callings a debasement of Gentility, as well as Trade; and he that marries with
the Daughter of any person of a Calling, to deserve the punishment of
degradation; And therefore, should Trade be maintained in England, in such a
way, as the riches got by it would remain in the Trading party, the Gentry
would consequently be poor, compared with the Trading-Families; and as honors
and respect will follow Estates, so the Gentry would be little regarded, whilst
the Traders would carry away all Interest and esteem in their Countries, as the
Trading-Families of Holland do at present, from the poor Gentry of Gelderland
and Overyssel, two Provinces of the United Netherlands. But if these new
Statists shall still desire the want of Trade, with poverty, rather than
riches, with the practice of that they call the debasement of Gentility, they
ought farther to consider, that the Case of England is not the same with other
Northern Nations; for Denmark, Sweden, and Poland, being all upon the same
Principle, of despising Trade in their Gentry, are alike poor, wanting
Commerce, and so under the less danger one of another: But England, having rich
and potent Neighbors, Trade is absolutely necessary for their preservation, in
rendering them equal in power, both at Sea and Land, to their great and opulent
emulators; so that in true English, they that plead for less plenty in the
People of England, do no less in effect (though in Charity I will hope they
think not so) than argue for exposing them as a prey to their Enemies. But
these principles are not strange in them, who, in pleading for keeping the
people low, seem to have lost all Natural affection to their Country, in
accusing the Commons (by which I suppose is meant the Yeomandry of England,
who, without ostentation, State of England, page 60, 61, 62.
may be called the best of their kind in the World, the Peasants of other
Countries being Brutes in Religion, good Nature and Civility, compared to them)
of being the coursest Bran, and the worst of People, etc. saying, they are so
distastful to their Gentry, that they wish their Country less plentiful, or
more burdened with Taxes, as the way to refine the manners of the Common
people. But, although the Competitors with England in Trade, may be glad of
having a Confession of Pride, Insolence, and ill Conditions in the English,
from one of themselves, to make use of abroad, for their own advantage, and to
the prejudice of the English Nation; yet if it be believed by any that know
England, they must have changed their observations of it, that people having
never lain under such a censure until now, that it is untruly, maliciously, and
imprudently clapped upon them, by, I may say, a degenerate Countryman, who,
in his reproaches, shows little of that natural affection, that every one
owes to the Land of their Nativity, nor suitableness to the Care his Majesty
and Council take for promoting Trade, by several Councils appointed to that
end: but what use soever Foreigners may make of these accusations against the
English Traders and Merchants in other Countries, I suppose the new Philosophy
of Poverty, and the transplantation of all Non-Conformists, State of England.
called the Sons of Belial, (the ready way to penury) being best for a Nation,
will have but few Disciples; for though all is thought to be made good, by
accusing the People of England of want of that humble respect and awful
reverence to the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, that is due to them, those to
whom the Commons of England are not strangers, know that they are not wanting
in good nature, or due observance to any of the three Orders, where there is
Justice, and not Oppression, in the two first, nor Cruelty, Ignorance,
Profaneness, or Debauchery in the last; for although Greatness may procure
Fear, nothing but Virtue, Honesty, and Justice, can Love, and true Reverence.
It may well be questioned, who it is, that the men of these principles aim to
gratify by them? for nothing can be more prejudicial to his Majesty, than
publicly to maintain that Plenty in his people, is inconsistent with Peace and
good Order in his Government, or that reducing the people to a complaining
condition, is the way to make them happy, as this Gentleman insinuates.

This seeming digression is necessitated, for Trade being the true and chief
intrinsic Interest of England, without which it cannot subsist, thus much
could not well be avoided, in the making out, that as well by some
Constitutions and Customs, as by its Native Commodities and Conveniences, it
so far excels all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths in worldly advantages; that
Providence may be said to have left nothing more for the People of England to
do, in order to their earthly felicity, than desiring of it; the matter of
Trade being naturally so prepared and fitted for them, that it may even be a
reproach to them, not to advance Trade, though no great glory to do it;
nothing, except some accidents extraordinary, or violent obstructions, (as
imposing upon Conscience, etc.) or want of good Laws, or the execution of them,
being capable of hindering the increase of it. And now, as from the growth of
Trade there does naturally arise, not alone riches to the Subject, rendering a
Nation considerable, but also inc^ease of Revenue, and therein power and
strength to the Sovereign; so it is the undoubted Interest of his Majesty, to
advance and promote Trade, by removing all obstructions, and giving it all
manner of encouragement.

As First, By lessening the overgreat impositions upon Native Commodities, and
upon such as are necessarily imported to be manufactured in England, or to be
again transported.

Secondly, By causing the Native Commodities to be faithfully and truly made,
and ordered.

Thirdly, By laying all Companies open, or at least, by leaving them free, for
all to come into them that please, without fines, more than a small
acknowledgment, tying them in such case, from burthening their own Manufactures
with Taxes, as they usually do for the raising money to spend profusely and
wantonly: what objections may be made against this general rule, in reference
to the East-India's Joint Stock, I know not; but this I am sure may be said for
it, that the Hollanders, driving their East India Trade by a Joint Stock, is no
argument for England to do the same: for they having by the public purse of
the Company, purchased and conquered several Countries and petty Kingdoms,
which ingageth them often in Wars with their Neighbors, and necessitateth them
to keep up a standing Militia of 30 or 40000 men, with many Garrisons, and 100
or more Ships, equipped as well for Men of War at Sea, as for Merchants use;
the carrying on of such a Government, and defraying the charge of it, is no
otherwise feasible, than by a Society and Joint Stock, the maintaining of their
propriety being impracticable by an open Trade; but the case not being the same
with England, they having nothing in propriety, save the insignificant Castle
of St. George, upon the Coast of Cormandel, and the little Island of Bomby,
given them lately by the King, their Trade being all by Factories, there is not
that reason nor necessity upon them, for a Joint Stock, as upon Holland: and
Societies, in restraining the number, both of Buyers of the Native, and Sellers
of Foreign Commodities, must consequently tend to the abating the price of the
first, and inhancing the rate of the latter, nothing being more plain to
reason, than that the fewer buyers of Native Commodities, the cheaper they must
be, as the fewer sellers of Foreign, the dearer they must be; and that which
abateth the price of Native Commodities, and raises the price of Foreign, must
be against the Interest of a Nation: and therefore the Netherlanders, who
certainly understand the Interest of Trade, equal to any people living, though
by making the Interest of Trade, matter of State, they have an eye of
regulation upon it, yet admit of no restraining Companies, as in England,
except in their East and West India Trades, where they have great possessions
in propriety.

Fourthly, By carefully protecting Merchants abroad, from the wrongs and
injuries of other Nations.

Fifthly, By making the transferring Bills of debt good in Law, it being a
great advantage to Traders (especially to young men of small Stocks) to be able
to supply themselves with money, by the sale of their own Bills of debt.

Sixthly, By constituting a Court Merchant, after the example of other
Countries, to prevent tedious and chargeable Suits in Law, taking men off from
their business, and in making the advancement and protection of Trade, matter
of State.

Seventhly, By having Registers of all Real Estates, as is profitably practiced
in other Countries, and in this, within the Manor of Taunton Dean, which in a
natural way, will abate the Interest of money, and make Purchases certain; for
it is no little prejudice and blemish to England, that of all the Countries in
Europe, there is none, where Purchasers, or Lenders of money upon Land, are
upon such uncertainty in their dealings, as in England.

Eighthly, By taking away all privileges (except of Parliament) from persons
and places, tending to the defrauding Creditors of their debts, and extending
the Statute of Bankrupts against all persons not Trading, as well as Traders,
it being but equal Justice, that all men should be alike liable to the payments
of their debts.

Ninthly, Banks (not Bankers, but) such as are in use at Venice, Amsterdam, and
Hamburg, where the several States are security, keeping particular accounts of
Cash, for all men, desiring it, are of great advantage to Merchants and
Traders, in securing their moneys from many casualties, and making receipts and
payments, speedy and easy; besides, so certain, without the danger of losing
acquittances, or by death, or otherwise to be in want of Witnesses, as takes
away all occasions of suits about them, Bank-accounts being allowed for
undeniable testimonies in Law; but of these, I confess there are no thriving
and flourishing examples, save under Republics.

Tenthly, The making Free Ports (which England of all Countries in Europe, is
most proper for) giving liberty to Strangers, as well as Natives, upon payment
of a small duty, to keep Magazines of goods ready for transportation to other
Countries, according to the encouragement of Markets abroad, are great
increasers of Trade and Navigation, and so of riches; as appears, not only by
Holland, which is a Commonwealth, but also by St. Maloes, under the Monarchy
of France, and Leghorne, under that of Turkany; the first, for its bigness,
which contains but thirty six Acres of ground, being the richest City in
France; and the latter, the only place in that Princes Dominions, which,
compared to former times, can truly be said to flourish.

Eleventhly, Making business at the several Offices for Custom and Excise, and
in all other places, as easy, and as little vexatious as may be, in employing
such persons of honesty, integrity, and discretion, as will not abuse their
trusts, no more in insolency than falseness, is a great encouragement to
Traders; as also, making passing in and out of the Country by Strangers and
Travelers, untroublesom, is a motive and inducement to them, to satisfy their
curiosity in visiting the Kingdom, and spending their money in it. For to
object, that the incivilities travelers meet with in going in, and coming out
of France, hinders no resort thither, is more than can be proved; besides that,
admit it is not, yet the like usage in any other Country, would be a prejudice
to it, and would be surely so to France, were it not the humor at present of
this giddy Age, to run a madding after them; and certainly, the facility that
is in doing business in Holland, and the unmolested egress and regress that
Strangers and Travelers meet with there, is a great benefit to them.

Twelfthly, Would the Trading Corporations, choose after the example of London,
and according to their own Interests, and reason of their institution, their
members for Parliament out of themselves, the Interest of Trade would probably
be better understood, and faithfullier prosecuted than it is, and it cannot but
be a prejudice to Commerce, that they generally send Courtiers,
Country-Gentlemen, or their Recorders, to Parliament, who will be sure to
prefer their particular Interests before that of Trade, it being natural to all
men, to seek their own profit, before that of others.

Thirteenthly, As England has some beneficial Customs, which other Countries
are strangers unto, so it has others, as prejudicial, not known to Foreign
Governments; as the great expenses of Corporations, undoing many Citizens and
Townsmen; a Freeman of York, or Southampton, not being able to go through all
their Offices, according to Custom and expectation, in the first, under seven
or eight hundred pound; and the latter, six or seven hundred; which may well be
judged one cause, why York is so poor, and the other thrives no better; and the
like observation may be made of the most of the other Corporations: The great
charge of Sheriffs of the Counties has decayed, if not ruined many Families;
and the expense of Barristers, at their Readings, is a provocation to them, to
increase their sharking, and growing upon the people; all which bad effects,
are to be wished were remedied, so far as taking away these unnecessary
expenses will do it: And even London is not herein to be excused. For first,
Whereas, nothing tends more to the advancement of a people, than living under
wise and honest Governors, the charge of their Sheriffs, will for ever (so
long as that expense is continued) necessitate the having an Eye in their
Elections, more to Wealth than Virtue.

Secondly, Their levying money upon particular persons, by choosing such for
Sheriffs, as they presume have not Estates to hold, and must therefore Fine at
near the twentieth part of what they are worth, which may be repeated once a
Year, so long as the parties live, and cannot swear not to be worth ten
thousand pounds, is an unequal way of raising money; some escaping all their
days, that have two or three times the Estates of those that are forced to
Fine: and to cure this evil, the best way (as I conceive) is by Sheriffs laying
down the profuse and unnecessary expenses of their Shrievalties, according to
the example of the Countries, it being a solecism in politics, not practiced
any where but in England, that whilst some by Offices of little attendance and
service, get vast Estates, others by Offices of drudgery, are by great expenses
ruined.

And thirdly, The City has one rule, the reason of which is not to be
understood, ( viz.) that whereas one chosen Sheriff before Alderman, may free
himself by making Oath that he is not worth ten thousand pounds, yet if first
chosen Alderman, he is deprived of that liberty, as to that Magistracy, and
when afterward he comes to be chosen Sheriff, must hold, Fine, or go to
Prison, though not worth a Groat, as has often fallen out.

But besides this, the administration of some of the Fraternities in London,
stand in more need of reformation than that of the City; for whereas the
Primitive Institution of most of them, was for regulating and improving
mechanical Arts and Mysteries, now by mixing in the same Societies the more
generous and free Trades and Callings; the original reason of their
Incorporations is totally lost, many of the Trades, of which the Companies bear
the name, not being looked after, nor indeed any thing else to speak of,
besides managing their Revenues, and providing for eating and drinking: For the
maintenance of which they are often very burthensom to men in years of mean
Estates, as well as to young Traders of small beginnings, by imposing upon them
greater Fines for their Liveries, (not allowing the Plea of inability, as their
Charter obliges) vain unnecessary Feasts, and not holding of Offices, than
they are well able to bear, or indeed holds any proportion with the charge of
the Offices, the Fines being in some Companies four times as much as the charge
of the Offices comes to; that choosing such, as they suppose will not, or upon
several accounts cannot hold, they may have the benefit of such unreasonable
penalties, to which men submit, not only from ignorance of the Charter of the
Company, but also as not being able to contest with the Purse of the
Fellowship, or be at the charge of a special Verdict, or of bringing the matter
before all the Judges in the Chequer-Chamber, where, in such Case, many of
their Ordinances and practices would be found contrary to Magna Charta, and
Common Justice: for for private men to try their right by a Jury of Citizens,
who have born the like charge themselves, they are sure to have it given
against them and for the Companies, it being natural for men to desire that
others should run the Gantlop as themselves have done. And to maintain their
Arbitrary proceedings herein, they oblige their Members by Oath at their
admissions into their Companies to submit to their Orders, though never so
unreasonable or illegal, and then afterward press Obedience upon the account
of Conscience; and these oppressions are great hindrances to the flourishing
of this famous City, which I speak not from hearsay, but in some measure from
experience, recommending the consideration hereof unto authority for
regulation. For I am not of their opinion, who think popular Feastings and good
Fellowship, called Hospitality, to be the Interest of the Nation, because it
consumes the growth of the Country; but on the contrary, that it is altogether
against it: For, besides the provoking of the Judgments of God by such
inordinate living, Excess weakens men's bodies, spends vainly their time, dulls
their wits, and makes them unfit for action and business, which is the chief
advancer of any Government, and to supply the want of people in any Land, by a
riotous wasting the growth of it, is at best but a bad effect of a bad cause,
and against that rule which forbids doing evil that good may come of it; and
therefore, the true Interest of any Country is, by immunities, privileges, and
liberty of Conscience, so to encourage, and increase the number of people, as
they may rather be (in a sober way of living) too many, than too few for their
provisions: and we do find, that in former times, when Hospitality was in
England much greater than at present, and that merely in the expense of their
own provisions, without French Dishes, or much of either Spanish or French
Wines, the Country was poor to what it now is; and that it has been the
increase of the Trade and People of the Nation by Liberty and Privileges,
indulging tender Consciences, that has advanced them. And (as to the
retrenching of expenses) this seems to be agreeable to the principles of that
wise and great Statesman, Sir Walter Rawleigh, who says, that taking away all
superfluous charges and expenses, as well in Hospitality, as in lessening the
Fees, Allowances, and Wages of Ministers of little necessity, as also of
Pensions, Rewards, Entertainments, and Donaries, to be a laudable pansimony,
used by the Romans, and other well-governed States.

But, fourteenthly, imposing upon Conscience in matters of Religion, is a
mischief unto Trade, transcending all others whatsoever; for if the Traders and
Manufacturers be forced to fly their Countries, or withdraw their stocks, by
vexatious prosecutions, the having Natural Commodities in a Country, or no
great impositions upon them, will signify little to the Prince or People; and
therefore Liberty of Conscience is not only the Common Interest of all the
Nation, but especially of his Majesty, in that,

First, By it he obliges all his Subjects equally to him, no man having just
cause to be offended at another man's liberty, since he enjoys the same himself;
and more particularly, he obliges all the Non-Conformists to him, who can have
no other Interest than his, that in grace and favor gives them Liberty;
securing thereby, in an especial manner, all the several persuasions, from
agreeing upon any thing to the prejudice of their common friend; whereas the
Papists have, as others may have, other Interests. And were it in the power of
man (as it is the Prerogative of God alone) to force a belief or disbelief in
matters controversal, it were not (to speak politically) the moral interest of
his Majesty to make all his Protestant Subjects (who own no other head than
himself, and who differ only in Circumstantials) to be of one mind in Religion,
but on the contrary, to keep them divided in opinions as checks upon each
other. For as anciently in times of Popery, when there was no difference about
the worship of God, this Kingdom was not without continual troubles and
irruptions in State and Government; so were not the violent Church party kept
now in awe by a contrary interest, and that they had not Non-Conformists to
exercise their minds, and vent their choler upon, they might probably (as in
former times) soon prove mutinous. And as the variety of humors and Nations in
Hannibals Army were reckoned to tend much to the obedience of it (each being
spies upon the other) so the like benefit may be expected from the cherishing
and maintaining of the Non-Conformists in England. And, although a Prince
arrived to that height which is above Envy, and all fear from abroad, may
sometimes adventure in imposing in matters of Religion, it is not in any kind
excusable in them that are not in such a condition, but that stand in need, in
reference to the potency of their Neighbors, of the hearts of all their
people, especially in this age, when the large experience the World has had of
the insuccessfulness and evil of it, has made (even) in the greatest
Potentates, a general abatement therein, and now, when it is too late, they
grow weary of their rigor: The last Pope, as is affirmed, having dissuaded the
French King from attempting Geneva, when he thought to have obliged the Church
of Rome, by reducing of it.

And oh that England, whilst they have time, would be warned by the miseries of
others, to avoid the rock they have split upon. Had the former Kings of Spain
used in any degree the lenity that that Crown at present practices in their
Netherlands, where now a known Protestant may obtain his freedom of several
Cities, without having his Religion enquired into, as at Bruges, Newport, etc.
those Countries had not been so thin of people, nor Spain so depopulated as
they are, nor yet the whole House of Austria so low, as it now seems to be.
Nay, had the Pope made formerly so little use of his Inquisition as he does at
this time, few places being less inquisitive after men's belief, than Rome,
where one may be as good as he will, and spend all his days without being
proceeded against, either Ecclesiastically or Civilly, for not coming to their
Churches, Italy had had more people than it has, and been more considerable
than it is: The French could never advance by Massacres, of which they are
reckoned to have had thirty or forty, at several times, in several places, nor
yet get forward in power and greatness, until they laid aside Persecution;
confessing, The History of the Siege of Rochel.
as Lewis the XIII. did at the taking of Rochel, that although it would rejoice
him to have all his Subjects of the same belief with himself, and that he
should use all sweet means possible to draw them to it, yet since the
experience of times past had sufficiently made France to know, that Religion is
not to be planted by the Sword, but (to use his own words) that it is God alone
that must incline the heart, and illuminate the understanding with his
knowledge; he assured them he would never use Violence in matters of Religion:
and to give that King his due, he truly inherited the merciful good Nature of
his incomparable Father.

Secondly, It may be concluded to be the Interest of the King and Kingdom of
England, to grant Liberty of Conscience, because by a general consent of
Nations, liberty in Ceremonies, invented by men, seems to be accounted
necessary for the good of humane Society. For I believe I may without boldness
affirm, that England is singular in prosecuting them, who are one with them in
Doctrine, for differing only in Ceremonies, no other Christian Church that I
know of, doing the like. In Germany, the Lutherans have scarce, in any two
Cities or Countries, the same Ceremonies; Nurenburg and Leipsigg, having almost
as many as the Papists, and yet differ in them; Hamburg has fewer, and
Strasburg none at all; and so it is through all the Lutheran Cities and
Countries in the Empire, and yet agreeing in Doctrine, their differing in
Circumstantials makes no breach of charity amongst them, although at the same
Communion I have seen some receive standing, as others have kneeling.

The Pole in that Kingdom, several Popish Ecclesiastical Sovereigns in Germany,
and the Venetians in their Grecian Islands, do all give Liberty of Conscience
in Religion, without those fears and jealousies which we groundlesly suggest;
and yet the Non-Conformists to the Magistrates belief, are in some of these
places, three times the number of the Conformists: and indeed where Liberty of
Conscience is given, all cause of mutiny from the Reformed upon the account of
Religion must be taken away, they owning no other head than their own natural
Prince.

The Church of Rome in their using the inventions of men in the worship of God,
seem (their Principles considered) to act rationally, because they pretend to
the assistance of an infallible Spirit; but for the Reformed Churches, who do
not pretend to any such help, to maintain that the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
who is so jealous of his own worship, that under the Law, he severely
prohibited the adding to, or diminishing one tittle from what he had commanded,
and under the Gospel gave no other Commission than to teach according to what
he had commanded, that he has left his Worship to the inventions of corrupt
frail man, inclinable above all things to superstition and idolatry, and who
are by nature endlesly various in their imaginations, sense, and
understandings, seems to be irrational, and to accuse Christ of not having been
as a Son, so careful of his Church, as Moses a Servant was of the Church of God
under the Law: for had Christ intended to have left his Church under a negative
obedience in worship, making all things lawful that he had not forbidden, the
command had been as readily made, to do whatsoever he had not prohibited, as it
was to do whatsoever he has commanded: And that the Church of Rome, who
pretends to infallibility, should not exact Conformity in Ceremonies, where
there is an agreement in Doctrine, as they do not even in Rome it self, (where
they might force it, without prejudice to Trade, having little to obstruct)
there being in that City several Popish Churches, differing from one another in
Ceremonies, and all abundantly from that properly called the Roman Church, and
yet agreeing in Doctrine, The Grecian and Armenian Popish Congregations, etc.
have public toleration, without exceptions; and yet that the Church of
England, who pretends not to infallibility, should to their civil prejudice, be
rigid in imposing them upon those that agree with them, not only in
Fundamentals, but in all material points of Faith, Worship, and Obedience, with
punishment for denial, I cannot conceive the reason, except without Ceremonies
to administer matter of employment in punishing tender Consciences, they think
they should be without work in any kind adequate to their great Revenues, and
that they dread the consequence of uselesness.

But if this be not the Case, and that they really design no more, than piously
to bring the Non Conformists into their Churches, (as I will hope they do not)
I shall (because the wrath of man will never accomplish the righteousness of
Christ) humbly recommend unto them, as the most effectual remedy against
separation:

First, Where the Parishes are so large, that the Churches cannot receive in
some places half, in others not a third or fourth to an eighth part of the
Parishioners, as the Churches of St. Andrews, Sepulchers, St. Giles, and St.
Martins in the Fields, etc. they would be a means of procuring Acts of
Parliament for dividing such Parishes, otherwise people cannot be justly blamed
for going to other Churches rather than stay at home.

Secondly, To furnish the Parishes with Virtuous as well as able men, fit for
the work of the Ministry, for that, where there is a defect in either
qualification, hearers will think themselves obliged in duty to God, and
excuseable before man in seeking other Teachers; for though a scandalous person
may discourse well for an hour in a Pulpit, yet his Life will always do more
harm than his Preaching good; Example prevailing more with corrupt nature than
Precept.

I have lived in reformed Countries abroad, where he that intends the Ministry,
is first heard exercise in private by some of the most able, sober, learned,
and judicious of the Church, to the end, that whatsoever should be found amiss
in matter, form, affectation in words or gestures, might be reproved and
reformed, after which he is Licensed to Preach, but not ordained, until
according to ancient Canons he is called to a Charge, nor then neither, without
a Certificate of his sober Life and Conversation; a method, which as it would
prevent the contempt of the Clergy (so much complained of by that Book, writ by
a Conformist, showing the cause of it) so it would tend much to the preaching
the Non-Conformists into, and not out of the public Churches, as the silly
Weekly Sermons to the Jews at Rome do them, hardening of them in their errors.
And this is a care, that may well be thought the proper work of the Governors
of a Church, and an employment becoming the greatest of them; for the
debauchery and ignorance of the Ecclesiastics in the Church of Rome, etc. may
rationally be judged the chief reason, why Religion thrives no better, and
Atheism grows so fast in the World. For carnal men (as all are such by nature)
will not credit a Minister, that teaches another what he does not practice
himself, but rather from his contrary walking judge Religion a Cheat.

Thirdly, It is a good remedy against Nonconformity, to follow the Apostles
rule, in not imposing any thing in the worship of God but what is necessary,
that so none may be kept out of the Church by offensive impositions, as by
turning the Communion Table Altar-wise (Churchmen bowing toward, if not to
it;) and exacting sitting bare all Sermon time, etc.

The first is directly against the Rubric, for that the wisdom of our Nation
has ordered the Table to be set in the Body of the Church, or in the Chancel,
(implying thereby as shall be most convenient for the Congregation) making it
(according to other reformed Churches) a common Table, and not an Altar, and
the Minister to stand on the Northside of it, and so consequently the Table to
stand East and West, and yet in opposition to Authority, it is in most places
set North and South (to the offense of many) being clapped to the Wall of the
East end of the Church, with Rales before it, as if (according to the Church of
Rome) it were an Altar and Sacred; which actings contrary to Law, may well be
thought to give some encouragement to the Non-Conformists to follow their
Examples in other Cases.

There are several other Ceremonies as well as these, which are without and
against Law. Though it is enacted, That no Form or Order of Common Prayer,
Administration of Sacraments, Rites or Ceremonies, shall be openly used in any
Church, Chapel, or other public place, of, or in any College or Hall, in
either of the Universities, the Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, or Eaton,
or any of them, other than what is prescribed and appointed to be used in and
by the said Book; in which Book is no where found several Ceremonies now
practiced, nor the Order used in some Churches. And as to that of sitting bare
all Sermon time, as it is without Authority, so it is against the practice of
all Christian Churches, in ancient as well as modern times, and never known in
England until of late, except in the three last Years of Bishop Lauds Dominion,
when he was designing the reducement of Religion to Forms, Gestures, Habits and
reverence to Persons and Stone-Walls: and this unwarrantable Ceremony keeps
(upon several accounts) many out of the Church, as some from weakness of
Constitution, no Caps being so good a fence against Cold, in a wide empty
Church, as a broad brim'd Hat, others upon an account of Conscience, as
thinking the Ceremony superstitious, and a third sort upon a political account,
as not daring to trust the Church with an Arbitrary Power of imposing what
Ceremonies they please, fearing that the Countenancing of one Innovation by
complying with it, may usher in another (encroachments and breaking down of
Fences, being always dangerous, but in some times more than in others) and so
leave it uncertain where the Ecclesiastical Itch to Dominion will rest, it
being already so far advanced, that in some places it is expected that men
should be bare even to the very Walls of a Church, out of Service or Sermon
time; and for warranting a Ceremony contrary to universal practice, and
greatest Antiquity, as that is of siting bare during the Sermon, we ought to
have a discovery of new Light from Scripture, lest otherwise we seem arrogantly
to accuse former Ages of impiety as well as ignorance, in never using any such
pretended decency. And as all unnecessary things tending to the dividing of a
people, and consequently to the breach of Peace and Charity, is impolitick, so
distinguishing Ceremonies not commanded by legal Authority, ought for Peace
sake, (as well as a duty incumbent) to be avoided; and if Churchmen would
according to the decrees of several Councils, apply themselves only to the
affairs of the Church, they would find work enough there.

As first in making strict Examination after men's parts, and inquiry after
their Lives and Conversations before Ordination, which is so necessary for
prevention of separation, that nothing else will be effectual, because
Parishioners will take exceptions against their Pastors, if they find them
wanting either in Morals or Ministerial Gifts, and will not be satisfied with
the care of procureing severe Acts of Parliament for the suppressing of
Nonconformity only to humane Ceremonies, not differing in Doctrine. And if the
Physicians who have the care but of our Bodies, will not admit any into their
College without a thorough Examination and full satisfaction of their
Abilities in their Faculty, with much more reason men ought not to be admitted
into the Ministry, who have the care of our highest Concern, without the like
trial.

Secondly, In procuring Acts of Parliament where it is needful, for securing
our Religion against Popery, as for preventing Popish Mothers (according to the
late if not present practice of the Reformed in France) in bringing up their
Children (after the Death of their Protestant Fathers) to the Romish Religion
as they often do. And also if their power for depriving scandalous Ministers
guilty of most enormous crimes, be not sufficient, as some pretend it is not,
to procure more, etc.

Thirdly, To promote the like for augmenting scandalous livings, and scandalous
allowances by Incumbents of pluralities to their under-Curates.

Fourthly, For providing (according to the Example of other Reformed Churches)
maintenance for super-annuated Ministers, to the end that such as are qualified
for the work of the Ministry, may be admitted to the places of those who from
Age or other infirmities, either cannot Officiate, or are made so unfit for
their Callings, that instead of instructing their Auditors, they administer
nothing but matter of laughter, scorn, and contempt, even to the meanest
Capacities of the people, of which I have sometimes been a witness.

Fifthly, For suppressing Popery in such places where Church Governors have
most power, as where they are Lords of Manors, and have Collegiate Churches
with Deans, as at Rippon in Yorkshire, reducing that Parish, which (according
to common fame) has near two thousand Papists in it, to the example of
Hallifax and Bradford, two Parishes in the same County, remote and furthest
from the eye of the Church, where the first has not one Papist, though twenty
thousand Communicants, and the latter but one (a silly old man) though it has
ten thousand in it, etc. and this I humbly propose, to the end that the
increase of Popery in such places may not reflect upon our Illustrious Church
nor its reverent Governors, for I would not be understood in this (which I am
led unto by the Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Interest of our Nation) to
intend the impeaching or arraigning any thing that is according to Law, or the
Ecclesiastical established Government, all such designs being so Foreign to my
thoughts, that in order to the service of the Church, I humbly offer further to
consideration, whether it is not safest to reduce our manner of Worship in all
Churches to the exact rule of the Law, lest otherwise the Separatists in many
places, when prosecuted for Nonconformity, should plead Innocence, in that
there is no such Church to go to as the Law directs; for unwarrantable
additions in the observation of a negative Law, may render the observation as
faulty and void as substraction may do, which I wish may be avoided; and most
of this I have been induced unto by that Book, showing the cause of the
contempt of our Clergy, writ by one of our Church.

Thirdly, Liberty of Conscience to all Protestant Non-Conformists, is the true
Interest of King and Kingdom, in that it is absolutely and indispensibly
necessary, for raising the value of Land, which at present is miserably mean
and low, and advancing the Trade and Wealth of the Kingdom.

First, Because imposition upon Conscience, hinders the resort of Strangers,
and so the increase of people, whereof England is greatly wanting, coming so
far short of Holland in numbers, (whereby that Province alone, is made more
considerable than all the other six) that whereas they are calculated to have
six Souls for one Acre of ground, England, I fear, has hardly one for ten: and
the riches of Holland, Interest of Holland.
under such multitudes, as the provisions of their own Country, are said not to
be sufficient to nourish above an eighth part of their People (all the rest
being supplied by the Sea, and Trade with other Countries) argues Plenty of
Inhabitants to be a benefit to Trading Countries, and Foreign Conquests or
Plantations, exhausting men and money, where there is not an overplus of both,
a prejudice which ought to be avoided.

Secondly, Imposition upon Conscience, drives the soberest and most industrious
sort of Natives into Corners, leaving Trade in too few hands, and to a kind of
people that do but rarely mind it; amongst whom, though there are some that get
large Estates, it is not the thriving of a small number, but diffusive wealth,
that makes a Country rich. And, as most of the Corporations in England have
declined in their flourishing condition, since many of the soberest and
publick-spirited Citizens and Townsmen, have, by the imposition of Oaths they
could not comply with, been barred all share in Government, so the influence
would have been the same upon the whole Nation, had not His Majesty wisely
considered the good of his Kingdom, in expressing his sense for Liberty, and in
some kind conniving at it. And if men, setting aside passion, would but
seriously remember, how pernicious quarrels grounded upon differences in
matters of Faith, have been to Mankind (of which History affords us plentiful
Examples enough to make an honest heart tremble to relate) and ponder the sad
consequence of Popish Persecutions in the Deaths (by several brutish ways and
torments) of many Millions of Christians in France, England, Netherlands,
Germany, the Alpine Valleys, Italy, Spain, and Ireland, besides the dreadful
Wars, Confusions, Ruins, and desolations of Countries, that have been upon this
account, producing no other effects than the depopulating of the three last,
and increasing the number of Dissenters in all the rest, besides the
irreparable damage of this Kingdom, in their former Bishops driving the Woollen
Manufactures back into the Netherlands, (as the King of Spain had before driven
them into England) by Persecution, where they have ever since increased, and
where they now remain sad Monuments to this Nation, of the impolitick severity
of those times, they could not but be convinced of the vanity and wickedness of
such practices, as well as of the civil prejudice they bring to Nations, in
destroying of their people, and therein depriving them of the benefit of
Industry, thinking charitably of that saying, which was anciently in Vogue, and
is still in some places remembered, that when a Bishop is Created, the Devil
enters into him, and makes him his Executioner; which as it had its original in
times of Popery, so it concerns their Bishops only.

And let no man believe, that because the Monarch of Spain, and Tyrant of Rome,
by prohibiting the reading the Old and New Testament, exercising bloody and
merciless Persecutions (thereby depopulating their several Countries) have
cleared their Dominions of their Protestant Subjects, that therefore without
using the like means, the Church of England may do the same by their
Non-Conformists; for if the exercise of a coercive power over the Consciences
of men in matters of Religion, causing poverty and the unpeopling of a Nation,
were more to be desired than liberty of dissenting in the worship of God from
Unscriptural Ceremonies, with populousness, and abounding in wealth and riches;
yet with the Reformed Religion it is not feasible, because under the light that
that brings with it, human inventions can never be imposed in the service of
God without encountering opposition: for should the Nation be at once emptied of
one whole Generation of Non-Conformists, so long as reading of the Bible is
suffered, another will unavoidably (from the discovery it makes) immediately
spring up; and for the prevention thereof to follow the Diabolical Doctrine of
Rome, in prohibiting the use of that word which was given to man by the Spirit
of God for his guide and instruction, is not to be done by Protestants, who
know that the Apostles did not intend, that those to whom they directed their
Epistles should be forbidden the reading of them, St. Paul having directed the
most of his to all that call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, St. James
his to the twelve Tribes that are dispersed, St. Peter his first, to the
Strangers in several Provinces, and St. John his, to Fathers, Young Men, and
Children, with a particular direction to the Elect Lady and her Children. And
beside these instances, there are multitudes of Texts in the Old Testament,
enjoining and commanding the reading and searching the Scriptures, as a duty
incumbent upon all that fear God: And if it be unlawful to do evil that good
may come of it, it is much more unlawful to commit an evil, which carries with
it the breaking down the Banks against Idolatry, Atheism, Profaneness and
Immorality, to the letting in an Inundation of all manner of sin and
wickedness, as that manifestly is, of the Popes taking from the people the
benefit of the Divine Word; for had not the Devil found him out that Policy, he
could never have expunged the second Commandment, introduced that monstrous
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that beneficial Article of Faith, Purgatory,
that ridiculous treasure of the Church, super-erogation, that impudent
prohibition of Meats and Marriages (called by the Apostle the Doctrine of
Devils) nor those absurd antic gestures, actions and Ceremonies in the Mass,
Administration of the Sacraments, and Discipline of his Church, so much more
fit for a Mountebanks-Stage than Divine Worship, that did he not keep the
people strangers to the word of God, by sealing of it up, his Church (being
without Foundation) would soon fall to the ground, the whole Fabric being
supported by nothing but ignorance and interest, the two great Commanders of
the World.

Thirdly, As it is the King and Kingdom of England's Interest, to give Liberty
of Conscience to all Protestant Dissenters, so it is not only to deny it to the
Papists, after the Example of other Reformed Countries, as Denmark, Sweden,
several Princes in Germany, and the reformed Cantons in Switzerland, but also
to take care to prevent the growth of them, and that upon a civil score; as
first, because they own a Foreign head upon the account of their Religion, in
which they are carried on by such a blind zeal, as cannot render them less than
Spies and Intelligencers for that Interest, and ready upon all occasions to
appear for it. And even the wisest Popish States, acknowledge the reason of
this Principle, Sir Walter Rawleigh affirming, that the Venetians, as not
holding it safe to have any in their Counsels, who have Foreign dependence by
Oath, Homage, natural Obligation, Pension, or Reward, when their Senate is
Assembled, cause Proclamation (before shutting of the doors) to be made, for
all Priests to depart, and he who in this Commonwealth, is called the Divine
of the State (an Ecclesiastical Person, to be advised with in matters of
Religion) is commonly chosen such a one, as is reputed the least Bigot in that
Religion, as in the memory of some living, Padri Pauli, and after him
Fulgentio, both successively performed that Office, and were esteemed Favorers
of the Reformation, and Corresponders with Diodati of Geneva: and if Papists
dare not trust their own Clergy in their Counsels, upon the account of their
Foreign dependence, Protestants upon the same account, have no cause to trust
Popish Subjects in their Countries, longer, than until they that are now
living, die away, and that they can breed their Children to the Protestant
Religion. I am not ignorant, that there are a sort of men, who, with the Author
of that Book, Entitled The State of England, seek to infuse a belief into the
People, that the dispensing with the Laws against the Papists, is necessary for
the prevention of persecution to Protestant Subjects, by their Popish Princes;
but the imposers of that opinion, presume more upon ignorance, and easy
nature, in the most of men, than upon any strength there is in their Arguments:
for this suggested danger, must refer to Spain, Italy, the Emperor, or the
French King; and for the two first, they have by former Persecution, (though
not without depopulating of their several Countries) left no Native Protestants
in them; so that however England shall deal with their own Papists, the King of
Spain, nor the Pope, have any Protestant Subjects, to use better, or worse; and
for the few reformed Merchant-Strangers that are among them, they must (for
their own Interest, in reference to Commerce) suffer them to enjoy a trading
liberty, without having their Religion inquired into, and more than that, they
are never likely to have. And as to the Emperor, he being through facility of
Nature, acted by the Church, has (to almost the ruin of himself, as well as
his Protestants) spent all his Reign hitherto in a grievous and sore
persecution of the Reformed in his Hereditary Countries (having no power over
them in other places of Germany) for by it, he has lost a great part of
Hungaria, and in a fair way of losing the rest, besides that he has thereby
much prejudiced Trade, and lessened his people; for even the Protestant Gentry
and Nobility, who, by Birth, have great Immunities, and ought not to be imposed
upon in matters of Religion, were (lately) some forced to leave their
Countries, and others who stayed, to entertain none but Papist Servants in
their Families, so that England by no kind of treatment of their Papists, can
increase the Emperors persecution (which is already so high) of his Protestant
Subjects.

And for the French King, The Edict of Nantes granted by Henry IV. 30 April,
1598. and Printed now with the Seige of Rochel.

The Edict of Nantes, confirmed by Lewis XIII. 22 May, 1610. and again 10 Nov.
1615. and by Lewis XIV. 8 July, 1643. confirmed in Parliament, 3. Aug. 1643.
and again confirmed by the said Lewis XIV. this present King, 21 May, 1652. and
in his Letter to Cromwell, dated 25 May, 1655. about the Waldenses then
persecuted by their Prince the Duke of Savoy, he takes occasion exceedingly to
magnify the faithfulness of his Protestant Subjects, and his great obligations
to them. Morlands History, Page 566.


he cannot persecute his Reformed, without breach of the Edict of Nantes (their
Magna Charta) and several other Laws, giving them as good a right to exercise
their Religion, as the Papists have for theirs, making them also capable of all
civil offices, privileges, and preferments equal with Papists, and that upon
consideration of having been always loyal and faithful to the Crown; so that
there is no parity betwixt the French Kings Arbitrary breaking of his Laws,
against the reason of them, which has not yet been forfeited, and which were
made (with acknowledged gratitude) for the preservation of the reformed, and
the King of England, with the continued reason of his Laws (witness the
Massacre in Ireland) his keeping and executing them against his Papists. But
further, those that observe any thing of France, must confess, that that King,
in matters of Religion, regards no examples of others, or any thing but his own
designs, as in his present persecution of his reformed Subjects he may well be
judged to aim at the advancing of his reputation with the Church of Rome, as a
means to help him forward in his aspiring designs; for but few years since,
when the Papists were under the most severity in England, the Protestants were
under most liberty in France, and now they enjoy the greatest liberty in
England, the Reformed are the most persecuted in France: but besides these
circumstances, it cannot but be of evil consequence, and a lessening unto
Sovereignty, to own the having an eye to other Princes in the execution of
their Laws, for nothing can be more dishonorable to a Prince, than to be under
the awe of Foreign Potentates in his Administration, within his own Dominions;
but this Gentleman does not always ponder what he writes, for when I consider
his sharpness against the Presbyterians, State of England, p. 50, 56, 60.
etc. in England, calling them Mushromes, Tares, and the Sons of Belial,
insinuating the transplantation and extirpation of them, I cannot but wonder he
should have so much concern for the Reformed abroad, who are the same with the
Presbyterians of England, and therefore must judge it to proceed from favor to
the Papists, toward whom he so tenderly avoids all reflections and severity,
as if he thought the revolt of a Presbyterian, etc. to Popery, to merit a
pardon from transplantation or extirpation, and not from any kindness he can
have for the Protestants in other Countries. Nor do I know how to reconcile his
boasting of the transcending Charity of the Church of England toward other
Churches, with his accusing them of looking upon the Non-Conformists of England
as Bastards, or making no account of any other Interest in them, than a man
makes of the Vermin which breed out of his excrementitious sweat, or those
Ascarides, which come sometimes in his most uncleanly parts; but for such
homely expressions, surely the Church of England will not think themselves
beholding to him, no more than for rendering them so charitable to those that
differ from them both in Doctrine and Discipline, as the Papists do, who are
the Church he must mean, and so uncharitable to those that agree with them in
all material points of Doctrine, and differ only from them in circumstantials,
as the Non Conformists do.

Secondly, The growth of Popery in England ought to be prevented, not only
because the Principles of their Jesuits (who of all Orders bear the greatest
sway) of good Intentions, Equivocations, Mental Reservations, Probability, and
Necessity, etc. and of their Church, that there is no Faith to be kept with
Heretics, render them unfit for honest Conversation, especially for the
Society of Protestants, there being no sense against such Principles; but also
upon a Moral, Political account, as they are Enemies (compared to the Reformed)
to civil prosperity, there being no Popish Country in the World, but were they
Protestants, would be more than of double consideration to what they now are,
as those that are so now, are so much more rich, great, and formidable, than
when they were under Popish Darkness, which proceeds from an unaptness to
business, begot in men of that Religion, by the slavery they are in to the
Church, and the encouragement given by it to idleness, in the multitudes of
their lazy Fraternities, numerous Vagabond Pilgrims, and Holy days; and where
Religion has no influence upon men, I wish this civil Consideration may: For
the truth of this, Italy and Spain, where they are the greatest Bigots, do
evidence; besides, that the same seems to be made good in England, in that for
one Papist stranger of business, that is in it, there is thought to be fifty
Protestants, or more, though, I fear, the difference in the number of strangers
of the one and the other Religion, is not much; and the fewer idle and
unprofitable persons any Country has, the more prosperous it must needs be.

Thirdly, Because the vast sums of money that go out of England, sent by
Papists to such uses as they call pious; for putting young Gentlewomen into
Nunneries, and breeding Gentlemen's Sons in Popish Schools and Universities,
with the Popes Revenue gathered by his Penitentiaries and Missionaries, for
Indulgences, Dispensations, Tolerations, Pardons and Commutations, with Chimney
money (called Peter pence) continued still by some, if not by all the Papists,
is a great impoverishing of the Nation, and so a prejudice to Trade, the School
at St. Omers having seldom less than an hundred and twenty English Youths, and
the College at Doway, eighty or more Students, besides their other Schools,
Universities, Convents, and Nunneries, scattered over all the Popish
Territories, (founded on purpose to increase that Interest in England, corrupt
and pervert their Gentry) which are too many to enumerate. And I have heard the
Popes Collections in England Calculated by a Romish Priest, of more than
ordinary employment and intelligence, to amount to a vast sum, a good part
whereof is paid out in Sallaries, to English titular Popish Church Officers,
and Superiors of Orders, which the Pope has ordinarily lurking in England;
and although this may peradventure be denied by Papists, who have no reason
(though true) to own it, yet if their private and frugal manner and way of
living, with their freedom from the charge of public employments be
considered, it may rationally be concluded, that were they not under some great
unknown expense, they could not but exceed their Neighbors abundantly in
Wealth, whereas on the contrary, they do not generally increase so much in
Estates, as Protestants do, who sometimes have less revenues, and always live
more plentifully.

And lastly, Because the multitude of lazy Priests and Jesuits, sent as
Emissaries, to seduce Protestants, and encourage Papists in their Errors, are a
vast charge to those of that Religion, and in them, to the Nation, without
contributing any thing to the good of mankind: And if the French King thinks it
his Interest, in order to the rendering himself Protector of the Romish
Religion, to suppress his Protestant Subjects, who, by Law, have a right to
Liberty of Conscience, equal with the Papists, who own no other Head but their
Native King, and who were so faithful to him, that when reduced to the greatest
extremities at Rochel, and forced to implore the assistance of England, yet
would never depart from their Allegiance, in putting themselves under England,
when solicited to it; The King of England has much more reason to think it
his Interest, in order to his safety, and making himself Head of the Protestant
Party, to suppress the Papists, King James his Proclamations, 22 Feb. 1603. and
10 Janu. 1606. and the Preamb. of the Stat. of 35 Eliz. Cap. 2.
who own another Head, and so have a Foreign Interest, and who are bred to
Principles which lead them to a restless plotting against their Sovereigns, if
contrary to them in Religion, never joining with such, but upon design for
themselves. As Sir John Temple in his History of the Rebellion of Ireland, well
observes, that to his remembrance there was not one Gentleman of Quality in all
Ireland, that was there born and bred a Papist, that at the breaking out of the
Rebellion, either took up Arms for the King, or desired to do it, they holding
the murder of King and People, Rebellion, or any thing else, which they judge
may tend to the propagating of their Religion, lawful, in the case of such as
they call Heretics, as those who have conversed with Papists abroad, where
they sometimes speak their hearts, and own their Principles, do know, as well
as the Gunpowder Treason, the Massacre in Ireland, and the many Plots in Queen
Elizabeth's days, (which cannot be forgotten) do sufficiently witness. And that
these are their Principles, appears not only by these instances, but also by
the writings of their greatest Churchmen, who maintain that the Pope has
power to dispense with the Laws of God, in case he judge the observing of them
to hinder the doing of a greater good. That if a Prince be (one they call) a
Heretic, he may absolve his Subjects from their Obedience to him. And as it is
their Doctrine, that Faith is not to be kept with such, so the other is their
practice, our own late stories acquainting us, that Faux (Executed for the
Gunpowder-Plot) justified at his Death, that horrid and detestable Treason, as
good and warrantable by his Religion, denying that he ought any Allegiance to
the King, because he held him for an Heretic, and was sorry only that the
design took not effect (blasphemously saying, that God would have concealed it,
but the Devil discovered it:) which words we find not since denied, or blamed
by any of their Church. And what security can a Prince or State receive from a
Religion of such Tenants? And for further demonstration, that these Principles
are justly charged upon the Roman Church, it is not to be forgotten, that the
Pope (whom they call infallible) to the end to recommend (as laudable) unto all
his Followers the practice of Massacres and breach of Faith, appointed at Rome
a Jubilee or solemn Thanksgiving for that at Paris (though odious even to
Infidels for the Cruelty and faithlesness of it) And suitable hereunto, I have
my self heard that unnatural act of Phillip the Second of Spain's putting his
Eldest Son Charles to Death (for being only suspected of favoring the
Protestants in the Netherlands) That not to be paralleled, bloody, and more
than barbarous Massacre in Ireland, and the Popes owning of it, by sending his
Nuntio into that Kingdom to encourage and assist the carrying on of that
Rebellion, all justified by Irish Priests and others of that Religion, which I
have met with in Foreign Countries. And that the Papists are instructed from
their Cradles in these Barbarisms, I have also reason to believe, knowing it
ordinary with them, to confess it lawful before God, to murder Protestants as
they are Heretics: and Dr. Luther in his Commentaries upon the Galatians,
confesses, that before his Conversion he could have administered Fire and Sword
for the burning and destroying of an Heretic, as thinking he should therein
have done high service unto God; and further charge it upon their whole
Church, that they hold they do God good service in killing Heretics. And how
strange soever this may seem to men of better Principles, ignorant of Popish
practices and doctrine, yet it is no more than Sir John Temple's History of the
Massacre in Ireland does fully make out, in making it appear by the
Depositions of several Credible Witnesses, that the inhuman Cruelties of those
Heathenish Rebels were so prodigious, as the Primitive Persecutions could not
exceed; their Priests giving them the Sacrament upon condition not to spare
Man, Woman, or Child, of the Protestant Religion, declaring it as lawful to
destroy such, as to kill a Sheep or a Dog, teaching Popish Children to kill
Protestant Children, and Popish Landlords to kill their own Protestant Tenants,
as they did Popish Tenants to do the same by their Protestant Landlords, and
all without regard to Sex or Kindred: And at the Trial of Macquire (a Chief
Rebel) it was proved at the King's Bench Bar, that there were no less than one
hundred and fifty two thousand Men,. Women, and Children, satanically murdered
in the first four Months, which number though so great, is far short of Sir
John's Calculation, who affirms, that in Vlster alone, which is but one of the
four Provinces of that Kingdom, there was the same number of Protestants
wanting in it; and yet the Massacre was over the whole Nation, which Sir John
observes, was occasioned by not putting the Laws in Execution against the
Popish Clergy, as that which caused the filling of the Kingdom with Priests and
Jesuits just before the Rebellion.

And now upon the whole, though I believe the English Nation to be in the
general the best conditioned people (freest from jealousies and fears,
easiliest cozened with good words, not believing danger until it be too late)
of any in the World, and that therefore there may be some among them of the
Romish Religion, who from a natural tenderness to Mankind, cannot bring up
their natures to the exercise of the bloody and destroying Principles of their
Church; yet as they in the general (and especially those in Ireland) are the
most Bigots to Rome, so they want Bowels and good nature toward any of a
contrary Religion to them, their Charity reaching at most no further than to
those of their own belief, losing sometimes with their Religion, all natural
affection toward even their nearest Relations remaining Protestants, when
themselves have turned Papists, of which I have known the experience. And as
their Priests working upon their blind zeal, do according to their own
ambitious and restless Spirits, inflame their Disciples with desires of being
uppermost, making them impatient of living under any other condition, so it is
the Interest of the Protestants of England and Ireland, to be the more jealous
of any Power in their Papists, as those whose faithless Principles are not to
be trusted, and especially since in contemplation hereof were (I suppose) made
those wise Statutes, 35 Eliz. Chapter 2. and 3 Jac. Chapter 5.
Enacting that the Popish Recusants shall be restrained to their private Houses
in the Country, and not at any time after to pass, or remove above five miles
from thence, upon pain of forfeiture for life, of all Lands, Goods, and
Chattels; That none of them, convicted, or to be convicted, shall remain within
ten miles of London, nor come into the Court or House where his Majesty, or
Heir Apparent shall be, nor have in their own Houses, or in the hands or
possession of any others, at their disposition, any Arms, Gunpowder, or
Ammunition whatsoever.

And by the Statutes of the 23 Eliz. Chapter 2. and 3 of Jac. Chapter 4. it is High
Treason for any one to endeavor to withdraw another from the the Established
Religion, in design to reconcile him to the Church of Rome, as also High
Treason in him that is so withdrawn and reconciled to Rome.

And by the Book of Thanksgiving appointed for the fifth of November, set forth
by King James and the Parliament, it is enjoined to pray upon that day, for the
strengthening of the hands of the King and Magistrates of the Land, to cut off
with Judgment and Justice, those workers of iniquity the Papists, whose
Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose practice is the murdering
of Souls and Bodies, and to root them out of the Confines of the Kingdom; and
it is pity this good Prayer is now left out of the Service Book, or not
practiced.

And now, since the Wisdom of the Nation has judged the Papists so dangerous,
it may seem strange, that putting the Laws in execution against the
Non-Conformists, should be thought a good reason for the prosecution of them,
and be none against the other, of whose dangerous Principles there has been
such large experience.

Some observations here may peradventure be thought strained and new, as that
there is a kind of Natural unaptness in the Popish Religion to business,
whereas, on the contrary, amongst the Reformed, the greater their zeal, the
greater is their inclinations to Trade and Industry, as holding Idleness
unlawful; but experience in most places makes it good: as in Spain and Italy,
no one City can boast of any great Trade driven by their Natives, the greatest
part of their Commerce being carried on by Protestant Strangers, Amsterdam
alone having more Trade than all the Sea-Towns of Italy and Spain have, put
together: But to come closer to the observation; In Germany, even in those
Cities where they are Papists, without toleration to any other, there the
Reformed may be said to carry all the Trade, as at Colne; in other Towns where
they are Lutherans, with a public toleration to Papists, which is denied to
Calvinists, there the Reformed carry the Trade clearly from both Lutherans and
Papists, the latter having little, as at Frankford, upon the Main. In other
places, where the Cities are half Papists, half Lutherans, without toleration
to any other, there the latter have the Trade, as at Augsburgh. In France, the
Reformed, for their number, are the greatest Traders, though that people being
looser from the Bishop of Rome than Spain or Italy, are more given to Industry
than either of those Nations; but yet, that the Reformed are by much the more
Industrious, appears, in that they have no Beggars amongst them, though
calculated to exceed three or four Millions of Souls; it having been observed
by one that traveled France round and crossed it several ways, that in all his
Travels in it, he never met with one Protestant Beggar; and yet the multitudes
of Popish, are such, that it has upon trial been found, that in going from the
City of Rouen in Normandy, to the Protestants Church (two English miles and an
half out of Town) to give every Beggar but that which they call a double,
(hardly the sixth part of a penny) will cost a Lewis d'or, which is at least 17
s. sterling. These instances cannot be denied by any Traveller, that has been
curious to enquire into the condition of these places; and examples are the
same in Politics, as experience is in Naturals. Upon my own observation
hereof, being inquisitive after the reason, a person of Quality, and Minister
of State to one of the Electors of Germany, with whom I had the honor to be
acquainted, granted the truth of these things, but went no farther for the
Reason, than that the Religion of the Reformed was an argument of their Wit,
and that their Understandings made them the abler Merchants. To which I shall
add this, that as the discovery of false Religions, may be said to be the
effect of sense, reason, and understanding, so it is liberty that is the
improver of them, no people under slavery, having that ingenuity as when under
freedom. The Grecians, who anciently in time of liberty, exceeded all others in
general knowledge and depth of Learning, being now under slavery, are a dull,
ignorant, barbarous Nation. And the Florentines, who were once famed for acute
and pregnant Wits, are now no more so, and at best but equal to the common sort
of Italians; for if oppression will make a wise man mad, it may well suspend
the genius of a people.

And now upon the whole, since it appears that Trade depends much upon liberty
of Conscience, the suggestions against it, either from unexperienced, or
concerned persons, are not to be regarded; Gentlemen, bred only in the Country
and brought up in a Religion which exacts little from them besides Conformity
to humane Ceremonies, with opposition to every thing that is contrary, being
tenacious of that which is so pleasing and grateful to frail Nature, are not
generally competent Judges of this Interest, nor yet any sort of People, who,
having spent their days in studying Books, more than Men or Things, employing
themselves more in punishing tender Consciences for not obeying in the Worship
of God the Commandments of men, than in the weightiest duties of their
Callings, as in suppressing Papists, ignorant, debauched and scandalous
Ministers, rendering their Actions thereby to proceed more from Self-Interest,
than an enlightened and sincere Conscience, are not in this case against
demonstrations to be harkened unto.

And indeed, it is a work most suitable unto Sovereignty, the Grandchild of
Henry the Great of France, and the large experience of his Majesty in Cases of
Religion in other Countries, to surmount all selfish opposition in this matter,
for the advancement of his own Interest, and the good of his people, which
whatsoever flatterers may suggest to the contrary, are bound up together. I
know that the Enemies to Liberty of Conscience, do impose upon the World an
apprehension of danger in it; but the position has no Foundation in reason,
presidents, or any thing else, save a confident running down of truth for their
own advantage, it no where appearing, that ever Protestants dissenting from
their National Church, having Liberty of Conscience given them, did rise up
against their King, or disturbed the quiet of their Country, as those of the
Romish Church have in all Ages and Nations done. For as the Reformed Religion
obliges its Members to worship God according to his Will revealed in his Word,
so keeping good Consciences in that, it teaches them obedience to their
Sovereigns in civil commands. It is confessed, that the old Waldenses, Subjects
of the Duke of Savoy, have sometimes fled to Arms for defense of themselves, in
the exercise of their Religion; but although the advantages they have often had
of their Princes, have been great, yet no sooner was ever Liberty granted them,
than they laid down Arms, returning again to obedience, in which they always
continued, until their Articles were broke, which (contrary to Faith) was
frequently done: and the like cannot be denied concerning the Protestants of
France, Hungary, and other places, whereas on the contrary, ancient and modern
Story afford us plentiful relations of those of the Romish Religion rising up
against their Kings, when they ^^ve had full liberty in Religion, and no
restraint. ^^^n them in their Worship: as who were greater Instruments in the
Barons Wars in England, against their Kings, and in the changes that followed
thereupon, than the Church in time of Popery? were not the many Tragedies,
acted anciently in Scotland, in such times, when they were all Papists? Did not
the Romish Catholics in France, notwithstanding theirs was the National
Religion, depose and degrade their lawful Sovereign Henry IV. the Parliament of
Toulouse, in his absence, Duke of Rohan his Memoires.
arraigning and condemning him to death, executing him in his Effigies by
Harquebushes; none of which Traitorous and Rebellious usage, did that great and
excellent King (Grandfather of His Majesty of England) although he recovered
all by force of Arms, in the least revenge; by which generous as well as
politic carriage, he added to the Conquest of his Country, the Conquest of the
hearts of all his people, reconciling at once all the animosities and factions,
which had been the product of near forty years Civil Wars. Are they not Papists
in Spain and Portugal, where, in our time, have been so many revolts and
mutations, with the deposition or confinement of the present King of Portugal?
The late Consederates in Poland against their King, were all Papists, and of a
Country where Popery is the National Religion. The present French Kings danger
in 1650, etc. was from his Popish, and was delivered chiefly by his Reformed
Subjects. The Papists in Ireland had (as none can deny) liberty for exercise of
their Religion, exceedingly above what the Non-Conformists had at that time,
when they committed that not to be paralleled bloody, and more than barbarous
Massacre in the Year 1641. Nay, the steady greatness and quiet of Sweden, is of
no elder date than since they cast off Popery, pulled down their Bishops, and
embraced Protestantism, the Church having been until then the occasion of much
trouble unto that Kingdom. And none of these particulars being deniable, the
Papists cannot without great impudence, boast (as many of them do) of their
fidelity to their Princes, accusing the Protestants with want of it, and
especially since if these instances were not enough to make good the assertion,
that the Protestants are the best, and Papists the worst of Subjects, the like
might be observed of every individual Country and Nation in the Christian part
of Europe, in the times of Popery; but supposing these to be sufficient, I
shall not give my self any farther trouble upon this point.

Fourthly, As England is an Island accommodated with good Havens, Ports,
Harbors, and safe Coasts, for making their Shipping the Walls of it (as they
have ever with good reason been esteemed and called) so they ought to look upon
the conveniences that God and nature have therein given them above all other
Nations, to be their great benefit, and to hold it the undoubted internal
Interest of both King and Kingdom, to make use of such their advantage, in
keeping always a sufficient guard at Sea, and that

First, Because Foreign Commerce is thereby protected and encouraged, in
freeing the Seas from Pirates, and in affording good Convoys against Enemies
and the pilfering French.

Secondly, Because such Guards at Sea (beside that they are honorable and
render the Nation formidable to their Neighbors) are to England, not only as
Frontier Garrisons are to other States, but much more, in that, notwithstanding
out-Towns, Inroads may be made into a Country, whereas England keeping
themselves Masters at Sea (which with ease they may do) they are not only above
all danger from abroad, but have also thereby the charge and inconvenience of a
standing Militia as well spared as Domestic Industry encouraged, by having the
Country freed from Land Soldiers, whose idle Callings and rude manners, being
(in times of Peace) of ill Example and a burden to a Nation, prove always
obstructors of ingenuity and trade, which is the reason why other Countries,
who are not capable of being defended by Sea-Guards only, make use of Frontier
Garrisons, keeping their Inlands as free from Soldiers as is possible.

Thirdly, Because Sea employment being of an active and laborious nature, the
spending that money at Sea which other Countries spend on Land Forces, an
industrious sort of people, fit and useful for service, as well at Land as Sea,
are bred and nourished, instead of Land Soldiers, who are generally of lazy
humors and useless save only in time of a Domestic War, which can never be
feared in a Country under so happy a Constitution and Administration as
England. Besides as no Oaths, or Arms, can (according to general experience)
secure an ill Government, so a good (especially in an Island which cannot be
invaded but by Sea, and where they are an overmatch for any Country) stands in
no need of either.

Fourthly, Because as it is the undoubted political Interest of all Trading
Countries, to countenance and advance by all honorable and honest ways the
Reformed Religion, as those of that persuasion are of active and industrious
Principles, and to suppress Popery because of their contrary dispositions and
breeding; so as the English Seamen having experienced abroad the ridiculousness
of Popish Worship, and the sluggishness that is nourished by that Religion in
all sorts of their members, especially in their Pilgrims, begging Friars, and
other unprofitable Orders, come thereby to be most averse (if not universally
so) of all other Callings to the Church of Rome, England is the more engaged in
their Interest, to endeavor the breeding of them, as a Generation that is for
the security of the Kingdom against Strangers, and upon all occasions useful in
opposing the dangerous designs of the Papists, and of great benefit to the
Country, in protecting Foreign Traffic, sparing the charge of Land Soldiers,
and preventing in them the ill Example of Idleness.

And Fifthly, Because never any Nation exceeded in Glory and Renown, that was
not great at Sea; The Romans, Grecians, and Egyptians, having all in their
several times been more or less great, according to the proportion of their
power there. And thus having done with the Domestic Concern of England, I come
to the Foreign Interest of that Kingdom.

And first, As the Foreign Interest of a Nation looks outward, and in order to
its good and preservation, regards the actings and designs of Foreign Princes
and States (especially their Neighbors) endeavoring to reduce them to that
which may most agree with their own good and safety; so it is the Interest of
the King and Kingdom of England, to make use of the advantages their strength
and situation gives them, in weighing the Imperial Powers of Christendom,
keeping the Balance, by adding to, or diminishing from any of them, as best
suits with Justice, and their own Interests. And as undoubtedly His Majesty
has done more than any since good Queen Elizabeth (if for a short time a sort
of people not fit to be remembered did not the same) in hitting upon his true
Foreign Interest, in that triple League of which he was the Author, and into
which he has, with so much wisdom and prudence lately entered for opposing all
growing greatness by Sea or Land, in the French, they being already too potent
for their bordering Neighbors; so constantly and effectually to adhere
thereunto, in joining with all others to that end, and particularly with Spain,
with whom England has a much more profitable Trade than with France, is
(according to present affairs) the same; For should France, by the acquisition
of those convenient Provinces and Ports of the Netherlands, become Competitors
with England in Trade (to say no worse of them) they would, in a short time,
Sir Walt. Rawleighs Cabinet Counselor.
make good Sir Walter Rawleighs Character of them, in being false, insolent,
and covetous Neighbors.

And as the French fomented the War in the Year 1665. betwixt England and
Holland, and then designed clearly and manifestly so far the assistance and
encouragement of which party soever should prove the weaker side, as would keep
them in an equal balance, to the end they might destroy each other, and in
their fall give them an advantage of increase; the which they did from a wise
prospect of the damage it would be to them (in a total defeating their design
for an Universal Dominion) to suffer either England or Holland, and especially
the first, to be sole Masters of the Sea; so

First, It concerns England to join with Holland for preventing of the French
in arriving at the same themselves, because nothing can be more manifest, than
that such is their ambition, and that both from their actions, and the writings
of their Subjects, though the frustrating of them in it, is yet as easy for
England and Holland resolving upon it (and holding a good and hearty
intelligence with each other) to do, as it is for them to desire it.

For the present want the French have of Ports in the Narrow Seas, and having
none very good on this side the Mediterranean, save Breast in Britaignie,
(except the new made Haven at Rochford upon the River of Charent, which is so
deep in the Bay of Biscay, as is out of all Marine Course, save to their own
Country, be a second) renders them obnoxious to a reducement in their Naval
strength, (without difficulty) to the devotion and discretion of their
Neighbors, and to do it in time, is the general Interest of Europe. For should
they be suffered to gain the Havens in the Netherlands, they would soon contend
for the Dominion of the Narrow Seas, or should they by the Death of the Young
King of Spain, become Masters of that Country, and after that consequently of
Portugal, and so of the Harbors and Ports in both Countries which are good, or
by the Rebellious Inclinations of the Papists in Ireland, surprise any Sea
Towns there, which are yet better, it would then (in a little time) prove a
hard task (if not too late) to deal with them. And since nothing can be more
clear, than that the French, considering that no People or Prince can exceed in
greatness that is not great at Sea, and that none can be great there, that is
not better accommodated with Ports and Havens than they yet are, do therefore
seek to supply themselves elsewhere; England and Holland are concerned in their
Interests to agree together, for preventing of them in such their design, and
particularly the first, in that the French are the only people in all the
World, that the English Nation has cause to be jealous of, all other Countries
being incapable of putting them in danger. For though the Dutch have of late in
their contests with them, come (by accident) better off than they could well
have hoped for, or formerly did; yet experience showed even then that they are
not fit for Land Invasions. And that they can never agree with France, whilst
they remain a Republic, for a Conquest of England (as some will irrationally
suggest) may be relied upon; And not only in that they want people for such a
design, but also because being a Country that has as wise men among them as
the World affords, they cannot promise themselves any security in a Partnership
with a Prince so much too mighty for them as is the French King, and therefore
we ought not to suffer groundless suggestions to turn us from our true Interest
in keeping of them up.

Secondly, Because the ambitious designs of France, their present Constitution,
and the nature of their Government, requiring a continual standing Land Army,
for keeping their oppressed people in awe, that they may thereby be ready for
any design, especially for Invading Spain, should that sickly King be taken
away; that by the payment of their Forces, they may Issue out some part of
their vast Revenue, exacted from their miserable Subjects (lest otherwise in
few years, all the money in France should Center in their public Coffers)
their sometimes Alarming of England, by drawing toward them with their
numerous Field Army, will be of no charge to them, whilst the English will
thereby be put upon perpetual expense, in keeping Land Forces on foot, and yet
notwithstanding be unsecure, except not suffering the French to increase at
Sea, but reducing them there to what they were (to look no further back) in
1662. when they had not twenty Ships of War great and small (whereas they have
now six or seven times as many, and all much better) the English keep in
themselves the Commanding power there, and so free their Country of the Charge
and inconvenience of Land Armies.

And the taking down the French at Sea, and so preventing our danger from them,
may yet with facility be done; for notwithstanding the great noise the number
of their Ships make in the World, we are still an over-match for them, and
shall be so, until they get more and better Harbors for Navigation than they
at present have, for nothing multiplies Seamen but Foreign Commerce, and
nothing that so much, as plenty of good Ports, Havens, and safe Coasts, (of
which to the comfort of Christendom France is in want) but if we delay bridling
their ambition, until they have furnished themselves further with Ports and
Havens, they will soon prove too great to be dealt with, and therefore it must
be the Interest of England, and indispensibly necessary for them, to join
(before it be too late) with Holland for destroying the French in their Naval
strength, New Foundland Fishery (increased lately to the prejudice of England)
and their West India Trades, which are their Nurseries for Seamen, and in doing
this, England, will have a treble advantage.

First, In securing themselves against their Invasions and Insolences, which
they have lately had experience of.

Secondly, In retrieving their New Foundland Fishery, which the French have
almost wormed them out of.

And thirdly, In putting a stop (without the Charge of Invading them by Land)
to their Conquests, for by taking away their Trade, their power at Land will be
taken away, the first being that which gives life to the latter; and when any
Nation not being content with their own Dominions, designs ambitiously, and
without provocation against Mankind in general (as by making their glory the
occasion of their War it is manifest they do, a reason so sensual and
unchristian, as may well alarm all Princes and States against them) they ought
to be dealt with as Beasts of prey, in using all just means for disarming of
them, and as it is most proper for other Princes and States (who are upon the
continent) to undertake them at Land, so for England to do it at Sea is their
natural Province; and this being done, they may then in Summer with twenty Men
of War in the Channel, and eight or ten upon the Coast of Ireland, and fewer in
Winter, bid defiance to all the World; whereas by any other way they can never
be safe; for should the French prove once their Masters, or equals at Sea,
England would not in any kind be able to keep a standing Land Army great
enough, to defend all the Coasts round their three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, but must in such Case be at the devotion of the French.
And when any other way of safety to our Nation, than by bringing down the
French at Sea is made out, I shall readily confess my error, but until then I
cannot without great anxiety of mind remember our danger from them, for that I
cannot apprehend any reason that that Nation can have now more than in former
Ages, for increasing (at so grand an expense) their men of War to so great a
number, other than in design against England and Ireland, that Kingdom standing
in no need of Sea-Guards, as is evincible by their having had none considerable
in their former Wars with Spain, at times when that Crown was in its Zenith,
mighty and powerful at Sea: for the difficulty and hazard in approaching their
Coasts, and Invading their Country, from the lowness of their Land, rockiness
of their Seas, with the multitude of their people, fit enough to defend their
own Coasts, may as well save them still the charge of a Naval Force, as it has
hitherto done, except they aim at an Invasion of England or Ireland, or both;
and to make this the more intelligible, I will reduce all to this Position,
That England and the Territories thereunto belonging, cannot be secure against
the Neighborhood of France, without keeping the Dominion of the Seas in
themselves.

For France being a Country over-stocked with people, abounding in Provisions,
and Ammunition for War, having plenty of Military Officers, an active ambitious
King, one of business, so wise as to choose able and faithful Counselors, to
know his own Interest and to pursue it; there is nothing wanting to them, save
a power at Sea, for Invading of England.

And as our Countries are not to be invaded but by Sea, so Islands are best
defended by Sea Guards, especially where the Coasts and Harbors are safe,
good, and of easy descent, as those of England, Scotland, and Ireland are,
where whoever is Master, may without difficulty land almost in any part, and a
Fleet being removeable with more speed than Armies from one place to another in
case of opposition, without wearying and harrazing of their Soldiers, landing
cannot be prevented, except it were possible to keep Armies sufficiently
numerous to defend all the Coasts round the three Kingdoms, so that there is no
way left to secure these Countries against the puissance of France, which lies
conveniently for invading of them, but by such Sea-Guards as may be an
over-match for them; and therefore it consequently follows, that the
indispensible Interest of England is, to reduce the French at Sea to that
condition, that they may not be able to invade them.

And as Ships no more than Guns can signify any thing, without men to make use
of them, so the way to keep the Dominion of the Seas, is to endeavor the
increasing of our own Mariners, as well as to prevent the French in doing the
same, lest otherwise they should come to equal if not exceed us in them, as
they seem to design, and if they should but increase in Seamen twenty Years
more, after the rate of the twenty last Years, in all probability we should
have enough to do with them, for in less than the time mentioned, they are
risen from twenty Men of War to one hundred and forty, and from having an
inconsiderable share in the New Foundland Fishery (which was our Chief Nursery
for Seamen) to outdo us there, and that by the advantage they have,

First, In the convenience of the Neighborhood of that Land which we lately
gave them in exchange for that part of the Island of St. Christophers, taken
from us in our Kings War with Holland. And secondly, By the cheapness of Salt,
which their King gives them free of duty, a piece of generosity he would not be
guilty of to his Subjects, were it not on purpose to eat us out of that Trade,
by going cheaper to Foreign Markets than we can, insomuch, that if we do not
out them there by force, they will us in a little time by underselling, and
then we shall not only lose our best Nursery for Seamen, but which is most
mischievous, make our loss such a gain to our malicious and implacable Enemies,
as may render them our equals, if not Masters at Sea; for in this Fishery
alone, they are reckoned to employ every Summer near thirty thousand men,
whereof five or six thousand become Yearly by that Trade new-bred Mariners, and
herein they already out-go England one third at least, though but a few years
since they were Pedlers to them in that Fishery. And besides this, they begin
likewise to improve in the Greenland Trade, in which if they proceed it will
tend mightily to the increasing of their Mariners, and so help them in their
design for the dominion of the Seas, which is hardly to be prevented, but by a
timely War; and therefore we may account it a providence, that we have an
opportunity to declare War against them, whilst we are too strong for them at
Sea, and may have Consederates not only to join with, for destroying them in
their several Fisheries, (which breed them more Mariners than all their other
Trades) but also that will find them work enough at Land whilst we fall upon
them by Sea.

And as for New Foundland, we have an original right to that, as having been
the first discoverers and inhabiters of it, and as I have been informed, the
French at first paid us a duty for permitting them to Fish there, but never
arrived at any height in that Trade, until of late Years, and by driving them
out of this place, and (according to the Example of other Countries in their
Plantations) prohibiting their trading thither, England will not only preserve
a Magazine of Mariners for their own use, but also thereby keep the French from
arriving at any greatness at Sea, which is our undoubted Interest.

Secondly, As England and the United Netherlands (which are in ordinary
discourse understood by the name of Holland, that Province, by way of eminence,
giving denomination unto the whole) are the two great Masters of Naval
strength, and seated with such advantages for assisting each other, that whilst
a true intelligence is preserved betwixt them, it is not in nature for all
their Enemies combining together, to prejudice either of them; so it is the
true Interest of England, to maintain a firm and perpetual friendship and union
with them; and that,

First, Because as the Netherlands are naturally strong, so they are above all
other Countries fitted by situation for the use of England, to give check to
any aspiring Prince, and be as invincible Bulwarks, against the All-devouring
designs of the French King, in being able at any time, with the countenance of
England, to destroy him at Sea, who being brought down there, and so in his
Commerce, will soon abate of his Power at Land; and surely nothing can be more
for the security of Europe, than to reduce the Naval Strength of that
threatening King, within former bounds; for the World found, that until the
Spaniard lost his Marine Force, in the Year 1639. which he never after
recovered, he maintained his design for the Universal Monarchy, very
vigorously, and never sunk till then.

Secondly, Because it is equally their Interest with England, in reference to
their Navigation, to keep the Balance betwixt the Northern Kings and
Sovereigns, not suffering any of them to engross that Sea, because Naval
Commodities comeing thence, neither of them can be safe longer than the Sea
remains divided among several Princes and States, whose general Interest it can
never be to deny them necessaries for their Shipping (the chief Walls of their
several Countries) or a general Trade with them; whereas if one were sole
Master of the whole, he would peradventure in some Cases judge it his, and
presume to refuse them all accommodations; and this principle, the States of
Holland have wisely in our days, several times owned, as in the Years 1643. in
siding with the Crown of Sweden, when the Danes would (had not the States
assistance been in the way) have run them down at Sea; as also on the contrary,
in the Year 1658. in taking part with the Danes, when the Swedes had otherwise
done the like by them, by which means, both the Crowns are preserved, and kept
within tolerable limits and bounds.

Thirdly, Because that as Providence seems to have placed them with
conveniences for joining with England, in keeping all other Maritime Princes,
or Powers in order, so, without any capacity of being dangerous to their
Neighbors, their Constitution being such, as will not well admit of any
further acquists.

Fourthly, Because as England and Holland are of one and the same Religion,
save in some Ceremonies, so it would be of great encouragement and countenance
to all the Protestant Countries, to have a firm League betwixt two such
formidable Powers of their own belief, and as great a trouble and disturbance
to all the Popish Counsels.

Fifthly, Because the World having had such large experience of the happy
success of their Conduct, in being principal Instruments in preventing the
House of Austria in their grand design for the Universal Monarchy, and
consequently, in the propagation of the reformed Religion, as well as at
several times, in preventing both Dane and Sweed, from either of them devouring
the other; it were surely high impolity, as well as in some degree ingratitude,
to suffer such useful Instruments and Allies, to whom this Generation is so
much obliged for their wise and excellent management of the general Interest of
these parts of Europe, to be destroyed.

And sixthly, should England by refusing assistance to the United Netherlands,
force them either to join with France, or stand Neuters, as if they be left
single in supporting the General Interest of Europe, they must necessarily
(according to the eye of reason) do the one or the other, nothing can be more
certain, than that it will be of most dangerous consequence to the very life of
England, to suffer so near a Neighbor as France, to increase daily in power
and strength; and if the States shall by a compulsed Neutrality look on, and
see their Neighbors by degrees subdued, they must be cleared from all guilt of
imprudence in it, and leave the blame upon them that deserted them, in the
maintaining the public Interest of Christendom, though it should prove in the
end the destruction of themselves, in that a reprieve for a time is rather to
be chosen than a present Death. And therefore, as it was accounted the Interest
of England in the Reign of Good Queen Elizabeth, to uphold the States against
the Spaniard, so it is not only now the Interest of King and Kingdom of England
to do the same against France, but even also sincerely and heartily to invite
the United Provinces (were they backward in it) to join with them, in reducing
that King within former bounds and limits.

These States I know have many Enemies, some envying their Trade and Riches,
others their revolt from the King of Spain, as of bad Example, and the Church
of Rome, their established National Religion, as that which is past shaking. In
that having found by experience, that their temporal as well as spiritual
Interest is bound up in it, there is no place left for Popish delusions. And
those in the Government being too numerous to be corrupted, the over-powering
them by Force, Massacres, and Fires, are all the ways the Romanists have left
for destroying of them. And since their Riches is their strength, which lie
most in Cities, the Papists had surely ere this applied their Fiery Potion,
were they not by extraordinary care and watchfulness prevented. But because
none of these Arguments can be plausibly made use of against them by the
Papists, who dread the Conjunction of England with them, nor by those Princes
and States who assisted them in their revolt, the grand reason for subduing of
them is made the greatness of their Trade, which being destroyed, would be
divided amongst their Neighbors, loading them sometimes untruly, with
accusations of unjust dealings, exactions, and falseness; to which I shall only
answer this, That although I have no cause to become an Advocate for them, from
any advantages or benefit received, yet having traveled their Countries,
observed their Manners, and read their Disputes and Transactions with other
Nations, I think it but an Act of Justice to acknowledge, that in the
generality of their Morals, they are a reproach to some Nations, (and
particularly, in so little using that Art of over valuing their Commodities in
their selling to France, who so shamefully use and practice it) And as to their
Treaties and Alliances, after which I have been inquisitive, I have sometimes
found them wrongfully charged with breach of Articles, and do not find cause to
accuse them of having been in the observance of Treaties less candid or
faithful than other Countries; and I cannot think, their Trade, or Wealth,
(although I believe that Holland singly taken, is the richest spot of ground
for its bigness, that ever was since the Creation) to be a good or honest
Foundation of a quarrel: for their Commerce being alone the effects of Industry
and Ingenuity, it is no reason for any to be angry with others, because they
exceed them in those Virtues; but besides that the destroying of the
Netherlands would be the shaking the safety of these Northern Regions, the
increase of Trade to other Countries, so much promised by some in their
destruction, would surely fail; for were Trade ruined in Holland, as less
cannot be the effects of Conquest and Slavery, the example and emulation of
their Trade, which has been the great increase of it in other Countries, being
taken away, and Trade fallen to a sort of People of less concern for it, men
would grow lazy and weary of Commerce, every one thinking they did well so long
as they were upon equal terms with their Neighbors; so that the subversion of
Holland would be no benefit to any, save to the French King, into whose mouth
their Country would most fall, who wanting nothing for the making of him
uncontrollable, but Havens and Ports to harbor Ships, nourish and breed
Seamen, would find supply there, and whose Kingdom being over-stocked with
People, would be able to spare men to plant an un-inhabited Country, as would
certainly be the Fate of Holland, under a Conquest and Arbitrary Government, as
it has been to all the free Cities in Tuscany and Italy, since they lost their
Liberty; whereas England wanting neither Havens nor Ports, nor having an
overplus of people, it would be a damage to them in the loss of their
Inhabitants, and an unprofitable Charge to maintain Foreign Colonies, where the
Seas must be perpetually crossed for supplying of them with Men, Money, and
necessaries; insomuch that the Netherlands, under such circumstances as they
would be reduced unto by subduing of them, would not be in the hands of the
English, so much for their own security as in theirs that now possess them; for
restraint and freedom makes so great difference in prosperity, that less than
Liberty, encouraging Trade and Industry, would never be able to maintain their
Walls against the Sea, which are kept up with incredible Labor, Charge, and
Ingenuity, but expose those parts lying upon the Sea, which are many times more
considerable than all the rest, to be devoured by it, or laid much under Water,
and so rendered inconsiderable. And the truth of this principle in thus much
advancing the benefit of freedom above Arbitrary Government, which would be the
lot of Holland under any Conqueror, may be observed by the two Cities of Wesel
and Maestricht, which whilst in the hands of the Spaniard, were without Trade,
miserable, wretched, and poor, many of the Houses of the latter being left in
ruins by the Inhabitants, as wanting ability to repair them; and now in less
than eight or nine and thirty Years, that the States have been Masters of them,
they are both become flourishing places, the latter being in a great part new
built, with one of the fairest and best new public Town-Houses that is
ordinarily met with, next Amsterdam, and Augustbourg in Germany. But if there
were not these Considerations in the case, as well as that of the advantage
that the fall of Holland would be to the French, which alone is sufficient to
engage England to support them, it could no way be the Interest of England to
ruin them, to the end to increase their own Trade, because if their aims be
only traffic, the World affords matter enough to satisfy both Nations, and
that England has so much the advantage of Holland in natural helps for Trade,
that if they do but improve them, they cannot miss of exceeding all others in
it; and if they will be careless of their common concerns, they ought not to
draw an argument from their own neglects and sloth, for the envying other men's
activity and diligence.

And lastly, So long as a firm Peace and amity is maintained by England with
the Netherlands, they may look upon them as the outworks, which must be first
taken in by any Invader that will attempt them; for as it never can be the
interest, or in the power of Holland to invade England, so their Interest in
reference to Religion as well as civil security, will always oblige them not to
suffer any others to do it, or to endanger them, in whose safety they can only
be safe, it being the clear Interest of England not to suffer any other
Potentate to subvert their Government: So that upon the whole, since the
subduing of Holland cannot be a benefit but loss to England, and may be of
great advantage to France, and the Church of Rome, against which they are
impregnable Fortresses; with some smaller profit to other Popish Sovereigns
bordering upon them, as to the Elector of Colne and Bishop of Munster, etc. it
must be the chief Foreign Interest of England to support the present Government
of Holland.

Thirdly, It is the Interest of England to hold a good Correspondence with
Spain, not only because that People being little inclinable to Commerce, gives
a Trading Country the more advantage in their Friendship, but also for that,
that Crown is necessarily to be made use of, for the ballancing of France.

Fourthly and lastly, As the French King striveth for the Protectorship of the
Romish Profession, so it is surely the King of England's Interest to render
himself (wherein he can have no opposition) the General Protector of the
Protestant Religion; whereby he will become more formidable and glorious than
he can by any other means: For as Queen Elizabeth adhering thoroughly and
cordially to that Party, advancing the Religion, holding intelligence, and
taking part with them in all their engagements, and considerable Treaties, was
not only able in the infancy of the Reformation in England, to maintain the
reformed in Scotland, France, and the Netherlands, against their Enemies, their
then several Sovereigns, but also at last to bring down Philip the Second of
Spain (one of the wisest and greatest Kings they ever had) and in him, the
whole Popish Party, by which her memory is made famous unto posterity; so his
Majesty having many less difficulties to struggle with than she had, by
espousing the same Principles, cannot fail of the like glorious success.

And as it is certain, that all Countries are more or less great and
prosperous, according to the proportion they have in Trade, peaceable and
secure at home and abroad, according to the prudent Election of their Allies,
and pursuance of their Interest; so the way to increase Trade, is to encourage
and indulge Industry, discountenancing all sorts of people of contrary and idle
Principles. And to security, to suit Alliances to Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil Interests.

And now, to sum up the Domestic Interest of England, it lies in the
advancement of Trade, by removing all obstructions both in City and Country,
providing such Laws as may any way help it, and make it most easy, especially
in giving Liberty of Conscience to all Protestant Non-Conformists, and denying
it to Papists; In not coveting Foreign Conquests, which have always been
prejudicial and can never be of advantage to them; and retrench the
unreasonable Fees of Lawyers, Physicians, and Officers, as they are great
impoverishers of the Nation: And as to the Foreign Interest of England, that
may be calculated to be in keeping the balance among their Neighbors, and
other European Princes; being in order thereunto, firm to their present tripple
League, and in that especially to Holland, in holding a good correspondence
with Spain, and in being jealous of all growing greatness in the French,
keeping the Baltic Sea open, in His Majesty's making himself Protector of the
whole Protestant Party; and as Peace is the advancer of Trade, to seek it, and
not War, except an inavoidable necessity require it. And thus I shall conclude
this Chapter, and in it, the Interest of England, with begging pardon of the
Author of that Book, Entitled, A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity, for my
Nonconformity to his Doctrine, which teaches, That it is safer for a Prince
to allow Vice and Debauchery, than Liberty of Conscience, whereby he prefers
the breach of the ten Commandments, and that which the whole Word of God, the
Old and New Testament, the Law and Gospel, so dreadfully threatens and declares
against, before that, which neither the practice of our Savior, nor his
Apostles, nor any Text in Scripture forbids, or at least, himself being Judge,
not positively and indisputably as they do the other; wherein, I confess, I am
so far from agreeing with him, as also in many of his other railing Principles,
not much better, that I think the Church of England has reason to wish his
Book had been writ by some of another Coat, and of a more remote relation to
the Church than the Author is reputed to be, by reason of the advantage that
their Enemies may have of drawing arguments from it, to prove their old Charge,
That the power of Godliness is so far from being held out in the Lives,
Conversations, and Principles of many of their Priests, that they rather seek
to debauch, and make the people wicked and profane.

This is all I have at present to say of this Country, besides adventuring to
Prophecy, that when England (neglecting Church Politics, which are commonly
founded in passion, revenge, and self, and Lawyers Divinity, which is generally
collected out of their own Books, more than the Books of God) will effectually
pursue their true Interest, they cannot fail (their natural advantages for
Trade considered) of being more great and glorious than any other Nation.

THE INTEREST OF SPAIN.
SPain is the most Western part of Europe, and by some (in allusion to a Body)
called the Head of it, being by the Pyrenean Mountains (as by the Neck) joined
unto France, and encompassed on the other sides, by the Ocean and Mediterranean
Seas, and since the revolt of Portugal, by that Kingdom, which before was under
Spain.

This Country is made up of several Provinces and petty Kingdoms, united under
one Head and King, who (besides this Conjunction of Territories, or aggregated
body, called and understood by the general name of Spain) has, in Italy the
Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy of Millain, with some other pieces there: In the
Mediterranean, the Islands of Sicily, Sardinia, Majorca, and Minorca, all
bearing the name of Kingdoms: In the Low Countries, the greatest part of those
seventeen Provinces, known by the name of the Netherlands: In Germany, the
Franche Comte, or the County of Burgundy: In Africa, several places, as Cita,
etc. Many Islands in the Ocean, some in the East Indies, and his West India
Plantations, Dominions enough, were they well governed, to render their Prince
great and dreadful: But Spain, which was able (until 1648.) to hold their own
against all the power of Holland, Portugal, and the assistance of France, and
until 1660. to do the same against the power of France, Portugal, and help of
England, and in 1667. not to be able to bear up against a Corner of France, is
a clear demonstration that Mis-Government, in suffering all manner of Frauds,
and neglecting the Interest of a Nation, will soon bring the mightiest Kingdoms
low, and lay their honor in the dust.

As under the name of Spain, is understood several Kingdoms and Principalities
united in one, so each of them have their several Customs and Laws, some having
more, and others less privileges, and of all Arragon seems to enjoy the
greatest freedom; for when they Crown their King, the Estates of the Kingdom
(as Heylin and Prin do both affirm) bring in a man, upon whom for that time,
they put the title of Justice of Arragon, and setting him in a Seat advanced
above all others, the King who is then to be received, does first homage to
him, and after that, is by the Estates Created King upon certain Conditions,
and told, that they that are as great as he, and can do more than he, have
Created him King, upon the then repeated Conditions betwixt him and them; and
this Ceremony is, or ought to be triennially executed in the Assembly of the
Estates of Arragon.

Their privileges are said to have been granted, to encourage them against the
Moors, and it is most undeniably true, that no people have so much cause to
adventure Lives and Fortunes against Invaders, as they who have Estates and
Privileges to lose; for those whose condition cannot be made worse by a
Change, have little reason to fight for nothing, and this is so naturally
imprinted in the minds of men, that the dullest Peasants are Masters of it; nay
even such of them as in all other things are acted merely by sense, and not by
reason, in this act rationally, as the Country Man in his Proverb, that they
may better play for nothing than work for nothing, fully expresses; and we
find this also made good in our time in Hungary, where the Protestants
remaining passive, have desired that the Turk might prevail rather than the
Emperor, because under him, paying a moderate Tribute, they are protected in
the enjoyment of their Estates, and exercise of their Conscience, it being
Death for a Turk to abuse a Christian upon the bare account of his Religion (a
good President for Christian Princes:) whereas under the Emperor (he being
acted by the Jesuits) they are not (or at least were not lately) suffered to
enjoy either Conscience or Estate, if they could not join in the Idolatrous
Worship, and approve of the wicked and ridiculous Doctrine of Rome; by which
Principle it is, that the Emperor, who was not long since a match for France,
Sweden, and several Protestant Princes, is no more considerable at this day:
for as the way for any Prince to make himself formidable in the World is to use
all just means to increase his people, provoking them to industry, and a lawful
emulation in acquiring of Estates (without which no Country can be great) so
the inducement to industry is, the granting of privileges that may secure men
in the enjoyment of the fruits of their labors; for industry and ingenuity are
not the effects of the barrenness of a Country, oppression of the People, or
want of Land, as the Author of the State of England has of late asserted, but
the effects only of Justice, good Laws and liberty: there are Examples enough
in the World of barren Countries and great impositions producing no such
effects; as Spain, Portugal, Sweden, and Norway, do witness: Neither does the
barrenness of that part of Italy wherein Rome stands, make that City flourish
now under Ecclesiastical Oppression, as it anciently did under Justice and good
order; nor does the barrenness of that land (with the oppression of the great
Turk) where the ruins of Athens yet remain (sad Monuments of the decay of that
once famous State) make that place, or any other part of Greece flourish now,
as it formerly did under freedom and good Administration; but the good Laws and
liberty of the City of Neurenburgh in Germany, which lies in a barren soil,
may be observed to be the cause of the great ingenuity, industry, and
populousness of that City and Country about it.

The want of Land in Holland, nor the great Taxes (instanced in by the
forementioned Author) are not (according to his new Philosophy) the causes of
their industry, but their liberty and good Laws, framed singly to the Interest
of the public (without consideration of any other) are the causes of it, good
or bad Government being chiefly that which makes any Country prosperous or
miserable; so that our pretended Statist, that fetches the reason of the
prosperity of a people from the want of Land, the barrenness of the Country,
and oppression of the Subjects, must be out in his politics, for that it is
not within the reach of his learning to give an instance of any one Country,
that ever grew diffusively rich by any other means than liberty and good
Government.

The Hollanders as they were always under a great degree of liberty, so they
were (compared with other Countries) always populous; yet as their freedom has
increased, so have their people, they being now much more populous than in
former days: for to say that want of Land, and great impositions, will bring
strangers to a Country and make them industrious, is as much as to say, that
Poverty and Famine will do it; but it is irrational, and becoming none but
half-witted men, to think that strangers upon an ordinary account will make it
their choice to settle in a starving and oppressing Country.

Were not the cold Climate of New England supplied and helped by good Laws and
Discipline, the barrenness of that Country would never have brought people to
it, nor have advanced it in consideration and formidableness, above those other
English Plantations exceeding it much in fertility, and other inviting
qualities: and as it is by strangers (which none can deny) that Holland abounds
(above all other places) in people, it must be good Laws, with good Government,
Administration of Justice and Liberty, that draws such multitudes to them, and
that makes them so industrious and rich as they now are; and it cannot be less
than nonsense, or a brainsick humor in any, to complain of the great charge
they are at in Holland, and the oppression they lie under there, when the
people thrive, and grow vastly rich, beside that populousness from strangers,
freedom from Beggars, a people well clothed, strong and healthful, are not the
marks of slavery but of freedom, all which Characters are in no one place
found, save in Holland, nor any one of them in France, where they are in no
want of impositions and oppression: And now to speak more particularly to the
Taxes and Impositions in Holland, quoted by the forementioned Book, as an
example to other Countries; they are,

First, no more than what is necessary in a frugal way for support of their
Government and protection of their Commerce (which all people ought cheerfully
to submit unto) and levied without any material burden to Trade, because from
it they must derive all their power and greatness.

Secondly, What is collected is not vainly spent, or paid away in great
Salaries, an employment of 200 l. starl. per annum, being rare amongst them,
for even Monsieur de Wit, who is according to common fame (which is generally a
good Intelligencer) one of the wisest Statesmen and Counselors of this Age,
and of the greatest uprightness, faithfulness, diligence, and industry for his
Country, and so consequently of greatest merit, had not until of late above 400
l. Salary per annum, and has it yet but little augmented: nor are they
cousened by their Officers, but have their income truly expended for their
necessary defense, and for the advancement of Trade; for had not Traffic by
good Laws, and prudent Conduct, the benefit of their impositions, they could no
more flourish than a Farmer could be rich, that reaped not the fruit of the
improvement of his Land, which he made at his own cost and charges. Neither is
it to be imagined, that were not the people of Holland fully satisfied in the
true and faithful disposal of their money (how great soever their Taxes may be)
for the good of the public, and that it is not vainly spent and trifled away,
it were possible to keep them in peace, because as they are a people frugal in
their natures and dispositions, so they would otherwise be haters of
profuseness, and mutinous against it in their Trustees; and the truth of this
appears, not only in that it was far short of what they now pay (the riches of
the Country then and now even considered) that made them groan under their
burdens in times of peace (which they do not now) and Beggars (compared to
what they now are) under the King of Spain, and provoked them to revolt, but
also in that (notwithstanding their Taxes) Foreign Commodities, and home
Manufactures (though made of materials fetched from other Countries) are in the
general cheaper than in other places, nay their provisions, though they are for
seven parts in eight of them indebted unto the Sea and Foreign Commerce, are
yet as cheap as at London, their public half Crown Ordinaries, being for their
rate better, and some sorts of Wine at less than half the price they are there,
in so much that their great Gabels, through a prudent management, are no
burden to their people; for their Country being all Traders, either in their
persons or Estates, and all they pay being laid out for their protection, and
the improvement of Trade, their impositions return unto them in an advantageous
Circulation, which other places not under the like circumstances are not
capable of, and therefore it is a great mistake in those, who though ashamed to
plead against riches in the people (as the Author of the State of England does)
yet being willing to maintain a harmlesness in unlimited Taxes, do make use of
the new notion of Circulation, in arguing from the example of one place to
another, when the parrallel or reason does not hold; for beside the indigency
of the Countries before instanced in (which are sufficiently burdened with
impositions without thriving by them) I appeal to Gentlemen that have nothing
but their Rents to live upon, whether they find by experience, any help toward
Taxes, from the new notion of Circulation: but the maxim of keeping the people
poor, having been so mischievous and unsuccessful in the World, and
particularly to Spain; it is matter of wonder it should still be alive to the
prejudice of Mankind. And it is a very uncharitable as well as unpolitick
principle, because,

First, It is an incumbent duty upon every one to do as they would be done by,
and that it is to be presumed, that those that plead most for Poverty in
others, would not be willing to be brought under it themselves.

And secondly, For that although the principle of keeping the people poor, that
never knew what riches were, may be practiced, it is dangerous to adventure to
reduce a people to such a condition, that have known the comfort of plenty, and
been used to a full way of living, as the revolt of the Low Countries is a
sufficient indication thereof. But to leave this digression if (being
occasioned by that Scandalous and vile Book, called the State of England, the
further censuring whereof I leave to Authority) it deserves the name.

This great Province of Spain, bordering upon no Country but France (save
Portugal) and having no way by Land to it, but over dreadful Mountains, could
never have had any probability of carrying the Universal Monarchy as it had
long designed, had it not in the prosecution thereof, been indissolubly united
to the House of Austria; for otherwise, though it has many considerable
Countries depending upon it, and belonging to it, yet being scattered over most
parts of the World, they would have been of little use in so great a design.
For Spain being divided from the rest of that Kings Dominions, and in the
general a barren and unpeopled Country, wanting provisions, and the hotness of
the Climate rendering the people the more unfit for colder Countries, was not
alone qualified for Northern Conquests, especially not of so populous a Country
as France, through which they must first have made their way; But as it was
unseparably united to the Austrian Family, and so to its large Interest in
Germany on one side of that great body, and on the other side, owner of those
considerable Netherlands called the seventeen Provinces, with a commanding
Interest in Italy, in the possession of Naples, Milain, and some other pieces
there, beside the Islands of Sicilia, Sardinia, etc. in the Mediterranean, and
it self conveniently placed for managing his West, and (then great) East India
Trade, and for establishing the chief Seat of rule from whence it might without
fear of disturbance, issue its directions, as from the Head to the Members, it
is matter of admiration that it prevailed not in the design, and that they
failed in the attempt, is next under God (who does often reprove Princes, by
blasting their ambitious and unjust designs against their Subjects or
Neighbors) to be attributed to the revolt and wise Conduct of the seven United
Provinces, together with the constant and faithful adherence of good Queen
Elizabeth to her and the Kingdom of Englands true Interest at that time, in a
Cordial assisting the States General, either privately or publicly, from their
first revolt to the end of her Reign.

Whilst Spain was upon their great design, they thought it their Interest as it
really was (although not then Great Britains but the contrary) to make Peace
with England, which they accomplished soon after King James came to the Crown,
aiming thereby to secure their East and West India Trades, and enable them the
better to act the Papists in England against their King and Country (as
appeared soon after by the Gun-Powder-Plot) and prosecute their War against the
United Netherlands, wherein they were surely exceeding right; but having before
missed their Interest, in depopulating their Country by persecution, expulsion
of the Moors, and Foreign Plantations (which no State designing Conquest should
do) and in quarrelling with Holland at so great a distance (when by reason of
the enmity of England, they could not without great hazard approach them by
Sea) and before they were Masters of any passage to them by Land, other than
after transportation of their succors by Ships to Final, then carrying them
through Italy over the Alps, and at last crossing Germany, a march as it is
difficult, so likewise so chargeable beyond support, that they thereby ruined
themselves, whereas had they been content to have suffered the Netherlands to
have enjoyed their privileges due to them from all Antiquity, and so kept them
under their obedience, and in them the considerable advantage of their
assistance, until by Conquest they had made their way to them by Land, Spain
would according to the eye of reason, have been beyond control, able to have
invaded France on all sides with more than probable good success; but their
unsatiable, lofty, swelling minds, disdaining all Dominion not founded in
arbitrary and absolute will and pleasure, Holland became a stone of stumbling
to them, against which they were dashed in pieces, in exhausting their vast
Treasure, wasting their Men, destroying their Naval strength, and levelling of
them to other Princes and States, which sufficiently evinceth the danger and
charge of maintaining at a distance, a War which must by Sea be supplied. And
were not the depraved nature of man so blinded by ambition and covetousness,
that it can hardly make a true Judgment of things, it could not but in taking
right measures of the several kinds of limited and Arbitrary Monarchies, find
that Kings and Princes would be much happier, greater, and more formidable
under the first than latter. For although an absolute Prince, may with seeming
reason think, that he is more considerable when he has the Estates of his
Subjects wholly at his Arbitrary Devotion, than when he has but part, yet upon
a true balance of circumstances, a part under one Government, will be found to
exceed the whole under the other, in that where there is a contentedness in a
Prince, under limitations, it begets such a considence betwixt him and his
people, in the conjunction of Counsels for the prevention of frauds and
deceits, and the improvement of public good (their joint Interest) as renders
Military power needless, and so saves the charge of all other instruments of
force, save those necessary for civil administration, which peaceable
constitution tending naturally to the increasing Trade, and in that the wealth
of a Nation, the riches of Prince and People grow reciprocally together, and
that each to a degree much above what it is possible for them both, or either,
to arrive at under Tyranny; for where that is the Government, Ingenuity,
Industry, and Trade (the Foundation of every Nations greatness) must be
discouraged, for that no people that have not an assurance of the enjoyment of
the fruits of their labors, have any reason to be industrious further than for
present subsistence; and if a Prince by Arbitrary Impositions, is able to levy
more upon his people than peradventure by mutual consent he could do, yet when
the extraordinary charge in keeping by force of Arms his Subjects in slavery
(to the obstructing Trade and Industry) and the cousening and cheating in all
sorts of Officers, which such Governments must allow, is deducted, the clear
revenue of the Prince will by the balance be found much less than what it
would be under a limited Monarchy, where Trade is improved, and deceit
prevented; beside that the debasement of the Spirits of his own people, who are
never so gallant under slavery as liberty, and in a great measure the loss of
the use of them, in that under Tyranny they cannot safely be confided in,
without a mixture of Strangers, is not small, as our Neighbor Nation does
clearly demonstrate, that King judging it not only his security, but also
necessary for him, even whilst his Country is over-stocked with people, to make
use of Foreigners to mix with them, without which his own Subjects would be
insignificant against other Countries, and dangerous as to himself; nor is the
want of that content and satisfaction of mind, which all men not unnatural,
take in the affection of their people, of little account, neither is this
consideration to be despised, that if such Governments fall to weak Princes,
they run great hazard of sudden subversion, oppressed people being apt to take
all advantages that may seem to promise ease, or if they shall be more
peaceably disposed, it will prove but the giving way to a languishing
distemper, which will end in a certain Death, as may be shown by plentiful
instances, where the inability or weakness of one has lost more, than the
succession of several able Princes have acquired. And if any in opposition of
this do object the example of a Kingdom not far off, they may be answered, that
beside that degree of freedom, which their Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and in
some kind their Trading Cities enjoy, they are saved by some circumstances,
that other Countries cannot hope for, as by the formidableness of their
Reformed Subjects, who (being always true to the Princes of the blood, never
contesting with their Sovereigns but for Liberty of Conscience in Religion,
when denied it contrary to their Laws) were a perpetual awe upon the Papists,
and when they have Confederated against their Kings, the Protestants have
frequently been their ruin, and as often the preservation of the Crown; beside
that the succession of two such Ministers of State, as served that Nation, who
having had neither Wives nor known legitimate Children, had the less
temptations to usurpation, cannot be again expected: and I dare further
undertake to Prophecy, that that Prince and People, who shall at any time be
blessed with this harmony and agreement in Government, shall thereby be much
more prosperous, happy, and formidable than ever they were before, or can by
any other way be hereafter. And this observation I own to have been first made
Master of, by that excellent answer of Charles the First of England to the
nineteen Propositions, presented him by the long Parliament, where reciting the
Virtues and Vices of the three several Forms of Government, as absolute
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, he prefers the Government of England, as
it is a mixed and regulated Monarchy beyond all other, in that it has the
convenience of them all without the inconveniency of any one. And surely there
is no Government good like that, where the liberties and privileges of the
people are so fortified by Laws, that they are beyond the invasion of their
Princes; for King James acknowledges that he was ordained for the good of his
People, and not they ordained for him; and Charles the First of England, in his
forementioned answer says, That there is legally placed in both Houses of
Parliament a power more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of
Tyranny.

The Duke of Tuskany may be held a rational instance of this assertion, that
absolute power is a prejudice to any Prince, in that the multitude of Taxes
which he Arbitrarily lays upon his People, are such, as has in a great measure
depopulated his Country, and destroyed the Commerce of it, without bringing
near so much into his Coffers, as whilst the Country was under freedom, it did
insensibly contribute for public good and preservation, or as the City of
Amsterdam alone is said to spend yearly in charitable uses; as on the contrary,
the famous things that great Queen Elizabeth of happy memory did during her
Reign, having been in War with her Neighbors round about her the greatest part
of the 45. Years of her time, beside in almost continual action with Ireland,
and sometimes at home (from the turbulent Rebellious humor of her Popish
Subjects) and that in all, with glorious success, is a pregnant demonstration
of the benefit that an affectionate agreement in Government betwixt Prince and
People (under a mixed Monarchy) brings to a Country.

If the French King who brags and glories most in his absoluteness (though he
exercises it totally but over his poor miserable Peasants and smaller Cities)
should compare what his clear yearly income would be under regulated Monarchy,
whereby he might increase Trade, spare the charge of vast Armies, many
Garrisons, prevent fraud and cousenage, with what it is at present under his
Arbitrary Power, with all the prejudicial circumstances attending it; it may
with reason be supposed, that that rich and good land would afford a far
greater intrade under the first than latter Government; and the Spaniard has
cause to acknowledge the truth of this Principle, since their King choosing
(contrary to the Belgic Liberties) to carry on the War in his Netherlands by
his own single Counsels and Foreign Forces (wherein they met with nothing but
rapine, guile, and corruption) rather than conform to the privileges of the
Country in joining with the Estates of it (who in such case offered to maintain
forty thousand men at their own charge) has had so great an influence upon
their decay, if not been the sole cause of it. The like observations might be
made of other absolute Governments, but this shall serve, as being sufficient
to show how Spain from the height of glory, promising to themselves the
Universal Sovereignty of Christendom, is by the means of a small beginning, the
revolt of a handful of their own despised Subjects (occasioned by ill
Government and invading of their privileges) brought to change their design
from that of swallowing up all Dominion, to that of seeking their own
preservation by a League with those that at first they thought to have
extirpated, having now no way left to preserve themselves, their West India
Territories and Trade thither, and what else they have any where in the World,
but to hold it their true Domestic Interest,

First, To reconcile all differences at home, uniting thoroughly there, that so
they may be the better able to agree (as it is indispensibly necessary for them
to do) upon methodical and well digested means for their defense and
preservation, and keeping their Viceroys and Governors in all their
Territories true to them, in case Death should deprive them of their young
King, because should such an unhappiness befall them, and that they should then
be found in divisions and distractions, it would give great advantage to the
French (who will be sure at such a time to fall suddenly upon them in all
places) and be an inducement to their great Officers in all their several
Dominions, to hearken to the temptations of the French (their Enemies) who will
not fail (according to their usual practice) of assaulting their fidelities,
with promises of the greatest rewards, corruption being the instrument they do
the greatest things with.

Secondly, Since neither the Emperor, nor Pope, is now able to afford this
King any such assistance, as is to be solely relied upon, it is his Interest to
set aside all Church Politics, and former pretended religious Artifices for
persecution, and to give all his Subjects encouragement, if not by toleration
in Religion, yet by a tacit abatement of the rigor of his proceedings against
them upon that account, as a means the better to oblige the Reformed Princes
and States to him; and as the affairs of Christendom now stand, in relation to
France, even the Pope himself, if he understood his own Interest, and were not
blinded by malice and superstitious zeal, could not be averse to this, in that
it is folly for him to think, that his gaudy Copes, Crosses, and tripple Crown
will defend his See against the French King, after he has by the help of his
Pastoral Staff hooked in all the rest, and that he will not reduce both him and
Peter's Chair to their original, and to his own devotion; and now as to the
Foreign Interest of this Kingdom, it is,

First, Cordially to unite with England, the States of Holland, the Northern
Kings and Princes, against the growing greatness of France, and for opposing
that King in all his endeavors for further additions, especially in his
designs upon the Spanish and United Netherlands, for should he gain those of
them lying upon the Sea, whether by Conquest, Treaty, or Purchase, he will then
find Ports and Havens there sufficient to increase his Naval strength, and want
nothing needful for the total ruin of Spain, save a pretense (which he will
easily invent) for quarrelling with them; for by such acquisitions, his
greatness both at Land and Sea would be so much augmented, that he would be
able to run them down in all places both at home and abroad, spoiling them in
their West India Trade (their chief support) whereas without better and more
conveniently situated Harbors than his own, he can never be very great at Sea,
and without being formidable there, no Prince in Christendom can exceed in
greatness at Land.

And Spain having in their late Wars in 1667. had sufficient experience of
France, they cannot (if what they charge upon them in reference thereunto, be
true) with prudence or safety rely upon any Treaties with them, how plain or
clear soever they may be, or trust to any thing less than the strength and
interest of their Allies in conjunction with their own to defend themselves
against France; and of this, Spain has the more cause to be sensible, since
they are the best able to judge of the danger other Countries were in, whilst
they themselves designed the Universal Monarchy, out of which enterprise the
French have at present justled them, taking it to themselves, and are now as
formidable in it as they ever were.

Secondly, It is the true Foreign Interest of Spain, to overlook and forget
all their pretenses or titles to Portugal, how good soever they may be, and to
make a firm and cordial League with that Crown, for anticipating France, in
having it as a back Door for entering Spain from thence, as by the way of
Perpinion on the one side, and by St. John de Luce on the other side, they have
already advantages for the invasion of it. And thus upon the whole, the
Spaniard having no Trade but to their own Plantations and Countries, nor genius
to any further prospect in it, their Interest may be summed up in
self-preservation: And this is all I have to say of Spain at this time.

THE INTEREST OF PORTUGAL.
POrtugal, under which name (beside that Country properly called so) is
comprised Algarva (sometime a small Kingdom) lies on the Western part of
Spain, bounded on that side by the Ocean Sea, having on the Coast near three
hundred Miles in length, with eighty or a hundred Miles in breadth; it is
neither populous nor fruitful, but thin of people, and so barren, that had not
the King a Revenue coming by Trade from the East and West Indies (where they
have large Plantations) and some other Islands, as from the Azores, etc. his
income would do little to the support of his Dignity and Government.

In the Year 1640. this Kingdom (after it had been near sixty Years under the
King of Spain) revolted, and set up the Duke of Brigance, Crowning of him King,
from whence ensued a War betwixt the two Crowns, which continued until the Year
sixteen hundred sixty seven, that by the mediation of England a Peace was
concluded betwixt them.

The ground of their contest was their several Titles, derived from one and the
same Common Ancestor, Emanuel King of Portugal, who left six Children, four
Sons, and two Daughters, as follows.

Sons
John Lewis Henry Edward
Daughters
Isabella. Beatrix.
John succeeded his Father, and had John, who had Sebastian, (reputed to be
slain by the Moors in Barbery). who dying without Children, the Line of John
Eldest Son of Emanuel expired in him.

Lewis second Son of Emanuel died before his great Nephew King Sebastian, and
left only Don Antonio a Bastard Son, who upon the Death of Sebastian was
Proclaimed King by those of Lisbon, but after forced to fly for England.

Henry the third Son of Emanuel (a Cardinal) was after the Death of his great
Nephew Sebastian Crowned King.

Edward the fourth Son of Emanuel, and his youngest Child, left two Daughters,
Mary and Katherine.

Isabella eldest Daughter of Emanuel, was married to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, from whom is lineally descended the present King of Spain.

Beatrix second Daughter of Emanuel, was married to Charles Duke of Savoy, from
whom is descended that Duke.

Mary the eldest Daughter of Edward, youngest Son of Emanuel, was married to
Alexander Duke of Parma, from whom that Family is descended.

Katherine the younger Daughter of Edward, was married to John Duke of
Brigance, from whom the present King of Portugal is descended.

Henry the third Son of Emanuel, in whom was the undoubted right to the Crown,
after the Death of his great Nephew Sebastian (as is beforementioned) was
Crowned King in the Year 1578. who being an old Man without Children, and
sensible of the disputes that would arise after his Decease about the
Succession, erected a Judicature, to hear and determine the several Claims
pretending to the Crown, of which there were five, ( viz.)

First, Don Antonio Son of Lewis, second Son of Emanuel.

Secondly, Philip the second King of Spain, Grandchild to Emanuel, by his
eldest Daughter Isabella.

Thirdly, Phillibert Duke of Savoy, Grandchild to Emanuel, by his second
Daughter Beatrix.

Fourthly, Mary Duchess of Parma, eldest Daughter of Edward youngest Son of
Emanuel, and younger Brother to Henry King Cardinal.

Fifthly, Katherine Duchess of Brigance, youngest Daughter of Edward, youngest
Son of Emanuel.

The Court for Claims erected by King Henry assembled and sat, where each
pretender by himself, Deputies or Advocates, pleaded their several Titles.

Don Antonio pleaded his own Cause himself, alleging the Marriage of his
Mother to Lewis his Father, but after a full hearing he was excluded (his Uncle
King Cardinal being present) as being judged Illegitimate, and that for these
reasons.

First, Because he had been reputed a Bastard all his Days, never any Man
before calling the truth of it in question.

Secondly, Because when Pope Julius the Third put forth a Decree against the
promotion of Bastards, Don Antonio sued to be exempted, and thereby owned his
Bastardy.

Thirdly, Because Lewis his Father, by his last Will and Testament declared him
his Bastard Son.

Fourthly, Because Lewis his Father never acquainted any Friends with his
Marriage of his Mother, as was probable he would have done to some of them,
notwithstanding she was of mean Birth, and of the race of the Jews (the reason
suggested why he did not) had it been true, and especially to his Brother King
Henry, who was with him in his sickness.

And Fifthly, Because the Witnesses brought to prove the Marriage of his Mother
to his Father, confessed that they were suborned thereunto.

Philip the Second, King of Spain, pleaded by several Learned Lawyers, First,
That being Grandchild to Emanuel by his eldest Daughter, and the Dukes of Parma
and Brigance but great Grandchildren to him, by Daughters of a younger Son, who
never lived to be King; he was one degree nearer to Emanuel, as also to the
then present King, than either of the other two, which the Civilians pretended
to be strong Arguments in their Law.

Secondly, That when John the base Son of Pedro, was Crowned King of Portugal,
it was to the injury of the King of Castile, the right being in him, as having
then Married Beatrix the Legitimate Daughter and Heir of Ferdinando King of
Portugal, Legitimate Son of Pedro, whereas John was but Bastard Son of Pedro,
and Bastard Brother to Ferdinando Father to Beatrix.

Thirdly, Because Portugal was given away by a former King of Castile, in
Marriage with one of his Daughters, contrary to the Law of the Land.

The Duke of Parma pleaded by Farneso Bishop of Parma, that being Son of the
Eldest Daughter of Edward, fourth Son of Emanuel, he ought to be preferred
before the King of Spain, being but Son of a Daughter of Emanuel, and therefore
as truest Heir, in deriving from the Male Line, laid Claim to the Crown.

The Duke of Brigance pleaded his Cause himself, and against Spain alleged the
same as Parma did, and to bar Parma, who was descended from the Eldest
Daughter, as himself was from the Younger, that Parma was an Alien (being an
Italian) and he a natural born Portuguese.

The Duke of Savoy pleaded his Cause by Charles Revero (afterward a Cardinal)
but he being descended from a Younger Daughter of Emanuel, as the King of Spain
was from the Eldest, he was presently excluded as having no color of right.

Beside these pretenders, Queen Katherine of France would have put in her
Claim, as descended by her Mother from Alphonso, the Third King of Portugal,
but the Plea being groundless, they denied to receive it, and so the dispute
remained between the King of Spain, and the two Dukes of Parma and Brigance,
but King Henry dying whilst the business was in hot debate, and before he had
decided the Controversy, the King of Spain (making himself Judge in the Case)
seized upon the Kingdom, which He, his Son and Grandson enjoyed near sixty
Years after.

Now the Case standing thus betwixt the two Crowns of Spain and Portugal; it is
consequently the Interest of the Portuguese, to be jealous of Spain (who will
hardly forget their Title to the Crown of Portugal) being always upon their
Watch toward them, and to make Leagues with Foreign Princes and States for
assistance whenever they shall be fallen upon by the Spaniard; and as France
lies nearest to them (except Spain) and so best able to do them most good or
harm, to hold fair with them, yet without trusting them (who practice a great
Latitude in breach of Articles) too far, or even their own Queen (if without
Heirs of her Body) because a French Lady, who are generally of busy working
Spirits in matters of State: And the designs of the French being manifestly for
increase and greatness, bogling at nothing that may stand in their way, should
the young King of Spain be swept away by Death, without leaving Issue, the
French Kings pretenses would be as well to Portugal as Spain, which
consideration does also oblige this King in prudence, to seek (if possible) a
hearty Union and League with Spain, for their mutual defense and preservation
against France.

How it comes that this people, who by their inclination to Trade, and success
in it, had formerly acquired the Character of the rich Merchants of Portugal,
should now so little (as they do) deserve that name, I cannot conceive, except
by falling under a more severe Government than anciently, they are (according
to the natural consequences thereof) fallen from their ingenuity and industry:
or that the industry and ingenuity that Reformation in Religion has brought
into the World, beyond what it had under Popish Darkness and Slavery; the
Reformists, by their wise and prudent conduct, have eaten them out of all
Trade, save to their own Islands in the Ocean, and the West Indies, which is
all they have entirely kept, having in a great measure lost their Trade to the
East Indies, as they have also (their circumstances considered) all capability
of further increase in it. And now this is all I have to say of the Interest of
this Country at this time.

THE INTEREST OF THE United Netherlands.
THE Netherlands are called so by lying low upon and toward the Sea,
containing seventeen distinct Provinces, encompassed with France, Germany, the
British and Northern Seas; they formerly belonged all to the King of Spain,
until Philip the Second by oppression, and invading their privileges, caused
those Countries known by the name of the United Netherlands (of whose Interest
it is I here design singly to write) to assert their Rites and Liberties, by a
Union for common defense and preservation, and in order thereunto, to lay aside
their limited Prince or Chief Magistrate, turning their Government into that of
a Commonwealth or Republic.

These seven United Provinces are, Gelderland, with Zutphen annexed to it,
Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, Friezeland, Overyssel, and Groningen, which in the
States account are in number but seven, because beside that the King of Spain
has remaining to him the City of Gelder, with a fourth part of that Duchy;
Zutphen being small is added to Gelderland (as it anciently used to be) and so
both are reckoned but for one, and that under the name of Gelderland.

As these Countries do lie all more or less upon the Sea, so those Provinces
are most considerable that lie most upon it, as Holland, Zealand, and
Friezeland, of which three the first is alone of more consideration than all
the other six jointly; from whence it is, that by way of eminence, Holland
vulgarly denominates the whole Union, although Gelderland being a Duchy, has
in Council precedence of it as it is but an Earldom.

Gelderland is the largest Province, but having the most Gentry, and so least
Trade, is one of the poorest; it has of Cities or Havens lying upon the Sea,
not any save Harderwick, an old decayed University (lately translated to
Nimmeguen) standing also but upon that broad Water, or Inland Sea, called the
Southern Sea, which flows to Amsterdam.

This Province is parted into three Divisions, called Nimmeguen, Arnheim, and
Zutphen; the chief Assembly or Parliament for the whole (which is the Sovereign
Power of the Province) is held yearly at each of these three Cities
alternatively. This Assembly is Constituted of Deputies, sent from all the
three Divisions, by the Gentry and Cities, who in their several Divisions are
of equal Power, each Division having (how many Deputies soever they may send)
but one Voice in their general Assembly for the whole Province, so that all
matters are decided by two of the three Voices, save in some Cases, wherein
there must not be a Negative; and as this is the Constitution of the
Legislative Power of this Province (called the States Provincial) who meet of
course four times a Year certain, and ofter as occasion requires, so the same
Orders that send these for their supreme power, send also a certain number of
other persons to the same Residence, as a Committee of State, which sits
continually in the interval of the States Provincial, and summons or calls them
together upon extraordinary occasions as they see cause, but during the sitting
of the States Provincial, the power of the Committee cease.

Holland being an Earldom is the second in place, and in common appellation
divided into South and North Holland, but in Law the latter part is called
West-Friezeland (and the first part only Holland) distinguished by the addition
of West, from that Province called singly Friezeland, as it is from that County
belonging to the Empire, called East-Friezeland; so that when in reading,
West-Friezeland is mentioned, it is to be understood the North part of Holland,
as Friezeland singly and without addition, is one of the seven United
Netherlands, and East-Friezeland, a County of the Empire belonging to an Earl
of that name (made lately by the Emperor a Prince of the Empire.)

This Province lies upon the Sea, having broad Waters on all other sides, with
several Islands belonging to it. It has in all thirty one Cities, whereof
eighteen are such, as send (by the Election of the respective Councils of each
City) Deputies to the Parliament, or supreme power of the Province, which I
shall hereafter call the States Provincial of Holland, according to their usual
style in speaking, not only of this Province, but also of all the other
individual Provinces of the Union, whose chief Assemblies are also called the
States Provincial of each respective Province.

Of these Cities, Dortrecht, Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, and
Rotterdam in South-Holland, Alkmer, Horn, and Enchusen in North-Holland have
the greatest Trades, but none comparable to Amsterdam, which alone bears a
quarter part of all the public Charges of the whole Province, and yet in
Council has but the fifth place according to its ancient right, Dort, Haerlem,
Delft, and Leiden, having all precedence of it.

As the eighteen Voting Cities (for so they are called) have in the Provincial
States each one Voice, so the Gentry (which are now but nine Families, several
being lately extinct) taken jointly and altogether, are made equivalent to one
City, and have likewise one Voice, and thereby make the Provincial States of
Holland (who meet always at the Hague) to consist in the whole of nineteen
Voices, where all matters are decided by plurality of Votes, saving in some few
particulars, wherein there must not be a Negative, and also the same Cities and
Gentry send likewise other distinct persons to the Hague, to Constitute a
Committee or Council of State.

The Provincial States meet four times a Year certain, and ofter as occasion
requires, and in their interval, the Committee of State sits continually, and
calls them together upon extraordinary occasions, as they see cause, sending
also with the summons a particular of the heads which are to be debated in the
Assembly, to the end, that the Council of every City, considering of the matter
among themselves, may give such Orders therein to their respective Deputies as
they shall judge fit, no other business being to be treated of in the
Provincial States, than such, as notice was first given of to each City; and
this rule is also observed in the other Provinces, as well as in this; but the
power of the Committee of State cease, during the sitting of the States
Provincial, they being the supreme power of the Province.

Zealand is a Province made up of several Islands, lying in and upon the Sea,
to the number of eight, Walkeron (which is the Chief) having in it the Cities
of Middleborough, Flushing, and Tervere; the Island of Schonen, has the City
Ziriksea, the Island of South Beverland, the City Tergoes, and the Island of
Tertolen, the City Tolen; which six Towns are all the voting Towns that are in
Zealand, for the Islands of North Beverland, Develand, Orsond, and Woolferdik,
being of little consideration, have no voting Cities in them, so that each City
having one Voice, and the Prince of Orange, as representing the Gentry, either
in person or by his Deputy, having likewise one; all the Votes of the States
Provincial of the Province of Zealand are seven, which decide all matters by
plurality of Votes, saving in some few things, wherein there must not be a
Negative.

This Council assembles of course at Middleborough some certain times, and
ofter as occasion requires, and has in their absence (as in Holland) a
Committee of State of other persons (chosen as themselves are) sitting
continually, who summons or calls them together upon extraordinary occasions,
their power ceasing whilst the States Provincial are sitting.

These Islands lie circled with Holland, Brabant, Flanders, and the Sea.
Zealand was anciently much greater than at present, the Sea having about a
hundred and fifty years ago, swallowed up the greatest part of some, and part
of most of the Islands; and were not the Walls of these Islands maintained with
wonderful industry, charge and ingenuity, the Sea would soon devour a great
part of them, especially of Walkeron the Chief Island, which lies so much lower
than the Sea, that the Inhabitants think themselves bound in prudence to raise
many high Artificial Mounts, scattered up and down the Land, on purpose for the
people to fly to in case of Inundations.

Vtrecht was formerly a Bishopric, but now one of the seven Provinces; it
lies encompassed with that part of Gelderland, called the Velew, Holland and
the Southern Sea, having but five Cities in it, that which bears the name of
the Province, Amersford, Dursteden, Renen, and Montford.

The States Provincial consists of three Orders, ( viz.) the Ecclesiastics
which are the first (being lay Canons, who buy for their Lives their places,
and with them the revenue belonging anciently to the Church) the Gentry the
second, and the Cities the third. The first of these Orders send eight, and the
two latter each four Deputies, in all sixteen, of which consist the States
Provincial of this Province, who assemble at Vtrecht of course some certain
times, and ofter as occasion requires, and in their interval they have as in
the other Provinces, a Committee of State of other persons chosen by the same
powers as themselves are, sitting continually, who summons them upon
extraordinary occasions, their own power ceasing whilst the Provincial States
sit, by whom all matters are carried by plurality of Votes, saving in some
particulars, wherein there must not be a Negative, majority of Votes having no
place.

Friezeland lies most upon the Sea, bordering by Land upon Groningen,
Westphalia, and Gelderland, and is the most considerable Province next Holland;
the chief Cities of this Province are Leurarden (the Capital Town) Franeker (an
University) Harlingen (the Seat of their Admiralty) Bolsward, Sneeke, Worcum,
Dorcum, and Stavern; there are others of less consequence, and some Villages as
good as Cities in other places; for as the Yeomandry in this Country are rich,
so their Houses for their kind, are the best that one meets with ordinarily.

The States Provincial of this Country, are constituted of four members or
Orders, that is of Deputies sent from the several Divisions of Westergo,
Ostergo, Silvestres, and the Cities; the three Divisions are again sub-divided
into several Precincts, where every one having a House with a certain
proportion of Land, has a Voice in their respective Precinct, from whence by
majority of Voices they send two Deputies to the general assembly of their
Division, and what is resolved upon by the major part of the same, is held the
act of that Division, as also what is resolved upon by the major part of the
Cities, is conclusive as to them.

The States Provincial of this Province, is constituted of Deputies sent by the
four forementioned Members or Orders, each Order having one Vote, who decide
all matters by three of the four, except what concerns the Sovereignty, in
which there must not be a negative; this Council meets at Leurden some certain
times of course, and ofter as occasion requires, they having a Committee of
Estates subordinate to them, sitting continually in their absence, as the other
Provinces have, and chosen by the same Orders as themselves are, who calls them
together upon extraordinary occasions.

Overyssel is so called from lying beyond the River Isel, it has Friezeland
and Groningen on the North, Gelderland and Zutphen on the South, Westphalia on
the East, and the Southern Sea on the West, it is least considerable of all the
seven Provinces, and was formerly belonging to the Bishopric of Vtrecht, but
being weary of the tyranny of Ecclesiastical Government they cast it off, and
upon certain conditions put themselves under the Emperor Charles the Fifth.

As this Province is least in consideration, so for its bigness it has the
most Gentry, having about sixty Families, which may serve to make good the
observation, that the more idle people any Country has, the poorer it will be.

The States Provincial of this Province, consists of two Members or Orders (who
fit at Zwall or Deventeur) that is, the Deputies for the Gentry, and for the
three Cities of Deventeur, Campen and Zwall; these two Orders are of equal
power, neither concluding the other without consent of all or part of the other
Order; for as the Gentry have three Voices, so the Cities being three, have
each one Voice, which making in all six Voices, there must be four for
concluding any matter in debate, as all the Gentry and one City, or all the
Cities and one third part of the Gentry, or two thirds of the Gentry, and as
many of the Cities, but in some Cases there must not be a negative, majority
having no place; and this Province has their Committee of State in the
interval of their Provincial Estates, in like manner as the other Provinces
have.

The Province of Groningen, in which is no City save that bearing the name of
the Province, is the most Northerly of all the Provinces, lying upon the Sea,
betwixt Friezeland and East-Friezeland. This Province is made up of the City of
Groningen, and the Land about it, called in Dutch the Vmlanden, which signifies
the Land round the City. This Land is divided into three parts, and those again
subdivided into three, which are in all nine. In this Country all persons
owners of House and Land to such a certain value, have Voices in their
respective Precincts, and what is concluded by the majority of the Precincts,
is the resolution of the Country, except in some Cases where majority has no
place. The City of Groningen has a certain number of Senators, whose
resolution by majority of Votes is taken in all Cases to be the act of the
City. The Deputies for the City, and for the Country, make the States
Provincial who sit in the City, and each Order ( viz.) the City and Country
being absolute, they must in all acts of Sovereignty agree, or else nothing can
pass, there being no plurality where there is but two Orders, and this Province
has also their Committee of State sitting in the interval of the Provincial
Estates, as the rest have.

The Republic of the United Netherlands is made up of these seven Provinces,
which I have here taken in order according to their Ranks (those ten of the
seventeen Provinces remaining in whole, or in part to the King of Spain, being
by way of distinction called the Spanish Netherlands) and are a Commonwealth
only for common defense, each Province being to all other purposes absolute
Sovereigns within themselves.

Beside these seven entire Provinces, there are several parts of several other
Provinces acquired (most) by Conquest which are under the Government of the
Union by the States General, and are made use of by them for their Frontier
Garrisons, to their great advantage, in keeping the Provinces of the Union, the
freer from Soldiers, to the encouragement of Trade and Industry.

Now this Republic being thus Constituted, and preservation being consequently
the Common Interest of all the Provinces (a Foreign Sword knowing no Friends
where it prevails) it is,

First, Their Chief Foreign Interest to be jealous of the greatness and
Neighborhood of France (from whence as soon as an opportunity serves, they may
well expect a storm) holding a good correspondence with England, who as they
are able, so lie most conveniently for their assistance, as also with the
Northern Kings and Baltic Sovereigns, keeping that Sea from being engrossed by
any one hand, in reference to the great Trade in general that they have
thither, and particularly to their Shipping, it being the place from whence
they are furnished with their Naval Commodities, maintaining also a good
intelligence with the German Princes, as necessary for upholding the great
Trade they have by Land into their Country, as well as for keeping them from
adhering unto the French in their ambitious designs.

Secondly, It is their Interest to be sure of Spain, in relation to the
profitable Trade they have thither, as likewise to their safety in the
Neighborhood of the Spanish Netherlands (so long as those Countries are in the
possession of that King) not suffering them to come into the hands of the
French, (who cannot approach them so near, without danger to them, as well in
reference to their concern at Sea as Land) and so far as is in their power, to
obstruct the French in their growth and increase at Sea.

Now as to their Domestic Interest, first it may be calculated from their own
observations, to be the avoiding of a standing General and Governor, except so
circumstanced and limited, as may only give him liberty and power of doing
good, without any of doing harm, which is the power that is Jure divino, and
due to Governors, the end of Government being for the protection,
preservation, and general good of the Community, and not for the punishment and
ruin of the innocent with the guilty, as according to common fame in Italy,
Philip the Fourth of Spain (to be revenged of the Neapolitans, for the
Insurrection of Mersinello) did, in sending Ships from Sardinia, laden with
persons infected with the Plague, on purpose to carry that sickness thither,
which when their Landing was opposed by the Inhabitants, were by the Governor
brought on shore by force of Arms to the destroying (according to common fame)
in and about it near three hundred thousand Souls, contrary to the Precept of
the Apostle, who tells us, that Rulers are not to be a terror to good but evil
doers.

And if the Dutch Writers speak truth (in that Book called the Interest of
Holland) in affirming, that their standing Governors with their former
authority and power, instead of reconciling differences, when any have arisen
betwixt Provinces, Divisions, Cities, or Magistrates (as was part of their
Office to do, and one of the benefits they promised themselves in a standing
Governor) they have usually nourished them, as holding it their Interest so to
do, according to that Maxim of Divide and Impera, and when they have decided
any Controversies, have made their own private designs the rule of their
decision, even to the prejudice of the innocent party, and that since they have
had no standing head, they have had fewer differences, and those easilier
composed than before (save only that single contest about a Stadtholder) as
also, that they ever observed, that when their Generals were in the Field, and
furthest from home, they had always the least faction and most union among
them: all these circumstances considered, it does clearly evince, that as
Concord or Faction is the Life or Death of a State, so the avoiding of a
standing General and Governor, invested with the former Authority and Power,
is their true Common Interest.

Secondly, As a Government is better or worse according as it follows its true
Interest more or less, and that all the Provinces, and every City in them, are
more at liberty to pursue their Interests while they are their own Masters,
than when they are under the overruling and over-awing power of a standing
General, that may have a distinct Interest of his own contrary to theirs, it is
the common Interest of the States to keep the power in themselves, and not to
give it to another, especially since they have found success and prosperity in
their own Conduct, and less prejudice by Pirates, than when they had a Head,
who as their Writers affirm, took no care of clearing the Seas.

Thirdly, As Trade is their grand Interest, by which they are only enabled to
defend themselves, and as liberty and freedom are the great increasers of it,
and as an uncircumscribed standing head, in both Civil and Military Affairs, is
under temptation of obstructing their liberty for public Interest, if contrary
to his private, according to the experience they had of their Governor in his
not harkening (as they say) unto the Peace at Munster, until gained by a
bountiful present made him by the Spaniard, of the Marquisat of Bergen,
Tournholdt, Seavenbergen, and the County of Monfort, beside a promise of a
large yearly sum of money, and as the great damage they suffered by their
first War with England, into which they say they were hurried by the party of
their deceased Governor and General, may be a warning to them; so all the
Provinces are concerned more or less, according to the several proportions they
have in Trade, to avoid such an Officer, as may obstruct the public Interest,
if his own private be not in it.

Fourthly, As War is an Enemy to Trade, and as all standing Governors, being
also Generals, will be for War although prejudicial to the public, because
thereby they render themselves greater, and more necessary than in Peace, as
also better qualified for Usurpation; and as in their designs they are apt to
eye their own glory, more than the profit of their Masters, not regarding at
what rate they purchase honor to themselves upon the cost and charges of
others, as appears by the debt of fifteen Millions and three hundred thousand
pounds English, their Generals run them into, and much of it by ostentatious
and unprofitable undertakings (as their Writers aver.) And as there is no
danger of the loss of liberty, like that from a standing General, who being
clothed with power and authority, is qualified for framing Factions for
Usurpation, so it must upon the whole be their Common Interest, to oppose such
a standing Head for term of Life, in whom there is so much hazard and
inconvenience. But although the general Interest of all the Provinces thus
considered, is to oppose a standing Governor and General, yet the several
Provinces are in several degrees, more or less concerned therein.

First, Because such an Officer by occasioning Divisions, and opposing his own
private Interest to that of the public, is prejudicial to Trade, wherein
Holland of all the Provinces is most concerned, in that by computation they are
not able to feed above one eighth part of their multitudes, with provisions of
their own growth, but are indebted to Commerce for seven parts of eight of
their nourishment: and as that Country lies the most conveniently of all the
Provinces for Traffic, to all Corners, East, West, North and South, having
good Havens and Ports, and abounding in Manufactures, so the Hollanders have
cause to look upon Trade as their Chief Interest, and themselves more obliged
to remove all obstructions in it, than those of the other Provinces, which have
not the like convenience for it, nor are under the like circumstances as to
their subsistence.

Secondly, As Holland having more Wealth and Treasure than all the other six,
is more potent than them all, so they cannot hope for less than destruction
under Usurpation, it becoming necessarily the Maxim of Usurpers, to reduce to
poverty such Countries and parties as they have cause to fear, and that not
only to prevent being capable of practicing against them, but also that with
their substance, they may gratify their adherents, gain, and corrupt their
needy Enemies: and as all men Armed with power do naturally press after
Dominion, and that a Civil and Military Head for Life in the United
Netherlands, can never arrive at an absolute Hereditary Rule, but by a total
subversion and suppression of Holland, whose vast loss in the decay of Trade,
which the Change of Government, with the loss of liberty, must necessarily
bring, will otherwise be continual provocations to opposition; it is more the
concern of Holland than any other Province, never to admit of a standing
Governor and General, because their utter dissolution is most endangered by
such an Officer.

Thirdly, As most of the public charge of the Union lies upon the Shoulders
of the Hollanders, so they have most reason to be Masters of their own Militia,
in disbanding and raising of their Armies, both by Sea and Land, as they see
cause, which whilst they have a standing General and Governor (who will prefer
his own splendour before public Interest) they cannot exercise without the
hazarding of a breach, as fell out in the Year 1650. And as this Province of
Holland, being most concerned in Trade, and so consequently in the benefit and
loss by War, is more engaged to have an eye to both than the other Provinces,
who are not so deep in Traffic; so it is more their Interest than any of the
others, to oppose a standing Head, that may be able by force to bring the best
Magistrates to a passive, and the worst by corruption to an active obedience,
or at least submission to his will, to the obstructing them in the pursuance of
their Interest, as happened not many Years ago.

Holland has of late Years been under great contests with the other Provinces,
about refusing to Elect a standing Stadtholder, which in their Adversaries
might proceed from a mixture of Causes, as from emulation (corrupt nature being
apt to envy the prosperity of their Neighbors) and selfishness, in considering
that Usurpation carrying necessarily with it the suppression of Holland, their
fall would be the increasing of Trade to the other Provinces, unavoidably
engaging the Usurper to a general indulgence of them, bestowing upon them the
Offices and employments maintained at the charge of the Hollanders, as a reward
for supporting him in the enjoyment of his unjustly acquired Dominion: For that
a Prince, who having to do with several Countries aims at making himself
absolute, must by profuse liberality (conniving at and excusing exorbitancies)
make it the Interest of the most indigent and needy, to assist him in the
subduing the most opulent and potent Countries; but by what Principles soever
the other Provinces were acted to the opposing of Holland, in their laying
aside of a standing General and Governor, they surely missed their Common
Interest in it: though I will not deny, but the private corrupt Interest of
some beggarly Courtiers, Soldiers and Families might not be wanting, for as
the Government of an Usurper must be Arbitrary and Tyrannical, the ordinary
course of Law not being sufficient to serve his turn, so for protecting him in
his illegal practices, he must allow his Janissaries to share with him in his
oppressing of all the rest, nay even in cousening and cheating of himself, as
the only means to quiet them under his doing the like by the people, and
therefore it ought, and indeed will be the care of all virtuous and good men,
not to forsake the paths of righteousness, for such as the rules of honesty
cannot maintain them in; and it has (in my private thoughts) been many times a
wonder to me, how men professing Religion (and whom I will not accuse of
insincerity therein) could not only join with Cromwell, but also magnify him in
his crooked designs. For though good men may have their failings, yet a man
stands in need of a great measure of Charity, to think well of those persons
that live and die in them without repentance; for uniformity in moral honesty
is that which all Christians ought to labor for, the contrary being
inconsistent with true Religion; for though a man may be morally honest that is
not religious, no man can be truly religious who is not morally honest.

And now as the Interest of all the Provinces is truly one, although in several
degrees, so it may be summed up to be (in order to their common safety and
preservation) their prime and chief Interest, in their jealousy of the designs
of France, making Leagues for preventing them in their further encroachments
upon their Neighbors, and especially upon the Spanish Netherlands, securing
above all others England to them, holding a good correspondence with Spain,
Germany, the Northern Kings and Princes; keeping the Baltic Sea open,
unmonopolized by any one Prince, clearing the Seas of Pirates, maintaining
Peace (if possible) with all Nations, avoiding a War, and especially at Sea, as
that which is destructive to Commerce, promoting Trade by all honest means, and
opposing a standing Governor and General, except so circumstanced and
circumscribed, that he can no way endanger their liberty, as that which will
otherwise destroy them: For whenever they shall be so far depraved, as without
strict limitations and bounds, to confer their three Civil and Military chief
Commands, upon one and the same person for Life, their liberty is gone. For the
advantages that attend those dignities, and Charges or Offices in an ability of
augmenting Salaries, giving Bribes, bestowing places of profit upon some, and
creating new for the sake of others, with the general influence he will have
upon all their Counsels, will leave very few uncorrupted in either City or
Camp, or faithful to their Country and not at his Devotion, and if he suspend
his Usurpation until by marriage he has increased his Interest and Power, and
has Sons grown up, to make use of, in the forming and heading of his Party,
courting and cajoling Officers and Soldiers, he will then certainly attempt
it; for nothing can be more infallible, than that a single Head of great
Allies, Interest, and Revenue, is inconsistent with a Commonwealth, according
to the Maxim of the Republic of Genua, who for that reason (in some kind like
the Ostracism at Athens) have sometimes made their greatest Citizens incapable
in their Republic of Magistracy, wherein they are certainly wise, for never
any people was in their Liberties Usurped upon by any of themselves, but where
there was either too much power, or too much money given to buy and corrupt a
needy, covetous, and ambitious party; but as the people in these Countries are
the original of the power of their Magistrates, so it must be left to them, and
thus I have done with this subject.

A brief Discourse of the Original Cause of the United Netherlands casting off
the King of Spain, and of their present Government by Estates General, which
follows here, as serving to make the foregoing Chapter of their Interest, the
more intelligible.
THat the United Netherlands are part of the seventeen Provinces of the
Low Countries, and what the nature and kind of their several Provincial
Governments are, I have showed in the Chapter going before, which treats of the
Interests of those Provinces: so that in this place it is not needful to add
more, than that they are all, each within their respective Jurisdictions,
absolute and independent as to all Civil and Criminal Causes, making Laws, and
doing all other acts and matters of Sovereignty whatsoever, without having any
Superiors or Appeals from them, being jointly (like anciently the Grecian
Republics) a Commonwealth to the end only of common safety and preservation,
and separately to all other ends, as so many individual Soveraignties.

As these Countries had in all times reserved unto themselves, such large
privileges and immunities, as rendered them always under a great degree of
liberty and freedom, so when the King of Spain by invading their privileges,
necessitated them to cast him off, they had little more to do in the change of
their particular Governments, than laying him aside, the Government remaining
much the same after as before, the Cities in each Province, being now governed
much after the same standing Councils, and after the same order and method as
anciently, except that whereas formerly upon the Death of any of their Council,
the surviving Counselors, by the Election of the major Votes presented in some
places a double, and in others a tribble number to the Prince, for him to choose
a single to supply the vacant places, they now have in all the Provinces, where
the late Prince of Orange was Stadtholder, the Election absolute in themselves.
And whereas the Sovereign power of every Province, is in their respective
States Provincial, and the management of matters of State in their absence, in
a Committee of State sitting continually, upon both which, the Prince of Orange
had a great influence, though no right of Session in either, the Prince being
now laid aside in Gelderland, Holland, Zeland, Vtrecht, and Overyssell, the
five Provinces over which his Ancestors had four times successively been chosen
Governors; both Councils in each of these Provinces, act now of themselves
without any reference to him.

And for Friezeland and Groningen, the remaining two of the seven United
Provinces, they choose always one of another House of Nassa, for their
Stadtholder, save that Frederwike Henry, a person of great parts and designs,
outed Grave William of Nassa, or at least after his Brother Henry was slain
before Antwerp, prevented him of the Governourship of Groningen, as had he
lived, he would possibly have done the same for Friezeland, that then having
the Stadtholdership of all the seven, he might at last have made himself
absolute Master of the whole; but Death preventing him in this his more than
probable design; Groningen since his Decease, returned to their first Family,
who deserves as well from them, several of them having lost their Lives in
their Service, as the other House of Nassa does from the rest.

And now to show further, the great liberty that these Countries (who are ever
jealous of their privileges) anciently enjoyed, as well before they were under
the House of Burgundy, as during that time, I shall instance in Gelderland and
Holland.

The first of these Provinces is found to have been divided into four
particular Tetrarchies, three whereof ( viz) Nimmegen, Arnheim, and Zutphen,
were invested with so much power, that if any Subject complained to the
Tetrarchy, to which he belonged, of wrong done him by the Prince, making the
truth thereof appear, they were obliged to demand right of the Prince for the
party injured, and not receiving satisfaction within two months after demand,
to sequester all his Domain within their Jurisdiction, and if he should still
deny, or delay giving reparation within one Month after that, then they were to
make the Case known to the other two Tetrarchies, who thereupon were obliged to
sequester all the Domain of the Prince within their several Jurisdictions. And
as in these times, the Government was in three Divisions with a Prince, the
Change is no more, than in laying aside the Prince, and Governing after the
same method without him, as before with him, save that the people enjoy now
their privileges under the present Government without dispute, whereas they
were in perpetual contest about them under the former.

Holland was originally an independent Province, holding neither of the
Emperor, nor any other Foreign Prince, and always governed by States together
with a Prince, none but Natives being capable of Election to be Counselors,
Treasurers, or other great Officers, the States having power of themselves to
assemble when, where, and as often as they pleased, without leave of their
Prince, as also they had the sole power of leavying Taxes, but making Peace and
War, ordering and disposing of the Mint, was with consent of the States and the
Prince, no subject being bound to the obedience of any Command, but as it was
founded in Law, the Prince at his Installation, taking an Oath to maintain the
Customs and Laws of the Land, and the people subsequently promising only to be
true and obedient unto him, so long as he governed according to Law. Many
privileges more might be instanced in, but by these the measures of their
ancient Liberties are sufficiently to be Calculated.

Charles Duke of Burgundy (surnamed the Warlike) Master of these Provinces,
begun first to incroach upon the Belgic Liberties, wherein with much subtilty
he proceeded soberly and secretly, as knowing that old Foundations were not
suddenly, but by degrees to be overthrown, his Grandson (the Emperor Charles
the Fifth) taking example from him, went on in the same way, yet a little more
publicly and vigorously, but his Son and Successor Philip the Second King of
Spain (although a Prince of great parts) being impatient of a slow pace, making
overgreat have in the design, provoked the Estates of these Countries to cast
him off, and take the Government to themselves, which they now carry on without
a Prince, as they did before with one.

This Philip being acted by ambition, and presuming upon his great strength,
vast parts and abilities, designed the total subversion of the Belgic
Liberties, Government, and the Reformed Religion (which had then taken root,
and was of a fast growth among them) and some say even of the Nation it self,
intending an extirpation of the old, and a replantation with new Inhabitants,
making his method the provoking them to stand upon their own defense, by the
highest oppression imaginable, not doubting, but when he had forced them to fly
to the natural right of self-preservation, he should be able with ease to
subdue them, and after he had done that, to cast (by the authority of his
dignity and person) the blame upon themselves, though never so innocent, and
then plausibly confiscate their Estates, destroy the People, new plant the
Country, and rule Arbitrarily according to his own Will and Pleasure, a method
which in part has been sometimes used by Princes for obtaining of absolute
Dominion, though not always with good success, as the revolt of the Cantons of
Switzerland, as well as these Countries do witness, beside that three Kings of
Denmark lost successively the Kingdom of Sweden by it, as did also afterward
Sigismondus of Poland the same Crown of Sweden: And that the King of Spain
miscarryed in his ambitious and wicked undertakings, his greatness in
Dominions, Allies, and his own parts considered, may serve to show to all
Princes, what a small people made desperate may do, and will be matter of
admiration to posterity, and of ascribing it to the signal hand of God, in
punishing the unrighteous designs of that Cruel King against his own Subjects,
and prospering their necessary defense, and the assistance afforded them
therein by good Queen Elizabeth, and the several Kings of England and France.

The several ways he used to incense the people, were first in making the
Duchess of Parma (his natural Sister) contrary to their privileges (in that
she was an Alien) Governess of these Countries.

Secondly, In imposing a new and extraordinary Council upon them, consisting of
several Strangers, whereof Cardinal Grandfield being one, was made President of
it.

Thirdly, In placing many other Strangers, in great Offices of trust and profit.

Fourthly, In setting up the Inquisition, and that with an extraordinary power.

Fifthly, In commanding the observation of the Council of Trent.

And sixthly, In increasing the number of Popish Bishops, from three to
seventeen, the fourteen added being chosen by the King with only the Popes
approbation, that depending upon him, they might be the more complying
Instruments for Tyranny and Persecution. And when he had made these breaches
upon their Liberties, considering such Innovations to be high intrenchments
upon their rights, and therein superlative provocations, he then contrary to
Law, brought in an Army of Foreigners upon them, to force a submission to his
Arbitrary Will, and that not only in Taxes and Impositions, but also in all
other things, by which he put the people out of doubt as to his intentions of
reducing them to slavery.

His petty Artifices for impoverishing the Nobility and Gentry, by provoking
them to live above their Estates, etc. as necessary (as he thought) to the
introducing of an absolute Dominion, are not worth mentioning, more than that
he therein missed his Interest, in that it was the only way to dispose them to
cast off that Government, under which they could not comfortably live; for
surely no Counsels are more dangerous to a Prince than such as tend to make a
people poor, who have had the experience of riches.

The people being thus provoked, sought first redress of their grievances from
the Duchess of Parma, who of her self was inclinable enough to relieve them,
insomuch that the Count of Egmont being with her approbation sent into Spain,
to represent the Complaints of the Provinces, the King dissembled a willingness
to redress them, returning him with a favorable answer, especially in
remitting the Edicts about Religion and the Inquisition, whereby the
discontents of the people were removed, and the Government carried peaceably on
by their Governess, with the advice and assistance of the Nobility of the
Country, until the Year 1565. that the Queen of Spain (having the Duke of Alva
with her) met her Brother Charles the Ninth of France, with his Mother Queen
Katherine at Byon, the next Port in France to Spain, and as near as Dover is to
Calis, where an extirpation of all professing the Reformed Religion in both
Kingdoms was agreed upon, with a mutual assistance of each other in the design;
and accordingly the King sent Letters the same Year to the Governess, disowning
what he had before granted to Count Egmont, Commanding without favor or
pardon, the putting all Heretics to Death, the Execution of the Council of
Trent, and the Emperors Edict about Religion. This multiplied discontents, and
the Constancy of many Martyrs in their Deaths, having wrought exceedingly upon
the people, great multitudes rise, and in the Year 1566. they hindered the
Executions of some, breaking Prisons, and setting others at Liberty, which was
soon after seconded by a Confederacy of the great ones, never to suffer the
Inquisition in the Netherlands, but to banish it as that which occasioned so
much Cruelty as exceeded all former Tyrannies.

These stirrings being by the Governess represented to the King, he did at last
recall his Commands, but by his slowness in it, his juglings and frequent
dissimulations (which with the wisest of Princes cannot last long undiscovered)
having lost his Credit with the people, this revocation at its arrival found
great Insurrections in many places, to which the Governess would have had
gentle remedies applied, but was not able to prevail therein with the King, for
^e (by the advice of desperate Counselors) being bent upon bloody resolutions,
instead of giving any satisfaction to their just grievances, returned nothing
but threats, seconding them immediately by sending the Duke of Alva (infamous
for Cruelty) with an Army, of which he was made General, and with him for Civil
matters, one Vergias, a witty, bold, needy Fellow, who (having been a Judge in
Spain, had been there laid aside for Injustice and Corruption) was as odious
for Villainy, and therein the fittinger for Arbitrary and Tyrannical Work.

Now the choice of these two Instruments, showing the Netherlanders what they
had to trust unto, caused Confederacies to be entered into by the Chief of the
Country (being yet Papists) for the defense of their privileges: but it was
not long after, ere the Prince of Orange and others, thought it wisdom to
withdraw into Germany, as the Counts of Egmont, and Horn, etc. not doing the
same, found cause in a little time to repent their imprudence, being soon after
Alva's and Vergias Arrival (although the Country was then by their means
reduced to Peace) unjustly put to Death.

The Emperor offered himself as Mediator, but was by the King rejected, his
intended work and design not being less than a total Confiscation of Estates,
wherein he went so far, that multitudes being made Criminals, another
Insurrection followed, and the Country being prepared by heavy and unusual
Impositions and Taxes, at the retired Lords second return out of Germany with
assistance, and after the Count of Marks success upon the Brill, etc. the
suffering party joined readily with them; and although the first places that
rise, as Antwerp, etc. were in a little time reduced to the obedience of the
King, the places remoter from Bruxels (the residence of the Spanish Governor)
so prevailed, that the Duke of Alva was forced in the Year 1573. to return with
disgrace for Spain, and his Successor providentially dying not long after, the
Chief of the Provinces entered (before any other was settled) into an Agreement
with the Prince of Orange, for carrying on the affairs of the Provinces, and in
the Year 1576. made an Act for expulsion of all Foreign Soldiers, restoring
all the ancient Forms of Government, referring matters of Religion to the
States Provincial of each Province respectively, to do therein particularly for
themselves as they should see cause, which Articles Don John (then Governor)
with the consent of the King, did under the name of the Pacification of Ghent,
ratify and confirm; but the King notwithstanding this, taking the first
opportunity of breaking this Pacification, occasioned thereby that solemn
Union, called that of Vtrecht (taken the 29. of January, in the Year 1578.
English, and 1579. Hollands style (they beginning the Year from the first of
January, as we do from the 25th of March) for their common defense and
preservation) which then laid (and still is) the foundation of their
Commonwealth.

After this, the Confederates growing bold, went on prosperously, and when they
had got themselves into a prevailing posture of defense, establishing a Liberty
in Religion, God so blessed them, that they grew rich, gained upon the
Spaniard, and after about eighty Years of continual War (save twelve of Truce)
forced the Spaniard in the Year 1648. to own them for a Free State, confess the
Justice of their Cause, and make Peace with them upon their own Conditions,
leaving every individual Province in the full exercise of that Government which
they had set up, and agreed upon exclusive to the King, and the seven United
Provinces, in a joint execution of their new model for common safety and
preservation, under the title of Estates General, upon which Government I shall
here make some observations, as I have already done upon the several
Soveraignties of each individual Province in the next preceding Chapter,
entitled The Interest of the United Netherlands.

The General Government of the seven Provinces united in one for common
defense, is chiefly carried on and managed by four General Councils (or
Colleges, as they call them) ( viz.) the Estates General, the Council of
State, the Chamber of Accounts (or Exchequer) and the College for Marine
Affairs, all sitting in the Hague in the Province of Holland, and constituted
of Deputies sent thither by the several States Provincial of the seven
Provinces respectively, for several Terms, according to the several Customs of
every particular Province, each Province having one Voice in the States General.

First, That Council called the States General (composed usually of about
thirty persons) is the supreme or chief power of the Union, to which each
Province send as many Deputies as they please, but whatever the number of their
Deputies are, they have all but one Voice, matters being carried by plurality
of Provinces, and not of persons, so that the Votes of the Council being seven,
according to the number of the Provinces, that Province that sends six or seven
Deputies (as Holland sometimes does) has but one Voice as another has, which
perhaps sends but one or two, and in this Council, neither Stadtholder of those
Provinces which had such an Officer, nor any Military person or Officer had
right of Session, though when the Prince of Orange thought fit to desire to be
heard, he was admitted to offer his advice in person to the States General, and
sometimes it was asked of him by their President sent to him to that purpose,
but in the Provincial States of the Province of Holland, the Prince never
appeared personally, but was always waited upon by the Pentionary for his
advice in their affairs; and although the Prince took an Oath of obedience to
the States General, as also to the States Provincial of every Province over
which he was Governor, yet he was not suffered to pay the Soldiers, the
paying of them being kept in themselves, thereby to keep the Soldiers in
dependence upon them.

The Members of this College are some for three, other for six Years, and some
though but few for life, lest such continuance should lessen the authority of
their principals; they have the highest Jurisdiction over the Militia (the
Soldiers swearing to them) over all Lands belonging to the Union, with an
absolute power of leavying and disbanding Soldiers, advising only with the
Governor in it, without acknowledging (as to the thing) any authority in him;
but the making Governors of Frontier Garrisons, Captains, Colonels, and
Military Officers, was so far in the Stadtholder, as to choose them out of such
as were presented to him by the States, who in their actings are obliged to
keep to the Laws of the Land, and Articles of the Union.

The work of this Council is to send and receive Ambassadors, to hold
intelligence with Princes and States, make Peace and War; to agree upon general
Taxes for maintenance of the general Union, and protect all the members of it.
To order the United General Forces both by Sea and Land in time of War. To
govern in chief the Conquered Lands in Brabant, Flanders, and the hither parts
of Germany (not being part of any of the seven Provinces) as belonging in
common to the Union, with all other matters of general concern, all debates
being carried by plurality of Votes, save in making Peace, War, and leavying of
Taxes, in none of which there must be so much as one negative, and in this
Council each Province presides their week alternatively, except refusing to
conclude according to plurality of Votes, he resigns to the President for the
ensuing Week, as in such Case he is obliged to do.

This Council does sometimes make and publish Laws in their own names, which
concern the Union, but not by any general Commission impowering them therein,
but by license first obtained from their principals. For as the several
Deputies of which the States General are constituted, cannot give their Votes
but according to the instructions they receive from their respective Superiors
(the States Provincial that send them) so they cannot publish any Law binding
to the Provinces, without having it first ratified and confirmed by the States
Provincial of each Province, the Provinces being as well careful to preserve
their respective Soveraignties and legislative power within themselves, as
jointly to defend the whole against their common Enemy.

The second General College is called the Council of State, the members of
which are sent by the Provincial States of the respective seven Provinces, as
the States General are, save that their numbers are certain, and that they Vote
by persons, and not by Provinces as the States General do; every Deputy
presiding by turns, Gelderland, Zeland, and Vtrecht, sending each two, Holland
three, Friezeland, Overyssel and Groningen each one, in all twelve persons,
continuing for two, three, or four Years, according to the Custom of the
Province that sends them, save that those sent from Zeland, and the person sent
by the Nobility of Holland, continue for life, as does also the Treasurer
General.

This Council is for all Land Affairs, in nature of a subordinate Council or
Committee to the States General, to prepare business for them; to have
inspection over the Garrisons, Fortifications, Ammunitions, Stores and the
Soldiery; to inform the States General of all things necessary for public
good, presenting to them once a Year, an estimate of the necessary expenses for
the Year ensuing. Taking care that Peace be kept among all sorts and degrees,
and nothing done to the prejudice of the privileges of any particular
Province, offering their advice upon all to the States General. To put in
execution the Laws published by the States General, and to see to the
observation and keeping of them. To see that the Union receive no damage. To
have an inspection over the Treasuries, and the disposal of the Finances
belonging to the States General, seeing that they be rightly employed, giving
every three months to the States General, and to all the States Provincial each
an account; in this Council the Treasurer General has a right of Session, with
a deliberative but without a decisive Vote, and formerly the Prince of Orange
as Captain General, was President of this Council, and in those times, if
during the life of their General his Successor was chosen, he had also thereby
right of Session with a decisive Vote, but neither the General, nor his
Successor, had ever any right to come into the Council of the States General.

The third College is the Chamber of Accounts, consisting of two Deputies,
sent from each Province, changeable every three Years, this College is a check
upon the Council of State (who disposes of the Finances) in controuling their
Orders, examining and stating the accounts of all the several Receivers.

The fourth College is of a different constitution to the other three, for
being for Sea affairs, wherein as the Provinces of Holland, Zeland, and
Friezeland are most concerned, so they have the greater shares in the Election
of their Deputies.

The Marine Affairs are managed in subordination to the States General, by five
distinct Admiralties; the first at Rotterdam, the second at Amsterdam, the
third at Horn, the fourth at Midleborough, and the fifth at Harlingen; the
three first being in Holland, the fourth in Zeland, and the fifth in
Friezeland. Each Admiralty consists of seven Members, four of which are of that
Province, and chosen by them where the Admiralty sits, and the other three, out
of the four Provinces which have no Admiralties in them, as Gelderland,
Vtrecht, Overyssell, and Groningen, and are Elected by the States General out
of such persons as are presented to them by the Provincial States of the four
forementioned Provinces, and in all the Admiralties, the Commander in Chief at
Sea presides, when ever he is present in any of them.

These five Admiralties send twice a Year their Deputies to the Hague, where
assembling they make the fourth general College, which being only for Naval
Affairs, their work is to consult with the States General, Council of State,
and Commander in Chief at Sea about their Marine Force, and maintaining of
Trade, each of the Admiralties having their particular Treasurers, an account
of the receipt and payment of which is given in every three Months to this
College for Sea affairs, residing at the Hague, and by them to the States
General.

The Election of the Sea Captains and Commanders belong to the Admiral General,
but the nomination to the Marine College, as does also a final decision
(without appeal) of all differences between Merchants, Ship-Masters, and
Seamen, under sixty pounds Hollands, which is about thirty six pounds English;
and to the end that Navigation be not hindered, they are obliged to a speedy
dispatch of all such disputes, and are further to take care, that the States
General have their due of all prizes taken by Privateers, of which belongs
one fifth to the States, a tenth to the Admiral, and the rest to the
Undertakers, the Seamen and Soldiers of the Ships.

All Captains and Commanders of men of War, both private and public, give
security before they go to Sea, not to wrong the Subjects of any Nation in
Friendship with the States. And thus the common defense of the United
Provinces, is managed by the States General, they having under them, the
Council of State for Land, the Chamber of Accounts for the Treasury, with the
Council deputed by the Admiralties for Sea Affairs, their several works being
carried on without envy; for as Faction is that which of all things is most
dangerous to a Commonwealth, so to prevent that, as well as out of frugality,
they make their employments so bare, that all cause of envying the enjoyment of
them is taken away, an Office of 200l per annum, being rare among them, the
Sallary of a Member of a Counselor of State, not being above 150l star. per
annum, and of their Secretaries under 100l. Their allowance to their
Ambassadors being but 1000l star. per annum, in all places save Constantinople,
where they allow 1200l per annum to him at that Court.

It is a Tradition and reputed true, that when that great and wise Spanish
General the Duke of Parma, observed the frugality of the Dutch, in their way of
living, ( viz.) in their Sallaries, and in all their management of affairs, he
said, their parsimony would undo his Master, wherein he proved no less than a
true Prophet. And certainly those States and Empires that carry on their
Governments by good Husbandry, will always have the Commanding advantage of
those that are profuse and lavish.

Though this Government cannot be said to be without Corruption, there being no
perfection in this World, nor any thing good, but as compared to worse, yet all
the care imaginable is (by their fundamentals) taken to prevent it, as by
strict Oaths against Bribery, either immediately to those in place themselves,
or mediately to their Wives, Children, Servants, Relations or others, all
members of Councils related to any person, having business before them, being
to depart during the debate thereof. And all Advocates at Law, at their
Admissions take three Oaths. First, Not to take greater Fees than are allowed
by Law. Secondly, Not to take Fees on both sides. And thirdly, Not to entertain
any Cause, which in their Consciences they do not judge just and right. And the
effects of these Rules are found, in that none are observed to grow rich merely
by Offices, as in other Countries, nor to get more than very ordinary Estates,
by the Ministry, Law, or Physic, which tends all to the encouragement of Trade
(the great inricher of them) in thereby disposing men the more to it.

And now upon the whole, to sum up the Governments of the United Netherlands,
both severally as so many distinct Soveraignties, with independent
Jurisdiction, each within themselves, and jointly, as a Commonwealth for
common defense and preservation.

First, The particular Government of each Province is much after one and the
same manner ( viz.) by States Provincial (or for our better understanding, by
Parliaments) as the Legislative and supreme power of every Province, with
Councils of State of other distinct persons subordinate to them, the members of
both deriving their powers from the several Orders of each Province (according
as is showed in the foregoing Chapter, called the Interest of the United
Netherlands) who send their Deputies for several Terms, to such places as are
appointed by each Province for their Residence, the States Provincial meeting
of course at certain times, and ofter as they are summoned upon extraordinary
occasions by the Council of State, who sit continually, saving that their power
cease, during the sitting of the States Provincial.

Secondly, These Provinces being united as one Commonwealth, for the ends only
of common safety, are Governed by that Council called the States General, who
have chiefly three other Councils or Colleges under them ( viz.) the Council
of State, the Chamber of Accounts, and the College for Naval Affairs, all
which as well as the States General, derive their powers and authorities from
the several States Provincial (or Parliaments) of the several Provinces, who
send their respective Deputies chosen out of themselves, to make each College
or Council (and to remain at the Hague in Holland, the place where the
Government of the Union is managed) for certain Terms, some longer, and some
shorter, according to the several Customs of each Province.

The public Charge of the Union is born by every Province according to the
proportions here undermentioned (viz.) of 100l.
l. s. d. GElderland pays 05 12 03. Holland 58 06 02. Zeland 09 03 08.
Vtrecht 05 16 07. Friezeland 11 13 02. Overyssell 03 11 05. Groningen 05 16 07.
100 00 00.

And Amsterdam alone, from the benefit of Trade, pays near 25. per Cent. of all
the Charge of the Province of Holland, as that Province pays according to its
quota, near three fifths, and by supplying what the other Provinces fall short
of their proportions, near four fifths of the whole Charge of the Union.

THE INTEREST OF GERMANY, OR OF THE EMPIRE AND EMPEROR.
GErmany being encompassed with France, the Netherlands, North Sea, Denmark,
the Baltic Sea, Prusia, Poland, Hungaria, Switzerland, and the Alps (which
parts it from Italy) is a mighty Country, in a manner round, containing many
Provinces, and within them many Soveraignties and Principalities, some under
Temporal and Ecclesiastical Princes, others under Republic Cities, Sovereign
Earls, Lords and Gentlemen, all making a kind of an undigested Commonwealth,
united under the Emperor as their Head, the Choice of whom is in eight
Electors; five for the Temporalty, and three for the Church.

Those of the first Order are the King of Bohemia, the Dukes of Bavaria and
Saxony, with the Marquess of Brandenburgh, and the Prince Elector Palatine of
the Rhine: For the Plenipotentiaries at the Treaty of Peace at Munster, in the
Year 1648. finding the last excluded the Electoral College, under pretense of
his Father the King of Bohemia's having risen up in defense of the German
Liberties, and the Protestant Religion, and the Duke of Bavaria advanced to his
place (which the Emperor Ferdinand the II. had procured the corrupt Diet, or
Parliament in 1628. illegally to Enact, contrary to the Protestations of the
Electors of Saxony, Brandenburgh and Mentz, and Fundamental Constitutions of
the Empire, by which the Children of the Electors, and other Princes, are not
for the offenses of their Fathers to forfeit their Inheritance) they had no
other expedient for his restoration than by increasing the number of the
Temporal Electors, to bring him in as an additional Elector: and although he
was anciently the first of the three secular Electors, they could not obtain
more for him, than the place due to a new Creation, which is the last.

Those of the second Order are the Archbishops of Mentz, Tryers, and Colen. The
King of Bohemia (until the Peace at Munster, that there were but six Electors
beside himself) was Umpire in Case of even Votes, but by the addition of one,
their number (with the King) is made eight, and without any provision (that I
can hear of) for decision in Case of even Votes.

The secular Princes of this Country are many, but the Chief are the four
Electors and their Families, the Kings of Sweden and Denmark (for what they
hold in this Country) the Dukes of Burgundy, Brunswick and Lunebourgh, Saxon
Lawenbourg, Mechelenbourgh, Wirtembourgh, and Holstein, the Landgraves of
Hessen, the Marquesses of Baden Durlach, and Baden Buden, the Princes of
Anhalt, and the younger Families of each of these Houses, with some lately made
by the Emperor from Earls to Princes of the Empire, as the Prince of Orange,
the Grave of Nassa (Stadtholder of Friezeland) the Graves of East Friezeland,
Salms, and Mauritz of Nassa; but though the Grave of Nassa Dillenbourgh is the
Chief of the Nassa Family, he refused or at least would not seek to change his
Title for that of Prince.

The Ecclesiastical Princes are the three Church Electors, the Bishops and
Abbots reputed Princes of the Empire, there being still the Archbishop of
Saltzbourg, and about twenty other Bishoprics remaining unalienated, and not
erected into secular Principalities as the rest are.

The Republic Cities are near if not full seventy in number, whereof three or
four are Papists, as many half Papists half Lutherans, one Calvinist (which is
Bremen) and all the rest of the Augustbourgh Confession, the Chief of which are
Neurenbourgh, Strasbourgh, Vlme, Frankford upon the Main, Hambourgh, Lubeck,
Bremen, Collen, and Augustbourgh, which last is one of those that are part
Papists, but the better half Lutherans, etc.

The Earls and Graves are so many as cannot well be collected, but some of the
principal are Oldenburgh (now fallen to the King of Denmark, the Dukes of
Holstein Goddorp, and Holstein Plaen, as joint-Heirs) Hanaw, Swartzbourgh,
Mansfeild, Hogenstein, Nassa, etc.

The ancient considerable Barons are not many, but of such as bear the title
there are not a few; but Barons, Earls, Princes, Marquesses, or Dukes, Created
by the Emperor, have no Session in the Diet, without obtaining of them their
allowance, and being first matriculated in the Imperial Roll, kept by the
Elector of Mentz for that purpose, so that the number of those that bear
several Titles (conferred by the Emperor as merely titular) and never come
into the Diet, are many.

The Gentry are according to the Custom of their Country, some Sovereigns (as
they call them) and others not, as the most of them in High Germany are
absolute within their own Jurisdictions, some of them owing only a bare homage
to the Emperor for what they hold immediately of him, as others do the same to
the Prince within whose Territories they lie; but the Princes of the lower
parts of Germany, together with Saxony, Brandenburgh, and Hessen, governing by
Estates, not having power to leavy Taxes but with their consents, there the
Gentry are not absolute, but subject to the Laws of their several Countries in
common with others, and are only looked upon as the principal Estate next the
Prince of the Country, whereby those Princes are the more considerable.

And now for the better describing the greatness of the Empire, I shall make
some observations upon each Principal Princes Family, beginning with the House
of Austria, of which, though the Emperor is as to dignity the first, yet the
King of Spain is otherwise the Chief. And withal you may take notice, that at
present it has no Heirs Males left, save the present Emperor and the young
King of Spain, so that the extinction of all the younger branches of this
Family, which formerly enjoyed large Territories in the Empire, renders the
Emperor the greater Prince in the sole possession of all the Lands belonging
to his particular Family, which is at least the fourth part of Hungaria (got by
Conquest) the Turk having the rest. The Kingdom of Bohemia (claimed by the
Sword, and confirmed to him by the Peace at Munster, of both which Countries he
now writes himself Hereditary King.) The Archdutchy of Austria, the entire
Dutchies of Stiria, Croatia, and Corinthia, the Marquisate of Moravia, the
County of Tyroll, and the supreme Sovereignty of the Duchy of Silesia: for
though there are several Dukes in it, with a kind of Sovereign power, they are
nevertheless subordinate to the Emperor as Lord Paramount, and these are
contiguous, beside many other Lands, small Counties and Baronies scattered in
several parts of the Empire, so that all his Territories considered, he were a
mighty Hereditary Potentate, did he not give himself too much up to the
Steerage of the Ecclesiastics, who seldom if ever prove good Pilots in Civil
Affairs.

The Elector Palatine has only the Lower Palatinate left him, the Upper being
given from him by the Treaty at Munster to the Duke of Bavaria, who was then in
possession of it, as was also that part of his former possessions, called the
Bergestraut, given to the Elector of Mentz, upon pretense of a forfeiture of an
old Mortgage. This Prince though (his Revenue being thus paired) he comes far
short of what the other Electors have, yet by his wise Conduct, holds as
Princely a State as any of the rest of his Order.

Of this Family there are five branches younger Houses, ( viz) The Dukes of
Bavaria, Newburgh, Zwaibrugg (of which last House the Grandfather of the
present King of Sweden was a Younger Brother, The Prince Palatine of Zimerin is
lately dead.
and himself now next Heir) the Paltzgrave of Sultzback, and the Prince of
Zimerin, Cousin German to the present Elector Palatine by his Fathers Younger
Brother.

The Elector of Bavaria has Upper and Lower Bavaria, This Elector of Bavaria
is lately dead.
the Upper Palatinate, and many other scattered Lands in other parts of
Germany, which taken all together are so great, that did he inherit his Fathers
Abilities, as he does his Territories, he might for Potency be reckoned equal
to any of the German Princes, save the Emperor, but falling very short in
that, he is the less considerable; the Younger Houses of this Family are the
same with the Elector Palatines, who is his Chief.

The Father of the present Elector of Saxony, was a considerable Prince, This
Elector of Saxony is lately dead.
in being the sole Master of Saxony Meisen, the Upper and Lower Lusatia, with
other large Territories, and a person of able parts, but this Elector having
three Brothers, who share with him in his Fathers Inheritance, and himself
coming very far short of his Abilities, is not by much so great as his Father
was.

There are several Younger Families of this House, as the Duke of Saxon-weimer
(whose Ancestor was degraded by the Emperor Charles the Fifth from the
Electoral Dignity, for adhering to Luther and that party, the present Electors
Ancestor being Installed in his place) the Dukes of Saxon Altenbourg, Saxon
Gota, and the present Electors three Brothers, each of which make a Family.

The Elector of Brandenburg is the mightiest Prince in Territories of all the
Electors (and the greater Potentate, in being the wisest and greatest Soldier
of any Sovereign Prince of this Age) having besides the old and new Marquisates
of Brandenburg, the half part of Prusia, (where he is an independent Sovereign
Prince) the Lower Pomerania, the several Bishoprics of Halberstat, Minden,
Cammin, and Magdeburg (after the decease of the present Administrator) the
Duchy of Cleve, and Counties of Mark, and Ravensbourg, with several other
Lands These Bishoprics were erected into Secular Principalities, and given him
by the Treaty at Munster, in consideration of his losses in the late Wars, and
in exchange for the Upper and part of the Lower Pomerania, which were taken
from him to give to the Swedes, they being in possession of them at the time of
the Treaty for the General Peace; there are of younger Houses of this Family,
the several Marquesses of Barheit, Culembach and Anspacke, and those descended
from them.

The Duke of Burgundy, who is the King of Spain, and has only the Franche
Comte, Burgundy now given to the French King.
or County of Burgundy left in Germany, is without any younger Houses of it,
more than the Emperor, who though greater in dignity, is a younger House of
Spain.

The House of Brunswick and Lunenburg has several Branches, all writing Dukes
of both Countries, for that in Germany all the Titles of the Father are derived
to every Son, who are distinguished usually by the places of their chief
Residence, and so there are at present four several Dukes Families of Brunswick
and Lunenburg, the Chief having his Residence at Woolfenbotle, the second at
Zell, the third at Hanover, and the fourth at Osnabourgh; but though the Title
of Brunswick belongs to the three last, who write themselves Dukes thereof,
because descended from thence, yet they are in Germany vulgarly called Dukes of
Lunenburg (with addition for distinction sake of the place where they live) the
whole Land of Lunenburg belonging (upon the matter) to them, and but a small
part of the Land of Brunswick the most part of that Duchy being under the Duke
of Brunswick and Lunenburg Woolfenbotle, who though (as I presume) the Chief of
the Family, because in common discourse (without other distinction) he is
called Duke of Brunswick (which is the Chief Duchy) yet in the Wars of
Gustavus Adolphus, was not by much so considerable as the Father of the three
present Dukes of Lunenburg, nor is he of Woolfenbotle, as I believe, so great
at this time, as either he of Zell or Hanover is at present, having, or at
least lately had, several younger Brothers who share with him.

The House of Silesia has several Dukes Families of it (as is before
mentioned) but the Emperor has the supreme power with the greatest part of
the Duchy, and is Heir to some of the Princes if their Male lines fail; but
this Duchy has in several Ages belonged to several Crowns, as anciently it
was reckoned a member of Poland, and though it lie in Germany, and speaks that
Language, it is now reckoned a member of Bohemia.

The House of Mechlenbourgh has two distinct Families, but descended from one
common Ancestor ( viz.) one called Duke of Swerine, and the other Duke of
Castro, who have betwixt them the whole Duchy of Mechlenberg, save the City of
Wismar (the chief Town of the Country, and best Haven upon the Baltic) with
the Land about it, which the Crown of Sweden had given to them (being in
possession of it) by the Treaty at Munster, when by the Peace made at that
time, the rest of the Land was restored to the two Princes of the Country, with
several Church Lands given them in lieu of what they parted with to the Swede.

The House of Hessen has two considerable Families of it, distinguished by the
several Titles of Landgraves of Hessen Cassel, and Hessen Darmstat, the latter
being a younger House of Cassel, and each of these Houses have, or at least
lately had younger Brothers, but of little consideration, one of each House
being lately turned Papist, of which he, called Cardinal of Hessen, is one.

Of the House of Wirtemberg, there were not long since (if there are not still)
several younger Brothers, all bearing the Titles of Dukes of Wirtemberg, but
the Chief is he of Stucgard, a very considerable Prince, this Duchy being
equal (if not superior) for fertility to any Country in Germany, and has a
younger Branch, which from its residence at Mompelgard, bears in common
discourse the Title of Duke of that Town, but in writing is styled Duke of
Wirtemberg.

The Duchy of Holstein contains Holstein (properly so called) Ditchmarsh and
Idersey. Holstein singly taken (which is a Province of the Empire) is equally
divided betwixt the King of Denmark, and that Prince called the Duke of
Holstein Goddorpe, each ruling distinctly within their several Jurisdictions,
and yet the supreme assembly for the whole is held alternatively one Year in
the Kings name, and another in the Dukes name; but of Ditchmarsh, and Idersey,
the Duke has much the greater share, if not three parts of four. And beside
these Countries, the Duke has the entire Duchy of Sleiswick, which joins upon
Holstein, where he has his residence at his Castle called Goddorpe, which
Duchy, together with Ditchmarsh, did depend upon the Crown of Denmark, until
the Swede by their late Treaty of Peace with that Crown, made the Duke (whose
Sister is Queen Regent of Sweden) as to those two Countries an Independent
Prince.

There are of this House two younger Families, one called Duke of Holstein
Plain, the other the Duke of Holstein Sunderbourgh, but the last by their
numerous younger Brothers, are all brought so low, and so dispersed in the
World for their subsistence, that they deserve the taking no more notice of
than naming, save only, that that excellent Princess the present Electress of
Brandenburg is a Daughter of that House, having been the former Duke of Zells
Widow, and now the Electors second Lady; who Married her upon condition of
turning Calvinist, being before a Lutheran, according to her Family (a good
example for Reformed Princes.)

The Marquesses of Baden are two several Families, and some say of two distinct
originals, others of one and the same, and that they have agreed upon entailing
their Lands upon each other, in Case of failure of Heirs Males. The most
considerable is he called the Marquess of Baden Durlach, a Lutheran, the other
a Papist, who bears the name of Marquess of Baden Baden, and is of much less
consideration than the first; but being a Romanist in Religion, is now (or was
very lately) by the Emperors Election, the Chief Judge of the Imperial Court
of Spyers; there were of both these Families not long since, several younger
Brothers, but being then Unmarried, they did little prejudice to their Chiefs.

The House of Anhalt is reckoned by some to be the antientest Family in
Germany, having been formerly Electors, and to make way for the Family of
Brandenburg, was degraded from that Dignity, without any other material reason.
Their Country is but small, and lies encompassed with Lutheran Countries, as
Brunswick, and Saxony, etc. but the people as well as their Princes, are of
Calvin's persuasion. This Family bears only the name of Prince, (though as
beforementioned was formerly so great) which here in Germany is in degree
under Dukes, Marquesses, and Landgraves. There are five several Families of
this House, much of equal power and revenue, living all in the Country of
Anhalt, making by consent a kind of Commonwealth among themselves, the eldest
in Years being ordinarily reckoned the Director of all the Families, he calling
them together upon all occasions of Consultation for the good of the whole;
they are generally persons of great Virtue, Worth and Gallantry, but of no
great Estates.

The Dukes of Saxon Lawenburg, are also very ancient, and of the same original
with the Princes of Anhalt, and have been likewise Electors, and without any
great reason deprived of that dignity (to make way for Saxony) There were in my
Memory, several Brothers gallant persons of this Family, which are now reduced
to two, and they without Heirs Male, and if they die so, the Princes of Anhalt
succeed in their Inheritance as Heirs to them, which will be a convenient
addition, their Countries bordering upon one another.

These are the Chief of the Princes of Germany, and if any be omitted (as
probably there may be some made lately by the Emperor from Counts to Princes)
they are such, as are but of little consideration. The rest of the Lands in
Germany not belonging to secular Princes, are enjoyed by the Popish Church,
free Imperial Towns, Sovereign Lords, Earls, and Gentlemen, of all which there
are too many to enumerate.

Germany being thus possessed, is divided into ten Circles, called the
Austrian, Burgundian, Nether-rhinish, Bavarian, Saxon, Franconian, Swaben,
Vpper-rhinish, Westphalian, and Nether Saxon Circles.

1. The Austrian Circle contains some Principalities, Earldoms, Bishoprics,
and several Convents, with the Lands belonging to them, beside the Territories
appertaining to the Austrian Family, which being very large make this the
greatest of the ten, and gives the Chief of the House of Austria the right of
assembling the Circle and presiding in it, they holding themselves too great to
have a Colleague in the Command of this Circle, as most of the other Circles
have.

2. The Burgundian Circle contains Burgundy, or Franche Comte, with several
other small Counties: This County of Burgundy is now granted to the French King.
Charles the Fifth added the seventeen Netherland Provinces to this Circle, but
now there cannot be any reckoning made of them, and the King of Spain, to whom
the County of Burgundy belongs, has the right alone of assembling this Circle.

3. The Nether Rhinish Circle, contains the Territories of the Prince Elector
Palatine, the three Church Electors, beside other Church Lands, with several
Earldoms; and the right of assembling this Circle and presiding in it, belongs
to the several Electors Palatine, and Mentz jointly.

4. The Bavarian Circle contains the Duchy of Bavaria, some Principalities,
several Earldoms and Baronies, the Archbishopric of Saltzburg, some other
Bishoprics, with several other Church Lands. The right of summoning this
Circle, and presiding in it, belongs to the Elector of Bavaria, and the
Archbishop of Saltzburg.

5. The Upper Saxon Circle, contains several Bishoprics, with the Lands
belonging to several Church Orders, the several Countries of the several
Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, with other Principalities, several Earldoms
and Baronies, the Elector of Saxony having the right alone of calling the
assembly of this Circle, and presiding in it.

6. The Franconian Circle contains three Bishoprics, several Convents, Church
Jurisdictions, and the Teutonick Order, with the Lands belonging to them,
several Earldoms and Imperial Cities, with their Territories, whereof the great
City of Neurenburg is one, the Bishop of Bamburg having the right of calling
this Assembly and presiding in it, when the matters are Ecclesiastical, and
when Political, the Marquess of Brandenburg Culembach.

7. The Swaben Circle is a Territory belonging to several Lords, to three
Bishops, and many Convents, beside that it contains the Duchy of Wirtemberg,
the Marquisat of Upper Baden, sixteen Earldoms, and many Imperial free Cities;
the right of calling this Circle, and presiding in it, belongs to the Duke of
Wirtemberg, and Bishop of Constance.

8. The Upper Rhinish Circle contains several Dukedoms and Principalities,
eighteen Earldoms, many Imperial free Cities, several Bishoprics and Convents;
the calling of this assembly and presiding in it, belongs to the Bishop of
Worms, and the Prince Palatine of Zimerine.

9. The Westphalian Circle contains four Dukedoms, two Principalities, two and
twenty Baronies and Earldoms, thirteen Imperial free Cities, some Bishoprics
and Convents, and the calling together of this Circle belongs to the Bishop
of Munster, and the Duke of Gulick.

10. The Nether Saxon Circle contains the several Dutchies of Brunswick,
Lunenburg, Mechelburg, Saxon Lawemburg, Holstein, several Earldoms, the several
Bishoprics of Bremen, Verden, and Magdeburg (all now alienated and erected
into secular Principalities) four Bishoprics, and six Imperial free Cities.
The calling together of this Circle, and presiding in it, did belong to the
Archbishop of Magdeburg, and the Duke of Lawemburg, but now the Elector of
Brandenburg, upon the account of being Master of Magdeburg, and the King of
Sweden being the same of the Bishopric of Bremen, they two take their turns in
this Circle.

Germany thus divided into ten parts is united in a Diet or Assembly of three
Estates. The first being that of the Electoral College. The second that of the
Princes, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, with Abbots, Counts and Barons, all
making but one Estate. The third that of the free Imperial Cities. In the
vacancy of an Emperor the Empire is governed by the Elector Palatine, as Vicar
for the upper part of Germany, and of the Country lying upon the River Rhine,
with Swaben and Franconia, etc. as all lying upon the River Elb, etc. is
governed by the Elector of Saxony, as Vicar for all those parts, the Elector of
Mentz being obliged to summon all the Electors to meet at Franckford upon the
Main, within three Months after the Death of the Emperor, for the Election of
his Successor.

The Diet (which is as our Parliament) is called together by the Emperor after
he has first obtained the consent of the Electors, which he is obliged to ask
as essential to the being of it, and to call it as often as the Electors shall
judge needful, and intimate the same to him. It Is the Legislative Power
considers of all matters of public concern, and as need requires grants aids
(though very rarely) against the Turk, or a common Invader, and not otherwise,
and then only according to the known standing proportions of each Elector,
Prince, Free City, Earl, Baron, and all that are taxable, some Cities, as
Neurenburg (which has as I was told upon the place, eleven Cities (whereof one
is an University) and a thousand Villages belonging to it) paying more than
some Electors, the Emperor having no standing Revenue from the Empire as
Emperor.

To this Diet thus constituted of three Estates, lies an appeal in
extraordinary Cases from the Imperial Court of Spyers, but seldom happens, the
Judges of the Court being kept in awe by being upon any occasion summoned to
the Diet, to give an account of the Decrees made by them some time before. For
there lies an Appeal to this Judicatory at Spyers, from all the Soveraignties
in Germany, in all Civil Causes, above certain known sums, which are in some
places more, and in some places less, according to the Customs of several
places, save that the Electors and some other Princes, are by special
privilege absolute in their Judicatures, without Appeal from them to the
Chamber at Spyers.

And besides this privilege, the Electors have others very great, as a power
of deposing the Emperor as well as of electing of him when they shall judge
him guilty of Mal-administration, but especially the power of the Elector
Palatine seems to exceed all the rest, in that (as the German Writers affirm)
he has the right (upon complaint, and at the suit of others) authoritatively
to convene the Emperor for Debt, with other privileges tending to the
limiting and bounding of the Emperor, who also ought not to make Peace or War
without consent of the Diet.

The Court of Spyers is constituted of Deputies sent by the Emperor, the
Electors, and the ten Circles, to the number of about thirty or forty persons,
the Emperor as such, having the Prerogative to choose the chief Judge, and send
four Deputies.

The Germans are as to Religion of different persuasions, as Lutherans,
Calvinists, and Papists; The Lutheran Princes and Countries are the Elector of
Saxony, and all the several Branches of that House, with their several
Countries. The Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg, and all their Branches and
Countries (save that he of Hanover is lately turned Papist, but without
Children) the several Dukes of Wirtemberg, Holstein, Saxon Lawemburg,
Mechlenburg, the several Marquesses of Brandenburg, Culembach, Anspacke, and
Barreit, the Marquesses of Baden Durlach, and the Landgrave of Hessen Darmestat
(of which last House there is one lately turned Papist, as there is also one of
Mechlenburg, but their Countries do all continue Lutherans) with the Prince of
Anhalt Serbst, many Earls and Barons, and near, if not full, sixty free
Imperial Cities, beside the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, and all their
Dominions which they hold in the Empire.

The Reformed Princes (called for distinction sake Calvinists) with their
Territories, are the Elector Palatine, the Elector of Brandenburg himself (but
his Dominions most Lutherans) the Duke of Swabrug, one of the Dukes of
Mechlenburg (the other as is beforesaid without Children, The Prince of Zimerin
lately dead.
turned lately Papist) the Duke of Zimerin, the Princes of Anhalt, excepting
him of Serbst, who is a Lutheran, with many Earls and Barons in Westphalia,
etc. and the City of Bremen, the only Calvinist free City in all the Empire.

The Popish Princes are the Emperor, the Elector of Bavaria, the three
Ecclesiastical Electors, the Duke of Newburg, the Marquess of Baden Baden, one
Duke of Lunenburg, and another of Mechlenburg, two younger Brothers of the two
several Houses of Hessen; but all the several Countries of the four last are
Lutherans (the Princes in this Country, having no great influence upon their
Subjects in point of Religion) with Bishops, Abbots, and Convents, and their
several Countries, as also some Earls and Barons, and three or four Imperial
free Cities.

The Lutheran and Calvinist Countries are in the general entirely of the one or
other Religion, but beside Bavaria, few of the Popish Countries are so, for
even the Emperors Hereditary Lands had many both Lutherans and Calvinists in
them, and have so still, if the late persecution has not lessened them, and in
several Countries belonging to Popish Bishops and Abbots, many Lutherans, and
some Calvinists, have not only a right, but do also actually enjoy the public
exercise of their several Religions, without disturbance, and much more without
Persecution.

The several Provinces of Franconia, Alsatia, Swaben, and Westphalia, are
Countries without any particular Princes, denominatively bearing the Titles of
them, as other Countries of Germany have (but the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg,
writes Duke of Westphalia and Hungaria, but both merely Titular, and not heard
of save in public writings to make a noise) the Proprietors being a mixture of
several Princes, Earls, free Cities, and Romish Ecclesiastics, which causes
in each of them the like variety in Religion, the three first being Lutherans
and Papists, and the last Calvinists, Lutherans and Papists.

The Kingdom of Bohemia (though lying in Germany, and in a manner encompassed
with it) I pass by, because a distinct Kingdom, speaking a distinct Language,
not esteemed part of Germany, nor comprised within the Divisions of it, and
without Session in the Diet, or being taxed by it, as Silesia is also in the
same condition, save that High Dutch is their Language.

And now after this brief account of Germany, it may well upon the whole be
observed, that were it under a good method of Government, with a perfect
general Union for common safety and preservation, it would not only according
to the eye of reason, be (speaking after the manner of men) invincible, but
also able above other Nations to become the Arbitrator among its Neighbors.
For the situation of the Country, and the accommodations of it, in plenty of
men, of stout Spirits, and strong Bodies, most fit and apt for War, abounding
in Provisions and all sorts of Ammunition for Land Service, seem to render such
a design its proper business; but as it is constituted of so many
Soveraignties, and of several kinds, with such variety of Religions, the
dividing of it (which can only be its Death) and so prevent it in keeping the
balance of Christendom (which may be reckoned its natural Province) is the
easilier to be wrought; and considering the former vast greatness of the House
of Austria, and the Conjunction of Popish Counsels and Forces, for bringing it
under the Arbitrary Dominion of the Emperor, it is matter of great admiration
it was not effected. And since the Germans are at this time delivered from all
danger thence, it ought to be their wisdom to secure themselves against the
like for the future, their true Interest being best discovered by remembering
the hazard it has (in our time) run of being reduced unto Slavery and Popery,
and how it was miraculously delivered from the bondage of both.

The danger that Germany has formerly at any time been in, has been either
from their Emperors dividing of them with design of Usurpation, or from the
invasion of the Turk, no other Neighbor so long as they remain united, being
in any kind their match.

When the House of Austria contended for the Universal Monarchy, knowing it
would be of great disadvantage to own the design, they thought it most politic
to color it with a pretense of Religion, as that which would not only engage
the whole Romish party for them (Religion having a great influence upon the
spirits of men) but also divide Germany, without which they could not hope to
prevail against so mighty a Country, nor without subduing it to proceed in
their work, and therefore upon that consideration, they gave their faction or
party the name of the Catholic League, but the contrary party answering them
in the naming theirs the Ecclesiastical League (names being in some Cases of
great efficacy as Cromwell found in naming his opposers Levellers) by the
assistance of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, the latter brought the first so
low, that they then fled to the Artifice of corrupting the Princes of Germany,
by tempting promises of advantage in case they would desert the Swede,
suggesting jealousies of them, by which means the Swedes (who came into Germany
for relief of the oppressed Princes and States) after their King Gustavus was
slain, were left destitute of any assistance, more than from that famous and
eminently constant House of Hessen Cassel, all the rest of the considerable
ruling Princes, either turning Neuters, or declaring against them; and had not
the French better understood their Interest, in stepping seasonably in to the
assistance of the Swede and the Landgrave, than the rest of the Princes did in
deserting of them, and making their Peace with the Emperor, Germany had lost
its liberty, and fallen under the absolute Dominion of the Austrian Family,
whereas by their assistance freedom was preserved, and an honorable peace
obtained.

Now, although Germany was thus by an overruling hand of providence kept from
ruin, yet the uncertainty of the Princes at that time when subversion so much
threatened them, and the unsteadiness of them to their own Interests, in being
drawn from it by plausible promises, which could have nothing less at the
bottom, than at last their own destruction, show the danger that the Empire
was, and ever will be in, from the variety of petty Sovereigns, who will be
always subject to temptations. For though the German Princes, being firmly
united in one common cause for common safety and preservation, cannot be in
danger from any Nation, yet by dividing of them, they may easily be sacrificed
to the will and lusts of Neighbor Potentates, less formidable than themselves.

The Turk has formerly made several attempts upon the Empire, but could never
advance further than Vienna (the Emperors Residence, and little more than the
entrance into Germany) and from thence he was then forced to retreat with a
loss he did not in some time after recover; and indeed the great distance
considered betwixt Germany and Constantinople, from whence the Turk must have
the main of his supplies and recruits, so long as Germany remains true to their
Interest in being unanimous, the fear of him is in no degree equal to that of
continuing the Imperial Crown too long in one and the same Family: for as the
covetous and ambitious nature of man is never contented, but always
undervaluing what it has, and pressing after more; so the great advantages
that follow the Crown, from the power it has of conferring honors, places,
giving rewards, and promising more upon success, is sufficient for a Prince,
that has an old root of succession in great Hereditary Dominions of his own,
to frame at any time a party for Usurpation, where he is but Elective. And that
which run the Empire (not many years past) into so much danger of being reduced
under the sole Dominion of the Emperor, and therein of the loss of their
liberty, was keeping the Imperial dignity so many Ages in one and the same
Family, and especially in one so mighty of it self as Austria at that time was,
as well as in great Allies, together with the emulation and indigency of some
of the Princes subjecting them to temptations, in hopes of bettering their
conditions by adhering to the Emperor.

Germany being a Country that affords great variety and plenty of staple
Commodities, and accommodated with the several Rivers of Elb, Weiser, and
Rhine, of great use and length, falling into the North Seas, with good Havens
and Ports upon the Baltic, is capable of the greatest improvement by Trade,
but is unhappily so obstructed in it, by the multitude of Soveraignties, laying
as many Tolls upon Merchandise, passing to and fro, both by Land and Water,
that without taking them off, it can never come forward in Trade: and of this
prejudice (that wise Prince) the Elector Palatine being sensible, made a motion
at the last Diet at Franckford, to have them taken away, freely offering (like
a Father of his Country) to lay down those (though very considerable) due to
him upon the River Rhine, wherein had he prevailed, it could not but have been
of vast advantage to the whole Nation; but though the Elector of Brandenburg
(whose Tolls are likewise great upon the Rhine) seconded the Palatines motion,
it not agreeing with the Interest of the Ecclesiastics (who are for getting in
their time all they can to themselves, without any regard to the public) the
Elector of Mentz first, This Elector since dead.
and after him the other Ecclesiastics, that have also Tolls upon the Rhine
(preferring their own private before the general good, as they there
universally do) so opposed the proposal, that it fell to the ground, and left
Germany (whose people have a genius for Trade) under no increase of advantage
for Commerce, nor more encouragement in it, than the liberty the free Imperial
Cities, and their prudent examples give to the people, so that were it not for
those Cities, Commerce being accounted in this Country, inconsistent with
Nobility or Gentry, and Slavery rendering a Peasantry unfitting for it, this
great and good Land, wonderfully accommodated for Trade, would have little
benefit by it; and therefore since it is Trade that makes every Country great,
it is the Domestic Interest of Germany,

First, To maintain their free Towns in their just rights and liberties, and
that in reference to the advancement of Trade, which cannot be improved without
liberty; for I dare undertake to foretell, that those Princes which do promise
to themselves great advantage, in the subduing of their Neighbor Republics,
shall find more loss by the decay of Trade, that the reducement of them will
occasion to their Countries, than they will find profit by becoming Masters of
them, for nothing makes Countries rich but Trade, and nothing increases Trade
but freedom; as Stade, Magdeburg, and Munster, in their several Countries do
sufficiently evince, those Cities, as well as the Countries wherein they lie,
being now miserable poor to what they formerly were under liberty; and I have
been credibly informed, that the Duke of Brunswick, from a sense he has of the
decay of Trade in his Country, since his reducement of the City of Brunswick,
does already repent his taking of it. And indeed I know no reason that can be
assigned, why Poland that is so good and rich a Country of it self, furnished
with natural advantages for Trade, should come so far short of Germany in
Wealth as it does, but the want of freedom and liberty in their Government to
encourage Trade, and of Free Cities in the Country, to carry on Commerce, which
Germany is happy in.

Secondly, It is their Interest to maintain their free Cities in their
Liberties, because under freedom, they are and will ever be, more formidable
Bulworks against the encroachments of their Emperors, or any other Potentate
upon their rights, than they will be in the hands of any Prince, and that their
formidableness adds much to the greatness of the Empire; and though this may
happily be excepted against by some out of a sottish averseness to freedom, yet
the advantage they were of to the Assertors of liberty in the War of Gustavus
Adolphus, does fully make it good.

Thirdly, Because as it is the general Interest of all Germany, in reference to
their safety, to maintain the Republics, so it is especially the particular
Interest of all the Protestant Princes to uphold them, in that they are all
(save some few) of their persuasion, and are so many sure Fortresses against
Popery, and do contribute exceedingly to the casting the balance of Dominion
on the Protestant side; beside that the prosperity of them, beyond what is
found in the Popish Cities, is of good example to the rest of the Empire, both
as to Religion and Industry.

Fourthly, It is the Domestic Interest of Germany, to reduce the Election of
their Emperors to the Primitive Institution, in not continuing that dignity
too long in any one Family, for although they have at present escaped the
danger of being subdued by the House of Austria, that Family being now not only
brought low, but also in want of Princes of active and daring Spirits, with
able parts (there being none left save the Emperor and young King of Spain)
necessary for so great an undertaking, it cannot well in our Age put their
Liberties any more in hazard, yet the example may be dangerous to posterity,
when peradventure Austria may recover its vigor, or a more puissant Potentate
obtain the Crown. And as to that exception against laying aside this present
Family, because of their ability to oppose the Turk, it may be answered, that
their Hereditary Countries lying next to the Dominions of the Grand Signior, it
will be as much the particular Interest of the House of Austria, without the
Imperial Crown, to oppose the Turk, as if they had that dignity.

Fifthly, It is their Interest to avoid the Election of a Prince that may be
too great for them, because aspiring to usurpation does ordinarily accompany
greatness.

Sixthly, It is their Interest to maintain a good Intelligence and Union among
themselves, not admitting difference in Religion to make any in State (lest
thereby they give advantage to their Enemies) but to be equal toward all,
protecting the meanest as well as the greatest, in their just rights and
liberties, without suffering any to oppress another, and to lay it down as a
certain Maxim, that ruin can never overtake them, but by division.

And could the Nobility and great men of Sweden be content with their
condition, and to live upon what God has given them, that Kingdom might be of
great use to this Country, in not only opposing (upon all occasions) the
encroachments of their Emperors, or ambitious Neighbors, but also in
ballancing of the Romish party, making it thereby, as well the general Interest
of the Empire, as the particular concern of the Protestant Princes and States,
to preserve and protect them (though strangers) as well as others, in the
enjoyment of their possessions in Germany; but by their success in the Wars of
this latter Age, they have with the spoils of other Countries, been so
habituated to live (and brought to affect a Grandeur) so much above their
Swedish Revenues, that it may well be foretold, that if ever by Peace their
supplies from abroad come to fail, they will be subjected to the profitable
temptations of any that shall desire to set them at work, without regarding
against whom it is, and so change the Interest of the Empire, from that of
preserving them, to that of driving of them out of the Country.

Seventhly, It is the particular Interest of the Protestant Princes, to
endeavor to undeceive the Popish Princes, by making them sensible, that the
pretense of Religion, which their Priests and Jesuits do fraudulently make use
of to stir them up against the Protestant party, is only that they may thereby
the better gradually destroy them both, their true Principle being for one
Monarch, as it is for one Priest or Pope. And thus to come to their Foreign
Interest, now they are delivered from all danger from the House of Austria,
that is

First, To be jealous of the French, not believeing themselves secure, until
they have reduced them within former bounds, who having justled the Austrian
Family out of their design for the Universal Monarchy, seem to be stepped into
the same themselves, and to be more formidable in it than they ever were. And
as all other Princes and States, as well as those of Germany, ought to be
jealous of that Nation, who declare the acquiring of glory a sufficient ground
(without other cause) for killing and destroying their Neighbors, so they
ought all to agree, for the fettering and restraining such loose and
unchristian Principles, especially since nothing more is needful in the Case
than a general resolution for denying of them Levies; for from the slavery of
that people, such is their unfitness for War, that when ever they shall be
confined home for Soldiers, or be denied recruits by England, Germany, and
Switzerland, they will be constrained as well as contented to live in Peace
with their Neighbors.

Secondly, It is the Interest of Germany, to be careful to keep the Baltic Sea
divided as it now is, not suffering the engrossing of it by any one Prince,
especially not by their Emperors, nor this present Family to be Masters of any
Sea Ports; for had they formerly had the advantage of Havens for Harboring,
forming, and raising of a Navy, the Swedes could never have entered the Empire,
nor the Emperor have probably failed in his design for Usurpation.

Thirdly, It is the Interest of the Princes to concern themselves in the
Election of the King of Poland (because bordering upon them) opposing so far as
is possible, the Choice of either French or Swede to be King, in regard of the
advantages that those two Potentates have each already upon them, in the
several footings they have in the Empire, and to obstruct their Emperors
arriving at it himself, lest by such an acquisition, he should prove too great
for them. And thus the Interest of the Empire is the supporting of the free
Towns in reference to trade, as the only way to greaten the Nation, to unite
for the preservation of every individual in their just rights and liberties,
and opposing all encroachments of their Emperors and Neighbors, or Invasion
of Foreigners.

And now as to the particular Interest of the Emperor, that is much changed
from what it was, for formerly he judged it his Interest, to divide the Princes
of the Empire, that thereby destroying them by degrees, he might at last make
himself absolute Master of them all, and in order to that design, to oblige the
Pope and his party by persecuting of all his Protestant Subjects throughout his
Dominions; but now neither Pope nor Spaniard being able to afford him any
considerable assistance, and the French King grown so great, that should the
young King of Spain be taken away, he would probably quarrel with him for the
Succession of the Spanish Dominions, and after stripping him of his most remote
Inheritance, then invade him in Germany, which circumstances make it his true
Interest to lay aside all persecution, and all designs of incroaching upon the
Empire, endeavoring cordially to reconcile and satisfy all persuasions and
Interests, making a firm and real Union throughout the Empire, for common
Justice, defense and preservation, and after the example of the wise Venetians,
to exclude the Ecclesiastics all share in his Councils and Civil Government;
for if he shall still in his severity against the Reformed, hearken to the
Jesuits (who according to their Church Politics, choose always rather to be
Masters of Error, than Scholars of Truth) they will infallibly be his ruin:
And beside the Alarms from France, to awaken him herein, the experience he has
had of twenty two Years of Peace (save a little exercise from the Turk) may
convince him of the truth hereof, in that though it is now so long since the
Treaty at Munster in 1648. which gave him a general rest and quiet, instead of
augmenting in Power and Riches, as all good Governments do in times of Peace,
he is decayed and grown less considerable than in time of War, and chiefly by
his persecutions in Hungaria, and the rest of his Hereditary Countries (that
part of Hungaria yet remaining unto him, being ready to revolt unto the Turk)
unto which he has been solely acted by his Ecclesiastics, to whom (out of an
excess of blind devotion) he has too too much given himself up. And thus I
have done with the Interest of the Empire and Emperor.

THE INTEREST OF Switzerland.
THose several United Countries known by the general name of Switzerland, are
small and Mountainous, surrounded with Germany, France, the Alps, and the Lake
of Geneve, the last parting them from Savoy. By this name are understood
thirteen Provinces, or (as they call them) Cantons, each being a Republic, and
absolute Sovereigns, as to their particular Governments and Affairs within
their respective Jurisdictions, all which being united for common safety and
preservation, make for those ends only a Conjunctive Commonwealth.

These Cantons are called Zurick, Bearne, Bassell, Shafshousen, Vrie, Zwits,
Vnderwalden, Lucern, Zugg, Fribourg, Solatourn, Apenzell, and Glaris, which are
of several Religions, the four first being all Reformed or Calvinists, the next
seven entirely Papists, and the two last mixed, though the major part of both
are Reformed: For it is an infallible observation, that where ever in any City
or Country, Protestantism and Popery are but equally privileged, countenanced
and tolerated by the Magistate, there the Reformed exceed the other much in
number, as at Augsbourgh, etc. The four Calvinist Cantons are more than trebble
the bigness of ^^l the seven Popish, which for their smallness are called the
little Cantons, so that that properly called Switz, gives not its name to the
whole by way of eminence, as is usual in such Cases, and as Holland does in the
United Netherlands (it not being a fourth part so considerable as some of the
greatest, and especially not as Bearne) but because it was the first that
asserted its liberty.

As their Religion is of several kinds, so are their Forms of Government, some
being wholly Democratical, as Switz, Vrie, Vnderwalden, Zugg, Glaris, and
Apenzell, especially the two last, and the rest, some more, others less
Aristocratical, but none perfectly so. At Bassell the Gentry are excluded the
Government, for having practiced the subversion of it, and some of the little
Cantons have no Nobility; but at Bearn (which is reckoned in bigness a fourth
part of the whole thirteen, and as big as some six of the little Cantons)
Zurick, Solatourne, etc. the Gentry are in great esteem, and the Chief in their
Government, their Ancestors not having forfeited their right to it, by
treachery to their Countries, as some of the others did, for which they were
excluded.

Beside the respective Jurisdictions of each of these Cantons, they have
several Territories belonging, some to all the Cantons in common, save
Apensell, others to but 3, 7, 8, 9, etc. as the four Bailiwicks in Italy (viz.
Mendriz, Valmadia, Lugana and Logarno) belong to twelve Cantons, and that of
Bade to eight; as others obey, some seven, and some but three Cantons, etc.

The General Council for the Union meets of course every four and twentieth of
June at Bade (a Bailiwick belonging to eight Cantons as is before observed) to
consider of all their common concern for the Year ensuing, and at other times
as often as occasion requires, Zurick having the privilege as first in rank to
summon the Assembly.

There are also several other Republics that are the Confederates of these
thirteen Cantons, as the Grisons, Valasions, the Cities of Routviell, Mulhusen,
Biell, Geneva, and St Gall, etc. all Republics, and the last such zealous
Calvinists, that though the Abbot (called by the name of the Town, and reputed
also a Prince of the Empire) has his Convent of Benedictins, his Palace, and
Residence in the City with all the Country round about it, even unto the very
Walls of the City, yet is not able to gain any of the Citizens to his Religion,
there not being a Papist in the Town but what are within the Walls of the Abbey,
an Argument of great Virtue and Zeal in the Magistrates and Ministers, for were
there a looseness in either, there would be a defection in the people.

At my abode here, there being one of the Chief of the City condemned to die
for Adultery, I saw the tears and Prayers of his Wife, and many small Children,
upon their Knees to the Magistrates for his pardon rejected, which methought
argued great equality in their Justice.

But these petty Republics, are not all Confederates with the whole thirteen
Cantons, but some with more, and others with fewer of them according to their
several stipulations, and the County of Newburg, or in English Newcastle, which
is a Confederate and Allie of the Canton of Bearne alone, are so zealous in the
Reformed Religion, that they will not suffer (as I was informed) the Duke of
Longevil, who is their Prince, to use singing Mass (which they call High Mass)
in his own Castle when he is with them, but must content himself with reading
Mass.

These Countries are (as is the portion of most Mountainous places) happy in
rich Valleys, affording plenty of Provisions, and all necessaries for the
sustentation of Nature; but their situation, in their great distance from Sea,
want of Rivers (which is in some measure supplied with Lakes) and staple
Commodities, renders them incapable of much more Trade, than that of hiring out
their men to other States and Princes for Soldiers, which they do upon two
accounts. First, for that being encompassed with potent Princes, and having no
Wars at home, they hold it necessary to have a Nursery of Soldiers abroad; and
secondly, for that otherwise their Country having no Trade to Sea, nor Wars at
home, they should be over-stocked with people; but what they do herein, is with
the preservation of liberty, no man being forced to Foreign Service, but every
one left in that to his own choice.

Their other greatest advantages are from a thorough fair for Travelers,
Merchants, and Merchandise to Italy, Germany, and France, having two great
Marts annually at Zurzackin the Bailiwick of Bade, where Germans, Italians, and
French meet, with their several Commodities, with a large linen Manufacture at
St Gall, and some benefit the University at Bassell, and several Gymnasiums,
bring to their respective Cantons.

Now although these Countries making a Merchandise of their super-numerary
people, with condition always of calling them home upon occasions, may seem to
render them formidable to their Neighbors, yet several Circumstances
considered, they are unfit for Conquests. As first, being encompassed with
Countries greater, and more potent than themselves, as with Germany and France,
should they grow ambitious, they would easily be run down. Secondly, wanting
Horse and Money, their Country having a scarcity of both, especially of the
latter, they are not accommodated for Invasions, in that Invaders, where
present success cannot be relied upon, must not be unprovided of either. And
thirdly, their Constitution being as in State a mixture of Governments, so in
Church of Religion, they are only fit for common defense, not being whilst
under such circumstances, capable of agreeing upon a design for acquisition,
each Religion being likely to oppose the falling upon those of their own
belief, beside that the difficulty in satisfying every concern, upon the good
success of their Arms, and the many occasions that would arise from thence of
differences among them, show their chief security, and internal Interest, to
consist in being content with their own, and as a means to keep what they have,
to nourish and maintain in their Neighbors their present principle of
obstructing one the others subduing of them, as that wherein consists their
safety: from all which their Interest may be Calculated to be in seeking Peace
with all their Neighbors, where they are not necessitated to Arms, studying
the preservation of their several Countries and Liberties, nature seeming to
have fitted them most for defense in the difficulty of their Advenues, and in
the courage and aptness of their men for foot service, to make good and keep
the passages into their Country; and in order to this, they ought as their
external Interest, to hold a good Intelligence with the German Princes, and
free Cities, and particularly with the United Netherlands, from whom (in
respect of the affinity that is betwixt them, both in Religion and Government,
without any possibility of their prejudicing them in their Trade) they may
expect as hearty an assistance, as so great a distance is capable of.

And further, they ought not to suffer difference in Religion to be any ground
of quarrel, nor the Popish Cantons their Churchmen (whose Politics are always
both selfish and destructive) to have any influence upon their Councils, but
after the example of the wise Venetians, to banish them their Consultations,
their Maxims (to which they are constant and true) being to foment animosities
against the Reformed Cantons, which the others ought carefully to prevent,
keeping close to this truth, that disunion will be their dissolution.

And yet further, as with great reason they formerly (being then jealous of the
House of Austria, because of their pretensions to them) held a good
correspondence with France, so it is now the Interest of them all, to be
jealous of the growing greatness of that King, and being firm to the House of
Austria (the danger of the Emperor being at present over) to hold a true
Friendship with them; and this is all I have to say at this time of
Switzerland, besides observing the great prudence and honest policy of the
Reformed Cantons, in their Law, that obliges every one amongst them that shall
turn Papists, to quit the Country, with liberty to sell their Estates, and go
into a Popish Canton, or whither else they please, and this they do not upon a
Religious but civil account; for it is not their delusive, ridiculous, and
Romantic Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory and Super-erogation, etc.
that they quarrel with, but their owning a Foreign head, holding that no Faith
is to be kept with those they call Heretics, and that the murdering of such
is meritorious, with other the like Principles destructive of all Morality,
rendering them unsociable and not fit for the Conversation of Protestants,
which is the reason of their Law. And in the Canton of Apenzell mixed of both
Religions, the Reformed are so sensible of the danger in living promiscuously
with the Papists, that though they are much the stronger party, they live in
one part of the Country as the Romanists do the like in the other part, and
this seems by a common consent to be necessary; for where the Clemency of the
Bishops was not interested in the change of Religion, all Countries in their
first Reformation swept their Lands of the Papists, and have ever since kept
themselves clear of them, except some places in Germany where the Emperor
Capitulated for them, and in the Low Countries, where being the first
Revolters, they Capitulated for themselves, as meriting a liberty of
Cohabitation without a public Toleration. It is true, Denmark and Sweden have
in their several Churches those they call Bishops, as six in the first, and
about the same number in the latter; but they are no more than (according to
the genuine signification of the word) mere Overseers without any Jurisdiction.

I am astonished to hear the prudence of our Ancestors sometimes complained of,
by persons not (in other things) wanting understanding, for making it Death for
Priests, Natives of England, to come into it, as if there were hardship in that
Law, when experience has sufficiently showed us, that Liberty to them, is
Cruelty to the Protestants. Sir John Temple laying the reason of the Massacre
in Ireland, upon the not putting the Laws in Execution against the Popish
Clergy, and since that was the Cause of the Murder of some hundred thousands
of Protestants, by several tortures and barbarous Cruelties in that Country, I
fear they that neglected the Execution of the Laws, are not able to answer for
the blood of so many Innocent Christians.

I am not for Persecution upon the account of Conscience, but do think it an
honest, civil, political Constitution, without the least mixture of Religion,
to make it Death for Priests and Jesuits to come into a Protestant Country,
since the immorality of their Principles is destructive to the Peace, and
Tranquillity of such Nations, and inconsistent with the well-being of them; and
it is to be admired, that the contrary opinion should in any kind obtain in
England, when that Kingdom has been under the perpetual exercise of their
wicked and devilish Plots and Designs, ever since the first Reformation until
this day. And if it be lawful in England to Execute a Protestant that shall
return after banishment upon penalty of Death, when his Crime for which he was
banished was not Death by the Law, and returns not with any intent of mischief
to the Nation (as none will deny but it is) it is surely much more lawful to do
the same by Priests and Jesuits, whose designs in their return are always most
dangerous and mischievous; and to interest Religion in their coming into the
Country, because as they pretend, for the edification of those of their Church,
as an excuse for them in it, is no more than they may do for murdering
Protestants, their Religion not only warranting them therein, but also teaching
them to do it as Meritorious.

THE INTEREST OF FRANCE.
THis Country is reckoned to contain thirty two Provinces, wherein many lesser
Countries are comprised, being of a round form, about five hundred miles in
Diameter: And as it is thus considerable in Circuit, so it is much more in
populousness, exceeding in that all other Countries in Christendom, and has in
it several Principalities, belonging to Subjects with Sovereign power
appertaining to them, but are all now (though not until of late) reduced to
that condition, as renders them at the devotion of the King.

France has seldom fewer than forty or fifty Dukes, of whom the Princes of the
Legitimate blood are the first in precedence, those of the Illegitimate the
Second, those descended from Foreign Sovereign Princes (as those of the House
of Lorrain, Savoy, and Mantoua) the third, and the Dukes of French Families,
not of the blood, and of Foreign Families, not derived from Sovereign Princes,
are the last in rank amongst them, and take place according to their Creations.

Next to the Dukes are the Mareschals of France, and of this Order (which is a
Military honor for life only) there used anciently to be no more than two, but
they have by degrees been so increased, that of late there have been seldom
fewer than thirteen or fourteen, and sometimes more; they abound in other
titles, but under the degrees of Dukes, and Peers of France, Mareschals, with
other Military and Civil Officers. There is no certainty as to men's qualities
(except in some few ancient known Families of Counts and Marquesses) it being
ordinary with their Gallants, some to assume the Titles of Marquesses, Counts,
and Barons, which are not due to them, and others to purchase them, which being
obtained at low rates, without suitable immunities, makes them numerous, and
therefore little regarded.

The ancient Government of France was by the three Estates of the Country, upon
whom (as representing the body of the Kingdom) was (as D' Avila reports)
devolved (during their sitting) the whole authority of the Nation, the Kings
power (whilst they were in being) seeming to be suspended; but at last an
Arbitrary Power being indiscreetly, and rashly given to Charles the Seventh
(under pretense of necessity) to raise money in the interval of General
Assemblies, their Kings having ever since kept that Prerogative (though granted
at first, but during a certain emergent occasion) have imposed what taxes they
pleased upon the people, without asking the consent of the Estates, save that
Britaign, Languedoc, Dauphinee, and Burgundy, do each of them retain still the
seeming privilege of three Estates, or Orders, which (though very ancient)
they are forced to preserve at dear rates by great presents (almost equivalent
to the taxes of other Provinces) made to their Sovereign.

After the French Kings had assumed the raising of money by their own single
Authority, yet they continued a long time the calling (upon occasion) the
Estates together, until having wearied them with fruitless meetings (in that
the Purse being lost, they were become merely journeymen to the Court) and
prepared them thereby for dissolution, they were totally laid aside, there
having been to this time, no Assembly of Estates, since the Year one thousand
six hundred twenty seven (about two years after Richlieu's entering upon his
Ministry) and now never likely to be any more, the Crown having gradually
engrossed all power to it self, to the misery of that Nation. And this example
may well be a caution to all people, who have any privileges lest, to be
jealous of them, and careful how they part with them, privileges not being so
easily recovered from Princes, as resigned to them, most of them being like
other men, ready to take all they can get, but unwilling to part with any thing
they can keep.

This Nation is so large, populous, and fruitful, furnished with convenient
Manufactures, and staple Commodities, that were it under a free and good
Government, nothing might be thought too hard for its undertaking. But although
the French being sensible of the benefit of Trade, endeavor the augmenting of
it, yet as the Popish Religion in its nature, is (in a great measure)
inconsistent with it, in their not only indulging idleness in all sorts of
people, but also in inviting them to it, by their many days they call holy, and
particularly in their encouraging their numerous Pilgrims (who ever after prove
ordinarily common Wanderers and Vagabonds, if not Thieves and Highway-men) as
well as the multitude of their Secular and Regular Priests and Friars,
especially those that profess begging; so also as all absolute rule founded in
Arbitrary will and pleasure, cannot be upheld but by Instruments that must be
allowed in corrupt and dishonest practices, wronging the King or Prince, as
they judge he does the people, sharing with him in oppressing and injuring of
them: Traffic cannot be improved above the nature of the Government, which
reaches little further than to a particular Monopolizing of Commerce (and not
to an Universal indulging of Trade and Industry) in granting immunities to
Favorites, and countenancing them before others. So that as France cannot well
from its natural advantages, be without a good share in Trade, so the
obstructions necessarily attending the Government, both in Church and State,
are such, together with the vast unalienated revenue of the Ecclesiastics,
that it can never be improved to what otherwise it is capable of; and to speak
politically, it is the better for their Neighbors that it is so with them,
lest else they might peradventure prove too great for them. For although they
have not in any degree such bold Rivers and Havens for men of War, and Ships of
burden as England, yet it is wonderfully accommodated with Rivers of great
length and use for conveyance of Merchandise, Travelers and Passengers by
flat-bottomed Boats.

And of these Rivers there are four in Chief, exceeding the rest, which empty
themselves advantageously into the Sea, in the four several quarters of the
Land, beside many lesser Rivers, some of which fall into the greater, and the
rest immediately into the Sea.

The four Capital Rivers, are the Seine, Loyer, Garonne, and Rhosne. The first
rises in Burgundy, and running through Champaigne, and several Cities in that
and other Countries, takes Paris and Rouen in its way, and falls at
Haverdegrace into the British Sea, being in its whole course of great benefit
to Merchants and Travelers.

The Loyer rises in that part of the Country called the Cevennes, running by
Nevers, Orleance, Blois, Tours, Saumers, and several other Cities and Towns,
and in its course, having received some other smaller Rivers, passing by Nantes
falls into the Bay of Biscay, some few Miles below it. This River is accounted
the Chief of all France, for its long stream and usefulness, being Navigable
with flat-bottomed Boats, near (as I believe) if not full three hundred English
Miles, and yet (which is unusual) is not so for greater Vessels above twenty
Miles.

The Garonne rises in the Pyrenean Mountains, upon the Territories of Spain,
and saluting in its way many Cities and Towns, falls into the Bay of Biscay,
forty or fifty Miles below Bourdeaux; this is the best and most Navigable River
of all France for Ships of burden, the Tide flowing many Miles into the Land.

The Rhosne rises in Switzerland, passes through the Lake of Geneve, and that
City, and not half a days Journey beyond it, losing it self under ground, after
some few English Miles rises again, and comes a great River to Lions, falling
into the Mediterranean about eighty English Miles below it, after having in its
course passed by several other Cities, as Vienne, Avignon, and Arles, etc. The
rapidness of this River, which is very great, makes it the less useful, but at
Lions the River Saone falls into it, which in its way thither, is of great
benefit to that City, and other places.

France though thus rich in Rivers, beside many Creeks, yet wants good Havens
and Ports. Their Coast in the narrow Seas is dangerous, from the lowness of the
Land, many Rocks lying in the Sea, and want of good and well situated Harbors,
their best being Haverdegrace and St. Maloes, although neither of them to be
boasted of; the first having a dangerous entrance, and when within, as ill
riding, the River being bad even up to Rouen; and the latter, though it has a
good Haven within, yet the entrance is very perilous, from many Rocks that lie
scattered far into the Sea. Diep is the next, but at high Water, not for
Vessels of above 150. Tuns, which lie dry at low Water, all the rest, as Calis,
Caen, and many others, deserve no better name than Creeks, although the
ostentatious way of French Writers, mention them sometimes as good Ports. Breast
in Britaignie lying upon the Ocean is a good Haven, but being in that part of
the Country which has not much Trade, the greatest use of it is, for the Kings
men of War, kept for the Seas on this side the Mediterranean, it affording
Water enough for Vessels of the greatest burden. There are in the Bay of
Biscay (which is that great Bay fou^ the Map, made by France and Spain) along
(...) Coast many Ports, as Nantes, Rochell, Bourdeaux, Bleavet, Croiswicke,
Maran, Charent, St. John de Luce, etc. of which, the four first are the best,
the rest being of no great consideration, more than what that at Charent is, by
the Haven and Dock which the King has lately made there, for the riding and
building of Ships, it lying too deep in the Bay, and too remote from the main
Ocean, to be of much other use.

Beside these Ports, there are several Roads, as at St. Martins, in the Isle of
Ree, as also betwixt the Isle of Oleron, and the Main, from Trimlado to
Charent, where some of the Kings men of War did (if they do not still) use to
ride.

Of Ports within the Mediterranean, there are no more belonging to France that
deserve any name, than Marseilles, and Toulon, the latter only good as to Ships
of War, being without Trade; but the first is a great trading City, and the
Harbor, where the Kings Galleys for those Seas are for the most part kept, as
the other is principally for his Ships of War.

The Coasts of France lying thus upon the Ocean, British, and Mediterranean
Seas, they all afford their several staple Commodities, and the Inland variety
of wrought silks, and toys, made in France, and carried out by Land as well as
Sea.

From the Coast upon the narrow Seas, come several sorts of linen to a great
value, as from Rouen, St. Maloes, and Morleys, besides Wine from Rouen, with
Paper and other lesser Commodities from both that City, and Caen. From the
Coast in the Bay of Biscay, come vast quantities of Wines, as from Nantes,
Rochell, Isle of Ree, and Bourdeaux, with great store of Salt, and sometimes
Corn and other Merchandise. From Marseilles in the Mediterranean, is sent of
staple Commodities none but Oil, and a fine sort of Soap, with some other
Merchandise of less concernment.

And now France being thus considered, with its staple Commodities, Ports,
Havens, and Roads, sufficient for Merchants use (though short of those in
England) Inland Manufactures of silk, Woolen, and other sorts, with convenience
of Rivers useful for conveyance of goods and persons, and a free passage by
Land to all their bordering Neighbors, as to Spain, the Seventeen Netherlands,
Germany, Switzerland, Savoy, and Italy, it may be reckoned to have great
advantages for Commerce, and to have Trade its Natural Interest.

This Kingdom thus circumstanced, and interposing by situation betwixt Spain
and that Kings other Territories and Allies, was naturally fitted to obstruct
and prevent (as for many Years it did) the House of Austria in their design for
the Universal Monarchy. For although France, joining with Holland, could not
alone without England have hindered it, neither could England and Holland,
without France, have well done it, a Conjunction of Powers being then necessary
for keeping the balance against Spain, as it now is against France.

Whilst France was under difficulties, it was the Interest of England (as they
did) to keep them up, lest otherwise they should have fallen under the power of
Austria, but when they came to be equal with Spain, as by degrees they did, and
be able of themselves to make good their ground in the Netherlands, Catalonia,
and Italy, for several Years together, without any material difference on
either side, England did not only then sit still, but also the States of
Holland (who until the Year 1648. were in a League offensive and defensive,
with France against Spain) being then at liberty, and judging it their Interest
(as it really was) to make Peace with Spain, and be passive, they very wisely
resolved upon it and effected it, and with design to keep those two great
Potentates in an aequilibrium, as the Long Parliament of England had prudently
given them the Example, which Cromwell had he aimed at the public, as much as
his own private Interest, would surely have followed, but not doing that, he
cast the Balance of Dominion on the side of the French, to the irreparable
loss of Christendom.

This Country has not at once but gradually arrived at its present greatness,
having made and gained several additions, at several times, as (to look no
further back) Henry the Second got by the Sword the several Bishoprics of
Metz, Verdun, and Toule, which are part of Lorrain, and members of the Empire.

Henry the Fourth added that part of Navar, lying on this side the Pyrenean
Mountains (as being his Inheritance) and la Bress lying near Geneve on this
side the Alps, receiving it from the Duke of Savoy, in exchange for the
Marquisat of Saluce, lying in Italy beyond the Alps.

Lewis the Thirteenth got from the Duke of Bulloin, the strong City of Sedan,
with its Principality, and therein a passage into the Duchy of Luxenburg, and
so forward into Germany.

This present King Lewis the Fourteenth, had given him by the Treaty at
Munster, the City of Brisac, with part of Alsatia belonging to it, and
Philipsburg in the Lower Palatinate, two reputed invincible holds, both much at
an equal distance of a day and a halfs Journey, from the great Imperial free
City of Strasburg in Germany, to the great grief of that Town, the first lying
above, as the latter below it, and all three upon the River Rhine.

By his Peace with Spain, at St. John de Luce, when he Married his present
Queen (a Daughter of that Crown) he got his Conquests in the Spanish
Netherlands confirmed to him, St Omers and Aires lately taken by the French.
being all the Province of Artoise (save St. Omer and Aires) several parts of
the several Provinces of Flanders, Henego, and Namures, with the County of
Rossillion, joining upon (if not part of) Catalonia, and in that the strong
Frontier Garrison of Perpinion. And in Italy, Pignorolo, with the Valleys
thereunto belonging, since this, and in the Year 1661. the French jugled the
Duke of Lorrain out of his Country, and now pretend after the Dukes decease, a
right of Inheritance in it to them and their Heirs for ever, having at present
a free passage through that Country, the fastnesses being by them demolished,
and the Duke stripped of all means of opposing them.

By the last Peace with Spain in 1668. they had granted to them, the Cities of
Lisle, Oudenard, Cortray, etc. in the Spanish Netherlands, which they had the
Year before surreptitiously fallen upon, and seized; and thus the French have
augmented their Dominions, and in doing of it, rendered themselves much the
more considerable, in having now most of their Frontier Garrisons upon acquired
Lands, giving them free passage into their Neighbors Territories, leaving
their own Country at the more liberty to follow their Commerce and Manufactures
(Soldiers and Armies being Enemies to both) which they wisely encourage, as
that which must lay the foundation of their strength in riches, and an increase
of Shipping, the Cities and great trading Towns, not being so burdened and
taxed, as the Peasants in the Country, and other smaller Towns are.

Whilst the French were in fear of Spain, they sought Alliance against him,
with the Protestant Princes and States, indulging their Reformed Subjects, by
Confirmation of old Edicts in their behalfs, with acknowledgment of their
fidelity and good service, neglecting and slighting what ever the Pope and his
party might think of them for it; but since they have been freed from all
danger thence, looking upon their Interest as changed, they have changed their
Maxims, from those that were for preservation only, to such as are for increase
also, seeming now to observe the same rules in reference to Rome, which Spain
followed in the time of their aspiring, as in pretending so much zeal for the
Romish Religion, as may render their King Protector of that party, (and as
Cruelty against Dissenters, in matters of belief, is by all false Religions
more approved of than Devotion, so) by evidencing their sincerity, in a
persecution of their Reformed Subjects, pretending to favor the Popes
greatness, though to the end only that he may do the like for them,
endeavoring to delude others into a contributing to their designs, either by
gaining them as Pentioners to stand Neuters in their Expeditions and Invasions,
or by procuring them to join, in hopes of sharing with them in the ruin of
those that shall stand most in their way, that so they may gradually devour
all, and at no greater expense than by the rewarding of their adherents for
their assistance, with the privilege only of being last destroyed: and in
order hereunto, they have labored to draw England from Holland and the triple
League unto themselves, that so they might the easilier subdue the United
Netherlands, and make themselves Masters of their strength, which they have
cause to fear, will otherwise be an invincible Bulwark in their Progress. And
for alluring England to join with them therein, it is probable, that they
tempted them with large shares in their Conquests, but it has been (as it is
to be hoped it ever will be) the wisdom of his Majesty, and the Ministers of
that wise State and Nation, to reject all temptations, as knowing that they
being an Island, the increase of the French upon the Continent, must so much
exceed any advantage that can accrue to them by it, that when they have done
their work, the English (as well as other Princes and States) must be at their
devotion, not only for all they shall hold bordering upon them, but also for
what else they shall any where possess.

And now the designs of the French, being manifestly for greatness, without
scrupling any thing whatsoever, that may obstruct them in it, their Foreign
Interest, according to their corrupt Principles, must consequently be,

First, In personating a great concern for Popery, that they may be no more
thought (as formerly) Heretical Papists, but on the contrary the most zealous
of that Church.

Secondly, In prevailing if possible, for one of their Faction to be chosen
Pope, as also upon vacancies, into all other Elective Governments.

Thirdly, In engaging as many of the Northern Princes, by Pensions or
otherwise, as they can.

Fourthly, In making England their Ally, and the rest of their Neighbors
Neuters, or sow Seeds of Sedition among them, for preventing their observation
of them, until they have devoured the seventeen Provinces, that so they may not
any more need to court, but threaten the World. And all these Artifices may be
observed, some of them to be publicly owned, and the rest endeavored by their
Ambassadors corrupting Ministers of State, in all Courts where it is feasible,
as there are not many uncorruptible; and thus much for their Foreign Interest.

As for their Domestic Interest, whilst they will carry on an Arbitrary
Government, it must consequently follow to be the keeping always in Arms,
ready as well to invade Spain, should that young King be swept away by Death
(upon the pretense of Succession) as for suppressing Insurrections; absolute
and Arbitrary Governments, where the hearts of the people must be wanting, not
being otherwise to be maintained than by force.

Secondly, It is their Interest to increase Trade, so far as the nature and
kind of their Government will admit, there being no other way to augment their
Naval strength (which they must necessarily endeavor) than by Trade, to the
advancing of which their Country affords naturally many helps.

Thirdly, It is their Interest to be careful in keeping Faith with all men, as
that which is of greatest advantage to any Prince or State. It is more honor
for the memory of Francis the First, that it is recorded of him, that he used to
say, that if Faith were utterly banished out of the World, it should be found
in his word, than that saying of Cardinal Mazarine to the prejudice of Princes,
that they ought not to be Slaves to their words (as if they were less obliged
to moral honesty than other men) is for his memory.

And fourthly, It is their Interest to encourage and indulge their Reformed
Subjects, as well in reference to the promoting Trade (they being more
industrious in it than the rest) as to their own security, and therefore (in
their Case) not to follow the Spaniards former example, in persecuting of them.

All these Maxims the French may be said to have exactly followed, except that
of keeping Faith, which to their prejudice they have miserably forfeited
toward Spain (if the Baron of Isala write truth) as well as in the persecuting
of their Protestant Subjects, in both which, they surely miss their Interest.
In the first, For that nothing can be of greater loss to any people than that
of reputation in keeping of Faith, according to that honest German, or High
Dutch Proverb, Faith lost and all is lost: And in the latter, for that
considering the great Discontents and secret animosities, that may well be
presumed to be in their Kingdom, proceeding from the heavy burdens that they
lie under, together with the dormant pretenses which have not been long
quieted, and which would probably have a Resurrection, should the Government
fall to a Prince during his Minority, as also considering the turbulent humor
of the Grandees of the Kingdom, who have in all times been apt to fly out upon
any Discontent, they ought in prudence to make sure of the Reformed party, who
whilst they enjoy Liberty of Conscience, according to the Laws of the Land, can
have no other Interest than theirs that give them their right, and who were the
Protectors of the King in the time of his Nonage, and to whom according to his
own Declaration of the 8 July, 1643. and again the 22 May, 1652. ratified and
Confirmed in Parliament, he is so much obliged; for in these Declarations, he
acknowledges to have received (meaning in the last Civil Wars to which his
last Declaration refers) full and certain testimony and proof of their
affection and fidelity, in consideration whereof he promises to maintain them
in the full and entire enjoyment of all their privileges granted to them by
the Edict of Nantes (their Magna Charta) and all other Edicts, Declarations,
Decrees, Rules, Articles, and Breviates in their favor, all which are lately
translated into English. And upon these grounds, it is the Interest of the
French, to make sure of the reformed party, lest Death should seize their King,
before his Son (who has not yet attained the Age of ten Years) can be capable
of the management of affairs; nay though the French may for serving their
present designs, think it their advantage to oblige the Court of Rome by
persecuting their Protestant Subjects, it is not their Interest (were it in
their power) to make them all of the Popish belief; for surely, the keeping
their Reformed Subjects divided in Religion, from that of Rome, in ways as
contrary as light to darkness, whereby the two parties are made spies one upon
the other, must be their great security; for as the Reformed can have no other
designs or Interest than that of their King, and that the Papists have a
Foreign Interest, and may have (as they have often had) other designs, so the
Protestants will be (as they have often been) checks upon the Papists; and as
they are a very considerable party, so they will always be the same to the King
against any of his opposers, or the discontents of his greatest Subjects.

Lewis the Thirteenth acknowledged at the Siege of Rochell, that it is not in
the power of man to force the Conscience, and confesses, that convincing the
understanding in matters of Religion, is the Prerogative of God only; and this
is so great a truth, that without offering violence to right reason, it is no
more to be denied, than that it is not in humane power to add to the Stature of
a man; for though Persecution may make Hypocrites, it can no more make a new
Conscience than it can a new Face. And though I will not undertake for an
infallible observation without exception, yet that the spirit of Persecution in
Church men, proceeds from want either of Sobriety, Learning, Ministerial parts,
or all of them, I believe will be found as seldom to fail as any other; for
lacking some, or all of these qualities to value themselves upon, they
endeavor to supply their defects with an excess of formality, in Habits,
Gestures, humane Ceremonies, and Persecution for Nonconformity, as a
recommendation of themselves unto the World: and this holds not only among
Protestants, but also so far among the Papists, that the more virtuous, wise,
and learned that any of them are, the less cruel and unmerciful they are, as
were it needful, many instances hereof in the several persuasions might be
given. And thus much, with the Addition of the Interest of Geneve, because
bordering upon France, and speaking that Language, shall serve at this time for
this Kingdom.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE UPON THE City and Interest OF GENEVE.
GEneve is an ancient City, reckoned three hundred Years before Rome; it stands
at the bottom of that Lake which bears its name, upon uneven and Hilly ground,
having on one side Savoy, within a quarter of a Mile, (and the Mountains of
that Country at three or four Miles distance, though from their height seem
close by) on another side the Lake, which being there contracted, runs through
the lower part of the City into the River Rhosne; on a third side France,
within less than a Mile, and their own Territories (which are about four Miles
in length) on a fourth side.

It was always a free City, but whilst of the Romish Religion, had a Bishop,
with a Dean and Canons in it, whom (after Reformation) they turned out,
converting their Houses to other public uses, making it unlawful for a
Stranger Papist to lodge in the City above a certain short time, and as I
remember, two or three Nights at most; the Town is small, not being when I was
there above two English Miles in compass, but by the bounty of Holland, and
some Protestant Princes, they have since enlarged it (which they were then in
doing) by taking in (for their better defense) some ground, which whilst it lay
without their Walls, was disadvantageous to them.

They are without any significant natural helps for Trade, having neither an
useful River, or Sea near them; for though the Lake into which the River of
Rhosne (that rises in Switzerland) falls, runs through the City, where it ends
and makes again the same River being there contracted within Banks, yet about
nine or ten Miles beyond this place (though one of the rapidest Rivers in
Christendom) it is so much lost under ground that one may pass dry-shod over it,
and is thereby rendered altogether useless to the Town; but some Miles further,
it rises again, and comes a great River to Lions in France: so that the chief
advantage this place has, is from their good Order and Administration,
inviting Travelers, as Germans, Netherlanders, Danes, Swedes, and Poles, that
are of the Protestant Belief, to visit them, and begin their Travels with them,
they having Churches and Sermons in the several Languages of Italian, High
Dutch, and French (the last being their own Tongue) all exercises as well
learnt as in other places, and cheaper, Dancing and Cards being allowed or
connived at in Strangers, though not permitted to their own Citizens; and
though the vulgar speak a bad French, or Savoyard, the better sort speak as
well as in most parts; for as Learning is the ordinary improver and refiner of
Languages, so this City has the advantage of that in having a Schola
Illustris, which is an University, without the privilege of conferring Degrees.

Their Trade is by the Manufactures of the Town, as in Silks, Gold, Silver, and
thread Lace, Pistols, Shamoy Leather, Watches, and Printing of Books, etc. all
which would not signify much as to their support, were not Traffic improved
by Liberty and Freedom, their Government being frugally managed and carried on;
First, by a great Council of two hundred, in whom is placed the Legislative
Power; and Secondly, by a Senate of five and twenty, chosen out, and part of
the two hundred.

Of these five and twenty, there are sixteen of the Order of Burgo-Masters, who
come to that Office in turns, by four every Year; these four Burgo-Masters, or
Syndics, have each their distinct Office; as the first is for matters of State,
the second over the Hospitals, the third over the Militia, and the fourth over
the Reformation; to see to the observation of their Orders and Decrees, both in
Church and State.

When any of the five and twenty die, their places are filled by the Election
of the two hundred, as when any of the great Council, that is not of the
Senate, die, by the Election of the five and twenty, every individual member of
the two hundred, wherein the five and twenty are comprised, do once a Year come
one by one to Trial by the Balloting Box, in the great Council, whether they
deserve to be continued or not, and accordingly they are continued or rejected;
but except they are by this way for some miscarriage cast out, they are all in
for their Lives.

The Chief Magistrates are at Christmas chosen by the people in general, every
one that is a Freeman of the Town, having a Voice in their Election, which is
solemnly made in the great Church.

The Court of Justice for Civil Causes, is constituted of one called the
Lieutenant, having six called Auditors joined with him, who make (as they style
it) the first Court for Civil Causes, whose Judgment in all matters under five
Crowns (about 23 s. star.) is final, but in Causes above that sum, there lie
three Appeals; First to the Court called the Appellations; Secondly, to the
Senate of five and twenty, and Lastly, to the great Council of two hundred,
whose sentence is absolute.

Criminal Causes are heard by the Lieutenant alone, who reports the whole
matter to the five and twenty, whose Decree is Conclusive, but the Sentence is
pronounced by the Lieutenant only, from a Seat made for that purpose in the
open street. They have here a municipal Law, which I have not heard of
elsewhere, That they will not harbor or protect Murderers, but if such flying
to them are in their City, and complained of by Prince, State, or others
concerned, they will either take the Judgment of the matter to themselves, or
deliver up the party or parties complained of, to those that shall accuse, and
demand them to be Tried where the Fact was committed.

The Militia is Ordered by a Committee of sixty, chosen out of the
Burgo-Masters, Senators, and the 175. I call them 175. because the twenty five
being deducted out of the two hundred, there remain so many Common-Councellors.

The Church in the City is governed by the Ministers of it in general (being
fifteen in number) the Burgo-Master that is for the Reformation, and six chosen
promiscuously out of the great Council, which Assembly of twenty two is called
the Consistory, but all their resolutions are brought to the two hundred for
Confirmation, and without their Sanction are of no force.

Their Territories being about four English Miles outright (as is
beforementioned) is divided into thirteen Congregations, with as many
Ministers, and these Ministers joining at certain times of the Year, with the
Consistory of the City for the Government of the whole Church in both City and
Country, the Assembly of the whole is called the Congregation or Synod, whose
Acts must also be confirmed by the great Council before they are binding.

This Country affords plenty of Wine and Corn, all provisions being very cheap,
and the Lake which is forty Miles in length, and of an uncertain breadth, from
ten or twelve Miles, to in some places two or three, affords excellent Fish, as
Carps, etc. but Trouts the best in Christendom, they being frequently sent many
Miles, because of their rarity, as Presents to great persons.

Their allowances to their Ministers are very frugal, to each, in Provisions
and Money to the value of about 50 or 60l star. and famous Calvin had never
much more, as his Estate at his Death seems to own, in that he left behind him,
not above sixty pounds star. his Library reckoned in; from which may be
observed, that a few Books well chosen, may serve a Learned Minister,
especially if he live in a City, where there is either a public Library, or
Books to be hired, as there is here; he gave Charge upon his Deathbed, not to
bury him otherwise than in the common Burial-place without the Town, where he
has only a plain Stone laid upon his Grave; which shows his Humility, as his
private Salary does his being void of Covetousness, and the equality in the
Church Government (which he was the framer of) his not seeking after Dominion,
or great things for himself, all three Cardinal Virtues in a Church man.

This City is a Confederate of the Canton of Beaerne (which lies over against
them, on the contrary side of the Lake) who upon occasion is to furnish them
with two or three thousand Foot, as they are reciprocally to do the like for
them with one thousand, the Town it self not affording in all, of men able to
bear Arms above five thousand, but most of them are expert in shooting, and
handling of their Fire Arms, being encouraged thereto by a prize allowed by the
State to be shot for every Week.

The Duke of Savoy pretends a Title to this Town, but they say without other
ground, than the convenience and nearness of it to him, and were it not that
the French King as well as the Cantons of Switzerland, are not willing he
should be Master of so great an advantage, he would certainly attempt it, as
his Ancestor Charles Emmanuel did in the Year 1602. when he acted
Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, and breach of Faith, to the greatest height that any
History mentions, save that of Charles the Ninth of France, in his contriving
the Bartholmew Massacre; and for their deliverance from his bloody Plot, which
was (without respect to Age or Sex, except the reserving some Virgins for
lustful ends) for putting all to the Sword, they still hold an Anniversary Day
of Thanksgiving.

Their condition being thus, their Interest is soon summed up, in being jealous
of Savoy, courting and seeking the favor of the French King, and the Cantons
of Switzerland, making it the Interest of them both, to defend them against the
third. And as they are now, or at least were when I was with them, well
governed, the Town being then very civil, peaceable, and modest in their
behavior, and exemplary in their habits, being in that so regulated, that the
greatest Women of the City were not suffered to wear their Clothes longer than
touching the ground, nor to use Gold, Silver, or thread Lace, except very
narrow, and of small value, so it is their Interest to continue the same good
order, as invitations to strangers to send their Sons thither, to begin their
Travels, and spend their money with them, as also to Merchants to make the road
through their City, their way into Italy, France, or Germany.

I know this Republic has many Enemies, men being influenced thereunto by
such as are haters of their Doctrine, Church Discipline, or manner of worship,
and upon these several accounts I expect opposition to what I write; but I
would not be understood, by my Commendations of this City, to intend the
defending of it as altogether faultless; or further than that (when I was
there) compared to other places in France (of which I have had experience) that
are the ordinary residence of several Nations (the great corrupter of Morals)
it exceeded them all very much in Sobriety and Virtue, deserving all the
Commendations I give it; and since my observation hereof, I have found (as a
concurrent testimony with me in what I say of them) the Chastity of the Women,
gravity of the Men, and modesty of both Sexes in their attire, etc. asserted by
that Book called the Estates, Empires, and Principalities of the World, writ in
French, and translated into English by Mr Grimston Sergeant at Arms.

In Mr Calvin's time there was one named Bolsec (who had been a Monk of the
Carmelites Order at Paris) that came to Geneve (and probably sent with design
to interrupt their Reformation) pretending to be a Convert to the Reformed
Religion, sometimes practicing as a Physician, but at last as a Divine,
endeavoring then to trouble the Church by pernicious errors, as he also did by
his wicked, scandalous life, and conversation. Calvin according to his wonted
zeal opposed him, laboring to convince him of his errors in a full Assembly;
but persisting in them, he was by the advice of all the Consistory
Excommunicated, which enraged him against Calvin to that degree, as was a great
disturbance to the Peace of the City, provoking the Magistrates thereof for
that reason to banish him Geneve with sound of the Trumpet, upon penalty if he
returned of being whipped out of the Town: hereupon he went to the Canton of
Be^rn in Switzerland, to complain of Injustice done him, but his factious and
seditious spirit being also there in a little time discovered, they did the
same by him in banishing of him, as Geneve had done After this, Bolsec
pretending to be sensible of his errors, presented himself to the National
Synod held at Orleance in the Year 1562. and there desired pardon of God and of
his Church, for all his evil practices, promising solemnly for the future to
renounce them all. Yet afterward returned to his vomit again, insomuch that
Beza in his answer to Genebrard, Printed at Geneve, 1585. says, that he was an
infamous person, who had been thrice banished, and had four times revolted, and
that after he had spit his venom upon both living and dead, died in despair.

This was that Bolsec (who to be revenged of this City, as well as of Calvin
and the whole Reformed Church, as also thereby to render himself the more
acceptable to the Romish party, from whom he had revolted) that writ that
infamous Libel, composed of nothing but Satanical lies and inventions, Printed
in the Year 1577. which passes among the Adversaries of the Reformed Religion,
for a true History of the Life and Death of Mr Calvin.

The Crimes this Libel charge him with, are some committed (as he feignedly
says) at Shaalon in Champaign, the rest at Geneve; besides accusing him of
being one of the wickedest of men in Life and Conversation, as that he was a
Drunkard, a Whore-Master, a Glutton, and an Epicure, etc. That he pretended to
raise men from the dead, of which deceit he was detected. That he died in
despair, Swearing, Blaspheming, calling upon the Devils, denying the Faith,
detesting his work of Reformation in the Church, Cursing the Day that ever he
put Pen to Paper. That he was eaten up with Worms and Lice, dying of that
Disease which is called the louzy Disease, etc.

I enumerate these things, to the end, first to show the calumniating practices
in former times as well as now of Papists against Protestants; and secondly, as
believing that but even naming of them, with the condition of the Libeller, is
sufficient to disprove the Libel, though for the reputation of Mr Calvin it may
be further said in his behalf,

First, That this Libel was writ thirteen Years after he was dead, and that
during his life there was not one of these Crimes laid to his Charge, but after
so many Years silence were devised and writ by a professed, malicious, and
implacable Enemy.

Secondly, That that eminent servant of God Beza, who was his Contemporary at
Geneve, and who was with him at his Death, has writ his Life, and given him a
due Encomium, which ought according to the Papists own Maxims be to believed by
them rather than the testimony of such a profligate Fellow as Bolsec, who had
several times revolted from their Religion; than which, no man with them can be
guilty of a greater crime and less deserve credit; for with Papists, the
testimony even of a born Protestant, whom they call a Heretic, is not to be
taken, and much less the evidence of a Revolter.

Thirdly, That at Geneve all men deny these accusations, having his memory in
great honor and esteem, whereas such Vices could never have been stifled by
Protestants at Geneve, any more, than the Church of Rome could stifle in their
City, the Whoredoms, Witchcrafts, and Sorceries, etc. of some of their Popes,
which themselves do there own and confess.

Fourthly, That Bolsec being a known flagitious Fellow, what he said or writ
gained no reputation in the World, until Cardinal Richelieu, about sixty or
seventy Years after Calvin was in his Grave, gave some life to it, by writing a
Book (which he calls a Treatise containing the most easy and sure way for
converting those that have separated from the Church of Rome) wherein he makes
use of Bolsec's Libel, and most of the things contained in it.

Fifthly, That upon the publishing this Book of Richelieu's, the States of
Holland thinking their Church concerned in it, gave Order to their Ambassadors
to take Shaalon in their way to Paris, to inform themselves of the truth of
what is by the Libel laid to the Charge of Calvin, as committed there, and
found all to be false.

Sixthly, Being my self curious to know the truth of these things, I was in my
Travels credibly informed, that even one of the Canons of the Cathedral of
Shaalon, writing the Annals of that Church, takes notice of the aspersions laid
upon Calvin, and out of pure generosity (more than is common with those of his
profession) clears him of them, owning the report to be a groundless fiction,
which being the testimony of an Enemy, may well be allowed as a good evidence.

That the Church of Rome never did, nor ever will want wicked Instruments to
lie and swear for them, as they shall judge will make most for their corrupt
Interest, I never doubted; but that so great a person as Cardinal Richelieu,
who one would think should have valued himself, as well upon the honor and
reputation of his actions, as upon the considerableness of the figure he made
in the World, should give countenance to such odious and hateful slanders, I
cannot sufficiently wonder at, as I have sometimes also admired to hear this
famous person Mr Calvin, who was so great a light in the Church of God, and who
has left such ample testimonies and Monuments of singular Piety, Learning, and
Spiritual Knowledge, should have his memory so unthankfully undervalued by
Ecclesiastics, and even by some pretending to Reformation, as we find it is,
when they ought rather to have his transcendant excellencies in the highest
estimation; but since I understood how his humility reproves the grandeur,
riches, and dominion striven for by Churchmen, in a self-denying contentedness
under a small Salary, and less power, when it was in his choice to have had
what he would desire, I have ceased to wonder at it, no men loving to be
touched in their Diana, nor to have their failings tacitly reproved by other
men's Virtues and Moderation.

Before the Reformation the ancient Motto of this City was, Post tenebras
spero, and since the Reformation they have changed it into Post tenebras lux.
And thus I have done with Geneve, which I believe is the least Republic,
Independent, and without a Protector, not holding of any Prince or other State,
that is found any where, save St Marino, mentioned in the Interest of Italy.
For though the Republic of Ragusa upon the Coast of Dalmatia, was much less in
Circuit (not being above an English Mile round) than Geneve, yet they had the
Grand Seignior for their Protector, under whom paying a small Tribute, they
enjoyed full and perfect liberty in both Church and State (their Religion being
that of Rome) living peaceably, and contentedly, until the late dreadful and
dismal Earthquake, destroyed (in a great measure) both City and People; whereas
this City has no Protector to whom they pay any Tribute, though that
incomparable Prince, for Gallantry, Justice, great Parts, and good nature, etc.
Henry the Fourth of France (Grandfather to Charles the Second of Great
Britain) was always a truly noble, generous, and real Friend to them, not
suffering them to be injured by any; and at his making a general Peace, though
so inconsiderable to him, concerned himself for them in comprehending them in
it as his Friends and Allies.

THE INTEREST OF ITALY.
ITaly is ordinarily resembled to a Leg, joined by the thigh to France, Savoy,
Switzerland, and Germany, and to all these places by the Alps, the rest of it
being (upon the matter) encompassed by the Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas. It
is long and small, in length about eight hundred English Miles, but in breadth
so uncertain, as from three hundred to (in some parts of Naples) twenty Miles.

The Apenine Hills making (as it were) a ridge through this long Country,
causes great diversity in the goodness of the soil, some of it being much more
fruitful, as well as healthful, than other parts.

The Rivers are not considerable, none of them being Navigable for Ships of
burden: The Tyber (upon which Rome stands) the Adige, Arne, and the Po, being
the best, and of all the last most useful, Merchants, Travelers, and
Commodities being conveyed by it in small Boats from Turine in Piedmont (the
residence of the Duke of Savoy) to Venice, which I judge to be in length above
two hundred English Miles, having in the way several Towns standing upon it.
The River Rubicon writ of in the Roman stories, is now in Summer, whatever it
was anciently, a dry Sand, having only in Winter (from Land Floods) water in
it; and likewise Ostia at the mouth of the Tyber (which was formerly the Haven
to the Roman Republic, twelve or thirteen Miles from the City) both it and the
River is so filled up, that it serves only now for Fisher-Boats of ten or
fifteen Tuns, Civite Vechia, at forty Italian Miles distance, being now the
Port to Rome for their Galleys and Merchant Ships.

The Alps which may be called a Wall to this Country, bear diverse names,
according to the several places they are in, some of them being very difficult
and dangerous, others easy and safe for passing over. The best are betwixt
Augsbourgh in Germany, and Venice, that being a good road without trouble or
danger. The next for convenience is Mount Ce^ee, betwixt Chambray in Savoy, and
Turine in Piemont. The rest are more severe, and some of them very dangerous,
as those betwixt Genoua and Niece, belonging to the Duke of Savoy, which are
very rarely used by reason of their difficulty.

The Governments in Italy are of two kinds, Monarchies and Republics, each of
which being of four several Degrees, as to power and greatness, I shall make
these following Observations of them. And to begin with the Monarchies, the
Dominions of the King of Spain, and those of the Pope, are of the first rank,
those of Savoy and Tuskany of the second, those of the Dukes of Parma, Mantoua,
Modena, and the Bishop of Trent the third, and the petty Dukes and Princes the
fourth.

As to the Republics, Venice is much the greatest, Genoua the next, Lucca the
third, and St. Marino the fourth or last. The Venetians with their Territories,
Prudence and Wisdom, do fully equal the power in Italy, of either the King of
Spain or Pope. Genoua though in Revenue much short of the second sort of
Monarchs, yet by their wise management of affairs come very near them, and
Lucca may be compared to the third, as St Marino upon the like account unto the
fourth.

The Popes Dominions in Italy lie much in the midst of it, being reckoned
twelve Provinces, beside that he possesses several Lands bordering upon the
Duke of Savoys Country of Piemont and Montferrat, as also upon the Marquisat of
Trevisain, belonging to the Venetians, with the County of Avinion in France,
and what he has in the Kingdom of Naples.

The King of Spain holds in Italy the Duchy of Milain (in Lumbardy) containing
eleven Divisions or Jurisdictions, beside Final upon the Genoua Coast, and the
Kingdom of Naples (which is divided into twelve Provinces) with the Isles of
Sicily, Majorca, Minorca, and Sardinia in the Mediterranean, and Portolongoune
in the Isle of Elbe.

The Venetian Territories are Istria, with so much of Lumbardy, and that which
they call Terra firma, as make fourteen Provinces, a good part of Dalmatia
lying along the Coast of the Adriatic Sea, over against Italy, several Islands
in the Levant, whereof Corfu, Capholinia, and Zant are the Chief, with some
Islands in the Archipelagoes.

The Duke of Savoy possesses in Italy the Principality of Piemont, with
several other little Principalities and Counties adjoining, as the Marquisats
of Saluze and Asti, the Duchy of Osta, the Counties of Nizza and Vercelli,
with part of Montferrat, beside the Duchy of Savoy, which lies not in Italy,
but on this side the Alps bordering upon France, as Piemont and the rest of
his Dominions are on the other side, which as they are generally taken are part
of Italy, though Italy strictly taken according to ancient account, is but a
part of that which is commonly called so.

The great Duke of Tuskany, possesses most of the Country of that name, and
particularly that part of it wherein lies the City of Florence, Pisa, and
Sienna, all formerly Republics, with part of the Isle of Elbe, and the
Seigniory of Pontremolie, etc.

The Republic of Genoua has under them the Coast of Genoua, about a hundred
and thirty Miles in length, and twenty Miles in breadth, the Sovereignty of the
Isle of Tarbarke, which lies upon the Coast of Tunis in Barbary (though the
soil and profits belong to Subjects) with the Isles of Corsica and Capraia,
lying in the Mediterranean, but these Isles are of no great consideration.

The Duke of Mantoua possesses the Duchy of that name, part of Montferrat,
and in that, the City of Casal, famous for its Fortifications.

The Duke of Parma has in Lumbardy the Duchy of that name, with the Duchy of
Placence, and in the Ecclesiastical Territories, the Duchy of Castro and
Rousillon, besides some places in the Kingdom of Naples.

The Duke of Modena has the Duchy of Modena and Reggio, with some other
Seignories, all affording no great Revenue.

The Republic of Lucca, being a City of twelve regular Bastions, lying in a
level Country, has only the Vail in which it lies (of no considerable
greatness) belonging to it.

The Republic of St Marino, is an inaccessible Hill, otherwise than by a way
cut up to it, lying in the Popes Territories near the Duchy of Vrbine, and is
about three Miles over, upon which stands the City of St Marino, fortified on
one side by a dreadful Precipice, and on the other by a Wall, with some great
Guns mounted; it is governed by a Council of five and forty ( viz.) fifteen
Gentlemen, as many Mechanics, and the like number of Countrymen, who all
together choose every six Months two Consuls out of themselves. This Hill being
all their Territories, has four Villages upon it, and one Market Town at the
bottom of it, the Inhabitants being in the whole, reckoned at six or seven
thousand Souls, and of fighting men fifteen hundred. They pretend to have been
a free State nine hundred or a thousand Years, but therein I fear they stretch:
they are Lovers of Liberty, and for that reason (as is said) jealous of their
Nobility, of which they have twenty Families. In all Wars they have enjoyed
Peace, and upon occasion they send Ambassadors to their Neighbor Princes and
States. I am the larger in this, because a thing little known, or taken notice
of in the World.

The petty Princes, who are called so from the smallness of their Territories,
and not of Sovereignty (being as absolute within their respective Jurisdictions
as the rest) are in number about two or three and twenty (beside such as are
only titular) of which some of them were raised by Popes, who usually in their
Reigns, make each a Prince in their Families, others came from the City of
Genoua, as Monico and Doria, etc. and some descended from ancient Sovereign
Princes, but none of them so considerable as to deserve any further insisting
upon, than that they adhere to France, or Spain, according as they are obliged
by their respective Interests, from their Lands they hold in France, Naples, or
Milain, of the one or the other Crown.

Beside these Princes and Republics, the French King holds Pignorolo in Italy,
(a strong Fortification) with some adjacent Valleys. The Emperor some Cities
with their Territories, but inconsiderable. The Switzers four Bailiwicks, and
the Grisons the Valtoline. And all these Estates in Italy, are held either of
the Emperor or Pope, save that the Venetians are independent as well as the
Bishop of Rome.

Italy taken generally, is with its Islands reckoned under four Divisions:
First, That part properly called Italy, containing the Ecclesiastical
Provinces, and Tuskany, in which lies the Republic of Lucca. Secondly,
Lumbardy containing Piedmont, Montferrat, the Duchy of Millain, Coast of
Genoua, and the Territories of the several Dukes of Parma, Mantoua, Modena, the
Bishopric of Trent, and the Venetian Domain. Thirdly, The Kingdom of Naples,
being the Eastern part of Italy. And fourthly, The Islands of Sicily, Sardinia,
and Corsica, lying in the Mediterranean Sea. In these Divisions are reckoned
near three hundred Archbishops and Bishops, besides a great number of titular
Bishops, who depending all upon the Pope, add much to his Interest, being
entirely at his Devotion.

The animosities and emulations among these Italian Princes and States, are
great, none scarce being content with their own, but coveting more, the Church
(according to their nature) waiting all opportunities for increase. The Duke of
Tuskany, looking with an envious eye upon Lucca, because lying within his
Country. The Duke of Savoy, thinking the Duke of Mantoua to have too great a
share of Montferrat, and the Duke of Mantoua, that he has too little of it,
the whole belonging to him. And the French King, having got an entrance into
Italy, and a strong hold in it, in possessing Pignorolo, and the Valleys
belonging to it, thirsts after more, so that these, and other dormant quarrels,
as that about Castro, etc. are such, that had not this Country common Enemies,
as the French and Turk, who watch their quarrelling among themselves, they
could not long continue in Peace. And although their former danger from the
House of Austria is now over, yet the French having got an advantageous footing
in Italy, and the Turk approaching them by Sea, both these formidable
Potentates waiting but an opportunity for falling upon them, it is their
general Domestic Interest, especially the Popes, (and indispensibly necessary
for them) to unite and agree for common preservation; and for making their
Union the firmer, to reconcile all their differences, and settle every one in
their just rights, privileges, and liberties, lest the French (not out of
Virtue so much as a specious pretense for a quarrel) should otherwise take
occasion (under color of relieving the oppressed) to enter Italy, of which
should he once become Master (as in such Case he would without difficulty be,
the Country wanting not only Soldiers, but also people to make Soldiers of,
and those they have unapt for War) he would in a short time make the Pope to
signify no more, than would be consistent with his designs. For though the
French King's Interest and Principles, may carry him on to pretend zeal for his
Religion, and at present to give testimony of it by the persecution of his
Protestant Subjects; yet when by such Artifices he has cousened the Popish
Princes and States, either into a neutrality, or the assisting of him in his
great design for Dominion, whereby he will be enabled gradually to devour both
Protestant and Papist, when his work is once done, he will then hold it his
Interest to countenance liberty of Conscience, as all great Conquerors for
keeping their new acquired Provinces in Peace must do, except the fear of
enriching his Subjects by it (which Arbitrary Governors do generally dread) do
(to his own destruction) hinder him, for he has too great experience in
affairs, not to observe, that where ever Popery does solely prevail, the people
are poor and miserable to what they would be under Reformation: for the effects
of idleness, which that Religion does not only encourage, but also teach and
injoin, cannot be other than Poverty. And as thus in reference to the French,
the Italians ought to agree among themselves, so they also ought to do it in
reference to the Turk, who draws nearer to them than he was, and who can
approach them by Sea, lest otherwise he also should take advantage from their
Divisions.

And further, were it not the general Maxim of Churchmen, to hazard the safety
of the whole, rather than own an error, or themselves in any thing fallible, it
were the Interest of Rome, for the peopling of this Country (which by Tyranny
and Persecution, is all save Venice, Genoua, the City of Naples and Lucca,
depopulated) to give liberty of Conscience, without which it can never be so
replenished as is necessary for their defense, some Cities not having a sixth
part, and others not a tenth part of the people they had whilst they were
Republics, as Rome, Florence, Pisa, Sienna, etc. but this self-denial cannot
be expected from them, who by a Sentence from Heaven are given up to believe
lies and delusions, as also because (according to their Carnal reason) it would
render their Church Government altogether useless, in interfering with their
pretended Infallibility.

Before the House of Austria fell from their greatness, the danger of Italy was
most from them, and therefore the wise Venetians, who seldom or never mistake
their Interest, did not only allow the States of Holland (as their Writers
affirm) 5000l star. a Month, during their War with the King of Spain, and House
of Austria, but also kept a close League and good Intelligence with France,
from whom they could only expect any considerable assistance, for bridling the
soaring ambition of that House: but the fear of Austria being at present over,
the same jealousy they had of it then, they ought now to have of France.

Italy is not only by situation (being in a manner a Peninsule) but also in
abounding in rich and staple Commodities, very convenient for Trade; and were
the advantages, and the peoples ingenuities improved to what they are capable
of, it might without all peradventure equal in Commerce any Country in Europe:
but the depopulating of Italy, as also of Spain by severity in State, and
Persecution in the Church, and the natural aversness to Industry and Traffic,
that is thereby bred in the people of those Countries, with the vast Interest
that the Ecclesiastics have in them both, and especially in Italy, is the
great benefit of the Northern Trading Nations, who bring and fetch from them,
most of the Commodities that they either want, or have, and even what the
growth of their own Country affords; so that the reason of the Poverty of
Italy, may be rendered to be the Romish Religion, together with not making Trade
their Interest, as indeed they cannot well do, no Country being capable of it,
that is so much under the bondage of the Church, and subject to their
Impositions as they are, liberty of Conscience, and relaxation from the
severity of Ecclesiastical Laws, being the necessary Concomitants of Trade. I
call Italy poor, because so in the general, and a depopulated Country, denying
that it is the riches of some few persons or places, but diffusive wealth and
populousness, that render a Country great and opulent. For it is not long since
the charge of a small Army for one Year against the Pope, about the succession
of the Duchy of Vrbain, made the Duke of Tuskany (the richest Prince in Italy)
weary of War, and as some say to lessen the number of his Galleys, by selling
some of them; and yet when Florence alone was under liberty, an Army four times
as great would not in a longer time have wearied them. And it is observable,
that those places in this Country, which are most considerable, by being
addicted to Traffic, are such, as being loosest from the Church, are fullest
of people, as Venice, Genoua, and Lucca; for the bondage of Rome, is enmity as
well to temporal as spiritual prosperity. And thus when I have given you some
Observations upon the several Cities of Venice and Genoua, as Members of Italy,
I have done with this Country.

SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Original and Government OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
THE City of Venice is an aggregated Body of Islands (which some reckon seventy
in number, united by Bridges, which are Calculated to be near seven hundred)
lying in and at the Head of the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice, and four or
five English Miles from any part of the Continent.

This City derives its Original from the Year four hundred, when the Goths and
Lumbards overrunning, wasting and destroying Italy, caused many of the
Inhabitants near the Sea to fly for safety to these Islands, where applying
themselves first to Fishing, and afterward to Merchandise, they begun their
Government with the Choice of two Consuls every Year, but continued not long in
that way, for the Islands increasing in People, they judged it most equal for
each to send a Deputy, for making a general Council for the Government of the
whole, which held two hundred and sixty Years without any material alteration;
but much about that time, they Elected a Duke, with a great Council of about
four or five hundred in number, chosen promiscuously by the people in general;
this Popular way of Government continued until the Year 1325. when an occasion
was taken, to reduce the great Council to all such persons, and their
Legitimate Male Issue for ever, that had that Year, or in the last four Years
going before, been at any time Members of the great Council, and that the Sons
of all such, should for ever after, at the Age of five and twenty, have right
of Session in it without Election, as those of whom it was always to be
Constituted. And thus the Government of Venice was changed from popular to
Aristocratical, all Sovereignty being taken from the people, and placed in
certain Families (who have ever since been distinguished from the rest of the
Citizens, by the name or title of Noble Venetians) where it now remains. And to
preserve this new order in honor and from corruption, every Nobleman was by
Law (as he still is) obliged, within a Month after Marriage, to go with his
Wives Father (if living) and three or four more Witnesses that were present at
the Solemnity, to the Magistrates appointed for that purpose, there making
Oath, that he was lawfully Married at such a time, to such a person of good
Fame and Legitimate. And a Son being afterward born of such a Bed, the Child
and Parents names must be given in by two Witnesses to the same Magistrates
within a Month, giving Testimonies of the Mothers honorable Reputation; and if
the Child live to the Years of twenty, then the Father of him, or if he be dead
the Mother, or if both be dead, the next two Friends of the Blood, do go with
the Young Man to the Magistrates, making Oath that he is the Son of such and
such Parents, Married such a Day, and whose Birth and Name was at such a time
signified and entered upon Record, which is done at the Age of twenty Years, to
the end, that there being every Year a certain number chosen out of the Youth,
betwixt twenty and five and twenty Years of Age, to the privilege of having
Session in the great Council and Voting in it, he may be capable of coming into
that Election, which is a privilege granted for the encouragement of Virtue,
Merit being of great esteem with them, and having a great influence upon their
Secret Ballot, by which is made all their Elections; for although Venice
compared with some of the Northern parts of Europe (where Adultery is so
odious, that the Crime is Capital, a Bastard incapable (so much as) of his
freedom of a Mechanical Society, and a Freeman of such Fraternities, Marrying a
Bastard, is for the same, ipso facto, disfranchized, as in Prusia, etc.) may be
said to be highly guilty of uncleanness, yet compared with other parts of
Italy, they are not so, nor guilty of that horrid sin of Sodomy, as Rome,
Florence, and other parts of that Country are: and although Concubines are by
the Venetians permitted, their Religion (which is Popery) allowing it being the
Cause, yet no Man observed to be a common haunter of Stews, a Drunkard, or
exorbitantly given over to his Lusts and Pleasures, is ever employed by that
wise people, who believe such men good for nothing.

Their Government is carried on by several Councils; As first, By that called
the Great Council, consisting of all the Patricii or Noble Venetians, together
with a Duke for life, who as he is more a piece of formality, or a Pageant of
State, than of Power or Authority, so his presence in the Council is not
necessary, it being often held without him.

Secondly, By that Council called the Signory, or the Council of Ten.

Thirdly, By that College or Council called the Senate, or little Council.

Fourthly, By that College or Council called the Savi or Sages.

Fifthly, By that Council called the College.

And now to take all these Councils in Order, the Great Council has the
Legislative Power, the Choice of the Duke, all the Magistrates of the whole
Republic, and many of the great Officers, (but not of all, the Senate having
the Election of some) and to this end the great Council meets on the Lords Day,
and sometimes on their Holy Days.

The Signory consists of the Duke, six Counselors chosen by the great Council,
and the three Presidents or Chief Judges of their three Chief Judicatures,
making in all ten, from whence it is vulgarly called the Council of Ten; this
Signory grants all Patents, sends and receives all Foreign Letters, peruseth
Ambassadors Credentials, giving them Audience, without returning any other
answer than that the Duke will consult the Senate and College upon the matter
then delivered.

They take care of the safety of the Commonwealth, and that it receive no
damage, suppressing and punishing all Conspiracies against the Government,
calling even the Duke himself to account, if upon any score they find Cause to
do it, especially if they have any ground to suspect his designing Usurpation,
and have almost a general super-intendency in all State Concerns; they have
also a right of going into, and Voting in all the Colleges and Committees, and
of assembling the great Council, they sit every day in the Morning, and once in
eight days (or ofter if there be occasion) with the addition of near thirty of
the great Officers of State, appointed to that purpose, for all matters of
extraordinary concern.

The Senate consists of one hundred and twenty of the Nobility, bearing no
other Office than Members of the Great Council (who are called the Pregadi)
about the like number of other Counselors, Magistrates, and Officers of the
greatest Rank, who have by their places right of Session, with Votes, beside
fifty six other Officers of Quality, together with all such persons as have
trusted the Commonwealth to such a certain sum as is directed by the Law; as
also all such Magistrates as have any new concepts to propound for the bringing
them into Laws, have a right of Session without Votes; so that this Council
consists of two hundred forty seven with Votes, fifty six eminent Officers
more, with an uncertain number of Creditors, and propounders of Laws without
Votes, all which are called together by the College, which gives notice of it
by their Officers, and at the time of their meeting by the tole of a Bell, four
of the six Counselors of the Council of Ten, and sixty of such as have Votes
in this Council, making the Quorum.

All Laws are last debated by this Council, and brought by them to the Great
Council for their Sanction, who have no power of debate, or other than of
receiving or rejecting the Laws propounded. The making Peace and War, and all
matters of State (except some extraordinary Cases, which for expedition and
secrecy, are in the Council of Ten) are, after they have been prepared and
debated by the Signory and College, brought by them to the Senate for
approbation or rejection, who do therein as they think fit, in whom is also the
Election of some great, and many small Officers.

The Council called the Savi or Sages, consists of sixteen persons. Six for
both Sea and Land affairs, who are called the Savi grandi, or Great Sages, five
for Land Affairs only, and five for Sea Affairs alone. The six take care of all
Land and Sea Affairs in general, the other keep each to their particular
Province, without engaging in one another Charge; they meet every day in a
Council Room near the Signory, each Order having their President, who propounds
in the Council what they have to bring in debate; and when any thing is
discussed concerning Land Affairs only, in such Case the five for Sea are
silent, as are also the five for Land, in debating any thing concerning Sea
only; but the six Savi grandi have a right of Debate and Voting, in all matters
concerning either Land or Sea in particular, as the other two Orders have in
matters of a mixed nature of both Sea and Land.

The College (which although for method sake I rank last) is of greatest use
in the State, being a Conjunction of the Signory, and the Savi, in all six and
twenty; for as they both meet every Morning at a certain hour, where in their
distinct Council Rooms, they spend separately an hour or more in Debate of
their several business, so the Savi going to the Room where the Signory sits,
and joining with them, make that Council they call the College. And thus the
gradations of debating and resolving in matters of State (except what is for
secrecy and expedition committed to the Signory alone) is first by the Signory
and sixteen Savi, each in their several Rooms distinctly. Secondly, by them two
jointly which make the College. And thirdly, by the Senate, who according as
they resolve after Debate, rejects or brings all to the Great Council, who has
only the last resolution without debate. And thus much may serve to show
briefly and in general, the method of the Venetian Councils, which is all that
is by this aimed at; for of the several kinds of Magistrates, Offices,
Officers, their Ballot, and their Elections by it, so much has already been
writ, that it is needless to trouble the Reader here with any thing more of
them, than to observe, that as Offices are all either honorary or mercenary, so
the Officers of the first kind (as Governors of Governments, etc.) are so far
from having profit added to their honor, that their places are chargable; and
although some Military Employments may be judged to deserve a benefit, by
reason of the hazard that attends them, yet so chargable are their honorable
Offices in the general, that it is accounted a reward answerable to the
greatest merit, to confer gratis the dignity of a Procurator of St. Mark, upon
the most deserving person, because beside the honor of it, they are also
thereby freed from having any Offices imposed upon them, and of this Order
there are twenty four, whereof nine are always made upon the account of merit,
and fifteen upon purchase, which costs each Purchaser, though an honor but for
life only, five or six thousand pound star.

The Mercenary Offices which have all but frugal Salaries, are conferred upon
persons standing in need of them, for that none but such will desire them. And
as it is not honorable for persons of large substance, to seek Mercenary
Offices, so it is accounted irrational, to make honourary places (except in
Military service subject to danger) profitable, the Duke himself losing by his
place, his income not being so much as his inavoidable extraordinary charges
are. So that the rule of the Venetians is to choose persons to their honorary
employments of great Estates, able to maintain the honor and dignity of their
places, with the benefit of some small Perquisits, at their own Charge, and to
make the Salaries of their Mercenary Offices very moderate. All honorary
charges are in the Nobility, save that the Chancellor (who is next the Duke)
and the Secretaries, are in the Plebeians, which is to encourage Virtue in
them, and not to leave them altogether without hopes of honorable preferment
in the State. They are great Enemies to Bribery and Corruption, and severe
punishers of it when discovered.

The Frame and Constitution of this Government, has in its eye above all other
things, general good and safety, one of the Excellencies of the Venetians being
the largeness of their Souls for public Interest, wherein they are observed by
Writers to transcend all other people, having not left it in the power of the
State, to pardon certain crimes against the Republic; as treachery in
Governors of Garrisons, Conspiracies against the Commonwealth, holding private
Correspondence with Foreign Princes, or States, or cousenage in Accounts; and
if any chosen to an Office, entrusted with Money, prove insolvent, they that
nominated him thereunto, are responsible for him to the State. And answerable
to these Rules, seems to have been the Complement of a Venetian Ambassador, at
his taking leave of old Sir Henry Vane, when Secretary of State, in telling
him, That England was happy in their King, Country, Nobility and Gentry, and
would be perfectly happy, had they public spirits; but of that he said, they
had the least of any people that ever he had the honor to know, wherein I wish
he did not make a true Judgment.

The Duke is for Life, and chiefly as a piece of Ceremony, (without Power)
representing the magnificence of the Republic, every one standing bare before
him: Though kneeling to him, kissing of his hand, painting or cutting of his
Arms or Name in any public place is not allowed. He can do nothing but in the
presence of four of his six Counselors of the Council of Ten, and ^wo of the
three Chief Judges of the Chief Courts of Justice. He cannot go beyond Malamoca
(the Haven hard by the City where the Ships ride) nor can he marry any of his
Children to Strangers, without leave of the great Council and Senate. All
Letters to the State are directed to him, and Letters to other Princes and
States are writ in his name, but no Letters are opened except in the presence
of at least four of the six Counselors, and two of the Chief Judges, the
Minutes of the Letters sent out being under-writ by four Counselors, before
the Originals are sent away.

Neither his Children, or Grandchildren, can be chosen to any of the great
Offices during his Life, or be Ambassadors. His Brother cannot be General,
either at Sea or Land, or an Ambassador, etc. Nor any of his Friends by
Consanguinity, be during his Life, of the Council of Ten in the Magistracy, or
President of any of the Colleges; nor can any of his Family nominate one to
any Office Temporal or Spiritual; and in all Taxes, the Duke bears a greater
proportion, than before he was Duke he had done.

All men are prohibited upon severe penalties, the making him or any of his
House any presents; but any Office not relating to the Policy or Justice of the
State, his Relations are capable of. As to be of the great Council (as their
Birthright) a Member of the Senate, a Procurator of St. Mark, or any Office
relating to the Arsenal, University of Padoua, or the Mint, etc.

And now by all this it appears, that the Children and whole Family of the Duke
are prejudiced by his being called to that Dignity, especially in its being a
Charge, and no profit to him, and yet there are none of them, but desire the
honor of being Duke, which contradicts that Principle of those that hold it
better to be no King, than not to be Absolute; for let them speak their passion
as they please, we find by this Example, that Precedence and Authority is so
sweet to the ambitious mind of Man, that men will be content to become
Prisoners, as this Duke in some kind is, even for a shadow of Majesty and
Authority, though without Power.

When the Duke dies, the Eldest Councellor is Vice-Duke, and he with the rest
of the Council of Ten, takes possession of the Palace, and remains in it until
a new Duke is chosen. Three persons called Inquisitors, and five called
Correctors, are chosen by the great Council; the three Inquisitors inquire into
the Administration of the deceased Duke, and if he be found to have been faulty
in it, his Heirs have a Fine laid upon them according to the greatness of the
Crime. The five Correctors inquire what Laws are necessary for the good of the
Republic, that if any be found needful, they may be made before a new Duke be
chosen.

And now as this City is a Member of Italy, so the general Interest of it is
the same with the Country, in uniting with all the several Estates of it for
self-preservation, and being jealous of France, which this wise people are sure
not to be wanting in, they being perfect Masters in the knowledge of their
Interest, and constant in the pursuance of it.

A SHORT DISCOURSE UPON THE REPUBLIC OF GENOUA.
THE Coast of Italy which runs at the foot of the Apennine Hills, along the
Mediterranean, betwixt the Rivers of Varr and Magre, is called the Coast of
Genoua, belonging all to that Republic, save Final, appertaining to the King
of Spain, with other small things to the Duke of Savoy and Prince of Monaco,
the whole Coast being about one hundred and sixty Miles in length, whereof one
hundred and thirty Miles at least, is judged to belong to the Genouesers, upon
which stands the City of Genoua, much about the middle of it.

This Coast though thus long, is in no place (belonging to this Commonwealth)
above twenty three or twenty four English Miles broad, and in some places not
so much; it is all Mountainous from one end to the other, yet affords plenty of
Wines, Oiles, Lemmons, Oranges, and other Fruits; the Chief Manufactures of the
City being several sorts of Silks, but in Velvets and Tabbies they exceed all
other places.

This City is not great, it is seated at the bottom of high Hills, the
Mediterranean washing the Southside, and being built upwards upon the Hill,
renders it very beautiful to Ships passing by at Sea. But although the
Buildings are generally the best in Europe, the streets save one or two are
mean, being too narrow, not answerable to the Magnificence of the Structures:
and it is probable, that the excessive heats in Summer (as well as the
Hilliness of the place) might for coolness, by the shade of narrow streets, be
one cause of making them so strait. The City is not only well built, but the
Land some Miles about it, affords as good Houses for Country Buildings as one
meets with any where. The most remarkable things in this place, are the Mold
upon the Sea, within which the Ships lie and ride; the Aquiduct which serves
the City with fresh Water, and the Walls of the Town, in being carried over
high Mountains, all three pieces of great Art; the last being designed by
Spinola, the great Netherland General (a Native of this City) and pursued soon
after his Death about forty Years ago, or about the Year 1630. The Walls are
near about five English Miles in compass, but the ground within, by reason of
the Hilliness of it, is not above two third parts built, yet is reckoned with
Suburbs to contain one hundred and thirty thousand Souls, which are many for so
small a place.

This Commonwealth is very ancient, and until their Wars with Venice (which
ended in the Year 1381.) whereby they sustained great losses, they were much
more formidable than they have been since; and their decay giving encouragement
to the growing greatness of the several Kingdoms of Spain and France, each of
them designed the subduing of it, which caused along time great troubles to it,
never ending, until by the valor and gallantry of Andreas Doria (a Citizen) it
was delivered from Foreign Wars, intestine Factions, and settled in Peace and
Liberty.

This Prince Doria (for so he then was, as the Family still remains) is surely
one of the most August Examples of Integrity, Affection, and Faithfulness to
his Country, that is met with in any story; for being so great a Captain
(especially at Sea) that his fame caused the most potent Princes of those times
to contend for him (as France and Spain being then at variance, and in War,
each of those Crowns striving to gain him) he made it his rule to serve him, by
whose service he could have the most opportunity of preserving his own Country
in Liberty; and as he always conditioned for it, so as soon as he found either
of them to intend breach of Faith with him, (as each of them at several times
designed the subduing of Genoua) he left him, and went to the other, and not
being corruptible by the greatest temptations of either Crown, by Constancy to
his Principles, he made them both at last content to leave his Country in
Liberty. And further, when after this he had delivered them in the Year 1547.
from the design of Fiesco (one of their Citizens) who aimed at doing the same
by them, as the Medices had a few Years before done by the Commonwealth of
Florence, in Usurping the Government, they would have made him Hereditary Duke,
he refused it, employing all his Power and Authority (which was exceeding
great) in settling them under the Government of a free State, as they now are,
and have ever since continued, without any considerable trouble; and being
satisfied with some honorary Privileges conferred upon his Family, was content
to have the chief of it (as too great, and therefore dangerous in so small a
Republic) excluded bearing any Office in the Government; as for the same
reason some other Families are at this day, wherein they act wisely, no
Commonwealth being safe where any in the Government exceeds in Riches, Power
or Greatness. And although it may be supposed that Oliver Cromwell (did he know
the story) esteemed this self-denial great folly, and despised his Memory for
it, yet the Faithfulness of Doria remains an honor to his Family, whereas the
falseness of the other will be a perpetual stain to his; for although Cromwels
Ambition, in dividing his Party that he might Rule, may be reckoned as the
Foundation of his Majesty's Blessed Restoration, and upon that account
advantageous to the Kingdom, yet he intending no such thing in it, but on the
contrary, the setting of himself up in opposition to the King, deserves no
thanks, or honorable memory, but detestation and abhorrency for it.

The Artifices which Fiesco used for Usurping the Government of this Republic,
were much like Cromwels practices, in pretending great zeal for public good,
with unbounded Charity toward the Poor, and any indigent necessitous Families
or Persons, carrying courteously and obligingly toward Friends, Strangers and
Inferiors, and dissemblingly toward all he suspected were Enemies to his
design, slily and cunningly accusing the Senate of ill Government, and infusing
ill opinions into the people of them, as also of the Family of Prince Doria,
because likely to oppose him in his design, until having got a party, he seized
the Town without any opposition, save what Andreas Doria and his Nephew (who
was slain in it) made, but when having all at his own devotion, going proudly
as well as needlessly the same Day in Triumph, to take possession of the Galleys
lying in the Harbor, in passing a long plank to one of them he fell into the
Sea, where having his Armor on he sunk right down, and so ended his design
with his Days. Tradition reports him to have been pushed over by one that
followed him, although not mentioned in story, to avoid the entailing a revenge
in his Family, but whether it was true or no, it is not material for any to be
too curious therein.

His Death made such a Confusion in his Party, that Andreas Doria (then very
Aged) taking the advantage of it dispersed them, set the Senate at liberty (who
were before Prisoners) and became again the Founder of the Commonwealth.
Fiesco's Body being found, was judged to be carried some Leagues to Sea, and
with disgraceful Ceremonies cast into it; his Estate to be Confiscated, his
Palace demolished, and by Sentence never any House more to be built where it
stood, so that the ruins of his House remains until this day a Monument of his
Treachery; as on the contrary, the stately and curious Statues in white Marble
of Andreas Doria, and his Nephew (who was slain) standing on each side of the
Stairs ascending the Senate House of this City, are true memorials of their
Virtues.

The disturbance that this Republic formerly met with in their Government,
caused great unsafety in City and Country, which in some measure continued long
after; and although the Senate has of late Years reduced both to great
security, some Travelers making use of former times, seem to pride much in
telling strange stories of it at this day. It was once my lot to hear one come
out of Italy, but few Weeks before my self, affirm amongst other things of like
nature, that besides the daily Murders committed in Genoua, there were twenty
thousand Highway men in their Dominions, the Heads whereof were persons of the
best Families in Genoua, that lived upon robbing, whereas if all that travel
through their Territories were robbed none escaping, there are not (as I have
cause to believe) Travelers enough by Land (most going thither by Sea to avoid
the dreadful Mountains and Precipices) to maintain a hundred Thieves; for
having my self traveled (within a few Months after this Gentleman left Italy)
through their Dominions, from one end to the other of all that is well
travellable; I neither met one Traveller, nor heard of one Thief; nor whilst I
staid in Genoua, which was several Weeks, did I hear of one Murder, nor found
cause to forbear in the darkest Nights walking the streets, when my occasions
required it. I instance in this, first to show how little heed is to be given
to the reports of some Travelers, who speaking often out of Envy, Passion, or
Foolish Vanity, in magnifying the dangers they have passed, care not what they
say, as this Gentleman did not, who being in Years, and Governor to a young
Gentleman of Quality, could not but know better. Secondly, That Travelers may
not thereby be discouraged; For I cannot but reckon this a very equal
Commonwealth, and well worth Visiting, having had no cause whilst I was there,
or at Venice, to complain of Insolency in either of the places, as is ordinary
with some to accuse them of: The greatest danger that I could observe in
traveling Italy, being in making young Gentlemen (not well grounded in
Religion) Atheists, by finding so much Impiety, and little Zeal in a Country,
which pretends to Infallibility in Religion, and to be the Mother of it.

The Nobility of Genoua, having the liberty of other Countries, in conversing
with Strangers or their own Citizens, are very civil in it (as I have cause to
say) toward strangers as well as the rest. But the Venetians, being by nature
or custom more reserved, have little converse with Travelers, and the Nobility
there, wearing a distinguishing habit, by which they are known, it is dangerous
to affront any of them; but as it is so in behalf of them for the maintaining
the honor of their Order, so on the contrary, the Law is severe against them,
if they dishonor their quality in abusing others, they having no such Law in
either place, as will justify any of them, in calling a Creditor. for demanding
a just Debt of (may be) seven Years or more standing, or for not bearing
patiently the being cousened with a false Mortgage or Title of Land, all the
opprobrious names imaginable, as in some other Countries, where if the loser in
return give the Debtor any thing more than a sad look, as in telling him he
Cousened him, or call him Knave (though one who peradventure common same speaks
void of all moral honesty) he shall be undone for it, though the keeping of his
Family from starving might provoke him to say what he did, the Plea of
Justifying not being allowed in the plainest matters of fact; a thing which
seems to tend much to the encouraging of that oppression, which is sometimes
met with from great persons; for were Merit and Virtue (which is all that is
truly valuable in men) made necessary ingredients in acquiring of honor and
respect from others, Immorality would not reign so much in the World as it
does; and since we find by experience, that reverence and respect will follow
just and honorable carriage and actions in great persons, and that even almost
to adoration, it is pity Vice should any where be privileged.

The liberty that is taken in these Cities in the time of their Carnivals,
cannot with right be objected against them as any proof of Insolency, that
being a time of general License, taken by persons in disguise, like those that
in Winter have lately used Masquerading in London, where they exceed the
Italians, in some times forcing their entrance into other men's Houses contrary
to the will of the Owners; so that if men would but make use of that Golden
Rule, of doing as they would be done by, they would find no cause to cry out,
as sometimes they do, of the Insolences of the Genouesers and Venetians; for
though it must be confessed, that the Italians in general are of more
unconversable natures, and more impatient under affronts than other people, yet
those qualities are not to be imputed to either of these Cities and their
Territories, more than to any other parts of Italy, nor so much as to those
places in this Country under the King of Spain; neither could I find any cause
to blame the Government of these Republics of Oppression, as is often the Vanity
of Travelers to do; For first their several Revenues are not so great, as
render them guilty thereof, that of Genoua not being a hundred thousand pounds
star. per annum, nor of Venice above eight or nine hundred thousand pounds,
which is not much considering their Dominions, and their necessary defense
against their envious Neighbors. Secondly what is leavied is equally laid upon
the people, and then honestly expended for public good and the necessities of
the State, without having any of it vainly wasted, or wantoned away, their
Salaries not being such as their Officers can raise great Estates by, their
Taxes in both places being too moderate to bear either Cousenage or large
Wages; and the freedom of living, and security at Venice is so great, that were
they Protestants as they are Papists, I should choose next my own Country, to
live there before any other Country that ever I saw; for I take it for an
undeniable truth, that where the Taxes are no more than are necessary for
support of the Government, without bad Husbandry or profuseness, and equally
leavied, the Government cannot be Tyrannical.

This may well expect the censure of those, who being engaged in maintaining an
opposite Character, cannot digest contradiction; but since I never found worse
from these people than I have here observed, it were ingratitude, and against
the Laws of Society, to speak ill of them, under whose protection I have lived,
and that never did me harm; or having occasion to mention them, not to bear a
suitable testimony to my experience, though to the disagreeing with such
persons, who either as nauseating every thing that is against their Appetites,
wanting an even and unbiassed mind, or taking reports upon credit, do load them
with undeserved reproaches. And none that know me, will imagine I can be led to
this by partiality or favor to any thing but truth, being far from an admirer
of their Form of Government, though I think well of their Administration (as
that which supplies the defect in the other) which is the greatest thing in all
Governments. For when equality is the rule, peaceable success and prosperity
will be the certain effects of it, as appears by this City, where the
Magistrates are so free of all jealousies and fears, that they do not think one
Soldier in the Town needful for their security. Nay the ten Lacqueys and other
Servant which the Duke is obliged to maintain at his own charge, are not
permitted to wear Arms.

And suitable to my observation of them herein, I find the forementioned Author
of that Book, called the Estates, Empires, and Principalities of the World,
writ in French and translated by Mr Grimston Sergeant at Arms, bearing this
testimony of the Venetians in their Government (viz.) Finally, there is a
wonderful equality, worthy of much Commendations, in this City, they respect
neither poor nor rich, Gentlemen nor common people; who (as I have said) have
some share in this Commonweal, enjoying many Offices which are very
beneficial to them: from whence it is, that the people are much affected unto
the Nobility, showing themselves very humble toward them, in requital of
which, the Gentlemen are their Protectors, favoring them in all their
necessities, advancing them to honors whereof they are capable. This Signory
has great regard to Poverty, for the which they provide by all good means,
spending much money in keeping down the price of Bread, and other things
necessary for the life of man, whereby they make the poor, not only subject,
but even Slaves to them; it is therefore no wonder if the people do willingly,
and without grudging, bear all their burdens, during the necessities of the
Commonweal.

The people of other Towns subject unto this Estate, are in like manner very
faithful, for that he that goes to govern them, has no other end but to do
justice to every man, and to assist the Towns which are under his Charge. For
in doing so, at his return he obtains the greater Honors, but if he govern
himself otherwise, he is punished and no more employed. And beside these
reasons for the people loving the Venetian Government, there is this also, that
they are not charged with insupportable Customs and Impositions, as some
miserable Towns are by Tyrants (and the same Author goes further) preferring
their Form, manner of Government, Administration, and good Laws* so much before
all other Commonwealths, that he affirms, those may be said to have been
governed by men that were greedy of spoil and blood, and this has been guided
by the Creator of all things, found out and framed by Philosophers with a
perfect composition, etc. And thus much being not my words, but the words of
Mr. Grimston already published in English, it will I suppose sufficiently
justify me in my sense of the City of Venice.

After the Genouesers were delivered by Andreas Doria, from the dangers
threatened by the Factions then reigning, and from all fears of Assaults from
either French or Spaniard, to reduce their Government to a certainty, which
during their troubles, had in some Years before suffered many alterations, they
caused in the Year 1570. a Register to be made of all their free Citizens,
which then consisted of five hundred twenty four distinct Families, and of two
thousand one hundred twenty four individual persons of ancient Noble
Extraction, and of Chief City Families four hundred eighty seven, with a
greater number of individual persons belonging to them; upon all which
Registered persons (they alone being called Free Citizens) and all such as
should descend from them born in Genoua, or in the Country under their
obedience, taking up their Freedoms by being Inregistred, not being infamous,
nor having exercised any Mechanical Trades within three Years before their
Election to any place, is settled the right of Government; providing also, that
though Infamy or Mechanical Trades should degrade a Citizen as to Government,
yet it should not prejudice his Legitimate Children, being of honorable
reputation, and arriving afterward at a better condition, but that such should
be restored to their Ancestors Rights and Privileges; and that to trade by
Exchange, in Commodities of Silk or Woollen, to go to Sea or negotiate in any
such like way, without keeping open Shop, should be permitted to any free
Citizen without prejudice to his quality.

But though the Government of this City consists thus in the general of
Hereditary Freemen (all the rest of the Inhabitants being reckoned Unfree) yet
for the encouragement of Virtue in the Unfree men, the Signory, College and
Council in Conjunction, have it in their power every January to Elect what
number they please (not having the recommendation of any Prince or State) and
not exceeding ten out of the Unfree Inhabitants to be of the number of the
Registered and Free Citizens, beside that the unregistred Citizens are eligible
to many creditable Offices.

Of Free Citizens and such as belong to Genoua, there are several who bear the
Titles of Princes, Marquesses, and Counts, from their Lands purchased of the
King of Spain, in Naples, Sicily, Millain, etc. sold unto them by several of
those Kings upon condition not to Alienate their Interest to any but a Citizen
of Genoua, to the end that by their Estates lying in his Territories, he may
keep the City in a dependence upon him, the Government of which (save that in
it none are born Senators as the Noble Venetians are, but come to it by
Election) resembles much that of Venice, their Affairs being carried on by five
several Colleges or Councils, as the Venetian Government is, ( viz.)

1. First, By a Duke (who is styled most Illustrious) Chosen for two Years,
with a Council of four hundred, which they call their Senate, but is their
greatest Council and Legislative Power, Elected annually out of the Freemen.

2. Secondly, By a Council called the Signory.

3. Thirdly, By a Council called the College.

4. Fourthly, By an Assembly called the Council.

5. Fifthly, By that made up of the Signory and College joined in one.

The great Council called the Senate, consists of the Signory and College,
with four hundred Elected annually out of the Freemen, living in the City,
twenty five Years of Age, having been four Years at least a Registered Citizen,
and not having been of the Council the Year before, the Electors having
notwithstanding a liberty, not exceeding sixty persons, to make choice of as
many as they please, betwixt twenty two and twenty five Years of Age, to be of
the four hundred, three hundred of which, beside the Members of the Signory and
College, being the Quorum.

This Senate by four parts of five, gives Sanction to new Laws, grants by
pluralities of Votes new Taxes or Impositions, and chooses Officers to many
Offices, but not to all, some being in the Election of the Signory, College,
and Council joined, unfree Inhabitants being Eligible to many of them.

The Signory consists of the Duke and twelve Counselors, that have been ten
Years free, called Governors (who bear the Title of Magnificent) holding their
places for two Years, and are not Eligible again in five, these together with
the Duke, decide most questions by eight Votes, but in some Cases by eleven;
they receive and write Letters, give Audience to Ambassadors, grants Patents,
and order the payment of Money, etc. and if in matters of public nature they
do not agree, they call the College to them, and if still they differ, they
call the Council, and then the matter in debate is concluded by plurality of
Votes.

The College consists of eight Members called Procurators, chosen for two
Years (and in four after not Eligible) together with all such as have been
Dukes, who are Procurators during Life.

This College decides all matters in debate by two parts of three, manageth
the Revenue, lets to Farm, buys and sells for the Republic, and in case of
difference, they call the Signory to their assistance, and if still they
disagree, they call the Council, and so conclude all matters by plurality of
Votes.

That called the Council, consists of the Signory, College, and one hundred
more, chosen out of the four hundred of the Senate, eighty of which, beside the
Signory and College, being the Quorum; these have no single work, but in
general, the last debate of Laws, and many other Cases brought to them by the
Signory and College joined, which being allowed of, are brought by them to the
Senate, who resolves by plurality without debate.

The Signory and College joined, has the right of ordinary Pardons, carried
by two parts of three, but High Treason, Patricide, false Coiners, killing a
public Officer, etc. cannot be pardoned, but by two third parts of the
Signory, College, and Council united.

The first debate of all new Laws (agreeable with their Fundamentals) Peace,
and War, giving assistance to their Friends, and making Alliances with Foreign
States, etc. is by the Signory and College joined, and what is resolved upon
by them with four parts of five, they bring to the Council for their allowance,
but all matters interfering (in the least) with the fundamentals agreed upon in
the Year 1576. (when they perfected their Model of Government) and laying of
new Taxes, with some other Cases, are brought to the Senate or Great Council,
where all is resolved by plurality of Votes, without debate, taken by the
Ballot, which is used in all their decisions, by every Council. Beside these
five Colleges, there are five persons called Conservators of the Laws, whose
Office answers their name, in looking to the keeping of the Laws, and
Administering Oaths to the Electors, they being always present at the Election
of all the Colleges.

The Duke must dwell in the public Palace, where he is accompanied by two of
the twelve Governors, who remain always with him; he is to be one inhabiting
in the City, that has not been Duke in five Years before, that is fifty Years
of Age, no Bastard (for though a natural Son of a Noble Genoueser, may be of
the great Council, he cannot be Duke) and that has an Estate able to support
the Dignity of the place, and is not to lie one Night out of the City, without
having first obtained leave of the Senate; he propounds in the Senate and
Council, all Laws or other matters of public concern, and having according to
his Election served two Years less three Days, he leaves the public Palace,
and retires to his own House, where he remains private for eight days, in which
time, inquiry being made into his Administration, if he be found to have
faithfully discharged his Trust, he is made Procurator during Life, if
otherwise, he is proceeded against as a Criminal.

Many Circumstances concerning Magistrates, Offices and the qualification of
them, as also belonging to the Ballot, with the manner of it, might be
instanced in, but there has already been so much writ of them by others, that
more is needless.

And now as to the particular Interest of Genoua, that differs nothing from the
general Interest of Italy, save that as they have great sums of Money due to
them from the Crown of Spain, and hold considerable Lands of him in Naples and
Milain, so they are more particularly obliged to hold fair with that King than
with any other Potentate, though they must do the same toward France, as not
being able to contest with them; and thus much shall serve at present for
Italy, and its two great Cities of Venice and Genoua.

THE INTEREST OF DENMARK.
THis Crown has nothing more left of that which is properly called Denmark
than Jutland (lying upon the Maine, and joining upon the Duchy of Holstein)
with certain Islands in the Baltic Sea, as the Isle of Zeland (which is the
Chief, and wherein stands Copenhagen, the Kings Principal Residence, and
Metropolis of the Kingdom) Feunen, Langland, Laland, Bornholme, Falster, and
Femerne, all lying in the East Sea, and Friezeland or Izeland in the North Sea;
there are many more small Islands in the Baltic, but being of little or no
consideration, I omit the naming of them.

Until the late Wars betwixt this Crown and that of Sweden, that in the Years
1643. to 1645. and again in the Years 1656. and 1657. etc. This King lost some
places to the Swedes, both in the Baltic and upon the Main, on the Northside
of that Sea joining upon Sweden; this Kingdom lay upon both sides of the East
Sea, but has now nothing remaining on the Northside, so that Denmark is at
present bounded by Germany, the North and Baltic (or East) Seas.

But besides Denmark thus described and bounded, this King has still the
Kingdom of Norway, divided from Sweden on the East by great Mountains, having
the Northern Sea on all other sides, and in Germany half the Duchy of
Holstein, part of those Countries called Ditchmarsh and Idersey, lying on the
North Sea, and his share of the two Counties of Oldenburgh and Delmenhurst,
fallen lately to him by the Death of their Earl, who dying without Legitimate
Children, this King and the several Dukes of Holstein Goddorp, and Holstein
Ploen, were his Heirs.

Denmark is an ancient Kingdom, the present Prince being according to their
account, the hundred and second King of several Families, all or most Elected,
and until the Year 1660. this King writ himself Elective of Denmark, and
Hereditary only of Norway, and his other Dominions.

Whilst this Crown was Elective they had a standing Senate of the Gentry or
Nobility ( Denmark under that Government not allowing of any dignity beside
that of a Gentleman, save the Order of the Elephant, and what they had by
Offices) without whom the King had not much Power, but in the late Wars between
them and the Swedes, the last King having got the Command of an Army, and made
himself Master of it, and the City of Copenhagen, took the opportunity soon
after the Conclusion of the Peace with Sweden, to cause the Gates of the Town
to be shut, into which he, the Senate, and most of the Nobility were retired;
permitting who would to come in, but suffering none for eight days to go out.
And then the 17. October. 1660. he persuaded the Senate of the Kingdom, much
against their wills, not only to deliver up to him the Instrument which was
always in their keeping (called in Dutch a Handfeste) which according to Law he
had after his Election Signed, Sealed, and Sworn unto, as King Elect, but also
to absolve him from his Oath, Devesting themselves of their Power, and
Investing him with it, acknowledging him as their Hereditary and Absolute King,
for him and his Heirs for ever; from which time, he has ever since writ
himself Hereditary King of Denmark, and exercised a despotical Government,
whereas before, he writ but King Elect of Denmark, and Hereditary only of
Norway. The next day being the 18. of October, he was with solemn Ceremony
publicly upon a Theater Installed, having then the Globe, Sword, Scepter, and
Crown delivered to him by the Senate, who making Virtue of necessity, saluted
him by his new acquired Addition.

This alteration was with the more ease effected, because the Cities,
Commonalty and Clergy having none of them any share in the Government, either
by themselves or Representatives, all Power and Authority being in the King,
together with a standing Senate of a few Gentlemen, who (from bearing hard as
the people thought upon them) had in straights little Interest left beyond the
Gates of their own Houses, when by the misfortune of the War they were driven
into Copenhagen, whither the King with his Army was retired, there remained
little more for him to do in the Case, than to let them know what he would have
them to do, or upon refusal, to tell them their doom; for the people reflecting
(as in such Cases they always do) upon their Governors, as the cause of their
misery, were at first well-pleased with the Change, as sick men are with the
change of Beds, but as I have heard it was not long before they repented the
Mutation, finding soon a difference betwixt a Government at the will of one man
solely (in opposition to which Solomon says, That in the multitude of
Counselors there is safety) and in Conjunction with others, whose Interest in
a great measure was bound up with the good and prosperity of the Community: but
however it was obtained, this present King being a person of more than ordinary
moral Virtues, exercising his Power moderately and wisely, he will without
doubt, during his time, maintain this new Government; but shall the Crown at
any time fall to a weak or dissolute Prince, it is more than probable, that the
Nobility will then remember their ancient Rights, and think it lawful to
recover by Force, what was by Force or Fraud taken from them; for as I am
informed, though the King since he was Hereditary, has assumed the Conferring
Titles of Honor, as of Barons and Counts, etc. which they never before did,
few or none of the ancient Gentry do accept of those Dignities, as if they
affected the old way of Government better than the new.

In this design the King had not one of the Nobility of the Country that joined
with him, nor was the Cabal more in number, beside the King and Queen, than
three, ( viz.) Monsieur Gabell of mean Birth, but Chief Minister of State (who
is by this King laid aside) the Bishop of Copenhagen, and the Mayor or
Burgo-Master of the Town, not one of which was a Gentleman, or is yet made one,
or have had any title conferred upon them, as has been done to others since
the making of the Crown Hereditary, saving that the Bishop had the bare Title
of Archbishop given him, during his Life, without any increase of Revenue or
Jurisdiction, his Successor having only the empty Title as before of Bishop;
and it is probable, (according to the Proverb) that though the King loved the
Treason he hated the Traitors, not thinking them worthy to be ennobled, that
had betrayed the Liberty of their Country, than which no crime can be more
odious.

Anciently Sweden was esteemed subordinate to Denmark, and was often under the
Government of that Kingdom, but not being able to bear the Danish Yoke, they
cast it off, and making Gustavus Errikson, Grandfather to Gustavus Adolphus (a
private Nobleman) in the Year 1528. King, they revolted from Denmark, and
thereby entailed unto Posterity an implacable Enmity betwixt the two Crowns,
which having several times since broke out into War, and ended for the most
part with advantage to the Swedes, they are now become Superior to those they
were before in subordination unto, whereby the quarrel is made the more
irreconcilable.

Formerly Denmarks Chief Interest (in reference to Jutland, and Holstein, which
are contiguous to Germany, and the latter a Member of it) was to join with the
Princes of the Empire, against any Incroachers upon their common Liberties, and
it is still the same with them; but beside this, it is their Interest to be
always upon their Guard toward Sweden, who have of late Years aimed at the
sole Dominion of the Baltic, and will not fail to attempt it, when any
probable opportunity and advantage is offered him; and as it is a true Maxim,
That by the same way that any Prince acquires Dominion, by the same way he must
keep it: So as the last King got by Force his absolute Power and Hereditary
Title, this must by the same way preserve it, not thinking that the ancient
Nobility, who have old Roots of Liberty, can easily digest their being by
violence (at their flying into Copenhagen in time of War for security) being
forced thereunto by the Kings not protecting them) divested of their ancient
Rights and Privileges, derived to them from their Ancestors by many hundred of
Years; or that they will not think it lawful for them at any time, when it is
in their power, to recover again by force, what was by such means taken from
them; and therefore as from the last Kings Usurpation, perpetual jealousies are
likely to be continued betwixt the Crown and the Nobility, so it will probably,
at one time or other, give an advantage to the Swede. And therefore it is
further the Interest of this King, to hold a Close League and Correspondence
with the States of Holland, who can in his necessities come best by Sea to his
relief, and who (as may be presumed) will never be backward in it, in that it
is their Interest, as well to keep Denmark under an absolute Dominion (because
such a Constitution will never admit of any great Improvement of Trade to the
lessening of theirs) as it is to keep the balance betwixt the two Northern
Kings, without suffering either of them to ingross the whole Baltic, from
whence they have their Naval Commodities which they cannot be without; and that
the States of Holland are sensible of this concern, they have given several
testimonies in our time.

For when Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, being inflated with his
supposed strength at Sea, did think in the Year 1644. to have run down the
Swedes, the Hollanders supplied them with twenty Ships, by whose help they gave
the Dane such an overthrow at Sea, as he hardly in a long time after recovered
(if they have yet done it) and again, when the Swedes were lately so much
Masters of Denmark, that had not the Dane received assistance, the Swedes had
in all probability carried their Kingdom, and within a short time after all the
Baltic; then Holland seasonably sent them in the Year 1659. a very
considerable aid, both by Sea and Land, by whose means, together with the
interposition of the Long Parliament of England (which after his Majesty's
Restoration was by him prosecuted) an equal Peace was made betwixt the two
Kings, each being kept within tolerable limits: but the Swedes being thus
prevented in swallowing up of Denmark, when they had said in their Hearts all
was their own, they cannot yet remember it, without passion, though the States
of Holland deserve so little blame for it, that they merit (even from their
Enemies) honor and applause, for not only so well understanding, but also for
constantly and stoutly pursuing their true Interest, without which it were
impossible for them to stand; for although a Monarchy may live (though poorly)
when its Interest is not followed, a Republic can hardly subsist where it is
missed; the nature of that Government being (from the impatience and
mutinousness of the people,) either to flourish or not to be at all.

There are some who do not only accuse Denmark of missing their Interest in an
unreasonable inequality in the distribution of their Church Lands, allowing to
those they call Bishops (though such as have only a bare superintendant
Authority) Revenues exceeding in proportion the riches of the Nation, and to
the rest of the Ministers, a miserable Livelihood; but also in so doing of
great impolicy, rendering it a prejudice to that Kingdom, wresting the lowness
of the Nation to the making good that Notion of no Bishop no Poverty. But
though I cannot deny the observation to be for the most part true, yet if the
Danes be concerned in it, I must put the stress thereof (as to them) upon the
Revenue rather than a Coercive Power tyrannically exercised, as in some other
Countries to the obstructing Trade and Industry; for they cannot be guilty in
any thing of that nature, having no Jurisdiction left them. And therefore,
since the Reformers in Denmark have stripped their nominal Bishops of all
Power, Authority, and pre-eminence, allowing them no more precedence than what
is below the meanest Gentleman (which being in a Kingdom crosses that false
Maxim, of No Bishop, No King) they cannot be concerned in this Proverb further
than in an unequal distribution of their Church Revenues; but as the Notion had
its rise in time of Popery, so it reaches only to Popish Bishops, against whom
the truth of it may indeed be made out by comparing the prosperity of
Protestant Countries under Reformation to what they were before, as also
amongst Papists themselves the riches of those least under the Dominion of the
Church, to those most under it, as of Venice to other parts of Italy, France to
Spain, and even in France, the Reformed to the Papists, as appears by the
former having no common Beggars among them, though the latter are crowded with
them. And were the Revenue of the Bishops (or rather Prolocutors of the Clergy)
of this Country, where (as in some other Reformed Churches) there is not
allowed any civil jurisdiction to their Ecclesiastics, so much against the
Interest of Denmark as some will suggest, it cannot be thought but they who
have formerly had a very wise Senate and great Statesmen, would ere this have
reformed the error, especially since they as well as all other Lutherans, know
that the Notion of Sacrilege in the Case, is a grand Popish Church Cheat,
which they have a long time imposed upon the World; for surely it is as lawful
for Protestant Princes, in their own Dominions, to alienate Church Lands,
without the Popes Consent, as it is for Popish Princes to do it in their
Territories, with his Approbation, as they have in all Ages and Countries
frequently practiced.

At the Treaty at Munster in the Year 1648. four Bishoprics (as is mentioned
in the Interest of Germany) were made secular Principalities, and given to the
Elector of Brandenburgh, as also a great share of Church Lands to that
Excellent Family (famous for vigorous and constant asserting of the Protestant
Cause) the Landgrave of Hessen Cassell, in consideration of their sufferings in
the late Wars in Germany, beside the like Lands given to the Dukes of
Mechlenburgh, in lieu of what they parted with to the Swede, and all with the
consent of the Popes Legate, who was afterward Pope Alexander the Seventh; but
I instance not herein as thinking Popish practices always fit for Protestants
imitation, but as a concurrent Argument in this Case, that if the Church of
Rome hold it lawful with the Popes allowance to alienate Church Lands from the
uses they were given unto, it is much more lawful for Protestant Princes to
alienate them from uses they were not given unto. For the Revenues of the
Bishops, etc. being anciently given to unmarried persons in the nature of a
trust, for building and repairing of Churches, relief of the Poor, Sick, and
Strangers, etc. and but one fourth part for themselves for performing the
Idolatrous Worship of their Religion, presuming always that they being single
persons, their devotion would lead them to make the Church their Heirs; if the
Founders were now living to see their Donations enjoyed by Married persons, no
way answering the ends they were given unto, either in their worship, relieving
of the Poor, doing charitable Works, or making the Church their Heirs, the
Bishops, etc. not having much to do, beside auditing their accounts, most of
their time being spent in contriving ways for raising Estates to leave to their
Posterities, it may with good reason be conceived, that they would not judge
the resuming such Lands from Lutherans to be Sacrilege, but that the Mohammedan
Priests, were they in possession of them, had as much right to them as those
they call Heretics; and therefore since part of the Revenue which was intended
for relieving of the Poor, and Charitable Works, etc. is not, and the rest for
performance of Popish Worship, cannot be applied to the uses appointed, it is
but reason, that in Denmark they should Escheat to the Magistrate, especially
being hindrances in the worship of God, the management of such great Estates
taking men off from their Ministerial Duties.

And certainly, if any thing of this nature be Sacrilege, it is not merely
because a sort of men from whom Lands are taken, have had Episcopal hands laid
upon them (when by the loss of them they are no way hindered in the worship of
God, in relation either to themselves or others) but in taking them from such,
who by the want of them, are prevented in the discharge of their Duties
incumbent upon them as Ministers of the Gospel.

As in the enjoyment of Pluralities, where one living deliciously, in plenty
and idleness, doing nothing, hires others for cheapness, not sufficient for the
work, or if he be (as few hirelings are) gives him so little, that without
neglecting his studies and following other business, he cannot keep his Family
from starving, so that the persons crying most out against the sin of
Sacrilege will be found upon a true enquiry, to be most guilty of it; for
Church maintenance cannot rationally be thought to be tied simply to the person
of a Minister, because in Orders, but to him executing his Office, being
qualified and able in the discharge of the Duty of a Minister. And for one in
the Ministry doing nothing, to withhold from him that does the work, the
maintenance belonging to it; or for a Minister who out of covetousness, that he
may enjoy several livings (especially when one is of a sufficient Revenue for
his maintenance) deprives his Parishioners of one part of the Lords Day, in
going from one place to another, seems in common sense and reason, to be
indisputably sinful, if not Sacrilegious; beside that non-residency has ever
been Condemned, (as well as meddling in affairs of State) by all incorrupt
Councils.

And although I think such a competent Provision for the Ministers of the
Gospel, as they may comfortably live upon, bring up their Children, and in some
measure provide for them, is Jure divino; yet I cannot do so of Princely
Revenues, to a sort of men that do nothing proportionable for them, but are
rather by them taken off and hindered in the work of the Ministry, nor of
pluralities held in Commendam.

Trade might be made the Interest of Denmark, the Country having convenient
Ports, and capable of it, were it not, that it is one of those Countries where
the Nobility or Gentry, undervaluing all Callings, do undervalue Trade; which
principle, together with the jealousy which may be rationally conceived will
ever be betwixt the King and Nobility about Dominion, will always obstruct the
improving of it, to the keeping of the Country (to the end of the World) in a
poor and low Condition. And as all this concerns Denmark only, so this is all I
have to say at this time of the Interest of that Kingdom.

THE INTEREST OF SWEDEN.
SWeden generally taken, with its Territories ancient and modern, gained from
Denmark, Poland, and Russia, contains Sweden properly so called, Finland,
Lapland, Scrivinia, Halland, Schonen, Gothland, etc. these being divided from
the Kingdom of Norway by great Mountains on the Westside, having Muscovia and
the frozen Sea on the North, with the Baltic Sea on the South: but beside the
main body, thus bounded and understood under the name of Sweden being all
contiguous, this Crown has several Islands in the Baltic or East Sea, and
upon the Continent Liesland, with some other places anciently belonging to
Russia and Poland, as also in Germany, the Upper Pomerania, with part of the
Lower, and part of the Duchy of Mechlenburgh, all divided from Sweden by the
Baltic Sea, the several Bishoprics of Bremen and Verden, now erected into a
secular principality, lying further into the Empire, on the Southside the River
Elbe, which flows to Hamburgh.

Sweden thus considered makes a formidable Power, unto which they arrived not
at once but by degrees; Gustavus Errichson (Grandfather to Gustavus Adolphus,
and Great Great Grandfather by the Female side of the present young King, and
the first King of Sweden of this Family) laying the foundations of its rise.

The contests that this Crown since his time has had, have been with Denmark,
Russia, Poland and Germany, in all which they have been gainers; their
differences with Denmark and Poland have risen from the pretenses that the
Royal Lines of those Kingdoms have had to the Crown of Sweden, with Russia upon
the common score of Emulation (as generally falls out between bordering
Neighbors) and with Germany, upon the account of the late oppressed Princes,
to whose assistance they were called.

Sweden is a Kingdom that gives place to none for antiquity; it was anciently,
and has been for the most part Elective, but having unhappily been often under
the Administration of bad Kings, it has had many Changes in Government, having
been sometimes under Elective, other times Hereditary Kings, one while under
Maresnals or Governors, another while under the Kings of Denmark, and again
Independent.

Magnus King of Sweden (surnamed Smeek) being deposed, and the Duke of
Mechlenburgh Crowned King in his stead, Margarite Queen of Denmark, Widow to
Hacquine (Son of Magnus who was deposed) recovered Sweden, and in the year
1387. united it to Denmark by an act of State for the perpetuity of the Union.

Margaret dying Childless, was succeeded in the three Kingdoms of Denmark,
Sweden and Norway, by Errich Duke of Pomerania, one of her Nephews, recommended
by her, but he being in a short time after expelled all the Kingdoms for ill
Government; Sweden divided from Denmark, and set up Englebert Elected out of
the Nobility, after whom Carolus Canutus a private Nobleman was appointed
Governor of Sweden, who out-living many troubles, and deserving well of his
Country, was in the Year 1450. Crowned King; but the Archbishop of Vpsal and
his Church Faction, taking advantage of his absence whilst at Dantzigg, seeking
aid of Poland against the Rusche, called in Christiern the first King of
Denmark, (and first King of his and this present Family of Denmark) and Crowned
him King, but Carolus returning, he was restored, and Christiern deposed, who
remained so until the Year 1470. that Carolus died, after which, Christiern
being again called in and Crowned, was a second time for ill Government
deposed, and the Kingdom then Governed by Steno Sture (Nephew to Carolus
Canutus) as Mareshal, (he refusing the Crown and to take the title of King) but
whilst he was employed against the Rusche who then infested the Kingdom, John
King of Denmark Son of Christiern, was by a Faction Crowned King, but soon
after expelled by Steno, who dying in the Year 1503. in the thirteenth Year of
his Government, Suanto one of the Nobility was chosen to succeed as Governor
or Mareshal, who all his life opposed Christiern the Second King of Denmark,
Son of John, but dying in the eighth Year of his Government, was succeeded by
Steno Sture his Son, who though valiantly opposing the said Christiern, yet
being slain in Battle, and the Swedes by his fall discomfited, Christiern was
received and Crowned King, but for his Cruelty and ill Government, was in the
Year 1520. expelled, and Gustavus Errichson, a Gentleman of a noble Family (and
as some say descended (though very remotely) from the race of the ancient Kings
of Sweden) was in the Year 1523. Elected King, and Crowned in the Year 1528.
And thus from Margaret of Denmark, annexing the Crown of Sweden unto Denmark,
and from Christiern the first, John Son of Christiern, and Christiern the
second Son of John King of Denmark, and all successively Crowned Kings of
Sweden (although some of the Swedes Writers omit them in the Catalogue of their
Kings and Usurpers, admitting the three Governors, who contended with them as
their lawful Magistrates) proceeded the pretenses of the Dane, to the Crown of
Sweden.

Gustavus Errichson entailed the Crown in the Year 1540. upon the Heirs Male of
his Body, he reigned well thirty eight Years, and was all that time to his
people (who had been so restless before) the joy and delight of their hearts,
and is still remembered by them with great honor and affection, as all Princes
will be that govern justly, according to Salus Populi suprema lex, which is the
Motto of King James's Scotch Gold, in 1602. and 1603. when he came to the Crown
of England (as for one instance, the strange affection that the Lorrainers bear
to their natural Prince (though out of possession) from a grateful remembrance
of his Ancestors lenity and justice in Government (compared with their new
Masters) do witness.) For the people being naturally bashful, modest, and
respectful toward their superiors, loving rest and quietness above all
things, have a reverence for their Magistrates (whilst they do them no manifest
wrong) almost to adoration; but if their superiors make use of their authority
to injure and oppress them, then as they are Masters of sense (though happily
void of much reason) seeling themselves trod upon, we find like Worms they are
apt to turn again, casting all Laws against righting themselves behind their
backs, flying as they think to the natural right of self preservation, as few
Countries, but in one age or other have done. And such has been the Case of
Sweden, where they have a Maxim, Fowlers History of the troubles between Sweden
and Poland.
that nothing but Virtue, and Heroic actions are worthy of a Crown. For their
mutations have not proceeded from any natural unquiet temper in the people, but
always from the oppression and ill Government of their Governors, who were as
is probable, tempted thereunto, by the advantage they had in the authority and
dignity of their persons and places, of laying their own faults upon the
provoked and injured people; for as the Swedes have been restless under
tyrannical and unjust Princes, so no people have ever been more obedient to
good and virtuous Kings than by History they seem to have been, and were not
England, Scotland, and Ireland to be excepted, all story would hardly afford us
one instance, where Male Administration has not been the Cause of the
Rebellion that has ever happened in any country. And King James in his advice to
his Son, agrees thus far with this Notion, that he counsels him in reference to
his Lords, in these words, (viz.) Teach your Nobility to keep your Laws as
precisely as the meanest, fear not their orping or being discontented as long
as you rule well, for their pretended reformation of Princes never takes effect
but where evil Government preceedeth, (Page 162.)

And that the people do not regard under what Form of Government they live,
provided that the end of it (the good of the Community) be but pursued, that so
they may be justly and honestly dealt with, which is all they look after,
appears by the Cities in Holland, where the Citizens do contentedly acquiesce
in an Oligarchical Administration, (the worst of Forms) because satisfied that
they are not cousened nor cheated; for otherwise they who revolted from the
King of Spain, upon their paying much less than they now do, (even their riches
then and now considered) would not probably bear a greater burden (as they
have long done) without ever rising up against it.

Gustavus Errichson left three Sons, Errich, John, and Charles, who all
successively came to the Crown of Sweden, but the first who came to it in the
Year 1561. was (for mis-Government and Marrying disgracefully) deposed, and his
Brother John (in the Year 1569.) set up and Crowned King in his stead, who
inheriting his Fathers Virtues, died in the Year 1592. lamented and beloved of
all his people, leaving two Sons, Sigismundus and John behind him. The first
was in his Fathers Life time chosen King of Poland, being Crowned in the Year
1580. and after his Fathers Decease was likewise Crowned King of Sweden, but
having been secretly bred by his Mother (who was a Papist) in her Religion
(contrary to the knowledge of his Father, who was a great Enemy to Popery) and
having declared the same at his accession to the Crown of Poland, the States of
Sweden received, and Crowned him King, upon condition of maintaining their then
received Religion (which was as it still is the Lutheran persuasion) without
any way endeavoring the introducing of Popery; which he in no kind observing,
but on the contrary, so soon as on his Throne, Erecting Popish Churches,
placing Popish Governors in his Castles and Forts, striving to bring in the
Romish Religion, they accusing him of breach of Faith, and mischievous
practices against the Kingdom, contrary to the end of Government, and Duty of
his place, deposed him, yet with offer of choosing his Son Vladislaus (a Child)
provided they might have the breeding of him in their own Belief, which he
refusing (after some Years spent in Treaties, and other endeavors for
accommodation, all in vain) the States of the Kingdom in the Year 1607. chose,
and Crowned his Uncle Charles (the third Son of his Grandfather Gustavus
Errichson) their King, and making a second Entail, Entailed the Crown upon his
Heirs Male, and in Case of failure thereof, upon Duke John, younger Brother to
the King of Poland, and his Heirs Male, he being a Lutheran, and living in
Sweden, who had before the Election of his Uncle Charles, made a solemn
Resignation of his Right to the Crown.

This King Charles being zealous in his Religion, and though a Lutheran, a
Friend and favourer of Calvinism, did readily agree with the Estates of the
Kingdom, in making several Laws for securing their Liberties and Religion, and
among the rest, one against the Heirs of the Crown Marrying Popish Wives,
another against the Succession of any Papist Prince to the Crown, and a third
against their Prince accepting of any Foreign Crown, otherwise than upon
condition of living in Sweden, etc. and from hence the Poles pretense to the
Kingdom of Sweden arising, great Wars betwixt them ensued, wherein Charles
maintaining his Election successfully, and Gustavus Adolphus inheriting his
Fathers Gallantry, doing the like, the Swedes in the Year 1629. obtained an
advantageous Peace or Truce for six Years, in which time they prospered so
much, that at the expiration of that term, the Pole was easily persuaded to
continue the Truce for six and twenty Years longer, which term was not expired,
when Charles Gustavus the last King of Sweden, and Father to this present King,
being weary of Peace fell upon Poland, where he prevailed exceedingly, until
Denmark (who must always be jealous of the greatness of Sweden) taking the
advantage of the Kings engagement in Poland, serving him as he had done the
Pole, fell in 1655. upon him in time of Peace, necessitating him thereby to
make Peace with the Pole upon equal terms, which Peace continued until Casimire
King of Poland (having no Heirs) put a period to that Crowns pretense to the
Crown of Sweden, by resigning his Crown into the hands of the Estates of
Poland, and withdrawing himself into a Monastery where he lately ended his
days, and being the last of the Kings of Poland of the Swedish Race, has ended
the Title of those Kings to the Crown of Sweden, which though (as is probable)
will much abate the heats and animosities betwixt the two Crowns, yet it cannot
but be

First, The Interest of Sweden to be as well jealous of the Pole, as of the
Russe, they enjoying at present several places anciently belonging to both
Countries, and at all times oppose the Muscoviters access to the Crown of
Poland, lest otherwise he should become too great for them, who in such Case
would not want pretenses against Sweden, upon the account of what they possess
belonging to both Crowns of Russia and Poland.

Secondly, The differences that have been, and emulation that is betwixt the
two Crowns of Sweden and Denmark, arising originally from the revolt of the
first from under the Dominion of the latter, and setting up a King of their
own, which caused many breaches and Wars betwixt them, wherein the Swedes
having always reaped great advantage and profit, and the Dane sustained as
great loss, their differences and animosities being thereby further increased
and continued; It is likewise the Interest of Sweden to be jealous of Denmark,
not trusting too far to Treaties of Peace with a reconciled Enemy (who always
keeps agreements more from consideration of Interest than Faith) but be
continually upon their Guard toward them.

Thirdly, The Swede being become a Prince of the Empire (besides what he may
claim by descent) in the possessing those Countries given him in Germany by the
general Treaty of Peace at Munster, as a reward for their good service, in
coming to the relief of the oppressed Princes, when unjustly used by the
Emperor, it must be his Interest to oppose all encroachments from abroad or at
home, upon the German Liberties, holding a good correspondence with those
Princes and the Empire, in being always true to the Interest of the whole, lest
otherwise they draw the envy of the Nation upon them (Foreigners in all
Countries being ordinarily (even without cause, and much more upon any
miscarriage) hated by the Natives) and provoke a Confederacy for driving them
out of Germany, which would not only be a vast loss unto them, in losing what
they now possess, but more in the Friendship of that Nation, from whence they
have the most of their recruits, the benefit of which they cannot lose, without
being rendered insignificant among considerable Potentates, their own Country,
though very large, being from the barrenness of it too thin of people, to do
any great matters in the World by; and they ought to consider, that when so
mighty a Country as Germany shall combine against them, their expulsion will be
the less difficult, in that Crossing of the Seas, where wind and weather must
be waited for, will be of great disadvantage to them, in the maintaining of
their Interest in a Foreign Land. And in order to the obliging of Germany, and
their other Neighbors, it is further their Interest, to be true to the triple
League, made against France, in that the French King is at present the only
Potentate to be feared, for designing the Universal Monarchy. And therefore as
this King is a party to that League, so it is his Interest to be constant to
it, for keeping the French at home, and within bounds; for should the French
prevail (in his more than suspected design) although some petty Princes whom he
may think fit to make use of, may peradventure be in little worse, if not in
better condition by his acquists than before, yet no King, nor considerable
Prince, but by his Conquests must be reduced, and rendered of much less
consideration (if suffered to signify any thing) than they now are.

Trade might be made the Interest of Sweden, that Country affording some of the
usefullest, and most necessary Commodities, as Copper, Iron, Pitch, and Tar,
etc. if after the mode of those Northern Countries, which undervalue all
Callings, they did not undervalue Traders, and that War, the Enemy to Trade,
were not become so natural to them, that they cannot live contentedly in Peace,
and that their Nobility and Military Officers did not affect a state, and
manner of living above their Revenues, a habit they have got by the War, which
forces them to seek additions by military service abroad, and to that end, to
improve all opportunities for War, which necessitating the King to burden
Trade with excessive Customs and Impositions, renders them altogether incapable
of any great increase in Trade, and the seeming desire of the Senate of that
Kingdom, for the promoting of it, to be fruitless and ineffectual; and upon
consideration of these unpeaceable Circumstances, they may be observed to be
the more unfit for Mediators in matters of Peace and War, and thus much for
Sweden.

THE INTEREST OF POLAND.
POland is encompassed with Germany, the Baltic Sea, Russia, Tartaria, the
Carpathian Mountains dividing it from Hungaria, and Wallachia. It is an
aggregated body consisting of many considerable Provinces, United into one
Estate under the name of Poland, that Province denominating the whole by way of
eminency, and so named from the word Pole, which in their Language signifies
plain, because it is much without Hills, and most of it a level Country.

This Kingdom taken generally is very large, reckoned two thousand six hundred
Miles in compass, under an Elective King, who alone without the Council of the
Kingdom, has so little Power, that Writers compare him to the Prince of a
Senate, and the Government to an ill digested Aristocracy.

This Country affords staple Commodities enough to make it flourish, as great
quantity of all sorts of Grain, Hemp, Flax, Tar, Pitch, Iron, Copper, Lead,
Clapboards for Wainscot, Deals, Salt, Honey, Wax, variety of Furs, etc. But the
two Orders of the Kingdom, the Bishops, etc. and the Nobility (under which
title is understood the Gentry as well as the Lords) discouraging Trade by
keeping all under them in a slavish condition, rendering them thereby incapable
of it in any considerable measure, causes Poverty in a Land, which of it self
is rich and good, and proper for Commerce.

As this Country consists of several large Provinces, so they are subdivided
into several Divisions or Circles, called Palatinates, each with a Governor
called a Palatine, who have Lieutenants called Chastelains, but neither of
these Officers are capable of such Offices in any Country, but where they have
some Interest by Lands of Inheritance in the Country; and because the Nobility
of this Kingdom are very numerous, when necessity requires the making of a new
Law, every Palatine calls together all the Nobility of his Precinct to some
certain place, where having acquainted them with what is to be treated of, they
choose from among themselves such a number of persons as they think fit to
represent them, which they call Nuncioes or Messengers, to meet and join with
the like from the other Provinces at the place appointed by the King, where
they make a distinct body or order, who though less in Dignity than the Senate,
yet equal to them in authority, and are a balance to the Senators, controuling
of them, if from the bounty and temptations of the King, they should prove
corrupted or biased, to the endangering of their liberties, which this order
does solely aim at preserving, with regard only to public good; for though
every Lord or Gentleman is absolute over his own Tenants or Peasants, who have
no immunities but mere Slaves, yet none can be more jealous of privileges than
they are of their own, so unequal is the corrupt and ambitious nature of man,
if not restrained by Laws.

The Religion of this Country is that of Rome, with a toleration to all others,
as Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, etc. from whence it was said of them
before it was of Amsterdam, that if one had lost his Religion he might find it
in Poland. And this is all the encouragement the trading Towns have, and were
it otherwise, and that men were persecuted for Religion, that little Trade they
have would soon fall to nothing, and so reduce the Nobility, who (from the
slavery of their Peasants) are already low enough, to yet more poverty and want.

The King takes an Oath to reign according to the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom, to maintain the rights and privileges of every order, and not to
diminish the revenue and limits of the Realm, with a Clause in his Oath,
amounting to the absolving of the people from their obedience in case he should
govern otherwise; and upon these conditions the Senate promises obedience,
whose advice and consent the King must have in making War or Peace, leavying
Subsidies or Taxes, alienating any of his Lands, or doing any thing of
importance that belongs to the Commonwealth. Insomuch, that it is said of him,
that his Power and Authority is more or less according to his Policy or Wit.

This Kingdom is seldom in Peace, being almost continually under the exercise
of War, either from Sweden, Muscovia, Tartary, Turkey, or the Cossacks, the two
first and they, having pretenses one upon the other, the third and fourth moved
by ambition, and the last a sort of sturdy people, who belong to the Kingdom
but rebel against their King; so that Poland being frequently necessitated to
War, it is their Interest, and indispensibly necessary for them, to have in
their Election of a King, an eye chiefly to a Soldier, who may by his wise and
good Conduct, the better defend them against their Enemies, avoiding
nevertheless the Emperor or one of the French Faction, lest such a one should
endanger the loss of their Liberties.

Secondly, It is their Interest to hold a good Correspondence with the German
Princes, who can never prejudice them, and may in their necessities give them
relief, their Country not only joining upon them, but also concerned in
Interest to support them, lest otherwise the Muscoviters, Turks, or Tartars,
prevailing against Poland, should afterward visit them in Germany.

And now that Denmark and Sweden* by their particular animosities against each
other, with other Circumstances, are obstructed in Trade; that Italy and Spain
have no genius for it; that the multitude of Soveraignties in Germany, laying
so many Tolls upon their Rivers and Passes by Land, as is a great impediment to
it in that Country; and that Poland by its Constitution and Customs, is wholly
incapable of it, are all much for the benefit of the Trading parts of Europe;
and those Countries who making the most use of these advantages, shall most
encourage Trade and Traders, will reap the most profit by their prudence,
whilst others shall suffer by their folly in neglecting Commerce. And let no
man call Trading a debasement of Gentility (as the politic Author of the State
of England does) since it is that without which no Country can be great, or
defend themselves against such potent Neighbors at Sea as England has. Since
the wisest of Nations account it honorable, as the Venetians, and Italians;
beside, that the French King finding it rational to make it so, has lately
declared the exercise of Commerce in a Gentleman to be no prejudice to his
Quality; and that the Examples that are against it, are from Countries who
esteem the Ministry, Physic, Law (the last the Profession of our Politician)
Court employments (save some of the highest Offices) and all Callings, except
Military, a debasement of Gentility, as well as Trade, and that in England
(especially) no person can be an Enemy to Traffic, but he that either
ignorantly is so, or Monster like, desires to impoverish and inslave his own
Country, and render it a prey to its powerful Neighbors and Enemies. And thus
I have done with Poland.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Original, the growth, and decay OF THE Reformed Party IN
FRANCE.
OF all the Countries in Christendom, none has been so much the Stage of
action upon the single score of Religion, as that of France, the Reformed
there, having since the mystery of iniquity came to its height, been almost in
continual exercise of opposition to it, either in way of patient Martyrdom, or
Military defense, against the barbarous Massacres, clandestinely plotted and
contrived against them, by the bloody and faithless Church of Rome.

About the Year 1160. when that Monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation first
received its Birth, there was at Lions in France, a dissolute young Merchant
called Waldo (from whence his Followers after his name were called Waldenses)
who being brought to repentance, by the means of a signal Judgment, executed
(by Heaven) in his presence upon one of his Companions (who was remarkably
struck dead at a time of their debauch) falling to the study of the Scripture,
became a public opposer of the new Monster, wherein he was so successful in
adherents, that the then Pope Alexander the Third thought him and them worth
the trouble of his Anathematizing, and chasing from Lions into Dauphinee and
Provence, where this Seed increased so exceedingly in a small time, that
reaching Picardy, Flanders, and Germany, it overrun those Countries to that
degree, that King Philip Augustus of France, to prevent its growth, is said to
have razed three hundred Gentlemen's Seats, destroyed some Walled Cities, and
burnt a great number of others in Picardy, and Germany.

These Disciples were about the same time persecuted by the Bishops of Mentz
and Strasburgh, who burnt them not singly but by heaps, the story of those
times reporting fourscore to have been burnt together in one Fire, vainly
hoping by such Cruelty to destroy them all suddenly. But notwithstanding the
continuance of the like Persecutions, the Lord (who reigns) ordered all for
the good of his Church, making the blood of the Saints the Seed thereof,
preserving the truth so far from being thereby extinguished, that it
overspread a great part of Europe, multiplying so abundantly, that in less
than an hundred Years from Waldo, there were found (as Perin Lyonois affirms)
in Passaw alone (a small Bishopric in Germany) fourscore thousand of that
belief, whose Persecutors not thinking Death sufficient, but (according to the
practice of the Church of Rome) loading them with false reproaches after they
were gone, it moved their Survivors, for their vindication, to publish the
Articles of their Faith, and grounds of their separation from the Popish
Church, dedicating of them to the King of France.

A multitude of these Barbarisms, and the Transactions of those times, came to
light, partly by the quarrels amongst the Papists themselves, and partly by the
taking of Montbrun in the Year 1585. by Ledigers the French General, who being
then a Protestant, saved the Records and Writings, found in that place, of the
persecuting times, from the Fire, when the Monks had designed to have burnt
them, because by them, appeared not only the Cruelties practiced upon the
Martyrs, but also their pious Lives and Doctrine to be the same with the
Reformed at this Day, even some of their Enemies having in those times honored
their Memories with Discourses of their holy Conversation and Principles.

Those of the separation from Rome in the Province of Albigoise (a small County
in Languedock in France, from whence comes the name of Albigenses) in the Year
1200. stood upon their defense, the Cities of Toulouse, Montaban, and many
others joining with them, having the public assistance of Arragon, and of many
great and private persons in England, which caused Pope Innocent the Third, in
the Year 1206. to order a dispute upon the Canon of the Mess at Montereau,
where Arnold Hott maintained the Albigenses, against a Bishop in behalf of the
Pope; but his Legates (two other Bishops) being Moderators, it produced nothing
but persecution by that great Persecutor King Philip Augustus, who making War
against them, forced their flight into Bohemia, Savoy, and other places; some
being reported to have fled into England, where the Church party in those times
prevailing, they were ill treated.

The Doctrine of Waldo was in the fourteenth Age illustrated by Wickliff an
Englishman, from whom the Duke of Lancaster, with many other Lords and
Gentlemen of that Nation are said to have received it, the constant sufferings
of the Martyrs giving life to it, and being the Messengers of it through all
Christendom.

About a hundred Years after him, rise up John Huss and Jerome of Prague, to be
eminent Witnesses to the truth, who upon the Emperors Summons, and his
Safe Conduct, appearing at the Council of Constance, were contrary to Faith
Imprisoned, and after some time, to the greater breach of Faith, brought to the
Stake, where their comfortable sufferings, were the means of the Conversion of
many in Italy and Germany.

This perfidy in the Emperor (which was endeavored to be justified by the
Council of Constance, the sitting) provoked Zisca to make War against him with
forty thousand men, whose success was so eminent and miraculous, that he that
is but a little versed in History cannot be ignorant of it; In the Year 1488.
the Count of Varux the French Kings Lieutenant, went into the Vallieses,
whither many of the Albigenses, with their Wives and Children, were fled for
safety, and to make short work with them, he put fire to the mouths of the
Caves, where the poor Christians were stifled to the number of three thousand
of them, of which there were found four hundred Infants, perished in their
Cradles, and the Arms of their dead Mothers; at this time the Pope following
his opposers into all Countries, with his fulminations and outcries, they
carried grievous persecution along with them into Bohemia, Polonia, Austria,
Dalmatia, Croatia, and Calabria, etc. but the Lord turned all still to the
increasing the number of Believers.

About a hundred Years after Huss and Jerome of Prague, Luther begun his work,
whose boldness bringing the Germans from the fire to the Sword, produced a
great reformation in that Country, as the History of those times and places do
show. Not long after him, and in his time, rise several eminent Lights in the
Church, as John Calvin at Geneve, Melanchton and Zwinglius at Zurick,
Oecolampadius at Bassell, Haller at Bearn, and Capito at Strasburgh, etc. every
one of which have left the Reformation of their several places, as Monuments of
their Virtues and Piety.

The Albigenses which fled into the Duke of Savoy's Country, inhabited in two
small Cities, and some Villages in the Valleys of Piemont, without Persecution,
until the Year 1556. there Belief being near the same with the Peasants of that
Country, who had not in the memory of man, known any thing of the Ceremonies of
Rome, though Neighbors to it, as Perrin Lyonois reports, but in this year the
Duke being instigated by the Monks of Pignorolo, condemned the poor Christians
of his Valleys to the flames, and gave them in Pillage to the Neighboring
Garrisons, who to the number of four hundred, coming upon them in the night,
finding them all fled, except a few, who being resolved to suffer, were upon
their Knees at Prayers, the Soldiers were so astonished at that pious sight,
that they fled in such a dreadful manner and haste, that many lost their Lives
in endeavoring to pass a Rivolet; the Monks also in fear quitting their
Convent, but were by the Reformed Ministers (more from Charity and good nature,
than desert in them) saved from plundering.

The Duke taking this as an affront sent Army against them, which was likewise
put to flight, the General acknowledging his men to be struck with an amazement
and terror; after which, the Duke treated with them, and by fair words brought
them to rely upon the promises of a Prince, as that which was sacred and
inviolable, but the poor credulous Christians had no sooner performed their
promise (according to the Principles of their Religion) and laid down their
Arms, rendering their Garrisons to him, and themselves at his mercy; than
(setting aside all consideration of the Faith of a Prince) all Agreements made
with them were broke, and the Soldiers made their Judges and Executioners, who
strove to gratify their Prince, in excelling each other in exquisite Torments,
by which means, they presumed either to have driven them out of the Country, or
forced them to the renouncing of their Belief; but this Cruelty had a contrary
effect, stirring up in the residue that was left, such a miraculous resolution
and Courage, that afterward they brought their Enemies to eight or nine several
Agreements, which were all as often faithlesly broken, until at last the Duchess
being moved with pity, and some liking of their Religion, wrought the Duke to
agree with them, and in the Year 1561. to give them an absolute Law for the
Liberty of their Conscience.

In these times, the Reformed in France were not without their exercise, under
Persecution and Massacres, there having been great Cruelty practiced in that
way in Provence, in the Year 1545. in the Reign of Francis the First, but this
oppression was more or less, according to the disposition and temper of their
Princes; Henry the Second, in the Year 1549. desiring to hear some of the
Condemned Martyrs discourse, had a person brought to him, whom they picked out,
as esteeming him one of the weakest, but proving able to baffle the Bishop of
Castilon, the King would see him die, who at his Execution, the King observing
him from a Window where he stood, to turn his Face toward him, was so
affrightned, that with an Oath he said, He would come no more to such sights.

The ordinary Courts of Justice being now glutted with Executions, and several
Members converted by the Pleading of the Martyrs, the King Ordered in the Year
1550. the holding of a Mercurial, a Court of Justice invented by Louis the
Twelfth, constituted of the King, the Princes of the Blood, and many other
Grandees; this Court was called to the end to send the Reformed as fast to the
Shambles, as they should be brought before them, not doubting but such a
Constitution would pursue the design; but instead of doing it, many of
themselves receiving Conviction from the defenses of the Prisoners, some
becoming Delinquents were arrested, whilst others being more nimble to save
themselves took flight: and thus the Lord by contrary means increased the
number, and Interest of the Reformed, and in a short time after, rendered them
so considerable, as to be able to defend themselves against bloody Massacres
and Torments.

This King enjoyed not long his delight in this Course, being in the Year 1559.
accidentally slain in a tilting by the Count of Mongomary (a French Protestant
that bears that Title in France) who when he had received his wound, which he
outlived but a small time, turning toward the Bastile (the great Prison in
Paris) and pointing to it, acknowledged the just Judgment of God upon him, for
afflicting the honest people that were in it, which the Cardinal of Lorrain
hearing, denied, and with an Oath said, the Devil dictated the words.

Francis the Second succeeding (being sixteen Years of Age) his Father Henry
the Second, the Guises taking the advantage of his Minority, dated from the
beginning of his Reign, their design for Usurpation of the Crown, and as a
popular way to attain thereunto, pretended great zeal for the National Religion
(which was as it still is that of Rome) and violence against the Reformed,
which setting the wits of Scholars and Statists at work; some writing for
Religion, and others for the State, and one a Treatise called, a Defense
against Tyrants, showing for what Causes, and by what means a people might take
up Arms, those who were driven by necessity (finding the Duke of Guise,
although Hypocritically pretending their Friend, yet secretly designing their
destruction) were easily persuaded to stand upon their defense, and take the
King of Navar for their Head, he being then of the Reformed Religion, the first
Prince of the Blood, and in right of his Queen, King of Navar; but it was not
long before they declined him, casting their Eyes upon his Brother Lewis Prince
of Conde, as in many respects the more fit person.

The Prince of Conde accepted of their Election of him for their General,
immediately hiding himself, and acting under another name. The place of
Conference, for laying down their General Thesis, was at Aubon, in the Land of
Vaux, the regulation of the Execution being at Nantes, where the Parliament for
Britaigne resided. Things were managed with so strange a secrecy, considering
the number privy to the design, and the distance of their Correspondence, that
the discovery of the Plot came first out of Italy and Germany, and that but the
day before it was to be put in Execution; many suffered Death for this design,
but so satisfiedly, that their party was much increased by it.

This caused the calling an Assembly of the Nobles, to meet at Fountainbleau,
under the name of the little Assembly of Estates; to this Assembly the great
Admiral Coligny, so much famed for wisdom, presented a request in behalf of the
Reformed, which he said he could have had signed by fifty thousand men, who
aimed (beside the liberty of Conscience) at nothing but securing the Crown to
the Princes of the Blood; The Constable Monmorency, the Chancellor, and many
others, made Speeches full of Moderation, but the Guises opposed throughout
those of the Religion, as knowing they would be the greatest obstructers of
their design for Usurpation of the Crown.

The King of Navar, and his Brother the Prince of Conde, absented, as not
daring to trust themselves at Court (though all means possible was used to
bring them thither) until the Cardinal of Burbon their Brother, having first
received the Oaths of the King and Queen for their liberty and security,
brought them to it, where they no sooner arrived, than setting all Oaths and
engagements aside, they were clapped up close Prisoners, and endeavors made of
proceeding against them as Traitors; but finding it difficult to do it legally
against Princes of the blood, and not willing to make too gross a breach upon
their privileges, it was concluded to send for the King of Navar to the King,
with design that upon not giving satisfactory answers to his demands,
exceptions should be taken at his uncivil and undutiful carriage to the King,
and so in rage and fury he should be fallen upon and murdered, in which action
the Duke of Guise was to have been the first, but his Majesty being moved with
pity, not suffering (nor giving the sign for) Execution, the King of Navar
escaped, though the French King did not Guises Censure of being a Poltrone
Prince for it, nor yet did the Prince of Conde (the King of Navars Brother) so
escape his malice, but that he afterward wrought (though illegally) his
Condemnation to die, earnestly endeavoring present Execution, and designed the
like against the King of Navar, and had probably obtained the Murder of both,
though Princes of the blood, and one a King, had not the Death of Francis the
Second, leaving his Brother Charles the Ninth in his Minority prevented it, the
Council advising the Queen Mother who was then Regent, not to suffer them to
die, lest thereby she made the Guises her Masters, which consideration did not
only save both their lives, but set them at liberty, and made the King of Navar
Lieutenant General of the Kingdom.

Upon the Death of this King Francis the Second, they sent home the Queen of
Scots (who was his Widow) to begin the troubles in that Country. Now the
Guises to ingross credit to themselves, and advance their own designs by
blemishing of others, and pretending a zealous affection for the deceased King,
gave out (contrary to the opinions of the Physicians) that he was poisoned,
causing Libels to be cast abroad, bringing even the Queen under suspicion, but
Fathered it more plainly upon the Protestants, on purpose to render them odious.

This Change caused the calling of an Assembly at Poisie, where Beza, Peter
Martyr, and many others of the Reformed appeared, and where the first making a
Discourse upon the point of Transubstantiation, in the presence of the Queen
and Cardinal of Lorrain, he is said to have convinced the latter; and where at
another time, clearing it in a long Harangue to the Assembly, that it was not
the Protestants that caused the troubles in France, but the Corruptions of
Rome, (though he thereby vexed the Ecclesiastics, yet in the end) he brought
them to conclude with him, upon this following Article concerning the Sacrament.

We confess that Jesus Christ presented D'aubignies History of the Civil Wars
of France.
to us in the Holy Supper, gives and exhibits truly the substance of his Body
and Blood, by the operation of his Holy Spirit, and that we receive and eat
Sacramentally and by Faith, the same Body that died for us, to be bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, to the end to be quickened, and to deserve all
that is requisite to our Salvation; that Faith supported by the word of God,
renders things promised as present, and that by the same Faith, we receive
truly and certainly, the true and natural body of our Lord, by the virtue of
his holy Spirit, and in this manner, we confess the presence of the Body and
Blood of our Lord and Savior in the Holy Supper.

The Cardinal finding this Article to please the Assembly, and being also
conformable to his own belief, consented to it, to the great rejoicing of the
Queen, and all the Princes, but many of the Doctors bandying against it, they
framed another as follows.

We believe and confess, that in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, the true Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, is really and substantially under the kinds of Bread
and Wine, by the Virtue and Power of the divine word pronounced by the Priest,
a Minister ordained only to that effect, according to the Institution and
Ordinance of our Lord.

This dispute had several effects viz. with the Reformed, to the strengthening
them in their belief, and with the Papists to a hesitation in theirs, reducing
both to such a Moderation, that in many places the latter were willing to part
stakes with the former, being content to let them have the use of their
Churches in turns, which exposed the King and Queen abroad (especially at Rome)
to the censure of being staggered in their Faith, and the Duke of Guise leaving
the Court, industriously helped forward the belief of that report, arguing the
truth of it, from their having a little before prevented the Execution of a
bloody Massacre which he intended.

The Queen finding her self under great disgust upon this occasion, and
threatened both at home and abroad, and desiring to know the strength of the
Reformed, in case she should be quarrelled with upon their score, received from
two thousand one hundred and fifty Churches, an engagement to spend willingly
their Lives and Estates, in defense of their Prince and her. The Papists in
many places made great Complaints, at Aix in Provence, at the Instigation of
the Bishop of Cisteron and a Cordilere, they entered into a League, and got
together many people, whom the Cordilere made believe were invisible, so long
as he carried his Wooden Cross before them, they attempting first Brignols,
where they defeated a Company of the Kings, then Besieging Bessee which they
could not carry, went to Bariols which they took, but enjoyed it not long, ere
by Command from the Queen, themselves were besieged by the Count of Cursols,
who retook the Town by Assault; when the Cordilere found that his invisibility
would not save him, being there slain with his Cross in his hand, and four
hundred more with him; the first that entered were two Companies of the Reformed
Religion, who when they saw the Town taken, and the Soldiers falling to
plunder, retired into the Field, to return thanks to God for his mercies to
them, and when the General sent to them, to come and share with the rest in the
booty, as they had in the enterprise; they continued their duty, and desired
him to be pleased to suffer them to keep clean hands, and content themselves
with having done God and their King the best service they could.

The Queen to prevent such irruptions in the future, Assembled at St. Germans,
the Princes and Grandees of the Kingdom, at which Assembly was made that Edict,
which bears the name of that of January, for the security of the Protestants in
the free exercise of their Religion, to which all the Ministers of State and
Deputies agreed.

The 4 th of August 1561. the Queen writ a long Letter to the Pope (which d'
Avila does not mention, though D'aubignie does) setting forth the dangerous
condition of France, by reason of Religion, reproving most of the material
errors in the Church of Rome, desiring his Concurrence in reforming of them;
for Beza by his appearance at the Assembly, had not only procured the Edict of
January for the Reformed, but so far advanced the Reformation, as to gain the
Queens Recommendation of it to the Pope; but Peace being contrary to the design
of the Guises, they would not suffer the Edict to work, but immediately after
the granting of it, contrived several Massacres against the Reformed, as in
March following at Vassi in Champaigne, where the Duke of Guise himself was in
person. In April at Sens in Burgundy. In May at Marseillis, Aix, Salon, and
several other Cities in Provence; for the Guises dreading the Reformed as the
chief party that would obstruct their aspiring to the Crown, all Edicts for
preservation of the Religion were laid aside, and no way of destroying the
Reformed neglected, as by stabbing, stoning, strangling, burning, famishing,
drowning, stifling, and others too tedious to enumerate; which grand Cruelties
moving several great persons to compassion, they met at the great Admiral's, to
consider of some way for their preservation; but as the wisest men are commonly
the least daring, because most sensible of danger, so the Admiral who was
reckoned as the Solomon of that Age, by the strength of reason silenced them
all, until by an extraordinary providence he was prevailed with; the story of
which, Monsieur d' Aubigne, who was the Favorite of Henry the Fourth, and writ
by his Order, affirms to be as follows.

This great and wise man the Admiral being one Night wakened out of his sleep
by the sighs and groans of his Lady, and endeavoring to satisfy her in that
which he knew was her trouble, and to arm her with patience under persecution,
gave her occasion to speak to him in this manner.

Sir, It is great regret to me, Monsieur D' Aubigny his History.
that I trouble and disturb your rest by my unquietness, but the Members of
Christ, being so torn as they are at this day, of which Body we are part, how
can we, or any other part remain insensible; you Sir, have not so little sense
as much strength to hide it, can you take it ill from your faithful moiety, if
with more freedom than respect, she pours out her tears and thoughts into your
bosom? We lie here, Sir, in fullness and Plenty, whilst our Brethren, flesh of
our flesh, and bone of our bone, are some in Dungeons, and others in the
Fields, at the mercy of the Dogs and Ravens, this Bed is a Grave to me, whilst
they want Graves, and these sheets reproaches, whilst they want winding Sheets.
Can we sleep quietly, and not hear the departing groans of our dying Brethren?
I cannot but remember the prudent discourse by which you shut the mouths of the
Lords your Brothers, and the rest of the Company, tearing from them all their
Hearts, and leaving them as well without Courage as answer; I tremble to think
that this prudence is only from the World, and that to be wise for Men is not
to be so for God, who having given you the knowledge of a great Captain, can
you in Conscience refuse the use of it for his Children? You have vowed
otherwise to me, and your Truncheon, Sir, is the Truncheon of God, and can you
fear he will make you culpable for following him? The Sword that you wear, is
it to oppress the afflicted, or to redeem them from the power of Tyrants? You
have confessed the Justice of their Arms, since they are forced to them, can
your Heart quit the love of Right, for the fear of Success? It is God that
takes away sense from those that resist him, under color of sparing Blood, and
he will save the Soul of him that will lose it, and lose the soul of him that
will save it. Sir, I have now poured out my Heart to you, in behalf of so much
Bloodshed of ours, which Blood, and your Wives Cries to Heaven, go from this
Bed to God against you, for Murdering those which you will not hinder from
being Murdered. This powerful Speech drew from the Admiral, after some pause,
this Answer.

Since I have gained nothing by this Evenings reasoning, upon the Vanity of
popular Commotions, the doubtful entry into a party not formed, the difficult
beginnings, not against a Monarchy alone, but against the possessors of an
Estate which has old Roots; so many interested to maintain it, free from all
attempts, either within or without, in general Peace, new, and in its first
flower, and which is worse, made with our Neighbors expressly for our ruin,
beside the late defection of the King of Navar and Constable, so much strength
on the Enemies side, and weakness on ours, but that you still remain the same;
lay your hand upon your Heart, and examine your Constancy, if it can digest
general Roots, the reproaches of Enemies, yea even of your own party, the
Calumnies of the people, who judge of things according to success, the Treasons
of your Friends, flights and exiles into strange Countries, shame, nakedness,
famine, and that which is more hard, the same to your Children; examine if you
can support a Death by an Executioner, after you have seen your Husband trailed
and exposed to the ignominy of the vulgar, and in the end your Children
infamous, the Valets of your Enemies, increased by the Wars triumphing over
your labors; I give you three Weeks to consider hereof, and when you shall be
in earnest satisfied against such accidents, I will go and perish with you and
your Friends.

To this she suddenly replied, Sir, the three Weeks are already finished, you
shall never be overcome by the Virtue of your Enemies; use yours, and suffer
not to lie upon your Head, the Murders that will be committed in three Weeks
time, and I summon you in the name of God* to defraud us no longer, or I will
be a Witness against you at the Day of Judgment.

After this the Admiral applied himself to the raising of his party, and
forming of their strength, who choosing the Prince of Conde for their Head,
became in a short time very powerful, and with the assistance of Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory, to whom they gave Haver-de-grace for caution, they
succeeded prosperously, and by a Victory gained in September 1562. wherein
Antony of Burbon King of Navar (Father of Henry the Fourth, having embraced the
Popish Religion) was slain; they brought the King not long after to a Peace,
and to the granting another Edict (which is as an Act of Parliament in England)
for the settling of their Religion in Peace and Liberty, Commissioners being
appointed to see to the execution and observance of the Articles, under a
plausible pretense of reality, when there was so little of sincerity, that
instead of observing them, they were soon after their Confirmation broke in
every particular, Murders, and all manner of Injustice being again committed
against the Reformed, who when they complained at Court of the wrongs done
them, received no other answer, than the clapping up of their Deputies, the
Kings party making it matter of laughter, for them to expect the keeping of
Edicts, or Acts of Parliament.

These Violences soon caused a second War, wherein the Protestants also
prevailed, to the bringing the King to a third Edict, by which (because of so
many former breaches of Faith and Covenants) were granted to the Reformed four
Cautionary Cities for security (to wit) Rochell, Mountaban, Conyak, and La
Charity, from which Grant, Rochell derived their right of standing out against
their Kings. Yet notwithstanding this provision for keeping the King to his
Agreement, the Council of Constance, by the Example of John Hus and Jerome of
Prague, having taught the Papists to believe breach of Faith with those they
call Heretics, to be no offense, but lawful and even meritorious; and the King
having been Maximed, that Princes are not tied to keep Edicts extorted from
them, this last Edict no more than the former was observed, all manner of
Cruelty and Massacres being again committed; for the King who had been bred to
see Beasts torn in pieces in their Blood, was left without Bowels, and
Massacres by the frequency of them made natural to him.

This not being the way to Peace, the War was still carried on by the Prince of
Conde and the Admiral; and the Queen of Navar going to Rochell, was declared
Head of the Reformed, but she devoting her Son (who was after Henry the Fourth)
to the service of those of the Religion (which is the name the Reformed in
France are usually called by) having brought him up in their Faith, resigned
her Charge to him, declaring under him, his Uncle the Prince of Conde, and the
Admiral Lieutenant Generals, they again brought the King to several Agreements,
but none of them being kept, necessitated the continuance of the War, to the
loss (beside others) of many great persons on both sides, as of the Kings
party, the King of Navar, Duke of Guise, and the Constable Montmorancy, were
slain; on the Reformed, the Prince of Conde was basely assassinated, but left a
Son which inherited his Virtues, as Guise did several, who succeeded him in
ambition, and carried on the War upon the same design as their Father had begun
it.

The War was now managed on the Protestant Party by the Admiral, in the name of
the two young Princes of Navar as Head, and Conde as succeeding his Father in
his Command. The Admiral governed affairs so wisely, having always the two
young Princes with him, that as the Bishop of Rodez, in his History of Henry
the Fourth confesses, the King not daring to adventure a Battle with him, nor
having any hopes of overcoming the party by force, resolved to make Peace, and
work his ends by other means, which was such as even the Bishop calls wicked.

Now the King knowing that the Reformed had (as Monsieur d' Aubignie affirms)
two hundred Cities in their hands, the worst of which was able to hold out a
Siege against a Royal Army for a Month at least, with other suitable advantages,
came to a Treaty with them, giving them another Edict for their security, which
was for two Years well observed, but to the end, that he might in that time the
better compass and bring about his Satanical and deceitful design, he pretended
so much kindness to the whole party, especially to the Admiral, that he cast
himself at Rome under suspicion of liking them too well, and Monsieur d'
Aubignie is of opinion, that the Admiral had gained much upon the spirit of the
King, and had probably got the sole Dominion of him, had not the assiduous
workings of the Queen and the Guises prevented him, but to leave the
uncertainty of this, it is most certain, that the King acted at last a
dissembling part, to as high a degree, if not higher, than ever any had done
before him; for merely as a blind, he forced his Sister, altogether against her
will, to marry the Prince of Navar, as the greatest pledge of Faith that he was
capable of giving to the Reformed, pretended to make War against the King of
Spain in the Low Countries, in favor of the Protestants, gave them all they
could desire, denied the Admiral no request, granting him those Suits which
before he had refused his Mother and Brothers, called him Father, caressing him
and his Friends in the highest manner imaginable, accompanied with the like
tokens of sincerity; and yet all but to delude the Protestants into a belief of
his integrity, that so bringing them together to the marriage of the Prince of
Navar, he might the better at once Butcher them all. Oh the monstrous and
horrible Hypocrisy of the heart of man! too many believed, whilst others
mistrusted him, the Excellent Queen of Navar (whom the Papists confess exceeded
her Sex, having no fault but Heresy) unhappily coming to the Marriage of her
Son, was by poison prevented the seeing of it, and from her Death the Prince
her Son took the Title of King of Navar. This sad beginning was excused by the
Court the best they could, denying the poison (though no doubt is made of it,
Monsieur d' Avila himself confessing it to be done by a pair of Gloves) that it
might not hinder the Marriage, nor subsequent design, the days for Execution of
both being set and could not be deferred, and within six days after the
Solemnity, upon St. Bartholmews Day, the four and twentieth of August, 1572.
was that horrid Massacre of Paris perpetrated, wherein the famous old Admiral,
twenty other great persons, twelve hundred Gentlemen, and throughout the Cities
of the Kingdom, after the example of Paris, near one hundred thousand in all,
(according to the Bishop of Rodez report) were most Satanically assassinated in
cold Blood. The King of Navar, and young Prince of Conde, being forced to go to
Mass to save their Lives. This Butchery was acted with such inhumanity, that
neither Age, Sex, nor Relation was spared; but Uncles became the Executioners
of their Nephews and Nieces, as Nephews of their Uncles and Aunts, suitable to
the spirit of Cruelty, running along with the Doctrine of Rome.

The King made his boast of this inhumane Cruelty, asking the Queen if he had
not dissembled well, and went to the Parliament at Paris on purpose to own the
Act, where Monsieur Thou, Chief President of the Court (and who at home had
wept, complaining of the Massacre) made a long Harangue to the King in
Commendations of it, and of that Principle, That he knows not how to Reign,
that knows not how to dissemble; such Vassals and Slaves are sometimes the best
of Courtiers, to the lusts and wills of their Masters.

There were none that knew of this Plot, and had their hands in it before it
came to Execution, beside the King, Queen, Dukes of Anjou, Guise, and the
Cardinal of Lorrain, Brother to the latter, it being so secretly carried,
whilst it was in agitation, that the Pope and his Consistory was highly
offended with the King for his kindness to the Reformed, as not knowing the
meaning of it, the King having been so private in it, that he caused a
Gentleman (a Favorite of his Brother the Duke of Anjou) to be assassinated,
because he perceived he had a suspicion of it.

Now as the Judgments of the Lord are for our Instruction, so the several
Deaths of all these principal Actors in this bloody Tragedy are worthy
observation, the King died wallowing in Blood, not only issuing from all the
passages of his Body, but as it were in a sweat of Blood from all the pores of
it. The two Guises, the Duke and Cardinal, were assassinated by Command of King
Henry the Third; the Queen a few days after them died of grief, lamented by
none, but hated by every one (as the Bishop of Rodez affirms:) And the Duke of
Anjou, who after the Kings Decease came to the Crown, under the name of Henry
the Third, was slain by a stab from a Jacobin Friar. And as Philip the Second
King of Spain's persecution of his Protestant Subjects in his Dominions, and
his end is also very observable, so I think it not improper in this place to
take notice of both.

Beside this Kings Cruelty in the Netherlands, and persecuting Life, having
once escaped a great danger of being cast away at Sea; at his arrival in Spain,
he appointed two days of rejoicing (as days of Thanksgiving) one at Validolid,
and the other at Sevil, whither he caused those in Prison for Religion, to be
brought from several places of his Kingdom, upon which days Scaffolds being
made for a multitude of Beholders, with a distinction of Seats for persons
according to their Qualities, the Prisoners were (with Triumphing Ceremonies,
and dressed in such Antic manner, as might best make the Beholders merry) led
to the Fires, and burnt before them; but as many faithful Martyrs finished
their course at this time, bearing signal testimony to the truth, so the end of
that King (who was so great an Enemy to the Reformed, that he put to Death his
Eldest Son Charles, partly upon suspicion of being a favourer of them) is as
fit to be remembered, he dying also of blood issuing from all the passages of
his Body, with a continual Vomiting of Vermin (as the Bishop of Rodez in his
History of Henry the Fourth relates) And thus the Lord gave them blood to
drink, who had delighted in Blood.

The Pope, lest Massacres should have been looked odiously upon in the World,
and so his Church deprived of the use and benefit of them, to give them credit
and reputation, declared a Jubilee for that of Paris, and returned thanks unto
the King for it, as a means to keep up the practice of them, but
notwithstanding his wrath, which aimed at no less than the utter destruction of
the people of God, the Lord raised them again, and fortified the remainder of
his Church, with greater resolution to stand upon their defense than ever,
seeming to reprove the barbarisms of some Princes, and great ones of the World,
who vaunt and stand so much upon their honor, by the more honorable
Principles of the public Executioner of the City of Lions, and the common
Soldiers of that Garrison; the first, when Commanded to Massacre those of the
Religion which they had got together, refused to do it, saying, that his office
was to execute persons Condemned to die according to Justice, and not others;
and the latter upon the same Command, that their duty was to kill their Enemies
in the Field, and not in cold Blood Men in Prisons, which may well be
remembered, to the perpetual infamy of those who took that Employment upon them,
which both the Common Hangman, and Mercenary Soldiers detested.

After this, the Duke of Anjou, by Command of the King, promising to himself
the total extinguishment of the Protestant Party, besieged Rochel, and for the
more countenance and terror to the City, having the young King of Navar in his
possession, forced his accompanying of him thither; but the Town with the
assistance of Queen Elizabeth, was so well maintained, that after the Duke had
spent, as some report, thirty four thousand Cannon shot against it, and lost
forty thousand men, he was forced to rise upon equal terms, granting the Town
most honorable and safe Conditions; and the King to make Peace with their
whole Party, giving them another Edict for their security.

Now the Duke of Anjou being chosen King of Poland, posted thither in have, but
was not long absent before his Brother Charles the Ninth fell sick, who when
near Death, sent for the King of Navar, recommending the care of his Queen and
Daughter to him, confessing him to be a person of honor, not esteeming so of
his Mother or Brothers (as it seems by his passing them by in the trust) to
whom at that time, he is said to have born a perfect hatred, though they had
been Companions with him in Iniquity. And thus at last, the honorable
Principles of the King of Navar were acknowledged by the French King, as a just
reward of Navars Virtue to his great Glory, and his Enemies reproach and shame;
and soon after this, Charles the Ninth left the World in that manner as is
before related.

Not long before his Death, and when they saw it approaching, his Brother the
Duke of Alancon, Montmorencie, and some other Grandees, combined to deprive the
Queen Mother of the Regency; but the King was no sooner expired, than she
prevented them by seizing the Government, in the absence of her Son (the King
of Poland, now Henry the Third) in his name, when immediately causing the King
of Navar, and Prince of Conde (both still Prisoners) to be brought before her,
after sharp reproofs, she released them; The Prince of Conde slipped presently
into Germany, where he raised Forces for the relief of the oppressed
Protestants, but the King was longer in getting away.

Now the War beginning again, the Duke of Alancon (the Kings Brother) joined
with the Prince of Conde, and in a short time after, the King of Navar escaped
to Rochel, where they received him willingly, but excepted against many of his
Followers, as wicked debauched Atheists, without any Morality as well as
Religion, which he did not oppose, knowing them to be persons put upon him by
the Court, in design to make him as wicked as themselves, the only way as they
thought to secure him from the Reformed Religion.

The Protestants in the Year 1576. brought Henry the Third (now returned out of
Poland) to a large Edict for the quiet enjoyment of their Religion, at which
the Papists being offended, they framed that Catholic League which vexed
France about twenty Years, the beginning was small, but soon increased, the
pretense being to maintain Popery and extirpate Reformation, but at bottom, the
design was first to destroy the Order of Succession in the Royal Race, and then
the Line it self, to make way for Henry Duke of Guise, who had at that time the
advantage of having of his own Family eight or ten Princes in his Party, all
persons of useful parts and daring spirits.

The Queen and the Guises begin now all to be weary of Peace, the first as
being naturally of a turbulent spirit, and not so considerable under it as War,
and the others as not holding Peace suitable to their ends. And therefore they
put the King upon demanding of the Protestants, the Towns given them by several
Edicts for their security, as the Queen did them upon a denial thereof as an
unreasonable request, so that a War consequently followed, but lasted not
longer than until the Year 1580. that Peace was again concluded, and another
Edict for satisfaction of the Reformed granted.

After this the new modelled League increasing, the King was made a mere
Cipher, the Guises by the power of the League so overtopping him, that at the
Assembly, in the Year 1585. held at Blois, they forced him to repeal all the
Edicts which he had sworn unto, and made for the benefit of the Protestants,
and to make another for the banishing of them all; the Ministers within one
Month, and the rest within six upon pain of death, to disinherit the King of
Navar and Prince of Conde, and to settle the Succession upon their Uncle a
Cardinal, an old Man, and one whom they knew could neither have Children, or
live long, and this to the end, that when he died, (if they stayed until then)
the Guises might step into the Throne.

This gave beginning to the War again, and the King of Navar, and Prince of
Conde, great and just cause to declare the Assembly at Blois null and void. Now
Henry the Third seeing himself laid aside in part, and near a total deposition,
the Leaguers name alone being used in many transactions, without once
mentioning his, he then plotted as his last remedy, the taking away of the
Guises, and in the Year 1588. the Court being at Blois, the Duke of Guise, and
his Brother the Cardinal, were by the Kings Command both slain, they being too
powerful to be brought to a legal Trial.

The King endeavored the seizing of all their Adherents at the same time that
they were put to Death, and made himself Master of the Dukes young Sons, with
some others near hand; but the Duke of Maienne, Brother to the Guises, being
further off, and having notice of the Death of his Brothers, saved himself
before he was arrested, and so became the General, and Head of the League. In
this same Year, Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde, was by his Enemies taken away
by Poison; a great loss to the Reformed Church, there dying in him the Virtue
of his own particular Line.

The Death of the Guises wrought variously (viz.) with the Leaguers, to the
making them the more fierce against the King, and with him for the security of
himself, to join with the King of Navar and his Protestant Party. This
Conjunction seemed to carry all before them, Beleaguring Paris (which held with
the League) and in a fair way of reducing it, but the Death of Henry the Third,
by a fatal stroke from a Jacobin Friar (the first of August 1589.) prevented
their progress, by the distractions that followed thereupon among the united
Forces; the Monk was immediately slain by those about the King, which unhappily
hindered the further discovery of the Treason; the King lived some hours after
the fatal blow, in which time he sent for the King of Navar, declared him (all
his own Brothers being dead) his lawful and lineal Successor, advising him to
embrace the Romish Religion, and exhorted his own Party to be faithful to him.

Many stuck to him, in hopes of his following the Kings advice in the change of
his Religion, others grew cold as fearing it; he durst not declare any way,
that he would not turn for fear of losing the Popish Party, nor that he would,
for grieving his old Protestant Party.

The Leaguers bestirred themselves more now than ever, acting all in their own
names, calling their true and undoubted King, who had never forfeited his
Right, by the name only of Henry of Bourbon; the Pope cast out his Thunderbolts
against the King and his Party, the Leaguers called in the Spaniard, and
declared the Cardinal of Bourbon King, but he not enjoying that Title long,
being in a short time after taken away by Death, they proceeded after his
Decease without a King, and so far distressed Henry the Fourth, that they drive
him to Deep, from whence he was ready to Imbark for England, and had done it,
but that by Queen Elizabeth's seasonable supplying him with four or five
thousand men, gathering breath again, he recovered strength, and came in a
little time to be upon equal terms with the Leaguers.

The Spaniard (being now entered the Kingdom) solicited the Leaguers to choose
a King, a Book being writ by one Hotheman, a great Civilian, to prove the
Kingdom of France Elective, with power in the States to depose their Kings,
according to several Examples instanced in; the King of Spain propounded to
them to give his Daughter with great advantages to whomsoever they should make
King, having an eye either upon the young Duke of Guise, who was escaped out of
Prison, or upon the young Duke of Lorrain; but herein the Spaniard was much out
in his Politics; for the Duke of Maienne having the power of the Sword, and
not in a capacity of answering the Spaniards design in a match; himself being
married and without a Son for their Daughter, he set Maienne, who could not
bear the thoughts of any new King but himself against him, and the Houses of
Lorrain and Guise one against another, and both against Maienne, because he
obstructed their advancement to the Crown, and so Spain divided the League
which they should have kept united, as those by whom they were to have wrought
their ends.

The War went on still with struglings on both sides, and with various success,
until at last Henry the Fourth, partly from the importunity of his Popish
Friends, and partly from mistrust of Providence, declared himself a Papist,
whereby making Henry the Thirds Party firm to him, and his own old Protestant
Friends not forsaking him (though highly grieved at his revolt) he carried all
before him.

The King sent an Ambassador to Rome to procure his acceptance and
reconciliation there, as the King of Spain and the Leaguers sent theirs to
oppose it, pleading him to be a Relapser, and therefore his Recantation not to
be received; especially it not being, as they alleged, sincere but feigned,
and from necessity. Great strivings there were a long time at Rome on both
sides, the one to be received, and the other to hinder it, until at last the
Kings affairs increasing, an end was put to the dispute by the Popes acceptance
of him, which was not long done, before the Duke of Guise (who waited for an
honorable pretense for coming in to the King) left his Uncle the Duke of
Maienne, and made his Peace. Many followed his Example, while the League kept
yet together under their Head and General, but in a short time the King reduced
them all; some by force, and others by kindness. The Duke of Maienne was the
last of the French Army that stood out, and yet notwithstanding (with a
remarkable Clemency) the King gave him honorable Conditions, at a time when he
was not in a capacity of resisting, telling him after he had (at their first
meeting) walked him round his Camp at a greater rate than he was well able to
bear, being fat and corpulent, whereas the King was spare and nimble, that he
had thereby revenged himself sufficiently upon him; a revenge suitable to the
magnanimity and greatness of his Soul, Cruelty and Oppression being the effects
of Cowardice and baseness.

After this the King having to do with none but the Spaniard, he forced him
easily to a Peace, which was concluded at Veruin, betwixt the two Kings and the
Duke of Savoy, by Articles sworn unto for them and their Allies; so that Geneve
being declared an Ally of France, and comprehended in the Peace, thinking
themselves thereby secure, entertained an intimate correspondence with Savoy,
they having always an Agent from him residing with them; but that Duke in a few
Years after, whilst in full Peace (with a Hypocritical pretense of Friendship)
plotted the surprising of the City, with an intent to have put all to the
Sword, and was so far advanced in his false and wicked design, that the 12 th
of December (in the Year 1602.) being a dark night, he had put two hundred men
over the Walls into the Town, had fixed a Petarr to one of the Gates, and had
twelve or fifteen hundred Soldiers more, near at hand, ready to enter, himself
not being much further off with other assistance, so that not fearing a failure
in the least, he sent Couriers several ways to his Friends, to carry the news
of his being Master of Geneve; but when he had said in his Heart they were in
his hands, and he would devour them, in that wherein he dealt proudly God was
above him, preventing all, by the accidental killing of the man that was to
have given Fire to the Petar, by which means the Town having time to rise, they
slew and took Prisoners most of those that were entered, being many of them
persons of the best quality of Savoy; those taken alive (though on the Lords
Day in the Morning) were by the Justice of the Town tried as Traitors (and not
as Prisoners of War, because in time of full Peace) Condemned and Executed, by
cutting off their Heads; the Bodies of all the slain, as well as of those
Beheaded, being thrown the same day into the River of Rohan (into which at the
Town the Lake of Geneve falls) their Heads being all set upon a Pole near the
City; this was so great a deliverance, that to this time they hold a very
solemn Anniversary Day of Thanksgiving for it. The Town would have made War
upon the Duke for this breach of Oath and Faith, as thinking their Allies
engaged to second them in it; but Henry the Fourth being then in love with
Peace, took up the difference; but this horrid and abominable Hypocrisy in the
Duke of Savoy, with his Ancestors former breach of Faith with his Reformed
Subjects, together with Charles the Ninth of France his Dissimulation, for
compassing the Massacre of Paris, and his Predecessors never keeping Agreements
with the Protestants of France, may well be a caution to all Separatists to the
Church of Rome, to be careful how they trust to the Oaths of Popish Princes.

The King of Navar now under the Title of Henry the Fourth of France, having
reduced all his Kingdom, applied himself to the settling of it, and to that end
made an Act of Oblivion, forgetting the greatest injuries, even that of the
Parliament of Toulouse their Arraigning, Condemning, and Executing of him in
his Effigies as a Traitor, settled the Protestant Religion by an Edict, The
Edict of Nantes, etc. is lately published in English.
bearing the name of that of Nantes, in larger liberty than ever, rendering them
equally capable with Papists of all manner of preferments, offices, and
privileges whatsoever, their causes in Law being made triable only by
Judicatures, constituted of equal numbers of each Religion, which Edict too
long to recite, is declared in express words to be perpetual and irrevocable,
bearing date in the Year 1598. And beside this, the King to the advantage of
the Religion, gave countenance to the Edict, by making (in favor of it) choice
of the Duke of Sullie (a zealous Protestant) for his Chief Favorite and
Minister of State, employing him in all his affairs, which trust the Duke
answered with so much wisdom and honesty, that in less than twelve Years that
the King outlived the Civil Wars, his Debts were paid, much spent in Building,
Taxes lessened, and a Treasure of fifty Millions of Livers gathered; a good
Example for Chief Ministers of State.

There is nothing reflects upon this King in his settlement, but the restoring
of the Jesuits, who had been banished, as a punishment for one of their
Fraternities attempting to stab him in the Heart, though he did it only in the
Mouth, upon which Villainy it was that one of his Favorites applying it as a
warning to him, told him, that as God had struck him in the Mouth for denying
him with his Tongue, so he would in the Heart, when he should deny him there.

Before the Restoration of the Jesuits, the King had several debates in
private with the Duke of Sullie about it, wherein the Duke overcoming him with
reasons for the not doing of it, he (who in the Field had always been a
stranger to fear) confessed his fear of the Jesuits, and so reduced the Duke to
a silent submission, considering there was no fence against fear; and thus the
Jesuits (Enemies to human Society) were restored, and the Pillar of their shame
(erected in Paris with reproachful Inscriptions) pulled down, no marks being
left upon them for the horridness of their Principles, save that whereas the
Caps of other Jesuits and Priests, are made with a perfect Cross, one part of
the Cross (leaving it triangular) is taken from the Jesuits Caps of France, of
which instead of being ashamed, their impudence is such, that many of them
glory in it.

After settling France thus in perfect and entire Peace, subduing all Factions,
gathering a Treasure, and by his excellent Government rendering himself the
delight of his people, having some great undertaking in his intention, though
undeclared, he laid down a method for maintaining of a War, raised an Army of
forty thousand men, such as Christendom had not often seen, taking order for
such recruits as he should have need of. His design was without all
peradventure, for the relief of the oppressed States and Princes of Germany;
how far he looked further is uncertain, but the World had so great an opinion
of his honor, mercy, justice, and faithfulness to his word (in all which,
France never had the like) that what ever it was he aimed at, they believed, as
he negatively professed, that it was not for increasing his own Dominions,
being fully contented with what he had.

This Army (which was a terror to the House of Austria) being ready to march;
the King went to Paris to the Coronation of his Queen, when to satisfy her
importunity, (though contrary to his own Judgment) he settled the Regency upon
her in his absence, resolving after the Ceremonies were finished to return to
his Army; but the very next day after the Coronation and settling of the
Regency, riding in his Coach in Paris, he received a stab from a Friar, which
gave him not leave to speak one word. How much the people of France, and
especially of Paris (who had most stood out against him) after they had had
experience of his good and virtuous Government, were afflicted at his Death, is
inexpressible.

The Villain was taken, and put to the Rack for discovering his Accomplices, but
the Bishop of Rodez in his History says no more of it, than that his
Confession was not made known, and that when those that examined him were asked
of it, they durst make no other answer, than with the shrug of their shoulders;
by which there seems to be too too much hinted concerning some person that was
too great to be spoke of.

When this great Prince died, the Protestant Religion was in its Zenith, and
top of reputation, but good Queen Elizabeth being dead some Years before, and
the Protestant Party having now no Protector left them, they being both gone,
the Interest of the Reformed begun then to decline.

In the Life time of Henry the Fourth, some great persons following his
Example, revolted from their Religion, but when he was gone, and the Regency
(during the minority of his Son) in the Queen, the hopes of acquiring her
favor, made some prostitute their Consciences, and others, that they might be
the more serviceable to her, and render themselves so much the greatlier
deserving her Grace, as they were capable of serving her ends, kept themselves
only to the outward profession of their first Principles (as some at this day
practice the same Policy) in the number of which, the Dukes of Tramoullee and
Boullion bear too high a Rank.

The Papists, as loath to be behind any in injuries to those of the Religion,
and ambitious of making themselves acceptable to the Court of Rome, as others
did to the Queen, contrived the bringing back to the Drones of their Church,
the Lands in the Principality of Bearn in the Kingdom of Navar, which had been
near sixty Years converted to other, and better uses. This Province was one of
the places, where the Reformation was first settled in Peace and Freedom, by
that excellent Queen of Navar, Mother to Henry the Fourth, and Great
Grandmother to Charles the Second present King of England; but the people,
though not able to resist this wrong, yet not knowing how to obey so great an
invasion of their Rights, caused the King to advance with his Army to them, who
though at first promised the maintaining of their privileges, yet the very
next day after that promise made to them, took them away, in annexing Bearn to
France, and therein changing the Government of the Country, the expectation of
the Kings being true to his word, being looked upon by the Courtiers, as the
effects of folly and weakness in the too too credulous Protestants.

Upon this invasion of right, the whole Protestant Party in France, esteeming
their religious Liberties struck at in it, took up Arms for defense of their
Rights and Privileges, and in them for the relief of Bearn, making the Duke of
Rohan their General, to whose excellent memoirs I refer the Reader for the
story of those Wars which followed upon this occasion, what goes before being
collected out of other Authors, without making use of Monsieur d' Avila's
Works; for although none can deny, but his History of the Civil Wars of France,
is finely writ, and better translated, yet being held by the Protestants upon
the place to be very partially done, I have chosen rather in this deduction, to
make use of Monsieur d' Aubignies story of the same times, as accounted much
more authentic than the other, he having been a great Favorite of Henry the
Fourth, and by his Order furnished with all necessary helps for writing of his
History; and if Monsieur d' Avila's care in matters of fact, was no better,
than in affirming England, and the Reformists in Germany, to be all Lutherans
(when beside the many Calvinists that are in the Empire, the Articles and
Discipline of our Church differ so much from the Lutherans, that we cannot
properly be compared to them) as also, that in the Bartholomew Massacre, there
were but forty thousand Murdered, when the Bishop of Rodez confesses, that
after the Example of Paris, there was throughout the Cities of the Kingdom near
a hundred thousand; nor than in his Geographical Description of Rochell, Diep,
and Bullogne; making the first to lie over against England, the second over
against the Mouth of the Thames, and the third upon the Ocean Sea; there may be
cause to except against his Authority, and to wish, the Translator had bestowed
his labor upon some more Authentic History of those Times. For since he has
so grossly erred in things easily corrected, it may well be supposed he is the
same in matters more in the dark.

As the Lords wonderful workings are most taken notice of, when from small
beginnings, and contrary means, he produces great effects, so of most stories
in the World, none deserves more observation as to both particulars, than this
of France, where a dissolute young Merchant, called to repentance by an
extraordinary means, was the Author of so much light; and where the several
ways used for the extinguishing of that light, turned still to the increasing
of it, and that to so high a degree, as the Confederation of all the Romish
Party, with their bloody practices could never suppress; and where after Henry
the Fourth, had turned his back upon the truth, contrary to the rule of
Apostates (who are generally the most violent against their old Party, to gain
credit with their new) he notwithstanding retained so much gratitude to those
that set him in his Throne, and confidence of their Principles (knowing they
had never been false to their Country, nor troublesome to their Kings, but upon
account of liberty of Conscience in the worship of God) that he left them in
perfect liberty, with power to defend themselves against any invaders of their
Rights, leaving at that time many Cities in their hands for their security. And
thus being come from the Original of the Reformed, to their condition in their
greatest Prosperity; I shall so far as is convenient, deduce their decay, and
conclude with their present posture.

The Protestant Interest in France has had the same fortune in its fall as in
its advancement, to be followed by many other Countries, the reason of which is
not obscure; for although the Lord can, and will when it seems good to him,
protect and maintain his Church, as well as raise it without the help of man,
yet as the ordinary way of his Providence in the World is by secondary means,
so he made use of good Queen Elizabeth, as an Instrument during her Reign of
increasing it, to the greatest height it ever arrived at. Whose Death, followed
not many Years after by the Decease of Henry the Fourth of France, was the
occasion of its sad decay and languishment.

After God had prepared and fitted this excelent Queen for his work, by many
troubles and afflictions, delivering her from Death, which her unnatural Sister
had designed, and that by the means of her greatest Enemy and Persecutor Philip
the Second of Spain, so prodigious in Cruelty upon the account of Religion,
that he spared not his own Son and Heir Apparent; she came to the Crown of
England in a time when Popery was in its Zenith, and at that height, that
nothing but an especial overruling hand of Providence could have preserved
her; for in her own Dominions there were few for Reformation, the King of Spain
in his greatest glory, combining with the Pope and all their Adherents against
her. In France the Protestants grievously afflicted and Massacred, without the
least hopes of relief, and every where without a head or formidable
countenance, so that in many places they were the exercise of Tyrants
Cruelties, enough to have made the highest spirit yield, as much less made
Henry the Fourth of France (the greatest Soldier of his time) warp; and that
she did not sink under her burden, is acknowledged by her Enemies, who look no
further than man, to have been the effect of a Courage not to be paralleled,
and by those that go higher, that there was an extraordinary appearance of God
in it.

Her work required wisdom and resolution, the one alone would not have done it,
for had they not both concentred in her, she must have failed; but she had
wisdom to choose wise and honest Counselors, or at least to choose them wise,
and by her example and strict eye, make them honest; she was resolute in
reforming Religion, and even almost at the same time, in assisting the
Protestants in Scotland against their Queen, those in France against their
successive Kings, and the Estates of Holland against theirs, levelling her main
stroke against the Crown of Spain, as the Chief Pillar of the Roman Church; she
was successful in all she undertook, settling Religion in Scotland, Henry the
Fourth upon his Throne in France to do the like there, relieved the Hollanders,
reduced the Papists in Ireland, suppressed at home all the continual Plottings
of her Popish Subjects; and when the House of Austria in their Pride, thought
none could have done them harm, she when none else was in a capacity of doing
it, put a stop to their Carrier, and humbled them, and all with so small,
though a well managed Revenue, not burthening of the people, that she became
dear to them; she ruled not only over a great people, but in the Hearts of
them, making their interest hers, without having any other, which procured
reciprocally to her the having but one Purse, the Nation being readier to give
than she was to ask, knowing that though money were given her, if the occasion
was taken away, she would return it to the people as she once did. She kept to
the Laws, without seeking innovations, loving her Country and people as Parents
do their Children, having no Interest but theirs, was a true Justicer, not
suffering the greatness of any to bear down right; Sir John Poynes having a
good Cause, was too hard for Essex (her greatest Favorite) in a Court Contest
betwixt them, about that Ceremony called, Serving up all Night, in some kind
still in use, which the Earl (being at Play in the room) thought himself too
great to observe and submit unto, until Controuled by Sir John (whose Office it
was to clear the place) he was forced to withdraw, for which the Queen upon a
hearing commended Sir John, and blamed the Earl; nor could that Earl maintain
his Page against a Country Gentleman prosecuting him for the blood of his
Servant, of whom in a Court presumption he had been the Death; she was true to
her Protestant Allies, having few or none else, as quick in giving them relief,
as they were in desiring of it, and always true and faithful to her word.

These Excellencies made her formidable in the World, loved by her Friends,
feared and honored by her Enemies, so that in her time, and by her influence,
Religion in all places (where it had any root) grew and prospered; and
espousing the cause of God vigorously, not by halves, but heartily and
thoroughly, she rendered her self the head of the Protestant party, and thereby
in her time the greatest Potentate in the Christian part of Europe, an Example
worthy the Imitation of her Successors, in that by making themselves the Head
of the Reformed, they may become the first and most formidable Power of
Christendom; and greatness being that which all Princes aim at, it may well
invite those that are capable of it to the design.

The Government of this Queen cannot well be reflected upon, for more than two
or three passages in all her days, and he must want Charity as well as good
Nature, that cannot excuse so few failings in the space of seventy Years that
she lived, especially when in the general course of her Reign, which was near
forty five of them, she so truly pursued the Interest and good of Religion and
the Nation, that thereby the first was increased exceedingly, and the latter
rendered glorious all over the World. Her Death made presently a great Change in
Counselors and Councils, it not being long after before England (whether with
or contrary to their then Interest, I leave others to judge) made Peace with
Spain, and left Henry the Fourth of France to stand alone, who was at that time
the greatest Countenancer of the Reformed, upon the account (at least) of
Common Justice and Gratitude, if not Conscience as well as Policy. About eight
Years after the Decease of this Glorious Queen, that Famous King died in that
manner as is before mentioned, and in him the French Protestants best Friend,
having left them in his own Country in such perfect freedom, and in so great
Power, that if any considerable Reformed Potentate had after Queen Elizabeth's
Example, joined vigorously with the Dukes of Rohan, Soubiz and Sullie, and
other great ones of the Religion that were faithful and sincere to the Interest
of it, he might with ease have established the Protestant Liberty past shaking;
for the Regency (after the Death of Henry the Fourth, during the minority of
his Son) being in the Queen, a Woman of little experience in affairs, and full
of jealousies, begot such Factions in the State, betwixt the Princes of the
Blood and other Grandees, that the work would not have been difficult, and
would have prevented the revolt of some, who forsook their Religion, and have
kept others in awe, who did worse, in keeping their Profession on purpose to be
the abler to betray the Cause. For they (seeing the party without any Sovereign
protection, and the weakness of the Queen, such as gave men of more wit than
honesty, opportunity of advancement, by complying with her) sought themselves,
some openly by a public profession of Popery, and others covertly, by
seemingly keeping to the Reformed Religion, whilst underhand they did them the
more mischief.

The Emperor seeing the distracted condition of the Reformed Church in France,
without any to countenance them, was encouraged to Persecution in Bohemia,
wherein acting contrary to the Conditions upon which they had Elected and
Crowned his Son King, they deposed him, and in his place chose the Prince
Elector Palatine, which occasioned a War betwixt the new King and the Emperor,
in which the Prince Palatine lost both his Kingdom, and Hereditary Countries.
The Emperor being thereby fleshed with success, went on against Germany, in
hopes of making a perfect Conquest of that Country, and had certainly not
failed in it, had not the Lord raised up the King of Sweden to prevent him. But
the prosperous proceedings in Germany, especially for the first twelve or
thirteen Years, of the Popish Party, gave encouragement to the Wars against the
Reformed in France, where although, the two incomparable Brothers, the Dukes of
Rohan and Soubiz, were all the Princes that the iniquity of those times had
there left faithful to the Cause of God, they had made good their Party, and
kept their ground in the last, as well as in the first and second Wars, had
their Neighbors stood but Neuters, and been faithful to them, as they ought in
duty at least to have done; but Counsels running contrary, and that Age
affording many concurrent advantages to the Romish Church, not convenient to
mention; the persecuted Protestants lost ground daily, until the Long
Parliament (as bad as they were) from Principles of Policy in reference to
their own security, as well as to popular reputation, became (during their
time) some Countenance to them, their declared Principles being (pretendedly at
least) for the suppression and ruin of Popery and advancement of the
Reformation, most of their Foreign projects (according to the History of those
times) tending that way, they being in Treaty with Deputies from Bordeaux, upon
Articles conducible to the same end, when Cromwell Usurping the Government, did
not only overthrow the design, but probably betrayed it to the French King,
with the Lives of some engaged in the business; for Mr Jochim Haines (by Birth
a German) General Engineer to the Army, and one of his own Emissaries employed
in that Affair, who after Cromwell and Mazarine were agreed, was pursued
through France and escaped miraculously, did believe he was discovered by
Oliver, his Errand being known only to himself and his Confident; and herein
Cromwell did more prejudice to the Protestant Cause, than is recoverable, or
than many such petty Embassies to the Duke and Duchess of Savoy in behalf of
the Waldenses (which is bragged of by his Party) could have repaired.

For the way to have advanced the Protestant Interest had been to have kept the
balance betwixt France and Spain equal, to the end to have rendered the
Reformed in France necessary to their King, by which they would have had a
formidable Interest in the World; whereas by casting the Scale wholly on the
French side, that King not standing now much in need of them, forgetting all
his former acknowledged obligations, has at the instance of the Bishops, taken
up a severe persecution of them. Not but that I believe, Oliver next unto his
own particular Interest, had some kindness for Religion, at least he seemed so
to have, as is witnessed by his zealous and passionate addresses to most, or
all the considerable Protestant Princes and States of Christendom, as well as
to the French King, Sir Samuel Morelands History of his Negotiation, together
with Sir George Downings.
Duke and Duchess of Savoy themselves, in behalf of the poor Evangelical
Churches of Piemont, when under dreadful and inhumane Persecution from their
Prince the Duke of Savoy (or his Ministers) but his aspiring was so great, that
he made all other designs subservient to his Ambition. And thus having in part,
and as far as is at present convenient in reference to this Age, showed how the
decay of the Protestant Interest has been occasioned, I shall in the next
place say something of their present condition.

After the French Kings reducing of Rochell, in the Year 1628. and making Peace
the Year following, with the rest of the Protestant Party, the ruin of the
Reformed in France was by the Bishops designed, and had not the serviceableness
of them to their Kings in their Civil as well as Foreign Wars preserved them,
it had long ere this been executed, but their necessariness has been often
such, that it has not only deferred their doom, but also sometimes drawn from
their several Kings (for their encouragement) Confirmations of their
privileges, so that their usefulness has since their reducement, been their
greatest security, for in losing Rochell, they lost their chief place of refuge
to fly unto in case of Massacres, having then no other left, save Sedan
belonging to the Duke of Bulloign, and out of France, though upon the edge of
it, toward the Low Countries and Germany, as also Orange, belonging to the
Prince of that name, on the other side of France toward the Mediterranean; the
first was parted with to the King, not long after the Surrender of Rochel by
the Prince of it, to redeem his life when a Prisoner, and had else surely lost
it, and the other, the two Princesses Dowagers of Orange, the Mother, and
Grandmother of the present Prince, differing after the death of his Father,
about his Guardianship, and consequently of the Government of Orange, the
French King was desired by one of them (according to Vox populi) to reconcile
them by taking it from them both, who being glad of the occasion, readily
besieged it, and in a short time reduced the Castle, the strength of the place,
to a heap of Rubbish (which was one of the ancientest, and of the kind, the
best Fortifications in France) and so left the Protestants in Case of
Massacres, without any retreat, and at the mercy of the merciless Popish
Church, whose impudence has since been such, as first to endeavor the
overthrow of their privileges all at one push, by that Principle, That Faith
is not to be kept with Heretics, nor Princes obliged to the observation of
Articles, which they say were extorted from them: and when after so many
Confirmations of their Articles in time of Peace, and the devesting those of
the Religion of all means of defense, and thereby removing all grounds of fear
of them, such Arguments could not be allowed; they cavilled at the Articles
themselves, and by wrested and false interpretations, endeavored to
ineffectuate them, in despite of their plain and indisputable sense, which is
so clear, as takes away all ambiguity and doubt.

And now since the determination of the power of the Reformed, in the loss of
all their Cities of security, their persecution has proceeded from their
Bishops (to whose order amongst the Papists Cruelty is annexed) who begun
betimes, discharging their malice first against the City of Pamier, because far
from Court, and so most easy for them to oppress.

The Bishop of this place forced the Reformed to abandon their ancient Temple
within the City (for so the French Protestants call their Churches) which by
ancient right and privileges they did enjoy, and to content themselves with a
small House in the Country, distant from the Suburbs, making it Imprisonment
with great penalties, for any Protestant Stranger to lodge one Night in Town,
though he came to see his Relations, or dispatch business, making it also
unlawful to sing Psalms, some poor Artificers being Imprisoned for the same, to
the thereby exposing their Families to want and Famine, through loss of their
labor to maintain them. He also took away the very Patrimonies of many to give
them to his lazy Convents, Imprisoning Parents, and taking away their Children
under Age to bring up in his Idolatrous Religion, not regarding the Canons of
his own Church which forbids such violence, where neither the Parents give
consent, nor the Children capable of making their own Choice; he maliciously
destroyed the Wine Presses of some, the Evening before their use, to deprive
them of the Revenue that God and Nature had blessed their endeavors with, as a
penalty for having lodged some Protestant Friends but one Night, when surprised
by bad weather (a small offense to be destroyed for) not only prohibiting the
harboring any of the Religion, but also relieving any in their passing by,
himself searching Shops for Apprentices and Journeymen of the Religion, to
drive them away, denying them the common privileges allowed all Strangers
throughout France; and Monsieur Burnet a Physician, who having Married a Wife
from Pamier, coming but to Town to some Patients, for conservation of their
Lives, was driven back with so many blows, that soon after he lost his own; nay
instead of giving obedience to the Kings Declaration and Decree, for
restoration of the Protestant Church, he called an Assembly of the Town,
consisting of his own Party, both Civil and Ecclesiastics, where himself
presiding, he caused to be resolved in the Assembly,

First, That if any person of the Religion should die in the City, or within
his Jurisdiction, the Body should not be Buried.

Secondly, That no Children of Protestant Parents, born since such a certain
time, should inhabit in the Town.

Thirdly, That none of the Religion should keep any Protestant Servants, Men or
Women, not born in the City within a limited term.

Fourthly, If any Maid or Widow Married one of the Religion, they should not
live in the City, if not born in it within such a time.

Fifthly, That none of the Religion one or other, if worth to the value of four
thousand pounds starling, should live in the Town.

Sixthly, That no singing of Psalms, or praying to God by those of the
Religion, should be suffered, upon pain of Imprisonment, and great penalties.
And as a Seal to all this his malice, he pulled down their Temple without the
Town, setting up in the place of it a Gibbet and a Cross, with this
Inscription, Either the Cross or the Gallows; and after all this, upon an Order
surreptitiously obtained, with eight days warning only, turned all the
Inhabitants of the Religion out of Pamier, to the ruin of many Families,
reducing them, who before lived plentifully, to Beggary, and to save themselves
from starving, to the living upon the Charity of others. Many the like Examples
might be given, as at Cere, Privas, etc. but that they are grievous to relate.

This Course it is probable had been followed in other places, but that it
pleased God to put a stop to it by Changes in the State, which rendered the
Reformed so useful, as procured them fresh Confirmation of their privileges;
but though notwithstanding they were grounded upon the good service they had
done the King, yet in the Year 1656. there being an Assembly of the Popish
Churchmen, which continued near two Years; they made it their greatest
endeavors to stir up his Majesty to War against the Reformed, who but a little
before had preserved him against the designs of the Papists for destroying of
him. And to move the King to so ungrateful an undertaking, they, who are
sufficiently lovers of money, offered him a great sum toward the War,
seconding their request with a large Remonstrance drawn up against those of the
Religion, stuffed with false suggestions and Calumnies, presented by the
Archbishop of Sens, wherein to the rendering of their Cruelty very observable,
they make the Collections of the Reformed, for the relief of five or six
thousand poor, hungry, and naked Christians, driven out of Savoy in the last
barbarous persecution, to be Criminal, although the King himself had in pity
given them Dauphinee for refuge, ordering his Governors to receive and let
them live, or at least weep and die in Peace, writing to the Duchess of Savoy
in their behalfs; and when Collections being made in England, Holland, Germany,
and Switzerland, for them, even some (though few) Lay Papists, as I have heard,
being moved with Compassion by a worse than cruel usage of them, contributed to
their relief.

This Convention of Bishops not being able to bear the Kings Declaration in
favor of the Protestants, ceased not working until they procured another from
the King in opposition to theirs, dated the 18 th of July 1656. premising that
although the Edict of Nantes, made by Henry the Fourth, had been inviolably
kept by the King without the least breach, until he had by Arms reduced to
obedience those of the Religion which were revolted, yet having then deprived
them of some privileges which had been granted by the said Edict of Nantes,
that the Edict ought not therefore to be otherwise observed, than according to
the conditions and purport of the Edict, and Declaration made for the
Pacification of the last troubles, whereby they not only overthrew at once all
the privileges granted them, and many times confirmed, but also set aside all
repealing of all the Edicts, Declarations, Decrees, Rules, Articles, etc. which
had at any time been made against them, and likewise even that Declaration of
the 21 May, 1652. which acknowledges, that the Reformed had given such large
testimony and proofs of their affections and fidelity to the King, upon several
occasions, especially in the late Civil Wars, meaning those from 1649. until
1653. that he remained fully satisfied with them, ordaining in consideration
thereof, that they should be maintained in the full and entire enjoyment of the
Edict of Nantes, and particularly in the free exercise of the Reformed
Religion, in all places where it has been granted to them, notwithstanding any
thing whatsoever to the contrary; commanding the opposers thereof to be
punished and chastized, as disturbers of the public Peace, which had been
enough to have stopped the mouths of any Bishops, had they not been destitute
of all Justice, Gratitude, and good nature, and that Tyranny had not been
natural to them of the Church of Rome.

Upon this, those of the Religion observing the design of the Bishops, to be
the destroying of all their rights and liberties, presented a Paper to the
King, humbly desiring the pure and simple execution of the Edict of Nantes, as
that which ought to be the rule for the determination of all differences. To
which the King gave for answer the 11 th of April 1658. that he would send
Commissioners of the one and the other Religion to the several Provinces, to
inquire after all innovations contrary to the Edict of Nantes.

Now the Bishops made it first their work, to keep out by their influence, any
such number of Commissioners of the Religion, as might signify any thing, and
secondly imposed in all places where they had power, their own construction of
the Edict, and where they had none, did it, or at least in a great measure by
sending memorials of their own sense and understanding of the whole matter, to
those Provinces, as Rules and Directions for the Commissioners to act by.

Whilst Cardinal Mazarine was in being, who was honorable and generous, in a
grateful remembrance of the good service the Protestants did from 1649. to the
Year 1653. in keeping the Crown upon the then young Kings Head, and restoring
of himself when the Papists would have turned them both out of Doors; the
Bishops could not get forward in their design, but he was no sooner gone, than
working upon the Prince of Conde's Discontents, being incensed against the
Reformed, for adhering to the King, and not to him in the late Civil Wars, to
revenge himself he did their business in his Government of Burgundy and Bresse,
especially in the small County of Gay near Geneve, where in the Year 1662. he
demolished all their Churches, they in that Country being near all if not
entirely of the Reformed Religion, and his Brother the Prince of Conte,
following his steps, begun also to proceed severely in his Government of
Languedoc, but was soon after prevented by Death.

At Rochell four or five hundred Families were turned out of the City, by a
wrested interpretation of the Articles at the reduction of that place, when to
the honor of that Town be it remembered, there was not one Family (according to
my Information upon the place) that would buy the Bishops favor, and therein a
liberty of keeping their habitation in the City at so dear a rate, as the
Renunciation of their Religion.

At Sedan another Protestant City, after a Jesuit who thought himself excellent
at seducing of Protestants, and upon that confidence had sought the employment,
could not in some years, gain more to his Church in that place, than two men
reputed Thieves, and one Woman a Common Strumpet, all which he bought with
money; the Jesuits were then at my being there, brought in by force upon them,
and part of the Revenue of their University taken from it, to give to them for
a foundation.

It is probable that the like proceedings would have been at that time all over
France, had not the difference betwixt the King and Pope then happening, caused
(according to the Maxim of the French Court, who always indulge the Protestants
in time of danger) a relaxation, the good and bad condition of the Reformed in
France, depending so much upon Peace and War, that without the latter, in which
they may be useful to the King, they are always in danger of persecution, it
being difficult for his Majesty, without such a plausible pretense, to resist
the assiduous importunity of his bloody Bishops, all the hard and unjust
dealing that those of the Religion have met with since the Death of Mazarine
being imputed to their restless malice, the King himself not being in his own
nature inclinable to persecution, and the Queen his Mother, having been ever
since the Year 1650. (when they did her such great service) thought to have had
a kindness for them, upon the account of honor and gratitude, for that whilst
she lived, the Bishops could not fully satisfy their inordinate and revengeful
Appetites, but since her Death, they have prevailed and gone far in it, common
fame rendering their actions very unjust and merciless, in stripping the
Reformed of their privileges, which they have as good right unto by Law, as
themselves have to any thing they hold: but of the particulars, since the
Queens Death, I can say nothing upon knowledge, having been so long a stranger
to the Country of France; but for further satisfaction therein, I refer the
Reader to the late Printed Relation of the sufferings of the Reformed in
France. And thus you have a short view of the condition of those of the
Religion in France, until the latter end of 1665. or beginning of 1666. that
the Queen Mother departed this Life, when notwithstanding all the contrivances
against them, they were upon the multiplying hand as to number (increase being
commonly the effects of persecution) and in a better Estate than many other
Reformed Churches at that day in other Countries, where they had formerly
flourished, as in Bohemia, Hungaria, Austria, all the Emperors Hereditary
Countries, beside in Piemont, where they have of late Years (in all these
Countries) been severely used.

And now upon the whole, I cannot omit observing, that although the Papists do
impudently charge the Reformed in France, with being disturbers of public
Peace, and Enemies to the State, they were never the cause of any troubles, or
ever rise in Arms, except either for the just defense of their Princes, or for
Liberty of Conscience established by Law, having been always faithful to their
Country and Princes of the Blood, without attempting rebellious subversion of
the Government or removal of the Crown, as the Papists (upon slight
discontents) have frequently done, and had probably several times prevailed
therein, had they not been prevented by the valor and loyalty of the Reformed.

Secondly, That the Proud, Merciless, and Bloody Principles of the Papists, and
their Bishops, are so contrary to the meek and peaceable spirit, which our
Savior crowns with blessedness, as may well detect them of Antichristianism,
and give sufficient caution unto all people freed from their Yoke to be jealous
of them, whose doctrine and practice is breach of Faith and Massacres, or
(according to the Prayer appointed by King James and Parliament, for the Fifth
of November) whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, and whose
practice is the Murdering of Souls and Bodies; which expressions were
unhappily, as I suppose, forgot by our Bishops, in their framing of our last
Service Book.

A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF So much as is convenient to be published, of the most
material Debates and Passages, in that pretended Parliament or Assembly, Called
by Richard Cromwell, and begun the 27 January, an. 1658.
THE overruling hand of Providence having upon the third of September taken
away the late Usurper, whilst he was in possession of the Title of Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, his Son Richard was the
next day, by the Council at Whitehall Proclaimed his Successor.

Richard (by the Authority thereof) did about three Months after, Issue out
Writs for a Parliament to begin the 27 of January following, and the people,
who in their diffusive condition, are capable only of obeying their Superiors,
and not of disputing the Legality or Illegality of their Commands, made Choice
of Members to serve in Parliament, who according to their Summons Assembled
upon the day appointed.

When they were met, the pretended Protector sent the Black Rod to let them
know, that he was in the other House (for so was that Assembly called, which
was intended for the House of Lords, and under that name it is in this ensuing
Narrative mentioned) and desired to speak to them there; at which call, not
above twelve or fifteen went out of the House, though more that were not come
in appeared before him; at which time, he made (beyond expectation) a very
handsome Speech to them, exceeding that which followed by his Keeper of the
Great Seal.

Mr Chaloner Chute was that day chosen Speaker, and after a Bill (left by the
precedent Parliament unpassed) was (according to Custom) read, the House
adjourned until the next day.

Then a Gentleman was complained of, for affronting two Members, and he Ordered
to be brought to the Bar of the House by the Sergeant at Arms. A private Fast
to be held in the House, and the persons to perform the Duties of that Day were
appointed; and a Committee for Elections and Privileges being Chosen, the
House Adjourned until the 31 th of January, it being Customary, at the
beginning of Parliaments, to give the Speaker a Day or two to settle his own
Affairs, to the end that he may the better afterward attend the Service of the
House.

The 31 of January the Gentleman that affronted the Members, was (according to
Order) brought to the Bar of the House upon his Knees, and for his offense
Committed to the Tower, but in a few days, upon his submission, and at the
Intercession of the Gentlemen abused he was released.

The first of February a Bill was brought in by one of the then Council, under
pretense only of acknowledging the pretender to be Protector, but with such
words couched in it, as had no less in them, than the admittance of the then
Chief Magistrate, and the persons then sitting in the other House, unto the
full Power, Privilege and Prerogative of the ancient Kings, and ancient House
of Lords, which the Court Party designed to have carried undiscovered.

The Bill was read without much difficulty the first time, which encouraged
those of the Long Robe, related to the single person, to press for the reading
of it again the same day, to the end, that being the next day read the third
time as was designed, it might then have passed into an Act; but in opposition
to that, some who were more careful of the liberties of the people, than those
of the Long Robe ordinarily are, moved, that according to Rule, in Cases of
such weight, it might be referred to a Grand Committee of the whole House, and
when that would not be granted, that the second reading of it might at least be
put off for some days, and liberty given in the interim to the Members, to take
Copies of the Bill, that considering of the business, they might be the more
prepared for the Debate; which was yielded unto, and the seventh of February
appointed for the second reading of it.

The state of Major General Overtons sad and deplorable condition was given at
the Door, and at the same time the House was Petitioned by his Sister for a
hearing of him by the Parliament themselves, which was readily granted, two
Votes passing the same day in order to it.

First, That his Keeper should with all speed bring him, with the Cause of his
Imprisonment, before the Parliament.

Secondly, That a Frigate should forthwith be sent to fetch him from the Isle of
Jersey, where he was then Prisoner. The Court at Whitehall was troubled at
these Votes, but the Army having a tenderness for their Fellow Soldier, they
durst not oppose it, the Votes meeting in the House with but two Negatives to
each, so that about six Weeks after, he was brought to the Bar of the House by
his Keeper, who produced no Authority for his detainment, but a bare Command
without any cause, expressed from the late Usurper Oliver; whereupon the
Parliament Voted his Imprisonment Illegal and Unjust, for which there were
these reasons given upon the Debate.

First, Because no Chief Magistrate had never power to commit any person by his
own Warrant, for that, as they said, should it be otherwise, the Subjects might
be without remedy in Case of wrong done them, which our Law supposes Freeborn
English men cannot be.

Secondly, In that there was no cause for his Imprisonment expressed in the
Warrant.

Thirdly, Because according to Law no Freeman can be banished but by Act of
Parliament, whereas sending Prisoners to Jersey, which was said to be out of
the reach of a Habeas Corpus, was adjudged a banishment contrary to Law, and
therefore he was Voted to be released from his Imprisonment, without paying any
Fees or Charges.

The fifth of February a person who had sat in the House some days, being found
to be no Member, was for his offense therein Committed to Newgate, and not to
the Tower, though accounted the Parliaments Prison; and that partly, because
the Lieutenant, after the Examples of his Predecessors, exacted great Fees
without any Authority in Law, which the Parliament intended to regulate and
prevent for the future, as being a great grievance; and partly for that upon
inquiry, the Offender was found to be under some degree of distraction, which
made his Imprisonment not above a day or two.

Upon the 7 th of February (the day appointed) the Bill for Recognizing the
Pretender, was read the second time, and the Debate begun; the Court Party
pleaded the Instrument called the Petition and Advice, made by one of Olivers
Parliaments, as the foundation of his Title, but the Country party denied it to
be a Law, and that not only from the inconsistency, lameness, and insufficiency
of it, but also from the corrupt manner of procuring it, that Assembly that
made it, being no Parliament but a Faction, in that the Members were never
suffered to meet, but so many of them kept out by force, and that even by him
that called them, as he judged would hinder the Execution of his will: besides,
that at the Creation of the Monster, there was of four hundred and sixty
Members which were chosen, but one hundred and four in the House; whereof fifty
one were against it, and but fifty three for it, among whom were Scotch and
Irish Members, who had no right to sit, but were Usurpers in making Laws for
England; showing further, that if Pope Alexander the sixth, Caesar Borgias, and
their Cabal, had all laid their Heads together, they could not have framed a
thing more dangerous and destructive to the liberty of the people, than is the
Petition and Advice in several particulars, as in settling so great a Revenue
upon the Pretender, that a frugal person might in a few Years heap up all the
treasure of the Nation in his own Coffers, and so bring the people to sell him
their Land for money, as the Egyptians did theirs, in time of scarcity to
Pharaoh for Corn; besides, that in giving the Purse of the People to the Chief
Magistrate, they give away all the security they have for their Rights and
Liberties, because having the Purse, he has power to raise what Forces he
pleases, and having that, all bounding him signifies no more, than binding a
Lion with paper Chains.

But the Court being resolved of no less than a Turkish Power, would suffer no
strength of reason to prevail with them, to the making the Petition and Advice
Unauthentick; but as it had force for its original, so it must have the same in
the allowance of it for a good Law; which provoked the Country party to demand
a proof of the pursuance of that Law, in the Pretenders Election, and that his
Designation was according to the directions of it.

But though this was pressed by persons of great Abilities, never any answer
was given to it, the Court party knowing that by the strength of their Members
they could overruled the strength of reason; but those for the Country, taking
the others silence in the point of proving the Designation, to be a granting
that there was none at all, argued, that if the Election of Richard was void,
and that Providence had prevented the Usurper Oliver of keeping to the Petition
and Advice, in appointing during his Life his Successor; the Law was thereby
fallen to the ground, and all Government reverted to its original the people,
who ought by their Representatives Assembled in Parliament to bestow it as they
should think fit, which would then have been readily given by most of those
then present, to the Gentleman in possession, if he and his Party would upon
those terms have accepted of it, as they refused it, lest by owning the
Parliament to be the Creator of the Government they should own a power in them
to destroy their own Creature when they pleased, which they were not for in
Cromwels Case, though some of them had made the same thing the ground of their
fighting in another Case.

This Debate, no man speaking twice to the matter, held eight whole days
successively, in which time, great excellency and good affections appeared in
several Gentlemen, in their Speeches for the good of the Nation, yet the best
they could bring this Debate unto, was to conclude with the two following
Votes, as previous to the Commitment of the Bill.

Monday 14 Feb. 1658.
Resolved, that it be part of this Bill, to Recognize and declare his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, to be Lord Protector and Chief Magistrate of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominion and
Territories thereunto belonging.

Resolved, that before this Bill be Committed, this House do declare such
additional Clauses to be part of this Bill, as may bound the Power of the Chief
Magistrate, and fully secure the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and
Liberties and Rights of the People; and that neither this, nor any other
previous Vote, that is or shall be passed in order to this Bill, is or shall be
of force or binding unto the People, until the whole Bill be passed.

This last previous Vote passed the House without any Negative, more than that
of the Secretary of State; but the Courtiers no sooner knew the sense of
Whitehall upon it, than from that time forward, they owned themselves such
slavish Executioners of the Pretenders Will and Lust, that they never appeared
in the least for the making good one word of it, though so necessary at that
time for the good of the Nation.

During this Debate several Complaints were made reflecting upon the Court
designs; as first, that the Assizes without President (upon no greater
occasion) were put off to the common wrong of the whole Nation, and therefore
to the end that the people might receive no prejudice by the sitting of the
Parliament (as the Courtiers were suspected to design, to the end to make them
out of love with Parliaments) it was desired, that the Pretender might be moved
to Command the carrying on of the Assizes; but the Courtiers being resolved not
to lose so considerable a part of their strength as the Lawyers, they would
have the whole Nation to suffer in the want of Justice, rather than they would
want one of their Members.

Secondly, That Whitehall had writ eighty Letters for the making Members of
Parliament, many of which had had their effect. That Mr Howard a Papist, had
boasted, that at the instance of the Pretender and his Secretary, he had sent
twenty Members to Parliament That several Tables were kept at Whitehall at the
Charge of the public, on purpose to debauch Members by great entertainments,
all which were acknowledged and declared to be against the Orders of the House;
and further, that it is so, for any Member, not a menial Servant, to do so much
as to go to Whitehall during the sitting of the Parliament.

After this the Secretary gave an account of Foreign Affairs, acquainting the
House with a great sum that was needful, for defraying the Naval expenses for
this next Summer, which gave occasion to the Country Party, to bring on in
behalf of the public, a Debate concerning the Navy, wherein arguing, that as
the Navy is part of the Militia, and the Militia the then right of the people
Assembled in Parliament, and that without the Militia the Parliament could not
make good their promises to the people, in bounding the Power of the Chief
Magistrate, moved, that the House would appoint certain Commissioners for
management of the Naval Forces.

The Debate for setting forth a very considerable Fleet to Sea, for the honor
and defense of the Commonwealth and Commerce, held not long, the thing being
readily agreed unto by all parties, but who should manage the Fleet was a
Debate of several days, and at last carried with a strong hand by the
Courtiers, that the Pretender should have the disposal of it; all that the
Country Party could get into the question being, that the making Peace and War
should be reserved unto the Parliament.

Mr Portman a Prisoner in the Tower, was upon his Petition brought before the
House, with the Cause of his Imprisonment, the Warrant to the Lieutenant of the
Tower for apprehending him was produced, and being only from the Usurper
Oliver, in these words, ( viz.)

Sir, I desire you to seize Major General Harrison, Mr Carew, Mr Portman, etc.
do it speedily, and you shall have a Warrant after you have done. The
Parliament Voted his Imprisonment Illegal, Unjust, and Tyrannical, and freed
him out of Prison without paying Fees or Charges.

This Vote troubled the Courtiers very much, some of them out of zeal to the
reputation of their Idol (the deceased Usurper) opposing it with tears; but
several other Complaints of a higher nature, as for banishments, and selling of
Gentlemen to the Barbados came before the House, wherein they were hindered the
doing of anything, for prevention of the like in the future, by their sudden
dissolution, though an eminent Sergeant at Law was ordered to bring in a Bill
for that purpose.

The accounts of the Commonwealth was called for, and a Committee appointed to
examine them, and report the State of them to the House.

The House was called upon by the Country Party, to make good their Vote, for
bounding the Power of the Chief Magistrate, securing the Rights, Liberties, and
Privileges of the Parliament and People, and that as they had filled the
hearts of all men with joy, in hopes of having their Rights ascertained, so it
was moved, that they might not render themselves Juglers, in promising what
they never intended to perform; but to take the several parts of the previous
Vote into consideration; and as bounding the Chief Magistrate is first in
order, so to begin with it. Yet such was the disingenuity of the Court Party,
being made up of Household Servants, Officers, Suitors for Offices, Lawyers (the
corrupt part of whose Trade cannot be maintained but by a corrupt Government)
Scotch and Irish Members, chosen by the Pretenders Interest, that no arguments
of honor or honesty could engage them to be faithful to their Country; such as
were most open confessing plainly, that they were so far from bounding the
Chief Magistrate, that they desired to give him as much Power, as any King or
Prince of England ever had; but others more prudent, waved bounding of the
Chief Magistrate, under pretense of first settling the Constitution of the
Government, and so leaving the other dispute, and falling upon the Debate of
that, after some days spent in it, it was at last Voted, that it should be part
of the Bill for Recognizing the Protector, to declare the Parliament to consist
of two Houses.

After this the House was again put in mind of their duty to the people, and
urged to fall upon bounding of the Power of the Chief Magistrate, which as it
was first in order, so ought to have been first in Debate, but the Courtiers
commanding all by the strength of their Members, waved the Chief Magistrate,
and fell upon the Constitution of the other House, in which some days were
spent in disputes betwixt the new and old Royalists, the Commonwealth men
remaining silent, to see what the strength of the others brains would produce;
the first was for the new Created Lords with a mixture of the old, upon such
limitations as they might not overtop the new; the other for the old Lords with
a mixture of the new, and for the full Privileges of the ancient House of
Peers; but after it appeared, that they could not make any thing of the Debate,
neither of the parties daring to trust the other, the third Party fell in, and
showed, that where the Cause is taken away the effect must cease; and that as
the House of Lords had anciently a natural Right to a superior Jurisdiction,
in that their Propriety was then three parts of four if not more of the whole
Nation; so it is now more natural for the Commons to have that Superiority,
their proportion of propriety being now near ninety parts of a hundred, as by
the sale of the Kings, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, with Delinquents Estates,
it might be Calculated, and therefore moved, that if they would have another
House, it might be so bounded, as might suit with the peoples Interest,
whereupon they proceeded to the Debate of the bounds and powers of the Members
sitting in the other House of Parliament, in which some days were spent,
beginning

First, With making them Members but for Life. Secondly, With proving that the
ancient House of Lords had no Judicial Power over Commoners, nor other
Jurisdiction than in matters concerning their own Privileges, in Impeachments
brought to them by the House of Commons, and in Writs of Error, more power
being inconsistent with the Common Law, which is against Hereditary Judges; for
that the Lord of a Manor by the Common Law, cannot confer the Stewardship of
his Courts, upon any person for him and his Heirs Male for ever. Thirdly, With
having the Members which should be called to the other House, first allowed and
approved of by the Commons in Parliament before they be suffered to sit. And
Fourthly, In their having Negatives but in some matters, and not in all. But
after much time spent upon this subject, the Courtiers being the stronger
party, they most disingenuously laid all aside, and instead of bounding and
approving of the other House, the bare question was brought on foot, whether
the Members sitting in the other House, as then Constituted, should be
transacted with or no, thereby to let them at once into the full privileges of
the ancient Lords: and to make it pass the smoothlier, a plausible Clause to
save the Rights of the ancient Peers was added by the Courtiers, which they did
only thereby to gain the old Royal Party, to join with them in that Vote, and
not with any intent to let in the old Lords, they afterward confessing, that
the Rights of the ancient Peers could be nothing, so long as the Act for taking
of them away was in being and Unrepealed.

Against acting with the Members sitting in the other House, as then
Constituted, was alleged the inconsistency of it with the Rights and Liberties
of the people, which they had sworn to maintain, as,

First, Because they were most of them dependants upon the single person, by
way of Sallaries or Offices, and so consequently his Mercenaries or Journeymen.

Secondly, For that the Militia both by Sea and Land was in the hands of the
persons then sitting in that House.

Thirdly, That all the Chief Judges were Members, as the three Keepers of the
Great Seal, the two Chief Justices, the Master of the Rolls; and that it might
well be thought, that the Lord Chief Baron would afterward be accounted as
worthy to be one as the rest, and then the people in all Cases of Appeals,
could do no more than appeal from the Judges in Westminster Hall, to the same
persons sitting in Parliament; and that the Chief Judicature being in that
House, and having the Militia to maintain it, that House would have it in their
Power to oppress the Commons as they pleased, and they left without remedy.

Fourthly, That all the Privy Council, the Chief Judges, and general Officers,
both by Sea and Land, being Members of the other House; the Lawyers and
Officers enjoying Offices of profit (of whom the Body of the House of Commons
would be made) would be the Creatures of the other House, and so make the House
of Commons to be no better than Janissaries, and Executioners of the will and
pleasure of those of the other House. But notwithstanding these, and many more
excellent Arguments, incomparably pressed by persons of great Virtue and
Abilities, the servile and mercenary Court Party would not be prevailed with,
to bound and approve the Members sitting in the other House, before they put it
to the Vote for transacting with them, which made the Country Party
immediately, as the question was coming on, to except against the Constitution
of the House, as having sixty persons in it sent by Scotland and Ireland, which
had no Right nor Title to sit; which they brought in Debate to gain time, as
being afraid to adventure the question for transacting with the other House,
without first bounding and approving the Members of that House.

With this new started exception (which afterward held fourteen days Debate)
the House rise, and the next day Mr Chute (their worthy and impartial Speaker)
finding himself indisposed, and tired out with long Debates and late sitting,
desired to be dismissed the Service; but the House having a great value for
him, would not accept of his Resignation, but dispensed with his attendance
until he should recover his health, by withdrawing into the Country or
otherwise as he should think fit, and to supply his place in the mean time, Mr
Long, Recorder of London, was made Choice of. But it pleased God to put a
period to the days of both these Speakers before the end of the Parliament,
taking away the latter first, in whose room as still supplying Mr Chutes place,
was Elected Mr Bamfield, Mr Chute being yet living, though he lived not to come
any more unto the House.

The Debate concerning the Scotch and Irish Members came on, which run several
ways; the Courtiers after they found the want of Law, made prudence their
refuge, arguing, that for the obliging the Scotch and Irish Nations their
Members ought to be admitted; to which was answered, that nothing could be more
provoking to those two Nations, than fraudulently to give them the name of
having Members in Parliament, when in truth by their late Elections, they had
few or none, most of them being Chosen at Whitehall, whereof some had hardly
been ever nearer Scotland than Grayes-Inn. But beside this answer to the
Courtiers Argument of Prudence, the Country Party argued against their sitting,
as having no legal Title or Right to sit, and that without keeping to legal
Rules, foundations could not be maintained, for that otherwise, those that sent
sixty now might send three hundred next time, and so make Parliaments of such
number and temper, as suited best with their designs; and therefore moved, that
the Members of both Nations might withdraw, and be after (if a way could be
found out for it) brought in more legally.

But the Courtiers knowing, that there would be want of Law in the introducing
of them if they should withdraw, would not consent thereunto; for being
resolved not to part with any of their strength (though after they had served
themselves of them, they intended to have cast them off) would have nothing to
do with Law or Right; but whereas the question should have been, whether the
Scotch and Irish Members had any legal Right to sit, the words Legal Right were
by a previous Vote thrown out, which then caused the Country Party (for
preventing the main question) to except against the whole Constitution of the
Parliament, as (according to the Courtiers own Law) illegal, for that in
calling of it, they ought either to have kept to the ancient Law of England, or
to their own new Law (the Petition and Advice) But to the old Law, in setting
up of Richard they could not keep, that affording them no Authority, and
therefore as to his Election, they made the Petition and Advice their refuge,
but durst not trust to it in calling of the Parliament, because that placing
the Elections of England most in the Counties where the Court could not rely
upon getting in their Creatures, they had for the English Elections recourse to
the old way of Buroughs; so that the Members for England had the old Law for
their foundation, and the Pretender for himself, and his Scotch and Irish
Members, a new Law ( viz) the Petition and Advice.

The first being Chosen after the ancient way of England, and the latter after
a new way. But Richard pretending to be Protector by a new Law, had no power to
call a Parliament otherwise than according to that Law by which he pretended to
be Protector. For the Title of Protector, and the Constitution of Parliaments,
were by the Petition and Advice made Relatives, which could not be separated;
so that consequently, the Members for England not being called by that Law, by
which he derived his power that called them, they were not according to the
Usurpers own Law, either legal Members or a Parliament. For admitting the
Petition and Advice to be a Law, then the ancient way of Elections was out of
Doors, and if no Law, then Richards Protectorship, and the right of the Scotch
and Irish Members were out of Doors. But although all this, and much more was
sufficiently argued, to prevent the question and prove the illegality of the
Parliament, yet the question was at last brought barely on, whether the Scotch
and Irish Members should sit or not; and by the help of their own Votes (who
were, contrary to Common Justice and right reason, suffered to Vote in their
own Case) it was carried in the affirmative, that they should sit in Parliament.

After this, the main question for transacting with the other House, before
bounded or approved (which had been interrupted by the Debate about the Scotch
and Irish Members) came on again. It was endeavored to get these words into
the question, ( viz.) The Members being first bounded and approved of. But they
were thrown out by a Vote, and the bare question put, whether they should be
transacted with or no, as then Constituted; all that the Country Party could
get into the question, being, to transact with them during this present
Parliament. And then by the help of the Scotch and Irish Votes (by whose number
all questions were carried in favor of the Court) it was resolved, to transact
with the persons then sitting in the other House of Parliament during this
present Parliament.

The report of the Committee concerning the accounts of the Commonwealth was
brought in; by it appeared much bad Husbandry, and ill Government in the last
five Years; several Offices being Created to serve persons and make Creatures,
without having therein any eye to the public; in so much, that whereas at
Cromwels Usurpation (reckoning the ready money in Cash, the Armies paid some
Months in advance, and stores newly laid in) he found (all Debts allowed for)
seven hundred thousand pounds (at least) beforehand, he was now (or at least
would be before any money could be raised) according to Mr Secretaries
Calculation, two Millions in Debt, so greatly Chargeable had his Jamaica
Expedition, and joining with France against Dunkirk been. But it is to be
presumed, that the Debt was made greater than it really was, as a means to get
the more money from the Parliament, not considering that their Argument from
the greatness of the Debt for getting supplies, rendered the Government the more
obnoxious.

A public Fast throughout the Nation was Voted, and a Declaration for the same
ordered to be brought in, in the names only of Richard and the Commons; but the
Court Party, to the end to engage the transacting with the other House, brought
in the Declaration in the form of a Bill, to be made into an Act, which caused
the expense of some days, in debating in what manner and form to send it to the
other House, for that the first transaction would be the Rule for the future,
and in order thereunto it was Voted,

First, That the Commons would not show the other House any other respect than
they should show to them.

Secondly, That they would send Members of their own to the other House, and
that they would receive no Message from them, but what should be brought to
them by some of their own number; and this was all the Votes of public
concern, that was carried by the Country Party, during the sitting of this
Parliament; and yet the Courtiers, after they had Consulted with Whitehall,
were resolved to have unvoted, and made it null and void, as envying the
Commons so much Equality with their new made Nobility.

After passing of this Bill, and nomination of the persons to carry it to the
other House, it came under Debate, what Ceremony the Messenger should use at
his approach to the other House, and what Title to give them. Mr Speaker, My
Lord Commissioner, and my Lords and Gentlemen were all severally spoken to, but
none agreed upon, the Courtiers haste being such, as would not let them stay
the end of the Debate, but the person appointed to carry this Bill (for the
Fast) to the other House, going away before the House came to any resolution,
was by his own Party advised, to give them no title at all, which directions he
followed, and so left the Bill with them, which was never returned.

During this Debate, some exceptions being taken at the unequal carriage of an
eminent Member, he was accused of having had Conference at Whitehall with the
Pretender, as that which was contrary to the Orders of the House. This Charge
put the House into a great heat, some taking part with him, as others against
him; and as the Courtiers were not only most in number, but also best at
bawling, so they made the greatest noise, until they observed undeniable truth
in the thing, and then, as the Party Charging was satisfied with giving a sharp
reproof, so the Courtiers were glad to have it die.

Some deficiency was observed by the Court, in the Acts for forcing the payment
of the Excise, and therefore a Bill was brought in by one of that Party, under
a specious pretense of settling it, but for such a certain number of Years as
the Parliament should agree upon, whereas it was then perpetual.

This Bill after long Debate, was by the Country Party laid aside, and a
Declaration brought in by them to injoin the payment of the Excise during the
sitting of the Parliament; owning clearly and openly their design in it to be,
that if the Laws were not good, the ascertaining the Excise no longer than
during the Parliament, would put a necessity upon the Chief Magistrate to let
the Parliament sit, until they had done some good for the freeborn People of
England (for such was the appellation then used) and if they were good, the
Declaration did not prejudice them, but as the Country Party laid aside the
Courtiers Bill, so they laid aside the Countries Declaration.

The Parliament fell again upon the accounts of the Commonwealth, considering
how to retrench the Charges of the Government, bringing the disbursements not
to exceed the income, raise present money for the Army by the Arrears owing the
State, and other ways (if possible) without laying any new Tax upon the people,
which the Country Party would fain have had, but in this they were interrupted
by the Courtiers, who brought on foot, First, To Vote all the Officers of the
Army to repair to their several Charges. Secondly, That they should not hold
any meetings during the sitting of the Parliament, but with consent of both
Houses and the Pretender. Thirdly, That none should be in Office, but such as
would subscribe, not to interrupt either House of Parliament in their Debates,
etc.

These Votes were sent to the other House, where they remained unreturned. The
next day the accounts were a third time fallen upon, but interrupted again by
the Courtiers, who brought on foot the question where the right of the Militia
resided, with a design, First, To Vote it in the Pretender and both Houses of
Parliament. And secondly, To Vote the Pretender General, knowing that in such
Case, the Parliaments Interest in it, even during their sitting, would have
signified nothing, and after they were dissolved, would fall naturally to the
Protector solely, because no other power pretending to it would be in being;
but in this business they could not come to a question that Night, though
striven hard for by the Court Party, who was so eager upon it, that when it was
desired, that they would but Consult the Declarations of the Long Parliament,
and the Kings Concessions thereupon concerning the Militia, that so they might
not rashly give away from the people, what the King had granted to be their
right, they would not endure the reading of them, lest they could not for shame
inthrall the people after their eyes were opened, which they were resolved
blindfolded to do.

The next day, being the 22 th of April, the Black Rod came to the Door
demanding entrance, the Sergeant at Arms, who should have done no more than
acquainted the House that such a Messenger was at the Door, acquainted them
with his Message ( viz.) that by Order of the Pretender, the Speaker of the
other House, sent to the House of Commons, to come with their Speaker to the
Pretender and them in the other House; which the Commons received generally
with great indignation and scorn, some asserting with height and passion
enough, that they were the Upper House; and so without receiving the Messenger,
the House Adjourned until Monday the 25 of April, but the next day the
pretended Protector dissolved the pretended Parliament by Proclamation.

This is a brief Relation of the most material Debates of this pretended
Parliament, many private, and some public business of lesser concernment being
omitted. And now upon the whole it may be observed,

First, That though the Courtiers when ever they could bring a question to the
Vote, they had the Command of it; yet such were the great Abilities of the
Country Party, that even by the strength of their parts and reason, they did
for three Months together keep the Courtiers from setting the stamp of
Parliament upon any thing, to the prejudice of the Nation.

Secondly, That all that Richard had to pretend to for his Protectorship, was a
Proclamation signed by some of his Friends, Proclaiming him Protector, his
Parliament, or rather the Assembly of the people called together in his name,
having added nothing to his pretense, not having in the least transacted with
him, and his Fathers Designation not being proved, his Title to the Government,
according to his own Law, fell to the ground.

Thirdly, That as the Court had by the advantages that follow the Authority of
the Chief Magistrate so packed the Parliament, that the overruling Vote was at
their Command; so the persons of that Party were most of them of such servile
and selfish Principles, that they knew no Interest but that of the single
person and their own.

Fourthly, That all that the Country Party could do (though they showed such
Abilities, Industry, and Affections to their Country, as is worthy for ever to
be remembered) was to keep off Slavery for a small time (in hopes that God would
send deliverance) without power of doing any more good, than in sometimes
getting a qualifying word into a question: For had the Parliament sat longer,
the Country Party could not have preserved the Liberties of the Nation many
Weeks more from the ruin that the Courtiers had designed; and therefore the
Dissolution of them may well be looked upon as a great deliverance.

Fifthly and Lastly, That as formerly in other Countries several Interests have
been destroyed by their several endeavors to maintain the corrupt part of
their respective Interests; so the downfall of this new Monarch proceeded from
the same Cause. For would a moderate Power have satisfied his Party, it had for
the present been readily given, those for the Country being so low in their
hopes, that they would have been glad of any indifferent terms for the good
people of this Nation, for whom many and deep Pits have been dug; but the
Lord has, and I hope ever will deliver them out of all.

FINIS.
Books Sold by John Wickins at the White Heart over against St Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet.
ROyal Pharmacopoeia, Galenical and Chemical, according to the Practice of the
most eminent and learned Physicians of France, and published with their several
approbations. By Moses Charras, the Kings Operator in his Royal Garden of
Plants. Faithfully Englished. Illustrated with several Copper Plates. Fol.

Refuscitatio; or, Bringing into public Light several Pieces of the Works,
Civil, Historical, Philosophical, and Theological, hitherto sleeping, of the
Right Honorable Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Albans. In two
Parts. The Third Edition. According to the best corrected Copies, together with
his Lordship's Life, By William Rawlegh, D. D. his Lordships Chaplain, and
lately his Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary. Fol.

The History of the Affairs of Europe in this Present Age; but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani,
Cavalier, and Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood. Fol.

The History of Barbados, St Christophers, Mevis, St Vincent, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all 28. In Two
Books. The First containing the Natural, the Second the Moral History of those
Islands, Illustrated with several Pieces of Sculpture, representing the most
considerable Rarities therein described. Fol.

The Chirurgions Store house, furnished with forty three Tables cut in Brass,
in which are all sorts of Instruments, both Ancient and Modern; useful to the
performance of all Manual Operations, with an exact Description of every
Instrument, together with an hundred choice Observations of famous Cures
performed, with the Indexes. First, Of the Instruments. Secondly, Of Cures
performed; And, Thirdly, Of things remarkable. Written by Johannes Scultetus, a
famous Physician and Surgeon of Vlme in Suevia. Octavo.

The Memoirs of Philip de Comines, Lord of Argenton. Containing the History of
Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable
Occurrences in their particular Reigns, from the Year 1464 to 1498. Revised and
corrected from diverse Manuscripts and ancient Impressions. By Denis Godefroy,
Counselor and Historiographer to the French King, and from his new Edition of
it Printed at Paris, faithfully translated into English. Octavo.

The History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire; Containing the Maxims
of the Turkish Polity, the most material Points of the Mohammedan Religion,
their Sects and Heresies, their Covents and Religious Votaries, their Military
Discipline; with an exact Computation of their Forces both by Land and Sea.
Illustrated with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representing the variety of Habits
amongst the Turks. In Three Books. By Paul Rycaut Esquire In Octavo.

The History of France, under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine; Containing all
the remarkable and curious Passages in the Government of that State, from the
Death of King Lewis XIII. which happened in the Year 1643. to the Death of the
Cardinal, which was in the Year 1664. Done into English by Christopher Wase.
Octavo.

The History of the twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by
Caius Suetonius Tranquillus, Newly translated into English, and Illustrated
with all their Heads in Copper Plates, Octavo.

A Relation of three Embassies from his Sacred Majesty Charles II. to the Great
Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark. Performed by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the Year 1663 and 1664. Written by an
Attendant on the Embassies, and published with his Lordships Approbation.
Octavo.

The Art of Chemistry as it is now practiced. Written in French by P. Thibaut,
Chemist to the French King. And now translated into English by a Fellow of the
Royal Society. Octavo.

The Annals of Love; Containing secret Histories of the Amors of diverse
Princes Courts. Pleasantly related. In Octavo.

The Loves of sundry Philosophers, and other Great Men. Translated out of
French. Octavo.

The Voyage of Italy; or, a Complete Journey through Italy. In two Parts. With
the Character of the People, and the description of the Chief Towns, Churches,
Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villa's, Gardens, Pictures, Statues and
Antiquities. As also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all
the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels, Gent. who
traveled through Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English Nobility
and Gentry. Duod.

The Present State of Holland. Duod.

The Art of Complaisance; or, the Means to oblige in Conversation. Duod.

The Present State of Italy. Duod.

The History of the Siege of Rochel, together with the Edict of Nantes. Octavo.

Rules of Health. By Sanctorius. Duod.

Temperate Man. By Lessius. Duod.

The Complete Gentleman; or, Directions for the Education of Youth, as to their
Breeding at Home, and traveling Abroad. By J. Gailhard, Gent. who has been
Tutor abroad to several of the Nobility and Gentry. Octavo.


