A FUNERAL SERMON PREACHED On the Occasion of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Sh -- y's Late Interment in DORSET-SHIRE.

By W.B. a Godly Minister (though unworthy Servant) of Jesus Christ.

Si quid habent very Vatum praesagia, Vivam. LONDON, Printed by George Croom,
1683.

PROVERBS. 10.7. The Memory of the Just shall be Blessed, but the name of the
Wicked shall Rot.


I Shall not trouble my self nor you with any tedious Introductions, or long
Circumlocutions (as some Divines use) before I come to the business in hand;
since I apprehend it altogether fruitless, and unsuccessful. For, (Beloved)
what signifies an impertinent preamble? an insipid, foppish kind of Harangue
before a Sermon? It Is a dull kind of Trick that Baal's Priests (the lazy
Levites of the Age) have got to make the Glass hold out; what with the frothy
business of Narrations, Exordiums, Paraphrases, the hour is slipped away
insensibly. Besides, (my Friends) they raise Peoples expectations too high, and
then it may be Parturiunt Montes, they make a splendid Porch to an ordinary
Thatched House: Why I tell you, the People don't approve of such tedious Graces
before they come to the substantial Food of Use and Doctrine; they are mad to
catch at the Division, like a sharp-set Country Bumpkin, who half devoured a
Plum-Pudding, e're a Brother of ours could dispatch his Grace. From whence it is
easy to infer, that long tedious Preambles before a Sermon, are equally
pernicious to Men's Souls, as a long winded Grace before Meat is to their
Bodies. This Position might quickly be proved, but I intend to be concise, and
I shall endeavor to alter this Jesuitical Trick of Introductions: For this
Reason I design to fall slap dash upon my Text, and so Anatomize it, and Split
it, as the matter will give leave. but (Beloved) before I proceed, I beg your
Christian Patience to permit me a little to insist upon the occasions of our
gathering together, and to show you the reasons of this great Solemnity. This
day (my Friends) is a day of Mourning and Lamentation, of Howling and Wringing
of Hands; it is a day we have chosen to Celebrate the Funeral Rites of our
Worthy, and much to be Lamented Patriot, the late King of Poland, who (in
spite of Axes and Halters, and other Engines of Mortality) quietly, and
peaceably gave up the Ghost amongst the True Republican Bores of Holland. Oh!
this was a fatal day, a day of Gloominess and Honor: This Man's unlucky Fate
(who was our principal Patron and Benefactor) has struck to the very Roots, and
Foundations of the Good Old Cause, It was Strong and Potent, and flourished
once to admiration, through the Wit and Conduct of this Great Masterpiece of
Politics: I had almost said it was supported by the Breath of his Nostrils; he
gave it entertainment, suckled it, nursed it, and almost (curse on the Fates)
brought it up to perfection.

But now alas (with grief and sorrow I speak it) it begins to simper, and
dwindle extremely, it drops so (I Am horribly afraid) that All the Quacks and
Bunglers in Politics will not be able to recover it. Let us therefore of the
Brotherhood lament, and seriously bewail the Death of this much admired
Patriot, and in him (I weep to speak it) the Funeral, the total Consumption of
our Interest: That my Friends must needs fall to the Ground, unless (in this
Critical Juncture of Affairs,) some Grand Politician luckily interpose, and
prevent the expected miscarriage.

But what hopes have we of such an excellent Successor? It must needs sink I
say, unless some Honest Man (some Anti-monarchical degraded Statesman, who will
be Rebellious out of a Principle of Revenge) bravely vindicate the Holy
quarrel, and take up the Cudgels to support a Languishing (if not Dying)
Faction, and carry on a drooping, decrepid Plot. Such an one as we must
necessarily find, if we hope ever to be successful in our future undertakings.
But this is by the By; and yet I must needs say, it is a necessary Digression.
Let me therefore now apply my self unto our Dear Sisters: Be ye likewise in a
Mourning Posture, let your Countenances be dejected, your Eyes full of Tears;
let outward Sobs and Sighs express the inward Sorrow of your Hearts. Lament ye,
I say, (Dear Sisters) for the Death of your Old Friend, he was always a True
Friend to you, always kind to your Sex, and a constant admirer of the Feminine
Gender, (as the late Salamanca Doctor has been of the Masculine.) Do ye
therefore gratefully Celebrate the Memory of this Just Friend of yours, which
brings me very pat to my Text, namely, The Memory, etc.

Not to trouble or perplex you with the nice Explication of the Words, nor to
ransack old Musty Worm-eaten Commentators and Paraphrasers, I shall content my
self to satisfy you with the Opinion of some of our Modern Controversiallists.
And to be brief, I shall not put the Words on the Rack, to make them confess
more than they have a mind to. The Words (in my Opinion) contain in them two
Affirmative Propositions. First, The Memory, etc. Secondly, The Name,etc.

This I shall make out (as plain as the Nose in your Face) by laying down those
two Positions. 1. That a Grave, Serious, Godly, True Protestant kind of Life
and Conversation, is the only way to secure a sound and honest Reputation after
Death. 2. That a Ranting, Roaring, Papistical Tory kind of Behavior here,
makes a Man's Name Rot and his Memory odious after Death, to all Sober Godly
Christians.


This (I Am sure) is a substantial Orthodox Piece of Doctrine: But I shall
proceed to prove my First Position. (Beloved) Gravity and Seriousness in
Behavior, (though its Profanely called by the Ungodly Formality, Hypocrisy,
and preciseness) is a very commendable qualification in any Man of what Age,
Size or Complexion. A reserved Face, a good demure sanctified Countenance,
challenges a civil respect from any Man. Men generally pay due deference to a
Man (though the meanest Person in the World) if his Looks are any ways inclined
to Godliness; if he has Religion stamped on his Face, (and if the Marks of
Reprobation are not visible in his Forehead) if (I say) his Elevated Eyes
discover a fervent Soul within, he must of necessity be wonderfully revered.
But alas! we are fallen into a degenerate Age, an Age as sinful and Profane,
as Tory-Evil Principles can make it; it is Second Sodom without doubt, the
People are hardened in Wickedness, they Drink, they Whore, keep strange Women,
they Neigh after their Neighbors Wives. These are the Ungodly (my Beloved)
that commit such abominable things; I hope it will never be justly said so of
us. We are the Righteous, the Chosen people of God, and we are surrounded with
the Protection of the Almighty, Assisted by the careful Administration of his
Angels, so that our Tongues cannot faulter, nor our Feet slide, or turn into
any evil Paths.

But see the inveterateness of our Enemies, the Spleen, the Rancour, the Malice
of the Ungodly, how detracting, how malicious and envious they are. They hate
us, because (in truth) we are more Holy than they. If we will not swear, we are
precise forsooth; if we refuse to frequent lewd Drinking-houses, we fall under
the censure of being Formal, and Starched: All our Righteous dealings are
evilly interpreted. What? If a Brother, or Sister, through the infirmities of
Nature (to which we are all subject) unadvisedly tread aside, and walk in the
Ungodly's Paths? Lord! what a clutter is presently made of it, what grinning,
and sneering there is amongst the wicked Adversaries. If the Spirit is frail
and weak sometimes, and the Flesh becomes too too Predominant, I say, if a
couple of our Fraternity should by the powerful influence of Flesh, and Blood,
chance to fall, if they should lovingly embrace one another in the Fear of the
Lord, and zealously Act that, which indeed is a Great Sin, suppose it be known.
Why! you cannot imagine what noise there is made about it. Nothing less than a
white Sheet and Wand, a Pilgrimage bare Footed, and bare Legged up to the
Parsons Pew. And this is the Antichristian Penance that is so severely
destined to our Godly Party, for a trifling miscarriage, a small cracking of
one of the Commandments: And yet our Adversaries, (I speak it calmly, and
without Passion) are bold in their Wickedness, they can Rant, and whore it away
without contradiction. Unless now and then a couple or so is hampered in
Bridewell to Play with Hemp a little, only to deter, and frighten others. If
the Wicked would but take our Savior 's Advice, and be ruled by him, we should
have a pleasant World. If no one should cast Stones but the Innocent, and
Guiltless, a Man might stand with security in the Pillory or Marketplace; Hang
Houses of Correction, and the Whipping Posts. There would be no hurling of
Stones, or Pelting with Orange Pills, I Will warrant it.

But Men are Partial (Beloved) now adays, and Censorious too; if we Preach most
powerfully, and press things home effectually to Men's Consciences, why, you
hear what they say, they say we are Hypocrites, that our Discourses are nothing
else but a Gypsie-like-Canting, that the unutterable Groans of the Spirit are
mere Satanick Effusions, that our Prayers are the effect of a Distempered
Brain, and promoted by Devilish Enthusiastic Raptures: That our Sighs (at the
time of our Worship) is an Imposture, a Holy Cheat, an Artificial Sobbing, on
purpose to seduce filly Women. (Thus are our good Works evil spoken off, by Men
of Unsanctified understandings.) If we Pray zealously, and are familiar with
God in our Ejaculations, the Wicked say we are saucy, and tumultuous in our
Petitions: If we talk of any assurance or certainty that God is on our side,
they ask what Intelligence, what Gazetts we receive from Heaven: If we are
Transported now and then, and speak that which indeed may be Impertinent, or
Incoherent, as to desire God Almighty to Ride Post to help a Sick young Man at
Sea, or such like things as these; why, this is no great harm: It would be
Interpreted by modest Men, only the Exuberance, (as I may so say) of Fancy, or
the over-flowings of Invention, but now it is termed Profaneness, and words
bordering upon Blasphemy.

Thus do they pester and teeze us, who are the Meek of the Earth, Vexat censura
Columbas; if (to be short) a Brother of ours was once engaged in a temptation,
which was wholly irresistible (as may be evident by the violent and sudden
Insurrection of the unruly Member;) What? Could there be a more charitable
piece of Humanity in a Godly Sister, than to strive to allay his eager
Appetite, and stroke down the Member that is troublesome, and uneasy? A
Bull-like Fortitude must be tamed at Moor-fields, or at some other convenient
Pastures. But to return to my Text, and tell you the means, and methods how to
fortify your Reputation against the virulent attempts, and reflections of evil,
and dangerous Tongues, and secure a good Memory after. Death. For in the Words
of my Text, The Memory of the Just shall be Blessed, their Name shall flourish
in the Earthy their Memories shall smell sweet, and blossom to suture Ages. Let
malice do its worst, and envy cast all its cutting Darts upon us, yet let us
persevere in our Godly resolutions, and then we may bear the indignities of our
Enemies without repining. The only way that I can propose to you, is to be
unconcerned at their sneering Calumnies, let them laugh, and expose us
publicly, we can grin in secret at them, and traduce them likewise. Let us be
unconcerned I say, at all their malice, for the only Pillar that can support us
(under the present circumstances of affairs) is a Barefaced well compacted
Impudence: That Is the only guard (that I know) against the lashes, and violent
Persecutions of inveterate and malicious Tongues.

But it is time to recollect my self, and return to Discourse of the Worthy
Person, whose Memory we now Celebrate. To be silent in his Praises (I know)
will not be resented well, or approved of by the rest of my good Friends. I
shall therefore consider this Great Man in a Twofold capacity. 1. As he was a
Public Man, and an Eminent Minister of State. 2. As he was a Private Man, and
an extraordinary Christian.


And Thirdly, I shall show how justly he may challenge this word Just in my
Text. (But pray, let not this be Interpreted a Punn.) As to his public concern
in the World, and his making so considerable (though crooked) Figure in it, I
must needs say, that all these Advancements and Dignities therein, were the
Purchase of his own Wit, and extraordinary Qualifications. That he was a Person
highly Descended, and wonderfully (if not miraculously) qualified for public
Administration of Affairs, is I hope generally confessed. That he had a vast
Gigantick Soul crowded up, and Cooped in a Pigmy's Tabernacle, yet so Brisk and
Active, that Prometheus stole half the Fire from Heaven to enlighten it. He had
such a Soul so bold, and daring, that he became (as the Elegy has it) the Dread
of the Crown, and yet the Friend of it too. He was a Strenuous Defender of the
Royal Prerogative, witness those many excellent Speeches of his in his
Chancellorship. And yet not so stiff neither, but (when after his Degradation)
he began not to love the Court so heartily as before, he then adhered to the
Majesty of the People, and defended the High and Mighty Plenipotentiaries, the
Multitude; then he wisely consulted with the Uncontrollable Rabble, to support
Magna Charta, Liberty, Property, etc.

From this, solicitous Care of the Nations Good, sprung that never to be
forgotten Model of the Association, the Spawn of the Holy League and Covenant.
Who therefore can sufficiently Lament this Worthy Person, the public Pillar of
the State, the Moses, the Conductor of the People, nay (without Profaneness)
the Puny Savior of the Nation? What, could I repeat concerning his worth? the
Exaltedness of his Fortune, the High and Meritorious Dignities conferred upon
him, his Prudence, Magnanimity and Height of Spirit, his Proving, and Zealous
Prosecution of the Late Plot, and faithful Adhaesion to the Crown, when the
Crown was kind to him, and Promoted him? But why should I thus descant on the
wonderful perfections of this Man, who was as Eminent for Religion, as for his
Politics. He was a Faithful Zealous Man in Holy Worship, (which is a strange
unheard of thing in a Statesman.) And yet notwithstanding all these
extraordinary Endowments of the Mind, the Wicked of the World take occasion to
traduce him, and detract very injuriously from his Worth. His Religion is
termed Atheism, his way of Worship Skeptical and Profane, the droppings of his
Tap, occasioned by his Hydropick Distemper, is rendered as the miserable
consequence of a young Debauch; his Care for the Welfare of the Nation is
reckoned Treason. And is it not strange that this great Person (the desire of
Mankind while living) should be so miserably Crucified after his Death? Is it
not a Paradox to a Wise and Understanding Man, to find a Person so
disingenuously abused, when he is not in a capacity to vindicate himself? How
wonderfully is he exposed to the scorn and contempt of the World in Doggrel,
Ballads, Visions, Dialogues, etc. with a number of Pamphlets that circulate the
Gown in Derogation of his honor? But I think it is time to leave off, lest I Am
thought too fulsome a Panegyrist.

We'll therefore descend to the Second Position, and show you: Secondly, That a
Tory-ranting, Roaring kind of Behavior here, makes a Man's Name Stink, and Rot
(as my Text has it) after Death. When People are Debauched in Principles, and
have wickedly forsaken the True Protestant Interest (which word True-Protestant
is miserably ridiculed by young Tory Whiflers, or (as the Ingenious Historian
Mr. Care has it) Dull Nosed Tories.) I say then, their Reputation sinks in the
World, and their Names (when they are Dead) are as nauseous to Mankind, as
their Putrified, and Rotten Bones. When People follow strange Devices, and
Worship false Gods, what the Devil can become of their good Names? They must
suffer in their credit after Death, that in their Life time commit such vile
Abominations.

They blindly frequent their Hallowed Steeple Houses, and Persecute us, because
our tender, and squeamish Consciences will not permit us to Conform with them.
They teeze us with their Spiritual Bumms, and Religious Kid-nappers, the
Informers Carp and Crow over us, and expose us publicity in Courants,
Dialogues, etc. but I shall not be censorious as the wicked are. The end of
such Men will be Tragical, and their Memories hateful to future Ages. Let the
wicked (Beloved) tickle and please themselves, and laugh at our Persecutions
(as the cunning Observator does) the time will come, when the Wind and Tide is
on our sides (when Almighty Parliaments shall again flourish) that we shall
handle them for their Insolence, in setting forth so openly the Practices of
our Party. I doubt not but this slurring Observator (I say) will be dealt with
by some of our Ingenious Youngsters of the Neighboring Academy; the young Men
of Newington are profound found Sophisters I can assure him, and can handle an
Argument most dexterously. They Will Confute his Dissenters sayings, they have read
Divine Milton, and Knox, and know how to settle the State, and Reform the
present Irregularities of the Government, they are Popular Men, and have the
very Hearts of the People of God: They can match him with their Philosophical
Windmils, and Flying Chariots, in opposition to his screwed Guns and Pistols,
and his scurrilous story of our Brother at Bath, (though it may be true I grant
you.) Such Men as these, I say, who expose the Righteous, and endeavor to make
their Names odious in this World, will by a strange (though just) course of
Providence be made wonderfully ridiculous themselves, and their Names (in the
Words of my Text) will Rot, and (as I may say) Putrify. But, Beloved, I would
not willingly transgress on your Patience too much, to go beyond the decent
limits of a Sermon. I shall therefore make Application of what has been said,
and enforce some practicable business to your consideration.

Let us (who are the Meek of the Earth, the Sober and Godly Party) endeavor to
live up to those excellent Rules that are Weekly prescribed to us by our Godly
Ministers; let us persevere in our holy Resolutions; let neither Persecution,
Reproach, or Contempt any way deter us from meeting and serving God in Private,
and then (there is no doubt of it) we shall have success proportionable to our
hopes, and in the Scripture Phrase, we shall Inherit the Earth. What though we
are miserably discomfited by late unhappy disappointments? What though the
Patron of our Cause be Deceased, and has left the Hotheaded Multitude without
Order, all things at Random and Confusion? Who knows but some cunning Politic
Person of Quality (as the Remarquer on Jovian, or the Author of the Elegy on
Stafford) may interpose, and vindicate our Cause in the Declension of its Age:
Such as these, both good Logicians, Historians, and profound Politicians into
the Bargain, would manage the concern bravely, if they would but take the
Reverend Mr. John -- n (in the room of that sottish Bestial Satyr of Salamanca,
who has Debauched our Cause) to be their worthy Chaplain, and Mr. Hunt their
Secretary. Lord! what a Blessed Reformation might suddenly follow? All our
concerns would again flourish, and spread into every corner of the Land, and
then we should see the Blessed Revolutions of Forty One again; then true Piety
would flourish, and grow in fashion once more; there would be no Swearing and
Blaspheming, no Adultery, and no complaining in our streets, Fast ye therefore
(my Beloved, but not as the Wicked do) and pray ye to the Lord for this happy
change, for our deliverance is nigh, and the Salvation of his People is at hand.

Lastly, Let me put before your Eyes, the great Example of our late Deceased
Patriot, consider how industriously zealous he was for the True-Protestant
Interest, what Indignities and Shame he underwent, purely on the account of
Religion, what difficulties he passed through, to reduce this Haughty Monarchy
into Order, and Subjection, if possible, and to settle it on the solid
Foundations, and firm Establishments of a Commonwealth: He left no means
unattempted to make the Nation flourish, for he condescended to men of low
Degree, he Conversed with Carpenters and Bricklayers, that he might carry on
the work of the Lord powerfully and successfully. All this he did to keep a
good Consciences, as some think, and to purchase a good Name for many
Generations: Let the Wicked (my Friends) talk of his Fatal descent into the
Regions of darkness, of his Congratulations with the Joyner, and the black
Catalogue of the damned Fraternity; we ought charitably to put good
Constructions on Men's actions, and hope, (at least) that he is at rest, and
that his Memory will be Honorably Celebrated amongst True-Blue-Protestants. I
am sure his Heroic Achievements, and Noble Actions, deserve to be faithfully
Registered, and to be carefully transmitted to Posterity. Let the Wicked and
Perverse talk of stinking Guts and Garbage, and say, That his Name shall Rot,
and be odious to future Ages: Yet let us follow his Blessed steps, and stand
stiff, and firm in our Holy Resolutions, to cherish the True-Protestant Cause,
and never leave it, and forsake it. Then our Names shall be famous here on
Earth, and we shall sit down at last (I hope) with St. Stephen, with our Friend
Deceased, and with Bradshaw, Ireton, and Hewson in the Kingdom of H --

FINIS.

