THE BLESSING OF MOSES ON THE Tribe of Asher, Opened and Applied: In the
Mystical and Spiritual Sense, to every Saint and Servant of Christ.

IN A SERMON ON

Deuteronomy. 33. 25. Thy Shoes shall be Iron and Brass, and as thy Days, so shall
thy strength be. By T. BEVERLEY.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey. 1693.

ADVERTISEMENT.
1. THE Revelation Vnvail'd: Or an Essay toward the Discovering, 1. When many
Scripture Prophecies had their Accomplishment, and turned into History. 2. What
are now Fulfilling. 3. What rest still to be Fulfilled, with a guess at the
Time of them. With an Appendix, proving that Pagan Rome, was not Babylon, Rev.
17. And that the Jews ssall be Converted. By Samuel Petto of Sudbury in
Suffolk. Price one shilling six pence.

2. A Faithful Narrative of the Wonderful and Extraordinary Fits which Mr.
Tho. Spatchet (late of Dunwich and Cookly) was under by Witchcraft: Or, a
Mysterious Providence in his even Unparalled Fits: With an Account of his
first Falling into, Behavior under, and (in Part) deliverance out of them.
Wherein are several Remarkable Instances of the Gracious Effects of Fervent
Prayer. The whole drawn up and written by Samuel Petto, Minister at Sudbury in
Suffolk, who was an Eyewitness of a great Part. Price six Pence.

3. A Collction of modern Relations of Matter of fact, concerning Witches and
Witchcraft upon the Persons of People. To which is prefixed a Meditation
concerning the Mercy of God, in preserving us from the Malice and Power of evil
Angels. Written by the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, upon occasion of a Trial
of several Witches before him. Part I. Price one Shilling.

4. Necessary Questions concerning Witches and Witchcraft briefly Answered. By
the same Author. Price One Penny.

5. Mathematical Divinity: Or a plain Demonstration from the Holy Scriptures,
that the Times of this World were fore-appointed by the Covenant made with
Abraham; and determined to be according to the Measure of the Age and Fullness
of Christ. Kept Secret since the World began, but is now made plain upon Twelve
Tables, in a Solar Calendar as familiar to the Understanding as a common
Almanac. With a full Proof that this is the last Generation, which shall not
pass away till all things be Fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be
opened. Being the Result of many years Study. By Elias Palmer. Price One
Shilling.

All Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey.

THE PREFACE.
THIS plain and short Discourse holds out the spiritual strength and support of
a Christian, flowing from the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, and the mighty
Efficacies of the Holy Spirit, amidst the Stony Places, the roughnesses and
sharpnesses of inward and outward Trials and Temptations; as also the most
Compassionate proportionings of that strength to the Exigencies and Necessities
of each Day of Trial, and to the utmost length of Time, and throughout
Eternity. In the Expression and Representation of which, the admirable Elegancy
and Significancy of the words used by the Blessed Spirit in this Benediction,
offer the most lively Images and Notions: But the inward Efficacy and Power are
alone from that Blessed Spirit that breathed them.

Let us bow our Knees therefore to the Father of Glory, that he would grant us,
according to the Riches of his Glory, to be thus strengthened, to have Feet
thus shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. And that as our Times
are in his Hand, so that into his hand we may commend our Spirits; that he, as
the Lord God of Truth would redeem us, and that we may Redeem and Buy off Time
from all the Disadvantages and Encumbrances of it, by strength given from him
according to the Day; till all Time is perfected and Consummate in the Fullness
of Times, or of All Times in the Kingdom of Christ, and of Eternity.

T. B.

The Reader is desired to Accept this Discourse, as spoken (and so desired now)
in the greatest Plainness, Freedom, and Familiarity of Expression, for every
Apprehension, to every ones Affections, and to correct the Errors of the first
Sheet, especially occasioned through Distance from the Press.
PAge 3. l. 3. for Force r. Display. p. 4. l. 22. for herein r. Here, in. p. 7.
l. 7. for wherein r. stands. l. 14. for the r. unto. l. 26. for though there be
r. For there is. l. 30. for amongst r. amidst. P. 8. l. 9. after God r. These.
P. 20. l. 22. after end r. For.
A SERMON Preached September. 3. 1693.
On
DEUTERONOMY. XXXIII. 25. Thy Shoes shall be Iron and Brass; and as thy Days, so
shall thy Strength be.


I Have undertaken by the Assistance of God, to speak to you on this Text;
which was the Blessing of Moses the Man of God, the Servant of God,
particularly upon Asher, the Tribe of Asher.

Now the sense of it is Prophetical: And so it Requires the Diligent
Attendance, and Enquiry of our Thoughts; that we may be led into the Spiritual
and Divine senses and meaning of it. If you look into the Chapter, you will
find, that it is the Blessing, wherewith Moses the Man of God, Blessed the
Children of Israel before his Death.

And if you shall say, How may this Concern us?

It is to be considered in Answer: That whatsover has been spoken of Old, by
the servants of God, in Relation to Israel in General; Israel, I say,
considered Naturally, in the Natural Stock and Race, that proceeded from
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the very same, every thing shall have its Course,
shall have its Complement, shall have its fulfilling in the Spiritual Israel;
in all those that are the Israel of God. For, as the Apostle says to the
Galatians, Chap. 4. 26. The Jerusalem which is above, is the Mother of us all:
so that we are all within what was spoken of Jerusalem, and of the Tribes of
Israel; if we are indeed the Israel of God: As he uses the very same
Expression: Peace be upon you, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. This very
Consideration ought to Engage us into the Enquiry after Divine Truths, with
relation to the natural Israel. Gal. 6. 6. As many as walk according to this
Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

And so, what was spoken Particularly to the Tribes, concerned in some regard
or other, and shall Run down upon all the servants of God, who are all those
that make up the Twelve Tribes of Israel. As we find in the Revelation, Chap.
7. which Vision, I am very well Assured (notwithstanding some indeed would so
Literally Interpret it) is to be understood of spiritual Israel. And I heard
the number of them which were sealed, of every one of the Tribes, or of all the
Tribes of Israel. Ver. 4. I say, it concerns the spiritual Israel, that shall
keep close to God, in the Great Antichristian Apostasy. And therefore in
Relation to them, shall all the Songs, and Blessings that were upon Israel, and
the Tribes of it, come again (as I may so speak with Reverence) into Force;
they shall have their full Effect upon all the Servants of God. It is said Rev.
15. Ver. 3. They sung the Song of Moses the servant of God. The Song of Moses
the Servant of God, is to have its course again in these Witnesses of the Lamb.
And so the Blessing of every one of the Tribes, and the Blessing of Asher,
shall have its Course, shall have its full Complement and Issue, and fullness,
in all the People and Servants of God; even this very Text that I have now read
to you, Thy shoes shall be Iron and Brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be. We find therefore Rev. 21. that as there was the Names of the
Apostles of the Lamb, upon the twelve foundations; so there was also twelve
Gates, and they had upon them the Names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of
Israel, Verse 12.

This therefore I have spoken by way of Preface, that you may not think this
great Text of Scripture is nothing to you, that it is nothing to us: But that
we may know, that we have our share and our Interest in it, and it shall be
fulfilled in and upon us, if we are the Servants of God.

I come therefore to a more Particular Consideration at this time, of Moses's
Blessing on Asher.

Here are Two great Branches of this Text. Thy Shoes shall be Iron and Brass,
and as thy days, so shall thy strength be. Asher indeed was one of the Sons of
Jacob by the Handmaid of Leah: His Name imports Blessing; it was given to him
by the Special Ordination of God, that he as the Father of one of the Tribes of
Israel, might bear the Memorial of that Blessing, and Blessedness enstated on
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by God through him in whom all
the Families of the Earth are Blessed; and in Relation to whom his Mother
accounted her self Blessed, in bearing a Son who should be the Father of one of
the Tribes of Israel, and bear the Type of Blessedness for all the Israel of
God enstated upon it by the God of Jacob, therefore she called his Name Asher;
that is to say, Blessed. And says Moses, Thy shoes shall be Iron and Brass,
and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.

Interpreters give the very literal Sense to be this: That Asher had the
Portion, the Lot in the Land of Canaan, that was a Land of Mines, of Mines of
Iron and Brass; and that relating to this, Moses said, Thy shoes shall be Iron
and Brass: Thou shall be (as it were) shod with Iron and Brass; and throughout,
thy Day shall be the strength of Iron and Brass.

Job said, Is my strength the strength of brass? Now herein Asher is the
Promise to the Servants of God, that their Shoes shall be Iron and Brass, and
their Day shall have a Proportion of strength, every way fitted and suited to
it.

And therefore I would give you the Spiritual sense of these Words; and I would
give it you out of Scripture, that you may find, that all Scripture has a
Relation and a strong Connection, one part of it with another. Ephesians. 6. 15.
says the Apostle, Having your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. Having an Assurance of the great Glory of the Gospel of Peace, that
shall break out upon you: And having a Preparation upon your selves, a
readiness to enter into the Glory, and into the Blessedness of that State;
Having your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, You shall
find your Feet in a Spiritual sense shod with Iron and Brass.

When any of us have our Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
then are our Shoes Iron and Brass, then shall we be ready and able to tread
upon Temptation and to overcome: To rise up above the Power of Sin and Death,
and to trample them under our Feet. Then shall we be enabled to tread upon the
Lion and the Scorpion, and upon the very power of the Enemy. As the Apostle
speaks, Romans 16. 20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly: This is because their feet are shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace.

So this is the Promise in the Spiritual part of it, and it shall never cease:
This Promise shall have its Operation upon all the Servants of God; every one
of them comes under the Blessing of every one of these Tribes; so this Blessing
shall be accomplished and fulfilled in them. Their shoes shall be Iron and
Brass; and according to their day, so shall their strength be; that is,
consider strength how you will, as I shall presently particularize to you. As
their days, so shall their strength be.

And thus having Opened to you the General Scope and Sense of the Text, I shall
lay down this Proposition: That it is an Assured Blessing, a Blessing that is
so conferred, so settled, so Enstated upon every Servant of God, as he is of
the Tribes of the Children of Israel; as he is one of the twelve Tribes, as he
is one in every one of the Twelve Tribes, and so in Asher: He shall have a
Strength for the Day, overcoming all the power of the Enemy: For this is the
Extension and Largeness of Spirituality; Every one in these Twelve Tribes in a
Spiritual sense, have a share in every Blessing in a Spiritual sense: And
therefore upon every Servant of God this Blessing is enstated and settled, that
their Shoes shall be of Iron and Brass; their Feet shall be shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace: and into whatsoever Encounter and Combat
they come, as their Day is, so shall their strength be; even to the uttermost
State of Eternity it self.

I shall therefore Propose to you, in the first Place, To open and to enlarge
upon the Particulars of this Part, that their Shoes shall be Iron and Brass:
And then in the second Place to open and enlarge upon that, That as their day
is, so shall their strength be: And then in the third place, I shall give you
the Arguments and Reasons for Asserting it, the Demonstrations from Scripture
of it: And in the fourth place, I shall lead you into the Prospect (as Moses
gat up to take a view of all the Possession of the Children of Israel) of all
the great Glory of the Kingdom of Christ, that is aimed at in all these
Blessings, and principally designed, and conclude with the Application of it.

I begin with the First: Thy Shoes shall be Iron and Brass; that is, Thou
shall tread upon any thing that stands in thy way, and thou shall trample it
down; thou shall subdue it through the Power of Grace.

And this I shall open to you in these three or four Particulars, wherein the
strength of the Servants of God, that are every one as every one of the Tribes
of Israel, and as this Tribe of Asher; wherein,

First, It shall be showed, in trampling upon the Power of Sin, in the Guilt of
it; the treading down of the Power of Sin in the Guilt of it; that great Matter
that Satan has against the Servants of God in regard of the guilt that is upon
them; the Accusations wherewith he would even give them not only the Foil, but
the Fall, the Ruin and Destruction. He thinks to set upon them, and to
undermine them, to overthrow their going, as the Expression of David is: He
thinks to overthrow their going in this great point, that they are Sinners, and
liable to Wrath, and Eternal Condemnation. Now to be able to tread upon the
Basilisk, and the Serpent in this matter; to be able to tread upon his Head,
requires indeed Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; that is
indeed with the Satisfaction, with the Blood, and with the Death and
Resurrection and Intercession of our Lord Jesus: And who is able to do that, to
lay fast hold upon the Righteousness of Christ? though there be nothing so
deadly as to tread among the Scorpions of our own Sins, the Cry of which is
against us like the Blood of Abel: And therefore I say, to walk amongst these,
it is to walk indeed amongst the Gates of Death; to be treading upon Death it
self, that is ready to rise up against us. Our footsteps are hunted, as the
expression of the Psalmist is: Hunted by this great Accuser of the Brethren; he
follows us into our most private Retirements, into our Thoughts as far as he
can divine at them; our Closets, our whole Conversation, our Company; our being
at home, our being abroad; our being in Business, our being in Divertisement;
our being in our Trade, our being in the Duties of Holiness, and drawing nigh
to God; are all watched by him; he hunts our steps through all these, and there
are Snares laid for us. As it was the stratagem of those Times in War, that
they drove sharp stakes of Iron in the way of those that were coming out
against them; they had need then be shod with Iron and Brass, that they might
tread upon those Spikes of Iron. Now so are the Accusations of Satan arising
from our Guilt, and when they are armed with the Justice of God, and the
Holiness and Purity of his Law, O! what shall we do if we are not shod with
Iron and Brass? If we have not the Assurance of the Love of God in Jesus
Christ? As the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. says he, We are more than Conquerors
through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Here are the things that we are to walk amongst, and to tread amongst: Now if
we have not Shoes of Iron and Brass, how shall we be able to walk amongst
these? But through the Love of God in Jesus Christ, we shall be in all these
things more than Conquerours. O! therefore, let us look to this, to have the
Feet of our Consciences (if I may so express it) to have them shod with Iron
and Brass, with that certain defense of the Blood of Jesus: And then as Jesus
Christ speaks of himself in that Prophecy of Isaiah, wherein he represents
himself coming out against his Adversaries; says he, in Isaiah 63. 3. I have
trodeen the Wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me: I will
tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be
sprinkled upon my Garment, and I will stain all my Raiment. Something like this
every Saint may say.

Christ will have a Glorious Victory upon all his Enemies, whoever, and of what
kind soever they are. Who is he that will condemn me, says he in another
place. He is near that justifies me: And therefore I have set my face like a
flint; and I know I shall not be ashamed, I shall not be confounded. When we
have this Armor of Proof, this Armor of the Righteousness of Christ on the
right Hand, and on the left, we shall not be discouraged, till we have obtained
the Victory over all: For he is Mighty that is in us, and that has undertaken
for us, and that has provided us this great defense against the Guilt of Sin,
against the Wrath of God, against all, that the Accuser of our Souls can raise
up against us.

In the Second Place: Our Feet shall be shod with Iron and Brass, in regard of
all the Temptations to Sin, and from the World. However, they may be very
great, and very sharp; what by way of Enticement to Pleasure, or what by way of
Terror in suffering; whatsoever is the Method, and the Device, and the
Stratagem of this great Enemy of our Souls, we shall be able (having our Feet
shod with Iron and Brass) to overcome him, having a holy Resolution, a holy
Purpose of Soul; yea, though we may fall, yet we shall rise again. He will keep
us in all our Ways. And this Defense, these Shoes, these War like Boots (as
the Scripture sometimes speaks of) these shall defend us against all the Power
of Temptations: We should therefore go out in that strength of the Lord our
God; we should go out in that Armor of Jesus Christ, that Armor of God, as
the Apostle calls it, in the Ephesians, and persuades every one that they would
take care to be Armed (as we say) Cap-a-pe, from Head to Foot throughout; that
we should be Armed with the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11. That ye may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil: For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the Rulers of
the darkness of this World, against spiritual wickedness in high places.
Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.

O! if we did but find that we are shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, this Iron and Brass, we should be able to tread down all the Temptations
that come to draw us off from God, and to Sin; we should tread them as the Mire
of the street, we should never leave threshing, and pursuing of them; Threshing
of them, as the Scripture expression is: Arise, and thresh, O Daughter of Zion,
for I will make thy horns Iron, and thy hoofs Brass: Arise therefore, and
thresh: So we should arise, and thresh all the Power of Temptation that comes
against us. O! how mighty should we be in the strength of God! If we consider
that great Love of God in Jesus Christ, who can sin against him? That great
Love of Christ that constrains us: If we had the Power of dying to Sin, and of
living in Newness of Life, through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, as the
Apostle admirably expresses it, in the first Epistle of John, 5 Chapter, 4 Ver.
says he, Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World; and this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes
the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? Let us therefore
lay hold upon the Arguments of the Gospel, upon the Strength and Power of Jesus
Christ, in the Faith of his great undertaking: In that Faith let us go out and
Conquer, let us go out and prevail. O! how would it raise us above this World,
above the fears of it, above the delights of it, above the pleasures of it! if
we had but the Power of this Faith, if we had but this Victory of Faith in us,
and upon us.

In the Third Place, it would enable us to tread even upon Death it self; upon
all the Afflictions that are in our way to Heaven, and upon that King of
Terrors, Death it self: For, though indeed we apprehend Death to be nothing but
a Privation of Life in the General; yet we know as we are Christians, it is an
Inlet into Eternity: Even Nature starts at it, as it is a Cessation, and
putting an end to the life and motion, and action wherein we are conversant
now; it looks much more dreadful to us, as it opens into Eternity. But if we
were but shod with Iron and Brass, we should find these Shoes of Iron and
Brass would carry us through, and we should be able to tread even upon the
sharpness of Death, and the Grave; we should find the great Power of Jesus
Christ enabling of us, because he has overcome Death: Even as he has overcome
the World, so he has overcome Death. We should never leave trying and proving
this Armor of God upon the Feet of our Souls, till we find that we can walk
even upon Graves, and upon our own Graves; among the Tombs, and not be
affrighted when we find we are carried through and through, and that we master and
tread down as we go. We should, I say, not only come and die when we must die,
but beforehand we should be armed at these very points; we should find our
Shoes herein to be of Iron and Brass. Observe how triumphant David speaks in
the 23d. Psalm, Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of death:
Where I don't know what may lie in my way, what may rise up against me; I do
not know what are the Secrets, what Ambuscades there are in the Valley of
Death; I don't know what Powers are appointed and prepared to Destroy. Yea, (in
the 4th. Verse) though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me, etc. This would bear us through, and carry
us with great Resolution, and with undauntedness of Courage: For, the great
expression of our Action (you know, in Scripture) is very much in our feet, in
our walking. Now therefore, to have our Feet thus shod, it would enable us to
get up above these things; to be aloft over the things that are so dreadful and
terrible to Flesh and Blood. Hab. 3. 9. The Lord is my strength, and he will
make my feet like Hinds feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high
places: And therefore I can sing, I can set a Song to the Chief Singer on my
stringed Instruments. Because I have such an Assurance, such an Elevation and
Exultation of Soul in the Lord, I will rejoice in the Lord, (Ver. 18.) and
glory in the God of my Salvation, although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, etc.
Although there be no outward appearance of Good. O how timorous, how Cowardly
are we, how ready to be affrighted at any appearance of Death! that in all our
Discourse we cannot endure the thing Dying: But were our Shoes but of Iron and
Brass, it would be easy, the way would be plain before us, we should be able
to strike through every thing, and to the overcoming of it. And then

In the Last place, Our Shoes being of Iron and Brass, we shall be born up
even when we have passed out of the Body: For, though indeed we do not know the
things that are beyond Death, none have come back to give us an Account, how it
is with Spirits when they have left the Body: I say, none have come to give us
Account; only the Word of God, that assures us, and tells us, that we shall be
upon Precipices, when we go out of the World, if we are not apprehended by
Christ. Though undoubtedly Satan has waylaid the way of Spirits going out of
the Body, with all the Incumberances he can possibly. As I told you before, it
was the method of former times in War, they took care to lay whatever could
incommode their Enemies Feet, with Stakes of Iron and Brass, that might make
the passage very difficult. So undoubtedly, that lost and undone Spirit, that
Envious Spirit, that great Adversary of Souls, does whatever he can do to
way-lay Spirits going out of the Body, and entering into the State of Eternity,
and going up to the Throne of God, and the Throne of Christ, he does whatever
he can do; but these Shoes of Iron and Brass shall carry us through. Jesus
Christ himself has taken care to remove him out of the way, so far as is
necessary: and the great Action of the Spirit of a Saint going upon to Christ,
and going up to God, it shall be sustained and maintained by him, and he will
arm us wherein soever we lie open to Disadvantage, and to Danger: There will
Christ more peculiarly provide; for I make no doubt, there is no one single
motion of the Spirits of Saints, but Christ has so guarded, and so taken care
of, as that very motion that we read of, Eccles. 12. 7. The Dust returning to
the Earth as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it. Now, what are (as I
said before) the Ambuscades? What are the secret Linings of the way (as we
speak in Terms of War) lining all the Avenues of the way we know not? Satan
has lined them all with what may utterly spoil and deterr our motion up to God.

But Jesus Christ having first armed us with Shoes of Iron and Brass, he
himself will be found in the way, and he will sustain our passage, and cover our
passage, and bear up all our motions unto God.

And so I have opened the first of the great Expressions of the Blessedness
that Moses expresses of Asher; Thy Shoes shall be Iron and Brass: Of which,
all the Mines that were in the Lot of Asher, in that part of his possession,
they were but Types to set out this Almighty Power, this Almighty strength of
God unto Salvation.

And therefore I shall close this Head of Discourse with that in the 4th.
Chapter of the Epistle to the Philippians, 7th. Verse, says he, The Peace of
God which passes all understanding. As he calls him the God of peace, Romans 16.
so here, The Peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts.

It is an Expression either taken from a Guard of a City, or about the Person
of any one. He shall keep (as under Guard and Defense) your Hearts and Minds
through Christ Jesus; a Peace that passes all understanding. O therefore, that
we were but more acquainted, that we had but more of the Experiment of this
Glorious Christianity, of this real Virtue and Power of it! We are too much
Strangers to it, and averse. We converse more in the Formalities, than in these
mighty Powers and Principles of it! O how should we try our selves, and put our
selves by the Thoughts and Consideration of Danger beforehand, to find out
these Shoes of Iron and Brass, the Necessity of them.

I come to the Second, which is a very great Expression: As thy Days, so shall
thy strength be. I know some translate the word, signifying strength, to this
sense; As thy Days, so shall thy Fame be: But this is rejected by the most
Judicious Jewish, as other Interpreters; so I would open it to you in these
following Particulars, that you may know what is the Importance of it: As thy
Day, or, as thy Days, so shall thy Strength be.

In the first place it signifies, That at any time when God sees fit to bring
us within the encounter of Danger, then he will take care by a peculiar
Presence, by a peculiar undertaking for us, by a peculiar Furniture, and
present Suggestion, that we shall be carried through. In that Hour shall be
given a Mouth, and so a Strength, the Adversary shall not be able to resist;
for he knows what the Day is, and he will accordingly provide, he will give a
proportion of strength according unto that: He knows what kind of Day it is,
what Ingredients it has, what kind of Temperature, how every thing shall fall
out: Now says God, and says our Lord Jesus Christ, I must consider what a Day
such a Servant of mine is to come under, and what he is to undergo; I must
therefore take care that he has a strength proportionable, that he have a
strength suitable to it. Psalm. 27. 1. says David, The Lord is my Light, and my
Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me
to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an Host should encamp
against me, my heart shall not fear; though War should rise against me, in this
will I be confident. Here is the great Assurance of the Servants of God, that
let the Day be as dark, let the Day be as Critical a Day as can be, let it be a
Day of the greatest decision, yet he that has an Infinity of strength, and
that knows the Day to every particular Action of it, he will take care that
there shall be a Furniture and Provision of strength suitable to it.

And though you may say, (for so you may Object) Aye, but do not oftentimes the
Servants of God stumble and fall? Have they not great Falls and great Defeats,
as it were?

It is true, it may be so; even as the Children of Israel in that of Ai, when
the Accursed thing was taken by Achan: But there shall be no rest of things,
till God has reclaimed, and brought them back: He Will never leave, till he has
brought them back again: he will bring a fresh strength, he will rally their force
again, and as their Day is, so shall their strength be: For he has set down
and counted what is necessary to come against the strength, against the Power
of such a Day, and he will be sure to take care in it. Deuteronomy. 33. 26. There is
none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the Heaven in thy help, and
in his excellency on the Sky; the Eternal God is thy Refuge, and underneath are
the everlasting Arms, and he shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee, and
shall say, Destroy them. Israel shall dwell alone in safety, and none to
trouble him. Verse 28, 29. Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the Sword of thy
Excellency! and thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places. O! how great is the Assurance that God here
gives! therefore, As thy Day, so shall thy strength be. They prevented me in
the day of my Calamity, (says David) but the Lord was my stay.

In the Second Place, it signifies this, That to the length of days, I say,
that to the longest of days, that God has allotted to any of his Servants, so
shall their strength be. To the length of Days; if God has determined to any
of his Servants a short Life, that a great deal of Life may be gathered up into
a little Time: As is their day, so shall their strength be; that is, they shall
find a proportion of strength, to the shortness of that State and Condition
wherein they shall be in the World. Thus you find in the 5th. Chapter of
Genesis, concerning Enoch, he was the shortest Liver of all those Patriarchs
before the Flood. And (in the 22d. Verse) Enoch walked with God after he begat
Methuselah three hundred years, and begat Sons and Daughters: and all his days
were but three hundred sixty and five years. A very short time of Life, in
comparison of the rest: but he Husbanded that time, as was his Day, so was his
Strength; he walked at a high rate with God, he walked a great way in a little
time, he ascended high in his Walk with God; And he was not, for God took him.
So according to the Day, according to the length of his Day, so was his
strength: I say, he lived but a short time in the World, but he did a great
deal of Work in that short time; his Heart was mightily lifted up in the ways
of God.

Again, On the other side, if God has determined a long Time for his Servants:
As their Days, so shall their Strength be, even unto Old Age, and the hoary
head, He is He that will bear them up. Therefore we should not be afraid we
shall forsake God at Last; God will not leave us, even in the Oldest Time of
Life: For, God is exceeding careful of his own Honor in this Regard: I say he
is Exceeding in his Care herein: Psalm 92. 12, 13. The Righteous shall flourish
like the Palm Tree; he shall grow like the Cedar in Lebanon. Those that be
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They
shall still bring forth Fruit in Old Age; they shall be fat and flourishing: To
show that the Lord is upright: he is my Rock, and there is no unrighteousness
in him.

God is careful in this; It shall not be said, That there is any
Unrighteousness in Him; It shall not be said, He left any of his Servants in
their Old Age, He was weary of them in their Old Age: But they shall flourish
like the Palm Tree; and they shall be fat and flourishing. For, the Grace of
God is able to run a Line Parallel with the longest of any of our Lives; and
his Grace shall be sufficient for us, even to the very last, and in the very
end of Days: As I have already spoken to you.

But then there is a Third, and Higher sense: As thy Days, so shall thy
strength be. Now, as his Shoes are of Iron and Brass; so his Days are to be
numbered, even in that Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and that Kingdom of Eternity.
There is therefore a strength suitable to that State of Glory, of Eternal Glory
and Salvation, in the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Consider, Indeed it is a length of Duration beyond Expression, beyond
Comprehension. The thousand years that the Scripture speaks of, that the
Kingdom of Christ shall be in visible Glory; that is, fully taken care for, and
the state of Eternity after that, or the state of Eternity rather comprehending
that, and one with it: Of that Kingdom there shall be no end, for as the Day,
or Days of Eternity, so their strength shall be the strength of Eternity. So in
that vastness of Eternity, a Created Being that could not uphold and bear up it
self, it shall be born up by that Fountain of Life that is in God, and by that
Great Mediator of Life, the Lord Jesus Christ: He will take care, that even
throughout Everlastings of Everlastings, there shall not be the least
Retraction, a retracting, a drawing back of the Powers and Spirits of Life. As
the Days of Eternity, so shall be the strength of the Servants of God.

O! how unspeakable, how incomprehensibly Glorious is this, that God has
ordained for everlasting every one of our Spirits! It is not a Life of fifty,
sixty, eighty, or a hundred Years, or any such Time to live the Life of Sense
and Body.

It is all nothing, how long soever it be. We say, 'twas a wonderful Providence
that kept Methuselah so long, to so great an Age, to reach almost to a thousand
Years. Alas! this is nothing, though it be very great; yet we should think, if
we lived hundreds of Years in this Life, how should we do for the Supports of
it, and for the Vigorous of it.

But now our Days are for the Days of Eternity; but as our Days, so shall our
strength be. And God has assured this to us, in the 16th. Psalm, last Verse,
Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore: So that every way, take the
Days of the Servants of God how we will, as are our Days, so shall be our
strength.

I come to the third Thing I Proposed, and that was, to Argue the Certainty of
this; I say, to argue the certainty of it, and it stands upon these two
Considerations, which I shall very briefly present to you.

First, It arises from that Infinite strength of the Love of God in Jesus
Christ made over to his Servants. If he rides in his Excellency on the Sky; if
he will undertake for us, if he will be our Refuge whose are the Everlasting
Arms; if they lie under, it is impossible notwithstanding all Enemies, we
should fall, he will thrust them utterly out: There shall be no power of Satan,
there shall be no power of Sin, no power of Death, but whatsoever it be, it
shall be shut out for ever in the Lake; He Will say, thrust them out, and destroy
them. If he, I say, undertake, how can it be otherwise; if he will ride in the
Heaven for our sake? We should therefore often say to our selves, Let us
consider, in all the Jealousies of our Natures, and of our weak Beings; in the
midst of all these, have we not an Eternal God? Have we not an Infinite and
Omnipotent Being? If he take such a Drop of Being as I am, this trembling Drop,
and if he will say, I Will enclose this little Drop in my own Omnipotency, and set
it in the Ocean of my own Immense Being, and I Will take care and secure it every
moment. How safe are we! As we find in that Song God commanded to be sung, Isa.
27. 2, 3. In that day sing ye unto her, A Vineyard of red Wine, I the Lord do
keep it, I will water it every moment: I will keep it, and sustain it from the
first to the last; from the very beginning of the Creation to Eternity; and
from Electing Love in Eternity, throughout Eternity of Ages. I the Lord will
keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night
and day: And so it arises from the Infiniteness of God, and from that
Unchangeableness, that he will never fail, that he will never take off his Help.

And therefore God's strength is our strength, and God's Eternity is our
Security, and the certainty of our state of life. O! how excellent therefore is
that in the 40th. of Isaiah, 27th. Verse, Why say thou, O Jacob, and
speak O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over
from my God? Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the everlasting
God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not, neither is
weary, there is no searching of his understanding: He gives power to the
faint, and to them that have no might, he increases strength; even the Youths
shall faint and he weary, and the Young men shall utterly fail: But they that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings
as Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint.

O! If we could read, and meditate, and unite, and Consolidate such a Scripture
as this with our own Hearts, with what certainty might we say, As our Days, so
shall our strength be? Take them any way, as I have now described and
Represented them to you: Because the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints
not, neither is weary; there is no searching of his Understanding. He gives
power to the faint, etc.

And then in the second place, it arises from that great Interposer betwixt God
and us, the Lord Jesus Christ, into whose hands he has entrusted strength, and
laid help upon him, because he is mighty.

I am persuaded, we are not able to speak of the great Security that Jesus
Christ is, between the Eternal God, and such Creatures as we are. We do not
know it, we shall know it, but we do not yet know it; no one is able to express
it to us, as the thing it self is. We are not able to Declare or Express the
thing plentifully, as the expression is in Job. Plentifully as it is, it is
rather a matter of Profession to us, or a matter of Confession of Faith, and we
cannot tell how to say it otherwise: But Oh the Infinite value of it, the
Infinite Security of it, that it holds God and all his Saints together, that
they can never be Divorced, they never shall be separated.

This I say, the Interposal of Christ, it is so fast, so stable, so firm a
thing, that all that can be spoken of it, is not any way equal to it. All the
Discourses, though they are never so wise and good, betwixt the Creator and the
Creature; betwixt Infinite Mind, and the Intellectual and Rational Creature;
though they are expressed never so well in the main, and never so true; though
men are never so Great and Wise in these Discourses; they cannot come near the
high sense of the Expressions of our Lord in this Great Point, who has Loved
us, and Reconciled us, and in whom the Creature lost in it self is united
Spiritually to God in him.

Men do not enough consider that Indissoluble Center of Union our Lord Jesus
Christ, who can never be removed out of the Center, and that all the Lines run
and meet in him.

To consider this, and to understand this, I say, I do not know who is able to
express the thing as it is, to declare the thing plentifully as it it is. The
Secret of this point of Wisdom, I am fully assured is double; nay, a
thousand-fold to all we know, and to all we can speak. It is summed up
admirably in that 17th. of John, that I have heretofore mentioned in such
Discourses as these, and always I am ready to mention, it is so great: And I
have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith
thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them: I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, and that the World may believe that thou
have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. Ver. 24. Father I
will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my Glory which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the World: That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, etc. Ver. 21. 23, 24, 26.

Now in these things, the Union by Virtue of the Interposal of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is so great, that I say, we do but quibble in comparison; Men do but
quibble, when they talk of Union between the Creator and the Creature, except
they consider this great Intervention, the coming between of the Lord Jesus. I
doubt not, take the Holiest Saint in Heaven, if there were no Interposer
between God and them, but they might be lost, though they are in the present
Happiness and Blessedness of the Enjoyment of God. Here is the Lord Jesus
coming between, Father I will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with
me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me, etc.

This is our great Security, and this is that that makes our Shoes indeed to
be Iron and Brass, and that as our Day is, so our Strength shall be.

I come therefore to the Last Particular, and that is, to show that there must
be a Time, when this shall be Triumphant: I say, there must be a Time of
Glorious Appearance.

For, the World dares Contradict this now, the World dares laugh at it; they
dare to take upon them to say, This is nothing but Fancy, this is nothing but
Talk, this is nothing but a high flight of Expression; or (as they call it) a
Cant, a High Cant of Talk, a high Enthusiasm, a heated Fancy; therefore, I say,
there must be a Time, that shall outface all these Taunts, that shall out-look
them; for Scoffers can look against Saints now, and they can say, as they in
Nehemiah said, What will these pitiful people do? what will these silly feeble
folk do, to speak of things at this rate? Do we not see how their Faith, and
their Confidence staggers at every turn? Are they not in fear? And does not
their Faith sink low? and are they not afraid to Dye? and are they not
oftentimes under horror and trouble of Conscience? How can these things be?

Now I say, notwithstanding this, there is a hold of things, even now, that can
never be turned off: There is a Consibulation, as I may so call it; a Clasp of
things, held by God and Jesus Christ now, that can never be separated; But it
must come into a more Triumphant State; and it must come to that, that it must
be visible. And therefore, as I have often said, there is a Thousand years to
make it so, wherein there shall be a mutual Aspect of God on the Saints, and of
the Saints on God, that shall be made visible to all: And the Wicked shall
grieve, and look on and wonder to see, and gnash their Teeth to see what a
Union here is struck and Consolidated betwixt God and the Souls of his Saints
through Jesus Christ.

It will be their Horror and Astonishment for ever: And therefore Christ speaks
in that 17th. of John, I named to you before; that the World may believe:
Believe as the Devils believe, and Tremble; they shall be forced to believe:
says our Lord, that the World may believe that thou have sent me, and have
loved them, as thou have loved me, (latter part of the 21st. Verse:) That the
World may know it, and that the World may believe it: This is that which God
will take care to show, he will magnify himself by at that Day. Then shall all
the Servants of God come out in their Shoes of Brass and Iron, (as I may so
express it) and they shall tread down every thing that has been an Enemy to
them, they shall tread it down as the Mire of the street; they shall come out
Armed, and trample the Nations in Anger, and Fury, for it is given to them,
even as to Christ; they shall trample and Rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron.
This Honor have all his Saints.

This I speak, (God knows) not for Language sake, or for Expression sake, but
what I am fully assured of, and what I have such Evidence of Scripture for,
that these things shall come into the greatest, most open, and manifest
Appearance that can be: And then shall be fulfilled, what is written in the
7th. of Micah, 16th. Verse, The Nations shall see, and be confounded at their
might; they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf:
They shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their holes
like Worms of the earth; they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall
fear because of thee.

O! how great shall this State of Things be! I say, how great shall it be! And
then says he in the 10th. Verse, Then she that is mine Enemy shall see it, and
shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? You shall
see (say the Enemies of Saints) all this that you talk of, what a dark Cloud it
will set in.

When the Servants of God come to be in Affliction, and come to Dye, Why then
says the Enemy, where is the Lord thy God? Where are these Shoes of Iron and
Brass? where is this Strength according to the Day? where is the Lord thy God?
Mine eyes shall behold her. I Will look upon them, I Will laugh at them, I Will scorn
them, because I see no such thing. But says the Spirit of God, Now shall they
be trodden down as the mire of the streets. All the Enemies of God shall be
trodden down as the mire of the streets: And as David in the 18th. Psalm,
expresses with what Courage and Power, and mighty Success he went out against
his Enemies; says he, Then did I beat them small as the dust: and thou have
given me the shield of thy Salvation, and thy right hand has holden me up,
(Ver. 35.) Thy gentleness has make me great: Thou have enlarged my steps under
me, that my feet did not slip. My Feet were shod with Iron and Brass, that they
did not slip.

As you know Shoes of Iron and Brass they keep steady and firm, not slippery.
I have pursued mine Enemies, and overtaken them; neither did I turn again, till
they were consumed: I have wounded them, that they were not able to rise, they
are fallen under my feet. And so he goes on, expressing it, that he beat them
small, as the very Dust before the wind, and there was none to save them. Ver.
22. And I cast them out as the Dirt in the street.

And if you say, But O! how shall this be to such Sinners as we are? How can we
look for such a thing as this is? Do we not find that we are Men of the same
Infirmities, of the same Passions, of the same Corruptions? Therefore Micah
goes on, Micah 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
their sins into the depth of the Sea. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and
the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our Fathers from the days of
old.

Therefore let us all Encourage our selves that wait upon God: for we shall
renew our strength, let our case be never so dark and gloomy; let things be
never so hard, yet the knor of Union that is fastened betwixt Christ and us, and
so with God, it shall secure us to hold out throughout Eternities of Eternities.

Let us therefore encourage our selves (in regard of every thing) in the Lord
our God, and wait for that great state of things that certainly is very near;
That that Day, as it is often called in the Prophets: In that Day, and that
Day. Now that Day, (as I may so express it to you) it is very near.

Let us therefore now Encourage our selves in the Lord our God, etc.

FINIS.

