BETHEL and SMITH;
Or a Sober Answer to a Tantivy Pamphlet, entitled HOW and RICH, etc.
By one of the Inhabitants of the Borough of Southwark, who is no Bromidgham
Protestant.
9. March. 1680/1
THE pretty Bantling that has lately been laid to the charge of our four
Parishes, and had probably as many (if not more) Fathers (for the Mother was
without doubt true to the Troop, and the Babe has some of the features of
several Faces well-known among us) one the B. of the Borough, who
(notwithstanding the pretenses of Interest to bias him for Bethel and Smith)
did certainly with his under- Janissaries engage for them as the French did for
the English in the late Dutch War; another shrewdly suspected to be too much
inclined to St. Thomas a Beckets Religion, though he appear an Anabaptist in
that one instance of never having Christened any of his Children; a third so
undeniably Popishly-affected that he has made choice to live in
Tripple-Crown-Court; and the fourth, one who perhaps thought he might the more
safely venture upon playing a trick of Youth because of his Interest in the
Baudy-Court; (All which will yet doubtless be ready to declare themselves as
innocent in the matter as the child unborn); this hopeful Babe I say, having as
yet no other Name than that of it is Godfathers, How and Rich, I shall take the
liberty to add to it the Title of a Scurrilous Jeering Pamphlet, which the
following serious Examination will make appear to be it is due.

After the reproachful term of Bromidgham-Protestant which they fasten upon the
Intelligencer Mr. F. S. and which without question they hope will stick as a
Brand upon the Sober-party in like manner as that of Papist in Masquerade does
upon another sort of men. They hint at some strangers who concerned themselves
in our Election, and slily call them no small -- with a space, which they knew
common use would prompt any ordinary Reader to supply undecently, whereas it is
supposed that it was well known to the Authors, that among those strangers
there were several true Protestant Peers that appeared in behalf of Bethel and
Smith, against How and Rich; to whom though those famous Patriots were content
to allow the Character of honest men, (which they may be for ought I know) yet
certainly our noble Friend was very much in the right, who at one of our
meetings told us that we ought to choose such hardy, rough-hewn Representatives
as the present juncture of Affairs required, and such as might effectually do
the business of the King and Kingdom; and if Steward Smith be not such a one as
well as his Partner, which I begin to suspect from the account those
Pamphleters (who it may be know him better than I) give of him, I recall my
Vote, which before did him ho good, and my revocation of it I doubt can now do
him no harm.

For it cannot be denied that that part of the Tory-Pamphlet which is purely
Narrative, is agreeable enough to matter of Fact. And besides by comparing the
Pole-book with the Poors-book of the several Parishes, the Majority even of
Scot and Lot men is on the one side of How and Rich by near a hundred; so that,
I must be content to be represented by those two persons whom the Protestant
dissenting Minister I mostly hear, and who is (I imagine) the person upon whom
the Authors have in one part of the Pamphlet so scandalously reflected, has
taught me not to make Arbitrators of my Religion and Conscience.

The reasonably-to-be suspected-and not justly-to-be-defended-Authors of that
Pamphlet have laid hold of all advantages to render the honest party obnoxious
to censure; else they would not so industriously have exposed their slips and
falls, particularly those of Mr. F. S. whom they would insinuate to the World
to have been mad or drunk under the phrase of being overcharged with Ale and
Zeal.

If by the Abuses said to be put upon How and Rich to weaken their Interest,
are meant the scattering abroad and posting up libellous Papers against them by
some of our party, those who did so must answer at Law for their imprudence, if
How and Rich, are not so good Christians and Gentlemen as the Scriblers of that
Paper represent them to be; for I for my part am no more able to justify such
than our Tantivy-men are to defend what they are pleased to call Town-raillery.

We never pretended to make use of an Appeal but upon grounds, which the
discovery about Scot and Lot men has now removed; and the Pamphleters cannot be
thought to have been serious when they insinuated that the Inmates above all
others had such a design; their condition in the World rendering them less to
be suspected to appear in behalf of a Member whose true English disposition
might incline him to require the anciently accustomed compensation for the
trouble and charge of his service. So that the Scriblers might even have left
off before they had begun; for I suppose that by this time I have made it
appear that their Paper is a scurrilous jeering Pamphlet, Quod erat
demonstrandum.

London, Printed for S. F.


