A Chain of Principles concerning the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, against
the Seni-Sadducism of the Apostasy, that denies that Kingdom; Humbly offered
by way of Appeal to All Christians, especially to the Pastors, and Doctors of
the Churches, that if there be Error in Any of the Principles, or Weakness in
the Concatenation, It may be publicly Testified, and Convinced, For All is
Founded on Express Scripture, Compared, and Reasoned from according to Acts
17.3.
Kingdom, that Jesus Christ is to Have most distinct to Him, as the Son of Man;
For such a One He must by the Apostles Express Doctrine Deliver up to God, and
to the Father; that God may be All in All, 1 Cor. 15.24. Now if such a Kingdom
were to Christ, as the Eternal Word, and not as the Son of Man, God would not
be more All in All by the Delivery of it up. It must be therefore distinct to
Him, as the Son of Man, as he He is styled in the Prophecy of that Kingdom,
Dan. 7.13. and so the Delivery of it up more Fully manifests God All in All.

Tim. 4.1.) witness to be at his Coming and Appearance in Glory; It can be
therefore no Kingdom, Christ has yet Had; Because He has not yet Appeared in
Glory; Nor can It be the Kingdom of Eternity; Because It must be Delivered up,
that God in Eternity may be All in All; and yet One with Christ, and his Saints
throughout Eternity. John 17.21.

Kingdom of Christ is a Kingdom of, and with his Saints, and not a Solitary
Kingdom, is, what the whole stream of Scripture runs so into, that no One dare
call it into doubt; But that All his Saints both Dead, and They Alive at his
coming Enjoy the Glory of his Kingdom, has not been so Clear; To some,
concerning the Dead Saints; To others concerning the Living Saints; The Apostle
Paul has therefore in Two Great Places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. and 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Distributed. All the Saints into the Saints dead in Christ, Raised
first, and Raised Incorruptible; and into the Saints Living, and Remaining at
his Coming, who Dye not; but are Changed first, viz. at that Coming; and after
Caught up to be Ever with the Lord; which Saints so Alive at his Coming are
called; We; to Assure They are Saints; and We All, to show, They are the Last
and the Complement, who make up the Full Number of Saints.

Coming, when His Kingdom is, He will Bring them with Him, and the Living shall
not be before hand with them; nor indeed Attain Them; so that if He have any
Saints with him in Glory, as He most certainly will; They that sleep by Him and
in Him shall be the First: And then concerning the Living Saints; The Apostle
is as full, and Positive, They shall be Changed, and shall not Dye; They must
therefore be in Bodies at least of such Excellency as Adams in Paradise, who,
if He had not sinned, had not Dyed; (though still under a possibility of
Dying.) 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. etc. This I say on Supposition, as
will Appear, They are not presently Caught up.

Corruptible of All Saints puts on Incorruption, and the Mortal of All Saints
puts on Immortality, Then is Brought to pass the Saying, that is written, that
Death is swallowed up in Victory. So the Apostle speaks expressly, 1 Cor.
15.54. Whenever Death is swallowed up in Victory, It is subdued; Else Victory,
and swallowing up in Victory is not subduing, v. 26. Now Death is the Last
Enemy to be subdued; when That therefore is subdued, All is subdued; Else It
were not the Last Enemy. And when All Things shall be subdued to the Son, then
shall the Son be subject, viz. as Son of Man, that God in the Eternal Word in
our Nature may be All in All, in and with the Saints, v. 28. John 17.21. to the
End.

Dead Saints, whom Christ brings with Him, and who Rise first, must needs put
on Incorruption; For the Apostle says, v. 52. They shall be Raised
Incorruptible; and They must put on Immortality, For our Lord says, Luke 20.36.
They cannot Dye any more, For they are Equal to Angels, whoever are the
Children of God, and of the Resurrection; And Their being thus Raised is to be
at the Coming of Christ, and at his Kingdom. So in these Dead Saints Raised
first, Death must be swallowed up in Victory, whenever Christ Comes.

Deaths being swallowed up in Victory shall be found necessary to the
Continuation of the Kingdom of Christ, and to its not being Delivered up
immediately unto the Father (seeing It must be Delivered up, when ever the Last
Enemy Death is subdued) That Delay must be found in the Saints Changed; who are
not therefore said by the Apostle to be Changed Incorruptible, although They
shall not Dye; Nor is it necessary by any Thing the Apostle has said, They
should be Caught up immediately; there being the same (...) or afterward fixed
by the Apostle between the Dead in Christ Rising first, and the Living being
Caught up, that was betwixt Christ Rising, and his Saints Rising at his Coming,
1 Cor. 15.23. which, we all know, has already spent above 1600 years. There is
no Scripture Evidence then, that the Saints Changed do immediately put on
Incorruption and Immortality, though in Event They shall not Dye; and so Death
not swallowed up in Victory in them, nor therefore that Last Enemy subdued, nor
therefore the Kingdom of Christ at his Appearing necessary to be Delivered up,
as else it must be at that Last Enemy subdued.

Kingdom and of a Monarchy succeeding Four Monarchies of Duration, as Christ's
is, Dan. 2.44. Dan. 7.27. Implies Duration; The Apostle Peter therefore
speaking of the Day of Judgment; which is also at the Appearance of Christ, and
at his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. and a Government, as well as a Judgment; would not
have Christians Ignorant, as a Point of Great Concernment, That One Day is with
the Lord as a 1000 years, 2 Pet. 3.8. and the Apostle John tells us, The Reign
of the Saints with Christ, both Principal or Participants in the First
Resurrection is for a 1000 years, Rev. 20.46.

Kingdom of Christ, seeing It must be at his Coming and Appearance, and before
the Kingdom of Eternity; and seeing, It is a Kingdom with All Saints, and
seeing It must have a Duration, and that Duration is defined to be a 1000
years, can have its place no where, but in that very (...), or afterward
between the Dead in Christ, Rising Incorruptible, and his Saints Alive at his
Coming Changed, as the Term of its Beginning; and the Living Remaining Caught
up into the same Incorruption, and Immortality with the Saints Raised First,
(...).
as the Last Term, or End of the Kingdom of Christ, when it is Delivered up;
The Saints therefore not Dying before the Kingdom, are called The Living, The
Remaining under Guard of Life, That They shall not Dye; and to that purpose are
also Changed into Bodies of Paradise, Healed by the Leaves of the Tree of Life,
Rev. 22.2.
and yet have not put on Incorruption, and Immortality, nor shall do till They
are Caught up; But as to the nature of their Bodies They might Dye, as Adam;
who yet, if He had not sinned, should not have Dyed. And This in the Holy, and
wise Dispensation of God gives the space to the Kingdom of Christ, before it be
delivered up at the subduing of the Last Enemy Death. Now to this Order from
the Resurrection of Christ to his Coming, There are set Just Notes of Time by
such Words, as express a Distance, and an Immediateness; which however they may
be used sometimes indifferently, yet in this order must signify with greatest
Exactness; the distance of above 1700 years from Christ's Resurrection to that
of his Saints is couched under the First Afterward (...).
; Of a 1000 years, and a little space from the Coming of Christ to the End
under the second, After (...).
; And at the End, the Immediateness of the Kingdom delivered up by the Third,
Then; or at that very Time 1 Cor: 15.23.24. And so 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. The same,
Afterward, is used to divide betwixt the Dead in Christ Rising, and the Living
Saints Caught up to be Ever with the Lord.

New Heaven, and a New Earth by the Apostle Peter Ep. 2. c. 3. v. 13; and His
Kingdom by the Apostle John in the same manner; And Nations of the saved
walking in the Light of the New Heavens, and Kings of the Earth bringing their
Glory. Rev. 21.24.
For He that sat on the Throne, said, Behold I create all New, and John saw a
New Heaven, and a New Earth, Rev. 21.5. And so the Saints Risen are described
by the Apostle to be with Christ, as in the New Heaven; And the Saints Living
Remaining, as on the New Earth, are Caught up at the End to meet together in
the Air, in that General Assembly, and Church of the First Born and at that
Great Solemnity of Delivery up of the Kingdom to God, and the Father, and so
being Ever with the Lord, and where He is, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. John 17.21. etc.

Resurrection, that Comprehends the Dead in Christ, as Principals and the
Living Remaining, as Partakers does not Comprehend the Wicked, who, though They
Rise indeed, yet It being to Condemnation are called The Dead, Revel. 20.5 and
at Last are Cast into the Lake of the second Death. There can be therefore but
One Resurrection joined with Life; of which Christ speaking, Says; I am the
Resurrection, and the Life, John 11.25. For the Dead in Christ, who Rise First,
can Dye no more, and so can Rise no more, then the First Time; And the Living
Remaining being changed, and not Dying are Caught up; and so are Partakers of
the First Resurrection, to which the Second Death is only opposed; and so Rise
not; But yet are found in the Lambs Book of Life by that Participation; So the
Second Death can have no Power over Them. Rev. 20. v. 6.12.15.

Kingdom of Christ is not by Scripture called the Fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom
But it is most plainly declared by Daniel, Chap. 2. and Chap. 7. to come after
Four Monarchies before it: But in that It makes its way by its own Power, and
Appearance in the Light, and Glory of the Gospel; The Doctrine of it if truly
stared can never be suspected of Mutinies and Insurrections; Nor that Brand,
which is so Generally Fixed on Fifth Monarchy Men, as They are called, can at
all belong to Them, viz. That they are Enemies to the Higher Powers, and
Governments which are of God.

Now Allowing, that whatever Scripture speaks in any Place, ought to be
compared with what It speaks in other Places; so that we may Reason from the
whole, and Conclude, as is evident, Acts 17.3, we ought; I, even making my
Boast in the Word of God, and not in my self, challenge All Persons Believing
Scripture; whether I have not proved, That there must needs be such a 1000
years Kingdom of Christ to be Enjoyed by all his Saints; by the Dead Rising
first in the New Heaven; and by his Saints L^ving Remaining on the New Earth;
and that It must be in the space between the Living Saints Changed, when the
Dead Saints Rise First; and the same Living Saints Caught up, and so All being
ever with the Lord in the Kingdom Delivered up, and God All in All; If I have
not proved these Things, Scripture is Open, Let Them Implead, what I have said;
And the Lord give us Understanding in All Things.

FINIS.

