THE WORLD'S MISTAKE IN Oliver Cromwell; OR, A short Political Discourse,
SHOWING, That CROMWELL'S Mal-administration, (during his Four Years, and Nine
Months pretended Protectorship,) laid the Foundation of Our present
Condition, in the Decay of TRADE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXVIII.

THE WORLD'S MISTAKE IN Oliver Cromwell, etc.
OF all the Sins, that the Children of Men are guilty of, there is none, that
our corrupt Natures are more inclinable unto, than that of Idolatry, a Sin,
that may be toward Men, so well as other Creatures, and things; For, as that
which a Man unmeasurably relyes, and setts his Heart upon, is Called his GOD,
even as that which he falls down before, and worshippeth: so, when one has the
Person of another in an excess of admiration, whether for Greatness or
Richness, etc. which we are subject to adore, we are said to Idolize him; and
therefore the wise Venetians, who, of all men, are most Jealous of their
Liberty, Considering that as the nature of Man is not prone to any thing more
than the Adoration of Men, So nothing is more destructive to Freedom, has, for
preventing the Mischiefs of it, made it unlawful, even so much as to mourn for
their Duke at his death; Intimating thereby, that their Felicity and Safety
depends not upon the uncertain Thread of any one Man's life; but upon the Virtue
of their good Laws, and Orders, well executed, and that they can never want
virtuous Persons to succeed: and how do such Principles in men, lead by little
more than Morality, reprove those, who have a great measure of Gospel Light,
for their senseless excess, in their adoring the remembrance of Cromwell. For
as the Objects of Idolatry are mistaken Creatures, or things, proceeding some
times from self-love, so well as other causes, So the undeserved approbation,
and applause, that Cromwell's memory seems to have with his Adherents,
amounting to little less, than the Idolizing of him, appears to me, to be the
product of an excessive Veneration of Greatness, and a selfish Partiality
toward him; for that the more honor is given to him, the more praise they
think will consequently redound to them, who were his Favorites; and they
fortify themselves herein, with the Credit they say he has abroad, though
there is little in that, because the opinion that Strangers have of him, may
well be put upon the account of their ignorance, in the Affairs of England,
which Travelers do find, to be so great, even amongst Ministers of State, as
is to be admired. And now as this Error in Idolizing Oliver has two moral
Evils in it, (besides the sin in it self:) The one, a reflection upon the
present times, as if the former were better than these; And the other, the
unjust defrauding the Long Parliament of that which is due to them, to give it
Idolitrously to him, to whom it does not belong; I esteem it a Duty incumbent
upon me, to discover the Mistake. I am not insensible, that I shall by this,
draw the envye of those upon me, who, being Jealous of their Honor, will be
angry for touching them in their Diana; but knowing my self clear, from the
Vices of envying Virtue in any, how contrary soever he may be to me in
Judgment, so well, as from being unwilling to allow every one their due
Commendations, I will cast my self upon Providence, for the success of this
Paper; And in reference to Cromwell's Government, and the present times, make
some Observations relating to both, and, in order thereunto, show,

First, That the original cause of the low condition that we are now (in
relation to Trade) reduced unto, had its beginning in Olivers time, and the
foundations of it, laid, either, by his ignorant mistaking the Interest of
this Kingdom, or wilfully doing it, for the advancement of his own particular
Interest.

Secondly, That his time, for the short continuance, had as much of oppression,
and injustice, as any former times.

Thirdly and lastly, That he never in his later days, valued either honor or
honesty. when they stood in the way of his ambition, and that there is nothing
to be admired in him (though so much Idolized) but that the partiallity of the
world, should make him so great a favorite of ignorance, and forgetfullness, as
he seems to be.

When this late Tyrant, or Protector, (as some calls him) turned out the Long
Parliament, the Kingdom was arrived at the highest pitch of Trade, Wealth, and
Honor, that it, in any Age, ever yet knew. The Trade appeared, by the great
Sums offered then for the Customs and Excise, Nine hundred thousand pounds a
year, being refused. The Riches of the Nation, showed it self, in the high
value, that Land, and all our Native Commodities bore, which are the certain
marks of opulencie. Our Honor, was made known to all the world, by a
Conquering Navy, which had brought the proud Hollanders upon their Knees, to
beg peace of us, upon our own Conditions, keeping all other Nations in awe.
And besides these advantages, the public stock, was Five hundred thousand
pounds in ready Money, the value of seven hundred thousand pounds in Stores,
and the whole Army in Advance, some four* and none under two months; so that
though there might be a debt of near Five hundred thousand pounds upon the
Kingdom, he met with above twice the value in lieu of it.

The Nation being in this flourishing and formidable posture, Cromwell began
his Usurpation, upon the greatest advantages imaginable, having it in his power
to have made peace, and profitable Leagues, in what manner he had pleased
withal our Neighbors, every one courting us then, and being ambitious of the
friendship of England; But as if the Lord had infatuated, and deprived him of
common sense and reason, he neglected all our golden opportunities, misimproved
the Victory God had given us over the United Netherlands, making peace (without
ever striking stroke) so soon as ever things came into his hands, upon equal
terms with them. And immediately after, contrary to our Interest, made an
unjust War with Spain, and an impollitick League with France, bringing the
first thereby under, and making the latter too great for Christendom; and by
that means, broke the balance betwixt the two Crowns of Spain, and France,
which his Predecessors the Long Parliament, had always wisely preserved.

In this dishonest War with Spain, he pretended, and endeavored, to impose a
belief upon the world, that he had nothing in his eye, but the advancement of
the Protestant Cause, and the honor of this Nation; but his pretenses, were
either fraudulent, or he was ignorant in Foreign affairs (as I am apt to
think, that he was not guilty of too much knowledge in them) For he that had
known any thing of the temper of the Popish Prelacie, and the French Court
policies, could not but see, that the way to increase, or preserve the
reformed Interest in France, was by rendering the Protestants of necessary use
to their King, for that longer than they were so, they could not be free from
persecution, and that the way to render them so, was by keeping the balance
betwixt Spain and France even, as that* which would consequently make them
useful to their King: But by overthrowing the balance in his War with Spain,
and joining with France, he freed the French King from his fears of Spain,
enabled him to subdue all Factions at home, and thereby to bring himself into a
condition of not standing in need of any of them, and from thence, has
proceeded the persecution that has since been, and still is, in that Nation,
against the reformed there; so that Oliver, instead of advancing the reformed
Interest, has by an error in his Polliticks, been the Author of destroying it.

The Honor and Advantage he propounded to this Nation, in his pulling down of
Spain, had as ill a foundation* For if true, as was said, that we were to have
had O stend, and Newport, so well as Dunhirk (when we could get them) they bore
no proportion in any kind, to all the rest of the King of Spains European
Dominions, which must necessarily have fallen to the French Kings share,
because of their joining, and nearness to him, and remoteness from us, and the
increasing the greatness of so near a Neighbor, must have increased our future
dangers: But this man, who through ignorance, is so strangely cried up in the
world, was not guilty of this error in State only, but committed as great a
solecisme, in his designing the outing of the King of Denmark, and setting up
of the King of Sweden: For had the Sweeds, but got Copenhagen, (as in all
probability had Oliver lived, they would have done) they had wanted nothing of
consequence, but the Cities of Lubeck and Dantzigge, (which by their then
potencie, they would easily have gained) of being Masters of the whole Baltic
Sea, on both sides* from the Sound or mouth down to the bottom of it; by
which, together with all Denmark* Norway, and the Danes, part of Holstein,
which would consequently have been theirs (they then having as they still have
the Land of ^remen) there would have been nothing, but the small Counties of
Ouldenburge, and East-Friezland, (which would easily have fallen into their
mouths) betwixt them, and the United Netherlands* whereby Sweden, would on the
one side to the North, and North-East, have been as great, as France on the
other, to the South, and South-West, and they two, able to have divided the
Western Empire betwixt them.

And whereas, it had in all Ages been the policies of the Northern States and
Potentates, to keep the Dominion of the Baltic Sea, divided amongst several
petty Princes and States, that no one might be sole Master of it; because
otherwise, most of the necessary Commodities for shipping, coming from thence
and Norway, any one Lord of the whole, might lay up the shipping of Europe, by
the walls, in shutting only of his Ports, and denying the Commodities of his
Country to other States. Cromwell contrary to this wise Maxim, endeavored to
put the whole Baltic Sea into the Sweeds hands, and undoubtedly had (though I
suppose ingnorantly) done it, if his death had not given them that succeeded
him, the Long Parliament, an opportunity of prudently preventing it: For if he
had understood the importance of the Baltic Sea to this Nation, he could not
have been so impolitick, as to have projected so dangerous a design against his
new Vtopia, as giving the opening and shutting of it to any one Prince. I am
not ignorant, that this error is excused, by pretending that we were to have
had Elsinore and Cronenburge Castle, (the first, the Town, upon the narrow
entrance of the Baltic, called the Sound, where all Ships Rides, and pays
Toll to the King of Denmark; and the latter, the Fortress, that defends both
Town and Ships,) by which we should have been Masters of the Sound, and
consequently of the Baltic; but they that knows those Countries, and how great
a Prince the Sweed would have been, had he obtained all the rest, besides these
two Bables, must confess, we should have been at his devotion, in our holding
of any thing in his Countries: And further, if the dangerous consequence of
setting up so great a Prince, had not been in the case, it had been against the
Interest of England to have had an obligation upon us to maintain places so
remote, against the enmity of many States and Princes; and that for these
reasons:

First, because the ordinary Tolls of the Sound, would not have defrayed half
the charge, and to have taken more than the ordinary Tolls, we could not have
done, without drawing a general quarrel upon us, from most of the Princes, and
States of the Northern parts of Europe.

Secondly, because the experience of all former times shows us, that foreign
acquisitions, have ever been Chargeable, and prejudicial to the people of
England, as Sir Robert Cotton makes it clearly appear, That not only all those
Pieces of France, which belonged to us by rightful succession; but also those
we held by Conquest, were always great burdens to our Nation, and cause of
much poverty and misery to the People. And it is not our Case alone, to be the
worse for Conquests, (although more ou^s, than other Countries, because of the
Charge and uncertainty of the Winds and Weather in the Transportation of
Succors and relief by Sea, which contiguous Territories, which are upon the
Maine, are not subject to,) but the Case also of (I think I may say) all other
Kingdoms. In France, their burdens and oppressions have grown in all ages,
with the greatness of their Kings; Nay, even after their last peace with Spain,
by which they had given them peace with all the world, besides many places in
the Spanish Netherlands, and Catalonia into boot: Upon which the poor people
promised themselves (though vainly) an unquestionable abatement of Taxes;
instead of that, they found their pressures increased daily, and their King,
though overgrownly great and rich himself, yet the people so poor, that
thousands are said to dye in a plentiful year, for want of bread to their
water, nothing being free there, but fresh water and air; For (except in some
few privileged places) wherever they have the conveniencie by their Situation
of Seawater, (least they should make use of the benefit of that, which God and
Nature has given them, for saving the charge of Salt,) every family is forced
to take so much Salt of the King, at his own rate, (which is above ten times
the price it is sold for to strangers, for transportation) as is judged they
may spend in a year; the Lord deliver all other Countries from their example.
In Sweden, that King, Count* and their Military Officers, are the better for
their Conquests, in Germany, Denmark, Russia, and some places anciently
belonging to Poland; but the Commons the worse: Spain is undone* by the great
number of people sent thence to the West Indies, which has depopulated the
Country, France reaping more benefit by keeping their people at home to
Manufactures, than Spain does by sending theirs abroad for Silver and Gold* and
now, though by these instances it may appear to be the Interest of the people
of other Nations, so well as ours, to live in peace, without covering
additions; yet it is more our true Interest, (because, by reason of our
Situation, we have no need of Foreign Frontier Towns, our Ships well ordered,
being better than other Princes bordering Garrisons) than any other Kingdoms to
neglect especially Europian acquisition, and colonies, and apply our selves:

First, To the improving of our own Land, of which we have more than we have
people to manage.

Secondly, To the Increasing our Home and Foreign Trades, for which we have
natural advantages above any other Nation.

Thirdly and Lastly, (by our strength which Trade will increase) To make use of
it, together with the helps that God and Nature has given us in our Situation,
and otherwise, in keeping the Balance amongst our Neighbors; For if the
Province of Holland, which is but Four hundred thousand Acres of profitable
ground, is by the benefit of Trade able to do so much, as we experienced the
last War, what might we do, if Trade were improved, who have much more
advantages for it, than they have: I ascribe what was done by the Netherlands
in the late War to the Province of Holland; because, that though the Provinces
are seven in number, Hollands due proportion of all charges, is 58 in a
hundred, to all the others 41, of which 41, Holland gets little more than 20*
honestly paid them, insomuch, that it alone may be reckoned to beat four fifths
in a hundred, to one fifth that all the other six bears; and how prodigious a
thing is it, that Holland, no bigger than as before mentioned, should be able
to Coap with England, Scotland, and Ireland, and that though their Charges in
the late War was abundantly greater than ours, yet by their good management,
to be so little the worse for it, that at the conclusion of the War, to have
their Credits so high, that they could have commanded what Money they had
pleased at Three in the Hundred, and all this by the mere additional benefit of
Trade and good Order; and how by Comwells indiscreet neglecting of Trade, and
choosing War when he was in Peace, did he miss the true Interest of England,
as by his ill founded designs, he did the Interest of the Reformed Religion;
For if he had succeeded in his unjust Invasion of the Spanish Territories in
the West Indies, (as God seldom prospers dishonest undertakings) it being
intended for a State acquisition, the benefit would not have been defusive, but
chiefly to himself and Favorites, and prejudicial to the people in general,
thought at the expense of their substance, the acquests would have been made*
For had he met with so much success in the gaining those Countries, and in
them, that plenty of Gold and Silver as he vainly hoped for, we should have
been as unhappy in them (in the depopulating of our Countries, by the loss of
the multitude of people that must have been sent thither, and in impoverishing
our Nations by the vast charge of a continual War) as Spain is, and to no
other end, than the making of him only Rich, able to Inslave the remaining
people, and to make himself absolute over them; for the preventing of which, in
such Tyrants as Cromwell, surely Moses had an eye, when he said that they
should not greatly multiply Silver and Gold. And thus, as Cromwells designs
must, to an impartial Judgment, appear to have been laid, some dishonestly,
others impolitickly, and all contrary to the Interest of the Kingdom, so the
Issue of them was dammageable to the people of England: As,

First, in his sudden making a Peace with Holland, so soon as he got the
Government, without those advantages for Trade, as they who beat them did
intend to have had, as their due, and just satisfaction for their Charges in
the War.

Secondly, in his War with Spain, by the loss of that beneficial Trade to our
Nation, and giving it to the Hollanders, by whose hands we drove (during the
War) the greatest part of that Trade which we had of it, with 25. in the
hundredth profit to them, and as much loss to us.

Thirdly, by our loss in that War with Spain, of 1500 English ships, according
as was reported to that Assembly, called Richards Parliament.

Fourthly, in the disgracefullest defeat at Hispaniola that ever this Kingdom
suffered in any age or time.

Fifthly, and lastly, in spending the great Public stock he found, and yet
leaving a vast Debe upon the Kingdom, as appeared by the Accounts brought into
Richards Assembly; which had, (I believe) been yet much higher, but that they
who under him managed the Affairs, were a sort of People who had been long
disciplined, (before his time) to a Principle of Frugality, and against
Cheating; though at cousening the poorer People* for their Masters benefit*
some of them were grown as dexterous, as if they had been bred in the Court of
Spain; For besides imposing Richard upon the People, after his Fathers death,
by a forged Title, according to the very Law they took to be in being, when by
his Assembly, they were ordered to bring in an Account of the Receipts, and
payments of the Kingdom; they made about Sixty thousand pounds spent in
Intelligence, whereas it cost not above Three or Four thousand at most; and
calculating the rest by these, it may well be concluded, that they were expert
in their Trades.

It is confessed, that Olivers Peace and League with France, was upon
honorable Articles; but as the tottering Affairs of France then stood, much
more could not have been sooner asked, than had; For Mazerine, being a Man of a
large and subtle wit, apprehending the Greatness of England at that time, which
was then dreadful to the World, and the Vast advantages France would have in
pulling down, by their help, of Spain, granted him, not only any thing for the
present that he demanded, but disregarded also, even his Parties making their
boasts of the awe he had him under, Considering, that when Cromwell had helped
him, to do his Work, in bringing under the House of Austria, and therein
casting the balance of Christendom on his side, he should afterward have
leisure to recover what then he seemed to part with; And though nothing is more
ordinary* than to hear Men bragg, how Oliver Vapoured over France, I do esteem
Mazerine's complying with him, for his own ends, to be the Chief piece of all
his Ministry; For by that means only, and no other, is his Master become so
great at this day, that no Factions at home can disturb his Peace, nor Powers
abroad frighten him, Which is more than any King of France, since Charles the
Great, could say; And when his Neighbor Nations have (too late I fear)
experienced his Greatness, they will find cause to Curse the ignorance of
Oliver's Politics; and therefore, when a true measure is taken of Cromwell,
the approbation that he has in the World, will not be found to have its
Foundation in sense or reason, but proceeding from Ignorance, and Atheism:
From Ignorance, in those that takes all that was done by him, as a Servant, and
whilst under the direction of better Heads, than his own, to be done by him
alone; And from Atheism, in those that thinks every thing lawful that a man
does, if it succeed to his advancement; But they that shall take an impartial
View of his Actions whilst he was a Single Person, and at liberty to make use
of his own Parts without control, will find nothing worthy Commendations, but
cause enough from thence to observe, that the wisdom of his Masters, and not
his own, must have been that by which he first moved; and to attribute his
former performances, whilst a Servant, (as is truly due) to the Judgment and
Subtilty of the Long Parliament, under whose Conduct and Command he was. And
now from Cromwells neglecting to live in peace, as if he had pleased he might
have done with all the World, to the great enriching of this Nation; The
improvement of our Victory over Holland in his peace with them, His being the
Cause of the loss of our Spanish Trade, during all his time, Of the loss of
1500 English ships in that War, besides, by it, breaking the Balance of
Europe, Of the expense of the Public Stock and Stores he found, with the
contracting a Debt of Nineteen hundred thousand pounds, according to his own
account, (which, for ought I know he left behind him, but am apt to think the
Debt was not altogether so great* though made so to his Son Richard's
Assembly, as a means to get the more Money from the poorer people:) And lastly,
of the dishonorable overthrow we met with at Hispaniola, It may well be
Concluded that he lay the Foundation of our present want of Trade, to what we
formerly enjoyed; and that the reason why his miscarriages were not sooner
under observation, is* because our Stock of Wealth and Honor at his Coming to
the Government, being then unspeakably great, stifled their appearance, until
having since had some unhappy additional Losses, they are now become
discernable as first Losses to a Merchant, who Concealedly bears up under them,
are afterward discovered by the addition of second Losses, that sincks him:
When I contemplate these great Failings, I cannot but apprehend the sadd
Condition any people are in, whose Governor drive on a distinct contrary
Interest to theirs; for doubtless Cromwell's overweening Care to secure his
particular Interest, against His Majesty, (then abroad) and the Long
Parliament, whom he had turned out, with a prodigious Ambition of acquiring a
glorious Name in the World, carried him on to all his Mistakes and Absurdities,
to the irrepairable loss and damage of this famous Kingdom.

To prove the second Assertion, That Oliver's Time was full of Oppression and
Injustice, I shall but instance in a few of many Particulars, and begin with
John Lilburne, not that I think him in any kind one that deserved favor or
respect, but that equal Justice is due to the worst so well as best men, and
that he comes first in order of time.

1. John in 1649. was by Order of the then Parliament tried for his Life, with
an intent (I believe) of taking him away, but the Jury not finding him Guilty,
he was immediately, according to Law, generously set at liberty by those, that
had quarrel enough against him. This Example in the Parliament of keeping to
the Laws in the Case of one, who was a professed implacable Enemy to them,
ought to have been Copied by Cromwell; but in the contrary, to show that there
was a difference betwixt his and his Predecessors (the Long Parliaments)
Principles, when the Law had again upon a second Trial (occasioned by Oliver)
Cleared Lilburne, the Parliaments submitting to the Law was no Example to him;
For, contrary to Law, he kept him in Prison, until he was so far spent in a
Consumption, that he only turned him out to dye.

2ly. Mr. Conyes Case is so notorious, that it needs little more than naming:
He was a Prisoner at Cromwells Suit, and being brought to the Kings Bench Bar
by a Habeas Corpus, had his Counsel taken from the Bar, and sent to the Tower
for no other reason, than the pleading of their Clients Cause; an Act of
Violence, that I believe the whole Story of England does not parallel.

3ly. Sir Henry Vain, above any one Person, was the Author of Olivers
Advancement, and did so long, and cordially Espouse his Interest, that he
prejudiced himself (in the opinion of some) by it, yet so ungrateful was this
Monster of Ingratitude, that he studied to destroy him, both in Life and
Estate, because he could not adhere to him in his Perjury and Falseness. The
occasion he took was this, He appointing a Public Day of Humiliation, and
seeking of God for him, invited all Gods people in his Declaration, to offer
him their advise in the weighty affairs then upon his shoulders: Sir Henry
taking a rise from hence offered his Advise by a Treatise, called The Healing
Question; But Cromwell* angry at being taken at his word, Seized, Imprisoned,
and endeavored to proceed further against him, for doing only, what he had
invited him to do; and some may think, that Sir Henry suffered justly, for
having known him so long, and yet would trust to any thing he said.

4ly. In Richards Assembly, certain Prisoners in the Tower, under the then
Lieutenant, and some sent thence to Jersey, and other places beyond the Sea,
complained of false Imprisonment. Their Goalor was sent for, and being required
to show by what Authority he kept those persons in hold, produces a Paper all
under Olivers own Hand* as follows. Sir, I pray you seife such and such
Persons, and all others, whom you shall judge dangerous men, do it quickly, and
you shall have a Warrant after you have done. The nature of this Warrant was by
Richards Assembly debated, and having first Richards own Counsels opinion in
the Case, as Sergeant Maynard, etc. they Voted the Commitment of the
Complainants to be Illegal, Unjust, and Tyrannical; and that first, because
the Warrant by which they were Committed was under the hand of the then (as
they called him) Chief Magistrate, who by Law ought not to commit any by his
own Warrant. Secondly, because no Cause was shown in the Warrant; And Thirdly,
(in the Case of those sent out of the reach of a Habeas Corpus, which in Law is
a Banishment) because no Englishman ought to be Banished by any less Authority
than an Act of Parliament. And therefore, for these reasons, they Voted
farther, that the Prisoners should be set at Liberty without paying any Fees,
or Charges, but the turning out, and punishing the Lieutenant by the Assembly
(for obeying so unjust a Warrant) was prevented by their sudden dissolution.

5ly. The Tyrany in the decemating a party restored to common Privileges with
all others, and the public Faith given for it, by a Law made to that end, by
the then powers in being, is sufficiently showed in the mentioning of it, only
there is this aggravating Circumstance in it, That Cromwell, who was the
principal* Person in procuring that Law, when he thought it for his advantage
not to keep it, was the only Man for breaking it: But to the honor of his
first Assembly, next following, it may be remembered, that they no sooner came
together, than like true Englishmen, who are always jealous of the Rights and
Privileges of the people, damned the Act of Decemation as an unjust and wicked
breach of Faith.

The third Assertion of Cromwells knowing no honesty, where he thought his
particular Interest was concerned, is made good; First (though therein he
mistook his Interest) in his odious and unjust War with Spain, without the
least provocations, merely out of an ambitious and covetous design of robbing
that Prince of his Silver and Gold Mines, and because he judged it for his
Credit to disguise his unlawful desires, he proceeded in it, by employing his
Creatures in the City, to draw the Merchants to complain of Injuries done them
by Spain, and to Petition for Reparations; but by a cross Providence, his
Project had a contrary Success; for instead of answering his seekings, the
Merchants remonstrated to him, the great prejudice that a War with Spain would
be to England, and showed, that, that King, had been so far from Iujuring us,
that he had done more for Compliance and preventing a Breach with England, than
ever he had done in favor of any other Nation; But when Oliver saw his Method
would not take, he called the Remonstrators Malignants, and begun the War of
his own accord, in which, he was highly ungrateful in designing the ruin of
that Prince, who all along had been most faithful to his Party.

Secondly, His Falseness and Ingratitude, appeared superlatively in turning out
his Masters, who had not only advanced him, but made themselves the more odious
by their partial affection toward him, and in his doing it, with the breach of
a positive negative Oath, taken once a year, when made a Counselor of State,
besides the breach of all other Engagements, Voluntary Imprecations*
Protestations, and Oaths, taken frequently upon all occasions in Discourse and
Declarations; and yet further (when he had turned them out) and left them void
of Protection, and exposed them to the Fury of the people, in pursuing them
with false reproachful Declarations, enough to have stired up the rude
multitude to have destroyed them, wherever they had met them.

Thirdly, His want of Honor, so well as Honesty, appears, yet further, in
that having by a long series, of a seeming pious deportment, gained by his
dissimulation, good thoughts in his Masters, the Long Parliament, and by his
Spiritual gifts, winded himself into so good an opinion with his Soldiers,
(men generally of plain breeding, that knew little besides their Military
Trade, and Religious Exercises) that he could impose, in matters of business,
what belief he pleased upon them; he made use of the credit he had with each,
to abuse both, by many vile practices, for making himself popular, and the
Parliament and Army odious to one another, and because the Artifices he used
are too many to innumerant, I shall but instance in some few; As his sly
complaining Insinuations against the Army to the Parliament* and against them
to the Army: His being the chief Cause of the Parliaments giving rewards to his
Creatures, and then, whispering Complaints amongst his Officers, of their ill
Husbandry: His obstructing the House in their business, by long drawling
Speeches, and other ways, and then complaining of them to his Soldiers, that
he could not get them to do any thing that was good: His giving fair words to
every one, without keeping promise with any, except for his own advantage, and
then excusing all with forgetfullness: And his deserting his Major Generals,
in their decimations, crying out most against them himself, when he only had
set them at work, because questioned by his Assembly, is not to be sorgotten,
etc. I would not be understood, to remember any thing here, in Favor of the
Long Parliament, for what might be Wicked in him, might be Just as to them; And
though, if what he did, had been for the Restoration of his Majesty, he might
have been excused, yet being for his own Single Advancement, it is
unpardonable, and leaves him a Person to be truly admired for nothing but
Apostasy and Ambition, and exceeding Tyberius in dissimulation. I am not
ignorant, that some thinks it matter of praise in him, that he kept us in
peace, four years, and nine months; but that has little in it, his Majesty
having done the like, almost double his time, since his Return, with one fifth
part of that number of Soldiers which he Commanded; though he, has also had
the trouble of pressing, and sometimes forcing Uniformity in Religion* which he
found under several Forms; whereas Oliver, kept the Nation purposely divided
in opinions, and himself of no declared Judgment, as the securest way of
ingageing all several persuasions equally to him; which Artifice, together,
with his leaving the Church Lands alienated as he found them, were all the true
Principles of Policy that I know of, which he kept unto. The Honesty of these
Principles, I referr to the judgment of every man's Conscience; but if we may
judge of things by experience and success, they seem to have been very happy in
the world; For in comparing the Condition of the Protestant Countries at
present, to what they were in times of Popery, we shall find them abundantly
more considerable now, than formerly; for in taking a true Survey of the
Reformed Dominions, we shall discover them to bear no proportion at all in
largeness, to the Popish, and that there is nothing, that keeps the Balance
betwixt the two parties, but the advantage that the first has, in being free
from the Bondage of the Church of Rome, and the latters being under it; For as
the Church of Romes mercies, are (by their Principles) Cruelties, so had they
power answerable to the natural richness of the Soil of their Countries, and
extent of their Territories, they would long ere this have swallowed up the
Protestant Churches, and made Bonefires of their Members; but as God, in his
Mercy and Wisdom, has by his Over Ruling Hand of Providence, preserved his
Church; so for the Romish Churches inabilitie to effect that which they have
will, and malice enough to carry them on to do, there are these natural reasons.

First, There being generally of the Popish Countries, above one Moyetie
belonging to Churchmen, Monks, Friars, and Nunns, who like Droans, spends the
Fat of the Land, without contributing any thing to the good of mankind, renders
them much the less considerable.

Secondly, Marriage being forbidden to all these Sorts, and Orders, occasions
great want of people every where, (they being incapable of any Children but
those of darkness) except in France, which is an extraordinary Case, proceeding
partly, by not being so subject to Rome, as other Countries of that belief are;
but especially from the Multitude of Protestants, that are among them.

Thirdly, The blind Devotion of these People, carrying them on to vast
expenses, in the building, and richly adorning of many needless and superfluous
Churches, Chapells, and Crosses, etc. with the making chargeable Presents by
the better, and Pilgrimages by the meaner sort, to their Idols, keeps all
degrees under.

Fourthly, The many Holidays, upon which, the laboring man is forbidden to
work, adds much to their poverty.

But Fifthly and Lastly, The vast number of begging Friars, who living Idly,
and purely upon the sweat of other men's brows, without taking any labor
themselves, makes it impossible, for the lower sort of people, who thinks they
are bound in Conscience to relieve them, ever to get above a mean Condition;
Now whosoever shall seriously weigh and ponder these Circumstances, under which
the Popish Countries lies, and consider the Reformeds advantage in being free
from them, must confess it the less wonder, that the Evangelical Princes, and
States, with their small Dominions, compared to the others great, are able to
bear up against them; and now as the alienation of Church Lands, the turning
out the Romish Vermin, the Priest, Monks, Friars, and Nunns, (who devours all
Countries where ever they come) and freedom from the Popish Imposition upon
Conscience, has mightily increased the greatness of the Protestant Princes,
and States, to what they anciently were, and the not doing the same in the
Popish Countries, keeps those Princes under; so, even amongst the Reformed,
where the Church Lands are most alienated, and Liberty of Conscience most
given, they prosper most, as in Holland, and some parts in Germany, with other
places. And on the contrary Denmark, where Church Lands are least alienated of
any of the Reformed Countries* and the City of Lubeck, where, of all the free
Imperial Cities of Germany Liberty of Conscience is least given they thrive
least in both places. And I think it will also hold, that as this famous
Kingdom, in the times of Popery, was in no measure so formidable as now it is;
so before the Restoration of our Hierarchy to their Lands, their hoording up
the money which before went in Trade, and their discouraging and driving into
corners the industrious sort of people, by imposing upon their Consciences, it
flourished more, was richer, and fuller of Trade, than now it is; And I dare
undertake to be a Prophet in this, That if ever any Protestant Country, should
be so far forsaken of the Lord as to be suffered to turn unto Popery, these
Observations will be made good in their visible loss of the Splendour, Riches,
Power, and Greatness, that they now know.

Had Cromwell been a Person of an open profane Life, his Actions had been less
scandalous; but having been a Professor of Religion, they are not to be pleaded
for, neither can it be consistent with Religion to palliate them which have
been of so much offense, and (as may be feared) made so many Atheists in the
World; And I cannot but stand amazed, when I hear him extolled by some, not
Ignorant of his Practices, knowing in Religion, and (as I hope) fearing God.

Now I will suppose, I may be suspected to have been injured, or disobliged by
Oliver; but I can with Truth affirm, I never received either Good or Evil from
him in all my Life, more than in Common with the whole Kingdom (which I think
may be allowed to render me the more a Competent Judge in his Case;) and that I
am so far from being moved unto this, out of any quarrel to him, that, as I
have here mentioned, some few of many Injustices, and State-errors, that he was
guilty of in his short time, If I were conscious of any thing more, during his
Protectorship, worthy applause, than I have here mentioned, I should not envy
it him, but freely remember it; and if any think I have not said enough on his
behalf, and too much to his disadvantage, I have this for my Buckler, that I
wish I could have said more for him, and had known less against him;
professing, that besides what I have here hinted, I am wholly ignorant of any
one Action in all his Four Years and Nine Months time, done either wisely,
Virtuously, or for the Interest of this Kingdom, and therefore that I am none
of his Admirers, I ought to be pardoned by my Readers.

Much more might be said upon this Subject, but this may suffice to show, that
if Mazerine (at the hearing of Olivers death) thought he had then reason for
calling him a Fortunate Fool, if he were now living he would find more Cause
for it, Cromwell's Lot, as to Reputation, having been exceedingly much greater
since his death, than whilst he was in the World: And that from forgetfulness
of his impolitick Government, (from whose Entrance we may date the commencement
of our Trades decay;) And (through want of memory) in men's giving to him the
Cause of our former Wealth and Prosperity, which truly belongs to others. But
what opinion soever Mazerine may have had of Oliver, he was without all
peradventure a Person of more than ordinary Wit, and no otherwise a Fool than
as he wanted Honesty, no Man being wise but an Honest Man.

FINIS.

