An APPENDIX, TO A DISCOURSE OF INDICTIONS: And to a Newly Published Discourse
OF THE JUBILEE OF THE Kingdom of Christ.
Approaching at the next following Vernal Equinox; in our Vulgar Account, 1701.
Proposed to the most Learned in Scripture, History, Chronology; or, Arithmetic
and Accountancy, for deep Consideration.
THE Prophetic Line of Time, from the Death of Solomon, to the glorious
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; which I have, for several Years last past,
established upon the greatest Reasons of Scripture Prophecy, and its
Chronology; with the fairest Agreement of Universal History, and Chronology; is
now confirmed to me, by the Indictional Frame, or Fifteens of Years, of which
it is composed; that does demonstrate it to be one and the same entire Line,
the given at several Times, in several Cantons or Parts; and that it was so
constituted by the Divine Spirit, that we might know it to be one Line: And
that by the Laws of Indiction, we may know where the Distributions Begin and
End. That even as by the Historical and Prophetical Assignations of them, we
have one view of them; so by Indictions we may have even Arithmetical
Demonstration of their Bounds.

The Line it self, I present in the very Letter of Scripture, in plain open
view.

Years Ezekiel's Visional bearing the Iniquity (Ezekiel. 4. 4. 5) of the House of
Israel on his left side; a Day for a Year. 390 Ezekiel's Turning on his
Right-side, immediately after the 390 Days accomplished; and bearing the
Iniquity of the House of Judah, forty Days, (v. 6. 8.) without turning from one
side to another, to confuse one time with another; and Bands Laid on him to
that purpose by God. 40 The long Line beginning with the Persian Monarchy;
given therefore visionally by the River Ulai, in the Palace of Shushan, in the
Province of Elam: All Persian; of 2300 Evs-morns, according to the Prophetic
Standard, a Day for a Year: During the time of the Sanctuary Trodden under
Foot, until the cleansing, or Justification of it. 2300

The distribution of this long Line of 2300 Evs Morns, into its several Parts.

1. The Time supposed of the Word's going forth to Restore Judah, and
Jerusalem, ( after the Seventy years of the Babylonish Captivity; and in all
appearance, ending with the Forty Years of bearing Judah's Sin;) and beginning
just before the Seventy Weeks, which commence from the time of the Word's going
forth; which took up a valuable Space, Dan. 9. 25. For it was by the
Commandment, and according to the Decree of Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes; and
whose Decrees are written by Ezra, Ezr. 6. 14. This space is by great Scripture
and Chronologick Reasons, and now by Indictions, shall be demonstrated to be.
75 The Time of the seventy Weeks, Forty nine of which join with the time of the
Word's going forth to restore; and make an 124 Years with the Building the Wall
by Artaxerxes His Letter on that Account, Nehem. 2. etc. of which Nehemiah
gives the History. Sixty two of the Weeks run to the public Appearance of the
Messiah, Dan. 9. During his more retired Life, 'till his appearance as a Prince
and Leader, at the one Week of his Public Ministry, v. 25. Confirming the
Covenant, and sealing it by his Death, v. 27. in the half or middle of the
Week; then for the other half Week, committing it to his Apostles, with the
Spirit poured out, Revel. 6. 1. Represented by Christ's opening the First Seal;
going out Conquering, and to Conquer; According to the Prophets Standard. 490
From the End of the Weeks to the Beginning of the little Horns, ( Dan. 7. 25.)
Time, Times, and half Time, made out by great Scriptural and Historical
Arguments, and Indictionally demonstrated The Time of the Seals Opened. The 400
The Time of the Time, Times and half Time, of the little Horns, (c.12.7.)
wearing, scattering the Saints of the most High, and of the Church in the
Wilderness; Rev. 11. 3. c. 12. 6, 14. the Witnesses Prophecy, in Sackcloth,
with which concur the Gentiles, ( Rev. 11. 1. c. 13. 5.) and the Beasts 42
Moons. 1260 The Additional time of Thirty, or two Indictions, added to the
Times, and half of 1260, making 1290, under the Character of Time, From the
taking away the daly Sacrifice. 30 The Addition of Forty Five, or Three
Indictions to 1290, making 1335, reaches to the Blessed state of the Kingdom of
the Resurrection, when Daniel shall stand in his Lot of the New Jerusalem;
which cannot be without the Resurrection. 45 Now, as it is most certain by
Account, that these Sums laid together make 2730

Indict. So it is most certain, even to Arithmetic Demonstration; they arise
by Indictions, or Fifteens. 182

That the Divine Spirit has put an Honor upon the Number Fifteen, in choosing
it for the Day of the so solemn Feast of Tabernacles; which he made a great
Type of his Kingdom, as appears by the most awful reading the Law on an
indicted Time in it, in the Year of Release, Deuteronomy. 31. 10. Adorning it with
Paradisiac Appearance in the most goodly Boughs; and by the Prophetic
Representation of the state of the Kingdom of Christ, under the keeping that
Feast, Zech. 14. 16. and the Misery of those who are shut for ever out of that
Kingdom, in their not keeping it, and the peculiar mention of it in the Vision
of Ezekiel's glorious Temple, Ezekiel. 45. 25.

But that he has chosen it in this Line of Time, is the Business now in hand,
and to be made out beyond Contradiction; for the whole Twenty seven hundred
thirty is all composed of Fifteens: Some peculiar Parts of it are given in such
Numbers, as Fall into Fifteens of themselves; as 390, 1260, 1290, 1335; each of
which deserve great Consideration: The Three hundred Ninety, as the First Part
of the Line of Time, has this peculiar Remark; That as it is the First Part,
so it gives Measure and Frame to the whole: For as it is perfectly composed of
Indictions; So it is most observable; Three Hundred Ninety multiplied by the
Number Seven, of which Scripture makes so great Use in all Things, and in all
Prophecy; both on Accounts of Mercy, of Grace; and of punishment for Iniquity,
Levit. 26. I say the First Three Hundred Ninety multiplied by Seven, makes up
the whole Prophetical Line of Twenty seven Hundred Thirty; and so casts all
into Indictions, or Fifteens, as any one moderately skilled in Accountancy,
will easily find.

In the Thirteen hundred thirty five, the End, and shutting up of the whole
Line, in the Fullness of all Times; There is, as I may humbly express, a Care
and Diligence, and even an Industry of the Divine Spirit, to compose it into
Indictions, or Fifteens. For in the twelve hundred and sixty, as the whole is
all Indiction, so each Division is according to indicted Time: Time, or one
Time 36^ Years: Two Times, or one Time doubled, 720 Years. One time halv'd or
180 Y. each is perfect Indictional, and so the Hebrew first gave it its Style:
And that the Prophetic Spirit might awaken us to know, All is intentional;
when he makes an Addition to 1260. It is by two Indictions, or Fifteens, in,
1290. When he makes an Addition to 1290, it is by Three Fifteens, 1335.

Whoever considers these Things, can no more think This could be by Chance,
Then that Things argued from their Train, Series, and connection in Creation,
and Providence, to be the Products of an infinite Mind, could be by Chance.
Could any one come after the Divine Spirit, and find that in his Writings, that
he had not laid there? Or, could He lay them there and not know he laid them
there himself; and could He be supposed to lay them there but as a Depositum, a
Prophetical Treasure, prepared for great Ends and Purpoposes: As

1. That we might know beyond the power of Objection, That this whole Line,
beginning at the Death of Solomon, when Israel and Judah became two Houses, or
Kingdoms, is one solid, real, and not imaginary one continued, and Progredient,
and not divided, though distinguished Line to the Blessed State: It therefore
begins in the Indictional 390, and so ends in 1335; so even curiously contrived
into Indictions, and the middle part comprised between both, into the whole
Indictional Frame, though in various Numbers, as is presently to be shown.

The supreme Wisdom of the great Arithmetician, or Wonderful Numberer, as he is
called, Dan. 8. 13. (see Margin there) is seen in his Arithmetic Frame. We
cannot attain to its Persection; for there is Wonder and Secrecy in it: But
there is what we may apprehend, by considering, how, and when that style of
Time, Indictions, or Fifteens of Years, came into Use; Lustres, or Account of
Time by fives of Years, had been long before; but then these Fives triplicated,
or three joined together, and called Indictions, according to the very Hebrew
Word, before noted, came into known and public use at a peculiar Time, when
Providence knew Prophecy would have need of it: And as Indictions are
constituted of the Number Five, which is the Number giving spring to all Parts
of these Numbers, and indeed of all the most Cardinal Numbers; the whole
Composure is most wonderful of Fives, so joined by Threes.

The Time then of Indictions coming into known and public Use, is that time
agreed by all History; when the Roman Empire from Pagan, became Christian;
under Constantine, memorializ'd, The Great, the First Christian Emperor: Since
which time, it has continued in use at Rome, and in what is called the Empire,
to this day: Now from its first entrance, it had a time of settlement, and of
growing into a generally used Character of Time: The Roman Papacy was preparing
for its Supremacy; and the Barbarous Nations, that were to be the Kingdoms of
the Ten Kings, its Horns; and who should give their Kingdom and Power to it,
were pressing into the Empire, as into an Outer-Court of Christian Profession,
without the Power, being so much declined; and so began the (...) two Moons af
the Gentiles; and the Witnesses beginning their 1260 Days of Prophecy, clothed
with Sackcloth, both for the Ruin of the Empire, as a Public Calamity; and
for the Visible Beginnings of the Apostasy. And just about the Time when
Providence had prepared the so now universally known Language of Indictions, or
Fifteens of Years; by which Time, Times, and Half Indicted Time, might (had
Prophecy been understood) have been certainly known to have Entered, viz. Some
time between the Gentiles Pressing in upon the Empire, and their having settled
into Kingdoms, and the Papacy with them.

Thus the whole Line is settled upon its Frame of Indictions, as in its general
view; but that we may more particularly and distinguishingly understand it, and
how to discern Times by these Indictions, as under particular Distinctions of
Time, is what I would now present: For, as if there had been a Line of
Indictions, and yet no Distinctions in so long a Line, we could have made by
Indictions alone, no Judgment of Time; So if there had not been Indictions, we
could not have so exactly, and assuringly Judged of the Bounds of Time
according to those Distinctions, in some Parts of the Line.

That we may therefore the better Judge hereof, we must observe: This
Indictional Line, though so wholly made up of Indictions, or Fifteens, as has
been shown, yet the Parts of it are variously given.

Some Parts in Indictions.
390 1335
Some Parts in Numbers, but not in Indictions.
40 490
Some neither in Number; nor in Indictions, viz. The Time between Cyrus his
Decree, and the Weeks beginning: The Time after the Weeks to the beginning of
the 1335 Days, And yet both fall in with the whole Line into Indictions. And we
may humbly conceive of the Reasons of all This.

1. It was necessary, the First Time of bearing Israel's Sin, or the First
Three hundred Ninety Years in the Line, should be given in perfect Indiction,
because it was to introduce the whole indictional Line; and to give, as it
were, the Soul of Indiction to it.

2. It was as necessary the 1335 should be indictional, not only as shutting
up, and consummating the indictional Line, but more principally, because that
was the Course of Time, God was pleased to give the Criterion, or Knowledge of
by Indictions; and Providence had prepared according to Prophecy.

3. The giving these two Parts of Time in Number, viz. The Forty Days of
bearing Judah's Sin, was necessary, that the Time of the Babylonish Captivity
ending, as a notable Pillar of Time, might be plainly known.

But most necessary, the Weeks to Messiah should be so precisely given: That
that lofty Pyramid of Time, called the Fullness of Time, might be prepared for,
before 'twas erected; and then stand firm to the End of Time, and fullness of
Times, viz. All Times, Gal. 4. 4. Ephesians. 1. 10. or the Kingdom of Christ.

But they are not given in Indictions; even as the Time before the Weeks, and
after them, not so much, as in Number, because Prophecy was Pleased so far, to
Veil it self; That it might, by close Search and Enquiry, be understood, and
opened to those only, who, through Desire separating themselves, are stirred up
by God, to intermeddle with that Wisdom: And withal, this Fluency of the Line
of Time, from the End of the First 390, to the Beginning of the 1335, through
the several successive Indictions, and the several distinctive Divisions of the
Line by its Titles of Event upon it; as the words going forth, the Weeks, the
Time of the Seals, is yet by them kept united, and conjoined with it self,
while the same Indiction takes hold of one Part, and of the other in each
Distinction; and will show, how according to the Laws of Indiction, those Years
that are not numbered, are to be determined in their Numbers: And even in the
very Parts of the Line, that are most under the guard of Indiction, yet those
most lofty Columns of Event, distinguishing Time, may fall in the middle of an
Indiction, or of a Fifteen; that though they divide Time, do not divide the
Indiction from itself; each of which will now be seen.

The most stately Pillars of Event, distinguishing Time in the Line, I look
upon to be,

1. The Time of the Last Week of the 70, viz. The lofty Boundary of Time which
the Christian Era of Account has kept known and sure; and Extolled by the
Style of the Fullness of Time, in Scripture; the Public Apostolate of the
High Priest, and Apostle of our Profession here on Earth; his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and giving his Spirit in the Ministry of the Apostles,
during the opening the First Seal within the last Week; going out on his White
Horse, of Gospel-state; Conquering, and to Conquer. Rev.6.1.

2. The Roman Empire becoming Christian, under Constantine, a very magnificent
Pillar of time before mentioned, for the sake of Indictions, brought into
public Knowledge and Use soon after.

3. The middle part of the Time, between the first Insults of the Barbarous
Nations upon the Empire; and the very subjugating of it. For at that time,
about the middle Point, viz. Four hundred Thirty Seven of Vulgar Account, then
the Gentile 42 Moons entered; and the 1260 Days of the Witnesses Sackcloth
begin; and therefore Great.

4. The Western Roman Empire, and the Imperial Exaltation of Rome, ceasing; and
the Papacy entering with its 42 Moons, with which the Gentiles 42 Moons Colesce,
and together make a Parallel Line, with the 1260 Days. This is a great and
Cardinal Event of Time.

5. The Mohammedan Imposture, and Tyranny, and Hegira beginning with the
Saracenick Five Months of Torment, and five Months of Hurting Men, and five
Months of Intervals, Revel. 9. v. 5, 10. Fairly allowable in its Intermissions,
or declining State; and so given, as it were, Indictionally, with which
admirably agrees the Duration of their Tyranny; as made out by the Reverend and
Learned Annotator on the Revelations, to be 435. And then the Hour, Day, Month,
Year of the Ootoman Empire, perfectly Mohammedan also, endures a Judgment on the
Anti Christian Papal state, while it lasts.

6. The Papal Supremacy made an Image to the Roman Imperial Power, by the other
Beast, the Roman Hierarchy when it came to its Number: Its Command of
Image Worship, and Interdiction of those who would not Worship: Its
Anathematizing upon Emperors on that account, Ratified by that Second Council
of Nice: Its deposing Emperors, and taking upon it self a Right of disposing
Crowns, and Kingdoms; all which bear a great Relation to the Indictional Time,
in its two times at 1157, and unto 1517, though not proper here to insist upon.

7. The very stately Pillar of the Reformation, the most to be Celebrated
Partition of the Beasts, or Papacy's First rising Time; and his two Times of
Strength, and full Potentacy; and his half Time of Declination; from 1517; Are
each and all exactly Indictional, and the Last by a Recent Agreement of History
found at 1517.

That which we now expect, is that greatest Glory of Indictional Time; the
finishing of Wonders, or of the Mystery by the Angel of the Seventh Trumpet, at
the End of the three Years and half, from the 1260, ending at 1697; and those
three Years and a half to End at the next following Vernal Equinox of the Year,
in Vulgar Account 1700, or 1701.

That which remains now; is, to show how by the Rules and Laws of Indictions,
in a whole Line constituted of Indictions, or Fifteens of Years; We may find,
what Number, or propoportion of Years is to be determined to those two Parts of
the Line, viz.

First. From the Forty Years of Bearing the Sin of Judah, to the beginning of
the 70 Weeks, or of the 490 Years (which was the time of the Words going forth.)

Secondly. What proportion of Time, or Number of Years we may fix upon from
those Seventy Weeks ending, or the Last Week, (That so lofty Pyramid of Time)
to that so grand Indictional Time of the 13^35 Years, by which we may exactly
know, at what time, and in what Year of Vulgar Account it began. The First of
these I affirm to be 75. The Second 400. The whole we have to work upon are
1005 Years, perfectly Indictional. viz. 40 75 490 400


To this great purpose I would lay down these selfevident Rules and Laws of
Indiction, which I thus apply,

1. That seeing the Line consists of Twenty sevenhundred and thirty Years; and
182 Indictions, there can be no Number added; not so much as an Unit, or taken
away; even in those Parts of the Line not given in Number, much less in those
given in Number; for as Room cannot be spared for more, so there can be no
Vacuum or Emptiness in such a Line strictly given.

2. Whatever is given in Indiction by the Divine Spirit, must rest in
Indiction, and not be stirred out of it, because the Spirit of Prophecy has
canonized it; so the 390, and the 1335 cannot help any portion of this Line not
given in Indiction.

Rule 3. When the whole Frame is perfectly Indictional, and yet there are
several Portions not in themselves Framed into Indictions; those Parts must
Borrow and Lend, out of, and to another, That they may be all Indictional; for
though each Portion, as it is given in such a Number, and so considered, cannot
be changed; yet when the whole Line is considered, as such a whole Entire Line
composed of several Parts, and all Indictional. One Indiction or Fifteen
succeeds another, without regard to each particular Number, but respects the
whole as Indictional.

Thus the Forty of bearing Israel's Sin, is not given by even Fifteens; but
wants Five; Though then as a Portion of time so given, it cannot be more then
Forty; yet as in the Indictional Frame it goes to the next Portion; the Time of
the Words going forth, and borrows Five of that: That Portion accounted (as I
affirm it should be) at 75, having lent Five, wants them for it self, as
Indictional; it therefore goes on to the 490 of the Weeks, and borrows five of
them: The Four hundred ninety of the weeks in the Indictional Frame then
becomes but 485, by lending Five to the former Portion; but that Number having
Five still supernumerary to Indiction, it offers those Five to the 400
following the Weeks, which receive them, so all becomes Indictional to
perfection: And this has nothing strange, but what is found in all Numbers, in
a progrediency. Four Fives may be accounted as each a distinct Number; and as
together making Twenty: Considered as Five, each stay in themselves; Considered
as making up Twenty, they flow in single Units one after another into Twenty;
so in this Indictional Line, Numbers may be considered as limited to
themselves, or flowing on Indictionally into such a number of Indictions. Thus
Forty, and Four hundred ninety are Numbers limited to themselves, as such
Numbers; but in an Indictional Frame, they freely take, and give according to
the Law of Indictions, and the whole Line is as beautifully conjoined, as if
each Part had been given in Indiction, even as the 1005 in the whole.

But the great Doubt still remains, what Proof from Indictions may be given?
That the time of the Words going forth, before the Weeks, was 75; for if that
be proved, then it undeniably follows; the Time after the Weeks must be 400,
and no more; and so what Proof can be given, the time after the Weeks was 400;
for the Time, if that be proved, before the Weeks must be 75. the whole Line
requiring there be neither more nor less; and the Thousand five of these
Portions of Time are even as Indiction requires the same: And this further is
absolutely necessary to be known, to fix the Time, viz. when the Twelve hundred
sixty of the Witnesses Sackcloth began, and where we now are in Time: To fix
this, I therefore consider these further Rules of Indiction.

That there be no more taken or given from one Joint of the Line to the other,
then just makes up the Indiction; now in the Rule of Proportion I have given,
there is no more, then just Five making the First Forty five, which it wanted
to make up three Indictions; the seventy five I settle upon before the Weeks,
receive back the five, they lent, viz. Five from the 490 of the Weeks, making
them just Five Indictions. The 490 of the Weeks having Ten supernumerary to
Thirty two Indictions, and having lent five to the Time before the Weeks, lends
also five to the Time after the Weeks, making them 405, and Twenty seven
Indictions; Thus there is as little taken, as the very nature of Indictions
will bear.

Whatever is added to, or taken from any Partition of Time, must be added to,
or taken from the Beginning and End of each Portion; For so this Law of
Indictions requires, as the Forty have added to their End, taken from the
Beginning of the Four hundred ninety of the Weeks: The Four hundred after the
Weeks have Five taken from the End of the Weeks, set before their their
Beginning; for thus only Indictions and Portions of Time will bear, and not to
be Intruded upon in their intimate Parts.

3. That which exceedingly gives Beauty to this Frame is, That all is by three
Lustres or Fives, gathered up into one Indiction: Although therefore there
might be other Numbers then 75, and 400; and other transposes from one to the
other: Yet it is even Arithmetical Evidence, there could be no other Fixation
so Curious, Beautiful, Symmetrall, and agreeable to an Indictional Line, as
this.

And it is not to be passed by; That these 75, as Five Indictions, are
Symmetrally agreeable to the Seventy Five, or the Five Indictions, that Run
beyond the 1260, to 133^, at the End of the 2300; So the same Number Begins and
Ends that long Line.

4. There is yet one Assurance more from the Indictional Frame, that fills up
the measure, shaken together, pressed down, and running over: And it is that
the Forty two Moons of the Beast enter at that so Recorded Time of the Roman
Western Empire ceasing in Vulgar Account, 476, and according to the Golden
Number of Adequation of Lunar Time to Solar; brought in so long ago by Meton.
Lunar Time bears the proportion of 1222 Years to 1260. There must therefore
have run out from 475, Those 1222 Years at 97 ending; and they being to be
joined to the Thirty Eight Years of the 1260 before them, and to the Moons of
the Gentiles; All making up the Time, Times and half Time, or whole, 1260 Days:
There is Room for no more then 400 Years, the time of the Seals opened from
that so often mentioned lofty Pyramid of Time; the last of the Seventy VVeeks
ending 37 Years from the Christian Era or Incarnation; so generallly known and
accounted by: And if there be Room for no more then 400; there must be 75, and
no more between the 40 of bearing the Iniquity of the House of Judah, and the
490 of the Weeks according to the Prophetical Line given.

And thus God has been pleased to give such an Assurance to this stating of
the Line of Time, as is deferred to the Julian Period, found by Scaliger; and
so Approved of for its certainty: The adjustment of Solar, Lunar Time, and
Indiction, one to another.

Now seeing all this leads so demonstratively to Ninety seven elapsed, and that
Scripture cannot be broken or dissolved; As has been made out, It must needs
be, That there must be a Reserve of Time, in the secret Counsels of Prophecy,
of the Three Years and half so remarkably given, Revel. 11. And that have their
Place in the First three Years and half of the 30, beyond 1260, viz. in the
1290, which 3 Y. and half shall Expire at the next Springs Equation of Day and
N.

I humbly therefore present this so Full Representation, that I could not, nor
durst Conceal: That when God had upon the several Arguments from Prophetic
Images joined with Scripture and general Chronology, and History, been pleased
to Found me on this very Scripture Line of Time, as appears by the Treatise
Entitled, the Scripture Calendar of Prophetic Time, Published 1684. About an
Indiction past at 1699. He should be pleased to show me then such a Frame from
Indictions or Fifteens of Years (of which it is so undeniable, his Word makes
so great Account) even Arithmetically demonstrative; That it is even to my
Admiration and Astoment. And I desire it should be wholly to the Glory and
Praise of his Grace, and for the exciting Faith, Hope, Prayer. And I most
freely submit it to the severest Examination, that is Scripturally Rational; I
am most assured, Except very Letter of Scripture only, Nothing depending on
Argument can be more Firmly, proved. And I find such an inward Assurance That
if God should call me to it, I hope I should, through the Blood of the Lamb,
and the word of his Testimony Overcome, even to the not loving of my Life to
the Death on Account of it: Nor could I rejoice to survive it, if a Failure
could possibly be supposed; but most humbly beg, with submission to the Divine
Will; that he would grant me so much more of Life, as to see Ezekiels
Ha-Galgal, that great Revolution of his Kingdom, That it might be cried in my
hearing; Oh wheel, c. 10. 13.

And because what I have now Written is the very highest, I can hope should be
revealed in this great Point: I have added this Publication as an Appendix to a
Treatise, Entitled; Indiction, or accounting by Fifteens, the Great Style of
Prophetic Time; Published 99. and to another, Entitled; The Good Hope through
Grace, The Jubilee of the Kingdom of Christ shall come on the Popish Jubilee.
Published this 1700. And have nothing now to do, but with the Spirit, and the
Bride, restlesly Day and Night to say, Come in the great Preparations to thy
Kingdom at the next Springtime of thy Resurrection; viz. the Cessation of
Antichristian Persecution, the Downfall of Antichrist, the rising of the
Witnesses, etc. Making it the Beginning of the sacred Year Anew; and then in
thy Kingdom it self. And oh that all Saints would Join in the Harmony. Even so,
come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The END.
ERRATA.
P. 9. l. 7. for twenty two Moons, put Forty two Moons.

The Postscript in supply of a Preface to the Reader.
AS it is truly said, Knowledge and Learning have no Enemy, but Ignorance; so
Re search into the more retired Parts of Knowledge has no E^emy but Prejudice,
and a loathness either through the wait of Leisure, or vigor of Thoughts; or
too great a love of Easiness, and a walking on in a beaten or plain ^r^ck, and
a Choice to sta^ in Principle, and the Beginnings of the Doctrine of Christ:
And when Men have chosen this, they seek a Justification from some Appearances
(...) Scripture and Reason: But ^till An^ can make it appear, There are some
Prophecies and Numeralls of them, which we are forbidden to enquire (or as I
know they affect to express themselves) to pry into: T^^y can never persuade
Any, to whom God has given Minds, that have Understanding, to surcease their
Diligence therein.

And as to the present Indictional Frame presented, they have but one ^f these
two things to do.

1. To deny that these Numbers are found in the Scriptures of Truth; Or, that
there is a mistake in the casting them up: Neither of which I am sure, can be
attempted by any in their, Understanding: And as it is supremely to be
acknowledged to the Divine Being, that the very Excellency of that Being proves
it self; So This very Line I have h^re offerr'd, proves it self in its kind:
And therefore, That Ninety seven is passed off without so great Effecs, as were
expected: We must either acquiese in God's Reserving the Three Days and half,
viz. Three Years and half, as a Time of Delay to make his Infraction, and
Breach on the Line, given us, known to us, because of our unsuitable Frame to
so great a Glory, as his Kingdom's Opening; or we may suppose, there may be a
Mistake in our Vulgar Computation from the Christian Era of the Incarnation:

But the R^formation so monumentally entering according to it: 1517, at the just
Half-Time according to Indiction, so exactly, forbids that Thought: Or,

Lastly, We must suppose, there were Disposes of Providence in this l^st Ninety
seven, wherein the Seeds of great Changes are laid up; though they do not
appear yet visible to our Sense, or Observation: The First ^s the Best; I
therefore beg this One Favor of the Candid, Christian Reader: Close
Application, and Consideration under Divine Illumination.

LONDON: Printed for W. and J. Marshall, in Newgate and Grace Church Street,
1700.


