The best Fence against Popery: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE Power of the KING IN
Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Being an ANSWER to the PAPISTS Objections against the Oath of Supremacy.

To which is added, Queen Elizabeth's Admonition, declaring the Sense of the
said Oath, and King James's Vindication of the Oath of Allegiance.

By a Learned Divine.

London, Printed for J. Robinson in St. Paul's Churchyard, and S. Crouch in
Cornhill.

THE LAWFULNES OF THE Oath of Supremacy, etc.
THE Supremacy of the Kings of England being eclipsed by the Bishop of Rome, in
both parts of it, the State thought fit to enjoin a Provision of equal
extension. In relation to the Civil Rights of the Crown, is the Oath of
Allegiance; and against the Encroachments upon the Ecclesiastical, this of the
Supremacy, which being first enjoined, contains in a manner both. This Oath
has given the Papists such a Blow, as they could not but strike again, and
have poured out a Flood of Arguments and Absurdities against submitting to it,
which has been a long time scattered, and stick in the Minds of diverse of his
Majesty's Loyal Subjects; who, tho otherwise well affected, yet by reason of
some Doubts and Tenderness, are at a stand to this day, and scruple the taking
of this Oath: For whose satisfaction, and clearing the Lawfulness of this
Supremacy, is the ensuing Discourse.

CHAP. I.
.1. The Oath it self, as now enjoined..2. The Occasion of this Oath..3. Various
Forms of it, and Alterations about it..4. Interpretations given of it in our
Laws, and Writers of Note..5. The Nature of our Assent and Stipulation.

The Oath of Supremacy.
I A.B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the King's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Things or Causes, as Temporal: And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this
Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise, that
from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness,
his Heirs and lawful Successors; and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences, and Authorities, granted or belonging
to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, as united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. 2. For many Years there has been a Contest about
Jurisdiction and Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters, between the Bishop of
Rome, and the Kings of England; who has got ground herein, according as our
Princes were found more weak, necessitous, or devoted to his Holiness. Rome was
not built in a Day. By William the Conqueror, Legates from the Pope, to hear
and determine Ecclesiastical Causes, were admitted. Henry the First, after much
Contest, yields to the Pope the Patronages and Donations of Bishoprics, and
all other Ecclesiastical Benefices; it being decreed at Rome, that no
Lay-Person should give any Ecclesiastical Charge. King Stephen grants, that
Appeals be made to the Court of Rome. In Henry the Second's Days, the Pope gets
the Clergy, and Spiritual Persons, exempted from Secular Powers. The Bishop of
Rome is now over all Ecclesiastical Persons and Causes, even in these
Dominions, Supreme Head. And having upon the matter made Conquest over more
than half the Kingdom, in the Times of King John, and Henry the Third, sets on
for the whole, and obtains of King John an absolute Surrender of England and
Ireland unto his Holiness, which were granted back again by him to the King, to
hold of the Church of Rome, in Fee-farm and Vassalage. Being now absolute and
immediate Lord over all, be endeavors to convert the Profits of both Kingdoms
to his own Use; so that Prince and People were hereby reduced to very great
Poverty and Servitude.

Such Ruin being brought upon both Kingdoms by this Device and Engine, (the
Claim and Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over Persons and Causes by a
Foreign Power) the Nation was awakened, both King, Lords, and Commons, yea, the
Spiritual Lords themselves, to join with more Vigor against this Foreign
Usurpation. To this purpose severe Laws were made, in the Time of Edw. 1st, 2d,
3d. Richard the 2d, and Hen. the 4th. Notwithstanding these Laws, (and some
formerly, as the Constitutions of Clarendon by Hen. 2.) partly by Sufferance,
and partly by Negligence, the whole Nation being Catholic, and held under a
devotional Slavery, there was no through or successful Contest against these
Oppressions. They remained unto, and were complained of in Henry the Eighth's
Days; as of Appeals to Rome in Causes of Matrimony, Divorce, Tithes, etc. to
the great Inquietation, Vexation and Trouble, Costs and Charges of the King's
Highness, and many of his Subjects. 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. In a further Complaint,
Anno 25, cap. 21. it is declared, how that the Subjects of this Realm have been
greatly decayed and impoverished by intolerable Exactions of great Sums of
Money, claimed, and taken out of this Realm by the Bishop of Rome, as well in
Pensions, Censes, Peter Pence, Procurations, Provisions, Delegacies, Rescripts
in Causes of Contention and Appeals, as also for Dispensations, Licenses,
Faculties, etc. who assumed a Power to dispense with all humane Laws, Uses, and
Customs of all Realms. And many the like Complaints were made to King Henry, by
his Parliament, at several times, as it appears in the Statutes of that Age: In
which Statutes, as in that of the 24th of Hen. 8. c. 12. and 25. c. 21. 26. c.
1, 3. Anno 28. c. 1, 7, 10, 16, and 35 c. 1. you have the whole Fabric of
Romish Usurpation laid level, and all Ecclesiastical Power reduced within his
Majesty's Dominions, and placed in the Arch Bishop, and other Ecclesiastical
Persons under him, by firm and severe Laws.

This being done, the King is petitioned by his Lords and Commons, That for
further Corroboration of those Acts, and utterly to exclude the long usurped
Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, that an OATH,
containing the Substance and Effect of those Statutes, be limited and tendered
to his Subjects.

This Parcel of Sacred Worship (an Oath) is indulged to Mankind in Civil
Affairs. Such is the Falseness, Unrighteousness, and Uncertainty of Men, as
that human Societies could hardly subsist without it. The Lord, to repair our
Credit, has formed Men's Hearts generally to a great and apparent Religion, and
Reverence of this Ordinance. The Heathens themselves termed it Sacramentum, as
if the most eminent or only Thing Sacred, and religiously to be observed. It is
so effectual a Means to establish a Reformation, as Men will be kept firm by
Oaths, (says one Live. Hist.
) tho there were neither Laws nor Magistrates. We are exposed to more Variety
and Changes from Vnsteadiness in the Mind, than from any thing that is without
us. Fix the Conscience, and you fix the Man, whatever Evil he is thereby
exposed to. There is nothing generally more effectual to fix the Conscience
than an Oath: If I have sworn, and invocated the Name of God in an Engagement,
it will be an End of all Strife, and dispute with my self, as well as with
others, Heb. 6.16. Our Counsels and Resolutions are in common apprehension
become immutable, when confirmed by an Oath, ver. 17. Whosoever (says Moses
Numb. 30.3.
) swears an Oath, and binds his Soul by a Bond. It is the Bond of the Soul,
we have given Security for our Faithfulness from Heaven. For removing the
Romish Yoke, which lay so heavy upon Prince and People, Means has been used
again and again, almost in each King's Reign, for near Four Hundred Years, but
to no great effect. Gospel Light dawning about us, and the binding of our Souls
by an Oath, has been the fixing of this great Work, and the best Fence against
Popery that ever was set up. I have spoken the more fully of the Occasion, and
this Means (our Oath), that we may not judge the taking of it to be a taking the
Name of God in vain; for as long as this Nation is in danger of Popish Tyranny
in Ecclesiastical Matters, so long is this Oath of absolute use and advantage,
as the best Security between Man and Man for Union against it.

.3. A Parliament being called in 22 Hen. 8. the King was recognized by the
Clergy of that Convocation, Supreme Head of the Church; the Expression or Form
hereof debated, agreed upon, and subscribed by each Person there, was this:
Cujus (Ecclesiae Anglicanae) singularem Protectorem, unicum and supremum
Dominum, and (quantum per Christi leges licet) supremum Caput, ipsius
Majestatem recognoscimus. This Title was afterward confirmed by diverse Acts of
Parliament, and two Oaths formed to this purpose in one Parliament, viz. 28
Hen. 8. the one more brief, having with it the Succession of the Crown, in cap.
7. the other more full and large, and to this purpose only, cap. 10. Some Years
after, viz. in An. 35 Hen. 8. a Revive of both these Oaths was made by the
Parliament, and with some Alterations reduced into one: The Reasons there are
given why this was done; and it was resolved, Those Oaths shall not therefore
be administered, and this Oath to stand in force and place of the two Oaths.
Which Oath began thus:

I A.B. having now the Vail of Darkness of the usurped Power of the Sea and
Bishops of Rome clearly taken away from mine Eyes, do utterly testify, etc.
This Oath remained the same the rest of his Reign, and all Edward the Sixth's
time. Queen Elizabeth, in the first Year of her Reign, made these Alterations:
1. That Expression of Supreme Head, etc. went hardly down by some, as taking
too much from the Pope; and as giving too much to any Secular Prince, by
others. Tho Henry the 8th, by his Letter written to the Clergy of
York-Province, Anno 1533.
well defends it; yet Queen Elizabeth by her Parliament 1 Eliz. 2.
changed that Expression. The Oath was altered (to use Secretary Walsingham's
Words In his Letter to Critoy, Sec. of France
) into a more grateful Form, the hardness of the Name, and the Appellation of
Supreme Head being removed. 2. This Oath by that 35 of Hen 8. might be tendered
to any Subject at the King's pleasure, cap. 1. By the Statute 1 Eliz. 8. the
urging of it was limited to certain Persons, ^mployed in Public Trust. 3. The
Penalty for refusing it, at first was no less than High Treason: By the Statute
1 Eliz. the Punishment for Refusal is only a Disenablement to take any
Promotion, or exercise any Public Charge, yet with this Proviso, if afterward
during Life there were a submitting to take this Oath, the Person might be
restored to his Office or Charge. But by the Parliament in 5 Eliz. the
Punishment (which as yet stands) is greater: The first Refusal of the Oath
brings the Person within a Praemunire; and if tendered a second time, after the
space of three Months, and again refused by the same Person, it is
High Treason. This Severity in the Punishment, is recompensed with a more
gentle and indulgent Interpretation of the Oath, as will appear in the
following Section.

As we are not to swear rashly, so our Laws do not give Oaths rashly, but with
great care and tenderness, weighing and considering both the Matter, Persons,
Penalties, and the Season or Occasion, being not willing their Laws, or
Punishments for breaking of them, be a Snare, or at any time more grievous to
the Subject than the Necessity of State requires.

.4. The true Scope and Sense of this Oath may be gathered from the Laws and
Statutes since established, and some Light also from other Writers of Note.

Queen Eliz. within a little time after this Oath was reduced to the Form
wherein now it stands, in an Admonition annexed to the Injunctions, declares
the Sense and Interpretation of it, as follows.

The Admonition annexed to the Queen's Injunctions.
THe Queen's Majesty being informed, that in certain Places of this Realm,
sundry of her Native Subjects being called to Ecclesiastical Ministry in the
Church, be, by sinister Persuasion, and perverse Construction, induced to find
some scruple in the Form of an Oath, which by an Act of the last Parliament is
prescribed to be required of diverse Persons, for the Recognition of their
Allegiance to her Majesty, which certainly neither was ever meant, ^ne by any
equity of Words, or good Sense, can be thereof gathered; would that all her
Loving Subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant or
intended by the same Oath, to have any other Duty, Allegiance, or Bond required
by the same Oath, than was acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of
famous memory, King Henry the Eighth, her Majesty's Father, or King Edward the
Sixth, her Majesty's Brother.

And further, her Majesty forbids all manner her Subjects to give ear or
credit to such perverse and malicious Persons, which most sinisterly and
maliciously labor to notify to her Loving Subjects, how by the Words of the
said Oath it may be collected, the Kings or Queens of this Realm, Possessors of
the Crown, may challenge Authority and Power of Ministry of Divine Offices in
the Church; wherein her said Subjects be much abused by such evil disposed
Persons: For certainly her Majesty neither does, ne ever will challenge any
other Authority, than that was challenged, and lately used by the said noble
Kings of famous memory, King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, which
is, and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: That is,
under God, to have the Sovereignty and Rule ever all manner of Persons born
within these her Realms, Dominions, and Countries, of what Estate, either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be, so as no other Foreign Power shall,
or ought to have any Superiority over them. And if any Person, that has
conceived any other Sense of the Form of the said Oath, shall accept the same
Oath with this Interpretation, Sense, or Meaning, her Majesty is well pleased
to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and obedient Subjects, and
shall acquit them of all manner Penalties contained in the said Act, against
such as shall peremptorily or obstinately refuse to take the same Oath.

In the fifth Year of her Reign, there is by Act of Parliament, a Confirmation
of this Sense, by way of Proviso, in these Words:

The Proviso in the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
Provided also, That the Oath expressed in the said Act, made in the said first
Year, shall be taken and expounded in such Form as is set forth in an
Admonition annexed to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions, published in the first
Year of her Majesty's Reign: That is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her
Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other Authority than that was
challenged, and lately used by the Noble King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward
the Sixth, as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear. There may be a
Doubt made about this Interpretation, as whether it be not inconsistent with
the Words of the Oath, it seems to be rather a material Change of them, than an
Interpretation. In the Oath it is, All Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or
Causes; in the Interpretation it is, All manner of Persons, of what Estate,
either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be. The Oath seems to speak of
one thing, and the Interpretation of another; the one of Causes, and the other
of Persons. Ad leges, per se requiritur potestas in persinam, secundario ^res
(...) Suarez. (...) lib. 1. cap. 8.


Answ. There is no opposition or Inconsistency between these two, Persons and
Causes. The principal Object of a Law is a Person, and a Person with respect to
his Actions, a Person morally considered; for a Person physical, that is, in
his Being only, and Nature as Man, without moving, or acting any thing good or
evil, is not the Object of a Law: nor Actions of any kind or sort whatsoever,
as Actions, and in that general Consideration, do come under a Law, but as they
respect Persons, and are some way or other the Actions of reasonable Creatures:
Tho a Law be made to punish the Exodus 21.29.
Ox which goreth a Man that he dies, yet it is with respect to Man, to let him
know how much God is provoked by shedding Man's Blood, as Genesis 9.5. 1 Cor.
9.9,10.
Does God care for Oxen? Does God in his Law respect the Beast for it self? is
it not that Man may be instructed and restained? Verse 10. He says it
altogether for our sakes. The mentioning of Ecclesiastical Causes therefore
does imply Persons, and Persons of the same Denomination, to whom such Actions
are peculiar, that is, Ecclesiastical Persons.

2. And that this latter is an Interpretation of the former, will thus appear:
The Oath, in giving a Supremacy in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Causes,
might seem to imply Spiritual Things to be the immediate and proper Object of
the Magistrates Power, and spiritual Persons, only for this, because they had
to do in spiritual Matters; and to infer thence, that the Christian Magistrate
has Power in spiritual Administrations, as the Word and Sacraments, after the
same manner as has the Ministers of Christ, who have Power in these Things, as
the principal and immediate Object of their Function: Which this Form af
Expression in the Admonition does clearly take away, 1. In asserting, that by
the Words of the said Oath, Kings or Queens of this Realm may not challenge
Authority and Power of Ministry of Divine Offices in the Church. 2. The
mentioning Ecclesiastical Persons, and not Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Causes
at all, implies, that the Persons of Bishops, Presbyters, and such like, are
primarily and immediately the Object of this Supreme Power, and the Laws made
by it, upon another Consideration than as Bishops, etc. namely, as being born
within these her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and such Persons, of what
Estate, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be, She has the
Sovereignty and Rule over them.

Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Things are mentioned in the Oath upon a twofold
Account: 1. Because the Civil Magistrate's Power and Jurisdiction really
extends it self to the Duties of both Tables, and has to do with Matters and
Causes, as well as Persons, that are spiritual, (as hereafter we shall show)
but, 2. Principally, that a Calling or Employment in Church Affairs,
(whatsoever has been formerly judged and practiced) does no more exempt a
Person and his Actings, (that is a Subject to the Queen upon any other account)
from her Secular Power, than does a Temporal Calling or Employment in any
worldly Affairs.

There is something of Explication further, in the Articles of Religion,
concluded in the Year 1562. The 37th Article is this:

The 37th Article professed in the Church of England.
The Queen's Majesty has the chief Power in her Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queen's Majesty the chief Government, by which
Titles we understand the Minds of some slanderous Folks to be offended, we give
not to our Prince the ministering either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments:
The which thing the Injunctions also, lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen,
do most plainly testify: But that only Prerogative, which we see to have been
given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures, by God himself; that is,
that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword
the Stubborn, and Evildoers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

It is mentioned in the Admonition, that the Queen's Ecclesiastical Power is
the same that was challenged and used by Henry the Eighth, etc. Which is
supposed by some, to be the same that was in the Pope, the Person only, and not
the Power changed; so that our Princes are but Secular Popes. This Objection
was strengthened by the Subtilty of Gardener Whom Calvin terms Impostor ille, in
Am. 7.13.
abroad; and at home, by a Sermon preached at Paul's-Cross, in the Year 1588,
by Dr. Bancroft, who calls Queen Elizabeth a petty Pope, and tells us, her
Ecclesiastical Authority is the same which the Pope had formerly. This 37th
Article removes the Scruple sufficiently: 1. In asserting the Authority given
to her Majesty to be no other but what we see to have been given to all Godly
Princes in holy Scriptures, etc. And for what Power Henry the Eighth
challenged, 26 Henry 8. cap. 1.
it was no new Jurisdiction wrested from the Pope, but a Power or Prerogative
justly and rightfully belonging to him, claimed and exercised by his
Predecessors some hundreds of Years before his Time, being anciently annexed to
the Crown. 2. In the latter part of the Article it is also evident: For tho a
Power in spiritual Causes be given to a Secular Prince, yet it is not a
spiritual Power, and such a Jurisdiction as the Pope claims, but such a Power
only, and in such a way as is put forth and exercised in ordinary Civil
Affairs; and the same, in respect both to Ecclesiastical and Temporal Persons,
namely, a restraining with the Civil Sword the Stubborn and Evildoers. So to
restrain or coerce, is an Authority or Jurisdiction peculiar to Civil
Magistrates, and by Christ himself denied to the highest Ecclesiastical Powers.
Ye know (says Christ Mat. 20,25,26.
) the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them; and they that are
great, exercise Authority upon them: but it shall not be so among you, you
Apostles; and threatens the Use of the Sword in such Persons, Mat. 26.52.

King James speaking of the Oath of Supremacy; 'In that Oath (says he) is
contained only the King's absolute Power over all Persons, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical, excluding all Foreign Powers and Potentates to be Judges within
his Dominions.' In his Apol. page 76. And more fully afterward, page 164. 'It
implies (says he) a Power to command Obedience to be given to the Word of God,
by reforming Religion according to his prescribed Will, by assisting the
spiritual Power by his temporal Sword, by Reformation of Corruption, by
procuring due Obedience to the Church, by judging and cutting off all frivolous
Questions and Schisms, as Constantine did; and finally, by making a Decorum to
be observed in all indifferent Things, for that purpose, which is the only
Intent of our Oath of Supremacy.'

My Lord Coke, out of 1o Eliz. and in the Words of the Statute gives this
Interpretation: 'There is (says he) no Jurisdiction by this Act affixed to the
Crown, but was of Right, or ought to be by the ancient Laws of this Realm,
parcel of his Jurisdiction, and which lawfully had been, or might be exercised
within the Realm. The End of which Jurisdiction, and of all the Proceedings
thereupon, is, that all Things might be in Causes Ecclesiastical to the
pleasure of Almighty God, Increase of Virtue, and the Conservation of the Peace
and Unity of the Realm, as by diverse places of the Act appears. And therefore
by that Act, no pretended Jurisdiction exercised within this Realm, being
ungodly, or repugnant to the ancient Law of the Crown, was, or could be
restored to the Crown, according to the ancient Right and Law of the same.'
Coke, de Jure Ecclesiastico, fol. 8.

Bishop Bilson, a great Searcher into the Doctrine of the Supremacy of Kings,
gives this as the Sense of the Oath. 'The Oath (says he) expresses not Kings
Duty to God, but ours to them: As they must be obeyed, when they join with
Truth; so must they be endured, when they fall into Error. Which Side soever
they take, either Obedience to their Wills, or Submission to their Swords, is
their due by God's Law, and that is all which our Oath exacteth.' And in a few
Lines following, he interprets what is meant by Supremacy. 'We do not (says
he) give Princes Power to do what they list, in the Matters appertaining to
God, and his Service. Indeed we say, the Pope may not depose them, nor pull the
Crown off their Heads. In this only Sense we defend them to be Supreme, that
is, not at liberty to do what they list, without regard of Truth or Right, but
without Superior on Earth.'

Dr. Morton against the Pope's Supremacy, out of an Epistle of Leo to the
Emperor, speaking thus: You must not be ignorant, that your Princely Power is
given unto you, not only in worldly Regiment, but also spiritual, for the
Preservation of the Church. 'As if he had said, not only in Cases Temporal, but
also in Spiritual, so far as it belongs to the outward Preservation, not to
the personal Administration of them. And this is the Substance of our English
Oath: and further, neither do our Kings of England challenge, nor Subjects
condescend unto.' page 26.

Mr. Mason in his Vindiciae Ecclesiae Angliae, Lib. 3. c. 5.
speaking of Calvin's being offended, verum si intellexisset nihil aliud sibi
voluisse hunc Titulum, etc. ' Calvin would never have disallowed this Oath, if
he had understood by the Title of supreme Governor in Ecclesiastical Things,
that nothing else had been claimed, but an exclusion of Popish Tyranny, and a
lawful Power in the King over his Subjects; which stands not in coining new
Articles of Faith or Forms of Religion, such as were Jeroboam's Calves; but in
defending and propagating that Faith and Religion of which God in the Scripture
is the undoubted Author. In this sense and no other that ever we have heard of,
is the Title of Supreme Governor given to, and accepted by the King.'

.5. This Oath has matters contained in it, (as you may perceive) that are not
of one nature and kind; the Assent and Stipulation required of us, in respect
to the several parts of it, is likewise various and different: As our Creed
according to the different nature of the Articles, is believed by the different
Acts of Faith. To what is contained in the former part of the Oath in these
Words; I do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the King's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, etc. Herein is required a
true, real and cordial Assent to, and Profession of what is mentioned; as also
to give this Testimony with such Sincerity of Heart as in the Presence of God.
To swear positively to any dogmatical Assertion, is not required; it would be
taking the Name of God in vain: for if it be a certain and undoubted Truth in
it self and to others; as are Principles in Reason and Articles of Faith; an
Oath is vain, for it ends no Strife. Heb. 9.
2. If doubtful, and a question whether true or not, though such an Oath puts it
out of question that I believe so; yet not that it is a Truth. My Belief though
ever so much evidenced and confirmed, does not make a doubtful matter it self
more credible; nor is one Man's believing an Assertion any just ground for
another Man to believe the same; such an Oath is therefore in vain, it is not a
fit medium to end such a Controversy. 2. It is further said, I do utterly
renounce and forsake all Foreign Jurisdictions, etc. This requires not only
the Sincerity of my Persuasion and Profession against the Title and Claim of
all foraign Powers; but upon Oath to forsake, that is to abjure (we abjure when
we swear to quit and forsake.) To forsake a Power or Jurisdiction, is to
refuse, and not to receive, submit, or yield Obedience to any Commands given by
it, or make any Appeals or Complaints to it. 3. That which follows, and
wherein the main of this Engagement lies, is in these Words, I do promise that
from henceforth I shall bear Faith, etc. and to my Power shall assist all
Jurisdictions, etc. Herein is required a Promissary Oath, swearing Allegiance
to the King, (as a Loyal Subject) to submit to his Laws, as also if there be
occasion; to my Power to assist and defend him, and all Jurisdictions and
Privileges belonging to him. Though my Persuasion be ever so right, my
Resolution ever so sincere, at the taking of this Oath; that is not all is
required. In an Assertory Oath, if there be Truth and a right Frame of Heart in
time I swear, and give my Testimony, it suffices: But a Promissory Oath is not
discharged by this, that I sincerely intend what I say and promise, for I
engage to Action, and for the time to come; I must not only promise, but (if it
be lawful and possible) I must act and do accordingly, Numb. 30.2. If a Man
swear an Oath to bind his Soul with a Bond, he shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his Mouth.

CHAP. II.
What is meant by Persons and things Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; in the
proper, as also in the vulgar use of these Terms.

IF this Expression Spiritual, be interpreted by the Contradistinct Member,
Temporal, it seems to direct us, to understand such matters as concern
Eternity, for that is the true Opposite to what is temporal: 2 Cor. 4.18. The
things that are seen are temporal, and the things that are not seen, are
eternal: now in strictness of Speech carnal, not temporal, is the opposite
Member to spiritual; I could not speak unto you as spiritual Men, but as to
carnal; 1 Cor. 3.1. and 1 Cor. 9. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? But this is too narrow and
strict a Sense. There are matters vulgarly termed Spiritual or Ecclesiastical,
being such in Name and Title only, having nothing of a spiritual Nature in
them. Such a Distinction of spiritual things you have in a Letter written by
Henry the 8th to his Clergy, of the Province of York, in the Year 1533, who
were offended at his Title of being Supreme Head of the Church: 'Men (says he)
being here themselves earthly and temporal, cannot be Head and Governor to
things eternal, nor yet spiritual; taking this word Spiritual not as in the
common Speech abused but as it signifies indeed.' By spiritual things as abused
in common Speech, he means what is given to all such Persons and Causes as
belong to the Spiritual Court, and are termed by Civilians, causae vel res
contentiosae vel judiciales, matters of contest, inter parts, actorem and
reum, and come to be determined by Sentence of the Judge in those Courts. By
those things that are indeed spiritual, is meant res extra judiciales, or non
contentiosae; that is, such things as are determined not in a Judicial, or
Court-way of Trial, by Witnesses, Oaths, Interpleadings, Sentences, and the
like; but in a more deliberate and synodical way, having the Word of God for
Witness and Judge; both in respect of what we do, and what we may do in things
of this Nature. Causes Ecclesiastical (says Dr. Field Field of the Church p.
680.
) are of two sorts; for some are originally and naturally such, and some only
in that they are referred to the Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Persons, as the
probat of the Testaments, Matrimony, etc. Those Spiritual Courts being
continued; and the same Causes tried in them as before, when this Jurisdiction
was usurped; the matters that were then, are still vulgarly reputed Spiritual.

Emperors receiving the Christian Faith, honored the learned and godly Bishops
anciently with some Jurisdiction, in the cases of Tithes, Matrimony, Wills and
the like; which are termed Ecclesiastical or Spiritual; not from their own
Nature, but from the Quality of the Persons who were made Judges of them. They
being spiritual Men; the Causes come to be called spiritual Causes (after their
Names and Quality) that were set over them. These Causes growing and increasing
in aftertimes, according as spiritual Persons were able by the Popes
assistance, to rifle from Princes; the managing of them require more hands,
than those to whom first committed, namely the Bishops, and such as were in
holy Orders, they therefore took in for Assistants, a great number of others,
as Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commssiaries, Officials, etc. and these are
denominated Spiritual from those Causes, and their assistance of Bishops in the
managing of them: and their Courts, Spiritual Courts.

There are Persons that are truly spiritual, The spiritual Man (says Paul)
judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.14. and Gal. 6.1. Ye that are spiritual, etc. That
is, such as have Grace and Holiness. He also that has spiritual Gifts, and in
a Gospel-Office or Calling, is a spiritual Person, 1 Cor. 14.37. a Man of God,
2 Timothy 3.17. 1 Pet. 2.5.
And there are Matters or Causes that are truly spiritual; as the Law is
spiritual, Romans 7. The Gospel and preaching of it, is a sowing of spiritual
things; 1 Cor. 9. the Worship and Service of God, 1 Cor. 12. and 14.12.
and all Gifts and Ordinances of Christ, are spiritual. Yea whatsoever things
natural, or moral, that are helps to the Persons worshipping; and by which the
Worship it self becomes more orderly and to Edification, and in the defect
whereof the Name of God is taken in vain, and Ordinances of Christ become less
acceptable and effectual: these Things and Circumstances, in some sense may be
termed Spiritual or Ecclesiastical. Persons and Causes of each sort, whether
vulgarly or properly, termed Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, are some way or other
under the Magistrates Government.

The former of these, those spiritual Persons and Courts, and Causes
appertaining to them in the first framing of this Oath, were principally (if
not only) intended and aimed at, as appears in the Statutes before mentioned.
And indeed the greatest Contention between the Pope and our Princes in all time
has been about Ecclesiastical Matters of that nature; being then judged of
greatest prejudice in respect both to the Honor and Wealth of this Nation.
For, those matters more truly spiritual, and nearly relating to God and his
Service (the Ignorance of the times was such) his Impositions, both in Doctrine
and Worship (though very sinful, unsound, and superstitious) were generally
received by Prince and People in this Nation, without resisting or complaining.

There can be no question but these matters being indeed temporal, properly
belong to the Secular Powers. For, for the space of three hundred Years, this
Distinction was not known (says Sir John Davis Sir J. D. in his Reports, the
Case of Praemunire.
) or heard of in the Christian World; the Causes of Testaments, Matrimony, etc.
termed Ecclesiastical or Spiritual were merely Civil, and determined by the
Civil Laws of the Magistrate.

And for Persons and Causes Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, that are properly and
indeed such, as first-Table-Duties, which contain matters of Faith and
Holiness, and what conduces to the eternal Welfare of Men's Souls; an Interest
and Duty there is in the Civil Magistrate more suo, to give Commands, and
exercise lawful Jurisdiction about things of that nature. And for Persons,
there is no Man for his Graces so spiritual, or in respect of his Gifts and
Office so eminent; but he is under the Government of the Civil Powers in the
Place where he lives, as much in all respects as any other Subject.

CHAP. III.
1. Of Power, its rise and original. 2. Two sorts of Power in Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual Things. 3. Their Agreement, and, 4. Difference of the one from the
other.

.1. THere is a difference between Potentia and Potestas Potentia, (...),
Strength, Force, Robustness. Such a Power is found not only in Men, particular
Persons, as Sampson, Goliath, etc. but in other inferior Creatures. Potestas
(...), Jurisdiction, Authority, Job 40.18.
this is peculiar to rational Creatures, and as they are a Commonalty and in
Society one with another. Though Force and Strength as in singular Persons be
sufficient for public Actions, yet without Authority, we act not lawfully; and
having Authority, if we have not Power and Strength sufficient, we cannot act
effectually, therefore joined together in a King. Dan. 2.37.

All Men by Nature are equal; yet, in the first forming of Man, a Capacity is
found in him, with some remote Disposition to rule and obey; as, 1. A
Sociableness, let us make Man in our Image; Us and Our, a Trinity in One his
Creator: Hence in each Man's Constitution, a Propension and natural bent to
Union. This God himself observes, It is not good for Man to be alone: the Woman
is created, not only for a Companion, but that Men and Women might increase and
be multiplied. 2. Multitudes of Men if not reduced into Subordination and
Order, having lost their original Righteousness, will be a greater Evil than if
each were alone by himself. One Man will exalt himself over others, and
according to that brutish Force and Strength wherein he excels, rob,
oppress, murder and pillage others. 3. Hence a necessity of Republics and
Commonweals, that some Rules and Laws may be provided not only for Direction,
but for Correction if need be. 4. Such Laws imply Authority, and a Supremacy
also in it; for such Authority or Jurisdiction only is Legislative.

Man consists of Soul and Body. This Principle of Civility or Sociableness
(whence Authority has its Original and Rise) is placed primarily in the Soul.
Society and Republics are for the moral Good of Men's Souls therefore, and not
to accommodate the Body only. The Powers also that are, being ordained of God,
Romans 13.
who is the Father of Spirits, ought to be managed and directed to Matters
wherein our Souls and Spirits are concerned. The Good and Evil for which these
Powers are ordained is not limited to the Body or outward Man.

The Power of Parents and Masters in the Family, it is civil, not sacred, yet
ordained for the bringing up Children and Servants in the Nurture of the Lord.
Ephesians 6.4.


There being a new Creation in and through the Lord Jesus Christ: These Persons
created of God, partake of a Divine Nature, and thence the like Propension to
Union and a holy Fellowship with those whom Christ has redeemed out of the
World. Therefore a special Provision is made by the Lord Jesus for such, to
join together in particular Societies or Churches, Himself being appointed by
his Father to be their King and Lawgiver, who has left them Rules and Laws
for managing the Affairs of these spiritual Corporations or Brotherhoods (as
the Scripture terms them); Power also and Authority for putting these Laws in
execution is given unto Churches. So that there is a twofold Power or
Authority, to be exercised in Causes, and over Persons Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, the one placed in the Princes, the other in the Churches of Christ.

1. The difference betwixt these two Powers. 2. The Necessity if the Civil
Power in Ecclesiastial Matters, notwithstanding Church Power.
.2. What is common to both, and wherein each of these Powers differ from the
other, shall briefly be showed.

1. They are Powers, both a Subordination or Policy in the Church as well as in
the Commonweal, and an (...), or Jurisdiction exercised in each. You read of
Authority or Jurisdiction not only in Civil Assemblies, as Romans 13. John 19.11.
but also in Churches, 2 Cor. 10.8. and 13.10. the word is (...) in both places.

2. They are both from God, and the Ordinance of God, and ought to be submitted
to for Conscience sake, and are for Encouragement to those that are Good, and
for Wrath upon him that does Evil; and he that resists this Power in either,
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist receive to themselves
Damnation (as the Apostle speaks) as well in respect to the one as the other.
And both being from God, they are also both Powers under God, that is, under
his Designment and Limits, as also his Direction and Guidance; for his Glory,
as the ultimate; and the good of Mankind, as the penultimate end of both.

3. This Power of Princes is termed spiritual, Ratione objecti, because it has
to do with Spiritual Persons and Causes. In such like a sense and manner of
Speech (if it had the stamp of vulgar Use) the Church Power, may be termed
Civil or Temporal; because all sorts of Persons and Causes without Difference
are under the Power of it. That as the secular Power is Custos utriusque
Tabulae, matters of Holiness (and what is opposite to it, Blasphemy, Heresy,
Perjury, etc.) as well as Righteousness; so Church Power is Custos utriusque
Tabulae, Righteousness and second-Table-Duties, and what is opposite, as
Rebellion, Sedition, Lying, Stealing; if any Man that is called a Brother, be a
Fornicator, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, etc. In all these and such Cases
the Church Power is applied in an Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual way; as in a
Civil and Secular way the Magistrate deals with what are Duties of the first
Table.

The Powers do mutually further each other, and so ordained by God, (from whom
they are both originally) as they sweetly comply and agree (being kept in their
just Bounds) each with other; as Moses and Aaron, David and Nathan, Zerubbabel
the Son Shealtiel, and Joshua the Son of Josedech. Jungamus Gladios, said the
Emperor to his Bishop, let us join our Forces and purge the Land of Wickedness.
And our Senators in Parliament, speak thus of these; Both Authorities and
Jurisdictions join together, and the one helps the other. Stat. 20. Hen 8. c.
12.


.3. Their Differences are in these Particulars.

1. Though both have (in their respective way) to do with both Tables, yet the
Civil Magistrates Work lies most over Persons with respect to the Duties of
the second Table; as in matters of Justice, and Righteousness; in the managing
whereof, the very being of a Commonwealth principally consists; its wel-being,
only as he has to do in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Causes. So the
Church Power is chiefly and principally exercised in the ordering of Persons,
with respect to the first-Table-Duties, and which appertains to Piety: Wherein
is the Being and constant Employment of Churches. The other, that is, matters
of Righteousness, Justice, Sobriety, and the like, are occasionally only and in
ordine ad spiritualia, under Church Power and Censures.

2. The Power of Churches is not only spiritual Ratione objecti, because its
over spiritual Persons and Causes; but ex natura rei, a spiritual Power having
Spirituality, and its Denomination from more intrinsic Considerations, as the
Matter, Form, Subject, Rule, End, etc. and not from the Object only, as that
other Power; which though it be in spiritual things, yet it is not properly
spiritual Power, the Sword which it bears is not the Sword of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6. which is the Word of God, and this Word is eternal, not temporal, it
endures for ever, the Power and Sovereignty of it is from Christ; R^v. 1.16.
out of his Mouth went a sharp two-edged Sword: his Sword and Power being
spiritual, it pierces, runs deep, Heb. 4. even betwixt the Soul and the
Spirit; there comes no such Sword or Law from Civil Authority: that Power in
its greatest Efficacy, reaches not the Inner-Man, though to be submitted unto
for Conscience sake. Indeed this Power is over spiritual Persons, but not
immediately and directly over their spiritual part: By these Powers we are
given up to a Prison, to Banishment, to Death, but not to Satan. It is not for
cruciating the Souls, and perplexing the Consciences of Men, as is
Church Power, where there is Cause.

3. That of Secular Magistrates, even in Spiritual Affairs, and having to do
primarily with the outward Man, is more Authoritative; it is Jurisdictio
proprie dicta, Legislative, Coercive, and in all respects the same as in Civil
Matters, what he does in his own Name. And truly (...), Church Power, is not
properly Jurisdiction or Authority, as in the Church, but as in Christ, the
Head of the Church; as seated in the Church, or Caetus fidelium, it is only
(...), Ministerium, not Dominium, and acts all in the Name or Authority of
Christ.

4. They differ in Extension, in respect to both Persons and Causes. 1.
Church Power is limited to a particular Congregation, as Family-Power to those
of our own Household: But this other Ecclesiastical Power, seated in the same
Person or Persons, extends it self throughout a whole Kingdom, yea, sometimes
to more than one. But in some one Province or Kingdom, you read in Scripture of
many Churches. This comes to pass from another Difference between these
Powers: The Manage of Ecclesiastical Affairs, as in Civil Magistrates, may be
delegated to other hands, by way of Commission or Deputation; they may ordain
under them subordinate Thrones, and inferior Powers, acting in their Names,
which is Lordly, and full of Honor and State: But Churches may not do so, by
delegation of Power, Representatives, or any other Method or Way, to stretch
forth the Wing of their Authority (like that of the Civil) over all the
Churches of a Nation, or over more Congregations than one, or a greater than
ordinarily partake of all other Ordinances together, is not at all suitable to
a Church-Condition, which is Ministerial, not Lordly. So Mr. Bradshaw, as the
Opinion of the Nonconformists: 'We confine and bound all Ecclesiastical Power
within the Limits only of one particular Congregation, holding, that the
greatest Ecclesiastical Power ought not to stretch beyond the same: And that it
is an arrogating of Princely Supremacy, for any Ecclesiastical Person or
Persons whatsoever, to take upon themselves Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over
many Churches, much more over whole Kingdoms, and Provinces of Churches.'

Dr. Bilson speaks much to this purpose: 'Tho (says he Of Supremacy, page 238.
) Bishops may be called Governors in respect of the Soul, yet only Princes be
Governors of Realms. Pastors have Flocks, and Bishops have Diocesses; Realms,
Dominions, and Countries none have, but Princes and Magistrates. And so the
Style, Governor of this Realm, belongs only to the Prince, and not to the
Priest, and imports a Public and Princely Regiment. The Commonwealth (says
Mr. Baxter Holy Commonwealth, page 220.
) contains all the People in a whole Nation, or more, as united in one
Sovereign: But particular Churches have no general Ecclesiastical Officers, in
whom a Nation must unite as one Church, but are as several Corporations in one
Kingdom, etc.' We see (says Sir Fr. Bacon Considerations about Church Affairs.
) in all Laws in the World, Offices of Confidence and Skill cannot be exercised
by Delegation, all such Trust is personal and inherent, and may not be
transported and delegated, as that of Kings, which for the most part is
hereditary, and rather an Office of Interest than Confidence. 2. In respect to
Causes, the Church Power extends its Censures to no Causes, but such as the
other may, as to Popery, Heresy, etc. But in many Cases the Civil Magistrate
extends his Care and Authority, where Church Power meddles not: As to Jews and
Pagans, and such as are not Members of the Church; some things may be done by
the Magistrate even for these, being Members of his Commonwealth, that may
conduce to their spiritual Good. The Church Power is limited, as 1 Cor. 5.12.
So likewise whether the Crime committed be private or public, Matter of
Scandal, or not, or the Person penitent, or otherwise, these Powers are at
liberty to punish or pardon alike, and as they shall judge it expedient, to be
severe or merciful accordingly. They may form or reform the Laws and Statutes
by which they govern; making the same Fault Treason in one Age, that in the
next not so much as Imprisonment. 1 Eliz. cap 1. with 35 Hen 8.
But Church Power is limited, the same Crime, the same Punishment ever, not
being in the Power of this Republic to vary in their Process, in respect of
lesser or greater Censures, if the Crime be the same.

5. In their Constitution or Tenure: Licet omnis Potestas (says Carbo Carbo de
Leg. lib. 2. cap. 8.
) tum Ecclesiastica tum Civilis, sit a Deo, tamen non codem modo; nam politica
licet universe sit jure Divino, in particulari est jure Gentium, Ecclesiastica
omni modo est jure divino, and a Deo. Government in general is of Divine Right,
but whether in this or that particular Form, as in one, or a few representing
the rest, this is humane, and has its Original from Man. That Power which is
termed an Ordinance of God, in Romans 13. is called an Ordinance of Man, in 1
Pet. 2. Church Power and Government being spiritual, has all particulars for
substance, both in respect of Persons and Administrations, for matter and
manner appointed by Jesus Christ, and in all Nations to be the same. Civil
Power, even in Ecclesiastical Matters, in many things for substance, is left to
the Prudence of the State in which it is exercised; and in the Forms of it
various, according to the manner of the Nation. As for Instance; Inspection
into Religious Assemblies, visiting and observing their Demeanor, receiving
Complaints by reason of Wrongs, Disorders, etc. These things may be done by the
Civil Magistrate, in his own Person, or by Persons authorized from him; these
Persons may be many, or but one in a Division, these Divisions of larger or
less Compass. And for the manner of Procedure, it is various, as Ecclesiastical
Courts differ in their manner of Process from Civil, or of a Method or Way of
handling Causes different from each, be established by Law, it is equally
warrantable. There are particular Directions left by Christ, according to which
the Officers (and Persons more especially entrusted with this Power) are
designed to, and invested in their Places and Charge, as Election, Ordination,
etc. with Fasting and Prayer. The other Powers are settled upon, and claimed in
such ways, as the respective Law of Nations design, as by Birth, Lot, Victory,
Donation, or the like, as well as Election; insomuch as a Woman or Child may
have a rightful Claim to this Supreme Trust, and the Management of it, by
themselves or others, as shall be appointed.

CHAP. IV.
.1. Of the Necessity and Usefulness of a Jurisdiction over Persons, and in
Causes Ecclesiastical, besides what is in Churches..2. This Power is placed in
Kings, and such as are the Supreme Governors in a Commonwealth.

1. FOr the second, we shall show how necessary and useful Civil Power is, even
in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Matters, notwithstanding the other. It is not to
be denied, that Souls were converted, and Churches established, and kept up,
when there was no Assistance, but rather Opposition, from the Princes of the
Earth, as in the Apostolic and Primitive Times. The Benefit we have now by
Christian Mgistrates, was then more abundantly supplied, (the Infancy of
Christianity requiring more) by the Miracles wrought, and the constant
Direction and Care of Apostolic and extraordinary Persons, who were gifted by
Christ for that purpose.

All the ordinary Helps that now we have, by external and more sensual or
carnal Means, contributing any thing to these great Works, is only a pious and
Christian Magistracy, where a Nation is blessed with it. The Benefit hereof is
much in a spiritual respect, both to the World, as likewise to the Church.

1. It is (tho remote) a great Help to bring Men out of their natural
Condition, unto Life and Salvation. We are exhorted to pray for Kings, and such
as are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. The reason, v. 4. For God will have all Men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth. As the Knowledge of the
Truth is a means to bring a Soul into a saving State; so is the Magistrate
(being enlightened himself) a great Means to bring us to the knowledge of the
Truth. Those Men were in a great Distance from God, in a Rage against Christ
and Religion, Psalm. 2.1. they did combine against the strict Ways of the
Gospel; these poor Heathens being, notwithstanding, given to Christ by
Election, v. 8. David uses a twofold Method for reducing them: The first is, a
representing their wretched and miserable Condition, while in this State of
Enmity, ver. 9. Then, 2. deals with their Princes and Rulers, to be forthwith
instructed, and serve the Lord, i.e. as Kings and Magistrates, in their public
Capacity. But must not the People be instructed also? Such Magistrates will
speedily provide and take care for their People, that they may be brought to
the knowledge of the Truth; and therefore it needs not to be mentioned.

The Magistratical Power conduces to this Work diverse ways, 1. By setting up
and protecting a Gospel Ministry. He only can subserve Providence, by sending,
or giving way to others to send forth fit Persons, and enforce a Maintenance
for their Encouragement in this Wor^ By such a Wo^d of Providence (it is (...)
we come to hear, and by hearing we believe, Romans 10.17. He can urge his People
to come to the Means, and outwardly conform to the same, and so bring them to
the Knowledge of the Truth, the very Knowledge whereof, tho not saving, is a
means at least to restrain our inbred Corruption, and to work preparatively to
Conversion, bringing Men into a Condition not far from the Kingdom of Heaven,
as Christ speaks. 2 Pet. 2.20.


2. The Civil Magistrate has Power to punish and reward, and so to work upon
the Passions of Fear, Desire, Hope, etc. Man, even in his Natural Estate, has
free Will in Moral Actions, if it be excited and drawn forth. The Passions are
so seated betwixt the Will and Senses, that outward and sensual Objects work
effectually upon it: the Motions of the Will, in this our State of Corruption,
depending more upon the visions of what is sensual, than what is a rational
Good or Evil. The most commanding and stirring Passion, and with most ^fe and
vigor, in a natural Man, is Self, or Self-Love; it is the first Principle
usually that God excites in us toward Conversion, as in the Parable of the
Prodigal, and diverse other Scriptures. Sickness, Poverty, and the like
Occurrence of Providence, (Punishments for Sin being sanctified by the Lord,
work much upon us; so Miseries inflicted upon the more obstinate, from
Magistrates (in Justice for evil-doing) have the same Operation: and by reason
hereof, gross Corruptions are kept in and restrained, whereby the Habits of Sin
decrease, and become less rank in the Soul. Hominem etsi timore poenae fugiat
peccatum, paulatim affectum and animum ad illud amittere, and e contrario
concipere odium ^tus, ideoque etiam vitare peccatum. A^iag. de Leg. Disp. 13..9.
It is a hedging our Way with Thorns, as the Prophet speaks. Hos. 2.6.


A great part of the World lies without the Pale of the Church, and the
severity of its Judicature reaches them not. This Power is exercised only on
Church Members; 1 Cor. 5.12,13.
we have nothing to do to judge them that are without, tho they be Fornicators,
or Covetous, or Idolaters, or Drunkards, or Extortioners; Churches, in respect
of Censures and Punishment, leave them to God by the Magistrate, or the like
Providential way to judge them, verse. 13.

3. Impedimenta removendo; he removes corrupt Teachers, that slay Men's Souls,
by crying Peace, prophesying of Wine, etc. Mich. 2.11.
indulging Sinners in their Security; and such as by Errors and false Doctrine
poison Men's Souls, to their eternal perdition; by restaining Stage Plays, not
permitting Brothel-Houses, and the like Fomenters of Sin.

Now there is no means or provision so certain, and generally effectual to send
out Preachers, to urge and constrain Men to hear, and for all these purposes,
as this, when the Magistrate, according to his Trust and Duty, puts forth his
Authority in these Matters; or that will so universally, as an external means,
stir that Principle of Self-love in all Men, to the seeking after what is good,
and the shunning of what is evil. A Coercive Power of this Nature is placed in
no other hand but his. Ministers may preach and persuade, but must be no
Strikers, 1 Timothy 3.3. Mat. 20.
may not externally afflict and constrain; Peter may not use his Sword in
Christ's Quarrel. God only, and the Civil Magistrate, further our Happiness, by
making us miserable.

Paul, who had as much Power as any Man of that Order, yet his Weapons were
only spiritual; and tho an Apostle, yet could not do so much as the meanest
Civil Magistrate in such a Coercive way: for their Weapons will, whether Men
incline or not, have an operation, and constant effect, less or more, to
whomsoever applied. This Power therefore of the Civil Magistrate cannot well be
wanted; or if it be, there is no ordinary means to be had for a supply in the
room of it. When there was no King in Israel, every Man did what was right in
his own Eyes, Judge. 17.6.
followed the Ways his Lusts led him to. Suppose there be good Counsel and
Instruction, yet to many Persons it signifies little; for some Men are not
corrigible by Words, Prove. 29.19. The Foolishness that is bound up in our
Hearts, must by Correction be driven far from us. Prove. 22.15.

4. I shall conclude, adding in the last place, the Praise of Well-doing. Romans
13.
The Countenance and Encouragement of the Magistrate to those that preach, and
those that obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, renders it even to a
carnal Heart desirable. The Lord gives this honor to a poor Servant, faithful
in his place, that he adorns the Gospel, Tit. 2.10.
and renders it more acceptable and effectual. So likewise the Conversation of
a Wife, that those who obey not the Word, are without the Word won by such a
Conversation; 1 Pet. 3.1.
that is, won to the Love of the Word, and the liking of those Ways that are
according to the Word. Much greater is that Honor and Ornament which comes to
the Gospel, when the Magistrate, not only by his Conversation, and personal
Example, but by his Laws and Authority, sets himself to encourage all he can,
the Preachers and Professors thereof, bearing them up against Despisers and
Scoffers.

To the Church.
2. In respect to the Church, and such as are effectually called out of the
World; God has promised, and in the Scripture much comforted his People in
this, that they shall have great benefit by the Civil Magistrates that are over
them: as Isa. 32.2. and chap. 49.23. and chap. 60.16. These Promises relate to
Gospel Times. And those Places, Numb. 27.16. and 1 Timothy 2. are equivalent to
Promises: a Prayer is as it were a Promise reversed; what is spoken by the Lord
in a Promise, being returned, is the strength and confidence of a Prayer.
Encouragements also to obey Precepts, imply Promises; so that of Romans 13. and 1
Pet. 2. our Subjection is required upon this consideration, that Kings are for
the praise of them that do well, Romans 13. ordained of God to thee (to the
Church, and to every Saint) for good. The Lord in this does not only promise,
but as it were undertake for the Magistrate, that he shall be such an one, as
those that are pious and righteous, those that do well, need not dread or fear
to be under him. A good Magistrate is a Blessing, and matter of joy and
rejoicing to the People of God, Prove. 29.2. Eccles. 10.17. a great Fruit and
Evidence of his Love to them, 1 King. 10.9. and 2 Chronicles. 2.11. Because the Lord
has loved his People, he has made thee King over them; it is so spoken of
Solomon.

The Benefit and Good to the Churches and Saints from the Civil Magistrate, may
more particularly be judged of in these Considerations.

1. Kings and Princes are an Ordinance of God, or Medium by which, in a more
special and peculiar way, he communicates his Power, Wisdom and Justice for the
governing of all Societies of Men. 1 Kings 3.28. All Israel feared the King,
for they saw that the Wisdom of God was in him, to do Judgment. So the Power
and Justice, and the like Attributes of God become visible in this Ordinance of
God. See Eccles. 8.2. Numb. 27.20. Prove. 16.10. and 21.1. It is brought as an
Argument to Magistrates against Partiality and Bribery; 2 Chronicles. 19.7. There is
no Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respects of Person, nor taking of
Gifts. What is, or is not in God, should be, or not be found in him that is a
Magistrate. They are therefore termed Gods, because a visible Representation of
God's Attributes, is, or ought to be in their Governing. And as Christ is said
to be present with those Officers in the Church which he has appointed,
because there is a special Virtue and Efficacy of Christ manifest in their
Ministry: So in this great Ordinance of a Magistrate, there is said to be a
special Presence of God with him, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. From the like Manifestation of
God, in his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc. for the Welfare of Societies.

There is such a Harmony and Neighborhood between the outward and inward Man,
that what works upon the one, affects the other. When therefore the Ministry by
Christ's presence works upon a Man's Soul, the Man is of a better Behavior
outwardly, and to Civil Relations: So also being brought into to outward
Subjection and Conformity, (by Magistracy) the Mind and spiritual part is much
the more fitted for Christian Communion. Moral Virtues, yea, Civilities are
much pressed upon Church Members every where in the Epistl^, as to be kind,
courteous, humble, submiss, self-denying. Romans 16.
P^ ^pends a whole Chapter in Greetings and Salutes. Men and Women that are
morose, selfish, stiff, opinionative, ill-bred, such for the most part are
burthensom in all, and as much in these spiritual Societies as in any other.

2. For Protection, Church Power neither judges or restrains them that are
without; it is no Fence nor Security against the World. The only Hedge about
this Vineyard, under God, is the Sword of the Civil Magistrate. ^nts and
Churches, being called and separated out of the ^ld, are hated by the World,
and such a Seed of Enmity in them against the Members of Christ; as if there
were no higher Power to restrain, being the far greater number, they would
utterly root us out.

The Church for Weakness and Helplesness is resembled by a Nurse-Child, or
Infant, which needs the Care of those who have more Strength. Isa. 9.16.
This religious Care and Tenderness, is, or ought to be in the Magistrate, who
is termed a Nurse. The Prophet in this Promise has an Eye to Gospel Times, and
Churches, called together amongst the Gentiles. In an Age when there would be
no Prophets or Apostles, or Signs, or Wonders, or mighty Deeds 2 Cor. 12.12.
wrought in the behalf of the Church, as was in the Jewish Economy, and first
Age of Christians. It Is promised that Kings and Princes (either by a common or
saving Change) shall become nursing Fathers, nourishing and protecting Christ's
feeble Orphant the Church. 1 Samuel 10.6,9.
1 Kings 4.29.
And where the Magistrate is such, we ought to pray that all may be such; we
have the Liberty under them (notwithstanding the World's Enmity) to lead a
quiet and peaceable Life, and this not only in Honesty, but in all Godliness. 1
Kings 4.2^.


3. The Judgments of God, Sword of the Magistrate, and the like external
Administrations are helpful to the best of Men, who are liable, while a Body of
Sin, to as foul external Acts of Sin, as the worst of Men. The spiritual part
in us by these means, helps it self much (in an hour of Temptation especially)
against the Flesh, over-ballancing the Pleasures of Sin, from rhat Shame and
Grief Sin brings with it; so that Self-love, or a higher Principle is hereby
strengthened to avert us. Servile Fear (evil only in defect) is good and useful
to the best of us, while in a mixed Condition and not perfect in our Love to
God. Joh was eminently godly and righteous, yet in both much furthered from the
Consideration of Wrath and Judgment. If I have seen (says he Job 31.19,21,
with 23.
) any perish for want of Clothing; If I have lift up my Hand against the
Fatherless, etc. ver. 23. For Destruction from God was a Terror to me. The
Magistrates Ecclesiastical Power had the like effect to restrain Impiety in
him, as verse. 26, 27, 28. If I behold the Sun, and my Heart has been secretly
enticed, or my Mouth have kissed my Hand: this were an Iniquity to be punished
by the Judge The Apostle Paul though constrained by Love, verse. 14. Such was his
Affection to Christ, yet moved also to Duty from the Consideration of Judgment
and Terror, 2 Cor. 10.11.

If it be thus with the best of the Saints, much more will Churches stand in
need of such an external Help against Corruptions: There being not only a
mixture of Flesh and Spirit, in those that are Members indeed; but a mixture
with them of Hypocrites, and such as are Members only in show.

We find in the Churches planted by the Apostles, a use not only of Spiritual
Censures, 1 Cor. 5.
but also outward and bodily Afflictions, Sickness, Weakness, etc. 1 Cor. 11.
for Church-Miscarriages; and it is said to be for the Salvation of their Souls,
Chap. 5. ver. 5. with Chap. 11. ver. 32. So that Severity of the Lord on
Ananias and Saphira, was for a Church-Fault, and it is said Verse. 11. Great Fear
came upon all the Church. It was an eminent Church, before whom Paul shakes the
Magistrate's Sword, and tells them, if they do that which is evil, they have
cause to be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain. Rom 13.


Afflictions that are from a more immediate Hand of God, either in an ordinary
or an extraordinary way, those also that the Lord chastises us with by the
Hand of the Magistrate, I difference not, each being to the same purpose, and
as an external Discipline. For where there are no Magistrates, or negligent
ones, God in a providential way, and more immediately judges and afflicts
Evildoers; even as where Church Discipline is wanting or neglected, God
himself excommunicates as it were, and gives Men up to Terror and Anguish of
Soul, for their evil Deeds.

If we should draw in here Instances from the Jewish Church, and how the Lord
disciplined them by the Civil Magistrate, and afflicting the outward Man, there
can be nothing more evident than this, an undoubted Usefulness of such
Dispensations, even to the Churches of Christ.

And although it should not be a good reasoning, to argue from what Power the
Princes of Israel exercised in respect of its Extent in Particulars; 2 Chronicles. 3
14.
many of them being Prophets as well as Princes; yet the Benefit and Usefulness
of such Power may be the same unto us as unto them, both in respect of Terror
to Evildoers, and Praise to them that do well. Though an Argument from
Circumcision applied to Infants, will not weigh with some, because they deny
Baptism to be a Sacrament of that Nature: Yet this cannot be denied by them,
that if an Infant be capable of Benefit by an Ordinance it understands not;
Infants may as lawfully in that respect be baptized while Infants, as they were
then circumcised. The Arguments brought from Ecclesiastical Power exercised by
Magistrates in the Jewish Government, will argue at least that there is a
Capacity in Men now to receive Benefit and Good thereby (even in spiritual
Matters) as they did then; which is all that is aimed at.

4. As it is the Duty of each Person, so of Churches to walk wisely toward
them that are without, that their Order may be looked upon, not only with
Rejoicing by Neighbour-Churches, but such as may appear amiable and comely in
the Eyes of all Men. Col 2.
There are many things common to all Societies, which Nature and civil Customs
instruct us in, and are especially to be heeded by Churches. For as the things
Moral and Lovely in the Eyes of Men, being neglected by Professors, the Gospel
will suffer, so much more if by Churches. The outward Beauty of these Christian
Assemblies, consists very much in what is requisite and comely in all human
Societies; as Unity, Love, Peace, brotherly Forbearance, etc. Let all things,
says the Apostle, Phil. 2.
be done without murmuring or disputing. Paul charged the Church of Corinth
with this, that there were Debates, Envyings, Wrath, Strifes, Back-bitings,
Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults, and the like amongst them. 1 Cor. 12.20.
There may be Wrongs and Oppressions in Churches, as in other Assemblies.
Innocent Persons impeached and censured as Schismatiks, Seditious, and
Disturbers of the Peace; and no Remedy but from the Civil Magistrate. Paul
appeals from the Church to Caesar, a Secular Prince, expecting from him, though
a Heathen, more Justice, then from his Brethren, being Parties, and in their
own Cause. For where Parties are Judges, the Sentence is passed before the
Cause is heard. As a Church may be offended; so they may, and oft-times do give
Offense as well as single Persons. 1 Cor. 10 32.
It Is part of a Christian Magistrate's Care, and as a Magistrate, to punish
open Offenderrs, whether single Persons or Assemblies. And the Truth is, if
such Assemblies, that is, Churches, be not under the Magistrates Jurisdiction,
they are under none, and will be at a loss in respect of all those Advantages
before mentioned.

The Usefulness of this Power being declared so fully, it will not be difficult
to evince the Necessity of it, that is, to the well-being of Churches. For
whatsoever thing is useful in Spiritual Affairs, is in the same degree
necessary. I argue thus:

If the Ruling and Coercive Power in a Church extends it self no further than
its own Members; if one particular Church cannot suspend, excommunicate, or
exercise any the like Jurisdiction over another; it will then follow,
whatsoever benefit or advantage Churches, or their Members, are supposed to
have and reap, by being under any external Ruling Power here on Earth; this
may, and ought to be expected from the Magistrates Ecclesiastical Power and no
other: His being the only Power that is of such an Extension and Compass, as to
be over all Persons and Societies within his Dominion,

For the further Explication and Confirming ^f what is asserted, I shall lay
down some Considerati^, and then answer Objections. Purposely enlarging upon
this Argument, as te^ding much to a distinct understanding of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, both as it is in Church and Magistrate.

The Considerations are these.

1. Consid.
There is no Power or Authority either in Church or Magistrate that does
directly and immediately compel or enforce the Soul. Pains, Penalties,
Restraints, bodily Punishments; or what comes nearer, and is more spiritual, as
Admonition, Suspension, Excommunication, or the like. When Persons in any of
these ways are judged and censured, by the Church or Magistrate, or both; it
has its Fruit and effect in respect of Morals, only in a more remote and
circular way, as by working upon the Judgment and Affections; for there is no
created Power can reach the Soul, to put upon it any immediate Force or
Restraint, further than by applying such means (discovered by the Scripture or
Light of Reason) as are apt and suitable to set the Soul and Conscience of a
Man, to work upon it self.

We term it Coercive, in difference from what is only directive and persuasive;
for according as the Lord has appointed means to this or that end, accordingly
he works, and so we ought to judge and speak. Now besides means appointed for
Instruction and Persuasion, God also has added Discipline; a means morally
coercive, which has Pain and Shame, it is a Punishment (...), and for the
Destruction of the Flesh, therefore a means morally Compulsive, and more than
merely persuasive, the Rod and Reproof is more than a single Reproof, 1 Cor. 4
21. Prove. 29.15.
it is a Correction which is compulsive; a Servant will not be corrected with
Words. Prove. 29.19.
To make all but directive, is to confound the Keys. The Reverend Author should
not judge or speak of an Ordinnce according to the Reception of a carnal Heart,
but according to what is designed by the Lord, as his ordinary Drift and Scope
in such an Appointment. Mr. B. in his first Dispute, p. 6.
There is the Word read, Gospel preached, and visible Seals; we are to judge a
greater and more effectual Exhibition of Christ in the one, than in the other,
yet all alike to a carnal and unbelieving Soul.

2. Consid.
2. There are two great and Catholic Bodies, or Kingdoms, immediately and
invisibly governed by the Lord and his Christ: The World and the Church, made
up each of lesser Corporations, as Cities, Families, particular Churches, etc.
I say, invibly and immediately: for, as God is invisible, so what he acts
immediately, he acts invisibly. As the Church is distinguished into visible and
invisible, so is the Power by which it is governed. Invisible as in a secret
and mysterious way, and immediately from the Lord: And thus are all Kingdoms,
Nations, Tongues and Languages united as in one, even the great bulk of
Mankind; as also the Catholic Church, that great Body of Saints, they are all
thus governed by the Lord, and by the Lord alone, and not by Man. Visible, as
where these great Bodies of Men and Christians, come to be cantoned, parcelled,
and formed into Political Bodies, governed by Men, in an external and visible
way. Whit. Tract 3. c. 6. p. 181.


These visible Bodies are either greater and containing, as Empires, Kingdoms,
Provinces, etc. Or those that are less, and contained, as Cities, Colleges,
Parishes, Families, and the like, whether they be Civil or Ecclesiastical.
These lesser, though they have the Compleatness of a Body or Corporation, each
in its kind, and sufficient Power to govern it self; yet not to govern one
another. A Church has not Authority to govern a Church, nor a Family, or the
chief in it to govern a Neighbour-Family. The Light in the least Star is
sufficient for it self, but not to rule the Day or the Night, as the Sun and
Moon.

These lesser Bodies are therefore so composed in their several Regiments; that
many of them together, may lie in the Bosom of a greater Corporation; and it
will be for their better and more comfortable subsisting and Government.

There is no external Coercive, or ruling Power that falls in, and fills up the
space betwixt those great and Catholic Bodies the World and the Church, and
those lesser and lowest Regiments and Societies, but what is, or ought to be
expected by or from the Civil Magistrate, who is to be acknowledged of his
Subjects, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil under God to be over all.

3. Consid.
3. These lesser Societies therefore ordinarily are found under a twofold
Regiment or Discipline. The one intrinsecal and peculiar, which in Families is
received from the Light of Nature, and from the Light of Institution in
Churches. The other more General and Common: And these lesser Bodies come under
it by reason of their Situation, being within the Confines of such a Republic,
they are under the Jurisdiction of the Princes thereof. Each Prince, says
Mason, De Episc. lib. 3. c. 5.
has Power in subditos suos ac proinde in Ecclesiam modo subditi sunt
Ecclesiae. If situated where there is no formed Commonwealth, King, or Supreme
Power over them they are as a Free State, each Family, City, and Church,
immediately under God and Christ, and no other Power but what it has in it
self; which being a Power not derived from the Magistrate, but peculiar to a
Family or Church, remains in them, though no Magistrate. Such was the Family
and Church State in the time of the Patriarchs for two thousand Years.

Consid. 4.
As it is a Happiness to a People that live in Empires and Kingdoms, that these
are parcels of that World which has the righteous God to govern it, who is the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 2 Kings 19.15.
So is it likewise to these lesser Bodies, a Family, or a Church, that they are
situated under the Wing of a Christian, and well-governed Commonwealth. Where
their Governors may be under some Government, and in Wrongs and Disorders,
they may have the Benefit of a Magistrate's Authority to appeal unto.

CHAP. V.
1. The first Objection answered. 2. The Government of a particular Church,
has Affinity with that of lesser Bodies, more than with the Government of
Empires and Kingdoms. Object.

1. IT may be objected, that Churches are spiritual Corporations, and of a more
peculiar Consideration, in respect of their Government; and therefore not to be
reckoned with Civil, at least not with Families, or such mean and low Societies.

Answ. Policy or Government in it self, and all the sorts of it, is from the
Light of Nature, and common Reason. And this is generally supposed by all; that
tho the Subject Matter, or Persons governed, be of different kinds; yet the Law
and Forms of Government may be the same where so appointed by Christ. And I
rather insist on such a way of Discourse and Reasoning, as most suitable to the
Subject I am upon, but especially because Subordination of Churches to Churches
is argued from the Light of Nature, and in this very Case, termed by our
Brethren a Divine Topic. Now if we may argue and guide our selves in
Church Affairs by the Light that shines forth (from the natural Wisdom and
Prudence of Man) in the Government and managing of Kingdoms; there is as much a
Jus Divinum, and ground of reasoning from the Light that appears in the prudent
Constitution and Government of any other civil Society.

I have mentioned in the Considerations, Cities, Families, and those lesser,
and contained (as I term them) Societies or Corporations with particulars
Churches: Because I humbly conceive the Policy and Government of each (tho in
other things different) to be more proportionable, and of greater Similitude in
many things, then between particular Churches, and those greater, and
containing Bodies, Kingdoms, Empires, or the like. Churches thus humbly
constituted and governed, are most consistent with Civil Magistracy, of what
Form soever the Commonwealth shall be.

In Confirmation of this Agreement or Similitude, I shall take for the most
part the Concessions of the learned of each Persuasion. The Instances or
Particulars are these.

.2. 1. Families tho contained under the National Government where they are
sinuated, yet are entrusted with a ruling and governing Power complete and
sufficient each in and for it self; so are particular Churches.

1. They are entrusted with a Government each for it self.

It is not sufficient (says Mr. Perkins Perk. on Rev. 2.20.
) for a Church to have the preaching of the Word, but Church Government. This
Church (speaking of Thyatira) is blamed because she did not use the Authority
God had given her. There is given to the Ministers of each particular
Congregation, according to Episcopal Ordination established by our Law, not
only a Power to preach, etc. [Take Authority to preach the Word of God] but
they are made Rectors, Governors in those particular Churches, and it is said
to them, [Whose Sins thou do remit, they are remitted; and whose Sins thou
do retain, they are retained] by which Words the Keys of Discipline are given
them; see Bilson Perpet. Govern. p. 213. 'By Order of the Church of England
(says Bishop Usher Reduct. of Episc. p. 2.
) all Presbyters are charged to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the
Discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has
received the same. And that they might the better understand what the Lord has
commanded therein, the Exhortation of St. Paul to the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus is appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination: Take
heed to your selves, and to all the Flock among whom the Holy Ghost has made
you Overseers, to (...) so taken in Mat. 2.6. and Rev. 12.5. and 19.15.
rule the Congregation of God, which he has purchased with his Blood.'

'Mr. Hooker Ho. Eccl. Pol. lib. 3. Sect. 1.
tells us that for Preservation of Christianity there is not any thing more
needful than that such as are of the visible Church have mutual Fellowship and
Society one with another. In which Consideration the Catholic Church is
divided into a number of distinct Societies, every of which is termed a Church
within it self, not an Assembly, but a Society, -- A Church (as we are now to
understand it) is a Society, that is, a number of Men belonging to some
Christian-Fellowship, the Place and Limits whereof are certain, having
communion in the public Exercise of such Duties as are mentioned, Acts 2.47.
As those of the Mystical Church by their inward Graces differ from all others
which are not of the Body, and those that are of the visible Body of the
Church, have the Notes of external Profession. Even so these several Societies,
or Churches, have Properties belonging to them, as they are public Christian
Societies. And of such Properties, it may not be denied that one of the very
chiefest is Ecclesiastical Policy. We use the name of Policy rather than
Government, because Church-Policy contains both Government, and also
whatsoever besides belongs to the ordering of the public Affairs of the
Church of God.' In which words he asserts not each particular Church to have
Government in it self; but this Government as a Property, or Propriety, by
which it is distinguished from the Mystical, as also the Catholic visible
Church. So that he does not, as some of late, make the Catholic visible Church
the first Subject of the Keys; but each particular Society, or Church,
supposing that great Body of Christians to be only and immediately under the
Spiritual Government of Christ Jesus.

2. Complete and sufficient.

It is not to be understood of such a perfection, as may not with much
advantage receive help both from the Power of the Magistrate, as I have showed
before, as also from the Counsel and Advice of other Churches: But I mean an
essential Compleatness or Sufficiency, not being deficient in any material
requisite for Government. This that learned Author expresses in those last
Words: ' We use the Word Policy, (says he) rather than Government, because
Church-Policy contains both Government, and also whatever besides belongs
to the ordering of the Affairs of the Church of God. Every particular Church,
(says Mr. Cartwright Against Whitgift, lib 3, page, 147.
) having an Eldership, is a Catholic Church of Christ, under whom Pastors,
Doctors, and Elders are the ministerial and immediate Governors. In which Words
he intimates a Compleatness in each particular Church for Government and
Privileges, as much as if the Catholic visible Church were Organical, and a
governing Church. 'The Power of Jurisdiction (says one Rutherf, Due Right
(...) Presbyt. page 307.
) is as perfect and complete in one single Congregation, as in a Provincial, as
in a National, yea, as in the Catholic visible Body.' All Things are yours,
says Paul to a particular Church, 2 Cor. 3. To this purpose Mr. Parker:
Parker's Polit. lib 3. cap. 13.
Sicut non pars, etc. As a particular Church is not a maimed or half, but a
whole and perfect Body; so it is possessed with the whole and entire
Church Government, and not with a part only.

2d Instance^
This Oeconomick and Domestic Power is intrinsic and essential to a Family,
and is a Power derived immediately from the Lord, by the Light of Nature, and
has not its original from any Power on Earth, Families being much more ancient
than Commonwealths: So Government or Discipline is intrinsic and inseparable
from the very Essence of a Church, received immediately from Christ, and not
the Grant or Constitution of any Secular Prince or State. Churches are endued
(says Dr. Jackson Jackson of the Church, cap. 8. 5.
) with a Judicature immediately derived from Christ, and independent upon any
Earthly Power, or any Power whatsoever on Earth, whether Spiritual or Temporal.
Bishop Bilson expresses it thus: Bilson of Suprem p. 171.
The Things comprised in the Church, and by God himself commanded to the
Church, (these Things are specified in page 227. to be the Word, Sacraments,
and Use of the Keys, or Ecclesiastical Power, and Cure of Souls) are subject to
no mortal Creature, Pope, nor Prince. And those of another Persuasion, are to
the same purpose. 'The Church (says Mr. Rutherford Peaceable Plea, p 300.
) has the Keys from Christ, equally independent upon any mortal Man, in
Discipline as in Doctrine. A Power and Right to Discipline, says the same
Author, Due Right of Presbyt cap. 9..9.
is a Property essential to a Church, and is not removed from it, till God
remove the Candlestick, and the Church cease to be a visible Church.' Potestas
ipsa de jure, etc. Power (says Dr. Ames Cas. con. lib 4. cap. 24. p. 4.
) is so much the Right of a Church, as it cannot be separated, because
necessary, and immediately flows even from the Essence of each true Church.
There are Authorities enough to be produced from the Writings of the Learned, for
the confirmation of this particular. All grant there is a Government jure
divino, (I speak not of this or that Form) and by the appointment of Jesus
Christ. It is denied by none but Erastus, and those that follow him, who may as
well deny Praying, Preaching, or Sacraments jure divino It is as expressly
ordained, that Discipline be exercised in the Name of Christ, as to preach,
pray, or baptize in his Name. There are certainly Things of God, that are not
the Things of Caesar: And if those Things upon which Christ has put his Name,
be not peculiarly his, I know not where we shall find the Joint. As we say,
there were Families, so particular Churches, before any Commonwealths were, and
Christian Churches and Discipline exercised, many Years before any Emperors or
Kings were Christian: And therefore as Families have many Privileges so
peculiar, and by the Law of Nature so much theirs, as are never touched or
infringed by the Supreme Power of any Nation: So likewise it is with Churches,
they have very many Privileges so evidently theirs, from the Law of Christ, and
their spiritual Constitution, as Christian Magistrates will do their utmost to
preserve and cherish, and not in the least infringe. It is a part of Magna
Charta: 3 Hen. 3. cap. 1.
Concessimus Deo, and hac presenti Charta confirmavimas, pro nobis and
Heredibus nostris in perpetuum, quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat
omnia jura sua integra, and Libertates suas illaesas. And it is mentioned in
the Oath our Kings take at their Coronation, that He shall keep and maintain
the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Holy Church.

3d Instance.
A third Particular, or Instance of what we have supposed in the former
Considerations, is this: The lesser Corporations, Cities, Families, and the
like, have not Authority or Jurisdiction one over another. It is the same with
Churches, each having the Fountain and Original of their own Power (as before
is showed) immediately proceeding from Christ in themselves, and not elsewhere,
or one from another; cannot by any Art or Device of Man be made to rise up
above it self, as it does, if one Church exercises a Power or Jurisdiction
over another. There is no Invention of Man, that by contriving Pipes, or any
other Artifice, can make Water freely and naturally run higher than the
Springhead. Tho that Jurisdiction which has its rise in a particular Church,
be pumped up into a Classis or Synod, it is but the same it was before. Synods,
says Parker out of Chamier, Polit lib. 3. cap. 13 9.
nullam habeant Authoritatem, etc. They have no Authority but what is derived
from particular Churches. So Voetius. Disp de Polit. Eccles. p 5.


There seems to be a great Emphasis in those Particles of Propriety, Children
obey your Parents, (...); Ephesians. 6.1.
so to Servants: And speaking of the Relation of Husbands and Wives, by which
is set forth our Obedience to Christ and his Officers, it is more appropriate,
Ephesians. 5.24. As the Church is subject to Christ, so let the Wives be to their
own Husbands; it is, (...), propriis viris, not only theirs, but their own
Husbands. It is said, 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules well his own House, (...). So
of Ministers, Know them that labor among you, (...), and are over you in the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. and in Heb. 13.17. it is (...), Duces vestri, your
Captains, Officers in Churches, being as exactly limited, as in an Army. There
is no Power in a Superior to command, where no Obligation upon the Inferior to
obey. And therefore the Lord seems by these Expressions, to limit both Church
and Family-Power within their own Walls.

This is the Judgment of the Learned of each Persuasion. Bishop Davenant. Nota
est Jurisconsultorum regula, etc. It is a 'known Rule of Lawyers, A Sentence
given by him that is not his Judge, is void in Law. But particular Churches are
not the Judges of private Persons that are of other Churches, how much less
then over the Churches themselves; such Sentences were to be slighted and
contemned, as of a Judge that presumes to make Laws out of the bounds of his
own Jurisdiction.' Nec potest, nec debet (says the same Author elsewhere De
judice cont. cap. 16. p. 90
) particularis una Ecclesia judiciaria authoritate aliam sibi non subjectam a
Catholica abscindere, quaelibet enim Ecclesia filios suos ad consensionem in
Doctrina public stabilita censuris adigit. Sed fratres Ecclesiarum externarum
monet pro officio charitatis, non punit pro imperio potestatis. Dr. Field, as a
common Resolution of Divines, tells us, Of the Church lib 5.
That if a Bishop ventures to do any Act of Jurisdiction out of his own
Diocese, (that is, his particular Church, so cap. 30.) as to excommunicate or
absolve, or the like, all such Acts are utterly void, and of no force. The same
thing, says Dr. Crakanthorp, cont. Spal. cap. 28. page 177. 'Every
Congregation (say our Brethren Jus divinum Regim. p. 230.
) has equal Power one as much as another, according to the trite and known
Axiom, Par in parem non habet imperium, An Equal has no Power over an Equal.'
Ecclesiae institutae parochiales integrae sunt, inter se collaterales, and
potestate Ecclesiastica aequales, says Voetius. Disp. de Polit. Eccles. p. 3.
Which you may English out of the English Puritanism thus: 'Particular Churches
are in all Matters equal, and are entrusted by Christ with the same
Ecclesiastical Power and Authority. Cap. 2..3.
' Jewel, Reynolds, Whitaker, and most of our Divines, against the Papists, are
large in their Disputes for a parity of Churches, and Mr. Parker has written a
whole Chapter de paritate Ecclesiarum. De Polit lib ^ cap. 21.
Some make a particular Church to be of larger Extension, as a Diocese, a
Province, etc. but that alters not the State of the Question.

A DIGRESSION.
1. Of Independentism, Name and Thing. 2. Its consistency with the Kings
Supremacy.

THis State of a particular Church, namely, their equality in respect of
Jurisdiction or coercive Power one over another, was wont to be expressed by
INDEPENDENCY, which though now it be a term of Reproach, yet formerly made use
of by good Authors, as very fit and significant, to set forth this Privilege
of each particular Church complete and entire: namely, their not Dependency or
Subjection, to the Jurisdiction of another Church, as their Head and Superior.

Dr. Jackson in his learned Treatise of the Church, Cap. 15. Cap. 119.
uses this term frequently, "Unity (says he in one place) of Discipline, or
of INDEPENDENT Judicature, is essential and necessary to the Church, as
visible. Hence there be as many distinct visible Churches, as there be
INDEPENDENT Judicatures Ecclesiastic." Dr. Sibbs thus, Gospel-anointings, page
94.
"Particular visible Churches are now God's Tabernacle. The Church of the Jews
was a National Church, but now God has erected particular Tabernacles. Every
particular Church under one Pastor is the Church of God, a several Church
INDEPENDENT. The Church of England (says the same Author) is called a
particular Church from other Nations, because it is under a Government Civil,
which is not dependent on any other Foreign Prince." Each Church, says
Voetius, Desp. Ca^. ^ap. lib. 3..3. c. 4.
as it has its proper Form of an Ecclesiastical Body or Society, so its endued
with its proper Government and Jurisdiction; which it exercises DEPENDENTLY
upon Christ, his Word and Spirit, but INDEPENDENTLY in respect of all other
Churches. Mr. Bates, Treatise printed Anno 1613.
"One Company of Men assembled, has no Authority to impose things upon many
Churches. 1. None now have Apostolic Authority. 2. Each Congregation is a Body
INDEPENDENT of any Ecclesiastical Power. There is no Ordinance of God for this,
(says Mr. Banes) that Churches within a circuit should be tied to a certain
Head-Church for Government, page 8. and page 13. We affirm that no such
Head-Church was ordained either vertually, or actually, but that all Churches
were single Congregations, equal, INDEPENDENT each of other in regard of
Subjection." Every true Church (says one A Collection of sundry matters, Anno
1601.
) now is an INDEPENDENT Congregation; and in another place, The Congregational
Body Politic spiritually INDEPENDENT, is Christ's Divine Ordinance in the
Gospel. "One ordinary Congregation of Christians, is a spiritual Body Politic
INDEPENDENT. That is, it has the Right and Power of spiritual Administration
and Government in it self, and over it self, by the common and free consent of
the People, INDEPENDENTLY and immediately under Christ." Confession of Faith,
p. Anno 1601.


This was the Opinion generally of N. Conformists, as is observed by one of
themselves in the Name of the rest, as also by B. Downam, Sermon at Lambeth, p.
5.
"They (that is the N. C.) say, that every Parish by Right, has sufficient
Authority within it self, immediately derived from Christ, for the Government
of it self in all Causes Ecclesiastical. To the Parishional Presbytery
consisting of their Parish-Bishop and his Elders, they do ascribe that
sufficient, immediate, and independent Authority for Ecclesiastical Government
for every proper visible Church."

That Independency of Churches was asserted (by those learned men of a former
Age) in relation only to a superior Church Power properly spiritual, and such
as is claimed jure divino; and not in relation to that Ecclesiastical Power
which is in, or exercised from, the Civil Magistrate. Some of them have thus
described a particular Church; It Is a Body Politic spiritually independent, or
independent in relation to a spiritual Superiority: which is expressed fully,
by him that wrote Church Government with the Peoples consent, page 115. "Though
we affirm the Church Government is independent, and immediately derived from
Christ; yet we affirm also, that the Civil Magistrate is even therein (that is,
in Ecclesiastical Matters) Supreme Governor civilly. And though nothing may be
imposed on the Christian Churches against their Will, by any spiritual
Authority (for so only we intend) yet we affirm withal, that the Civil
Magistrate may impose on them spiritual Matters, by Civil Power, yea, whether
they like or dislike, if it be good in his Eyes, that is, if he judge it within
his Commission from God."

And such an Independency has been pleaded for also, and argued by them to be
much more consistent with His Majesty's Supremacy, than a DEPENDENCY or
Subordination of Churches, to any spiritual Power. And it was their professed
Judgments, That no External Power ought to be exercised in spiritual Matters,
any where (within that space betwixt a particular Congregation instituted by
Christ, and the Catholic Visible Church) by any person but the Civil
Magistrate, or by his Appointment.

Take their own Words. They that make claim Jure Divino, of Power and
Jurisdiction to meddle with other Churches, than that one Congregation of which
they are Members, do usurp upon the Supremacy of the Civil Magistrate, who
alone has, and ought to have a power of Jurisdiction over the several
Congregations in his Dominions, etc. A Protestation of the King's Supremacy
made and published in Anno 1605..27. and in.28. "The King himself is to be
General Overseer of all the Churches within his Dominions, and ought to employ
under him, fit persons to oversee the Churches in their several Divisions,
visiting them, and punishing whatsoever is amiss in any of them."

Mr. Bradshew in the Unreasonableness of Separation, against Johnson, writes
thus: It Is their principal Honor (speaking of Archbishops and Bishops) to be
Commissioners and Visitors in Causes Ecclesiastical under the King, over the
Pastors and Churches of Provinces and Diocesses. In his Answer to Johnson's
first Reason: And in his Answer to his second. He questions him thus: 1.
"Whether the Supreme Magistrate has not Power to oversee and govern all the
several Churches within his Dominion, yea, whether he be not bound so to do. 2.
Whether for his further help and assistance herein, he may not make choice of
grave, learned, and reverent men, to assist him in the same Government. 3
Whether by virtue of his Power these persons thus called, to assist the Supreme
Magistrate, may not lawfully try the Gifts of Ministers within his Dominions,
convent them before them, examine how they have behaved themselves in their
places, and punish the blameworthy."

In a Petition also to King James for Tolleration, "That your Highness would
afford us, and assign to us some persons qualified with Wisdom, Learning and
Virtue, to be under your Highness our Overseers, for our more peaceable orderly
and dutiful carriage of our selves, both in our worshipping God, and in all
other our Affairs, at your pleasure. To whom with all Readiness and Subjection
we are willing to be accomptable and answerable, always."

The opinions of learned men about Church Matters (Government especially) were
collected together, in a Treatise which was put into Latin by Dr. Ames, and in
an Epistle of his prefixed, avouched by him (who was a man much studied in
those Controversies) to be the Judgment of Cartwright, Fenner, Fulk, Whitaker,
Rainolds, Perkins, Brightman, and those that were more Ancient: As Wichliff,
Tyndal, Regers, Bradford, Gilby, Fox, Moore, Dearing, Noel, Greenham, Dogmata
ista, etc. These Tenants (says he) were either their Principles, or so
conjunct with them, as not to be denied, theirs. Christ Jesus (says the
Author) has not subjected any Church or Congregation of his to any other
Superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, than unto that which is within it self --
the Civil Magistrate alone upon Earth, has power to punish a whole Church or
Congregation, Cap. 2..3. and more fully in.12. "They hold and believe (says
he) that the Equality in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Authority, of Churches
and Church Ministers, is no more derogatory and repugnant to the State and
Glory of a Monarch, than the parity or equality of Schoolmasters of several
Schools, or Masters of several Families. Yea, they hold the clean contrary,
that Inequality of Churches and Church Officers in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and Authority, was that principally that advanced Antichrist unto his Throne,
and brought the Kings and Princes of the Earth unto such vassalage under him.
And that the Civil Authority, and Glory of Secular Princes and States, has
over decayed and withered, the more that Ecclesiastical Officers of the Church,
have been advanced and set up in Authority beyond the limits and confines, that
Christ in his Word has prescribed unto them." And in Cap. 6..6. They are said
to deny a principal part of the Kings Supremacy, that hold any Jurisdiction or
Offices over Churches jure divine, and not by the will and pleasure of the King
and Civil States of the Realm.

And from what is said, cap. 5..12. It is evident that this way is as little
prejudicial to the Subjects Liberty: For its expressly there said, If any Member
of a Congregation being under a crime, shall of himself forsake Communion with
the Church, that then the Ecclesiastical Officers, have no authority, or
jurisdiction over him, but only the Civil Magistrate, Parents, or Masters, etc.
So that as persons are free (otherwise than from conscience of duty) to join
with these Assemblies, so also to leave them, remaining always under the
Magistrates Ecclesiastical power and care.

I have made this Digression, not only for the matters sake, which is very
suitable to our present Subject, but also to vindicate the Congregational way.
1. That it is not such a Novelty as is pretended. This of the equality of
Churches, and thence and Independency (from which we are reproachfully
surnamed) seems to be the worst of our Tenants: Yet it appears to be no other,
but what the reverend and learned of a former age have asserted. Nor do I know
any other of their opinions or practices, but may as easily be remonstrated, to
be the assertions of those holy men. Nor secondly, inconsistent with civil
Magistracy, or with their Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs. And as a further
Testimony hereof, they take the Oaths both of Allegiance and Supremacy.
Professedly assent also to "All the Articles of Religion which concern only the
Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments,
comprised in a Book entitled, Articles whereupon it was agreed by the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation Anno 1562. for the avoiding of diversity of Opinions, and for the
establishing of consent touching true Religion," as is required by Stat. 13
Eliz. cap. 12. And do humbly hope, living peaceably under his Majesty's
Government, they shall obtain their share in that Indulgence his Majesty
graciously purposed to show to such persons, as through want of full
satisfaction, differ in smaller matters from the present Establishment.

4 Instance.
A fourth Particular, which arises from the former, is this. Families being not
subordinate one to another, they cannot associate or unite into any large or
great Body; and therefore do, and may more conveniently retain their Government
(though it be peculiar and distinct) in any Commonwealth, of what form soever,
without prejudice to the Peace and Welfare of it. So is it with Churches, their
State and Government (as it is appointed by Christ) is such, as is consistent
with, and no prejudice unto any civil Powers under whom they are situated. And
that upon this account principally: Having no Dependency in Respect of Power or
Jurisdiction one on another, they cannot in their own Sphere enlarge themselves
by Subordinations, to a political Body of any such Extension and Greatness, as
may render their Obedience or Compliance more doubtful or uncertain. It is
matter of Jealousy with Princes and States, when there is in their Dominions a
Body, large and extensive, firmly joined and compact in it self, of an interest
peculiar and not holding of them. Particular Churches are of a small compass,
sometimes comprehended in One, ordinarily but of a few Families. So that in
this respect, though their Interest and Government be peculiar, they may retain
it, and for substance the same (as Families do) throughout the World. Which
will further appear in the following Considerations.

1. It is granted on all hands, That the Lord has limited his Church to a
Government which is perpetual, and for substance to be the same in all places.
As also that the Nations, from their Civil Government variously, and as they
judge most prudent.

2. Since the Wall of partition by Christ's Death was broken down: The Gospel
and Christian Churches were by Christ's commission to be planted in all parts of
the World. It stands therefore with common reason, that the Church Government
Christ has left us, is of that Nature, as without any substantial Alteration
may comply with, and not be prejudicial to, any Civil Government.

3. If particular Churches by Union become one body, for extention as large as
the Civil State, There will hardly be a due and peaceable accord, and each
enjoy its privilege and Liberties without prejudice to the other; unless these
two great bodies be molded and formed one with respect unto the other. The
policy therefore of the Nation and the National Church of the Jews, were both
respectively formed by the Lord himself.

4. Hence this opinion of Statesmen, that there is no form of Church
Government left by Christ, or his Apostles; but to be molded by the wisdom and
discretion of Christian Magistrates, as may best suit and joint in with the
Civil Government. And of others the contrary, "The Commonwealth (says one)
must be made to agree with the Church, and the Government, thereof with her
Government: for as the House is before the Hangings, therefore the Hangings
which came after, must be framed to the House which was before: so the Church
being before there was any Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth coming after,
must be fashioned and made suitable to the Church: We need none of these
extremes." The middle way is this, Let not the Churches claim to be National or
Provincial Jure divino, but leave such disposements to the civil Magistrate,
and be numbered with those lesser Societies, Families, Cities, Colleges, etc.
For these do retain in themselves much the same form of Government and Freedom
therein throughout the World.

5. It is not so much a different Form of Government: For in each Republic
there are contained lesser Societies of all Forms; but their Extention and
Potency in numerousness of Persons, by which they are made up. Nor from this
Principallity, but the nature of their Union and Incorporation begets the
Jealousies. If particular Churches become Diocesan, Provincial, or National by
Union from the Law, or Direction of the Civil Magistrate, for the better
exercise of that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the Lord has entrusted him with,
and convenience of such persons as he shall appoint to inspect the Churches; in
such a case the Greatness of Churches cannot be disturbent to the Civil
Government, being so directly under its cognizance. The Commonwealth (says
one Holy Commonwealth, R. B. p. 2.220.
) contains all the people in a whole Nation or more, united in one Sovereign,
but particular Churches (distinct from the universal united in Christ) have no
general Ecclesiastical Officers, in whom a Nation must Unite as one Church. How
then become they to be termed a National Church? Ans. As several Corporations
in one Kingdom, or as so many Schools that have a peculiar form of Government,
but such only as is under (and united in) the Magistrates Government in its
kind. If this should be claimed as the Law or Privilege of each Family, that
the Governors, be it the Father, or Husband, or Master, are thereby invested by
Nature with the same Power, in respect to all Families in a Nation; and by
several Correspondencies and Subordinations raise, and Unite themselves at last
into a general Assembly or Representative. And by Virtue of that Enconomical
Authority give Laws to the whole Nation, though not as their Subjects; yet to
the same persons under another notion, that is, as Wives, Children, Servants.
There is no well Governed State could entertain such a spreading interest as
this, without great doubtfulness, lest their Authority and Supremacy, should
hereby be much Ecclipsed.

6. But a particular Church consisting only of a few persons in it self, and
independent on others; is necessitated to depend, under God, upon the
Magistrate for protection. Which if they should not obtain, but be opposed and
persecuted; yet have no ability to resist, being as a Family single and alone,
not able to defend it self or molest others. Nor if they were able, is it
lawful for a Church to compel by the Sword, more than the Magistrate may by the
Keys, or what is peculiar to the sacred Function. 2 Chronicles. 26. Matthew. 16.19.
with 24,25.
Vzza erred in the latter, and Peter in the former. The primitive rule and
practice was this, being persecuted in one City to fly into another, Matthew.
10.23.
and pray that their flight may not be in the Winter. Matthew. 24.20.
No nor do we judge that these spiritual weapons (the Keys or Censures) may
lawfully by a Church, or any Ecclesiastical Assembly be threatened, or drawn
forth against a whole Nation, and the chief Governors thereof, to urge or
compel, especially in State concernment (as the Pope and some others have done)
though it be truly in ordine ad spiritualia.

The 5. Instance.
The fifth Instance or particular is this. A Family of all Corporations or
Societies, is the lowest species or kind, it is Consociatio simplex and prima,
and has the least of pomp or state in the Government of it. Cottages are built
low, Palaces with many stories one above another. Those great and extensive
Bodies Empires and Kingdoms, represent in their Government more adequatly the
mystical Church, in respect to Jesus Christ who is their King and Lawgiver,
whose Kingdom is with Power and Glory, a Power that is truly Imperial and
Princely, having Officers under him (his Kingdom reaching to the utmost ends of
the Earth) who in his name command reward, and punish. But Particular Churches
as Governed by his Ministers, have their porportion rather with the meanest and
lowest Societies of men.

The Scripture seems to point at more than a similitude and likeness betwixt a
Family and Church, in the managing of affairs; I mean in the general, and what
is it not determined by express Institution. Paul speaking to Timothy about
Church affairs, mentions their expertness in Governing a Family, as a good
preparative or qualification for Church administrations. And this is not only
Negatively, if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care
over the Church of God. 1 Timothy 3.5.
But affirmatively, These things I writ, that thou may know how thou
ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the
living God, verse. 15.
The sense is full in those words, the Church of the living God, yet it is
added the house of God, purposed as it were to carry the Eye back to what was
written, ver. 5. which shows that there is a great affinity betwixt our
Houses and the Household of God. In a Fathers Governing his Children (says one)
there is a lively resemblance of such Duties of Government, which he is to
dispense toward the Church. There is nothing enjoined, the Minister as a
Father of Children, which belongs not to him as he is a spiritual Father of
the Children of God.

On the other hand, it may be observed, this question being amongst the
Apostles, who or which of us shall be the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?
Matthew. 18.1.
upon supposition (the Church being termed a Kingdom) there would be places of
State, and higher dignity in it, as are in the Kingdoms of the World. Christ
Answers: There shall be no such thing, no primacy in one Apostle over another,
no, the greatest of you shall be the least, and the first shall be the last,
Though a Jurisdiction and power truly Imperial, absolute, and equal to any of
the Kings of the Gentiles, belongs to me, and I exercise it in those spiritual
administrations, yet no such dignity may be assumed by you, (...). Luke 22.25.

1. When the Scripture speaks of a particular Church under the notion of a
Family or Household, Government or Ruling is mentioned as that wherein the
similitude or proportion is most perspicuous and clear, as has been showed:
But speaking here of a Church under this expression, a Kingdom, how purposely
are we cautioned against an imitation in Rule and Authority?

2. We may further observe that Ambition after greatness in those that manage
these great things, Hos. 8.12.
is an infirmity almost unavoidable. 1 Pet. 1.4.
For if 1. Such persons, the holiest men on the earth, they who had forsaken
all to follow Christ. 2. And these so often relapse into this folly after they
had been reduced from it by Christ. 3. And at such times, immediately after
Christ had minded them of his Death, and that one of them should betray him,
when also they had newly been at the Communion with him: What great cause is
there that every man be very jealous of his own heart? Matthew. 20.19,20.
Luke 22.21,24. and 19. with 24.


3. It is not unevident also from the Disciples often Disputes about their
greatness; that most of our controversies and contentions about
Church Government, if traced home, will be found to arise from hence, namely:
The having our Eye fixed so much upon the lofty state of a Kingdom as our
pattern in such managements, rather than that familiar and humble way of a
Family. For indeed this was the only breach and contest that we read of,
amongst those holy Men, the Disciples of Christ.

4. And where such differences are, a Reconcilement will be found more
difficult, because where the mind is bent on worldly greatness, we are very
dull and slow in understanding whatsoever shall be spoken (though from Christ
himself) that seems to cross those thoughts; as appears also in that story,
Mark 9.32.

A Parent or Master would not easily have been tempted into such an Error, or
make this question, who or which of us shall be the greatest? that is, have a
paternal power over other Parents and their Families, etc. And had the
Disciples looked upon Ministerial power under so low and humble a notion as
what is Economical, James and John would never have thought it congruous, that
they should have an Apostolical power over the other Apostles, Hoc Papatum
fefellit, etc. (says Cartw.) This deceived the Papacy, which governs
throughout after the form of worldly Plurimorum consensu Ecclesia. a repub.
formam illam magna part mutuata est Filisac.
Empires. The Pope he is as the Emperor himself, the Cardinals as his Deligates
or Representative, the Archbishops as the Governors of Provinces, etc. Hence
John calls the Church of Rome, the Image of the Beast, the Vizard of the Roman
Empire.

For further confirmation of this fifth particular or Instance, let it be
considered, how seldom and sparingly a particular Church in the N. T. is termed
a Kingdom. Although 1. Its Government be derived as a Branch of Christ's Kingly
Office. 2. Church Ordinances are the most effectual means by which he
exercises his spiritual Sovereignty in each man's soul. 3. His Mystical Kingdom
on earth, thus by parcels, comes to be wholly under an external spiritual
regiment, and 4. His Church when National was managed in the Glory and State of
a Kingdom. Yet notwithstanding all these leading occasions, how sparingly, and
not without special Caution is a particular Church thus termed? Whereas not
only the Society, but the Government, Officers, Ordinances, Censures, and other
Church matters, are universally and frequently delivered unto us by Christ and
his Apostles, in terms apt to mind us of this low and humble policy. To give
some Instances thereof.

1. A particular Church or the Society it self, is represented unto us as the
House of the living God, 1 Timothy 3. His Household, Matthew. 24, 45. over which he
has set Rulers (therefore to be understood of a particular Church, for the
universal is immediately under the rule of Christ.) A Brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2.17.
and the Members of it Brethren and Sisters (as the Pastors Fathers) 2 Cor.
7.15. Jam. 2.15. 1 Timothy 5.2. and it is given as a title of Dignity, 1 Cor.
5.11. Ephesians. 4.21. Romans 16.1,23. 1 Pet. 5.12. yea to the Poor as well as to the
Rich, and to those of low as high degree, Jam. 1.9.

2. Church Ordinances as 1. By teaching and admonishing the Word is said to
dwell amongst them in all Wisdom (...) Col. 3.16.
compared with Matthew. 24.45. The faithful and wise Ruler of Christ's Household is
to give them meat in due season. It is a description of a Pastors duty, who is
hereby admonished to feed with knowledge, and to be much in it, that the Family
may be richly and plentifully, and not sparingly, niggardly fed. The Word
dwelling, is the Household Bread or Food, which by the Stewards or Ministers is
to be rightly divided, 2 Timothy 2.15. and respectively dispensed as milk to the
Babes in the Family, and strong meat to others, Heb. 5.13,14. 1 Cor. 3.2. 2.
The Sacrament an Ordinance peculiar to this Society, it is represented unto us
as the Supper of the Lord, a Spiritual repast of Bread and Wine. It came in the
place of a Family Ordinance the Passover, and so termed: Churches being now
become Gods Family, and the Lords Supper their Feast, 1 Cor 5.8. but most to
our purpose, are such expressions as set forth the Governors and Discipline
appointed to a particular Church.

3. The Officers are as the Stewards and Servants in this Household, and so
termed not in relation to Christ only, who is the Lord, but to the Church his
Family. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Romans 16.1.
Christ abates of the over-high expectations of his Disciples, by telling them
that those who are the chiefest amongst them, ought to be even as Servants in
the House, that attend at the Table, Luke 22.26,27. There were those in Corinth
raised much above their level (whom Paul personates in himself and Apollo and
Cephas) even equal with Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12,13. with 4.6.
as having the Fountain of their excellency in themselves, and communicated
unto others of their own (as great Princes and Benefactors) like Christ: 1 Cor.
4.7, etc.
this being Lordly and Princely, Paul tells them, they reigned like Kings. ver.
8.
To reduce from this exorbitant height to a just balance, Paul sets down the
rate they may value themselves, 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of
the Ministers of Christ, Stewards of the Mysteries of God.

4. Discipline and Censures, the Keys that open and shut; this expression has
its reference to a House or City most properly. And in the first place,
particularly the Censure of Excommunication, which is as the purging out of the
old leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7,13. this was done by a careful and diligent search into
every corner of the house. So the Excommunicate person, like Cain, is cast out
of the Family, and droven from the presence of God. Exodus 12.
With such a one not to eat, is all one with holding him as a Heathen and
Publican. This Censure is temed a Rod, (...), as the Correction of our Children
is termed (...), Discipline, Ephesians. 6.9.
see Beza. The Apostles being Spiritual Parents, 2 Cor. 12.14.
threaten the Rod, that is to censure in a Discipline way, cap. 13. 1. In the
mouth of two or three Witnesses, etc. compared with Matthew. 18. And then verse.
2. If I come again I will not spare, which is the same with 1 Cor. 4.21. Shall
I come with a Rod?

The 6 Instance.
The sixth Instance: As the Government of a Family is low and humble, so it is
carried on in the most familiar and affectionate way; there is an intimacy, and
daily converse with our Governors. Instruction and Correction are much
sweetened from that Fatherly care and Affection, we have experienced in other
dealings. It is thus with Churches; though the Power there exercised, be some
way coercive, yet brotherly, and submitted unto with much Reverence, being
administered by those we love, honor, and depend upon, as Spiritual Fathers.
Ecclesiastical Power (says our Brethren of Scotland Prop. to the Genesis Assem.
1647.
) is indeed furnished with Authority, yet that Authority is rather the
Fatherly, than the Kingly Authority.

We have said that neither the censures of the Church, nor of civil Magistrate,
morally work upon us further than we work upon our selves. Yet there is this
difference, the weapons of the one being carnal, affect the senses, and by them
the mind coming in upon it more suddenly and strongly. Sense and Appetite have
now a broad, ready, and more direct way to the Soul than Reason. But
Church Censures touch us not, or very little in any Bodily concernment. So that
nothing comes in upon us any way, but what we our selves are willing to let in.
It is a great advantage therefore, and much to our Edification, that the
persons who deal with us in such a way, be first let into us, that is, much in
our affections and good opinion, and having entertained the persons, their
ministration will the easier be let in with them, and so we come to be taken by
Craft, as it were, (as the Apostle expresses it) 2 Cor. 16. that is, we are
induced by a sweet and attractive Bait, to take our selves. The Persons
therefore that are over us in the Lord, being such as we intimately know, and
daily converse with, such as our selves have chosen to be our spiritual
Fathers, such also as we have experienced their goodness and tenderness in
other Gospel-Administrations: we more easily subject to their Rebukes and
Censures, as coming from the same Affection. The Ruling power in a Family, is
you know by those that are intimately known, and greatly oblige, as Parents who
daily care and provide for us for present and to come, and therefore though
they correct us, yea, sometimes in Passion, yet we give them reverence, Hebr.
12.9. Censures in Churches, or Church-Chastisements, are therefore or ought to
be from those that instruct and give us our portion in spiritual Comforts: the
Rulers of Christ's Household gives them their meat in due season. Mat. 24.45.
We exhorted and comforted, (says the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.
) and charged every one of them, as a Father does his Children. Paul can charge
them, and with greater Authority, even in their own hearts who have had
experience, how in a Fatherly way, he Exhorts, Comforts, and Travels as it were
in Birth with them. The Apostle urges Obedience and Submission upon such a
Consideration; Obey them that have Rule over you, and submit your selves; for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account. Hebr. 13.7.
That is, there is an intimate and affectionate relation between them and you,
being such, as Fast, and Pray, and Mourn, and Rejoice, yea, Eat and Drink with
you daily at the same Table of the Lord, and are entrusted with the Care of
your Souls from the hand of Christ.

This cannot be where the Pastoral or Ministerial Work is divided, and the Keys
of the Church hung apart. Those that instruct us not, nay, are Strangers to us,
Rule over us; Rebukes and Chastisements in this spiritual way, are from those
whose Faces we never saw, or know so much as by name. It Is true, we may argue
thus, They are strangers, expect no favor therefore, or mercy from them, if
you offend: this procures Obedience indeed, but it is in a servile way. The
mind of Christ is, that as our Submission to himself, so to his Ministers (who
even in Censures act in his Name) be affectionate, filial, and drawn by the
cords of love.

Thus have I gone through with the Instances promised, with what brevity the
nature of the matter would permit. By which it is not intended to parallel
these Societies in respect to the intrinsic Form of Government peculiar to
each: (for that, in a Church is from the Institution of Christ, rather than the
light of Nature) but the more general state and habitude of Ecclesiastical
Government as Churches stand disposed to the Civil Magistrate, or one to
another, and what the light of Nature and common Reason contribute hereunto,
being so much insisted upon. What has been said, I hope tends to Union and
Accommodation. Those that hold any spiritual Government Jure Divino, and by the
appointment of Jesus Christ, do not deny it to a particular Church: And those
that hold none, yet are at a lesser distance from such who claim so little.

CAP. VI.
A second Objection. Of the Jurisdiction over Particular Churches in Synods,
Ecclesiastical Courts, etc..1. as exercised with us..2. and in other places.

Object. 2. THere are Synods, Consistories, Colloquies, and other
Ecclesiastical Courts, which exercise an Authority in spiritual matters over
Churches: Therefore that of the Magistrate before mentioned, is not so
necessary.

Answ. It is humbly denied, and asserted, That these greater Assemblies, a
Synod, Classis, Coloquie, and the like, either have no such coactive
Jurisdiction, as we mentioned, or are dependent upon the Civil Magistrate for
it. This we shall show, by declaring more fully what Ecclesiastical Power is
exercised by Synods, or such Courts. 1. In this Kingdom. 2. In other Reformed
Churches.

The Ecclesiastical Courts in this Kingdom are of two sorts:

1. There are, we know, Spiritual Courts, (so termed) such as the Prerogative,
the Arches, Court of Faculties, the Archdeacons and Commissaries Courts: These
claim only from the Civil Powers, as was showed before. Page 45,46.
In the Statute of 37 Hen. 8. c. 17. it is declared, That the Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, have no manner of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but by, from, and under the King's Royal Majesty.
By the Statute also of 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. All Courts Ecclesiastical within the
Realms of England and Ireland, ought to be kept by no other Power or Authority
either Foreign or within the Realm, but by the Authority of His most Excellent
Majesty. And it was further Enacted, That all their Process shall issue out
under the King's Seal, and His Name and Style, etc. but since repealed. Dr.
Cosens, in his learned Defense of them, and their Proceedings, asserts thus:
They are (says he) warranted by the Statute and Canon Law of this Nation;
professing also, that there were Reason enough against those Ecclesiastical
Proceedings, if they were not claimed from the Crown, but from some other
Authority immediately, as the Popish Clergy did theirs from, by the means and
direction of the Pope. Apol. Part 1. Cap. 1.


2. Our Convocation or General Synod, which makes Laws and Canons about matters
that are more spiritual. This is an ancient Court, and has formerly been in it
self of great Authority in Ecclesiastical Regulations; it is not so now, but
dependent upon the Civil Magistrate, for whatsoever Jurisdiction or Coercive
Power there exercised, which will appear in these Particulars.

1. There are no Laws or Canons made by the Bishops, and others of the Clergy
in the Convocation, that oblige under any Penalty, without the Stipulation and
Assent of the Civil Magistrate, be it either in matters of Faith or Discipline.
The 39 Articles and Canons about them, concluded upon by the Synod in Anno
1562. engaged no man under any Penalty in our Law to believe, profess, or
subscribe, until they had an Assent or Establishment by the Civil Powers. Nor
can they proceed against any Crime, as Heresy, Apostasy, or gross Enormity in
Doctrine, but what our Laws declare to be such. Nihil habet vim legis priusquam
Regius assensus fuerit adhibitus, iis quae Synodus decernanda censuerit. Cosins
Polit. Ta. 1. a.


And for matters of Discipline and Worship, it appears by the Letters Patent,
Copies whereof are annexed to the Canons published in Anno 1603, and 1640. That
1. All power to meet, confer, treat, debate, and agree upon any matter for
common good, is from such License, Power and Authority as is granted to the
Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors, and other Members of the Convocation from
His Majesty of His special Grace, and by virtue of His Prerogative Royal and
Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes. And 2. the Synod having treated of,
concluded and agreed upon Canons, Orders, etc. To the end and purpose by His
Majesty limited and prescribed unto them, they are to offer and present the
same to His Majesty in writing: He, upon mature consideration taken thereupon,
may allow, The License to the Convoc. in Anno 1640.
approve, confirm, and ratify, or otherwise disallow, anihilate, and make void
such, and so many of the said Canons, Orders, etc. as he shall think fit,
requisite, or convenient. And none of those Canons, etc. shall be of any force,
effect, or validity in Law, but only such, and so many of them, and after such
time as His Majesty by His Letters Patents shall approve and confirm the same.

The Civil Magistrate may suspend for what time he shall please, yea, wholly
deprive any Bishop or Bishops from their Office and Place in this Synod, who
are the chiefest Members thereof. He may Commissionate also by Writ Cook
Instit. page 4. cap. 74.
, what other Persons He shall please to sit in Convocation with them. And if
occasion be, He may likewise wholly constitute another Synod, and nominate each
particular Person of what Quality and of what Number of His Natives as He shall
please, and give them like Authority in Ecclesiastical matters. So was that
Synod of the 32. appointed (by Hen. 8. and afterward by Edw. 6.) to do the
work of a Synod, and present a Body of Ecclesiastical Canons for Confirmation
by the Magistrate. Field, Of the Church. Lib. 5. cap. 53.
Princeps potest assignare, nominare, and authoritatem dare quandocunque and
quamdiu ipsi placuerit hujusmodi indigenis subditis quos idoneos censuerit,
etc. Dr. Cousin de Pol. Tab. 1. a.


3. These Laws, says De Ju. Ec. page 9.
Cook, are termed Regiae Leges Ecclesisiasticae, and another such
Ecclesiastical Laws as now are in force, are called the King's Ecclesiastical
Laws, for that now all Jurisdiction, whether it be Temporal or Ecclesiastical,
is the Kings. And if there be any thing difficult or doubtful in these Laws,
the Interpretation is ultimately to be given in the Civil Judicatures. So
Cook's Instit. page 4. cap. 74. To the King also is the last Appeal to be made,
and Delegates appointed by Him, give final Determination in Controversies,
after adjudged by those Laws and Canons in any, yea, the highest of those
Ecclesiastical Courts. Vltima Appellatio sit ad Principem and non extra Regnum,
says Dr. Cosen, and tells us it is a Jurisdiction Coronae Regiae de Jure
debita. Dr. Ridley's view. page 110.
25 Hen. 8. c. 19.
15 Hen. 8. c. 21.


4. The King's Majesty may dispense with any of those Canons or Ecclesiastical
Laws, indulge the Omission of what is enjoined by them, make void the Crime,
and remove the Penalty incurred by breach of them, yea, and give Faculty to do
or practice otherwise, any Synodical Establishment or long usage to the
contrary notwithstanding, in what offends not the Holy Scripture and Laws of
God.

5. The King may exempt Persons and Societies from the Jurisdiction of the
Ordinary or Bishop, or any else who are to execute these Canons. This my Lord
Coke asserts, De Jure Eccles.
and as a Prerogative annexed to the Crown. He gives many Instances of such
Dispensations in several Kings Reigns, both ancient, and of later times. For
doubtless what Power He grants, and is exercised under Him, may be reassumed
by Him. And Privilege, even whole Parishes if he please, from Episcopal or
Synodical Jurisdiction, and such Parishes are said to be Regiae Majestati
immediate subditae: Mocket, de Ecclesiastica Ang. Pol. page 294. And many
Parishes to this day, stand thus exempted, by the favor and grant of Princes
formerly. The Dutch and French Churches in several Parts of this Kingdom, by
Patent from Edw. 6. were exempted from the then Establishment, and exercised a
Discipline; and Forms of Worship, according to their own Persuasion, our Synod
and Ecclesiastical Courts having, by virtue of this Exemption, nothing to do
with their Ministers or Churches; which Privilege has been confirmed to them
by our Kings that Reigned since, and are enjoined to this day, His Majesty that
now is, by His Prerogative in Ecclesiastical Matters, notwithstanding the
present Form of Worship and Ceremonies, Graciously indulged Tender Consciences
a Forbearance in what they were not satisfied, and to practice otherwise,
Declaration of October, 1660.

6. There is no matter or thing appertaining to Religion, or first
Table-Duties, or so intimate and properly spiritual, which a Synod or
Convocation has Cognizance of, and may make Laws and Canons about: But the
like things have been established by the Civil Powers (more than sometimes for
Advice) without it, as will abundantly appear in the many Statutes and Laws of
former and later Times, as against Swearing, Perjury, Sabbath-breaking, etc.
That one instance, the Liturgy, and ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, the
many Rubricks in each of those Books, are so many Canons and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, insomuch as some have termed the Parliaments of England Synods,
or Representatives of the Church of England; observing also, that in the King's
Writ, by which a Parliament is called, there is expressly committed unto them
the Considerations of what concerns the Church as the Kingdom of England.

There has been also Injunctions, Declarations, Advertisements, Proclamations,
and the like Edicts published in Ecclesiastical Matters, from time to time by
our Princes, without calling or advising with a Synod: And Obedience has been
required unto those Precepts, by the Ordinary in each Diocese, as well as to
the Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws made by Synods.

The Dependency therefore of Synods and Convocations upon the Civil Magistrate,
according to the Constitution and Practice here in England, is very great and
apparent: For, I. They can make no Canon, or Ecclesiastical Law, without the
Civil Magistrate, but he can and may without them. II. None of their Laws,
though ever so Ancient, but may be revoked by a Parliament; but the Rubricks,
or Ecclesiastical Laws established by it, may not be meddled with by the
Convocation. His Majesty's License to the Convocation, May 12. 1640.



I shall conclude with B. Bilson, who seems to state the Nature and Occasion of
Synods, as they are in this Kingdom, very fully, and indeed much as they ought
to be wheresoever they are called; his words are these:

D. Bills. Per. Gov. cap. 16. p. 383.
"With us no Synods may assemble without the Prince's Warrant, as well to meet
as to consult of any matter touching the state of this Realm: And why? They be
no Court separate from the Prince, nor superior to the Prince, but subjected in
all things to the Prince, and appointed by the Laws of God and man, in Truth
and Godliness, to assist and direct the Prince when and where they shall be
called to assemble; otherwise they have no power of themselves to make Decrees,
when there is a Christian Magistrate, neither may they challenge the judicial
hearing or ending of Ecclesiastical Controversies without or against the
Prince's liking."

It appears evidently hereby, that in the Judgment of the Learned Author,
Synods, in their Nature and Use, are not for Rule and Government, where there
is a Christian Magistrate; or otherwise than as Assistants only to counsel and
advise Him.

THe Synods in other Reformed Churches claim a coercive Jurisdiction, from an
intrinsic right received immediately from Jesus Christ, as Ministers of the
Gospel. There being no express Scriptures to uphold this Assertion, and the
light of Nature and common reason being supposed sufficient to create a jus
divinum. The Authors of this persuasion argue thus. Discip. of Scot. lib. 2. c.
11. also Act. of G. Assemb. before the Confess. of Faith.
Jus divinum regiminis, cap. 3.


"In all Kingdoms and Republics, if wrong be done by inferior Courts, we may
have right by appealing to a Court superior in Authority; there ought therefore
to be such an order in Churches, that is, a Classis, Synod, etc. That there may
be regular Appeals in like Cases. And further they argue, if it be not so, when
whole Churches or their Consistories transgress, there is no ordinary Remedy.
The Provision Christ has made for Government in his Church will be found
defective: For though there be a Remedy for particular persons; yet for a
Church offending, there is none, if there be not a superior Church or
Ecclesiastical Power to appeal unto." Jus D. regim. cap. 1.
Assembly Dispute p. 114.
Rutherf. peaceable Plea, cap. 15.
Assertion of the Gover. of Scot. by G. Gillespie. part 2. cap. 4


Leaving wholly what they pretend from Scriptures: I shall examine this only
their Reasoning from common light, it being more suitable to our present
subject; and in the general say.

Answ. 1.
1. In the Mysteries of the Gospel (from which by their own concessions,
Church Communion and Discipline is not to be excluded any more than Preaching
or the Sacraments) It is very unsafe to make the dim Eye of Reason our Guide.
Of what advantage such suppositions have been, in producing Arminianism,
Socinianism, Platonism, etc. but especially of the many gross Errors and
loathsome Superstitions in Popish Worship: we cannot be ignorant.

Answ. 2.
2. An Appeal (as understood in this dispute, and ordinarily by Civilians) is a
provocation to a superior Tribunal, upon the error or wrong done by an
Inferior. Such an Appeal is not essential to Government, unless we can suppose
a progressus in infinitum: Nor is there a defect in that Government where it
cannot be had. Some Societies are 1. So low and little in compass, as they need
not such Appeals. A Family is a complete Society or Corporation, though there
be not a Superior in the same kind, that is, an Economical power to appeal
unto; so may a Church be, though not a Superior in a series, properly Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical. 2. Others so High. If there be an Error or Wrong done in or
by a general Assembly or National Synod, (supposed in the exercise of power of
greatest perfection) we have no remedy, no Superior to appeal unto; therefore
they term their Church or General Assembly an Independent. If it be said, as it
is by some, we may appeal from it to an Ecumenical Council. Answ. These great
Councels have erred, and may, and what then is the Remedy, or further
Provision? To what Ecclesiastical Tribunal Superior can we appeal from them?
Argued by the Commissioners of Scotland, Anno 41. p. 1, 2, 9. Also their
Declaration against a Cross Petition. P. 10.


Answ. 3
To answer more particularly: This Reasoning being grounded upon a Similitude
betwixt the Ministerial Government of Christ, and the Political Government of
Kingdoms, we say there is not Par ratio, and therefore no just consequence. The
Disparity will appear in diverse Particulars.

I. Disparity.
In their Natures, as Civil and Religious Assemblies. In this the Difference is
so great as Councels, Schoolmen, and Casuists, who all grant Appeals in Civil
Affairs: yet in Ecclesiastical Matters the ordinary use of them is so
constantly and generally denied, as it is an Axiom, says One, That in
Religious Causes, the Voice of Appealing is not to be heard or mentioned.
Videtur axioma communiter acceptum inter probos Religiosos Appellationis vocem
audiendam non esse, Suar. de virt. Tom. 4. page 99.
And in the same Chapter he gives us the Reasons of it in these words: Si in
ordinariis correctionibus quae juxta disciplinam religiosam fiunt, locum
haberet Appellatio a Priore ad Provincialem, and a Provinciali ad Generalem;
magna sequeretur perturbatio, and disciplina religiosa sine dubio corrueret,
etc. "In ordinary Censures, and such as are according to a Religious
Discipline, if Appeals should be made from the Prior to the Provincial, and
from the Provincial to the General, it would breed a great Disturbance, and be
doubtless the Ruin of Religious Discipline: For, 1. Inferior Governors would
quickly be despised, and have little Reverence or Fear. 2. By such a dilatory
way, opportunity will be given by Friends, or underhand working, to prevent
any Religious Discipline. It is therefore expedient for the good of Religion,
that there be a more simple way of procedure in these spiritual Corrections,
and that it be without any kind of Appellation:" Thus far Suarez. And others of
them also tell us, Soto de Just. lib. 54. 6. art.
That in a voluntary and brotherly Society, it is more comely and honorable to
end Offenses and Differences in a private and peaceable way, amongst
themselves, and within the Society, than by clamorous Appeals, to make Matters
more public. It should not be of little weight also with us, the Tenderness of
Christ, if it be considered, and how he would not have Breaches and Offenses
amongst Brethren to be made more public, or carried further than is necessary.
And by any thing we find in the Text, there is no Necessity we should carry
Matters for Censure, out of the Church where the Offense is; if there were,
doubtless Christ would have given us direction as well for the managing of
Appeals FROM a Church, as IN a Church, Mat. 18.15,16,17. where each step and
circumstance, in the progress from a lesser to a greater Authority, is
described.

II. Disparity.
From the different condition of Punishments in respect to Relief, if unjustly
inflicted. Church Censures have little operation on us, further than our own
Conscience and the Spirit of Christ make them effectual, by working them in
upon us: But if inflicted where no just Cause, and Clave errante, the Spirit of
Christ will not convince us of Sin, or let in Satan's Terrors, nor any such
impressions of Grief or Shame as much to afflict us being innocent. How little
has the Pope's Bulls, or such Thundrings from Rome, been valued or esteemed;
or Excommunications sent out of our Spiritual Courts, when we know it is but
for a Four-penny Offense? In Civil Affairs it is much otherwise: For, be the
Sentence just or unjust, the Execution of it is equally grievous, and a
punishment, be it in respect of Life, Liberty, or Estate; and there is no way
either to avoid or mitigate such wrongs, but by Appeals: The necessity of such
Appeals therefore is very great, but in respect to Ecclesiastical Censures,
little or nothing at all.

III. Disparity.
The ordinary end and use of Appeals, is either, 1. For Relief of Persons
suffering: Or, 2. That corrupt Judges be censured, and unjust Sentences
rescinded. Persons come to be relieved, when by Appeals to Higher Powers there
is a better understanding, either 1. in the Rule and Law; or, 2. a more
righteous judgment in matters of Fact. There are none of these Ends or Uses of
an Appeal so accomplishable in an Ecclesiastical Process, as in a Civil.

1. If the Rule be obscure, a right understanding of it may infallibly be had
by appealing in Civil Affairs; the Supreme Court is here on Earth, that made
the Rule or Law; what is determined by a Parliament, or such Persons as are
entrusted by it to this purpose, is to us unquestionable.

But it is otherwise in Church Affairs, our Lawgiver is in Heaven, and cannot
in such a forensical way be appealed unto, nor has he left any Vicar or
Visible Judge under him, of greater Authority, in respect of Infallibility,
than a particular Church, which is the ground and pillar of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.
The Papists, some of them in great and weighty matters (not otherwise) that
are spiritual, yield Appeals; but it is upon this Supposition, that the Cause,
at last, will be brought to a Tribunal that is Infallible, Licitum est (says
P. de Aragon Aragon, in 2. 2. q. 69. a. 3. D.Th.
) in re grave cuique causam suam defferre ad sedem Apostolicam; quando vel ex
imperitia, vel ex Passione inferiorum judicum qui homines sunt ac decipi
possunt, injuriam patitur: The Pope cannot be deceived, he is more than a Man.

2. Matters of Fact, by reason of Appeals, come to be sentenced at a great
distance from the place where the Crime and Offense lies, which in Worldly
Concernments may with more Righteousness be done, than in what is Spiritual,
and of Church Cognizance.

1. Transgressions come under a Civil Judgment, as materially considered, and
according to the gross Act, but brought to the Church, not as Sins simple, but
as Scandals and Offenses, which is a Consideration not so obvious, but requires
good judgment in the Witnesses, as well as in the Judges. The Obstinacy also,
or Penitency of the Person offending, accordingly as Testimony shall be given
of either, is a more difficult matter to make out, than either the Sin it self,
or the Scandal. Repentance, Godly Sorrow, or the contrary, is the principal
thing to be regarded in Church-process. Repentance, I say, in truth and
sincerity, so far as we can judge in (a seeing and not blind) charity. It is
not only the Passion, Sorrow, or Shame, but Godly Sorrow, which is more
spiritual, and deeper in the heart, and requires much and particular knowledge
of the Person, and his temper, and such as cannot be attained at a distance,
but by frequent and familiar Converse. To sit in the Stool of Repentance, stand
in a White Sheet, or do Penance, (as it is termed) these are (as the fruits of
the flesh) manifest, and judged of at the greatest distance, it is not so deep,
as we need much understanding to draw it out. Prove. 20.5.


2. The Censure, whether binding or loosing, is to be executed always by the
particular Church where the Offender is a Member; those persons, above all
others, are to have a particular knowledge of his Crime and true Repentance;
they are to forgive, and confirm their love, 2 Cor. 2.7.
or otherwise, to withdraw from him. If THY Brother offend thee, let him be
unto THEE an Heathen, etc. Mat. 18.15,17
The Execution of the Censure being by each Brother of that Church, it is
necessary the Examination of the matter be before them. Spiritual Duties are
not to be performed upon an implicit Faith. What knowledge, but by remote
heresay, can a Church in the Orchades have of a man's repentance or obstinacy,
the ultimate trial and cognizance whereof, is taken by a Synod at Edenhurgh.
Civil censures are for Satisfaction of the whole Nation, and not the Parish or
Borough only where the crime was committed: but in a Church-censure, the
particular Assembly being only, and no other Congregation, or person morally
leavened, and charged with the offense, are principally, and in the first place
concerned, to have satisfaction of the repentance and submission of the person
offending: For by this means only their Lump or Church, becomes again
unleavened.

4 Disparity.
4. The other End (before mentioned) and Use of Appeals is, that our Judges and
their Sentence be censured and judged by superior Tribunals. To which
proceeding, the Judges in Civil Judicatures are liable; but there is not the
like Subordination in Churches for these Reasons. Vnaequaque res per quascunque
res nascitur per easdem dissolvitur.


1. All the Power and Authority placed in their Inferior Courts, is no other
but the influx of the supreme Civil Powers, to whom we always make our last
Appeal, and therefore proper to them, to suspend Actings, nay utterly to
destroy in part or in whole, what Jurisdiction is derived from them, as appears
in the Constitution of all Kingdoms: But it is not so here a particular Church.
The Court we are to Appeal from, has not its Being or Jurisdiction, from a
Classis or Synod; Ecclesia Parochialis est Ecclesia vera essentialiter and
integraliter absque ulla correspondentia vel Synodo Voet. de Syn. page 13.
these rather derive their Power from it, being Representatives only, as our
Brethren have formerly written. Particular Churches, they term Ecclesiae
primae, and Synods Ecclesiae ortae. Again, if Synods (as they grant) exercise
over Churches a Power only cumulative, not destructive: How can they
Excommunicate a Church, seeing Excommunication renders a Society as Heathens
and Publicans, which is to unchurch them, as Mr. Rutherford rightly affirms.
Parker de Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 13.
It is an authoritative unchurching of an obstinate Church we plead for. Ruth.
peaceable Plea, cap. 15. p. 223, and p. 222. Excommunication is an
authoritative unchurching.


2. Although whole Churches may be punished for male Administration by the
Civil Magistrate, yet may not an Ecclesiastical Power merely such, do the like,
for to destroy or save whole Societies, for the Evil of a major part, or a few
persons, is the prerogative of the Lord himself, which he communicates also in
some cases to Civil Magistrates, his Deputies, but in no case to Churches; it
being an Authority high and Princely, and not at all suitable to such as have
only a Ministry, and not a Dominion. Bishop Davenant tells us, Brotherly
Communion, c. 9. p. 102.
That a Censure is not to be drawn on the whole Body of the Church; for as the
Laws forbid to Excommunicate a Society or Corporation, because it may happen,
that those that are innocent may be entangled in the censure: So Right and
Religion forbids to exclude whole Churches from the Communion of the Faithful,
because this cannot be done without an injury and contempt to many that be
innocent. What ever formerly of this same unchurching power in Synods has been
asserted, yet since upon further debate we are told; this same Excommunicating
of whole Churches is a thing not known in the Presbyterian Government, and not
the Churches, but particular persons in the Churches are censured. Assemb.
disputes page 180.
But how can we say single persons only are to be censured, and not the whole
Church? Whenas we know the contending parties of what condition soever, are
both equally liable to the Censure of the Judge. Now when matters are brought
by Appeal to a superior Court, the Court Appealed from, is a Party; and in this
respect upon no higher terms than the pars appellans, though a single person.

But grant it be so, and that the object of a Censure from a Synod be only
particular members. Then, 1. Churches cannot have such a remedy as in Civil
States; for Appeals of this Nature are not to be made to any, but persons
invested with such a power, as may suspend, or make void in part, or in whole,
the power of that Court by whom the wrong has been done and Appealed from, as
has been showed. Excommunicatio ejusque denunciatio post appellationem
legitimam latam, est nulla. Nardus p. 53. col. 2.


2. If there be no Power in a Synod, of such a proportion superior to a Church,
as to censure it by Excommunication or Suspension at least: Then will the
Members of this Church, by admitting such Appeals, be necessarily under a
twofold Jurisdiction not subordinate, which tends to the greatest confusion
imaginable: For if the Synod and the Church in their Light and Apprehensions
vary about the condition of an Offender, one of them may in Conscience be bound
to justify whom the other condemns.

3. There is no supply of a supposed Defect, or Addition of what was not
before, for if their superior powers Excommunicate particular Members only and
not the whole Church: This is nothing more than each particular Church has
power to do. And it is as much an Ordinance of Christ, where two or three, that
is a lesser number are gathered together, as where a greater; a Censure by the
Church at Keneria, is as much a Censure, as if by Corinth. If a Quarter
Sessions Execute a man, its as much a Judicial deal, as if judged by the
Assize, King's Bench or Parliament. The reason is obvious, its the Law that
judges him, not this or that Judicature: So it is the Law and appointment of
Christ that Excommunicates, not this or that Presbytery, greater or less, and
this Law is the same to all.

We come now to the other part of the Argument, drawn from the light of Nature,
If Appeals be not, there will be a defect in Christ's Government; Persons are
left without remedy, for wrongs done by whole Churches.

I answer with Suarez in the same case, Argumentum est (says he De virtute
Tom. 4. p. 99.
) ab specie ad genus negativum, defensio est genus and latius patet quam
appellatio. Potest enim ad superiorem recurrere per simplicem quaerelam vel per
modum supplicationis, etc. quod est sufficens remedium diversum appellatione
and multo magis decens religiosum statum. "It is an Argument from the Species
to the Genus, there are other ways of defense. We may have recourse to a
Superior by simple Complaint, or by way of Supplication; which is a sufficient
remedy, and diverse from an Appellation, and much more becoming the state of
Religion; thus that Author. More particularly, we therefore Answer."

1. There may be a sufficient defense or remedy, though not by Appeals. 2.
There may be Appeals, though not in such a way.
1. For the first, this Address or Recursus to others Superior or equal, is not
for the putting forth any Act of Jurisdiction or Compulsion: Such persons
interpose by way of Entreaty, Persuasion, Pleading the Cause of the wronged,
Reproving, Threatening, or in such way, as a single Pastor may deal with any of
his people. Thus Paul often, in a difference between Philemon and Onesimus,
Philem. verse. 10. I beseech thee for Onesimus, Phil. 4.2,3. I beseech Evodias
and Syntiche: It was upon some breach in the Church, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech
you Brethren that there be no Division. This interposition of the Apostle with
the Corinths, was upon the desire of the House of Cloe ver. 11. There may also
be more earnest Pleadings, Reasonings, Rebukes; Hos. 2.2.
yea openly, and before others. The Apostles were equal in Authority, yet Paul
did not only Reason and Plead with Peter, but Rebuke and Reprove him publicly,
and before others. Gal. 2.11,14.
And in his dealing with Barnabas, Paul's spirit did rise higher, and yet no
Power or Jurisdiction exercised, or might be by one Apostle over another. Act.
15.39.


If Synods be applied unto, only for Counsel and advice in differences and
difficult cases, it is a provision not to be despised. Scripture Light in an
instruction or reproof is cogent, by what hand soever administered, but more
especially when in the way of an Ordinance or Appointment of Christ. As are
Pastors, and Synods, though entrusted with a Declarative Authority only.

Let it be considered how the greatest reformation made in the H^s and Lives of
men and women, is ordinarily by the applicati^ ^f the Word of God in the
Ordinance of Preaching; which is the instruction, Reproofs, etc. of a single
Minister, who has not power to Excommunicate such as despise his Doctrine.
Faith comes by Hearing, not by Discipline. Until they be judged, believers they
are without. 1 Cor. 5.
If this means, or such a Doctrinal Application by a single Minister, be
sufficient to make such Reformation upon single persons, and those that as yet
own not Christ, or have Conscience of an Ordinance, why should we not expect
the like fruit where many Ministers are Synodically gathered for the
Reformation of whole Churches, (persons professing to understand and reverence
so solemn an Ordinance of Christ) though there be no coercive Power entrusted
with it, to enforce Submission.

2. There may be Appeals, though not in the same Series, but to a Tribunal
extrinsecal, and not merely Spiritual: as when we appeal to the Civil
Magistrate, or such as are appointed by him over Ecclesiastical matters. For 1.
if the King in his Laws, and the Church in their Synodical Canons, command and
forbid one and the same things, as is asserted. And 2. if the persons commanded
stand as much in a Civil Relation to their Prince, being Subjects, as they do
in a spiritual Relation to the Church, as Members. Doubtless the Christian
Magistrate having a Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters as in Civil, and
(especially) being assisted by the Council and Advice of Synods, is a
sufficient and ^ectual means to reform the miscarriages of particular Churches,
if appealed unto. Receptum est in Gallia ab Ecclesiasticis posse provocari ad
ad carias supremas Parliamentorum P. Gr. Tholos. l. 50. c. 2..36.
Ruther. Due Right cap. 6..5. page 396.


The truth is, though Churches were threatened, or struck with the highest
censures (being merely Spiritual) and from a National Synod the highest Throne:
Were it not from foresight, that if such Discipline be despised, the
Magistrates Sword, by some Corporal punishment will second it, there would be
little fear or dread of those Synodical censures. And if so, as it is apparent
to the most in a National or Provincial Church as ordinarily constistituted, it
is no otherwise. Common Reason will direct us rather to go immediately by
Appeals to the Civil Magistrate, or his Delegates, than in such a compass, as
to drive the cause from a Consistory to a Classis, from thence to a Provincial
Synod, and after that to a National Assembly; and when all this is done, there
is little to any purpose done, if not seconded by a secular arm. Hence our
learned Brethren formerly admitted no other Appeals of this nature, but to the
Civil Magistrate, as we have fully showed in the former Digression: To which we
add what is by that Author further said. Cap. 2.
"If the Brethren or Officers in a Church be perverse, and will not hearken to
Reason, they (that are wronged) are to crave the assistance of the Civil
Magistrate, who alone has Power, and who ought by the Civil Sword and
Authority, procure to all Members of the Church, Governors or others, freedom
from all manifest injuries and wrongs." The manner how the Civil Magistrate is
to proceed in Church-causes, is there also described to us in the words
following; "Though the Civil Magistrate cannot absolve the Excommunicate
person, etc. or take away this power from the Church, yet when they or any of
them shall apparently abuse the same, he is bound by the Law of God, and by
virtue of his Office grounded upon the same, to punish them severely for it,
and to force them by Civil Mulcts to rectify, etc."

THus I have done with that first Consideration, upon the account whereof the
Usefulness and Necessity of the Civil Magistrates Ecclesiastical power is
affirmed: Which is, in respect to the well-being of Churches. There is another
consideration remaining now likewise to be prosecuted, showing the like
necessity of this Power, in respect and relation to the well-being of the
Commonwealth. The Knowledge and true Worship of God, and the means hereof the
word of God, is a national gift. He has given his Law to Jacob -- he has not
dealt so with other Nations. Psalm. 147.
It was true then, for Israel had this privilege as a peculiar; but now it is
otherwise. And where the Lord is so bountiful to a Nation, thus to give the
means of Life and Salvation, it is a Depositum Governors must account for. The
whole Nation becomes peaceable, prosperous or otherwise, according as the
matters of God and his Worship, are more or less Religiously attended by the
Governors and People thereof. This Consideration is urged by Bishop Davenant to
this purpose, Daven. de judu cont. ca. 36. p. 91.
Regis potestas judiciaria se extendit ad ea omnia sancienda quae rem publicam
florentem conservant atque ad ea tollenda, etc. "The Kings Legislative power
extends to the establishming of whatsoever may preserve a Commonwealth in a
flourishing State, and the taking away of all such things as may prejudice or
ruin it. But the Religious Worship of God is granted of all, even of the very
Heathens; as of concernment to the well-being of the Republic, and the neglect
of it to the eversion of it." The careful and orderly management of Religious
affairs, being a special means and way to make the Republic prosperous, the
care whereof lies upon the Magistrate: It is necessary that he both judge of,
and put forth his Authority, in the procuring and preserving such a means or
conducement, the further prosecution of this second Argument, together with
other particulars, requisite to the resolving this Case, I shall leave to a
second Part of this Discourse, in which, after the clearing and vindicating the
former part of the Oath as lawfully to be taken: The two great doubts arising
from the latter part of it, shall more largely be insisted upon. The words are
these: I shall to my Power Assist and Defend all Jurisdictions -- belonging to
the Kings Highness -- or united to the Crown, etc.

The Doubts hereupon are,

1. The Jurisdiction, Privileges, etc. granted and united to the Imperial
Crown, are unknown unto us, and some of them Controverted: How can we swear in
judgment? Jer. 4.2.
Answ. Though there be not a distinct knowledge in respect of each particular,
yet an Oath may be taken in Judgment, and how.

2. There are some Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. in Spiritual matters
granted and united to the Crown, the lawfulness whereof are scrupled; and we
may possibly believe they do not belong to the Civil Magistrate, How can we
swear to assist and defend him in such, and Swear in Righteousness? Answ. In a
Federacy, or Allegiance, to assist and defend another, against a common Enemy,
if the things be just and lawful in His opinion, though doubted of, or thought
otherwise in ours: It is no unrighteousness in us to give assistance according
to our Oath. These Resolutions and Assertions I doubt not, will be made
evident, in what is to follow, and be the other part of this Discourse.

POSTSCRIPT.
King James in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, Page 46, etc. thus
argues with Cardinal Bellarmin, viz.

AS the Oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a Difference between Papists,
and them of our Profession; so was this Oath [of Allegiance] which Bellarmine
would seem to impugn, ordained for making the Difference between the civily
obedient Papists, and the perverse Disciples of the Powder Treason. In King
Henry the Eight's time was the Oath of Supremacy first made; by him were Thomas
Moor and Roffensis put to death, partly for refusing it. From his time till
now, have all the Princes of this Land, professing this Religion, successively
in effect, maintained the same: and in that Oath only is contained the King's
Absolute Power to be Judge over all Persons, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical;
excluding all Foreign Powers and Potentates to be Judges within his Dominions:
Whereas this last made Oath contains no such matter, only meddling with the
Civil Obedience of Subjects to their Sovereign in mere Temporal Causes. And
that the Injustice as well as the Error of Bellarmin's gross mistaking in this
Point, may yet be more clearly discovered; I have also thought good to insert
here immediately after the Oath of Supremacy, the contrary Conclusions to all
the Points and Articles, whereof this other late Oath does consist; whereby it
may appear what unreasonable and rebellious Points he would drive my Subjects
unto, by refusing the whole Body, or that Oath, as it is conceived. For he that
shall refuse to take this Oath, must of necessity hold all or some of these
Propositions following.

1. That I King James am not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all other
my Dominions. 2. That the Pope by his own Authority may depose me: If not by
his own Authority, yet by some other Authority of the Church, or of the Sea of
Rome. If not by some other Authority of the Church and Sea of Rome, yet by
other means with others help he may depose me. 3. That the Pope may dispose of
my Kingdoms and Dominions. 4. That the Pope may give Authority to some Foreign
Prince to invade my Dominions. 5. That the Pope may discharge my Subjects of
their Obedience and Allegiance to me. 6. That the Pope may give License to one
or more of my Subjects to bear Arms against me. 7. That the Pope may give leave
to my Subjects to offer Violence to my Person, or to my Government, or to some
of my Subjects. 8. That if the Pope shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose
me, my Subjects are not to bear Faith and Allegiance to me. 9. If the Pope
shall by Sentence excommunicate or depose me, my Subjects are not bound to
defend with all their power my Person and Crown. 10. If the Pope shall give out
any Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation against me, my Subjects by
reason of that Sentence, are not bound to reveal all Conspiracies and Treasons
against me, which shall come to their hearing or knowledge. 11. That it is not
heretical and detestable to hold that Princes being excommunicated by the Pope,
may be either deposed or killed by their Subjects, or any other. 12. That the
Pope has Power to absolve my Subjects from this Oath, or from some part
thereof. 13. That this Oath is not administered to my Subjects, by a full and
lawful Authority. 14. That this Oath is to be taken with Equivocation, mental
Evasion, or secret Reservation; and not with the Heart and good Will sincerely,
in the Faith of a Christian Man.
FINIS.

