AN Appeal most Humble, YET Most Earnestly by the Coming OF OUR Lord Jesus
Christ, AND Our Gathering together unto HIM, Even Adjuring the CONSIDERATION OF
THE Most Contrary Minded, Who love HIS Appearing: Concerning the Scripture on
due Compare, Speaking Expressly, or Word for Word.

Of the Thousand Years State of the Saints; The Dead Raised First, and of The
Living, The Remaining Changed in it.

And of the Wicked-Dead-Raised, the Gog Magog under it.

By T. B.

(...)

THE ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
MY first Intention was only by way of Proposal, concerning the Saints in the
1000 Years Kingdom of Christ; But finding Scripture-Evidence Rising so high
concerning the Wicked-Dead, the Gog Magog of the 1000 Years also Raised, but to
a State of Death, and so called still, The Dead. It Gave me the Boldness to
Raise my Proposal to an Appeal; My Assurance in These Things is, that the
Spirit by laying its words in one Scripture, to its words in other Scriptures,
speaks (...) Expressly, or word for word of These Things; so that the Ring of
Truth concerning the Resurrection Broken between, especially, the Apostle Paul,
and the Apocalyptic Apostle, by laying Them together, meets, and Unites; which
is the Greatest Assurance that can be Given; Thus It is concerning the Saints;
And thus It is concerning the Wicked Dead, the Gog Magog Raised to Condemnation.

Whoever would disprove what I have Asserted, I expect, He should not only
perplex what I have said, with Ensnaring Questions; For so Things most clear,
most certain may be perplexed, but either lay down by the same Scripture
Contexture a contrary, or different Scheme, or at least show this Inconsistent
with Scripture, or with it self.

A most Humble, and (I cannot but hope) A most Modest Proposal to the Reverend
Pastors, and to All others that dissent from, or doubt of the Thousand Years
Kingdom of Christ, and will give Leave to Scripture-Search, and Consideration
concerning it.
THE Proposal is this: I will here single out Three Arguments, Taken from
Plain, Doctrinal, Apostolical, and from Prophetical Scripture in Compare; and
which may seem of all other most disputable; and if They can be made Good, They
will undeniably prove the Thousand Years Kingdom: And if They can be made void;
They shall stand a Witness against me, that I am not able to make Good the
Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, I have so earnestly endeavored to Assert.

And that They may be more Clearly, and with All Brevity seen in their Force I
will offer Them in the most Argumentative Order, and Form, I can Conveniently
for General understanding compose Them into.

Argument 1.
If the New Heaven, and New Earth, the Scripture speaks of, be prepared for the
Thousand Years Reign of Christ, and of his Saints, so as to Begin, when that
Begins, and to End, when that Ends; Then there must be a Thousand Years Kingdom
of Christ; But so It will be Found by a Compare of the most Litteral
Consequences from Doctrinal, and Prophetical Texts compared: Therefore so it
must be.

I will here Anticipate one Evasion; Seeing All Prophetical Scriptures of the
Old Testament, particularly the mention of the New Heaven, and New Earth, Esaias
65. 17, and c. 66. 22. are so positive; and that in the New Testament, There is
mention of the Regeneration, viz. of All Things, Matthew. 19. 28. of Times of
Refreshing; or Resouling of All Things; of the Time of the Restitution of All
Things at the Coming of Christ; For the Heavens must Receive Him, till then;
And that this Restitution was spoken of by the Mouth of All his Prophets, since
the World began, Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. and that the Apostle, Romans 8. 19. etc.
plainly Asserts the Restoration of the Creation, (Translated Creature) in which
Heaven, and Earth, must needs be; Seeing All this is so; No one shall Fly off,
and say; All this is but Allegory, Metaphor, and Figure; For with such, There
can be no Argument on Scripture Text held.

Having thus premised, I carry on the Argument.
If the Apostle John saw, together with the Holy City, prepared as a Bride, a
New Heaven, and New Earth, and that the Former First Heaven, and the First
Earth, were passed away; which City will presently Appear to have a Thousand
Years Peace, and Glory; Then the New Heaven, and New Earth Begin, when the
Thousand Years State of the Holy City Begins. But so He Asserts; I saw a New
Heaven, and a New Earth, and the First passed away, Revel. 21. 1. and then to
make it most Emphatical, He says; I John saw the Holy City, v. 2. So that it is
not to be supposed Any One will deny the Holy City, and the New Heaven, and
the New Earth to be Together, according to the Apostle John, besides the Great
Concurrences of Reason, that such a Glorious State, if Any should have a New
Heaven, and a New Earth. Thus They Began together

When any one Compares this with the Apostle Peter's Positive Assertion of a
New Heaven, and Earth, wherein Righteousnese shall dwell at the Day of Christ;
and that a Day with the Lord is as a Thousand Years; and sees here a City, (as
will be seen) of a Thousand Years State of Peace, and, as secured from Satan,
of Righteousness; They must be very Averse to Compare of Scripture, that will
not suppose them to Expound and Illustrate one Another, and would Absolutely
discourage All Compare of Scripture, which I cannot once suppose of such
Friends of Scripture, as I direct unto.

Now that this very New Heaven, and New Earth, and no other Fly away, after a
Thousand Years State of Peace, and Righteousness Granted to this City, in a
Security from Satan, and so end alike; I Go on undeniably to prove.

The Flying away of whatever Heaven and Earth, It was, was at the same Time
with the White Throne, (as it were Blancking All into the High Spirituality of
the Eternal State) and at the same Time, that there was no place Found for
Them; and therefore for no other such after them;and at the same Time, that
John saw the Dead, Small and Great stand before God, and that Death and Hell,
and whatever was not written in the Book of Life, were cast into the Lake: This
Conjunction of These Things I am Assured none can deny, that shall but with the
Least observation Read Revel. 20. 11. etc.

If then Death, and Hell, were cast into the Lake, then certainly Satan, the
Prince of the Power of Death, if whatever was not Written in the Book of Life,
was cast into the Lake, then certainly Satan, for whom the Lake was prepared,
must needs be at this Time Cast into the Lake; But for what Reasons the Beast
and False Prophet were there before Him, I have elsewhere declared.

Sathan's casting into the Lake must needs be after the Thousand Years, as is
express, Revel. 20. 7. etc. and will be more argued immediately; if then the
Heaven and Earth that were in Being, when Satan was cast into the Lake, were
the Heaven and Earth that Fled from the White Throne, as is proved; It must
needs be that Heaven, and Earth that were in Being after the Thousand Years,
that Fled.

And if the Heaven, and Earth that Fled, were the Heaven and Earth that were in
Being at the Thousand Years end, They must be the Heaven and Earth that were in
Being during the Thousand Years; who can so much as Imagine other? And If They
were the Heaven and Earth during the Thousand Years, They must be the Heaven
and Earth during the Holy City.

For the City, cap. 20. and cap. 21. must needs be the City New Jerusalem,
which as called Holy, c. 21. So it was the Camp of the Saints, secured from
Sathan's Approach, during the Thousand Years: And so Righteousness dwelt in it,
c. 20 9. And it is the Beloved City, c. 20. 9. Because it is the Bride the
Lamb's Wife, c. 21. 9, 10.

Now this Beloved City, and Camp of the Saints, had had a State of Peace and
Righteousness for a Thousand Years, while Satan was in Prison, and Gog and
Magog stirred not; All which Time the Saints Above sat on Thrones, and Reigned
with Christ a Thousand Years; and the Partakers of the First Resurrection on
Earth were Blessed, and Holy, and were Priests of God, and of Christ and
Reigned with Him a Thousand Years, and so were for ever Holy, and Blessed; For
over such, the Second Death has no Power.

If then the Heaven, and Earth that were in Being during the Thousand Years of
the Holy City, be the Heaven and Earth that Fled, when Satan was cast into the
Lake after the Thousand Years, as has been shown; These must be the Heaven and
Earth that John saw together with the Holy City; And so they must be the New
Heaven, and the New Earth that He saw, c. 21. 1. and not the First; and there
can be no more, except a New Creation be Piled on this New Creation, and New
Heaven and Earth that Fled away: So They End with the 1000 Y.

Argum. 2.
If according to Prophecy, concerning the Thousand Years Reign of Christ, with
his Saints of the First Resurrection, and his Saints, Partakers of the First
Resurrection, There must by the Apostolical Plain Doctrine be a space of Time
between the Time of the Saints Dead in Christ, Rising first, who Answer to the
Saints of the First Resurrection; and the Saints Changed, who Answer to the
Partakers of the First Resurrection; and the Time of these Changed Saints being
Caught up; This space by Prophecy must be the Thousand Years Reign of Christ
with his Saints? But such a space will in the Apostles plain Doctrine be found;
Therefore It must by Prophecy be the space of the thousand years; and so the
thousand years Kingdom of Christ will be Fully Assured from hence.

If the Apostles plasn Doctrine be, That there are two Sorts of Saints, and no
more at the Resurrection viz. The Saints Raised Incorruptible, and the Saints
who shall not Sleep, but be Changed; Changed in opposition to Dying, far below
the privilege of being Changed; Changed in distinction from being Raised
Incorruptible, a privilege above being Changed, when Incorruptible is not
Added, And if these make up the We All of Saints, even The Living, The
Remaining Rescued from the perdition of the Wicked Dead, and preserved under
Guards of Life, Then These are two Sorts of Saints, vix. Principals in the
First Resurrection, and Partakers of the First Resurrection; Seeing To be the
We All is to be Saints or Holy: To be the Living is to be Partakers, To be
Changed but not Incorruptible is to be no more than Partakers; To be Hi Zontes,
The Living, Hi Perilipomeni, or the Preserved is to be Blessed, For over Such
the second Death has no power. But All These Things are expressly written. 1.
Cor. 15. 51, 52. 1 Thessalonians. 4 14 etc. and Revel. 20. 4, 5, 6. And Both these
Sorts of Saints Live and Reign with Christ a thousand years: So There is a
thousand years Kingdom.

2. If the Saints, The Living, the Remaining, who dye not, but are Changed, are
Changed in the Atom of Time, the very same Moment in the very Twinckle of an
Eye with the Saints Raised, 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. and yet The Saints Dead in
Christ Rise First, and the Saints, The Living, and the Remaining are not Caught
up till an Epita (not to be Translated [Then] but [Afterwards] which Epita is
so Translated [ Afterward] 1 Cor. 15. 23. and leaves Room to almost 1700 Y.
since Christ's Resurrection; If All This be, Then there may be such a space as
the 1000 Y. from the Raising the Dead Saints, Changing the living Saints;
before The living, The Remaining Saints are Caught up: and the Ama Translated [
Together] shall not signify Together in Time, but pariter, or Alike, (as it
must needs be Romans 3. 12.) with the Dead Saints raised, and with Christ Above,
(who cannot be said to be 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10. and elsewhere
Caught up at all; For Christ Brings Them with Him,) much less, Together, with
the Saints Rising, For this would Contradict the Apostles Proton, or First, of
the Saints rising; and his Epita, or Afterward, of the Living Remaining Saints
caught up. All this we find express. 1 These. 4. 14. etc.

Seeing then by the Apost. a Space there must be, and Prophecy says expressly,
the Dead Saints, Living and Reigning with Christ on Thrones a 1000 Y. was the
First Resurrection, and that the Reign of the Partakers of the First
Resurrection, Blessed and Holy, and on whom the Second Death has no Power, is
a Reign with Christ also of a 1000 Y. It must be a 1000 Y; So Christ must needs
have a Kingdom of a 1000 Years.

Argum. 3d.
If the Saints Raised Sit on Thrones with Christ, as above, a 1000 Y. and
There is a City and Cittadell of Saints on Earth for a 1000 Y. and who after
are made to Sit on Christ's Throne, in his Kingdom, ere the end, according to
Prophecy; and that According to the Apostle; The Saints changed, The living and
The Remaining are on Earth, while Christ, and the Raised Saints are above; and
this for some space of Time; Then how clear a proof is there of the 1000 Years
Kingdom of Christ in the New Heaven Inhabited by the raised Saints, and in the
New Earth, Inhabited by the rising Remaining Saints? But so it is according to
the Prophecy, and Doctrine of Scriptures, Such a Kingdom therefore There shall
be.

1. It is never said in Scripture, Christ shall come down on Earth, at his
second Coming; But He is the Epouranios, the Lord from Heaven; The Heavenly;
not Earthy, as the First Adam, As He went up to Heaven in a Cloud, so He shall
be seen Coming in a Cloud; Then indeed out of sight; But now Every Eye shall
see him, as Above, Those places, Job. 19. 25. Zech. 14. 4. that seem to Favor
Christ's standing upon the Earth at the last day; The Hebrew Word may better be
Translated Above the Earth, or Over it, He indeed Descends into the Lower
Heaven; His Glory as the Sun's Reaching down to the Earth; so This, 1 Thessalonians 4.
17. Represents Him in the Clouds, and in the Air, where his Throne and Tribunal
must needs then be.

2. The Raised Saints are there with Him, shining as the Firmament, and as the
Stars, even as the Sun, Reigning with Him in the Air, viz. the New Heaven
above, a 1000 Y. as Ana in Anastasis may well signify.

3. The Living, and the Remaining Saints, as the Kings of the Earth, the
Nations of the Saved, walking in the Light of, and Bringing their Glory to the
Jerusalem Above, Healed with the Leaves of the Tree of Life, Reign in the
Beloved City, and in the Citadel of the Saints, as with Christ always in their
Eye a 1000 Y. and at last are Caught up to Christ in the Air, into a Like State
with the Sts. Above, and are made to sit down on his Throne in His Kingdom
Above, where He Resides the 1000 Y.

And thus the New Heaven, and the New Earth are Inhabited, during the Thousand
Years Kingdom of Christ, according to both Apostolic Doctrine, and Prophecy.

When at the End These Living Remaining Saints are Caught up. Then They put on
perfect Incorruption and Immortality; and the Triumphal Song over Death is
Sung. For it is Swallowed up in Victory; Satan, the Dead, and Death and Hell,
who had been Condemned to Lie as the Footstool of Christ's Feet at the
Beginning of the 1000 Y. are now cast into the Lake, so the Last Enemy Death is
Brought to Naught; The Kingdom in a General Rendezvous, or Meeting of Saints,
spoken of also, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. is delivered up to God, and the Father All in
All; and so All Saints are Outo, in that very Posture and State of that
Meeting, Ever with the Lord, with God, and with Christ.

THE END.
A Continuation of Arguments from the Spirits Speaking (...), expressly in
Scriptures, concerning the Dead, and of Gog and Magog, by way of Further
Illustration of the 1000 Years Kingdom.
Arg. 4.
IF it be declared in Plain Scripture, that the Seed of the Woman shall Break
the Serpent's Head, as Genesis 3. 15. and that God will Bruise Satan under the
Saints Feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. and that most Express Prophetic Scripture
tells us, that during the 1000 Years, wherein Christ Reigns with his Dead
Saints Raised, Living, and Sitting on Thrones; and with his Saints, Partakers
of the First Resurrection; Satan lies Chained, Sealed, Bound, and Imprisoned
for all that 1000 Years; All which, so many, and so Emphatical Expressions
speak the utter Impossibility of his Annoying the Holy City for that 1000
Years; If All this be, It is then certain, that Christ, as He shall Appear the
Glorious Second Adam, the Seed of the Woman, and the Lord from Heaven also,
has a Kingdom of a 1000 Years; wherein as Referring to that Promise, Satan,
Called Remarkably the Old Serpent, Rev 20. 1. Lies under Him with his Head
Broken by Him; and that in this Kingdom, Coming according to the Apocalyptic
Phrase, (...) Quickly, God Bruises Satan under the Saints Feet, who Reign
while He is so Bound, and Imprisoned these 1000 Years also.

Now that which Justifies the most Solid, and Substantial Sense of Sathan's
Binding, and for a 1000 Years, under an utter Impossibility of Annoying the
Divine Kingdom for those 1000 Years, is; That Both the Binding, and the 1000
Years, must Bear a proportion to the Loosing Satan for a Little Season after
the 1000 Years Expired, and to the Casting Satan into the Lake; which must
needs signify an utter Impossibility of his Action, except as within his own
Lake, against the Divine Kingdom for ever; as All must needs Acknowledge; If
then the Binding: Chaining, Imprisoning, Sealing Satan in such an Imprisonment
for a 1000 Years, Bear a proportion to the Casting Satan into the Lake, He
must be under an utter Impossibility of Acting against the Beloved City, and
Camp of the Saints, or the Divine Kingdom for that 1000 Years, as He shall be,
when in the Lake to Eternity; And if the 1000 Year Bear a proportion to the
Little Season of his being Loosed after Them, then that Little Season must be
but a Little part of a 1000 Years.

Now who can say? There has been ever yet such an Efficacious Foreprizal of
the Action of Satan against the Beloved City, and Camp of the Saints, as will
Agree with the Seed of the Woman, Breaking his Head, or God Bruising Satan
under the Feet of the Saints shortly, or with his Chaining, Imprisoning, or
Sealing, so as to Bear a Proportion to his casting into the Lake? Or how can
the Time, viz. from Constantine, Generally pitched upon for the 1000 Years, be
that Time? wherein Both Antichrist, and Mahomet, have Raged so against the
Church of Christ; And how could the Time since those 1000 Years ended, viz.
about 1300 A. D. be without Great unreasonableness, called the Time of Sathan's
Loosing, which has been the very Time of the Gospel Rising out of the
Apostasy, first in the Bohemian Testimony, and since by the Reformation! How
can it be called a Little Time, compared with the 1000 Years? when it is almost
Half a 1000 Years already; besides what may be expected of such a State, as the
present is; according to such Apprehensions, as Give no Credit to the Assigning
of any Time according to Prophecy, that might be short.

I Appeal therefore to Any Considering Person, whether this be not Equal to the
Spirit's speaking expressly, when by plain, and Prophetic Scripture compared;
Christ shall have a Kingdom of a 1000 Years, which is yet to come; and that
after the End of that 1000 Years Kingdom, within a very Little Time, how Little
we cannot express, seeing Scripture has not, Satan shall for ever be Thrown
into the Lake.

Argum. 5.
If there be a State of the Wicked, Dead before the Kingdom of Christ, and
Destroyed by the Fire of his Coming; and yet Raised to a State of suffering,
that according to plain Doctrinal Scripture, may be a 1000 Y. and according to
Prophetic Scripture must be a 1000 Years, and then the Lake; Then It is
certain, There is such a 1000 Years Kingdom of Christ.

1. If according to both sorts of Scripture, There must be a Rising of the
Wicked, or Unjust, that have done Evil at the very same Time, that the Just,
and that They that have done well, Arise, and in Conjunction with Them; and
that They with Them shall make an Appearance before the Tribunal of Christ;
Then that must be in some State, and for some Time, or space of Time, whatever
State, or Space that shall be; And seeing the Just Arise at the Coming of
Christ, and at his Kingdom 1 Cor. 15. 23. The Unjust must then Arise also; This
being a General Principle, and Article of Faith, I only Refer to the
Scriptures, most Evidently proving it. Eccles. 12. 14. Dan. 12. 2. John 5. 29.
Acts 24. 15. Mat. 25. 31. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Revel. 11 18.

And according to my Judgment, when by the Sixth Voice, Rev 14. 18. (For there
had been Five before it;) The Earth is Reaped by Him, that had on his Head the
Golden Crown in the Raising the Dead Saints, and Changing the Living; In the
Seventh Voice, (by which Seven Voices in that Chap. I understand the Seven
Thunders opened) the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth are Gathered, and Thrown
into the Wine Press of the Wrath of God; that is; The Wicked are Raised to
Condemnation, and to Everlasting punishment; which by Comparing Rev. 16. 14.
and c. 19. 10. 15. is done at the Battle of Armageddon, when Christ with the
Armies of Heaven, viz. the Raised Saints on White Horses in Linen, White and
Clean, expressing the Purity of Spiritual Bodies of the Resurrection, Following
Him, in Righteousness Judges, and makes War on all the Wicked, and Treads
the Wine Press of the Wrath of God, into which They are cast.

And yet Because the Wicked Rise thus to Shame, and to Contempt, and to this
Everlasting Punishment, their Resurrection is Counted, as no Resurrection;
neither in Doctrinal, nor in Prophetic Scripture: The Resurrection Absolutely
spoken of, is by our Lord styled; The Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14 14. and
c. 20. 36. The Children of God are only Accounted the Children of the
Resurrection: The Apostle Paul in those Two Great Discourses of the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. and 1 Thessalonians 4. 13. so Frames the Doctrine of it, as to
Apply it only to the Saints, who are Christ's at his Coming, and to the We All
of the Saints Changed, v. 23. v. 51. 52. and to Those whose who Sleep in, or
through Jesus, Rising first, and to the Living, the Remaining, who are Chang*d
in the same Moment with the Saints Raised; afterward, viz. the 1000 Years
after, Caught up to Them, and into a Like State with Them, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. etc.
and so the Apostle Leaves the Wicked wholly out in Both.

Agreeably Prophecy, as if They were not Raised, calls the Remnant, Slain with
the Sword of Him that Sat on the Horse, Rev. 19. 21. as in that very word, the
Rest, or Remnant, (and in the same Sense with Slain) of the Dead, c. 20: 5.
viz. The Remnant, or Rest, because not cast into the Lake, as the Beast, and
False Prophet, but only Slain; The Dead, because Slain, and neither Saints of
the First Resurrection, nor Saints Partakers of it; Both which Lived, and
Reigned with Christ a 1000 Years; But the Dead Lived not for the 1000 Years,
that the Saints Reigned; and yet to show They were an Appendage to the First
Resurrection as Raised, though but to Death; till They were named, It is not
said, This is the First Resurrection, Then it is, and They are set in the
middle of both sorts of Saints; What Greater Evidence can there be of the 1000
Years Kingdom, then the plain Scriptures, Leaving the Wicked out of the High
Discourses of the Resurrection, and Prophecy in Agreement, calling them the
Dead, as neither Principals, nor Partakers of the First Resurrection, but
Assigning one and the same 1000 Years, to the State of the Principals, to the
State of the Dead not Living, and to the Partakers in the First Resurrection,
and the Reign with Christ Concurrent with it!

Argum. 6.
If Gog and Magog can by Scripture be Cleared to be these very Dead, slain with
the Sword of Christ's Mouth, and so in the State of the Dead the 1000 Years,
and then making their last Attempt, and so cast into the Lake; This will still
Complete the proof of the 1000 Years Kingdom; But there will be Found a Cloud
of both Witnesses, Prophetical and Doctrinal Scripture Probabilities; and one
Great Proof of Scripture Doctrinal, and Prophetical Compared, that will
conclude, it must be so.

Let then the Scripture Correspondencies, both Prophetical first, to which this
Figure first belongs, and then the Doctrinal be just named, as Probabilities,
and then the more conclusive Argument weighed. The First Rudiments of this
Image are Found in Ezekiel, which, whatever Litteral Sense it may have, serves
this Apocalyptical Image, with these Great Correspondencies: 1. Gog Magog is a
Confluence of Nations: 2. They Appear in Battle: 3. They come up against a
People Rescued from the Sword, and of Vnwall*d Villages: 4. The Vengeance and
Fury of God comes up as in his Face upon Them: 5. Their Death, and Graves are
made most Monumental. Ezekiel. c. 38. c 39. Proportionably in the Revelation;
Although Their Name is Concealed in the First; Yet I lay their Appearance both
in the Battle of Armageddon, c. 6. 14. etc. and in this Battle, wherein They
are named, c. 20. 8 etc. and so first they are a confluence of Nations, the
Kings, and the whole World, c. 16. Kings, Captains Great Small, c. 19. 18. etc.
Gathered under the Beast, and False Prophet Both, and under the Dragon, by
Spirits of Devils, c. 16. But when the Beast and False Prophet were cast into
the Lake, c. 19. They are Rallied under the Dragon, Satan only, c. 20. and
their Number, to show their Confluence is as the Sand of the Sea; Their City
being a Hammonah, as Ezekiel. 39. 16. 2. Their Appearing in Battle is plain, and
it is their Appearance under the mighty Efficacy of Spirits of Devils, or
Satan, in all their Malice against the Divine Kingdom. 3. They come against
the Kings of the East, viz. (as I understand) the Saints, the Living, the
Remaining, Rescued from the Sword of Him that sat on the Horse, and on Unwalled
Cities, viz. these Saints, before the New Jerusalem came down, and now again
after the 1000 Years, when the New Jerusalems Glory, as Walls and Bulwarks of
Salvation was Retired. 4. The Vengeance of God is alike described every where,
Ezekiel. 38. 21. etc. Sword, Fire, and Hail, Rev. c. 16. c 19. Fire, c. 20. 5. 9.
As their Graves in their Hamon-Gog, and Hammonah, are Ezekiel. 39. so Their being
Slain, call*d the Dead, cast into the Lake, is in the Revelation

The Correspondencies of Doctrinal, and Prophetic Scripture Inducing a
probability, that Gog Magog are the Wicked rais*d, are, that there is a
distance of Time between the Enemies of Christ, being made his Footstool, and
their being Finally destroyed: The Man of sin made up of the Beast, and False
Praphet, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Rev 17. 8. 11. c. 19. 21 goes first into Perdition, and
is cast into the Lake at Christ's very Appearance, no Antichristian Church, or
Kingdom being any more possible; But the Three other Great Enemies of Christ,
Satan, Wicked Men, Hell and Death are first the Footstool of Christ, according
to Psalm. 110. Heb. 1 13. c. 10. 13. All Rule, Authority and Power are not
Finally destroyed, or under the Catargesis, till the very End; Death is the
Last Enemy, so destroyed just before the Kingdom Given up, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 26.
And the very date of this Time is, when the We of All of Saints, the Living,
the Remaining are caught up to Christ into a like State with the Saints raised
First with Him in the Clouds, and so put on Absolute Immortality, and
Incorruption; Then the Triumphal Song over Dearh is sung; and so All Saints are
ever with the Lord in the Clouds, or Air of the New Heaven, and in the Kingdom
delivered up to God All in All. 1 Cor. 15. 51. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. The
Occasion of the Great Mistake in this matier is, that the Changing, and the
being caught up, are not distinguished; The changing into Bodies of Paradise,
or of a Participation of the First Resurrection, is indeed at the same Moment
with the Saints rising First; There is an Epita, an Afterward of a 1000 Years,
before They are caught up.

According to this, The Enemies of Christ, as the Footstool of his Feet, Bear
up the State of his Sitting on the Throne for the 1000 Years, viz. Satan
Chained, Bonnd, Imprisoned, and Sealed up. The Wicked, as Gog Magog in such an
Infinite Number, Exiled in the Four corners of the New Earth, Appear, but
cannot stir against the Beloved City, and Camp of the Saints for the 1000
Years: Death, as not cast into the Lake, has an Appearance, and a possibility
of Action, in that the Living Remaining Saints, in having but a part, and not
the Full yet in the First Resurrection, have not put on Immortality and
Incorruption; yet so Healed with the Leaves of the Tree of Life, They shall not
dye; Death cannot Fasten, though It shows its Fangs. When Christ does, as it
were, Take off his Feet from his Footstool; from all his Three Enemies, in
order to Give up the Kingdom, They Every one Rise, as into Action; Satan the
Prince, the Gog Magog, the Dead under Him, viz. Condemned, and so in the State
of Death; and Death and Hell under their Prince; All these move to their utmost
Activity against the Holy City, but as in Anticipation to the Lake, or a
present Description of it, Fire comes down from Heaven; Satan long ago
Condemned is without any New Judgment cast into the Lake: The Judgment of Gog
Magog the Dead, from all the Receptacles of Death, is Recollected, and Ratified
in their being All Judg*d: And Death and Hell are cast into the Lake with Them.
This is the Final Catargests, destroying, and putting All the Enemies of
Christ, that had been his Footstool the 1000 Y. quite Below under his Feet.

The Conclusive Argument from the Compare of Doctrinal and Prophetical
Scripture, That Gog Magog are the wicked dead raised, is this; According to all
Scripture, the Wicked are Raised with the Servants of Christ, all at a Time;
The Resurrection is yet peculiar to the Saints, Because the Wicked are Raised
to Condemnation, and so to Death. All Ungodly Men, whether Dead before, or
Found Alive at Christ's Coming, are under the Perdition of the Fire of the Day
of Judgment, and of Christ's coming; according to the Apostle Peter, Ep. 2. c.
37. according to the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. and so There are none, The
Living, The Remaining, but Saints. Then according to Prophecy, whatever is not
Partaker of the First Resurrection, to which, nothing is Second, but the Second
death, must be under that Second Death, Beginning with that very First
Resurrection; so the Wicked dead raised, not partaking of that First
Resurrection, Immediately Begin to have their part in the Lake, which is the
Second death, though not cast into it, Revel. 21. 8. as the Living Saints in
the First Resurrection, though not caught up into it; Gog Magog then called the
Nations, and in so vast a Number as the Sand of the Sea, must be the Dead,
having their part, though not the full in the Lake; For there are no Earth none
else but the Nations of the saved; But Gog does not for the 1000 Years Annoy
the Holy City, being Exiled in the Four corners, even as the Wine Press is Trod
1600 Furlongs without the Holy City, or Camp; showing the Four square
Vengenance, Issuing from the Four square Holy City, on the Wicked without it,
The Saints above Equal to Angels, with the Lamb, Behold their Torment, and are
Satisfied with their Flesh, viz. Rejoice in the Vengeance; The Saints below, as
it were Burying Gog, Ez. 39. 11, 12. in Israel, nigh the Holy City, go out to
Behold their Carcases; For without are Those Dogs, Going round about this City,
Esaias. 66. 24. Psalm. 59 14. Rev. 14. 20. c. 22. 15.

Concerning the Gog Magog, as the Dead Raised to Comdemnation, I have this
Remarquable to Add, that when at the Final Doom, They are said to stand before
God, Rev. 20. 21. The Earth is not said to Give up any Dead. The Sea had (as
Grotius and Piscator Render it) Given up its Dead long before, viz. at the
Beginning of the 1000 Years; when, as has been proved, the New Heaven and New
Earth entered, and There was no more Sea: Why then does not the Earth give up
its Dead, as well as the Sea? viz. Because the Sea giving up its Dead, wh^^ the
Old Earth Burnt, became in its Four corners The Common Death, or State of the
Dead, and the Hades, or Hell of Them: So Hades, or Hell, and Death Alone, Give^
up the Dead, and are cast with Them into the Lake. This Assures, Earth is not
meant by Death and Hades; except the Old, as Burnt, and Becoming the Seat of
the Dead, and so cast into one Common Lake: For when Gog came on the New Earth
to Cover it, Fire from Heaven then Rescued that Earth, and devoured Them; So
Death and Hades, or Hell, had all the Dead, for the Sea had before Given up its
Dead to that Hades, Death and Hell, which is the Hamon Gog, or Hammonah of Gog
Magog, Slain, and Buried in Israel, viz. without the Gate, and Camp of the Holy
City, as Malefactors of Old: Satan, for whom the Lake was first prepared, is
cast into it, without the Formality of a Judgment, as to his own place; The
Dead; on whom the Judgment was at the 1000 Years Begun, is at their end
Completed. The New Jerusalem, Seated in the New Heaven, and New Earth, upon
their Flying, Re-Ascends to God, from whom it Descended; So the Kingdom is
delivered up to God All in All, and the Saints are for ever with the Lord, with
God in Christ.

THE END.
A SUMMARY Of Arguments for the 1000 Y. Kingdom: By T. B.
Argument 1. IF the New Heaven and the New Earth be a Palace for Christ, the
King of Glory, and for his Saints in Glory with Him; Beginning with the
Thousand Years, and Flying away within a Little space, after They are Ended;
when the Kingdom is Delivered up, and the New Jerusalem Re-ascends to God; Then
there must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom; But so It is, by plain Doctrinal,
and by the Prophetical Scriptures of the Revlation compared: Therefore There
must be such a Kingdom.

Arg 2. If All Saints be Saints Dead in Christ Rising first, or of the First
Resurrection; Or Saints, Styled The Lrving, The Remaining, not Dying, but
Changed in the very Moment of that First Resurrection; so putting off this Low
State of Body, but not immediately Caught up to Christ; nor Immediately putting
on the Incorruption and Immortality of the First Resurrection, but Secured for
it by this Change; as being Partakers of the First Resurrection, over Whom the
Second Death shall have no power. And if there be a Thousand Years between this
Change at the Time of the Saints Rising first, before the Time of these Living,
these Remaining Saints being Caught up; All which Time the Saints of both Kinds
Reign with Christ; Then there Must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ.
But so all this is by plain Doctrinal, and by the Prophetical Scripture of the
Resurrection Compared; Therefore there must be such a Kingdom.

Argum. 3. If Christ, and the Saints of the First Resurrection are in the
Palace of the New Heaven above, as on Thrones, and their Glory shining down on
the New Earth below; and the Saints, the Living, the Remaining Changed, are in
the Paradise of the New Earth below, and walk in the Light of the New Jerusalem
Above; and so Each in this Thousand Years, Reign with Christ; and at the End
the Saints below, are Caught up Alike with the Saints Above, Then there must be
a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: But so it is by the Compare of plain
Doctrinal and of Prophetical Scripture in the Revelation; Therefore such a
Kingd. must be.

Arg. 4. If Satan the Old Serpent Bound, must Lie a 1000 Years, having his Head
Broken by the Second Adam, the Seed of the Woman, and Bruised under the Feet of
Saints shortly; and then be Loosed for a Little space before he be Cast into
the Lake, which can never yet have been: Then there must be a Kingdom of a
Thousand Years to Christ and his Saints. But so by plain Doctrinal Scripture
and the Prophetical Scripture of the Revelation, It must be; Therefore there
must be such a Kingdom of a Thousand Years.

Argum. 5. If the Dead Wicked Raised, as at the same Time with the Saints of
the First Resurrection, and with the Saints changed; and yet being Raised to
Condemnation, are neither counted Principals nor Partakers of the First
Resurrection, but the Dead still; who with Death it self must be the Footstool
of Christ's Feet, Sitting on an Exalted Throne Above Them, and as Ashes under
the Soals of the Saints Feet for a Thousand Years, before They are Finally
after the 1000 Y. Destroyed, and Cast into the Lake; Then there must be such a
Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: But so It must be by plain Doctrinal
Scripture, and by the Prophetical Scripture of the Revelation Compard.
Therefore such a Kingdom must be.

Argum 6. If the Gog-Magog in the Revelation, of which Ezekiel's Prophecy is a
Great Type, c 38. c. 39. that stirs not for the Thousand Years of Satan Bound
under the Reign of Christ with his Saints, against the Beloved City and Camp of
the Saints; but at the End of the Thousand Years, makes a short Assault, is no
other than the Wicked Dead Raised, and Lying at the Fotstool of Christ on his
Throne for a Thousand Years, then Judged and Cast into the Lake with Death and
Hell; Then there must be such a Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ: But so it
must needs be by plain Doctrinal and the Prophetical Scripture of the
Revelation Compared. Therefore such a Kingdom must be.

And thus according to both plain and Doctrinal, and Prophetical Scripture; The
last Enemy Death shall be subdued, with Satan its Prince, and all its Dead; and
in the New Heaven and Earth flying away, the Kingdom is Delivered up, and God
All in All.

By way of Addition upon All This.
Inferential Argum. If at the Reformation, Beginning by Luther, A. D. 1517. The
Last 180 of the 1200 Years, Assigned to the Tyranny of Antichrist, and to the
Witnesses in Sackcloth, Began, and so at the Ending of those 180. A.D. 1697.
Daniel's Fourth Monarchy is at an End, and the Kingdom of the Stone and of the
Son of Man, Filling the whole Earth shall Begin; and the Kingdoms of this World
shall be Proclaimed to be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, in order
to a 75 Y. Preparation to the Glorious Kingdom of the Thousand Years. Then the
Time is so near that it ought to call us off from this World to a Faith in,
Earnest Prayer for, and Preparation for this Kingdom: But this has been Argued
on Great Scripture Grounds; Therefore so we ought to be Affected, Loving this
Kingdom, and Appearance of the Lord Jesus Coming Quickly.

AMEN.
Revel. 20. Verse 4, etc Expounded by Parallels of its own.
Ver. 4. I saw Thrones, and They sat upon Them. Viz. The Armies of Heaven, cap
19. 14 Prophets, Saints, Small, Great, Fearing God Rewarded, cap. 11 18.
Peculiarly John saw the Souls of the Beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and the
Word of God. Viz. The Souls of the Slain for the Word of God, and the Testimony
of Jesus, under the Pagan Empire, cap. 6. 9. Then in white Robes, as Spirit,
Now Living and Reigning in Bodies of Glory; as Intimated then. Most peculiarly,
Those who had not worshipped the Beast, etc. Viz. The Witnesses He killed, cap.
11. 7. His Image caused to be killed, c 13 15. viz. The Rest of Fellow
Servants, Brethren, to be killed, c. 6 11. V. 5. The Remnant, or Rest of the
Dead Lived not, etc. Viz The Remnant slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth,
being Kings, etc. Small, Great, cap. 19. 21. The Dead judged, and Those
destroyed, who destroyed the Earth, cap. 11. 18. V. 6. Blessed and Holy is he
that has his part, etc. They Lived and Reigned. Viz. The Nations of the Saved;
Kings of the Earth, c. 21. 24. Healed with the Leaves of the Tree of Life, cap.
22. 2.

An ANSWER is Desired to a DISCOVRSE Annexed.

Some Short Additional Remarks, taking off what may seem to Weaken the former
ARGUMENTS.
Rem 1. THE New Jerusalem Revel. 21. Can neither be the State of Saints in the
Highest Heavens to Eternity, As Some; Nor any Excellent State of the Church on
Earth, As Others would suppose: It cannot be the State in Heaven; For the New
Jerusalem is first by the Apostle Paul, said to be Above, Galat. 4 26. and to
be the Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. Then Three times in the Revelation, It
is said to Come down from God out of Heaven. Not only from Heaven, but from God
out of Heaven, Chap. 3. 12. Chap. 21. 2. and Verse 10. And upon it, The
Tabernacle of God is said To be with Men. Now if this were a Going up to God
into Heaven, the Apostle had Inverted all; And what he says, is a Coming down,
must be a Going up: As if One should Look up, and say, Oh Earth, and Look down,
and say, Oh Heaven; And whereas on this Account, He says, The Tabernacle of God
is with Men, It should rather be said, The Tabernacle of Men is with God. When
therefore plain Doctrinal Scripture says, the New Jerusalem is Above, and the
Prophetic Scripture says, It comes Down from God Out of Heaven, What can be
more Assuring? It is not the Going Up of Saints to Heaven.

On the other side, If it were a State of Saints in Glory on Earth, Distinct
from the Saints in Heaven; How does the Apostle say, in that, Gal. 4. The
Jerusalem Above is the Mother of us All; And so the Bride, the Lamb's Wife?
Whereas the Jerusalem on Earth would be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife; and so the
Mother: And how did he say, You are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to the
Spirits of just Men made perfect? viz. In Bodies of Glory Coming Down from the
Mansions in the Father's House, into the Place of the New Jerusalem, Christ
went to prepare for them, and to Receive them in unto himself, Even in the
Kingdom he went to receive, Joh. 14 2. with Luke 19 This is the Mystery of
Marriage between Christ and his Church, which He Presents to Himself without
Spot or Wrinckle, or Any such Thing; Which therefore can be no Other than the
General Assembly, and Church of the First Born, even of all Saints written in
Heaven, both Above and Below, who are the Bride and the Lamb's Wife.

Re 2. Whereas Some would have the Proton or First applied to the Saints
Rising, 1 Thessalonians. 4 16, 17. and the Epita, or Afterward, Applied to the Saints,
The Living, the Remaining Caught up, to be words only of Order, without
Distance of Time, as they are used. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Of First Apostles, etc.
Afterward Miracles. I urge it cannot be so; For upon this very Supposal, First
and Afterward, must signify either Difference of Order, of Time, or Both: When
then Difference of Order cannot be, there must be Difference of Time; But the
Saints Rising, and being Caught up, are All of One Order, being Both Alike
Saints; even the Saints changed and Caught up are the We All, of Saints, and
also alike Happy; For We are ever with the Lord: So the First and the Afterward
being not of Order must have the same Force to Distinguish Time; viz. of the
1000 Y. as They Distinguish now near 1700 between Christ the First Fruits, and
His at his Coming in the Resurrection; and the Natural First, the Spiritual
Afterward; viz. From the Beginning of the World, to the Kingdom of Christ, 1
Cor. 15. v. 23. and v 46. And hereupon indeed follows a Distance of Order;
Saints Raised Incorruptible, of the First Resurrection; Saints Changed,
Partakers of the First Resurrection; Not putting on Absolute Incorruption, Till
Caught up; Yet on whom the Second Death has no power.

Rem. 3. Whereas by our Translation, and general Interpretation, The Living,
The Remaining, are supposed to mean Those who in ordinary Providence happen to
Remain Alive at the Coming of Christ: It will by Four Geat Reasons appear; A
State, Order, and Generation of Saints is Intended.

1. The Word Lipomeni, joined with peri, signifies Left under some Special
Designation and Care: So These Saints; In regard of Saints, with Christ Above
are Left to Inhabit the New Earth Below; In regard of the World of Ungodly are
Left; viz. Reserved, Guarded from the Perdition of Fire.

2. The Order in the Original is not, Remaining Alive, or Living; but Living,
Remaining, or Left: Whereas, if Remaining Alive, had been only meant, Remaining
had most Naturally come First in the Greek, as in the English.

3. To show a High Sense; The Apostle says not barely, Living Remaining, but
with an Article to Each, Each Is made Emphatick and Distinct; As if He had
said, The Living, The Left.

4. To give both Certainty and Stronger Impression; It is doubled in the same
Words, the same Order, with the same double Article, The Livers, The Left, The
Livers, The Left.

Rem. 4. Whereas the Changing has been generally understood to be in order to
be Caught up; It is much otherwise; For the changing, and not changed
Incorruptible, is in order to a Participation of the Kingdom of God, (as even
the Living, the Remaining) on the New Earth, before Caught up Incorruptible, to
a Full Enjoyment Above; which present Flesh and Blood cannot have. For upon
that very occasion, the Apostle shows the Great Mystery of some being changed,
1 Cor. 15 40. Now if Their Changing were only to be Caught up, That needed not;
For being caught up, were it self the highest Change, as in Enoch, Elias, our
Lord; And yet changing and being caught up, cannot be the same; For the
changing is at the same Twinkling of an Eye, with the Dead Saints Raised. The
Catching up not till Afterward; Not to meet Christ with the Saints he brings
with him, and to come down on Earth, (for that could not be, All being in one
Twinkle nor does Christ so come down) but to be for ever with him, after having
been The Livers, The Left of a Thousand Years space of Christ's Kingdom.

THE END.

