Imprimatur

Hic Liber cui titulus, A Discourse concerning the Judgments of God, etc.

Sept. 18. 1667. Tho. Cook Rmo in Christo Patri and Dno D. Gilberto Archiepisc.
Cant. a Sacris Domest.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Judgments OF GOD.

Composed for the Present Times, Against Atheism and Profaneness.

Thy Judgments, O Lord, are a great Deep. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry
Herringman at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New
Exchange. 1668.

modern bookplate

To the Right Honorable Sr William Peak, Lord Mayor of the City of London; To
the Honorable Court of Aldermen there: And in them to that whole City.
Right Honorable,
THis Discourse humbly dedicates it self to you, having received Being from the
Contemplation of those late Monuments of Divine Displeasure, raised upon this
Nation in General, and more directly over you. If you vouchsafe it Acceptance
and Patronage, you give it the advantage of that Hill, upon which so Famous a
City is set, that it may not be hid in its own obscurity. But as the great
Tapers of Judgment, upon which it gazes, were thought fit to be exalted into so
lofty a Candlestick; which in lower places had been as under a Bed or Bushel:
So these Observations that would shine by their Beams, will be most happily
fixed there, if it may be with your Favor and Allowance.

There is nothing herein to plead so great a dignation from you, but,

First, an humble zeal to Divine Glory, the Counsel of which Atheism darkens by
words without knowledge; while it would set up petty Mechanics of Evil at work
in their dark shops, instead of that Almighty Hand, reaching down out of its
own Heaven into this lower World, its own also: and in the room of that
Jehovah, who knows no other besides himself in Heaven or Earth; or any that as
he, creates good and evil; without whom no weapon formed to destroy, no Smith
that blows in the coals for it, no waster that uses it, is erected.

Secondly, an affection of Honor to you, expressing it self in an endeavor to
vindicate your Calamities out of all such rude, black, dark Lanthorn-hands, and
to surrender them into his; by whom to be chastised without hatred, how
severely soever, is honorable; but by any other, servile and abject.

From this Hand, even when it smites, if it be humbly and repentantly turned
to, drops a Balm that heals, and an Oil of excellent kindness distills, that
does not break our heads, but soften our hearts: An Unguent that does not only
embalm us for suffering, but anoint us for Holiness and Happiness. This Rod,
after it has stricken, if it be accepted, blossoms in a night, and suddenly
flourishes with the peaceable fruits of Righteousness.

He that touches an affliction immediately after God, by says and obedience to
the ends of it, shall find his fingers dropping with the sweet smelling Mirrhe:
but taken out of any other Forge, there is nothing to be felt, but the cold
Iron prepared to mischief, and the impurity of it self, and the offices through
which it has passed.

He that ascribes our Ruins to any but God, sows them with salt and
barrenness; he that assures them from him; gives us the upper and neither
Springs of gracious motion to God, and Blessing from him.

All Paraphrases upon our Sufferings out of the Atcheists Chair, are as the
Corn that withers before it grows up, wherewith the Mower fills not his
hand, nor he that binds sheaves his Bosom; nor do any say, We bless you in
the Name of the Lord: The true Interpretations of them lead us out to sow
indeed in tears, but that we may reap in joy; that going forth, and bearing
precious seed, we may come again rejoyceing, and bring our sheaves with us. Who
would not then choose to find himself fallen into the hands of God, with whom
tender mercies dwell, and gracious purposes mollify the greatest rigours; as
the harshness of medicaments is overcome with the sweetness of the health they
design?

Who? except the stupid Ignorant, the Atheistick contemner of God and his Hand,
the profane Sensualist, the hardened Impenitent, who hates to be reformed; and
therefore all evils upon them are the Brands of an Eternal Judgment, and print
Hell upon their flesh; the private marks of which are first upon their Souls.

But you, who have a wise and grave apprehension of all things, much more of
those wherein you are concerned with God; especially in his solemn interviews
with you, though of Judgment, will give Glory to him, by acknowledgments, It is
the Lord; and therefore will not walk contrary to him, but searching wherein he
has been dishonored, whether in denying that Amplitude, and Example to
Religion, or allowing freedoms to evil, will turn to him, by reducing things to
an order, beseeming Humiliation under his Hand; both within your private Walls,
and in your more public Administrations.

And this not only from Principles of self-preservation, but out of Gratitude,
and love to those compassions, which interposed, that you should not be utterly
consumed, as Sodom and Gomorrah, by a Judgment that so nearly resembled theirs.

From which compassions those vigorous designations and daily rising hopes of a
new City, are now receiving life, which make this a fit season to present you
these considerations, seeing a holy Improvement of passed Judgments is the best
kind of Telesma against future Evils.

Now that Ruler of all the World, whose goings out are from everlasting, who of
old laid the Foundations of this City, who prospered it into its late Grandeur,
who derived upon it the confluence of that wealth, adorned with the Ingeny,
Arts, and Learning of the whole World; decorated it with a Civick Authority;
even to Majesty, ennobled it with the Thrones of England: who lately in
righteous Judgment for sin, humbled, laid it low, even with the ground, that it
yet sits (but brooding) upon its own ashes; raise it again out of them,
increase the Glory of it sevenfold along succeeding Ages, draw it out of the
fire a vessel of Honor refined, make his Church in it a brightest Candlestick
of the Gospel of Peace, after it has been a mountain burning with fire, that
could not be touched; create a new Heaven and Earth in it, wherein
Righteousness may dwell, after this dissolution of Elements; make it exemplary
for Reformation to this Nation, as it has been for suffering, make the name of
it for ever, Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there.

In these Prostrations Rests, Your Humblest Servant, T. B.

The General Address.
THere is a Spirit in Man, that within the Sphere wherein he moves, is very
curious and inquisitive to understand, how things are carried, and what is
done, or falls out in the world; and when he observes any thing new or great,
his Inquiries stay not in the things themselves, but rifle them for the causes
and springs of them.

This men do agreeably to their Elevation and Compass, even from those that
reside in the higher and vaster Orbs of Government, down to those that are
circumscribed within the narrownesses of meaner conditions: who yet not only
stretch themselves round their own little circles, but ascend as high, and run
out as far as they can into what is above and beyond them.

Who of any largeness of mind, would have the great Revolutions in any part of
the world concealed from him? Men of a very common size of Soul are acquainted
with the motions of their own Nation; and they who are crowded up in the least
room of Understanding, comprehend the things of their neighborhood, and the
Periodical changes of the State they live under.

Herein wise men cast themselves backward upon former times, and desire a
knowledge from History, much elder then themselves, praedate their lives to the
oldest moments, by their researches what was done in them, their Judgment upon,
and affectionate Sympathies therewith. Again they throw themselves forward upon
Futurity by all ways of Divination possible; but how much more do they settle
upon their own Center of Time; and in that, the fresh and new emergencies
challenge their most conversable thoughts: wherein they rest not in the bare
Events, but are earnest to know the bottom and reason of them; and to sound
their Original as far as they can; and this every one does according to the
innate sagacity or improved observation he has attained.

Thus that natural examinativeness of man pierces every way to its utmost
possibility.

Now all this so far, as ingraffed sense of a God, or the Discipline of
Religion, has its effect upon the Soul, turns it self to God, to observe the
daily occurrents of his Providence, and the Magnificencies of his Power, either
in mercy or wrath; and comparing one thing with another, makes a Character of
the times, according to those signs imprinted upon them by the Divine Hand.

Where this is not done, it is a negligence so supine, and contemptful of God,
that our Savior rebukes it from the most ordinary marks of humane attention,
which is often more bold and prying then becomes it; and yet dissembles and
pretends a modesty, when it is called to understand God and his doings.

He then that has not viewed the bulk or extern presence of the late Judgments
of God upon England, must either be an utter stranger to it, or to whatever is
called Man.

He that has not particularly, and with an inquisitiveness agreeable to the
searches of man's Soul, made a rational inspection into them, has not aspired
to the more Heroic efforts of a Soul.

Lastly, he that has not ascribed them to God, and considered his intentions,
and the reformation comporting therewith, has not answered the obligations of
a conscience, that in all things reveres a Deity; much less behaved himself as
one placed in the highest Class of Religion, I mean that most excellent one of
Christianity.

This following Discourse presumes to no more, then to give occasion to these
native exercises of men, concerning the Judgments of God in General, and then
to incline them upon the particulars so fresh upon us.

First, to bring to their view those so notable Events of the late years, that
they may know of them, whether they are things of every day; which besides the
common work has upon some parts of it these huge Balls fixed, besides the
natural curling of ^^s waves, the swelling of such ^^^ntainous Billows.

That they were very portentous, the very amazed concernedness of all sorts of
men about them demonstrated; and after-History will in recounting them, take
that state to it self, which it assumes in relation of greater things.

2. To propose to their Reason, whether they are not most justly owned to him
that made and governs the world; and whether there is not as great reason to
acknowledge the one to him, as the other.

Lastly, to advise with their Conscience, whether if Judgments of God, they are
not the most persuasive Intercessors of Repentance and Amendment of life to
this whole Nation: seeing the reasons why so gracious a Power punishes, are
sins; and if these continue, the executions of Judgment must rise higher, till
they swell into destruction, or eternal wrath: except he that is the Author of
them were suspected of weakness of Counsel, to do so great things to no
purpose, or want of power to furnish him with means to pursue his end.

Which consideration, if lively applied, would be most constraining of our
humblest and most penitent supplications and returns to God; both out of love
to him, who having so great a reach over us, would make us better, and not
destroy us, and out of love to our selves, that we may not by further provoking
him, even necessitate him to our ruin.

For though we cannot abat^ that blessed Being so far, as to impute to him the
passions and discomposures of anger; but remove from him the trouble and
disquiet that enter into Humane Indignations: yet we cannot so much diminish
from his own expressions of his wrath, but to believe the effects of it much
more real, then those of created displeasures, how many wisdoms and methods
soever they run through.

And though we own him above, and without extern cause; yet we must acknowledge
according to the determinations he has made, he does with the highest freedoms
of his own will, and a tranquillity infinitely agreeing with his eternally
happy condition, execute punishments upon sinners according to his Laws: even
as a just Prince suffers procedures of Justice against Offenders without any
disturbance or passion upon himself; more, then that he delights not in the
misery of his Subjects, but cannot because of that, bend Righteousness from its
own exaltness; though he is still ready to moderate it by pardons upon becoming
reasons: Even as there are in God the relentings of his infinite Goodness at
the sorrows and contri^ions of humbled sinners.

Now in these considerations lie the great obligations of Repentance, and
invitations to it, exciting the most powerful Principles of self-preservation,
and more ingenuous affection in man's Soul, and apprehending the most
advantageous handles of it, Love and Fear.

Such an Appeal then, as this to men, to use their own sentiments in things of
so clear an importance, ought to be made to every one, but with more particular
address to the Heroes of the Nation, whose Understanding and Virtue amplified
with the Advantages of Government and Condition, set them upon the higher
risings of the world, and give them the freest prospect upon all things; from
whence they discover not only secondary expedients of the Common Peace and
Weal, but also if these are governed by piety, they will find those primer
ones, the worthier Policies of conciliating the Divine Favor.

Such as do this, extend themselves beyond Demestick Blessings, and become the
Public Good; who having an Interest and Example to spread, and Influences to
derive, consecrate them to God, and the good state of a Nation with him; that
as their opportunities of knowledge are most open, their Interests widest, and
their senses of evil quickest; so their endeavors against that sin which
ruins Kingdoms, and for that piety that exalts them, is most earnest.

When persuasions of Reformation find freest entertainment with those who have
most power to promote it, and Princes are not only Philosophers, but Divines,
publishing Repentance and Amendment of life, by those Sovereign Documents, the
face of their Authority and Example shining upon Holiness; how orderly does
this Reformation descend from the Superior Regions? without that tumult and
suspicion of Design that usually accompanies Popular Attempts therein; and with
greatest Honor: For such being nearer God, the Original of all, we accept from
them recommendations of goodness, as Acts of Bounty with thankfulness; but not
without disdain and regret from them below us: There being ever an exprobration
in that inversion of Order and Nature, when we receive the light or dew of
Heaven from beneath, that should come down from above to us.

It must needs be a Rebuke from Heaven upon the upper world, when in the
silence of Religion, Judgment, and Equity there, God opens the vulgar mouths to
call for them; and yet if these should hold their peace, there is so great a
constraint for the want, that even the stones would cry out.

The Reason that forsakes men, transmigrates as it were into insensible things:
Universal Wisdom having so contrived, that as the neglect goes down lower and
lower; things lowest should be moved to convince them above, till the
nethermost foundations of the Earth are stirred to reprove disobedient man,
though at the other higher end of it.

When the Seats of Dignity are empty (that is) not filled with good Government,
who is not ready to press into them? and when the Prophets Chairs are
unfurnished by persons of graver investiture, naked Saul's crowd into them; as
they say, Nature swells out of its place to prevent vacuity.

Or rather the plenitude of wisdom, that flows from God the Fountain, is so
immense, that being excluded its proper place, as a full stream forced out of
its own Channel, it bursts into another, or overflows all; or like the Apostles
Doctrine, which driven from the Jews, expatiated upon the Gentiles.

But these extravasations are ever in themselves dangerous, if not deadly; this
Wisdom never showing it self out of the residences it has chosen, as fittest
for it, but in wrath; when it speaks by men of lower rank, what it would do by
Superiors; or by the Creatures, what men should understand themselves: It is in
Judgment to forbid their madness.

May it then be the Happiness of our Times and Nation, to be rescued from the
further pursuits of the Divine displeasure, by the mediation of personages of
place, and lawful suffrages, that have not taken their Honor to themselves, or
by the Indignation of God thrust into it.

To whom to present these two Generals of Reformation, that are not of any
private Interpretation, or Opinion, but of the sense of all sober
understanding, will not be accounted presumption, though they know, and do the
things already.

1. An efficacious Interposal against Licentiousness of Practices, which grows
speedily to a height; when those, whose honor and grav^^^ forbids them to
stoop to those m^^^nesses of vice, which others fall down to, have not yet that
zeal against it, but either draw too nigh the Circus or Ring of the Disorders,
beholding them with pleasure, or entertain the Actors of them with familiarity:
Any of which give a boldness to wickedness, that soon espies its own
advantages, and grows insolent upon them, ready not only to rise with violence
against common opposition, but to dismount Authority it self; which has no
greater security then its own virtue enstamped upon those under it.

Solomon's advice not to be overmuch wicked, has not only equal, but larger
place upon States then upon persons; for besides, that Justice makes more haste
to punish a Combination in evil, the f^ of contrary passions and lusts (...) so
outrageous, that they violate all things in their mutual encounters; and the
inundation grows so strong through the meeting of so great a Body of Evil, that
the destructive force runs into suddenner confusions, and is more impatient of
those abatements, a single wickedness must admit; and so more leisurely brings
forth death.

There are possibly few Instances of any such, who have been the notorious
Debauches of their time, but have been exemplary for the Fate attending them,
except prevented by sudden returns to a sober mind: but not any of an extremely
corrupted Age, but unhappiness, if not ruin, have trodden along with it.

But could it be, that a stream of wickedness had run like Oil, smooth and
untroubled; yet does that time wherein it so ran, look black to Posterity; not
Chance, but some unchangeable Law giving the Character always alike, which is
ever derived from those of Eminency; as when Pictures are taken, the Head, and
parts of the Body nearest to it, are generally thought enough to represent the
whole: thus when the Portraicture of any Time is given, the Aspect of Majesty,
the Seat of Authority, and Understanding are the life, and the rest added to
make the Grace of them the greater; and more impressive from the beauty of a
full proportion.

2. A potent opposition to Atheism, and scornful neglect of the Solemnities of
Christianity; which when it is professed, has the weight of prosperity or
ruin resting upon it: for as God often hung the Glory or Desolation of the
Princes and people of Judah, upon the observation of their Sabbath, though an
extern Rite of Religion, because it carried so much of the Reverence of Divine
Worship, and the Acknowledgments of God: so he still suspends the Greatness or
Depression of Nations, to whom the notices of himself and Jesus Christ are
given, upon their subjection to those Sacred Principles and the Institutions
wherein they are conserved. And because we have fallen into the mention of a
Sabbath, and these Institutions have their full room in it; it is not out of
the way of this Address to observe, That our Christian Sabbath is slipped out
of the shell of a Jewish Ceremony, into the Spirituality of the Lords Day, and
the Morality of a Rest for the public and private Exercises of Religion; on
which accounts, our Obligations to it still continue with those advantages
wherein it was made for man: All contemptful disenclosures or unworthy
prostitutions of it, must needs therefore imply not only a great senselessness
of God and his Glory, whom we would dispute into the narrowest rooms, but too
much of an irreverence of him, if not defiance to him.

Were it possible there could be a severe suppression of Vice, and inclination
to Virtue without Piety, yet would it be dishonorable without the Illustration
of Religions Glories; The highest care of those that truly understand Honor is
the paying all due Observances to God, the Fountain of Honor; who honors them
that honor him, but delivers to in^ or contempt those that lightly ^^g^rd him.

^s some States, that have enact^^ v^^tuous Laws, and been vigilant ^n their
execution, have not yet been hereby able to recompense themselves for the want
of a lawful Prince, but have appeared foul and stained; much less can any other
Acts of Government, how splendid soever, redeem from infamy days full of injury
done to Laws of supremest value (that is) Religion.

But it is indeed unreasonable to think, Irreligion should be just or sober
(especially where there is the na^^ of a Church included within that of a
Commonwealth.) The Virtuosi of the Heathen assumed the Fear of the Deity, as
the true dye of common honesty. For he that is conscious to himself of so great
an Injustice, as the neglect of his Duty to God, cannot rationally be fidelious
to any other parts of Righteousness. Besides, that God in a just scorn dashes
in pieces those little Idols of Virtue that set up for themselves without him,
by delivering up to a reprobate sense, to great injudiciousness in some, or
other of the Essential points of Morality, those that do not like to retain him
in their knowledge, or knowing God, do not glorify him as God.

To conclude. This first and great Commandment, Piety toward God, and the
second like to it, Christian Morality, do so reciprocate, that one without the
other is neither true, nor accepted.

These are first the Interest and Peace of every single person, and to be his
care in his retired Administration over himself; next of Families, and the
Economy therein; lastly, of greater Communities, and the Rulers over them, to
whom is committed the custody of these two Tables: when these are oblitterated,
or exaucterated by sin, God publishes them afresh from the dreadful Mount, and
engraven with his own Finger in Judgments, that they may still be preserved in
full force. He promulgates them with that Trumpet with which they were at first
given, the sound of which having increased louder and louder to this Nation,
should awake us to receive them with a new Devotion.

These things upon the grounds of the ensuing Discourse, are presented to
General Consideration, under the Favor of Divine Benediction.

The Contents of the Discourse.
CHap. 1. A Prefatory Discourse, showing the Excellency of Scripture, in
discovering to us that Judgments are from God, and leading us from Atheism to
the true Use of them. 1 Chap. 2. An Explanation of the Nature of Judgments. 12
Chap. 3. An Endeavor to demonstrate by sound Reason, That Judgments are from
God. 22 Chap. 4. A Solution offered to the several Objections against this
Position, That Judgments are from God. 48 Chap. 5. The discussion of this
Scruple, How can it stand with the Author of Nature to disorder it? 71 Chap. 6.
A general Account, That there are several Reasons of Judgments comporting with
Gods holy and good Government of the World. 86 Chap. 7. The first Reason: The
importance to the World, that a Justice over it, be understood. 99 Chap. 8. The
second Reason, showing the necessity of a purgation upon the sinful World. 107
Chap. 8. The third Reason expresses the connection of these with Eternal
Judgment. 122 Chap. 9. Fourth Reason, expressing the Government of the World
falling in with Judgments. 129 Chap. 10. Fifth Reason, expressing the
usefulness of Judgments to reform. 133 Chap. 11. Of the Use true Reason may
make of the assurance Sense has of the Evils we call Judgments; and how far it
may advance toward Christianity. 137 Chap. 12. Of the much higher Elevation of
Reason into Christianity, received from the improvement of innate and revealed
Principles concerning Judgments. 154 Chap. 13. Of the more direct operations of
Judgments toward Reformation; wherein first of the efficacy they have in
confining Sensuality, and setting free Conscience, and its proper Motions. 166
Chap. 14. Of Sense of particular Sins effected by Judgments. 175 Chap. 15. Of
Judgments exeiting Prayer. 180 Chap. 16. A Recollection of this Discourse to
its proper purpose. 182 Chap. 17. An Inquiry into the Freedom of God in his
distribution of Judgments; with a solution of doubts concerning it. 186 Chap.
18. Of the variety God uses in the manner of the execution of his Judgments.
205 Chap. 19. Of the great Character of Judgments when they end in desolation.
210 Chap. 20. The Reduction of the whole to a Conclusion. 216


Besides the mistakes of pointing, which the Favorable Reader will reconcile
to Sense, let him be pleased to correct the more material, thus.
PAge 10. line 1. for that, read they, p. 16. l. 7. for whole, r. while the, l.
17. for dissoluted, r. desolated, p. 25. l. 3. blot one, p. 26. l. 9. for
found, r. formed. p. 50. l. 21. r. Ravillac, p. 54. l. 19. r. Ante-Rooms, p.
77, l. 25. for it, r. its w^ys, p. 89. l. 20. for suing, r. seeing, p. 109. l.
27. r. Trochus, p. 120. l. 26. for then, r. thus, p. 129, l. 3. r. postulate, p
130. l. 13, r. unfolded, p. 133. l. 21. r. adopted, p. 136. for that, r. they,
p. 144. after improve, blot it, p. 148. l. 26. for insecured, r. ensnared, p.
152. l. 16. for guided, r. girded, p. 164. l. 27. r. clue, p. 165. l. 12. after
sweetness put in viz. p. 168. l. 25. r. inslaved, p. 171. l. 23. r.
inapprehensiveness, p. 175. l. 4. after true, blot and, p. 176. l. 20. r.
between it and all, p. 181. l. 14. for bran, r. bear, p. 185. for discust, r.
disease, p. 191. after l. 17. put in vain confidence looses it self, p. 196.
for when, r. where, p. 198. l. 21. r. (...), p. 204. l. 25. for salve, r.
salvo, p. 210. l. 8. r. Courrier, p. 212. l. 16. for arms, r. army, p. 226. l.
24. for contracts, r. contrasts.

CHAP. I. A Prefatory Discourse, showing the Excellency of Scripture in
discovering to us that Judgments are from God, and leading us from Atheism to
the true use of them.
IT has pleased God to cast us into those times wherein Atheistick Opinions,
as well as Practices, have dared a contest with his Judgments: That the
boldness of either Monster, speculative or practick Atheism, should be
permitted to outlive, or over-grow such convictions of his hand lifted up, as
we have had, is by every good man as earnestly to be deprecated, and with as
great a compassion to the Age in which he lives to be born off, as a common
Ruin. For all Judgments being the strange Acts of God, and those we have felt,
the most unusual of those strange Acts, they come near Miracles, and are like
his finger on Pharaoh, and the Jews; and therefore to impute them to Chance, or
Nature, or any thing below God, comes also too near their debasement of Divine
Power, and ascribing it to Beelzebub, that they might not be constrained to
submit to it: A sin that our Savior tells us, is not forgiven in this world;
which sounds more to such kind of men, then to add, Nor in the world to come.
This were indeed to be delivered up to a reprobate sense, which is the greatest
of Judgments, and precedes destruction: It being very rare, that God suffers
himself, and the Majesty he carries in the world, to be trodden under foot,
when he has begun the assertions of them; but that lesser strokes (which are
Discipline) ceasing, the fatal blow follows: when the wind, to fan and cleanse,
lies without success, the dry wind from the wilderness, that blasts and withers
all, soon after rises; when God thinks it vain, men should be stricken any
more, because they revolt more and more, and will not so much as own him that
strikes; he then strikes once for all, and affliction rises not up the second
time.

It is necessary then, all that have together a sense of God and Public good,
should interpose against those idle words that corrupt good manners, that
dis-entitle God to our calamities, and so enfeeble all those inferences of
Reformation, that are deducible from the acknowledgment of him as the Author;
and also against those evil manners that arise and corrupt Communications,
having nothing else for their security, but to plead, that God does neither
good nor evil.

Now these things distill first from the upper sort of men, who having the
advantage to build their lusts above others, screw up by themselves, or the
ministry of servile wits, a falsified reason to the height of those lusts;
whence they fall upon the lower world, which as greedily, though not with such
a discretion of sensuality, drinks them in.

This following Discourse is therefore levelled to this end; that every man of
all sorts owning his hand, may make no doubt, but his Kingdom has come upon us
in his late dreadful Providence, and so may give glory to him.

The grounds of it are, that reason of Scripture, which being the Book of God,
gives the History of the Government and Acts of God in the world. For as the
Records of any Nation or Prince, are to be found with their proper Historians,
and we seek them with most reason and success, where the accounts of them are
professedly offered: Even so the digests of Holy writing render us the best
assurances of God in the world, and ascribe to him that which is his own, with
greatest sincerity.

Though therefore there are many confessions to God from the light of Nature,
and its Prophets; yet those whom God himself deputed to the testimonies of
himself, are much more to be trusted, carrying along with them a clear,
constant, and even Tenor of Truth.

And the Examples he singles out to demonstrate his own Dominion, Justice, or
Goodness in the world, are much fairer then those that are foreign to the
Scripture. Even as a wise Reasoner makes choice of the best Arguments; when an
ordinary Disputer, though he may fall upon such as have truth, yet not upon
those that are most cogent.

To us, to whom the Word of God is the measure and fountain of Truth, all its
affirmations are demonstrations: Its repeated inculcating and exemplifying of
things in matters of Fact, are like strongest concatenations of reason.

Yet as God often took the Pagan world within the Verge of his Word, and
extended the line of Prophecy upon the utmost distant earth, therein at once
laying fuller assurances of himself for his own people, and advantages of
acknowledging him, for the use of those that were not yet proselyted to him:
Which Word (besides the authority of, Thus says the Lord) carries also a high
hand of reason and evidence along with it; that if any would but show
themselves men, they must needs be convinced by it. Even so may we make use of
all reasons to confirm the faith of them who first rest it in Scripture; and to
compel those to bow to what it declares, who think not themselves obliged to
believe Oracles, though Divine, where they are not supported and pointed by
those Ratiocinations, wherein they put more trust.

While then we center upon the Revelations of God, and upon them endeavor to
compass all that is indeed sound, we shall find whatever is fit to argue us
into that wisdom and seriousness to which so awful a hand has summoned us.

In evincing the reasonableness of our grand Position, That God is the Author
of all our calamities, we have this singular advantage, that every step we take
in acquitting it from utter impossibility and unreasonableness, is in the place
of a great reason. For it being carried in the high stream of all Mankinds
consent, it is most rational it should be accepted wherein it cannot be
convicted of popular error and mistake: whereas Atheism herein has nothing to
settle upon, but a wickedness generally condemned (even by the very Atheist,
that assumes Morality) and a reason unstamped, unauthorized by suffrage. It
must therefore have so great a validity of Demonstration, as may be accepted
for it self; which being indeed impossible to be found, the field must be left
to that victorious Truth, and every man obliged to that Duty and Repentance it
calls for. In which last particular, the very enemy of it be friends it; for as
if it were clear, there were a God, the Atheist that would seem just and
impartial to all things, and avoids the suspicion of choosing his Opinion from
his life, professes he would turn the force of his reason for Religion and
Service to the Deity: Even so, if all we suffer be from God, he will say, It is
most necessary we should by all means agreeable to his Nature, make it our
business to appease him; wherein the practical Atheist is deserted by the
Contemplator against a God and his Providence, and left alone as a person most
unreasonable, and desperately forsaken of all sense; who owning so great a
Principle, governs not himself with conformity to it.

But we are in no want of Concessions from Atheism, nor from so much as better
taught Morality, though we thus speak. For in points of Reason and Discourse,
that anointing of the Spirit of God in his Word, leads the humble Christian
into all truth, and is it self truth, who has therefore no need that any
should teach him; yet he accepts the tributes of subordinate understanding
also. In historical accounts the sacred Chronology has days enough to speak to
us, and years to teach us that knowledge that grows from matters of Fact, though
all story may serve it as a Commentary.

In the Principles of holy and wise practice, we need not the Cisterns that are
broken and often foul, having the fountains of living water, and the Crystal
Sea it self; yet we may allow, that as all waters, so far as they are wholesome,
come from this Sea, they should with a percolation return thither again.

In all these, whatever we receive from the words of God is genuine, and of the
true alloy, purified seven times; which the most sublimated Moralist has only
in the Ore, ignorant of the true Arts of Refinement.

All accounts from thence are steady, even, and uniform with themselves, their
path pondered, and their eye strait before them; compared with these, all
others are giddy, distracted and uncertain; when they have spoken like wise men
in some things, that Spirit of Truth and Wisdom not inhabiting them, they fall
into the wildnesses of mad men, and the impertinencies of Fools; whence all the
superstition that has been in the world, has continually sprung.

In Scripture all things are full, and to the height; but in others scanty, and
below the true elevation. For though they speak at any time that is great and
worthy God, considered by it self, yet not like his Servant Job: They know not,
nor can pronounce the great Tetragrammaton, the Eusebeia of the Gospel, nor the
true Evangelick Righteousness and soberness: What they discourse is either so
thin and airy through Philosophic attenuation, that it loses its weight and
substance, its usefulness and intelligibility to common capacity, or else it is
too thick and gross. Scripture knows only to speak plainly, yet most divinely.

Of most things that have only some imperfect resemblances, and half
expressions, Scripture is only able to interpret to them their Prophetic
Dreams of Divine matters, as Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar; which by its
explanations become excellent sense.

Lastly, holy Oracles are the natural Soil, the native Country of all Divine
truths; transplanted from them into more rigid and barren ground, they lose
their first sweetness; or as Colonies sent from it, they forget their
Mother-City, the true Jerusalem, and by length of time grow first strange, then
inimick, till by a captivation and recovery of them, as spoils taken by the
Sword and Bow of Original truth, they are reduced, instructed in their own
descent, and restored to their noble alliances.

Thus Religion draws home all those branches and stems of it self, from those
artificial Roots, upon which they grew weakly, or degenerated through the
unnaturalness of the moisture conveyed to them from false Principles; although
if they might have had their own force and vigor, they would have meliorated
the worse, but being overpowered, they lose their own excellency.

But from this general Discourse of Scripture, we return to the particular
case; the fullness and sufficiency of it to teach every man concerning the
Judgments of God, what he is to know and to do touching their revolutions in
the world.

Herein the Fundamental Doctrines, plain Precepts, Promises, Comminations there
to be found, lead us to actions great and serious; even as the Judgments
themselves, which are the most solemn of Providence; all procedures of Justice
carrying along with them highest gravity, and requiring a suitable reverence.
And because we see them best in Examples, which are admonitions taken out of
words, and printed into things; we upon whom the ends of the world are come,
are made to sit upon the shoulders of former times, through the favor of
Scripture-history, beholding the Saints of God in their holy, humble, and
heavenly demeanor in bad times, and their happy issue out of temptation: On
the other side, the miscarriage of obstinate men, with their sad Fates; that
whosoever is wise to observe those things, and prudent to know them, may
understand, The ways of the Lord are right, and that men upright, and straight
in themselves, may walk in them; but transgressors, whose feet are crooked,
their motions indirect, and they froward in all their paths, cannot hold
themselves on so strait a line, but fall therein.

CHAP. II. An Explanation of the Nature of Judgments.
THe Judgments of God are like another Volumn of his Works, fitted first for
our contemplation; As the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead: so are the same arrayed in justice and
righteousness, apparent in those that are as it were unmade, and decreated in
his wrath. For seeing that immense Essence cannot be comprehended in his own
Globe of light and purity, we need all the refractions he is pleased to make of
himself, that we may understand him. These of his wrath, which is holiness
provoked by sin, declare that part of his glory: and there is no speech or
language where their voice is not heard. For their line is gone out through all
the Earth, and their words to the ends of the world. In them has he set a
Tabernacle for his Justice, which rejoices as a strong man to run his race,
and the acts of it in their season are new every morning. For they are as the
light that goes forth.

Before we enter into the Rational parts of this Discourse, let us stand and
behold the state and order of Judgments as in Theory.

1. Judgments are those evils that exceed the standard vanity and vexation of
spirit, that are the every days complaint of the whole Creation, rational,
sensitive, and insensate, in their several kinds of deploration of themselves.
For these are the Covenant made with all things after the Fall, and as it were
the very terms and conditions upon which they stand in the world, and not new
things under the Sun to move wonder and search: Yea that death and dissolution
into which every thing below the Heavens sinks, either by degrees, or unawares,
and is lost in that dark, amounts not to the nature of what we call Judgment;
but moves with life in such a kind of even vicissitude, as day and night, and
inter-changes with as little noise.

But Judgments are the hand of God lifted up to show a greater indignation. The
former are indeed the angry prints and Characters of a settled Justice, that
rests and fixes upon that radical pravity and evil of man's nature, and keeps
pace and constant motion with the continual actuations of it.

But as there is a difference between the distempered state and corruption of
Mankind, with its scintillations, as from a perpetual fire, and more notorious
enormities; so is there between the unintermitted discipline that chastises
man, as a Creature out of the first favor and grace with God, and those more
terrible approaches, when he comes out of his place, and does his strange work
upon sinners, that they dye not the common deaths of men.

Yet in both these, viz. natural corruption, and constant infelicity, lie the
seeds and matter; which being either suddenly blown up, or by degrees gathered
together, swell high in an instant, or with leisure grow to a sum corresponding
each other.

For as depraved Nature breaks out into outrageous impiety, or by repeated acts
of it self, rises to its measure; so it is answered by God with sudden
Thunderclaps of his wrath, or the bringing out those Treasures, that by daily
additions have been amassed, and are issued out in the just seasons appointed
by him.

In the mean time, as there are many excellent Rules of Religion and Morality
consistent with the one, which do not only govern particular persons, who are
Heroic herein, but spread themselves by wholesome Laws and Counsels upon
Communities, and adorn the Chronicle of that Age, of which they have first been
the stability: so are there great accounts of the goodness of God contemporary
with the other, and rich acts of his bounty, which do most eminently bless
whole Nations as well as persons, and recommend the times current over them to
posterity, as prosperous and happy: but all the whole world is neither
acquitted from this guilt of universal corruption, nor exempted from the misery
so closely woven into every state of it.

This condition of the world has given occasion to great inquiries, how it
lapsed into it; some resolution of which is hereafter intended: but now we
observe how much even this differs from the more tumultuous and dissoluted
appearance of things under Judgment, when a resemblance of the Garden of Eden
becomes a Wilderness, and what we now call Prosperity, is clouded with
overruling adversity. We come into the world, and finding it as it is in its
most constant estate, think it was never better, till by way of negation,
removing the evils we perceive to be such, and via eminentiae, measuring how
much higher things might have been, we ascend in our thoughts to the first
perfection. But Judgments, without any such circuit or elaboration, are
downright proofs of wrath and misery, and that things are not as they were
designed to be.

2. The intention of this Discourse is especially to observe Judgments, as they
comprehend Nations, and infold Communities: For though God visits obscurest
persons, and Families with them, yet they renown themselves by their large
spread upon greater pieces of the world, and the stretch of themselves upon
Thrones, Cities, and Countries, over which they draw the line of confusion and
desolation; in so much that their descriptions are proportionable to that
general dissolution of all things, at the end of the world: of which they are
indeed smaller Maps and preparatory introductions. The Prophet foretelling
these, speaks in a language proper to the day of Judgment; when the mountains
shall tremble out of their places, and the foundations of the earth discover
themselves; the Sun and Moon resign their light, and the Stars forsake their
Orbs, and fall from their Heaven. All which solemnities are borrowed to
represent the downfall and judgment of particular places and Kingdoms.

While we consider them thus, they are upon a hill, and fitter for general
observation, as being more public, and instructions from them more
comprehensive; though the same reasons have place, and like admonitions arise
from the hand of God, however it plants it self, or grounds its work, if the
motions of it fall under our view, and offer themselves to our notice.

3. These Evils arise sometimes from Nature turned out of its course, and
losing that poise God has with greatest wisdom given it; from whence come all
those inequalities and intemperatures that produce Famines, Pestilences,
Earthquakes, Storms, and Deluges.

For when all things were settled by God in number, weight and measure, for the
advantage of the world, and welfare of the whole Creation; there necessarily
follows, when they are disordered, ruin and misery, according to the degrees
of the disorder, both through the cessation of that benefit, their right course
carried with it; and also through the violence of causes out of their places,
and those exorbitant motions which are the fury and rage of Nature.

Besides these, there are also the terrible conflicts of the lusts and passions
of men striving upon the great Sea of the world, roaring like Thunder, flashing
like Lightning, tearing more greedily then Tempests, and that put all things
into greater Convulsions then Earthquakes.

There are no greater evils upon Mankind, then those of which he himself is the
Engineer; Blood, War, Rapine, and Terror devouring without mercy, are bred in
his own bowels, and executed by himself, being the combats of those fiery
exhalations which arise from his unruly Soul. From whence come wars and
fightings among you? Come they not hence? Even from your lusts, that war in
your members? And these often introduce as suddenly and inevitably those
Famines and Pestilences, which come more kindly out of the hand of what in this
case we style Nature. Throughout Scripture, and all History, we find God in
justice using man against himself, and creating him the severest enemy of his
own kind. He prosecutes peccant Cities, Nations, by some others that are fitted
to bring to pass his righteous ends, being no less under him, then the several
Creatures that seem more immediately his instruments, and the reins of which
are acknowledged in his hand, to turn them every way as he pleases.

4. All these we define to be Judgments; that is, They come upon the world
through the design and counsel of the supreme Cause of all things, God himself;
and are neither Revolutions, that arriving at such a Period, must needs show
themselves like Eclipses in such a Nodus; or accidental and eventual things,
that through long tosses of them hither and thither, fall out and happen to be,
and by constant throwing of them, hit sometimes thus, sometimes otherwise: But
they are the most mature and sage determinations of an infinite mind and
understanding; that though he cuts the lines of his own motions often, and
labyrinths them through one another, so that we can find no certain path; yet
will he at last adjust all he disposes, to the conviction of the whole world.
And yet we stay not here, but pursue the sense of this awful word, Judgments;
in which the Scripture comparing spiritual and divine things with themselves, so
much delights. They are the execution of a just and righteous Sentence of God
upon the evil actions of man, according to Laws of unquestionable equity;
wherein his own glory and the truest peace of the whole Creation lie together
concerned (the establishment of Order and Government requiring so necessarily
the punishment of sin) so that they are neither the displays of his mere
pleasure, or the Arcana Imperii, the Cabals of his Dominion or Rule of the
world; but the presence of his infinite Justice, and Jurisdiction over all
things, how much soever the administration of so great an Empire falls within
it; which does certainly conspire herein: as is hereafter to be shown.

CHAP. III. An Endeavor to demonstrate by sound Reason, That Judgments are
from God.
THe great matter of debate we are first to take notice of in the account we
have given of Judgments, is, That they are from the infinite Wisdom and Counsel
of God, carrying a course of Justice in the world: which is established by
these following persuasions.

1. By those reasons and assurances we have for the truth of the Scriptures,
all which must needs come home to the proof of what they do most industriously
assert and teach, and which they make so great a point of their Doctrine. To
every one that acknowledges them the Word of God, it is out of all
Controversy, that all the evil that is in the City is to be ascribed to his
directing and overruling hand, who forms the light of prosperity, and creates
the darkness of adversity; and that this he does for the punishment of sin.
Since then so great and weighty moments of reason have been insisted upon by
those who have placed their labors in demonstrating the truth of Scripture;
and the sense of that in this case, among all the Disputes that have been
raised out of it, has not been called into question (except by men deprived of
common understanding) we may challenge all that reason to our selves in
assuring this Principle. But further then this. All those instructions which
are so plentifully given us in Holy Writing, and wherein it travels so
earnestly to direct us into the right bearing and removing these pressures,
would be altogether unuseful and vain, if God were not the Author of them: For
to those that remove him out of this Province, fatal Nature or Chance seem with
most decency of reason to be appointed over it: All invisible Beings guided by
Intelligence and Will, are as dreadful to them, as Specter to Children, both
for the evidence they give to a Spiritual world, and the Scale that leads up
from them to God as their supreme Origin.

But who that is wise, would set himself to appease, or exorate a marble and
insensible Fate, or compound with a giddy Chance that knew nothing of what they
did before, nor so much as when it is come to pass; that are ignorant and
uncertain what will be done next? being such kind of causes, that neither
govern; for that were an act of reason; nor are governed; for that imports a
reason over them. Yet these nor knowing, nor willing any thing, nor able to
either, are supposed to have this so great Principality over all; which makes
it impossible, that we should with any hope of benefit endeavor to move them
toward us. But when a mind observes a mind; an inferior and subject mind, Man,
the highest and most excellent mind, God; there is greatest reason to use all
ways to find out the meaning of that most righteous and holy understanding, and
to approach his ends with humblest prostrations of Soul, seeking his face, and
the returns of his mercy: much more then, when among men one mind understands,
and in cases of difficulty, even divines at one another; and he that is
dependent, bows to him that is above him: whereas every one knows, it is in
vain to woo Nature off its Adamantine pillars in those things wherein it is
unmoveably fixed; no man prays or sacrifices to it, there may be no more night
or Eclipses. And as vain it is to purify our selves before a Fortune, or
reconcile our selves to that which is so unacquainted with it self and us, that
it can do us no favors; and so slippery, that it is impossible any sagacity or
industry should be beforehand with it.

Although then some superstitious Rites have been done to both these; yet a
certain understanding and will governing must have been conceived under them;
or we must say of all Superstitions they were the most superstitious, that is
the most unreasonable; so that, besides the main Position, those Doctrines of
Humiliation before God, Repentance and Reformation (which are so great a part
of Scripture) fall to the ground also, and with them the results of sound
Reason and Morality, that tend the same way, though by a much dimmer and more
wavering light, then the Word of God gives, which is most distinct and positive
in this; first, That all the instruments of punishment, with their efficacies
and Periods, are found and determined by the Lord himself: And then, that what
he does therein, is with greatest counsel and equity; the ends of which are, so
far as concerns us, made known to us, that by returns to God, according to
those ends, we may procure the removal of the evils themselves: which is a
clear account in reason, why we should wait upon God in the way of his
Judgments.

Against this (which we say is a clear account in reason) no suspicions of
secret Will or unmovable Decrees in God, can take place; as if by their
unchangeableness, they shut up these undertakings of man within the like
inconveniences as the former.

For those that acknowledge the excellency of a Divine understanding, will
easily believe, it can draw a thread so fine and even between it self and man's
Soul, that acts of highest reason and duty toward himself, should have all
their encouragements, and yet himself without the least shadow of turning; and
if we cannot find this out to perfection, what wonder is it? That were not an
infinite understanding, whose contrivances are all fathomable by a finite; yet
let a man appeal to himself, and feel how consistently these things work within
him, and his own experience shall be the witness hereof. For that Medium, in
which these acts of man are to move, is made like the water or fluid air, soft
and yielding, that it gives way, yet without losing its place, or abating from
it self. Every thing has its own play in it; yet the Laws of it are severe and
unchangeable. It is swathed with an eternal ordination upon it, and yet allows
every thing its own liberty; not like the compacted rock, that yields to no
encounter, without dreadful violence; but as the easy stream that is willing
to comply, and is still under as constant a constitution as any other part of
Nature, under him who sends up by the Hills, and down by the Valleys, these
waters unto the place appointed for them; which do even persuade their way
through the firm Mountains, that they may obey that Law that is upon them.

Augustus his taxing or describing the world, had its native progress in the
pliant current of that determination, that Christ should be born in Bethlehem;
and the prediction, it should be so, insinuated it self and its completion into
the heart of a Prince, affecting a reflection upon his own Dominion; to which
that heart was as penetrable as one stream of air, or rivulet of water to
another; though often as the heart of Leviathan congealed with it self, so are
the resolves and inclinations of majestic breasts. From whence we see, how
possible the conceptions of our returns to God, finding their place in his most
established Ordinations are; and how possible also are his Ordinations of our
good, making their way through our returns to himself, while they mutually pass
and repass themselves, without any infringement of one another.

That Decree of Gods to accept Penitents to mercy, is of the same date with any
other of his disposes: as therefore they never clashed in that aeviternal
Source of all things; no more do they in their derivation from him upon time.

The difference is then infinite betwixt having to do with God, the most
perfect mind and will, who sees into every thing, balances one thing with
another, and so composes time and Eternity, and draws them into Parallellisms;
that how ancient soever his Counsels are, he does all he does with as present
an attemperation, as if he had never resolved of them before, but considered
only their just now condition. Thus he pardons, as if his pardoning mercy were
of the same date with our humiliation, and his compassion then inclined, when
our repentance sues it: For his eternal purposes of Grace slide down to us with
their own efficacy, and invite our Souls to those motions in which he delights;
vesting themselves first in our acts of duty toward him, and then crowning
themselves in those acts with remission and removal of evil: so far are Divine
determinations from putting those bars upon man's Soul, and its worthiest
endeavors, that must needs be put upon them by those that set a dark Fate or
Chance in the place of God.

2. All reasons that affirm God and his Providence, combine in this; That all
our calamities are the Judgments of God. How close God and his Providence are
united, may appear to us by those discourses which are written to that very
purpose, and would be here a digression too great to insist upon. But in the
general, we may accommode the assertions of it to the minds of men, with this
consideration; How close is Providence to an infinite Understanding, immense
Power, unlimited efficacy, and presence. The narrow Souls of men entertain
things one after another, and desire the first to withdraw, when they would be
free with those that come after; or if we endeavor to converse with them
together, we find a crowd and throng, which always begets tumult and confusion;
so that many things cannot so much as lodge with us but with straitness and
difficulty, and in danger to thrust out one another.

But with an Almighty mind, infinite also, every thing has its own full room,
and consideration, timely dispatch without cumber or aggravation to it.

As the eye of him that is upon a Tower, commands a multitude below with
greatest ease and quiet of observation; so infinitely more does the eye of
Providence survey every thing, and is yet out of the dust of them.

We who are confined to a certain place, do with much pain and motion visit
those things that require our care and superintendence, according to the
distance they are in from us: But omnipresence needs no removes of it self,
being much larger then its affairs, and the wing of its protection more
spacious then the Creatures that are to come under it. Our little greatness
loses its reputation, which is most of it self, by dealing with little things.
But the highness of God, without any degrade, condescends to every Atome, as
the Sun with its light, and yet removes not out of its Sphere, nor takes off
its beams from greater things.

This summary meditation may show us how easy Providence is to God. The
unseparableness of it from him, is no less to be concluded by laying them thus
together; he that is thus infinitely present with an increate, and therefore
supreme understanding, always in Act, must industriously affect improvidence;
which so great a goodness cannot (were it possible) or else he does eternally
provide. Further, we thus argue:

That the Fabric of the world should derive it self from any but the spring of
Being, is to deny that there is such a one: when it is in Being, that it should
depend upon any but God himself, who is this Fountain of Essence, were to
depute another into his Glory, which he tells us he will not give to any: but
that he should at first create, and still support things without any
consideration or reasons worthy his wisdom or praise; or that he should trust
them to run on themselves to those ends, is unbecoming the Sovereign
understanding and power. That he should maintain the world to be the stage of
ungoverned incertainty, is so unlike the true apprehensions of God, that we can
no sooner settle in the acknowledgment, that the whole Frame of Nature is his,
and that it runs its course in his hand; but we must conclude, he is aware of
all things that pass in his own world, and does not leave it as a field for
things to take their chance in; but interposes himself to steer them to some
certain Haven, wherein his own glory and the due end of things will be found
together. There must therefore be a Providence. But that there should be a
Providence, and Judgments not from God, is most unintelligible: For if we
should allow things of a minute nature to slip this eye (which we can by no
means do) yet to grant so great mutations, such huge dislocations as are in
Judgments, and that they should come to pass, Providence being either not awake
to consider them, or that the causes of them should never ask the consent of
it; were to confess the word, but withdraw the thing; for there were nothing
left, but a bare spectatorship.

If we suppose some malignant Spirits so violent upon the unhappiness of the
world, as the Prince of them was upon Jobs destruction, and that they are not
to be controlled by this higher ordination, we make it the same thing, as if
there were no Providence; for that is none in this case, that is not Almighty.

If there was a necessary connection of things from the beginning, and there
needs no after-consideration; yet if Providence did not, what put them so
together? and where was it; when they were joynted into one another? And why
were they fixed upon such points of time? If any should answer, they must fall
somewhere, and it so fell out they should be placed as they are: It follows
then, there was no room for Providence, nor indeed for the disposes of a
rational will, but Fate and Chance took all out of the hand of God and infinite
wisdom, which who, together with a Providence, can believe? If then there be a
God, there must be a Providence; and if there be a Providence, all evils are
Judgments from God upon men.

3. We may reason this from the so ready and immediate sense of conscience, not
only of particular persons, but in general. For no sooner are men arrested with
these strokes, but immediately they are apprehensive of a supreme and just hand
that is upon them; and betake themselves to those Methods of atoneing it, which
are within the compass of that Religion they understand. Now though this is
ascribed by the enemies of God and Providence to an unreasonable fear, that
has been instilled into the minds of men by the cunning of those who have for
their own ends made use of the natural jealousies and suspicions man is so
prone to, through the weakness of his condition subject to every impression,
and molded them into this superstition: Yet let it be considered, there can be
no greater presumption then thus to dishonor the universal sense of Mankind,
and call into doubt what is sealed by the whole world.

For with as good satisfaction may the sanctions of Morality be unhinged from
that awe and regard the minds of men bear to them, as if there were nothing in
them, but the present use they are of: As for any intrinsic goodness that
should induce their reverence and obedience, or reason for a sting of
conscience as an immediate revenge of transgression, they must be refused as
mere apparitions raised by affrighted reason, or conjured up by the Necromancy
of State Policy: And if this be not sufficient to condemn any supposition of
unreasonableness, what is?

But what can the Atheist relieve by his resolved opinations against a Divine
hand in those evils good men style Judgments? neither able to shroud a man from
the least of them, or to wrench out of his own mind the secret fears of some
superior power, that guides them against the world.

In point of Judgment, the most he can pretend to, is but to arrive at the
proof of this; That possibly he may be in the right (which indeed he never can
to any tolerable acquiescence) In the mean time he leaves both himself, and all
whom he would persuade to the force of the other side possibility, and with
this disadvantage; if that which he would have, be true, it does no man any
considerable service to know it, or injury to be ignorant: for it abates
nothing of the main evil, which certainly deals not more mercifully for an
Atheistick conceit; or is any man condemned to suffer an excess of punishment
for not being so irreligiously learned. But if that be true which he would not
have so, he robs men of those remedies that are to be used for the prevention
and remove of Judgments, and despoyls them of that peace that comes in with the
submission to so wise and holy a hand, besides the dangers of increasing the
wrath by not acknowledging God in it. Certainly it is much more chusable to any
man that is willing to make an Interest in God, or would have true peace, that
all those unhappinesses of the world should be so wisely and justly disposed,
as we now discourse, then that they should be under no Law, or from no such
Divine Counsel; with which to comply, carries so great reason and advantage.

He that goes to help himself by removing this hand of Government out of the
world, does himself no other service then this, that he utterly takes away such
a thing as a rational peace or patience, other then that upon force; leaving
himself, first to the mercy of the next accident, afterward under the
necessity to bear what it lays upon him, without stirring himself under it; but
submitting to it, because it cannot be otherwise, and only for that reason,
because it cannot be otherwise. Whereas, he that owns God in all that comes
upon him, has a large Sphere of rational and pious motion, in contemplation of
that righteousness and goodness that meet together in the infliction; which
obliges him to resign to them, and out of a sense of them to compose himself
into a more excellent and heavenly state of mind, which abundantly recompenses
for the indurance. He has the hopes of an eternal happiness, though he perish
now; he has the expectations of a seasonable relief, when the ends of such a
gracious and wise Discipline are obtained. There are the present mitigations of
the outward evil, those internal consolations with which so compassionate a
Father as God tempers his anger.

Against all this the Atheist lays in the balance a stupefaction of conscience
and all religious Principles, as the only Expedient for that sullen resolution
he so much admires and praises above that weakness of Spirit, brought in (says
he) by the unnecessary fears of a Justice, which do so intimidate and chill the
Spirits of men; and that it may be a perfect counterpoise, he magnifies this
braver freedom, that takes the mind off from the rack and torture of an amazed
conscience. But he considers not, that this is a comfort proper for him only
that desires there should be no God, that is altogether indisposed to seek him,
and uncertain of him, notwithstanding all the assurances he is pleased to give
of himself.

The first choice of every man must needs be, There should be a God, and he
should be his Friend. For who would be without the care and bounty of so rich a
Being in amity with him? But when a man finds a mutual enmity betwixt God and
him, his second choice may be, there should be none; yet when he understands
him willing to be reconciled upon conditions of repentance, he will return to
his first choice, who is not bewitched with the love of his sins, the renounce
of which is so necessary a term of his peace. In the present case, a man's first
election will be, not to be racketted at adventure by evil; but that it should
be governed by one so holy and merciful as God is: but when he perceives an
eternal Justice brought over him by this wish, he will desire to reverse it,
and that any hand rather then such a one should hold him in these cords; one,
that though it sports first in his misery, will at last conclude him in a death
senseless of pain. From this desperate volition, he is lastly recovered by the
grace of the Gospel, that disarming all evil of its sting, allays present
horror with everlasting kindness to him that repents and believes. He then
only that dares not trust, and is resolved not to reform, is the fit Patient
for this Physician of no value. But yet alas, these things are no man's choice,
nor has he a vote, whether they shall be or no. He has only a moment, in
which he can seem to give them a Being in his own thoughts, or annihilate them:
yet still they are, whether he will or no, even now. He finds them here, he
does not make them, nor can undo them. Mountains are not removed by a breath,
nor do dreams of opinion take away solid things; but themselves are dissolved
and pressed into nothing by them. He is conveyed in a fantastic peace to an
eternal misery, that believes there is no God nor Justice; and is healed for a
minute, at the price of a never ending horror, that shuts his eyes against
those most wholesome Principles. All opinions contrary to which, are the
intoxication of the Soul, and not the true ease of it. Lastly, is so much
possible as this? that a man should baffle his own mind in that, wherein it is
of the sense of all the world, by those private opinions which he is always
begging of himself to believe, but cannot prevail, except he have first feared
himself by obduration in sin: It being much a more expedite Method to destroy
the sense of an avenging hand that way, then by arguments of reason, which
cannot but be a friend to truth, though tortured against it: Even as the mind
considering against a God, is the more surprised with the sense of one, through
the connatenss of the principle. A serious debate lets in more water then can
be pumped out, while the wicked man arguing for a God and his distributions of
Justice, unawares loses his own Principles by unholy practices; so that Atheism
stands in need of wickedness to support it: but let it call to any other, if
they will answer it; or to which not only of the Saints, but even of the Sages
in Morality will it turn?

Thus the speculative and practick Atheist edify one another: for while the
speculative lays the best foundation for the practick (since nothing can make
wickedness so reasonable as this confidence, There is no God or Justice) on the
other side, the practick gives the greatest credibility to the speculative; for
nothing draws the Being of God, or his retributions into greater question, then
a bold wicked life. But while they thus uphold each other, they also pull down
themselves in one another. For many of those that deny God by their actions,
profess to abhor the Principle that protects them; and many of those that own
the Principle, join in condemning much of the practice that grows so naturally
from it.

But all this while, true conscience and secret sense in man's Soul, hearkens
neither to Pilate or Herod, when they fall out, or when they agree; but
converses often so busily with its own fears, that the torment of suspicion (as
it frequently happens) exceeds what the Atheist charges upon the full
apprehension and belief of a God, and infinitely more, if taken in with all its
advantage: where then is the good of Atheism?

4. The notable circumstances of Judgments so timed with sins, and
counterparting them, do as plainly declare a Justice, as when among men
offenders are executed in the very place where their crimes were committed, and
with such Characters of their offense, that every man may know they were on
purpose designed, that their sin might be read in their punishment. Thus
Adonibezek acknowledged a retaliation in the hand of God upon him;
Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar were taken in the very act of their pride and
presumption against God. No less are all Histories full of the same instances;
so that the Historians, though senseless of God and his Justice according to
the Scriptures, have pointed to the Divine hand, and taken notice how express
it was in marking the sins of men by his righteous Judgment upon them.

These are not indeed so general, as never to be otherwise; but given as
Indexes of that Justice that is always the same, however it appears severally:
Even as the Formalities and Ceremonies used by several Nations in their
punishments, make no difference in the main.

If thereforce the force of this reason be avoided, because other acts of
Judgment have no apparent affinity with the sins punished by them; and it is
thence concluded, those that have, are but the flourishes of Chance, wherein it
counterfeits discretion, as Nature sometimes dissembles Art: let it be thus
reinforced. First there is no doubt, the consciences of men lead them to many
more instances then can be publicly observed; but those that are of open
notice, are both so many and so fair, as to satisfy them that have a reverent
sense of God and his Judgments, and to admonish, even to inexcusableness, the
more profane, attacquing their consciences, whether they will or no.

But further it is to be considered, God does not force Religion upon men's
minds, but offers them fair inducements and reasons, that it may be a matter of
choice and not of necessity; so that good men have that hold of the assurances
of it they desire, and which do abundantly settle their minds; and all have
that which is sufficient to convince, and therefore to condemn them in their
refusals.

That which knows its own authority and Truth, submits not it self to the use
of vulgar importunacy; but offering to every one enough, leaves men to their
choice. He that is wise, is wise for himself: but whosoever scorneth, he alone
shall bear it. No man can in the thing it self, either advantage or indamage
Religion. Besides, the supreme operations of Grace always remain to that most
blessed Spirit, whose inspirations are more free then the wind, and his
penetrations more intimate to the Soul then it self; without which even
miracles themselves dazzle without persuading: and how far a man perverse and
obstinate will withstand God in his most forcible Sieges of Judgment, is most
evident in Pharaoh. It is no wonder then, if those who are not so plied with
these Arguments, say, Who is the Lord?

God generally carries things upon such a line, that there never want those
mirrors wherein he may be seen by quick and humble eyes; and yet they are so
tempered, that prejudications of men, either through lust, profaneness, or vain
opinion, see him not in the clearest of them.

Those things which present times are worthily earnest in asserting as
undoubted verities, that they might demonstrate the reasonableness of our
Religion (viz. the miracles done by Moses, Christ, and his Apostles) were as
certain to multitudes of the Age then present, as sense could make them, and
yet not enough to persuade. The little Fragments of History we so carefully
gather up from those Heathens that writ synchronically with the Evangelists, to
give evidence by to some matters of Fact, were unnecessary to them who had
broad light to discover the whole series of things, and yet were unconverted;
which shows Religion is carried in a stream of Grace and Divine Illumination,
wafting the Soul that is meek, and him that fears God, into the secret of his
Covenant; while these outward manifestations are sit Channels for it to run in,
though they convey nothing effectually to unprepared Souls.

It is not then necessary, there should be just such a measure of this kind of
palpable assurance an Atheistick Wit demands; nor would it do with him, who is
not persuaded by Moses and the Prophets, that is by such an assurance of the
evidence of things, as God in Wisdom and Goodness metes out to men, giving
still more and more to him that soberly improves; but taking from him who
repines at the littleness of what he has, and neglects it, even that which he
has.

CHAP. IV. A Solution offered to the several Objections against this Position,
That Judgments are from God.
IT is an observation of old, a little knowledge of Nature makes men swollen
with sudden conceit, Atheists; but a deep and accurate insight into things,
surprises them with the clearness and evidence of a Deity. Men having played a
while upon the surface of things, and leaping off from them, conclude hastily
against a Providence, while those that are patient, and leisurely consider, see
even greatest reason for it, there where Triflers pitch against it: Contentious
minds that will not obey the truth, nor can be quiet in any of the sagest
Principles, fasten in the softest places, that give some little entrance to
bold cavil; but they that search deeper, find solid Rock there.

Wits that think themselves never high enough, except they are advanced upon
the ruins of all sound Maxims, and have that under their feet, which others
wear as a Crown upon their heads, dispute against them, till they are thrown
off with scorn and shame by the evidence of unmovable truth and certainty,
that cannot be unfixed by a breath; but though these winds and waves beat, yet
the house they conceit fallen, stands, and great is the standing of it; while
they themselves are wasted into nothing, but a bluster of vanity, and the foam
of their own shame, and at length hurried by the Whirlwind into utter darkness.

But let us weigh the objections of greatest confidence against our affertion
of Gods Primacy in Judgments.

are apparently carried in a course of Nature.

Ravailliac dies in the Tormentors hand, may it be supposed there was no
Justice intended, but Nature fell in upon him. Or how does this lessen God more
then earthly Princes?

Nay indeed it exalts God, that he sits in his Chair, and yet orders all
things. Nature goes on in its own course, the wills of men move in their proper
freedom, and contingencies hover up and down in their fluid air, and all bring
about his justest ends, and carry with them his righteous determinations
against sinners. Is not God much the greater, that things come to pass stilly,
and without noise of miracle, that he comes not in this sense out of his place,
viz. the settled state of things, every time he punishes; and yet when he
pleases to punish with a Divine grandeur, miracles of vengeance are alike easy
to him?

Some things go slowly on, and at length come to those points, where they
determine in unhappiness to man. These finishing their course, and treading
their circles within such a time, or near it, are by observation deprehended in
their motion, and expected, yea almost known like the stages of the heavenly
bodies. As Contagions have been observed to make their return within such a
term; under no very unlike calculation have fallen the peace of Nations, the
periods of Empires; though to some of these are allowed Ages for their
revolution; as among the Stars there be some said to claim no less; others
start suddenly out of the bosom of their hidden causes, and fall with an
unsuspected violence upon mankind; but both are alike under the cognizance of
God, and subject to his jurisdiction. Known to God are all his works from the
foundation of the world, and the whole plot of things, with all their
interferings, lie before him; even the planetary motions of men's wills are
descryed of old.

The things that rise up successively to us, are one moment to him. It is no
wonder then, that Judgments should fall perpendicularly upon sins, though they
move never so punctually in Natures path. For the one (viz. sin) suppose never
so naked a permission of it; yet it must be foreseen, because of that
permission: for all that God permits, he has decreed from all Eternity to
permit. The other (viz. his Judgments) are not only foreseen, but ordered upon
such sins foreseen; how exact then may the placing of the one be with the
other; and to him that calls things that are not, as if they were, be a
perfect act of Judgment? And to us who see things, not in the shell of those
elderly causes we now discourse of, but take notice of them only as they are
hatched into execution; they first appear as extemporary sentences of Judgment
upon the present occasion: But observing more nearly, and being more sagacious
about them, we find the evils that press us have a settled progress, and were
fixed upon some causes, that being further off to us, were not so soon espied;
but that the evils we commit, are, after all our examination, found to be of a
sudden and accidental kind of birth and growth, of a much latter edition to the
Judgments we thought ordered against them, which were on their way, though at a
great distance before the sins were committed: and therefore we conclude, they
cannot be Judgments, seeing it is unreasonable, punishments should be preparing
for an offense not yet done; but they only happened to meet together: for if
such sins, as we supposed, they came to revenge, had never been committed; yet
these effects being risen already, and sprung from their principles, would have
come to their ends. But helped by a sounder reason, enlightened by the Word of
God, we find the sins were as early in the foresight of God, though his
infinite purity can be no way the Author of them, as the progresses of Nature,
which come directly out of his hand.

Further we might add, if this were not full, Sins are so always in motion,
that it is no injustice preparations of punishment should be so too; and how
far Nature may be hastened, or retarded to serve God, is very unknown to us, who
are admitted at the most but to the Anti-rooms of Providence, but kept off from
the presence; and may look into the outer Warehouses of Nature, but are
secluded from the Shop and retired Workhouses, where things are set forward
and backward without our privity.

Those Judgments, the executions of which the wills of men are subordinated to,
are of the same, and in this last particular of a clearer account. For whether
they are those that require a tract of time to accomplish them, as the
leisurely dissolution of States through daily degeneracy of manners, opening
the way, and inviting foreign violences, or breeding intestine dissentions,
where the sin and the punishment grow in wreaths and links one with another
(for all wickedness carries weakness of counsel along with it, and is in
tendency to ruin) or whether they are sudden storms, that through some
unexpected accident rose up; yet they that allot God the straitest Government
over the wills of men, and tie up his Prerogative closest, will allow him to
call for a ravenous bird out of the East, and to hiss for the fly beyond the
River; that is, he can summon on the sudden, or with more leisure dispose the
minds of men to such actions, that while their own projects are all they feel
or know of, yet his just wrath upon those against whom they come, lies secretly
hid, and unknown to them passes on with them; and though they think themselves
excited only by themselves, and the considerations about them; yet there is a
spring out of their reach, and deeper then their fathom.



And therefore it is worthy inquiry, how it comes to be an adversary to it
self; for it would have minded in all things the perfection of it self, in the
whole, and every particular, if there had not been a feud raised by the Author
of it, in revenge of sin, and enmity infused into one thing against another. It
will be hard to give any account of these destructive acts of Nature, so easy
to our thoughts as this of God displeased with sins, and punishing
transgressors by them.

That which may give some relief to the enemies of Providence herein, viz. That
the good of the Universe is secured by the disadvantage of particulars, on
which occasion we see in all things Nature yields ground from it self, shall be
considered in a distinct place.

case; Famines and Pestilences wholly out of the road of Nature, a Deluge of
water, and storm of Fire, that if it had been left to it self, had been utterly
unknown; Invasions, Captivations, and Slaughters, that had not God animated,
had lain still to this day.

These things are indeed preserved in Sacred Records (as is most reasonable)
and the memory of them laid up in the Temple; yet the power that patrated them,
is not without witness in common story.



the wickedness and impieties then raging; who have therefore concluded the
Justice of God prepared those destructions for them as so corrupted and guilty.
But in Scripture it is so evident, that we never read of any Judgment foretold,
or in the execution; but the sins that demerited, are signified with it. In
that progress or general visitation Amos foretold, it is still inserted, For
three transgressions and four.

Achans wedge troubled that time, as well with the unknownness of the cause of
such an overthrow, as with the thing it self. These retirements of sin
all-seeing Justice espies.

Many that are not owned for evil, through darkness and error of conscience,
as the Heathen Idolatries, Persecutions, the Jews Crucifixion of Christ; which
he that understands his own Holiness, Laws, and sins committed against them so
exactly, cannot pass by. Lastly, sins that are out-dated to any but the Eternal
Righteousness, to which all things are present, and therefore it requires that
which is past to us, and entails the punishment with the guilt of former times
upon impenitent posterity. The Famine in David's time revenged the cruelties of
Saul dead, and did not remove, till the sin spread upon the whole by
connivence, was gathered into his Family, and punished there. By which we may
understand, God sees the secret veins of guilt, upon which his Righteousness
falls, which only he knows, before whom Hell is naked, and destruction has no
covering.

Public, which they conceive distant from that so even Righteousness of God,
who will not set the Childrens teeth on edge, because the Fathers have eaten
sour Grapes; nor strike an innocent person, because a guilty one (whose
offense too he knows not) stands by him: let them consider, There are no times,
places, or persons so innocent, as to make them an argument: For there are
several ways by which sins derive, and propagate themselves, and so justify
the translation of punishments (which supposed, as it must be) the Dominion the
great Ruler of the world has before him, vindicates him from imputations of
wrong, even while he laughs at the trial of the seeming or comparative
innocent; or without any reason accountable to us, singles out this or that Age
of a world always guilty and liable to his Justice, and makes it chronicular,
and exemplary for the punishments of sin upon it. Is it fit to say to a King,
Thou art wicked? or to Princes, Ye are ungodly? how much less to him that
accepts not their persons, though never so great; but strikes them openly in
the sight of others.

Ignorant people afford a blindfold compassion to all they find in the hand of
humane Justice; and those that appear wiser, are touched with the same
weakness, if their crimes are not as plain as they would have them, not
considering those reasons Justice and Government together enforce upon the
powers that have so adjudged them; and are therefore bold to reproach them with
want of righteousness and mercy: greater folly and presumption do they betray,
who impeach him whose goodness and mercy being equal with his strength and
Sovereignty, are all infinite; yet not to be measured by Rules proper to
finity, even as his Eternity can be comprehended by no standards of time, to
whom a thousand years, of so great account with us, are but as one day; and
lastly, that light he dwells in so inaccessible, that searching all things it
oppresses audacious inquiries into it self. From whence we may much rather, in
all cases of doubt, conclude ^^^dness in our selves, then no Providence or
Justice in God; yet let us with reverence and godly fear see how far the
designation of Judgment upon some particular Age, that can say, Our Fathers
have sinned, and are not, and we bear their iniquities, may be set right to our
thoughts by the weights and beam of a humane Justice applied to them: And when
we consider all punishments in this world are commensurate to the continuance
of it in such a state as we see it set, we shall find a necessity, that the
infliction should fall upon some parts of time, and not on others, lest the
whole become like Hell and eternal punishment; instead of which, God is now
pleased to use a kind of decimation as men do, where an execution upon all is
not to be practiced. Nor is it unequal to that Age upon which the blow falls,
seeing latter times make one body with those that went before; Monarchies with
the Progenitors and Posterity are united in their consideration, as the parts
with the whole: why then should it be strange, that God should order the guilt
and punishment of elder Ages to glide down upon the descendents of them, as
well as those advantages of wealth and greatness, purchased at that very rate
by their Ancestors, that the inheritance of all should be conveyed together?
Nor is it hard, when the measure of a Nations sin is as one common vessel,
which they that go before, with them that come after, have filled together, and
it grows full, that the unhappy generation that crowns it, should receive the
Antistoichon or countermeasure of Judgments; which Doom yet is by a just
interpretation placed upon the whole, and in ordinary discourse referred to it;
for who seeing posterity miserable, does not call to mind the sins of
Forefathers, so far as they know them, and acknowledge them punished in their
Childrens ruin? And if the proceeding were not in this manner, there must be a
quite different state of the world. All which will be clearer, when we come to
the variety God uses in administering Judgments.

and adventurously upon all, or have missed the worst men, lighting upon the
less nocent; or at least have been apparently ruled by the course of Nature, or
contingency. Men who exceed others, as much in licentiousness of evil, as they
do in condition and greatness, are generally most secure. Good men fall with
the multitude, without distinction of their virtue. All which little comports
with so wise and a holy a Government, as we establish by calling the dispose of
evils, Judgments.



1. The terror that spreads it self universally, while Judgments are
executing, is no inconsiderable degree of a Judgment, even upon those that are
not yet struck. For if every death makes some impression upon the spectators,
though in health, because they carry the same mortality about them; much more
when deaths are linked, and danger flies every way, like chain-shot, cutting
off many together. They that are conscious to themselves of the same capacities
of evil, tremble every moment, and their life hangs in doubt before them; which
God himself ranks among the sorest of afflictions upon men.

Thus God communicates his wrath, and strikes more then those upon whom his
hand comes: The very report and sound of their stroke and fall, being a
vexation and punishment upon others. The passing of the grounded staff raises a
general outcry and lamentation: For though some are so secure, as to be
touched only in themselves, for whom some worse thing is provided; yet does not
their more then usual obduracy take off from the force of this consideration,
any more then particular exceptions invalidate a general Rule. The Thunderbolt
that falls but in one place, astonishes and shakes round about with the
terror, violent motion, and roar of it; from whence they that in such evils
seem most secure, are but upon their parol, and daily compounding for their
safety, put upon often flights and continual fears; which are at least great
drops of that shower, which comes indeed in more abundance upon some, but
lessens every ones impunity.

2. It Is incredible how great the circulation of Judgments is; those which
begin at the feet, or meaner parts of a Nation, insensibly climb up to the
head; there being unknown Sympathies in the civil, as well as natural body. God
therefore threatens a whole Nation with those evils that fall especially upon
some parts; when he wounds in the head, it is generally fatal to the whole;
when he looses the girdle of Princes, and takes away Counselors, Jerusalem is
ruined; when he strikes in the lower parts, yet it is reciprocated by
Principalities and Powers, as David felt the stroke of that destroying Angel
that directed it self upon the people: God therefore uses a vicissitude,
sometimes taking one, sometimes another, when yet he minds the affliction of
all; for he that can disperse his punishments by making one the fountain of
them to the rest, is not at all liable to suspicions of partiality, any more
then that Justice accused as lame, that passes upon one member of a man, and
yet intends the whole man.

3. Very often the Judgments of God are sweeping, and in the Prophets phrase,
cut off root and branch, and so deprive of all possible scruple; of which there
are so many dreadful monuments, as to make this a very feeble cavil of those
who mind not so much the satisfaction of their reason, as they delight in a
slavery to their own Hypothesis. But as God sometimes resolved to take away the
use of some profane Proverbs, and scandalous to his truth or goodness, by the
severity and presentaneousness of his Judgments; so does he often by the same
means silence many of the objections made against his supreme hand in them: yet
a fuller answer of this turning to every side of it, is still intended.

is no more then the sowing of the seed, that first dies, that it may rise in
the greater flourish: And at some times more haste must be made, then by the
leisure of ordinary dying, that supernumeraries may be disburdened, who would
else increase too great a charge upon the Earth.

and humbly adore God, it cannot be thought that he should govern, and bring to
pass ends with the grief and unhappiness of his innocent Creatures, who could
with the same ease to his Divine power and wisdom, and more agreeable to that
goodness, have administered them with all the mildness and clemency in which
that richest Being delights it self. But things carried so different hereunto,
argue as high as may be, the sense of a Judgment: That God should make room in
the world by the hurries of men out of it, which might have been as well by a
gentler transplantation: that he should change seasons by the ministeries of
storms and tempests, and show the wonderful events of his Providence by flashes
of Lightning, and Blazing-stars, which would have been as clearly understood by
the kinder beams of his goodness, assures us he is necessitated by his
righteousness and justice to transact by ways strange to him, and in which he
has no pleasure; and therefore puts them into such a frame, that they may at
once discover his Attributes and Counsels with that wrath and severity that
have their only display upon the sins of men. Thus the iniquity of the Amorites
fall moved God by so dreadful a displacing of them to give the inheritance to
Israel, wherein his Bounty to one fell in with his Justice upon the other; the
former of which, infinite understanding could have carried in another Channel,
had there not been righteous reasons for the latter also. The Jews infidelity
introduced the Adoption of the Gentiles upon their own rejection; which yet was
so little necessary otherwise, that their reconciliation will be as life from
the dead.

CHAP. V. The discussion of this Scruple, How can it stand with the Author of
Nature to disorder it?
BEcause the wrath of God in his Judiciary Acts, is, as we have observed, so
often discovered in the irregular moves of Nature, which is guided by an
intelligence extern to it self, and so can commit no offense; and this
intelligence is no lower then that which created it; so that no error can be
charged upon Creatures, with which nothing was supremely entrusted, but must be
ascribed to God originally: It may add much to the clearness of what has been
so earnestly asserted of his hand in all the evils that are in the world, to
discourse the reasonableness of his administration, when he unravels in
displeasure that order of the Creation he has with so wise and skillful a hand
composed, and interrupts the chain of things himself has interwoven, upon
occasion of the sins of men, lest it should seem dishonorable to his goodness
and unchangeable counsel, if he chooses so; or derogatory to his wisdom and
power, if he is so necessitated. For whenever sinful disorders provoke him to
disanul or confuse those things wherein he has showed himself so wise,
something suitable befalls his works, to that Solomon complains of as one of the
greatest grievances of humane Nature in its acquests, and that made him go
about to despair of all his labor, viz. That a foolish Son arises and
dissipates that state of things the wisdom of his Father transmitted to him
with beauty and splendor. To the resolution of this, will be most conducing
the loosing of the doubts that arise from the constant weakness, debility, and
incompleteness of things to their ends, their frequent aberrations, and
miscarriages from them; which advantagiously solved, will contribute much light
to this case of Judgments.

Let us then search the original order of the world, and see how fairly the
disorder of it, either general, or more extraordinary in time of Judgments,
agrees with the goodness and providence of God, and is reconciled with the
glory of the first Creation.

1. When things were in their primordial state, set into such a posture, that
at the same time they expressed the bounty and wisdom of the Creator, and their
amity one with another; man stood at the head of them, in whose happiness they
conspired, and paid him their several tributes, as to a native Prince: They
rejoiced in his Glory and Grandeur, receiving from him the honor of a near
alliance, and bowed to him with humblest obedience, as fit to command them,
through the excellency of a highborn spirit. They all in their several degrees
of Being were disposed, as one common ear, to take the sound of man's
contentment, which rebounded from Heaven to Earth; and the Echo so conveyed,
that it took hold of both ends of the Creation at once. The Heavens hearing the
Earth, the Earth the Corn and Wine, and all, Man. The Heavens send him down
their sweetest and kindest influences; The Earth breathed nothing upon him but
innocent; The Clouds most liberal of their fruitfullest distillations, and the
Earth an open bosom of its own riches to this lower Angel, who being a Spirit
placed in a body, has the opportunity of tasting the pleasures arising from
them. Thus all things were created with an aspect upon man, and for his sake
ordered into their several classes, and prepared to their various motions;
wherein we cannot indeed but cry out, What is man that thou art mindful of him?
But who could challenge God for it, whose counsels and influences are all his
own, and all the whole imaginary space out of him, Nothing? What then could
implead God out of its nothing, for doing what he pleases with his own? Man
being thus the center wherein the Sovereign goodness of God, and the service of
all things met (for in him their series and happy order ended) his obedience to
God was made the security of his condition, wherein was entrusted his own
welfare and the blessing of the whole Creation. For while all things were so
fixed, that they could choose no other state then their own, man having the sum
of freewill in himself, to use it for the good of himself and all the Creatures
under him, by continuing in his duty to God (the knot wherein all was infolded)
what wonder is it, if when he by transgression lost his own station, for whose
advantage all things stood in their first and most beautiful order; they also
run out of their ranks, and join in the confusion he is to be punished by? For
they run not with such an exorbitancy, but that they pay as great an honor to
the wisdom of God, united with his Justice, as they first did to the same
wisdom in conjunction with goodness, and that service to his indignation, that
they had done to his bounty. For which reason the effect of this also points
just upon man. For what Creature has so quick a sense of, and pain in the
disorder as he? or upon whom does the malignancy fall equally as upon him, to
whose ruin the world it self, had without further patience run, had not the
Grace of God, intending a restoration to that fallen Nature, staid the
precipitation? Hence things are kept so near the rule and tune to which they
were at first set, that there remain fair prints of their former exactness in
themselves, and humble amicableness to man, together with the admonitions of
his lapsed state; which are so intermingled, that they give luster to each
other: but so still, that they are at a minutes warning, and in a moment take a
Divine Allarm to rise up against sinful man, with the executions of his wrath,
in what degrees he pleases (even to the turning themselves into a general flame
at last, to which they are reserved by him) and whereunto they were at first
upon supposition of sin equally prepared.

Now in all this, there is as august a presence of wisdom, and as great an
understanding in the displays of it self, though severe to man in his
disobedience; as great a beauty and order of Justice, as there was of Mercy.
The night has its Graces, though in black shades, and the glories that
inlighten it. There is an order in storms, and a rule in the bloody battles; a
declaration of God in Judgments, as well as in acts of bounty.

Nor is it any change in God, but an even counsel, that in his favor is life
and peace; but rebellion against him is pursued with disappointment and misery:
And what can be more natural then that Nature it self should leave its own
place, to serve the Creator that fixed it there, or turn out of its way, when
the more primitive paths of it lead not to his ends? Or what more unnatural,
then that the Lord of all should be disserved? Or what more orderly way of
punishment, then that those Creatures should rise up against man, that were
made for his service, when he sinned against the common Sovereign of him and
themselves? and that sinning, he should find his unhappiness just in that
place, where his contentment in his obedience rested?

2. This outward world or state of things was tuned to an inward, more
excellent and immaterial world, constituted of Holiness and Righteousness,
standing in communion with God, and conformity to him: The perfection and
highest glory of it was indeed in Heaven, and the center of it Eternity, where
God and blessed Spirits under him inhabit. But it pleased infinite goodness to
give an example of it also in a visible and material world, and to set it
floating in time, that after an experiment made, he might again unite it to
himself in Eternity.

The great exactness, curious frame, and order of the outward world, was a
transparency for that unspotted purity from above to shine through. The eye
prepared to read the Laws, and behold the Divine Beauty, and in whom the
intellectual image it self resided, was man; who therefore is created similar
to it; a Soul enriched with knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness,
sparkling through an innocent, inoffensive, and unspotted body, that while with
his mind he adores that supreme and original goodness, and conforms to it with
greatest pleasure; he may withal delightfully contemplate that wisdom and
righteousness as it were incarnate in the several Creatures, and visible in
their beauty, order, and peace, wherein they stand united one to another.

This Divine likeness in which man himself was made, was the life, and all
below him a beautiful shadow, which received its continuance and liveliness
from the purity, and flourish of that heavenly life preserved in him. By sin he
quenches this Divine spark, sinks below himself, and betrays the whole
excellency of the Creation depending upon him. Thus great personages held up by
the grace of the Prince, shining upon their loyalty, spread their beams, not
only upon their real dependents, but give honor to their effigies: But falling
by treason, all the marks of honor they derived, are defaced, and their very
representations, though insensible, partake their guilt and degradation. Man
deposed from that excellency of Gods image, a cloud covers all about him; the
order and peace are dissolved, and fly in pieces, and the whole becomes a
black shade, in which his sin and fall are drawn: That Soul that first shone
through, is now imprisoned in its own body, and looking out at the grates, sees
the dreadful likeness of its impurity: The body (and Soul by it) feels those
pains and disorders that arise first through the jars and violences of things
intumult and conflict with themselves, and rushing upon it; then through the
want of that supply and service, caused by the interruption and discontinuance
of the line of things that run up to man. These are also daily brought within,
in those strifes that fall out among the humors, the continual trepidations of
a healthful state, constant propensities, and at last putrefaction in death.
All which are a sensible history of sin and Apostasy from God, unlikeness to
him, and disinterest in him; as the former was of holiness and a state of
favor. Thus falls the glory of the outward world in the ruin of this inward,
that was the Spirit and Soul of it. In all which there is nothing unbecoming
the stability or foresight of that Counsel, that first contrived things. For
when the integrity and perfection of the image of God in man was broken, and
all other beauty, but an ensample of it, as it stood in him; why should the
transcription be kept fair, as an honor to him, who had unworthily betrayed
the Original? But even according to the first design, the deformity rushing in
with the first treason, was to be drawn upon the very same tables that were
thus embellished in resemblance of, and as a dignity to humane Nature; or
seeing the glory of the Creation was a reflection from the Eternal light, that
first descending upon man with strongest rays, was from him with a fainter
splendor to rebound upon the lower region of the Creatures; when these rays
were so withdrawn, that his day was turned into night, it must needs be dark
with them also. Lastly, how could the punishment of man be more equally laid,
then in the confusing those things, the order of which was prepared for his
glory, and as an act of Grace to him, and wherein his pleasure and fruition, as
a Creature of this world, consisted; when he himself was so unlovely, and
instead of a delight, grown an object of repentance to God?

But everlasting brightness that dawned upon man in a Mediator, ere it set in a
total privation, continued much of the primaeve glory to all things as to their
fundamental state; yet the cloudy condition of mankind between his own fall and
recovery by Christ, is exemplified by the waving motion of all the creatures
about him, while the constant pravity of his Nature is counterparted by as
settled a vanity and vexation of spirit; and the more prodigious distortions of
common Nature, are the characters and descriptions of greater violations of
these Laws of righteousness anew instamped upon man.

For God having a greater regard to this inward world, the world spiritual,
whereof we especially speak; he accounts the things we are amazed at, little,
in comparison of those more monstrous, our sins, which are hideousest
convulsions, more portentous then Comets and Earthquakes. If then one Iota or
tittle of the Law be of a more awful establishment then Heaven and Earth, what
strange thing is it, if in its revenge we see Nature loose it self, if we hear
of Nations and Kingdoms torn up, and dispersed? For all order of Nature and
peace of Nations, being but a case of these more material things; it is no
wonder they are made nothing of, when what they are servants to is perished and
lost. But that God intends all visible and sensible composure of things should
wait upon the condition of the spiritual and invisible, is yet more evident, in
that the final resolution of all things produces the perfection of the less by
the greater; when righteousness advanced to the height shall dwell in new
Heavens and a new Earth, prepared for it, and the spirits of just men made
perfect inhabit incorruptible and immortal bodies, made like his glorious body:
Then wickedness having finished it self, shall be sealed up into a lake of
unmixed misery, which is so great a remove from God, that as sin, it was never
created by him, or of primitive intention, but a secondary ordination against
sin that intruded it self upon the works of God.

From all this that has been said, appears the uniformity of the ways of God
with themselves, whenever he most reverses those natural sanctions. For if
without any derogation from them, he so early admitted upon the first
constitution such an allay of the excellency of it, and so many cross lines of
motion to the truly native settlement, and into such a fixedness, that they are
now grown natural, from whence death and affliction are compartners with life
and comfort, ballancing and poising one another; it is less of wonder, that
upon greater rebellions and persistencies in sin, God concedes his Justice and
wrath a larger scope upon this second state, in which he has at the least
shared things between prosperity and adversity.

When men transgress the Laws, change Ordinances, break the Everlasting
Covenant, we may well expect this more fluctuating and precarious state of
Nature should with greater freedom be rolled up and down, and removed from it
self. And if at last that Covenant of day and night, and those Ordinances of
Heaven will resign themselves, waiting till those greater then they be
vindicated, and restored to their full authority by an universal Judgment; and
if all the Creatures are willing to be passed through that fire that is to
purge evil wholly down into its own draught, they will now undoubtedly even
surrender themselves to be made use of to the sooner purposes of vengeance upon
wicked men, as the Creator pleases; whereby they have a prefatory redemption
from that vanity and corruption wherein they are infolded, not willingly: for
they earnestly expect the time of a full deliverance, and proportionably now
they even lift up their heads to that vindication they find in a partial
Judgment.

CHAP. VI. A general Account, That there are several Reasons of Judgments
comporting with Gods holy and good Government of the World.
HAving thus far in general endeavored to show the reasonableness of
Judgments, upon consideration of their agreeableness with the first state of
things, as also with the second settlement in such a poise between prosperity
and adversity, as we find them: let us yet further, and more particularly
search those great Principles upon which these dreadful ways of God move
themselves, when the scale in which unhappiness and misery lie, is pressed down
below the equality we now call Nature (though it be not pure and perfect
Nature) For they will convey us most happily into those rules of practice, by
which we may either prevent, remove, or suffer them with greatest advantage: A
wise sense of them will enable a man to conspire with the infinite
understanding that inflicts them, and to accept the punishment; by which he
changes the nature of it to himself, while he votes with God against himself by
the higher part of his Soul, and kisses the rod that afflicts him, adoring the
righteousness, equity, and faithfulness of God in it, as David: I know that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. But he
that sees not why he should be so used, has nothing but a patience created of
necessity to relieve him, if he be not brutishly senseless, and stupidly bears
the knocks that fall on him, till he dies under them, without any regard to the
mind of him that sends them: we have therefore those accounts given us by God
in his Word, that we may suffer as men.

That highest wisdom and goodness, though he treat in greatest severities with
his rational Creatures, yet allows them the honor of being rational; as great
persons, though malefactors, are notwithstanding arraigned and condemned with
more honorable ceremonies, and have a state in their death; even meaner
persons in Governments humane, and remote from Tyranny, are not smothered and
stifled in the dark, but by public procedure reasoned into their condemnation.

It is very disagreeable to a Sovereign Righteousness, whose strength loves
Judgment; to that Creator that made man in his own image, to devote him to
destruction, so much as in this world for his pleasure, or to give him up to
any arbitrary spirits that would crush him, as men do vilest Creatures under
them, for mere sport, or because they please to do so: so little is that
conceit to be assented to, that makes such conjectures.

Yet is it not contrary to sound sense, that man losing God, and himself so
far, that he casts off all fear of him, and even unsouls and dispirits himself
through ignorance and sensuality, should be given up as the prey and spoil of
those invisible powers, that being fallen from God, and become ignoble and
degenerate, are used by him in such black ministeries, and make use (through
that Divine permission) sometimes of one instrument, sometimes of another for
their cruelty. Such men are sunk, as it were too low, for the more honorable
chastisements of God himself, or those blessed Spirits who serve him in his
Judgments only out of zeal to his glory, never out of envy, or in compassion to
mankind.

Thus some sort of profligate Rebels, who are not worthy of a serious Justice
or noble pursuit, are by just and wise States deserted to be hunted, like
beasts, by any that will, either for recreation or advantage; who are commonly
the worst, that delight to be so employed.

But indeed we find the Scriptures always discoursing Gods dealings with men at
a higher rate of esteem then this, and suing himself to all the moves against
them, that they may be orderly and just, as if the Soul of man would reason and
debate with him concerning his ways; for so indeed we find, there is a spirit
in man, that in those that are good, humbly and reverently desires to plead
with him, as in Job and Jeremy; and in evil men, contends and calumniates him
as unequal, till he convinces them of all their hard speeches against him.

And the comparison can never be equal betwixt man and any of the creatures
under him; for they melt away from the least pressure into death, and cease
there: but man dated for Eternity, is therefore of a much higher consideration;
nor have the other those notions of right and wrong, of rewards for doing well,
and punishments for ill doing, that are implanted in man's Soul. God therefore
passes into all the cases of his rational Creatures, and determines upon them
so, that he will not regret or offend those Principles which he himself has
put into them; but in all his Judgments and trials of them, he comprehends
their right in his own, and so sentences them to misery, as that it could not
be otherwise consistently with that Justice and Righteousness he is to declare.
All which are not only argued here in the world, in the darkness and low state
of Souls, and in this mixture of things, wherein a man cannot truly know love
or hatred by any thing that is before him; but in the clearness and open air of
Eternity, when the spirits of men will be at their highest pitch, and
multitudes of them aculeated with the sting of an endless doom; while other
Creatures lie still in their dust, and covered in their ashes. These immortal
Souls challenging out of rottenness their bodies rise up, and plead with the
Almighty concerning themselves. From whence we infer, that God does not
willingly afflict the children of men so much as here, seeing it is he that
has put into them, and excites in them these powers of debate with himself,
and those reasons upon which they argue; and he does it, that he may be
justified when he speaks, and be clear when he judges, and that it may be
known, that all he does is, as we have said, upon accounts of Interest in his
own glory, of sincerest intention for the good of his Creation, and of
necessity for the righteous Government of the world. Of which accounts we shall
treat particularly, having first laid down the fundamental reason of Judgments.

The primary reason of Judgments is to be found in close connection with Justice
and the nature of punishment. For Judgments upon a close description, are the
executions of punishment according to rules of Justice. The essence of this
Justice, is in the distribution of every ones right to them by an exact
balance of reward and punishment according to works, for the establishment of
righteousness and order in the world, which are both the beauty and peace of
it. The supreme care of this is in the hand of Original Righteousness and
increate Justice, whose the world, and all the Creatures are, and which is ever
awake upon this its Paramount Function.

The nature of punishment is found only in pain, without which we can have no
possible notion of it; for it always imports to us something grievous. And it
stands upon this reason.

Fruition and pleasure are the last ends in which the desires of man rest as
his happiness; this is always his reach and contention, through what ways
soever he steers himself: When he travels through the mediums of honor or
profit, or when he immediately grasps pleasure it self, or whether these be
truly, or but apparently what he names them, the satisfaction arising from them
is equally the design in all.

This pleasure or satisfaction is the taste or reflection of man upon the
convenience of things to his Nature, ministering delight through the mutual
touch and embrace of them one with another, being thereto fitted by the wisdom
and goodness of the Author of Nature.

This convenience of things is called Good; the Fountain of it is God himself
the First Good; the streams of it are derived from him upon the several
Creatures which flow one among another.

True pleasure God has by great skill woven into Holiness and gracious Action;
these things being of themselves most accordant to man's Soul: and further, by
an eternal and unchangeable constitution (which is the foundation of all
propriety) set it as the reward of obedience to these Laws of Goodness; so that
to him who perfectly observes them, the reward is reckoned of debt; that the
mind considering first this pleasure springing from goodness, may be led to
that as the root of it; then understanding it as a reward apportioned to
virtuous actions, may be yet more fully invited thereunto.

The whole complex of Good is hereby assured both in the present accommodations
of things to this life and state, and in the sum of it, eternal life: For
godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which is to come; and
they are rendered to them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
honor, glory, and immortality, the paths of which lead to that fullness of Joy
in the presence of God, and to those Rivers of pleasure at his right hand for
evermore; which are the most commensurate significations of Happiness.

On the other side, that which stands opposite to pleasure, as darkness to
light, or death to life, is pain; and it is the point from which the Fuga or
aversation of the Soul hastens it with all vehemence. This we style Evil; for
it is the disagreement of things to our Nature, which awakening resentment,
causes greatest displeasure.

All this evil is by God seated in the heart of the evil of sin, where its
proper habitation is; for every impure action being dissonant to the true make
of man's Soul, is as far from pleasure, rightly so called, as it is from
goodness: and it is moreover prepared for the avenge of disobedience, as its
due portion and reward: From whence both the rise of unhappiness is known, and
the reason understood; Death entered by sin, and the wages of sin is death, with
all the preparations to it.

This evil of punishment is administered by the severe Touches of God himself as
an adversary, or the unfriendly pressures of the Creatures upon our Nature, set
on by his wrath, either in the degrees now, or that complement Scripture calls
Hell, where is wailing and gnashing of teeth in utter darkness, or utter
impossibility of enjoyment.

This constitution of things is the foundation of Religion, the pleasurable
both fruit and remuneration of obedience, and the painful issue and recompense
of transgression, being adapted to the inclining of the mind on each side of
it; and the more necessary, because through the wise disposition of things by
God for the trial of man, virtue is beset with present inconveniences
(especially since our Fall) which deters the simple; and on the other side, the
entertainments of folly and sin have the sweetness of stolen waters, the
inticement of Fools: but both these are counterballanced by the after and
lasting rewards or punishments.

These things that are first proper to persons considered singly, spread (as
men themselves do) and combine upon Nations and Communities: For that Justice
we speak of, is not only as distinct as every man is to himself, but as large
and general as the whole world, that Bodies of men may be awed with the same
reasons that seem to have greater place upon particulars, and be either
prosperous, and spend their days in pleasure; or calamitous, and traveling
always with pain, according to their conformities with the Laws of
righteousness, or prevarication from them.

Let this then be reduced to the present purpose. Justice always intent upon
its high administration, observes the sins of men, passes sentence upon them,
and is ready to execute it. The sentence upon sin is the entire sum of pain and
misery, rolled up in that one commination of dying the death; the proportions,
instruments, and seasons are chosen by that highest wisdom, that guides the
dispensation of Justice, and the residue laid up in store for the last
Judgment, when the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and the Nations that
forget God.

From hence it is, that Judgments, the great vehicles of pain to the world,
move up and down in it, by the appointment of Justice to enforce transgressors
to receive that pain, which is the demerit of their sin (in which else they
would disclaim their right) and to compel the Kingdoms of the Earth to drink
certainly the Wine-cup of fury (however unwilling they are to it) because it
duly appertains to them.

These things are so close to man's Soul, that punishment is the next
expectation after an offense; and if it be delayed, men are ready to cry out,
Where is Justice? as if it were in a slumber: How reasonable is this account
then of Judgments, that there may be a due execution of Justice?

In this Reason lie the seeds of these sequent Reasons of Judgments.

1. That there may be a sense of Justice preserved in the world, as an
admonition against sin. For these inflictions are evident as matters of fact,
and countersway the present pleasure of sin for a season, by after-pains.

2. That there may be an expiation of the world; for satisfaction for the
present given to Justice for sin, is a purgation pro tempore.

3. That men may have assurances of Judgment to come; seeing such a thing as
rendering vengeance that is not perfect, leads to that is absolute.

4. That God may change times and seasons in his Government of the world; for
pain unpins and forces the state of things asunder.

5. To reform men, by showing their folly in shaping their course to the
Country of pain and dolors, that they might find pleasure.

From this general consideration, let us pass to the particular reasons of
Judgments, of which we proceed to speak in order.

CHAP. VII. The first Reason: The importance to the World, that a Justice over
it, be understood.
Solomon observes: Sentence is not speedily executed upon wicked works; nor
will men, who do not curiously inquire, know by them, whether there be a
Justice over the world or not; and therefore still the hearts of the Sons of
men are set in them to do evil.

For this cause God erects such pillars of salt in the world, as Judgments, and
they stand not only for the admonition of the just present, but they project
their instructions upon succession, even that which is most quiet and secure.
The Apostle Peter observes, the great monuments of Judgments were raised to
that stupendous height betimes, that they might overlook all decurrent Ages,
and be seen by the last and lowest of the world, that there might be none
without such cautions of the Righteousness of God. Their kind too was
extraordinary; from Heaven immediately, that the Argument might be more
undeniable, and the impression stronger.

But how much the apprehension of such a waking Eye upon all the ways of men,
and the administrations of States and Kingdoms, is both to the glory of God,
the good Government of the world, and the Interest of man, may without
difficulty be understood. For as the Apostle expressing God in a jealousy of
the honor of his Goodness, says, he left not himself without witness, but
engaged the acts of mercy in giving fruitful times and seasons: So in like
manner do the distributions of his Justice give testimony to him, that he
judges in the Earth, so that all the inferences of Righteousness that are most
naturally to be derived from so high a consideration, may fall with greatest
force upon the minds of men. For as Judgments being abroad, are prevalent
preachers of it; so those that have been heretofore, being past, yet speak: And
the treasure of that Justice and Power in God that inflicts them, is an
unmovable persuasion, that no change falls upon, and which indeed carries a
constant force, without which those that are past, would have soon been
exhausted and spent, and those that are present included within themselves.

Take away the sense of a Justice, and all rules of goodness are chilled into
honest notions, and moral speculations without any sting; Laws grow feeble, and
have only a precarious authority. And if the Justice be only humane, the Sphere
is so narrow and restrained, that great wickednesses are committed out of its
Jurisdiction and cognizance. But Justice (and that Divine) commands and
threatens with all highest confidence, and nothing can find exemption from it;
laying strongest warnings upon men, l^st they sin, and giving greatest motives
to repentance after the commissions; spanning all reasons for prevention and
removal of evil.

Now there are no arguments of a Justice so cogent, as those it self gives,
which like things of sense, find least dispute when they are resident by their
own motion upon their proper subjects. For as the objects of sense are to
sense, so are these strokes of the hand of God to the conscience; all fineness
of conceit and tricks of wit, will not elude the strength of things themselves,
taking place upon sense: though they should have inveigled the fancy at a
distance from them; yet the first approach melts the vapor: yea though the
Judgment should have been reasoned into a confidence, and undertaken to give an
Apathy, as the Stoic to his wise man; yet is it not of proof to the body
against these realities, however it may defend the mind. Nor can the Atheist by
all the turns of his perverted reason, escape the reciprocations of conscience
with the Justice of God, when he is attacqued by this pressing hand; even
unawares to himself he not only lets in, but often sends out the confessions of
it. But yet this difference there is between sense and conscience (which is a
common sense in the Soul) that the one depending upon the body is soon
overwhelmed, if it be too closely embraced, or too long held, or too powerfully
urged; when the other, properto a spirit, is the more awakened, and the more
certainly possessed by the earnestness of things with it, that are properly
agent upon it.

These Judgments then generally drawing from those that are more inclinable to
yield them; or pressing from those that are loath to give them such
acknowledgments that have raised and continued an universal consent in this
Justice of God we discourse of, make good this first reason we have proposed;
That God for his own Glory and the good of man, retains a sense of Justice in
the world; this sense being so apt to keep an awe upon the Soul, deterring it
from evil, and provoking it to good.

It were but tything the Mint and Cummin of so weighty a consideration, to add
to it, that the very Interest of Government and civil Polity lies much in it;
which cannot be better conceived, then by offering to the Atheist the choice of
his own mind, whether if there be certainly such a Justice animadverting upon
men's ways, and this were as certainly and livelily acknowledged, it were not
likely to give some better Law to the actions of mankind, then if there were no
such Justice, and it were certain to every one, there were no such. He
confesses enough, when he imputes the belief of it to the insinuations of
Rulers, as one of the necessary Arts to rivet their Decrees, and give them ease
in wielding their Scepters.

It may, no doubt, be far argued on the side of virtue, righteousness, and
mercy, that they are the very weal of mankind; from whence the Atheistick
professor takes advantage, and carries himself demurely upon it, as if no more
were necessary to incline men of sobriety, nor any need of borrowing aid from
imaginary Principles; but knowing unruly lusts are too boisterous to be
commanded by handsome discourse, he provides the iron-hand of Laws and
executions to subdue the more unbridled part of men: which (says he) shall go
far, where the acknowledgments of a Deity can do nothing.

Let such a one consider, there is a secret strength conveyed up and down the
world by the general consent in this radical notion of a God and his Justice,
which adds a much higher reason to the wisest minds to sway them, then the mere
excellency of goodness it self, which is not the less, but infinitely the
greater for being hypostatiz'd in a Divine will; and withal infolds the less
sensible part of men, that what they do not consider in its own worth, they yet
upon the silent awes of conscience revere, and drink in with much greater ease
the commands of Authority that steer the same way; and more patiently suffer
the penalties of their transgressions, being first adjudged to them by
themselves.

To sum this; as the predictions of punishment before the execution, were acts
of favor to men; so is the established Doctrine that grows out of the many
experiments of this vindictive Righteousness of God, a grace to the world, that
it may not surprise un-understood or unawares, but keep men in a daily regard
to it, not running into its dang^r by neglect of duty, or presumption in sin.

When it is often in the exercise of it self, it can neither be unknown or
forgotten. All which is most condecent to the infinite goodness and
graciousness of God, as well as to his Justice.

CHAP. VIII. The second Reason, showing the necessity of a purgation upon the
sinful World.


For sin lying as an impurity upon the moral Creation of God, and under that
upon the very natural, there must be a purgation suitable. All pollutions
require some kind of removal, else accumulating themselves, they overload and
destroy. In Nature things run through their own circle, wherein lie several
expedients by which they acquit themselves from that Sordes they contract: when
this is interrupted, ruin is their last resort. The body dies, and resolves it
self, that it may part with that it had not power to expel, while it held
together. Earth and air suffer those convulsions and violent schisms upon
themselves, to work out of their bowels and bosoms unfriendly mixtures. The
foulnesses of sin require higher and nobler purifications, or more severe
depurgations: For the stain they cast, being upon a more excellent state,
argues a deeper vitiousness in that which defiles so high, and a more worthy
expiation necessary; as the Apostle says, the patterns of heavenly things
(which he calls worldly) are purified with these legal sacrifices; but heavenly
things with better then such. Our Saviors discourse of meats not defiling the
man, but that which comes out of the heart only, confines things within their
own kind, natural within natural, spiritual within spiritual, and their
defilements are peculiar to themselves. Material things cannot rise above
themselves in what they pollute, they cannot defile the man: All they do is
within their Sphere, in which they roll out of one thing into another. Meats go
in at the mouth, enter into the belly, and are cast out into the draught: They
run their round, and finish their motion among themselves. To morrow blots out
to day, and is it self defaced by aftertime. One thing wears off another, and
all things are in the constant flux of the water, for their own purification.
The body as it stands in a line with these things, is of no greater remark, the
actions of it come into no greater account.

But the spiritual state is in all things great, the Laws of it are Royal, Laws
of liberty, wisdom, justice, and goodness, elder then time, as ancient to the
world as the decrees for the Sea, and rain, for the way of Thunder; then were
they searched out and declared to man; equal they are as the balance of the
Clouds; just as the weights for the winds, as the scales in which the mountains
were weighed; certain as the Trochees of Nature, ere it was out of tune. All
these have relation to God, who is the head of this order, and gives a virtue
and greatness to it. They are all everlasting, and bear up themselves
consolidate by Eternity.

Man by his Soul is set in this heavenly world, and can no more remove himself
out of it, then he can his body out of the material one; let his mind be never
so high in its own elevation, it cannot keep the impressions of matter off from
his earthy part; much less can he by sensuality untye his relation to
spirituality, to which his Soul knits him so fast; God having given a touch and
feeling, a sense and judgment, though it be not improved. Whatever a Soul does,
or does not, that is, wherein it refuses, or through neglect minds not to act,
becomes most momentany; for all partakes the spirituality of its nature, and
receives beauty or deformity, purity or defilement from the powers of that Law
within it. A man cannot be a beast, though he degenerate like one.

Sin then receiving force from the Soul that commits it, mounts the spiritual
Creation, and rests it self in the world of Righteousness, as a defilement in
it adheres to it; as death, deformity, sickness, emptiness, darkness, do to the
solid parts of the Creation; and thereby challenge a place in this world, which
yet in themselves are nothing but the want of the due perfection of the subject
to which they adjoyn.

Thus have we considered these two worlds as distinct; yet is there in this
world an Ordo ad Spiritualia, through which it is inclasped under the
Government of the higher, having a capacity to be sublimated to ends above it
self, which is as a cement betwixt them both; whence it comes to pass, that sin
descends upon the lower by neglect, or inversion of the order wherein it
stands: the first of which is to depress the works of God below his intention
and aim at his own Holiness in them, and is to disanul it: the latter is to
debauch the Creatures of God to lust, blotting out his superscription, and
setting that of sin in the room; and both are to build up evil grounded in
matter to the third Heaven. Thus though meats cannot defile the man, yet the
man may defile himself by meats, and defile the meats; as on the other side,
meats commend him not to God; yet he may by a holy use, by the Word, and
prayer, commend himself, and sanctify them: he is able by his Soul to touch
them into gold, or to taint them with his own impurity.

And this very innate power, though a man never considers it, nor behaves
himself worthily by his judgment and caution of it, is yet the same as to the
substance, as if he had a Soul never so greatned and enlarged by improvement.

When there is a defilement among spiritual things, every thing in the whole
spiritual Nature keeps it extant, and puts a seal upon it; the certainty and
unchangeableness of those holy Laws; the all-seeing Eye of God; an infinite
mind and understanding, an infinite purity, an everlasting Justice and Judge;
the consent of the whole world of spirits with him; the immortality of the
Soul, from which the defilement immediately rises, and recoiling rests. From
whence it comes to pass, that what men do with their Souls, they never lose,
but live in the midst of all their actions, whether good or evil. For God
keeping in force these Laws, retains and binds the Soul sinning under the sense
of what it has done, and sends down the charges of his wrath into the
conscience, and dispatches punishments as he pleases, ever preserving
inviolable records of every transgression, laid up within his own Justice, and
registered in the guilty breast, which sucks in the air it has breathed out,
and if evil, is settled into a defilement so great, that nothing is pure to it.

Let us then compute things, and when we find so many men in the world, whose
actions are going out by hundreds and thousands, having no balance of
righteousness upon them, nor sifted by any examination; but rolling down that
great precipice and declivity of humane Nature all corrupted, not only with
their own violence, but by the force of that power of darkness that concurs
with them, what must the amount of the impurity then be?

That an Eternal Judgment countervails all this evil in number, weight, and
measure, shall be hereafter discoursed: But how Judgments take off the foulness
of sin at present, is now to be considered; which may better be conceived by
applying their efficacies to every of the particulars of its defilement, in
these following observations.

1. That prime and eternal Holiness, which with its Glory governs the spiritual
order and beauty of things in a conform Holiness, Righteousness, and Purity, as
their first constitution; when offended by the sin of any of the proper
subjects of it, is secondarily repaired by punishment upon the sinner.

We may consider this as abstracted into its own most spiritual Nature, or
formed into Laws, and either way punishment repairs it.

1. If in its own spiritual Nature we look upon it, there is a splendor in
punitive Justice, which is another mode of that Eternal Holiness showing it
self; it is the zeal and earnest intention of it, meeting with any thing aliene
and receded from it.

The wrath of God is the flame, or light-fire of his infinite purity, in
contest with iniquity; which gives such a luster, that all the Earth is filled
with this glory, and is an accidental illumination of the superior state of
things: For which had there been no place, undoubtedly all entrances of sin had
been precluded. The Apostle speaks of God, that he willing to show his wrath,
and make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction. Knowing how to give reparations to himself, he permits
to sin and sinners a scope in their own actions: There is yet no communion
betwixt light and darkness, only another kind of efficacy of light. For that
which endures not the approach of the least evil, but by its own vigor and
perfection throws it off with abhorrence and disdain, can never be defiled; but
has occasion from evil to manifest its own intenseness and supremacy, and
preserve in another way the same luster and greatness of the whole state under
it.

2. If we consider this Holiness, as it is formed into Laws, wherein the state
of it is more plain, the first honor of a Law is obedience; if that be not
paid, the second is punishment, which keeps up the Majesty and greatness of it,
and even establishes its authority; those Laws being only weakened and
infringed by transgression, which go unrevenged; for then the power passes out
of the Law, and settles in the transgression, which from thence assumes an
authentickness, and damnes the Law to an obsoletion. But if the Law has the
offender in its hand to deal severely with, and to condemn, the power is
apparently with it, and it can terrify into its observation, those whom it
cannot allure by its direction, equity, and rewards; which makes evil a feeble
and weak thing: for whoever is bold in it, presumes upon his own ruin, not
only serving without protection, but under the certain penalty of dying the
death. Thus a further potency of the Law is explained and opened, that else had
lain hid at least in the effect, viz. that it cannot only command, but avenge.
It is true, the natural desire of every good Law is to be obeyed, and to have
the hearts of men burn in innocent flames of affection and devotion to it,
rejoicing more in its power to rule well, and do good: but when this is not
accepted, the violater is struck by the hand of it, that it may not betray its
power to Anarchy and wickedness. All the Laws of God have therefore come armed
into the world with threats and denunciations of wrath, that the rebellions he
foresaw might not diminish ought from the greatness of them; and the Judgments
that gave being to those threats, and made them true thunderbolts, have come
professedly to recompense the injuries done to his commands, and revenge their
quarrel, that all may know There is a Government in the world.

2. Judgments are a great expiation of the spiritual world it self. God
instructs the vicegerent powers under him to assoil themselves and a Nation
from community in piacular actions, by heaping the guilt upon the offenders
head; which proceeding separates the malefactor from the common mass, and
dismembring him from the society of which he was, disinterests that in the
perpetration. This is the great meaning of that excommunication recommended by
the Apostle as of so much use in the Church of God. This was the sense of
Sacrifices, in which beasts commuted for men, attracted like common sponges,
symbolical guilt upon themselves, and bydeath or that ceremonial exile of the
Scapegoat, were thrust out of the world for the atonement of it. As therefore
things set apart to holy ends, and distinguished from the ordinary heap, were
Nazarited to God; so are persons under this kind of devotion also, and have a
more unhappy sacredness upon them to his Justice, being herein Catharmatical to
the rest, put out from among them, and forced down into the common receptacles
of impurity. For when unclean things or persons are reduced to their own place,
as the Apostle speaks of Judas, they cease to defile. We see throughout the
world, pollution arises from the boldness of things (that for their
unworthiness and impurity ought to be by themselves, and bound in dark^ess)
appearing openly, and joining with b^tter company; or when that which is of
(...) b^tter alloy moves downwards, and submits it self to mean allays; like
the Sons of God falling in love with the daughters of men: But when noisomness
is stopped up in its own vaults, and cast into its own lake, those depurations
preserve the common air wholesome and free, and the great complex is not
indamaged.

That therefore which the Justice of man is too little and weak for, God who
has a much wide^ Jurisdiction, performs by extending his Anathematisms, his
greater or lesser excommunications (as to his Justice appertains) upon greatest
Princes and Nations, till at last by that Anathema Maran-atha of casting into
Hell, he makes a purgation so perfect, that nothing out of it has the least
breath or exhalation of that great Sewer upon it. For were not that segregation
to the very utmost, it would certainly have been an annihilation; so
incompatible is the foul state of things with the pure, when brought to their
everlasting and incommutable point.

3. God gives a period to evil, and iniquity comes to an end by his Judgments,
which sometimes fall upon the great Engineers, the workers of iniquity, and
either causing them to drink the wine of astonishment, that they have no
further spirits and life for sin, or cutting them off in the midst of their
work, force them to leave off to build their Babel; sometimes he takes from
them the instruments and matter with which they are at work, so that they have
no more to do; or lastly, the very Scene or Stage upon which they are acting;
the Cities and Countries that bore them, are as it were removed. Now when God
does any of these, there follows a great silence of evil, and a cessation of
the further defilement of it; as a calm and stilness ensues, when great Tyrants
that have made a huge noise in the world, go down into the nethermost parts of
the Earth, and lay their Swords under their heads: or as when Cities that have
filled that circuit of Earth they took up with the sound of their pomp and
business, become a desolation, an unwonted quiet succeeds there, even then
there is a present stop upon that constant stream of wickedness that ran along
with the duration of Princes and Cities in their flourish, till as their power
and greatness rises in some other part of the world, so a like impiety grows up
out of their ruins; the whole course of time being spent in mowing down
thosegreat repullulations of sin that are no sooner cut and gathered in one Age
or place, but they spring in another, until the harvest of the Earth is fully
ripe, and the last time reaped by that sickle that leaves nothing to be done
after it: till then History swells with these descriptions, and prophetic
Writings most livelily represent such vindemiations, and to the ends we have
now discoursed.

4. Herein also are the Creatures freed from their unworthy services; the
righteous use that God makes of them, restoring them to that sanctity that
stood in dedication to himself; in which, if they suffer a resemblance of
punishment, as they first received a seemingly culpable imitation of man's sin,
it is but purgatorial; for the whole Creation is by Judgments in a degree now,
at last perfectly freed from soil, and restored to its first and genuine
clearness.

5. Man himself who is the defiler and most defiled, is led by affliction to
purification, if sin has not eaten so deep into him, that he is become one
with that accursed thing, and so himself fit to be made a curse. This
usefulness of Judgments shall be disposed into a distinct head of reason.

CHAP. VIII. The third Reason expresses the connection of these with Eternal
Judgment.
and also because the settlement it makes is unchangeable, but many outlive
their present calamities, or at least are ransomed from them by death. God
therefore teaches us beforehand that so great vengeance: These lesser sums are
arguments of that treasure, for he that is infinitely rich, has provided a
great abundance of all things; and from a little we may argue there is a whole
Element of the same within his command, when he sees good, and that the like or
greater reason calls for and requires it in the same or greater measures: when
God had use of the water for a deluge, not only that we see and account for,
but unknown Cataracts were opened. There are hidden powers in God to create
things, of which we see no prints, nor are so much as able to conceive, who are
in every thing confined by what we see and know is done; because of the little
grasp of our mind, we call into question of impossibility what we have never
seen, and of improbability what we seldom see. That we may therefore be led to
further conviction of such a Judgment, then the bare affirmation of it (though
from him whose word is a Creation, that were enough) God sets the realities of
it before us; in which we may behold all in a little, as a man is drawn in an
infant; and therefore he uses to express that little by the whole, that we
might be the more acquainted with it: we see his power hereby to call to
account whom he pleases, how, and when he pleases; he accustoms Nature to
frequent dislocations before that final remove. And because our incredulity of
it is so much and so faulty, besides our other demerits, like Zachary, we are
confirmed by a punishment inflicted on us for the time being: In our flesh is
printed the certainty of an Eternal Judgment by a temporary one, God chastising
our unbelief as well as our sins by this his hand; or as Christ evinced his
pardoning authority in Heaven by his pardon of sins on Earth, that was by an
act of his goodness expressed in such effects of it, as men upon Earth measure
the power of causes by: So these his Judgments drawn down to us where we are,
and composed to our present sentiments, are the fittest demonstrations of that
which is as much above us as the Heaven above the Earth, and of that to come;
of which we are always doubtful, whether it will be or no: For with slender
reason can we dispute against the futurity of such a Tribunal that is out of
the reach of our calculation, whether it shall be or not (had we not a
revelation of it) who are daily surprised with the wonders wrought before us,
which we would not have believed, if they had been told us before they came to
pass, though much more near our Prognostics then the other. From whence we may
well infer, All the declarations we have of these things from God, shall
certainly be fulfilled in their season; since things so unexpected to us, the
search of which, and their likelihoods of event is not so far out of our depth,
do yet appear, and all we have to say against them is but this, we never
thought it. What may not then be, that is assured shall be in those things we
can pretend to no acquaintance with, though we are not aware of them before?

But further then this: when we see some times and persons that have the marks
of Judgment upon them, and that look as smitten of God; and others again that
have no such scars, and yet we cannot but say, deserve punishment, and often
equally with the others: if there were not a Judgment to come, it would argue a
partiality in that Justice, which yet we know is so great and free, that it
accepts no man's person for being great, nor over-looks any as too small for its
eye.

If there were not a Judgment to come, and that universal, our Saviors
discourse, that we should not rate sin and sinners by their sufferings here,
would fall, when he says, All that do not repent shall perish in like manner,
that is, as notoriously as those upon whose destruction the eyes of the world
are set; and yet we see many flagitious persons passing impune out of this
life, having given charity it self no hopes of their penitence: His perswasives
of the necessity of repentance from thence, would be of no force or strength,
if there were not a Judgment to come, and a perishing beyond all we see here.

There were no place of Argument, if it could establish it self so great
against Divine Providence and Righteousness, or against all Religion and
Christianity, as that which supposes, there is no everlasting and final
determination further off then now, to reconcile the great inconsistencies of
things with their disorders, which do but seem to be, because there is a
Judgment, but would indeed be, if there were none.

If then there be such a day of God, and his righteous Judgment, and the lesser
acts of it deserved messengers of so immediate a mission, sealed often with
miracles; that which is so much greater, and in which all is summed by
proportion, should have the most solemn embassy; accordingly God takes care,
for the Doctrine of it is delivered by his Son, and confirmed by his
Resurrection from the dead.

All the Judgments of God from the very beginning down to the end, offer
themselves as the premonitions of that Day; the eldest Prophets spoke of it,
Enoch the seventh from Adam said, The Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints; and the most ancient of Judgments, the Angels thrown into chains of
darkness, declare the Judgment of that great Day; because it is the acquittal
of Providence that has seemed crooked here, while it has run through the
mazes of the froward and strange ways of men, and therefore appeared as
confused and entangled as they. God not depending upon time, as an
unquestionable or indisputable representation of his Rule of the world, has
throught it worthy of himself to provide by a last Judgment to assoil his
Government of it from all possible calumny, by showing the greatness of his
skill then, in those cross lines, those shades and lights that encounter one
another now, and look like perplexity and error in the parts, but in the whole
picture will present adorable wisdom, excellent in this above all, that it has
made every thing with such aspects upon this end of things, and with such
direct motions to this center: If that therefore were taken away, the several
lines and paths in the world would lead no whither, nor rest any where; and not
only so, but the great points of Christianity leaning upon this Postulare,
would fall. As therefore God does indeed hasten all things hither, that they
might not wander overlong, though by a measure of time, that seems tedious to
us, yet without any delay in himself, or in the thing it self: For yet a little
time, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: So does he support
the inclining faith of men concerning it with all reasonable assurances of it;
that what it will fully do at last, it may proportionably do now, if it be not
wilfully disbelieved and slighted.

CHAP. IX. Fourth Reason, expressing the Government of the World falling in
with Judgments.
WHen from the sins of men, and Gods Government over them, arise those reasons
of Judgment of so deep an Interest in his Righteousness and Goodness, as we
have already given, and shall yet add; it is no way dishonorable to God to
interpose this, as one account of Judgments, That he takes occasion from hence
to variegate his administration and providence, and to adorn that great Table
of Time with those mixed colors, which when seen at that true light we last
spoke of, will reflect the beauty of infinite understanding and wisdom, as in a
curious piece of Tapestry, the pleasure of which is its well placed diversity,
when we see it on the right side, and fully infolded; till then it may seem an
unskillful confusion. God, I say, takes advantage from the sins of men thus to
govern the world by his Judgments, not that there was any thing new to
Providence in the breaking out of sin, that it did not think of before: yet it
became the infinitely good and holy Creator to give the first model of things
answerable to himself, and when out of deep Counsel he determined to suffer a
perturbation, even then to undertake the guidance of those many cross and
unruly motions, that certainly fall out upon so great a disorder for the
further displays of his Eternal understanding. As the skill of the Painters
hand may be as great, and appear far greater, the sudden varieties giving an
advantage, and the difficulty enhansing the Art, when he draws a confusion,
then when he shadows an accomplished piece of order; and the prudence of a
Leader more known, when it turns it self to every accident, in a mutiny or
ungoverned medley, then when it leads a well-governed Army, and only keeps pace
with the known Rules of Military Discipline. It is first most natural to God to
rule, and to rule with infinite wisdom and goodness; next having permitted
things to distemper through the sin of man, to overruled that very distemper,
to set off the excellency of his own conduct by it: For when the sins of men
have brought it to that pass, that there must be Judgments, it is most worthy
of God, that by them the state of the world should be also managed, which if
that case had not been put, should have been conducted by mercy only. But now
Judiciary Providence is a bridle, that God puts into the mouth of humane
affairs, and turns about the whole body of them how furious and fiery soever:
It is a Helm with which he wheels about the most bulkie actions, and driven of
boisterous winds, raging and impetuous passions: It rolls down States and
Governments, and carries huge mountains of times and seasons before it.
Dominion is whirled about to several points; Monarchies are dashed in pieces,
that could have prescribed for themselves, and others rise out of their ashes.
He divides the Nations, and the everlasting Hills bow themselves; he weighs and
measures out Princes; he gives the Earth to whom he pleases; he shows his signs
and tokens in Heaven and Earth by his Judgments, and in these things none can
stay his hand either with power, seeing every thing depends upon him; nor by
reason or pleas of right, seeing all that he gave is forfeited back into his
hand by sin. Of this reason of Judgments Scripture is not at all silent, but
avows with highest confidence the translation of things according to the
pleasure of God, who works all things after the counsel of his will; who
created all things, and for whose pleasure they are and were created, and yet
he never moves them from their rest, but with just respects to sin; for he
takes pleasure in righteousness. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, and
his Throne, the Emblem of his Dominion, has its habitation as well in equity
as Judgment, and exercise of power.

CHAP. X. Fifth Reason, expressing the usefulness of Judgments to reform.
Sinai, and places them upon Mount Sion; like those precepts that were first
given with all circumstances of terror, and after adapted into the mildness
and gentleness of the Evangelick Law. For there is nothing wherein God is more
gracious to man, then in those advantages he gives him to return to a right
mind: when he takes those methods that are rough and severe in themselves, and
makes use of them for medicine, they lose whatever is hard and grievous in
them, and are even chusesable thus far, That it is more to be desired God
should chastise, and not hate us, then with a greater indignation and revenge
not be angry with us. It is better we should pass through his fire, then be
unpurged, and even boiled in his Cauldron, melted in his Furnace, and brayed in
his Mortar, then remain in our own impenitency, dross, and folly.

God the best as he is the greatest, in those things wherein he is most potent,
is also most benign, and therefore casts beams of his goodness upon his most
dreadful disposes: He made not the night without some beauties of the day. As
the Father of Heaven and Earth, and more peculiarly of the spirits of men, he
takes care of his offspring and family with the bowels of the Father of
mercies. But then as the infinite Holiness, as the Ruler and Judge of all the
world, he plants all his works, even of mercy, in righteousness: from both
which arise a discipline most conducible to the participations of his Holiness,
guiding us first by Rules, and after admonishing us by corrections, and
reducing us by chastisements, which are most proper acts of a paternal
Government.

This sweetens and mollifies those more awful respects he carries upon the
world, as supreme in his Dominion and Judgment, though even in those, it is
agreeable with increated mercy to leave nothing untryed and without its
experiment, that might conduce his Creatures; much more, as he governs the
world in a Mediator, all his relations to mankind are infinitely endeared and
made kinder by the presence of God with us.

While this reason of all others does most, not only vindicate, but addulce and
commend these severities of God to us, because it stands so fair with all his
Attributes, and level with the good of man, we will take a freer account of the
use of Judgments under it.

In the general we may understand, there is nothing in the works of God, so
thin or volatile, as for sight only, but would imbody and fix it self in use.
In Nature it self, those things which afford us only speculation, because we
have not the Mechanics of them in our own hand, nor any Engines to move them
with, are yet in their own place full of that common labor and industry
(Solomon speaks of) to serve the world, and by the screws of one thing upon
another, fastened on them in Creation, they are applied more effectually to
common ends, then those that are elaborated by our selves, and carried by our
endeavor and art to the private ends of our necessity and pleasure.

In Religion, the most mysterious parts of it, and which we think furthest
removed from action, are yet indeed the pillars of it, and richest springs of a
heavenly conversation; like the superior bodies, that being far above us, are
yet the source of all the vigor and fruitfulness of moral precepts, that, as
the Earth, are nearer us.

Judgments are yet most evidently designed for our practice; for (as we see)
all approaches of pain quicken to some kind of action, and discuss that
lethargick humor that benummes and deads us; nothing stands still to feel and
contemplate its own misery: and when this is understood to be the admensuration
of so knowing and just a hand as Gods, it calls us to acts that become us; and
while it calls us, it also excites us, and after a physical manner, disposes us
to those respects to his counsels and ends in administering punishment.
According to which Notion we shall propose our following meditation herein.

CHAP. XI. Of the Use true Reason may make of the assurance Sense has of the
Evils we call Judgments; and how far it may advance toward Christianity.
BEfore we enter upon the more direct powers of Judgment in order to practice,
let us see what will necessarily follow from Gods setting such a thing as
Adversity in the world, and what advantages to the Doctrine of Christianity, as
worthy all acceptance, will flow from this naked consideration by easy
inferences, as consectaries from Principles.

We will then take but thus much, that is most undoubted: That humane condition
is very obnoxious to unhappiness and misery, whether we consider it as united
into Communities, or broken into single persons. It is a great receipt of
trouble, man is born to it, as the sparks fly upward. All Histories, Ages,
Families, Persons, and Sects of men are agreed in this, because it is evident
to sense.

Our senses are those agents and emissaries of our Souls, that we most trust,
and in whose intelligence we most easily settle, and with least doubt. God has
therefore taken care Religion should have some foundation here, even in the
certain and unquestionable assurance of sense.

That it is appointed to all men once to dye, is a resolution of
unexceptionable experience; and upon this, Heathens have raised great
structures of moral wisdom and practice. That there is a world of creatures in
so great a variety, and yet framed with aspects upon, and subordinacies one to
another, is in no man's power to deny: all our senses bring us every moment
strong assurances of these things, like one post after another, that Skepticism
about them is but a ridiculous madness. How do these press to the
acknowledgment of a God! pestilences, famines, desolations by war, and the
miseries attending them, are such known things to us, that we cannot doubt. And
how do these urge to the awe of a Justice! For upon this indubitable Philosophy
of sense, fall in those common notions, wherein man is taught, by reading, what
is written in his heart. They come into the former, as light upon the Fabric
of the world, that shows us the use and ends of every thing, and invites to
action. And these have as ready an assent in man's Soul, and would have as
general an agreement of mankind in them, as the other, were it not that men
finding them in the way of their irreligious and sensual practice, are
necessitated to call them into question, as far as they can, and accuse them of
incertainty or falsehood, which first impeach their ways of folly, and condemn
them of wickedness. For the Law is a continual grief to them that are out of
the way. From hence discourses to the dishonor of such awful Hests have a
pleasingness, and give advantage to those that affect a reputation by
dissenting from the most received Principles, to speak of them, as if they were
the common cheats into which the herd of people are either driven, or abused;
while they to whose lives such Harangues are set, cannot indeed believe what
they seem to admire so much. But when we consider, the great sentiments of
Religion have their truest reverence for their relation to another world; and
few think, but that the present might be well enough managed without them,
being altogether careless of the other: It is not to be conceived, how they are
continued so certain among men in spite of the combination against them, if
they had not an evidence in man's Soul, past the cunning of any design possibly
to infuse or remove. Not to mention the exotic Characters of them in those
parts which have had no commerce with the learned world, most reasonably to be
suspected of such artifice.

But we will first reason upon that acknowledgment, which bears no difference
of opinion: That is,

There are such universal unhappinesses in the world, which comprehend greatest
Powers, and Bodies of men, besides those that grasp more frequently, and with
greater liberty, private families and persons. Touching which we will also
suppose a while, that they are no more then certain revolutions and
conjunctions, or but the play and sport of things against humane condition.

And raising things no higher then thus, yet we shall find so much toward God
and Christianity, even hereby introduced, upon but a wise and manly computation
of things, that will make the rest much more easy, and surprise us with the
reasonableness of the whole beyond imagination, that sense could have
contributed so much to Religion. For what man of Soul can deny, but that seeing
all worldly things are so inconstant, and so often adverse; humility,
indifferency to the world, and the happiness of it; sobriety, a temperate use
of all things, contentment with our condition, patience, are virtues created
even of necessity? and if these were admitted and received in their full
strength, how easy would the ascent from them to the higher Principles of
Religion be? He that is thus initiated, would find freer approach to the
mystery of Godliness, and take the Dye of it by being thus colored first.

And yet, except we shall count all but dream and mistake, that ever has risen
from the Soul and sense of mankind; except there be no such things as reason
and discourse, these things must be received. And surely the operations of our
minds concerning them, are as plain, and commanding, as that we have bodies,
and that they have motion, and are subject to such impressions as they are.

Let us further argue herein, leaving out still the supposition of a God and
his Judgments: And what can we take instead of what I have proposed, but the
Sensualists, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye; let us crown our
selves with Rose-buds before they be withered; that is, let us ruffle as high
as we can in all manner of pleasure and sensual fruition how impure soever,
while we have season, and in a moment go down to the dead: Let us take the
mirth and jollity the present time affords, not fore-stalling unhappiness with
preconceipts of it; and when worse comes, let us bear it as well as we can, but
throw from us all those fantomes of a mind or virtuous consideration, as if
they were only air, and breath for their truth, and of no service to man, but
to torture and deprive him of all enjoyment.

Now this does so violently despoil a man of all he can be supposed to have an
understanding given him for, and turns him into the condition of a beast, that
it cannot seem credible, man should have powers given him, and possibilities of
consideration above such a state, and nothing at all to do with them. We see in
all other creatures their action and their powers are equal, except we could
imagine, that beasts have phansies and contemplations of things of a higher
state then their own.

But who that has not forfeited all sober face, dares own so brutish a life,
who does not detest such a debasement of reason, that it should either have
nothing to do, or no more then sense can do in the Beasts?

Yet lest this should be too much to be consident upon, we will only say, There
is a great disposition in the mind and Soul of man, that is never so little
opened and unfolded by ingenuity, education, or observation of it self, to
improve it, and compose it self by reason to an excellency standing in virtue
and magnanimity, to cast the accounts of evil, public or private; and to
secure it self first by moderation and withdrawment from all these outward
things; then by the better enrichments of self with knowledge and goodness:
lastly, to flanck it self with patience and resolution, that it may be defended
on every side against whatever can befall it on the right hand or the left.

That men of Philosophy have flown this pitch without any tincture of
Christianity, or color of the Doctrine of the Scriptures upon them, is enough
known: That they have discoursed of greatning their spirits against all
assaults of Fortune, of constancy of mind raised upon the confidence of a man's
native excellency, and domestic riches, out of the reach of all extern
disorder, those writings of theirs so much magnified, and worn by every hand,
testify.

Furthermore, seeing every man feels within him an Impetus to pursue that
firstborn desire to be happy; he that goes about it considerately, must needs
find, There can be no such thing as happiness in the outward man, whose
condition is subject to every change.

The room of the body is indeed too narrow and close, the receipts of it too
dark and pent, to entertain so great a presence as happiness; but besides this,
the accesses are too open to pain and misery, the sound and noise of all kind
of disturbance is ever about it, and one time or other the things crowd in upon
it. But happiness is even, and all alike; it is a consistency, a perpetuity, or
nothing: A perpetuity, that at this time we date not into Eternity, but allow
that to be so, which fills up its own measure, and runs out to its own utmost
length; that in this case we allow to be so, that is commensurate with the
present life and being in the world. But it is impossible to preclude the
pressures of evil from this moment; for no man can tell how soon a disease bred
within his own walls, shall wage a war against him, and blast all his
contentments; how immediately a violence from without shall rob him of what
most pleases him. Whoever then will lodge any such thing as a felicity within
himself, must retire it into this appartment of his Soul, and himself
sequestered from body, and dissolved from it, must retreat into spirit, that he
may enjoy it: He must forsake all things beyond the line of mind, and looking
upon them as the daily prey of every contingent, be wholly unconcerned what
becomes of them; though he uses them while they are to be had, yet with
greatest indifferency, coolness, and freedom from them, and even then despising
them, when he seems to enjoy them. He must bear the strokes of evil with that
part alone upon which they fall, and never let them touch his mind. In the mean
time he must raise and ennoble his Soul, and carry all kind of treasure into
it, that is proper for it; he must fortify, and environ it on every side with
courage and longanimity; he must watch, that it be not betrayed by lust or
inordinate affection, nor made weak and false by such correspondencies which do
not only open an avenue to suffering, but leave a guilt behind them; of which,
though we suppose no higher Judge then himself, yet the reverence he owes to
his own authority, and the severity he feels from himself, when that is
offended, obliges him to innocence.

Thus while he has a being in the world, he maintains it in peace and
greatness; first not taken and decoyed out of himself by the general applause
of pleasures, riches, and honors, he hears in the world; nor sunk below
himself, when he finds any of these gone, whose service he accepted, so as to
be well without them, though he did not morosely refuse them, but either when
through their own inconstancy they change their master, or are compelled to
leave him; he is yet the same he was, living in himself, and supplied in all
things by himself: For he has taken the elevation of every thing in the world,
and of his own Being; he has set down the incertainty of these things, and
therefore he is not amazed at what he expected; he has taken the estimate of
wisdom and virtue, and finds them invaluable in their price, unmovable in
their nature; his business is therefore to fabricate his mind for them: These
are his happiness, that do not feel the pain of a disease, the cruelty of a
sword, the pinches of a famine; his Soul is the Cabinet of them, that nothing
from without can either find or touch, while it keeps it self distinct, and
alone from the body, which it visits by a necessary charity and care of it, but
dares not mix with it, lest it first be insecured with its lusts, and after
infected with its misery.

Thus has Reason in the dark, and unenlightned by Sacred Truth, selt out
happiness, and having enough from sense, that it could not be out of the Soul,
has placed it within. But if there be no better state beyond this life, who
feels not a compassion, that such a man as has been described, must dye; that
so great a Soul that can protect it self, while it is in motion and action,
must yet be suppressed by death; that he whose reason and magnanimity endures
the torture, must yet be silenced and stupefied by Fate! Who does not wish that
Soul should outlive that body in a perfecter state, that lived now so much
above and beyond it? Yea, who would not desire that that Soul that had so well
commanded a body, should have a glorious one to shine in, and that out of the
ashes of that body in which such a Soul dwelt, and taught it virtue, another
more perfect should rise?

In the mean time, would not just cause of complaint arise, if Fortune or a
blind course of things, should have any dispose of, but the outside of such a
man? Who would not desire there should be a God, who with skill first exercises
virtue into a luster, and then rewards it? Who that has any love to virtue,
would not bewail it, if there were no other difference between virtue and vice,
then what is seen here; and rejoice in an Eternal Judgment that would
illustrate and crown it? Who would not wish virtue ennobled with the love of so
blessed a Being as God, and that it should be made more considerable by
pleasing him; that it should be enriched by the knowledge of Jesus Christ, so
great an Exemplar of it in our nature; that it should be assisted by the
blessed Spirit of Grace, without which it cannot sustain it self? And who that
behaves himself thus in the world (as we have described) can but think the
Principles of Christianity would best fit his purpose and manner of life, and
therefore be willing to espouse them? For though this we have insisted upon, be
all a man can do, and that he must do to retain any thing o^ the honor of a
man; it is yet but poor and unhappy, if separated from the hopes and promises
of immortality, very jejune and cold, when alone; virtue without Christianity
is but like the temporary and perishing things of the world, that make a blaze,
and then go out. Though that of virtue be the purest, yet it is as soon
quenched by death; and while it is, it wants much of the true alloy and reason:
For so great an object of goodness, whom continually to love and adore, so
great a Spectator and Judge, so gracious a Father of Spirits, and their
excellent endowments, as God, makes as great a difference in these things, as
the light of the Sun does in the world, compared with the light of the Moon;
and as the influences of the one surpass those of the other, so do the virtues
falling from the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, excel those chiller
irradiations of Moral Disciplines, when separated from Diviner Fire.

But we have thus far argued from the sentiments of Morality upon Sense, that
we might from thence conclude; Seeing there is no security for man in his
compounded state of Body and Soul, and that yet the appetite of man contends
toward happiness with so much earnestness, he must either be a beast stifling
all motions but of sense, and the just present satisfaction; so that he may
enjoy himself, when things are well, and suffer as a beast, when evil falls
upon him, without any agitation of a mind: or else he must be an Angel,
removing his chief interests out of the body.

This wise men, without any suspicion of subordination from Christianity,
confessed, and therefore the ground on which true Religion states all things,
must needs be to Morality, that is not sullen and prejudiced, the most
acceptable: For sagest Ethics (guided by Christ indeed, as Cyrus by God,
though they knew him not) acknowledged this conclusion of the matter, That
there must be some higher end of men then the body, and that all his condition
must be resigned to that; and hereupon waded as far as they could into those
deeper Doctrines of the Immortality of the Soul, a Judgment, a future state,
besides that which was much opener to them, the acknowledgment of the First
Being, God.

Now he that upon these grounds dies to his flesh to live in his Soul, is not
far from the Kingdom of God and Christ; which teaches a man to deny himself,
and sow his present life to let it dye as a grain of wheat, which except it
dye, abides alone (that is) can never be any more then it is, but loses it self
at last; whilst that which submits it self to a short death, in expectation of
a better resurrection, propagates it self to Eternity.

The assurances of Everlasting life at the end, and in the mean time that no
imaginable thing, either height or depth, life or death, what is present or to
come, shall separate from that love of God in Christ, which makes more then a
Conqueror in all, are true grounds of the happiness of man, and only sufficient
herein.

All these Christianity has the honor to reveal, and yet Morality has so
great need of to impe it self with, that if it were it self alone, it must
needs adore this Revelation; however as it is blended in men with corruption of
Nature, and planted among those roots of bitterness that spring up and defile
it, it may profess an emnity; yet certainly as those Heathen Princes paid a
reverence to that God that had foretold their successes by his Prophets, so it
is impossible but all wise use of reason must needs say of the Doctrine of
Christ, There is a divine thing in it, seeing it does not only establish the
same rules of life with that reason, but advances the encouragements of them to
the very Heavens.

CHAP. XII. Of the much higher Elevation of Reason into Christianity, received
from the improvement of innate and revealed Principles concerning Judgments.
HItherto we have from evidence of sense stated things, as if man finding them
in a posture generally adverse to him, were by his own wisdom and virtue to
make the best of himself, and to rise by it, as much above the condition of the
creatures below him, as his understanding exceeds theirs: and discoursing thus,
we have fathomed the excellencies of Christian Religion, without which Morality
sinks very low. But we come now into a debate upon those Principles ingraffed
in man's heart, heightened by the Word of God, even as the sensitive Soul is
elevated by the presence of the rational; or as the reason is advanced by the
Spirit of God inhabiting it, viz. That there is a God, an Eternal condition,
that all calamities upon humane Nature are from God and his Justice for sin.

And who that is wise would leave so strong a sense as his Soul has of these
things, unsatisfied, unanswered? Or why should a man be truly dealt with by his
eye and ear, his taste and touch, and that common sense that weilds them, and
deceived by that inward intelligence, his mind? Why should it be true, there
are wars, plagues, etc. and that these are grievous and destructive; and not be
true, that God punishes by them? Sense is sure of the one, innate reason of the
other; the reports of which are as confident and earnest, and if heeded, most
prevailing and effective: For as the universality of men believe sense about
its own objects, so do they acknowledge these Principles even against
themselves, when in their evil actions they wander from them. If evil practice
be taken for an argument against good Principles, why is not self-condemnation
for that evil practice, a much stronger argument on their side, especially
seeing it is taken for no sufficient Plea against assurance of sense, that men
most considerable disbelieve it, and act contrary to it (wherein it pretends
beyond it self against truer dictates) that they may obey the sadder resolves
of their minds? Or who that is any thing suspicious and examinative, as every
man in this wilderness of things has reason to be, would be careless of so
valuable and reverend a Record as the Word of God? which he sees so great and
wise a part of men for several Ages, have had such an awe of, and found so
great an efficacy in. Every one conscious of reason in himself, cannot but
attend to him that speaks gravely and rationally, and think him worthy to be
heard, and the more, when he knows he is esteemed and attended to by those of
whom he is bound to think, if he have understanding himself, they have it also.
But most of all in this case, he has cause to beware how he despises, when he
converses with that so venerable a representation of things, that vouches it
self to be divine, and is so received by so great and grave an Assembly, as the
Church of God in all Ages; into which if he patiently and seriously inquire,
and advise with it, he shall find such an august presence of truth in it, that
he must needs acknowledge more then humane. For as men print their Souls, and
the strength of reason they carry, into their writings, and he that reads them
intelligently, traces the sagacity of that mind that moved in them, gilding its
own paths; so is the wisdom of God to be found in his Word, and that power and
sense of man's Soul that judges of things divine, as reason in general does of
rational, will say, God is in it of a truth.

Let us then observe the Oracles of our own minds, and those livelier of the
Scripture concerning Judgments, and what must necessarily be inferred from them.

First, it is plain from hence, affliction has no root of its own, nor does it
rise up out of the dust; it is not only the unavoidable clash of things one
against another, but all the unhappiness and pain that is in the world, must be
an administration of an infinite Righteousness and Power, who has all the
organs of evil in his own power, aad no instrument of it is out of his hand.
This is the present resolve of man's mind: For as the Soul of man can rise no
higher in its thoughts, or surmises of any thing or Being then to God; so if it
be not stupefied, as in senseless ignorant men, or stopped and forced to be
quiet, as in the Atheist, it cannot rest, but searches and soars, and mounts it
self, till it comes to something infinite, perfect, divine; and when it is come
thither, it most plainly professes it can go no further, it being impossible to
exceed absolutely perfect and infinite.

Thus it is in the general, and thus it is in this particular case, viz. in the
quest it makes after the highest cause of evil, it cannot stay till it
discovers God; it cannot be still lower, nor stir higher then him; the
under-scale of things serves only to lead up to him.

For though all things are indeed formidable from their power to hurt; yet if
they cannot move themselves, but are guided by a superior hand, we must go up
to that, ere we understand the head of our unhappiness: when we find this to be
God, who is a Being infinitely good, we know he afflicts not willingly, he is
displeased and angry because of sin, which puts the Soul into a necessary agony
of seeking reconcilement with him.

The being of man is so lovely to him, that he cannot but desire to preserve
it; and yet the well-being of this being is so much more desirable, that he had
rather quit it, then retain it miserable: From hence arise those fears and
suspicions we have of every thing, which our reason and experience tell us can
do us injury: but our greatest fear must needs be of the greatest evil, the
wrath of God. For it is the fear of a power above us, that can reach us at
pleasure, that is always present to us, that comprehends all ways of
punishment, so that it cannot be prevented or impeded, nor can we save any
thing from it: when a man draws out himself to a longer Being, and finds
himself consigned for Eternity, the knowledge of God eternal in his wrath,
continues his fears to that Eternity; there being the subject and principle of
this wrath coaeval.

It is palpably vain to enter a Covenant with little and petite powers of evil,
to make our peace by, when this greatest is insecured; whose power is, as the
Heavens to the Earth, that flows round about it, and compasses it every way.
But when a man is at peace with God, the whole body of evil is settled,
commanded, and composed.

The Scripture therefore to correct our vain fears, and to guide that passion
or affection of fear aright, goes down to the very center of it, and with
truest wisdom explains to us the great object of it, God, and that first Mover
of all misery, his wrath and displeasure, the suspension of which is the quiet
of the world, the removal of it our eternal consolation.

It is therefore of greatest necessity we make our peace with him; for then we
have a league with all: before this every whisper and rustle, every noise of
danger alarms our quiet; yea, the very surmises we have of unknown powers,
those very unshapely and inconsistent suspicions affright us, because we are so
placed, that we are ever offered at by danger; the waves are always rolling
toward us, and we can never be truly quiet, till we are reconciled to him, who
says to these proud waters, Hither shall ye go, and no further.

Reconcilement with God lies in a most wise and ponderous method of things; for
he being the highest reason, and not a force or power only, the purest Holiness
and Righteousness, and not a mere irresistible strength, our safety stands in
agreement with those Attributes, according to which he governs every thing, and
seeing he is also infinite in beneficence and Grace, we have the advantage of
all expectations from that Grace, either as it is impressed upon our minds,
together with the apprehensions we have of a God, or more clearly discovered in
the Gospel; the declarations of which are always ready to unite with those
secret intimations in man's Soul, conveyed thither for this very purpose.

The fundamental peace of a man lies in his conformities to God in Holiness and
Goodness, without which it is hardly possible for it so much as to imagine its
peace after cold consideration of it, there being no overthrowing so deep a
sense, as conscience has of this; for it arises from the most intimate
persuasions we have of God, as a Nature infinitely pure, and those we have also
of our own Souls, whose due perfection and accomplishment is a participation of
the divine Nature, or likeness; and therefore from the correlation between God
and the Soul, flows that pertinacious exaction of the Soul from it self, that
it be good and holy, that it may have peace with God.

But because the Soul finds so much disorder and contrariety in it self to that
awful Law, so many transgressions against it, that cannot be undone; it can
have no rest here, but needs something that may countervail that guilt within
it. There can be none so convenient, so great and potent, as the pardoning
mercy of God in Jesus Christ, who by his obedience to death in our Nature,
carries up the supreme forgiveness of God.

Yet this not exhausting that Principle and persuasion of the Soul, that it
must be inwardly good; it is most necessary the Doctrine of pardon by a Savior
should be filled with a spirit and influence of Holiness, that this grace may
not seem prostituted as an indulgence to sin.

Thus the foundations of our peace stand upon the free Grace of God, and
sincerity of Holiness, as an evidence we are within the compass of that Grace:
To assure which, the very same Spirit of Holiness, alone able to diffuse the
comforts of this peace, comes in and anoints the Soul with the Joy of it, till
it enters into the full possessions of Salvation, which is the final acquittal
from evil.

Evil may in the mean time be used for chastisement, and higher inticement to
Holiness, but loses its sting, when that Justice that armed it, is satisfied.

Thus a man acting upon the Principles of his own mind, when he finds himself
oppressed with evil, is led into the Doctrine of Christianity; for observing
the handwriting upon himself, he reads God the Author of affliction; hence
flows the sense of sin, since God afflicts not without cause: sense of sin and
the displeasure of God upon it, makes it necessary to inquire after the
Doctrine of pardon and repentance. These are no where in their Oriency, but in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ: The Doctrine of pardon and peace carry a man into
expectations of good from God. This being not found here, the Soul is sent to
the promises of Eternal life, made known and brought to light by Christ. These
give joy in tribulations, and hope of the Glory of God. This crowns the Soul,
and sets it triumphant over all evil in the world.

Less then this can give us no true sense or construction of the great miseries
of our condition, nor with reason cluck us out of them into so much as the
discourse of lasting rest and safety.

The Soul of man so busy as it is, first to inquire the reasons of its
unhappiness, then to find the remedies of it, has great advantage of accepting
that truth which tells it all that is within it concerning these things, and
explains them so far, that it finds it self at the very utmost ends of these
wonders, and to have as much made known of them, as is to be known.

Thus out of the eater comes forth meat and sweetness, out of evil considered
by the mind of man, either acting its own reason, and securing it self the best
it can against what it cannot remove, or turning it self upon those Principles
ingraffed within it, that lead it to the source and Antidotes of misery: Both
which convey it to the Discipline of Jesus Christ, as the true relief of humane
condition, and its infelicity.

CHAP. XIII. Of the more direct operations of Judgments toward Reformation;
wherein first of the efficacy they have in confining Sensuality, and setting
free Conscience, and its proper Motions.
LEt us now approach the considerations of the more immediate powers of
Judgment.

1. They give a notable rebuke and abatement to sense, and the sensual temper;
Judgments trouble all the air sensuality has to breathe in, and make it dark;
they pour out their vial upon its Sun, and a night ensues, so that it every
where meets terror and disappointment, which bring it low, and enfeeble it.
Now this is that sensuality that over-grows at once the proper motions of a
Soul and Conscience, and that spiritual world, with which the converses of a
spirit most properly lie. When this is wind-bound, and brought to an ebb,
either through the hand of God upon the body, the primary seat of it, or those
external objects that feed and minister to it, immediately the mind that lay in
a swoon, and oppressed, emerges, and rises up. It has its opportunity, and
uses its freedom; through the great clefts and rents the strokes of God make in
this vail and cloud, the Soul espies the spiritual world, the shadow of the
material one removing off by reason of these commotions caused by Judgments.

The great accounts of man's sin and impenitency lie in the deep plunges and
immersions of his Soul into sense, and sensual things, wherein he grows
immoderate above the beasts, through the vigours of an immaterial and immortal
Spirit dissevered from its true objects and natural motions, and carried down
this stream: From whence retaining all its own force, but misguided, it grows
extremely foul, while it at once neglects heavenly and spiritual things for
which it was made, boldly transgresses all rules of goodness, and cuts its way
through every thing to its impure satisfactions.

The light that is true and pure, is kept from all approach to it, and its own
native exercise is suppressed; whence it comes to pass, that God and Eternal
things are covered from it, and as it were wholly blotted out, it lives in the
unclean pleasures of the body, which have all the influence and sway upon it.

But awakened by the Judgments of God, the Soul inquires after its own world,
and meets it every where; God having graciously disseminated it into every
thing within it, and without it, even as the open eye in the day time, greets
the light where ever it goes.

That great deal of sensual noise and business, being made to cease, the false
light being put out, and the windows, out of which lust looks, dammed up, the
Soul has nothing else to do; it finds leisure then to do like it self, and is
even provoked to it by its own force, carrying it always upon action, and when
it is taken off from that to which it is only inclaved, it returns upon its
proper motion; when the noises of Chariots and their jumping wheels, the sounds
of music, the light of candles, as in the overthrow of Cities, are removed, in
that stilness Conscience is heard; in that silence of foolish fires, purer rays
shine upon the Soul: For the beams of truth, and the distinct voice of it fall
every where, were there but an eye and ear to receive and take them in. On the
other side, the capacities of the Soul are always fitted to them, and were they
not importuned, and encumbered by other things, they would be continually
opening to, and earnestly expecting them. Heavenly light and knowledge, like
God and his Providence, is both within by its intimate diffusion of it self,
and without every thing in the world by its own unmeasurableness, and so cannot
be covered; but because those organs that are to observe, and work by it, are
disabled, and turned another way, and because men use every art, and make all
kind of vails and shuts between themselves and this spiritual light, the
Judgments of God make a collision upon the faculties of the Soul, upon which
the sparks hid within fly out, and there is a forced kind of light, in order
to that which is more natural and continuing; a great flame often arising out of
this little fire.

Although if the heart of man were not so thick in its insensibleness of God,
and the powers of it that should tend toward him, afar off from him, there
were no such violence necessary in the case: But things being as they are,
there can be no fairer opportunity presented to man to recover himself out of
the snare of sensual things, or the profound launches of his Soul into them,
then these severities of affliction, which bridle the appetite in himself, and
render ungrateful, or remove out of his reach the very things he lusts after;
for if the pain be in the body, the Soul is filled with so dolorous a
resentment from it, that nothing appears fair to it; when man is chastened with
pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain, his Soul
abhors bread, and his life dainty meats. If the Judgment of God lies on the
pleasures of sense without, it immediately enters within, through the famine
that presses, or through the very anguish inflicted upon it by the contrariety
of natural causes; so that either way, it is made to sit alone and keep
silence. In which interval rush in the thoughts of God, and the obedience we
owe to him; a sense that we are made for greater things; the excellency of
peace with God, and likeness to him; our relation to Eternity: in all which lie
the most potent arguments to goodness, which when they meet upon an irregular
and unreformed estate, fill the Soul with the sorrow that works into
repentance, and a zeal of recovering it self to a better condition.

For the inconvenience that sense feels in these pressures, when the goodness
of God is retreated, and the hand of his displeasure stretched out, is so
great, that it enters into the very reason, and provokes that to inquire the
cause; even as the delights of sense distill upon the mind, and close it up in a
soft slumber, and in apprehensiveness of it self, and what is truly its
interest, fascinated with other pleasures: In the mean time it exacts of it,
all its sagacity and vigor to be employed in continuing and enlarging those
fruitions: So the discontents of the same sense pierce into the Soul, and
putting it into an agony, call it up to another kind of exercise, the
consideration of the complaints it offers.

Now though while the bed was easy, it was content to lie down, and forget
every thing; yet when it misses of this, and grows full of losses, and is set
to examine how this comes to pass, by degrees it returns like the Prodigal in
want to it self. Its first inquiries and determinations stay as long as they
can upon natural causes; it undertakes and endeavors to solve things upon
those Principles: but being urged by the case it self, and its own temper to
search further, it is sent from one thing to another, till within the inmost
fold of things, it finds a divine Justice, and upon it is resolved into a
conscience, and lays together the great obligations of repentance and
humiliation.

By this light a man has quite another sense of sin, and the evil of it; those
actions he passed so favorably or carelessly upon, have much a more ghastly and
dreadful appearance. Thus God excites a man to take a just account, and make a
righteous judgment of his own actions, and to call that into suspicion he never
questioned before. It is meet to be said unto God under chastisement, I have
done iniquity, but will offend no more. That which I see not, teach thou me. He
searches and tryes his ways, that he may turn to God.

For Judgments carrying with them the most close and sensible instructions of
the displeasure of God, convey also the quickest reasons of self-examination,
of repentance, and change of a man's course, to those who are neither sunk down
to a brutish or Pharaoh-like impenitency, nor risen up to the more heroic
state of one choosing Holiness for it self, and not of love. For man having an
affection of fear, it is impossible he should not turn it upon that which is
most dreadful, when it appears to him; or that that fear should not excite him
to the removal of the danger; the first of which is founded in that Law of
Nature, that every affection turns to the supreme object understood with
greatest intention; the second in that of self-preservation: For the first, it
is certain the wrath of God is most terrible, it being most commanding, and
pursues a man beyond the most formidable of evils, death, which is therefore
so, because in the opinion of Nature it swallows all sense of Being; now sense
of Being is the foundation of pleasure and delight: but this keeps a man in the
jaws of that second death, which eternally ruminates upon him. Our Savior
spoke highest reason; Fear not them that kill the body, and have no more that
they can do; but I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, Fear him, that after
he has killed, has power to cast into hell: I say unto you, Fear him. For the
removal of this danger, there is nothing conscience is more authoritative in
then this, There can be no firm at onement with God, nor so much as expectation
of good from him without repentance or reformation; it ever appearing most
unreasonable to it, that God should give any ear to him that regards iniquity
in his heart.

To conclude this; conscience that is the most vigorous of all a man's powers,
being collected and congregated of the strength of all, and acting upon those
Principles that every man knows to be the most concerning, if true; and instead
of demonstration for the truth of its grounds, has this advantage, that they
are deeply rivetted into the heart, so that though there may be a stupefaction,
yet there can be no obliteration. Against this stupefaction Judgments come,
making legible those Characters which at other times we dissemble, and are as
the fire to some sort of writing, that makes apparent what was not before
discerned.

CHAP. XIV. Of Sense of particular Sins effected by by Judgments.
2. UNder Judgments there is a sense of particular sins, which reverberated
upon the Soul by it self, thus encouraged and inlivened by the presence of a
divine Justice assisting it, is of all things most astonishing, prostrates the
Soul, and submits it to any terms of obedience in hope of Grace.

A man thus affected, feels the deadly stroke in that strength of his Soul,
that is to bear him up in every infirmity (that is) the spirit of a man, which
when it is wounded, what can uphold it, that it self carried all?

This is the power that poises every evil, and judges of the spring from which
it rises, the extent of its virtue, the effects and ends it is to reach: And
then compares with the evil the strength that is necessary to oppose it, the
means of prevention, the proper allays in enduring it, if it cannot be avoided,
the efficacies of removal; according to all which, that native courage and
resolution keeps it self upright, and sinks not under the evil. But what can it
do? when the evil is so great, that there is no match between all that the Soul
can find either to protect or rescue it, and that this very spirit of it falls
split, as with a shaft of Thunder, is so dissolved and melted, that it is ready
to take any new shape, having no further consistency in that, formerly its own.

Now it is most evident, an infinite wrath is too great for allay or remedy,
too constant for removal; all valor and resolution against an infinite evil,
is first madness and foolish hardiness, before it comes, and when it is felt,
either softens into extreme despondency, or rages into despair.

That which breaks the spirit of a man thus, is not yet simply the evil, or the
infiniteness of it, but its failure in that which is its strength, viz.
innocence and freedom from guilt; without which it can never be truly great,
and when it finds the want of this, it sinks oppressed with its own weight.

Judgments are like the Rack to the Soul, which work it to unbosom it self
within it self, as men are tortured into the confessions that they would else
most earnestly have suppressed. Joseph's brethren at such a time confessed among
themselves the sin they had so long hid from their own Souls as well as others.

Thus rise up particular sins, leading into the universal foulness and
obnoxiousness of the whole state, so that if a man should offer to retire into
himself, he feels he is pursued into his very heart, and yet finds no Sanctuary
there, when he would be quiet in his innocence, and that is gone; this is the
profoundest abasement of a man.

Thus God girds us with our sins, and fills our bowels with our guilt, and even
soaks our bones with our wickedness, as with oil, till all we endure is no less
our own Justice upon our selves then Gods.

This begets in a man earnestest desires of mercy from him, without whom we
cannot be merciful to our selves: This makes repentance and returns to
goodness, as necessary to the Soul for its peace with it self, as it is for its
peace with God.

For all the sentences of God, when ever they come into execution, propagate
themselves, and beget the very same in the sinner himself; who if he could but
comfort himself with his integrity, would with far more ease suffer from a
power above him, though injust to him.

A virtuous man conscious of nothing, but rectitude and sincerity, stands
unshaken in that, and values his untainted mind above the Tyrants spotted
greatness, however he lie at the power of it. But whither should he fly, that
feels so great a severity from himself, but out of himself into the arms of
mercy, and to the re-innocency of repentance?

Into the arms of that mercy which is superior to the natural compassion of a
man to himself, and to that re-innocency of repentance, the only refuge of the
Soul when vexed, and pursued with its guilt, and the self-abhorrencies
springing from it, which make it intolerably weary of its own thoughts, and
retorted looks upon its state.

That supreme Goodness, that first drives a man out of his sins by these
interior perplexities into the necessities of repentance (for who can endure
himself in that foulness his eye is continually upon?) has also prepared the
same repentance to be the pleasant and consolatory retirement of it, in which
it returns into a reconciliation with it self, even as with God through Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. XV. Of Judgments exciting Prayer.
3. ALL anguishes of the Soul, either from its outward trouble, or those
internal afflictions from the sense of sin, do most naturally run out into
Prayer and address to God. Whosoever gives them not that vent, restrains and
forcibly imprisons so free and inclinable a motion of his own Soul. These
desires toward God and his mercy, when they are cloistered in sullen and
irreligious breasts, like strong liquors confined against their will, or like
the earnest winds that cannot endure their prison, find some outlet to
themselves, so that sometimes unawares, sometimes extorted invocations of
highest goodness, have come from them who have studiously compressed those
their most genuine sentiments; but not only from the truly humble and religious
breast, but even from unprejudiced Nature they have much a greater liberty, and
take their free course. Now no man's Soul goes out to God for relief in misery,
but it has some considerations of those great Principles that make such a
motion reasonable, and of such attendants of these desires that may make the
address to God decent and honorable: All which concenter in the necessary
change of the heart and life. If he that wrought a miracle in Christ's Name
could not lightly speak evil of him, with how great an impropriety does that
man approach God and his Goodness, who intends a continued defiance to him by
his sins? How does he bran down that sense of divine mercy leading to
repentance, the consideration of which gives him leave to hope well from God?

This then shows the advantage of affliction, in which these motions of the
Soul to God are as natural as the very desires of relief simply considered; all
are ready to visit God in affliction, and to pour out a prayer when his
chastning is upon them. God makes no doubt of a very bad sort of men, that in
their affliction they will seek him early: It being the highest act of
impenitency Daniel complains of in his time, and the seventh seal of their
Judgment, that they made not their prayer to God, that they might turn from
iniquity, and understand his truth. The powers of men's Souls are never in a
more fading condition, nor their sins in greater violence then when they call
not upon God, nor stir up themselves to take hold of him.

CHAP. XVI. A Recollection of this Discourse to its proper purpose.
THis Discourse of the efficacies of Judgment, we have so placed, that it is
most applicable to particular persons; but when they have a due effect there,
^hey do from single breasts conspire into a general air, especially when they
affect the hearts of personages that are of power and example, from them they
result upon whole bodies of people, and give at least some tincture to the
state of times, that they become more sober, and of a better inclination. For
there is apparently a Genius and temper of an Age, even as there is of persons,
and a common constitution of a Nation, as of one man, which is also capable of
such kind of alterations in Morality, as in single men, which are produced by
the Cardinal changes that fall out in and upon them.

Yet seeing no man can determine what this will be (that is) whether the Age he
lives in will be reformed by Judgments, when it has so far corrupted, as to
make it self the seat of them: seeing these general amendments grow not upon
private men, nor so much as upon lesser fraternities, except as they meet in
greater incorporations, or spring from the highest branches of Principality,
which as in the tree inverted, are indeed the roots of all public
associations, and most often of their manners.

That being then uncertain to us that is out of our power, it is good for every
man to look well to the state of his own Soul; that if he find not any
exemption from the common evil, yet he may be enrolled in eternal mercies,
which is a Cabinet always removed from the possibilities of danger: and indeed
these powerful operations of Grace are most designed to the eternal happiness
of man, even when they pass through these austerer methods, wherein God is very
good; for if he takes the present state, and moulds it any way for our
everlasting peace and life, it is an act of infinite mercy. All true goodness
has its present use in this world; it honors God, makes the best composure of
the Soul, offers a blessing to the world now; but it does not like the
creatures of time, determine it self here: It does not as those faint things
breathe out and dye, but shines a light in the world, keeping the most perverse
and crooked generation from utter darkness, and is at last translated from
hence to a higher Orb of Glory and eternal luster, but never suffers
extinction.

No man then loses by his reformation, or the good effect of evil, though
through general obstinacy in wicked ways, the Judgment goes on, and he dies in
the common calamity; for to fit men for enjoyment of prosperity here, is but a
contingent end of affliction, eternal blessedness is only certain to it.

While good men are thus provided for, the refractoriness of the Age or other
particular persons, is no disproof of the usefulness of Judgments, any more
then that many dye under the methods of Physic, is an argument against so
worthy a Science. When men under the hand of God have nothing worthy repentance
rising in them, it is deadly. As when a Physician purges, yet the distemper
continues, and the blood is still impure after frequent Phlebotomy; for it
argues all is discust, the whole mass is corrupted, and nothing to be purged,
but what is it self; for impurity still swims up after all evacuations. God is
weary of striking impenitents in order to a cure; they must dye as those in
whom Nature has no resistance to make against the prevailing distemper; the
whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, and those powers perished, that
should be aided by medicine: The principles of recovery that are as the handles
by which God apprehends the Soul, are lost by great obdur^cies in sin, and men
dye like beasts under those strokes, of which they understand no more, then
that they oppress them.

This is that irremediable malady of sin, whereof Nations and persons dye, and
are written upon, as Ahaz that trespassed more under Gods hand, This is that
King Ahaz.

CHAP. XVII. An Inquiry into the Freedom of God in his distribution of
Judgments; with a solution of doubts concerning it.
WE have thus far endeavored to speak the reason of Scripture, touching the
Judgments of God, which are all holy, just, and good, faithful to his own
Glory, and the true interest of the world. There remains nothing within our
present intention, that may either establish, or clear from the objections
raised against it, this grand Position, That all the evils we endure are
righteous Judgments of God; but to reconcile with it the liberty and
arbitration God uses in over-looking and passing by some times and persons that
are free from those strokes, upon which yet the main reasons of Judgments we
have assigned, are concurrent.

This is first to be resolved into the uncontrollable Counsel of God, who
gives no such account of his matters; but that his paths are still hid in the
Sea, and his footsteps in the great waters. This we know, he is righteous in
all his ways, and holy in all his works, what he does is therefore to conclude
our thoughts; who being but upon the skirts and borders of knowledge,
understand much more what is fit to be done, by what we see him do, then by our
own conjectures, which if not so bounded, are vain, and rove incertainly in the
wild of things. His actions are the great marks by which our understandings are
to be guided, that they may not dangerously miscarry. If then we observe a void
place of Judgments, let us rebuke our own apprehensions (when we take upon us
to think it fit, Justice should there have planted it self) with the
acknowledges of the Dominion it has over all times and persons; when we see
its displays in the world, we may then understand God is giving some present
check to sin, and its grassant impurity, that carries such efficacies along
with it, as seem meet to himself.

But though we thus ascribe greatness to God, yet may we secondarily observe
those moments of satisfaction we receive out of his Word, and the reason of it,
which are enough to answer any scruples concerning the nonappearance of his
Justice in a season, when it seems requisite it should be seen, and to free us
out of that maze of doubts that falls in therewith, viz. the inequality of his
dealings either with good men, compared with evil men, or toward good and evil
men, compared each sort among themselves; for when either the evil pass
peaceably through, and out of the world, and feel no bands in their death; but
good men have waters of a full cup wrung out unto them; or when one good man
has the candle of God shining in his Tabernacle, washes his steps in butter,
and has the Rock pouring out oil to him; and another, though fearing God, eats
in darkness all his days, disconsolate either with public or private
calamities: or lastly when one evil man fares well in the common prosperity, and
another of the same stamp is covered with a cloud all his days, either in the
general adversity or his particular infelicity; there is an appearance of
partiality: and seeing all of both qualities arrive each at their own ends, any
solution taken from those ends seems insufficient. All these are so many
scandals to this Doctrine, which yet true reason of Scripture plentifully
removes. There is enough too to resolve us, how the disadvantage of living out
of the discipline of affliction, is recompensed to those, who possibly had they
lived under it, would have repented in sackcloth and ashes.

All these, I say, to him who reverences Gods Ark, is wisely conversant in the
things revealed, that pertain to us, and repines not that the dark waters and
thick clouds of the sky are Gods Pavillion; are so far unridled, that he finds
the benefit of that promise; The humble he will guide in Judgment, and the meek
he will teach his way: the secret of the Lord is communicated with them that
fear him; for he leads them into more, who expect his admission, then they can
obtain, who cutting their way to themselves, ravish the cloud of an empty
imagination; when they most please themselves with what they think they have
found out and comprehended. The Scriptures speak wisdom, but not the wisdom of
this world, which is brought to naught; not that which he towers into, who is
vainly pufft up with his fleshly mind; but that which is to sobriety: let us
then measure by the line of it to these foregoing thoughts, to which it
reaches, so as to bring them into subjection.

1. As to the Justice of God it can have no injury, because there is an Eternal
Judgment, so high and substantial, that it does infinitely honor, satisfy,
and recompense whatever Justice can seem to suffer. Nothing is under a
necessity to show it self, but that which is confined to such a moment; and if
it loses that, lies hid for ever. Things which are poor, that have only an
appearance, and not a retired treasure, are in haste to be known; small
revenges are hastily executed, but nullum tempus occurrit Regi. The deep waters
run silently, and what has Eternity to give it room and space, slumbers not,
though it make no present noise; God has the highest reasons of his patience,
the perfect strength of his Being, and the vastness of everlasting Ages to
explain himself and his displeasure in. All opinations of men against him and
his Judiciary Providence, vanish like a dream when he appears, for his coming
constrains belief, commands full assent, and nothing contrary dares then be
seen; nor can it be traced, but in that horror and condemned disappointment,
to which it has betrayed the masters of it.

The apprehensions that have footing only in time, are not to be valued; for
time it self is so little and inconsiderable a thing, that though it is greater
or less, when it is measured by its own line; yet it is but the dust of the
balance, the drop of the Bucket, nothing, and less then nothing when it is set
by Eternity; when any immortal Being, especially the prime Being, who only has
immortality, has the grasping of it, it is squeezed to nothing: while it is
within it self, judged by its own Rules, and the creatures of it, it is
somewhat; but to God the Grandeur and pride of it a thousand years are but as
yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night; the contempt God and
his Justice endure from it, as soon as ever it sinks into Eternity, are as if
they had never been; one glance of that Judgment immediately consumes it.

This consideration does also abundantly remove the inequalities of time, if we
suppose them never so great, and level good men among themselves, and bad men
among themselves; and so precisely distinguishes good and bad one from another,
that there remain no possible remembrances of the state of this world, nor any
thing that should call in question, or diminish ought from the clearness of
Gods dealing. Eternal rewards and punishments swallow up all distinctions of
time, which hereupon become no more then imagination or opinion, when true
Judgment takes place; or then thought and fancy, when knowledge and reality
enter; the pleasures and happinesses, the torment and complaint of it are all
gone; all that is great in time is the manner and temper of an immortal Spirit
in and upon it, which is an inchasement of Eternity into it, and makes it
valuable for the ordinableness of it to an everlasting condition of things: all
of it else is but like infancy and childhood, compared with manly estate; that
is vanity and folly: whatever puerile age seems to it self, it is known to have
nothing worthy in it, but the beginnings and dawns of that mind, which
education improves, and ripens to a strength in elder years, for which it is
formed: The contempt it has of severer Judgment, detracts nothing from the
solidity and dignity of true reason, but is imputed to its silliness and
imperfection; the pleasures of it are condemned, as unworthy a man. The very
same Soul censures, and even despises it self in its childish estimations,
discourses and actions, when it feels it self man, and remembers them not but
with dislike or compassionate scorn. If after-time then blots out the things
foregoing with so strange an oblivion; if manhood does so efface past
childhood, and death yet expunges much more then these, how exceedingly more
does another world wipe out all things pertaining to this? Moralities only
remaining, and transmitted through all without loss; from whence accrues to
good men greater glory through their sufferings, and increase of torment to the
evil from their pleasures, with which they are upbraided hereafter; and very
probably each of these arising to both sorts, proportionable to the difference
they have met with here in the world.

Further, different presences of God, and the consolations of his Spirit, may
be a present reward to good men in the worst times; service of God, even to a
kind of Martyrdom, speedier translations to Heaven, greater degrees of Honor,
and blessed Immortality, are much better to them then an ease and quiet, that
must within such a number of years expire however: Even as stings of
conscience, and longer heaping up guilt and wrath, may make it less tolerable
for evil men, who have lived in prosperous times, then for others of the same
kind, who have been preserved from so much sin, and awakened to some sense of
God by adversity; their present trouble thus lessening an eternal punishment,
except to those who have been brawned to a greater contempt of God, and hardened
in the fire against him, whose case deserves no consideration.

From all which we see, there is no such necessity upon God to punish now, nor
any so complainable inequality in his distributions to good and bad men. For
when either of these ranks of men know themselves in that unchangeable state,
they will reflect upon nothing in time, but as it has paid something to
Eternity, and conveyed thither what remains and abides. If then any thing
aggrandizes that happiness, or asswages that misery, however it has been
resented with grief and deploration here, it is then put on as a crown, or
applied as a Lenitive to pain; but that which is blessed with no addittament of
Glory, is laid aside as worthless, how pleasant soever in the world; and that
which inflames torment, always bewailed, though it was carried as a privilege
here. All things else lose themselves more perfectly in that state, then
whatever we can imagine most trivial here, when it is utterly out of date, and
succeeded by a contrary, however it presumed before in the moment of its
flourish.

With this Judgment then God infinitely assoils his Justice, from the scoffs
of men that say, When is the promise of his coming? from the sensuality of men
that put the evil day far from them: with this he divides the world, that all
may discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that fears and
serves God, and the profane and him that serves him not. By this he adjusts
to every of both these their due portion, honor to whom honor, stripes to
whom stripes, with their degrees and number; however they lie huddled now, and
the best oft-times in the darkest place. And this Judgment is plentifully
declared to the world, that every one may make a right use of it, in giving
Glory to God, and prejudging things not against, but with that day. If any do
otherwise, he that sits in the Heaven observes their folly, and laughs at it:
For he sees that this day is coming, as he that is sure of his revenge upon a
contumacious ingrate, first in compassion warns him, and that rejected with a
secret derision, observes him in his foolish boldness, and with a contented
patience bears his continued affronts; expecting quietly the season of his
punishment: or as a wise man that knows his own grounds in a point of truth,
tranquilly rests upon them, and bears with a merciful disdain the clamor of a
conceited Opinionist; so God having settled things with an unmovable
Righteousness, and a patience also, that yet carries dread with it, says to
those that will not believe such a Judgment, He that is filthy and unrighteous,
let him be so still.

2. Whereas God may seem by the suspension of his Judgments, careless of that
purgation of the world by their present execution, let us observe what other
provisions his Holiness, Wisdom, and Goodness have made herein.

1. That Eternal Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, that in one act of offering himself
gives that perpetual glory to Justice, that does not only countervail, but
infinitely preponderate and effect more then those daily repeated Sacrifices,
or those more solemn ones; to which yet the reason of all the world has ever
made recourse for lustration of themselves.

The life and actions of our Blessed Savior, of such incomparable innocence
and divine perfection, has set Holiness at such an elevation, that no
depression of it by the iniquities of men, are at all comparable with the
exaltations of it in him. He as our (...) has contracted upon himself all our
guilt, an^ being made a curse for us, has devoured our curse, and paid an
uttermost compensation to punitive Justice. He by a most Chrystalline purity
resplendent in our Nature, has discovered the beauties of Holiness beyond all
possible obscurations of ours, the efficacies of which his mediatory
negotiation are much clearer in Heaven, the proper Region; whither he carried
his merit to be seated in an unintermitted Intercession, and whence he pours
down the benefits of it upon Earth.

As God therefore is well pleased, and always smells a savor of rest in Jesus
Christ, upon which he cannot only stay his severity but bless the world without
injury to his Justice, or dishonor to his Holiness; so is the world it self
seasoned by so great a Sanctity, and perfumed with the odor of it. This indeed
eminently is the safety of them that believe, but extends it self to all, for
he is the Savior of all, though especially of them that believe; and tasted
death for every man: which therefore avails for the reprieve of those, whom yet
it does not protect from condemnation.

That which relieves good men from eternal sufferings due to sin, with the
perfect atonement of Justice and Holiness, can without the offense of those
Attributes continue under patience and long-suffering those, that at the last,
through impenitency, pay themselves to the glory of vengeance in the day of
wrath.

3. Under the wing of this Priesthood lie the humiliations, obediences, and
intercessions of gracious men, who are also the Priests of the world, and
obtain pardon upon Earth in the virtue of the Mediator in Heaven. They who
giving God no rest day or night, prevail for mercy, and live the Horsemen and
Chariots of Israel, the great security and defense of their Country, of which
when any City or Nation is naked, they are immediately the prey of Justice;
their Righteousness being from the Grace of God, a salt that preserves their
time from putrefaction. To this we may subjoyn the happiness of some times,
that are fuller of the days of the Son of Man (that is) have clearer effusions
of the Gospel and Divine Truth upon the world; which carrying a sway upon the
consciences of men, give universal estimation to God and his ways, and have a
train of moral Virtues attendant; which may make general Judgments less
necessary vindications of contemporary sins, and may at least delay Judgments
till aftertimes. Examples of which we observe in Sacred Story.

Lastly, we have already said, instances of Judgment do not breathe out
themselves in the present moments, nor so much as in the present Age; but
derive themselves upon following time, and are accepted for such a period: Like
the great expiation, that in one day purged the whole year. In all times there
are yet footsteps of Judgment, though in more private and retired walks that
continually fall out, like those Sacrifices that were daily offered, though of
less solemnity, and those that were appointed in particular cases of a more
ordinary occurrence.

3. If it seem the disadvantage of any time, that it is not disciplined by
these chastisements; we must know, that Judgments are not equal with those
Ordinances of God, or like his Word, that have in their institution an
immediate accommodation to such ends; but are useful through the intervening
instruction of that Law that God teaches out of, when he chastises; without
which men dye under those strokes unreformed. Other courses of Providence have
also their witness of God, and peculiar fitnesses to be managed by his truth to
the ends of conversion and repentance; for thither the patience and goodness of
God lead, att^mpered to the more ingenuous Elements of man's Soul, that are
touched with the magnetisms of love: Even as Judgments take ear of those that
are moved by fear, and therefore have their operation in the more corrupted
parts of degenerate Nature.

To sum all: Suspension of Judgments is a beautiful place in the contexture of
Providence, and illustrates that Being to us, whom we know in the various
discoveries of himself, but chiefly in his goodness; which yet would be
unknown, if he did not thus administer things: His patience and long-suffering
in which he so much delights, would be covered; the loving kindness he
exercises in the Earth, and the tender mercies wherewith he fills it, would be
concealed, so that his present Government would want that considerable piece of
honor, which it especially chooses and prefers it: For his mercy rejoices
against Judgment, and accordingly he has taken care these kinder Attributes
should have fairest impressions on man's Soul, and be the clearest testimonies
of him; whereas Judgment being his strange act, has lesser prints of it on our
hearts, and raises doubts concerning him. No man wonders, or is in amaze at the
goodness and benignity of God, whenever he hears it; but is startled at his
severity, and calls for his saddest thoughts to resolve it into the sinful and
guilty state of man.

Without this gracious Manu-tenency there could be no condition of things;
Kingdoms and Empires could grow up to no flourish, nor settle in any greatness;
the prosperity of them, which is so great a glory of Providence, were an
impossibility; the whole Scene would represent nothing but Judgments, till all
run into an universal desolation, and many of the most remarked methods of
Judgment it self lost; most of the freer motions of man's will had been
concluded and shut up by them which afford so large a ground to Providence
both of Mercy and Judgment. God as an Instance of his Justice essayed the use
of an universal destruction in the Flood of Noah, when he repented he had made
man, as if he had done a dishonor to his own Holiness, in bringing forth a
Nature that should defile it self, and all it touched: and that he might
relieve against a mischief as it were unexpected, and right himself, makes
haste to destroy that degenerate Nature, with the parts of the Creation most
used and corrupted by it.

But then, as if he disallowed the experiment, determines against it for the
future, and restores the seeds of mankind he had to that purpose preserved, to
much of their former condition, and renews the Charter of their Dominion over
the Creatures.

This piece of Sacred History represents to us in a Land-skip (thus flourished
to take our apprehensions) this truth, That God with a Salve to that Holiness
(in honor to which he delivered things to so great a ruin) would now conserve
the world under his patience and long-suffering; and not roll it up any more in
an universal devastation, till that greatest and last of Judgments, in which he
will absolve the whole Scheme of his Justice, and fill up whatever seems
wanting in it now.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the variety God uses in the manner of the execution of his
Judgments.
BEsides the freedom the supreme Ruler of the world uses, in fixing his
Judgments upon some parts of time, and not upon others; there are also the
various kinds and measures of his debates, and the Crisis of them, when they
end in destruction; which to observe, may much further enlarge our thoughts in
this Contemplation, and the Duty of it.

As then in Creation God has formed vast bodies of the same kind, wherein we
see a great deal of one thing together, by which he teaches us that immense
power that never spends it self; so has he also multiformed his productions
into an endless variety, that we may behold that infinity of understanding,
that is not tied to one shape of things.

Thus his Judgments are sometimes cast into one Element, or Globe of fire,
swelling like the huge mountains, covering all like a great Deep; such were
those on Sodom and Gomorrah, on the old world; teaching us Justice is not poor
in any of its revenges: Again it uses several lesser, and diverse evils, that
we may know every thing is ready to its purposes of wrath, and carries stings
of punishment against sinners.

Both these sometimes are single, made up entire in themselves, solitary Wars,
Plagues, Famines; at other times they meet together in one great Configuration,
and are constellated. Lastly, sometimes they rise up to their height, as it
were in an instant; at other times they are ordered into a train and
succession: and this being the most ordinary Tenor of Judgments, and with
which we of this Nation have been much acquainted, let us reflect more freely
upon it.

At such a time the hand of God keeps upon the Table, and his operations are
like several limbs of a body, that are drawn one after another, and then the
whole seen; or like a suit of Hangings wrought by their pieces, and then placed
together, or unfolded by degrees, and the whole at last presented; or like an
excellent Discourse that passes out of the mind in single sheets, and then
meets in the entire Work; or like the Creation, that by the steps of six days
came to its Sabbath.

Thus Gods procedure upon Pharaoh was by a gradation of Judgment, that
completed its figure in a succession. The Angel in the Revelation proclaimed a
woe to the world, because of the Angels yet to sound: and one woe made haste,
that another to come quickly might have place. As Ezekiels waters, they rise
higher and higher, till they are a River not to be passed over. Noah's Flood
prevailed by degrees, till every thing perished, that had not an Ark for its
safety.

By all these God shows himself; he weighs the hills in seals, and the
mountains in a balance: he makes one Judgment so great, as to fill the Earth
with it self. For what can more speak his immensity, He comprehends the dust of
the Earth in a measure, that is, he imploys little things to great purposes.
The dust that is easily scattered, when divided, is yet great and considerable,
when gathered to a proportion. Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou
have perfected praise, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.
Judgments small in themselves, yet gathering to one another, are able to give a
final determination to the sum of affairs.

By a succession in Judgments he makes a fairer impression of himself, which is
better done by a leasurely proceeding and continuation of his hand, like the
rain that distills, and enters deeper then the sudden storms that haste away.
Slay them not, lest my people forget: consume them in wrath. God lodges himself
in men's Souls when they are still under his rod, whereas a nine days wonder
swallows up a sudden execution. Hereby he teaches, as in his Word, a line here
and there, here a little, and there a little. These gradual motions are essays
of man's repentance, lesser strokes, being as warnings to prevent greater; God
moves the Pillars of a Nation first, that the concussion felt, may admonish
their weakness, when his angry touch is upon them, and every man from his place
seek resettlement in his favor: For the words of God finding so little regard,
he thinks fit to give them an Emphasis by his Rod, and the accent is still
deeper, that it may take the more place; or if men are incorrigible, and God
resolve to settle upon any Age, and make it the Generation of his wrath, he
chains into a series the acts of his indignation: It being rarer, that he
destroys at once as Sodom, upon which no hand had room or space to stay; but
Judgments in their several courses come on into the Battle, and one begins
where the last ended, the Locust eating what the Palmer-worm left.

Yet which way soever things fall out at last, God justifies his goodness, and
that Philanthropy wherewith he governs humane affairs, by the pauses he makes:
For like those aversations of his Glory, from the Temple by degrees in Ezekiel,
that the Jews moved by them might beseech his return, ere he quite left them,
they show his willingness to have the occasion to retreat.

Even Sodom it self had the Avant-carrier of so great an overthrow, by the
lesser it suffered in the combination of the Kings against it; wherein God
justifies himself, that he desires not the death of sinners, but that they
should turn from iniquity and live.

CHAP. XIX. Of the great Character of Judgments when they end in desolation.
THe greatest Crisis of Judgment is yet to be considered in all the course of
it (that is) when it is to cease in destruction; when God begins, and also
makes such an end, that affliction rises not up the second time; from which
proceed those resolved changes of the world, emptied out of one vessel into
another; which by single Judgments are only shaken, and time is set upon other
Epoches that are to it like new hinges of motion; as in general from these
variations it receives its curious Needle Work: In some parts of it, Judgments
and mercies lie intermingled: others beautiful with mercies only; and lastly,
some wholly dark and sad with Judgments.

This Character of Judgments ending in Ruin, is most diligently to be
observed, and may be discerned either by the Judgments themselves, or the signs
of the times upon which they fall.

1. In themselves they are remarkable, for then they are preceded by those more
then ordinary admonitions, from the disturbed Course of Nature, which God has
made as well the Trumpet as the Instrument of Judgment. Signs in the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars, Earthquakes, the Sea and the Waves roaring, the Powers of
Heaven shaking, gave an Allarm to Jerusalems destruction.

These indications of a common Calamity are often strangely insinuated into the
rational Creatures also, causing distress of Nations, perplexity, men's hearts
failing for fear; there being unknown motions, and discomposures of men's
spirits, whereof no account can be assigned, but they are the loosning of that
Bridle God keeps upon all things, before he lays the ruins on their necks, and
gives judiciary stimulations to them. These God usually sets as Introductions
to great Calamities, as Prefaces to huge Volumes, as Portals to great Edifices,
or like the musters of the Clouds, and trepidations of the Air before a
Tempest, or the unformed motions of dispersed Soldiers, gathering into a body
or arms before a Battle: he sends these, as Elias before the great and terrible
Day of the Lord, giving hereby a state and pomp to those monumentous Judgments,
the descriptions of which yield a natural eloquence to the Prophets, taken
immediately from things (for pomp and state are the eloquence of things, and
most easily pass into words.) This is further discoverable, when Judgments
tread on the heels of one another. For God does not many things in vain, but
intends to reach some height; when he is not quiet with the world, but
importunes and sollicites it to a sense; when he speaks once and twice, he
intends something great and considerable; for he does not fight as one that
beats the air, but having entered into particulars, at last sums up all in a
perfect effect. In Amos, when Judgments hung together in so long a line, at
last he resolved, Therefore I will do this unto thee: Then lesser Judgments are
but the beginnings of sorrows.

Lastly, when God does strange things without precedent, things that men will
not believe, though they were told them, unusual not only in the common course
of Providence, which is very smooth, but strange even in his strange paths of
Judgment, as it is said of the Plagues of Egypt, the like were not before, nor
after them any such: God does not reverse what he has settled by so great
Wisdom and Counsel, with so high a hand, but when he designs greatest
alterations.

2. In regard of the times upon which Judgments fall, this Crisis, is then to
be feared.

1. When the Age we live in seems the drain and sink of the sins, and evils of
former times, where they settle and grow to a head. One Age rolls down upon
another, and sinks into the bottom of time, so wickedness shoves it self on,
and rests upon a center. Of this Generation shall be required all the blood
that was shed from righteous Abel to Zacharias. The iniquity of the Amorites
grows full, which had been some Ages in filling; the Ephah is crowned, and the
talent of Lead closes it, and by wings it is hasted to its own Base, that is
destruction.

2. When we see people incorrigible, and insensible of Gods hand, keeping their
Figure; it is much to be feared Judgments have still more to do to accomplish
their own: when things are in a contest, they continue to conflict one with
another, till one of them deserts its own mode and station. This cannot fall on
an Almighty Justice; for in such encounters great things crush little ones,
till they can no longer maintain resistance; and weak things that have a wise
instinct or reason, shift themselves every way to avoid the danger. A broken
spirit, a melted heart running out of its former shape, cease the controversy
betwixt God and Man: but Pharaohs heart hardened as the Adamant and steel, held
Judgment play till it accomplished it self into that absolute portraicture we
read in his History.

3. Injuries done to the Truth and Gospel of God, are sad forebodes of ruinous
Judgments; the Ministry of Christ dishonored was a just preparation of the
way to that great destruction of Jerusalem, and a highest justification of so
severe a stroke. The Gospel honored is as a wall of fire for defense, and
breaks outward upon the enemies of a Nation; when it is despised, it burns
inward: It is a pillar of fire, and a cloud of protection when observed; but
disregarded, it is a cloud troubled with a Thunderbolt, rolling up and down,
and at last flashing out in Lightning to destroy.

Nothing delivers the History of any time so fair to posterity, as an
honorable entertainment of a pure and unmixed Religion, giving it the utmost
freedom to shine as the Sun, to communicate it self as the air, and to run like
the Fountains without any interruption: For as these, so the Gospel of Jesus
Christ is the common happiness, and necessiety of the world, from no Nation of
which wherever it had place, has it used to remove, but it has carried the
honor, and peace residing there with it, as the Glory together with the Ark
departed from Israel, leaving it as naked of present happiness, as of the hopes
of eternal.

CHAP. XX. The Reduction of the whole to a Conclusion.
SEeing all things of general importance, do most liberally allow themselves to
particulars, and enrich them with their abundance; every thing we have asserted
of Judgments, is to be measured out in due proportions to this, and that Age:
and ours present has a peculiar Right, because the Judgments of God have made
a remarkable residence upon it, and these years last past been signed with
unusual prints of his Hand.

I doubt not there is profane wit enough in the world to refuse with scorn
whatever shall be offered by addresses much more potent then this; especially
encouraged by any smoother motion of affairs, or a peace, the very name of
which is laden with the hopes of prosperity.

It is also most true, that whoever in general sets his heart to seek and find
out all the Works of God in the world, while he balances times and seasons,
and weighs out prosperity and adversity, shall find much more then he can
comprehend; for the paths of God turn aside suddenly from humane thoughts, and
divinations, that a man is still put upon new inquiries, even then when he
imagines he has found. Solomon observed, there are that see not sleep day or
night, but labor to seek out the Work of God under the Sun, yet they cannot
find it; yea further, though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be
able to find it.

Notwithstanding this, we are to mind the times, and the signs of them, every
thing being beautiful in its season, and having a fitness in its own place: so
that there arise from it such Phases or Characters, which like the Sun* and
Moon, and Stars, are for signs and seasons: and in this sense to distinguish
days and years; from whence by the guidance of the Spirit of God, we may
discern both time and Judgment, if we are those that fear before him; while
wicked and ungodly men, like fishes and birds, are caught and snared in an evil
time, when it falls suddenly upon them. Moreover he that observes the
Government of the world, shall perceive, as we have already observed, that
there is an usual clemency by which God either lays not on his hand when there
are great corruptions, or takes it off, and quiets times: and yet no general
repentances or amendments, or but very Ceremonial shows of them. This Jonah
pleaded, as the reason of his disobedience in not publishing the express
Revelation of Ninevehs ruin. I know that thou art a Gracious God, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.
How uncertain then must their conjectures of Gods punishments be, that have no
such denunciations to publish?

Yet still upon the grand Principles of the Doctrine of Judgments, we have
great cause to apprehend the condition of this Nation.

For first, acknowledging the evils we have felt to be from God; and that we
must ascribe them to him, as to the Author; we must also conclude he has
inflicted them upon us with highest reason and design; seeing he can do
nothing, but according to that will, which has an infinite Counsel, more
intimate to it then the faculties of reason and will to man's Soul; and the
results of which never cleave asunder, as ours do, into those of an
understanding rightly guided, and those other of an understanding darkened with
passion, and predominated by inordinate appetite.

Now none of the Reasons of Judgment we have given are perfected, but in
Reformation, or some consistency of Judgment, that remains as a monument of it
so absolute, that it has no further occasion of moving it self; the triumphs
of it glorying over all, except such remnants as resemble the poor people left
of the Jews after the Captivation of every thing great into Babylon.

The first end is Reformation, without which the snare that is laid shall not
be taken up, because nothing is taken by it.

How little Reformation we can pretend to, we are all sufficient witnesses
against our selves, and may be judged out of our own mouths. For as the great
complaints of humane Nature against it self argue it all in a lapse; so the
general outcries of the several parties of a Nation against one another, and
all against the whole, concerning the inefficacy of Judgments, are strong
arguments we are unreformed; there being such a Criterion of these things in
the Civil, as there is of the natural body within it self touching its state.

How many of the marks of danger must we needs see upon our selves, in regard
of the evils Judgments have branded us with, and made them the signs of our
times: These three last years have stood laden with so many Judgments, raised
like Pyramids upon them.

That of a Plague began the account, wherein the mouth of the Grave opened so
wide, as if it would have drawn down all the living. This Hell (as that in the
Prophet) in larged it self without measure, that the multitude might descend
into it. Death upon the pale Horse contested for Empire, and Mortality, like a
Cloud, spread it self so wide, that it shaded life it self. This has ever been
accounted a Judgment of the first three, an unquestionable messenger of the
displeasure of Heaven: the entrance into the Grave by it being not only most
dreadful for the voraciousness of it, but most abhorred to humane Nature, for
the poison of that exhalation that annoys the Vaults, and defiles the dust of
Death beyond its ordinary loathsomness.

In the second of these years, God calls to contend by Fire, and it devours as
it were the great Deep: This is the usual Emblem of the severest Acts of God;
it is the last of Judgments upon the world, to which it is reserved. Scripture
often makes use of a Deluge to signify destruction by it, God having already
used it to so great a desolation of all things: Yet is it less expressive of
his utmost indignation, seeing he renewed the state of Earth after it; which is
finally destroyed by Fire, and that never quenched is the description of
eternal wrath.

With these two run parallel a Naval War, which divine Providence uses as a
State-consumption, that is ever insinuating a silent and insensible Fate,
besides those noises and slaughters; into which it ever and anon rushes out,
that it may give more public Allarms of death.

This the last year approaches us, like a dying hour, or a last gasp, showing
as it were the common Grave of our Glory, Riches, and Liberty, and cast a
blackest cloud upon the time on which it fell, and dwelt with as great a
horror on it, as any of the former.

All these made up to the very head and top of the Nation, where they fixed
themselves, as if they had that Commission to fight neither with small or
great, but the Metropolis; whither by degrees ruins have at other times
contended, and at last made their rest: But these like Apoplectick diseases
surprised the Turret of Nature at the first, and descended with stupefaction
upon the whole: And though so much has been still preserved by that Goodness
which delights not in immediate ruins, as serves to administer spirits to the
body; yet all these are threats of what would immediately ensue, if there were
a total oppression of that Magazin of life; every offer at which is much more
dangerous then heavier down-falls upon less noble parts, and speak severest
intentions of that displeasure that cut us so deep in that head or one neck.

Lastly, if we should appeal to the Prognostics of the most sober Breasts upon
the present Scheme of our condition, would they not be very trembling? seeing
besides the incertainty what a day may bring forth, we look more like a people
reprieved, then restored and settled.

Yet greater Symptoms of danger are those our sins discover upon us, and these
not softened or mitigated with those things, that may stay off the blow so much
as from our own days.

If then we can neither deny those several appearances of Judgment, nor say,
that God does any thing without design, nor plead our own Reformation, how can
we but expect the successions of Judgment, till there be some evident
determination of things by them, which yet may be hid and concealed in a
present Truce: under the favor of which our affairs may essay a motion back to
their rest, and that bosom of peace, which when it is firm, opens to receive
all public and private Interests into it self, that there they may be
cherished after a long languor.

It is sufficiently known; Judgments may intermit, and suspend themselves
though they intend their own retrieve, as a snare is taken up that has taken
nothing, that it may be more conveniently placed, and at a better time: Or as a
Discourse that has several full points, and yet begins afresh, till the whole
be completed; or like the Cockatrice springing from the root of the Serpent,
that seemed dead. For the Judgments of God take their own leisure, and discover
themselves at such distances of time as seem meet to them, sporting as it were
with humane affairs, yet always including those benign and serious morals of
patience leading to repentance.

Yea Interposals of mercy may have place, when destruction shall yet be the
last act. Thus Israel delivered from Egypt, was in that Generation destroyed in
the Wilderness. Hoseahs Prophecy of the final Captivity of the ten Tribes, took
its beginning under the Reign of Jeroboam the Second, wherein that Kingdom was
in a hopeful posture.

We our selves have seen the state of our Nation, triumphing back to its own
Center, where alone it could be supposed to stay, and fix after so long, and
uneasy an Anarchy; and yet how soon have we seen it trembling upon that very
Center, and full of new perplexity?

If mercies then leave us insecured, what will any of the vain confidences and
good hopes of men avail, which we see in no case can ward from evil, but as
refuges of lies surrender themselves, and the persons entrusted to them to that
overflowing scourge, that passes along and sweeps before it; for things of
reality, and grounded upon certain causes, keep their way, and maintain their
greatness, never considering whether they are believed, and looked for
beforehand or not.

But which way soever it shall please the great Ruler of all things to command
our affairs, or what hand soever he shall guide them with, either of mercy or
Judgment; we have great reason with attent consideration, to behold either his
severity or his goodness, so as to move us home to him: If it should be
unexpected and undeserved goodness, that like a melior natura balances and
disposes those seeds of Boute-feumotions rolling in our bowels, that out of
them may arise a happy Universe, which else would in their contracts destroy
each other, and expose all to flames; yet this goodness is to be feared, that
we may continue in it. For no Nation is the root that bears mercy; it will be
mercy though we perish: But it is mercy bears up all humane condition, which
hangs like a ball in the air, supported by infinite kindness.

It is the great miracle we are preserved, not that we are in distress, being
so apt to danger, that we are crushed before the moth; so worthless, that we
perish by multitudes without any regarding it: Lastly, so guilty, that all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth give their applause to divine Judgments upon us;
which are unwilling to proceed, till the stone cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber answer it; that is, till the most insensible things are
ready to join with, and even provoke them up.

If then mercy carries all our happiness, what reason have we to revere it?

Nor is mercy less wise and holy, of smaller counsel and intention, then
Judgment. In God it is not a softness of Nature, or indulgence to sin; it is
not resembled by the tenderness of a weak, but of a severe and wise man: and
therefore is not to be trifled with.

It is true indeed, the womb of mercy is infinitely pregnant; if it were not
hindered by our sins, it would be to thousands; if it made up its circle, and
were not interrupted in its course, it would be from everlasting to
everlasting: but then the hearts of men must be suppled, and oiled, sweetened,
and purified by it; the reasons of it must be pursued, that it may not be
abused: for it delivers at last into the hand of vengeance, when it is
neglected and disobeyed; it accomplishes dreadful ends upon those that despise
it, giving them opportunity to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath; and
those that hate its counsels, are repaid even to the third and fourth
Generation, in the days wherein the righteous Judgments of God reveal
themselves.

Seeing then that the ends of all Gods disposes are, that the world may partake
his Holiness; if he uses the soft arguments of favor toward us after those of
displeasure, is it not a sin of the greatest aggravation to contemn the riches
of his goodness? For it either argues this kind of Atheism, that men take all
the good they receive for the course of Nature, and kinder conspiration of
contingencies, and so regard not the work of Gods hand; and these God destroys,
and will not build up: or else, which is a greater Atheism, it is, as if we
should say, we are delivered to do all these abominations.

To sin against mercy, shows an exceeding obduracy of men in sin, that nothing
will take them off; for mercy is the proper argument (the cords) of a man; he
kicks against bowels that offends it; it shows the greatest sensuality, that
men turn all that way, as the Israelites gave those good things to their Idols,
which they received from God. In such a case nothing remains, but that God
vindicate himself by Judgments.

These things I have subjoyned concerning mercy to a Discourse of Judgments,
with a prospect upon the hopes of a more prosperous condition, and in
meditation of that of Ezra, After all this is come upon us for our evil deeds
and great trespasses: Seeing that thou, O our God, have punished us less then
our iniquities deserve, and given us a breathing, should we go on to break thy
Commandments, and to continue our strict alliances with former abominations?
Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us? so that there
should be no remnant, or escaping.

But alas! seeing one sinner destroys much good, and we see them with their
sins by multitudes thronging into the broad light, while in public appearance
we have very little of the preservations against Judgments, or the usual
reasons of their suspensions, how can we but fear our clouds should return
after the rain, till we are punished to seven times more?

Yet because there are better hopes, though retired into the secret closets and
corners, we may not despair a preservation from utter ruin through that
Mystery of Providence, to be observed in the Government of the world; whereby
God without that desolation, by which States are dashed in pieces like a
Potters vessel, redeems their converts with the Righteousness and Judgment he
executes, purges away their dross and Tin by the spirit of burning, exciting
the fire to a just intention to such an end, purifies them seven times in the
sevenfold punishment, and then reinstates them in Glory, and over that Glory
creates a defense.

Let us now hear the conclusion of the whole matter, which is, That God has
not only a time to judge every work of every single person, but he has
appointed seasons now to judge whole Nations, not so properly capable of that
future Judgment. This falls out at certain periods ordained by him, according
to the strict measure of time (even to half an hour) which does not only bring
forth Events designed to it, but even exacts, and calls for them.

It is then the whole Duty and Interest of Nations to fear before him, to keep
his Commandments, and advance his Glory and Truth, by not contending with, but
obeying it.

This conclusion is so indented with the mind, that it more closely twines with
it, then that circuit of reason used to demonstrate it, and more speedily rises
up out of the confession of the Soul, then those Engines that are fit to raise
it can be applied. So that of making many Books or long Discourses there is no
end: Yet because the mind resting upon its own conclusion, and enlarging also
upon the whole circle of truth about it, stands both better to view, and with
more benefit collects practical inference from it; it is good to take the
advantage of what may be subservient hereunto.

FINIS.

