A REVIEW OF What God has been pleased to do This Year, According to PROPHECY;
And particularly near the 23d of the Month we style August IN THE General
Peace, and the Muscovian and Imperial Victories over the Turks.

WITH A most Humble Apology and Defense concerning the falling short of Events,
of what was expected according to the Interpretation of that sure Word of
Prophecy.

By T. BEVERLEY.

Psalm. 111. 2. The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of All who have
pleasure therein. LONDON: Printed for William Marshal at the Bible in
Newgate-street, and John M^rshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street. MDCXCVIII

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Humfry Edwyn, LORD MAYOR Of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
I Have observed, The supreme Providence, has Placed you in the most Eminent
Magistracys of this Great City, in Two Extraordinary Years, Engraven upon with
Illustrious Appearances of his own Hand; Your Sherivalry, as I have been
assured in the Year 88, The Year of the so Great Revolution in these Nations;
and your Lordships Mayoralty Enters in this Year of the Peace, and the so Grand
Victory of the Imperial Army over the Mohammedan, Turkish Signiory; and both so
close together, and at a Time, as I apprehend, well known to Prophecy: I have
therefore thought it my Duty, Humbly to present the following Review of both to
your Lordship, as in so High a Station, This so Great Year: And yet, If God
has Graciously led me into the t^^e Interpretation of his Sure Word of
Prophecy, This is but small in Comparison of your Authority, Extending it self
into the much Greater Year 98; As I hope it will be found; In which your Sword
shall be born before the Prince of Princes, the King of Kings and Lords of
Lords, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; I mean not in His Personal
Appearance, as many either Ignorantly, or wilfully mistake; but in Regard of
the Glorious Manifestation of His Kingdom Entering its Succession; which will
not Lessen but Aggrandize both Royal and Magistratical Honor, and Authority,
that Kisses the Son, and does Homage to This Supreme; and will not in the least
give Countenance to Anarchy, Confusion, or Resistance to that Ordinance of God
by either Le ellism or Rebellion; but Conciliate the most Holy, Humble and
Pious subjection to Authority so Enstamp'd from Heaven, as then it will be.

I have taken Notice by General Discourse; Your Lordship in your Public
Attendance on the Worship of God, appears to Desire the Reconciliation of
Protestants, whether under those undesirable, and, as too much managed, unkind
distinctions of Episcopacy, Presbytery, or Congregational Union.

I hope, It is, as Falling out this Year, not without happy Presages of that
Blessed Philadelphian Church State speedily about to enter; In which all such
Names of difference will be lost in both the Purity and Love, that will
overflow them in the Succession of that Kingdom; And as I have some Years ago
Foretold; That the Cathedral of Paul's, (as we style it) whose Loughty Pile,
which Providence seems to have allowed the Preparation of, for the National
Solemn Acknowledgments of God in the Peace, wherein your Lordship will bear
such a Figure, shall yet, (I am persuaded) speedily with those Names of
Prelation and Prefidency in it, that have their only Basis in that Antiquity,
wherein the Synagogue of Satan began to have the Ascendency, and not in pure
Scripture-Antiquity, Bow Themselves at the Feet of that Philadelphian State,
and Acknowledge, Christ has Loved and Chosen it; or else both the Prelacy and
the Cathedrals will suffer Abrogation, and become useless;

There is one thing more, I Congratulate to your Lordship this Year of your so
eminent Magistracy in; And that is, An appearance of Zeal for the Retrenchment
and Extirpation of open Profaneness, Irreligion, and Lewdness of Manners: I
cannot but have an Honor for any such undertaking, and beseech of God his
presence with it, and Blessing upon it; So far as it bears, but a desire to
prepare for, (if I may so allude) a Temple for God in the Nation; and I doubt
not. It will have the assistance of your Authority, and other the Religious
Participants of your Government; But yet I cannot but hope* Our Greater Solomon
will be supreme in the Administrat^on, and Raise it much higher then Man can do.

My Lord* As to my self, I cannot claim any particular Knowledge of, or
Interest in you; but looking upon your Magistracy in 88, and 98, as Honored
with a Prophetickness, I have on that Account taken the boldness to Inscribe
your Name, and I do very humbly beseech your Patronage of this Review under its
Great Patron, and the acceptance of this Dedication; Till it shall be able, as
I hope, it will within few Months be, to Answer for it self to all that shall
send to it or ask a Reason of its Hope; as owned by that Higher Patronage,
publicly in the Eyes of all. In the mean time, as I most humbly beg the
Prayers of all, who Love the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; So my most
Fervent and Earnest ^upplications shall be for the Magistracy of this Great
City, and their as Honorable Station in the Kingdom of Christ; and most
particularly for your Lordship.

Mo. 9. D. 12th. 1697. My Lord, Your Lordships, Most Humble Servant, In that
Kingdom, THO. BEVERLEY.

An earnest Invitation, and Persuasion to All, that profess a Reverence of the
Divine Majesty, to Regard the Works of the Lord; and to take Pleasure in
Searching them out in their Greatness, particularly this Year; By way of
Preface to the following Discourse.
SEeing this Review rests upon the very Eminent Appearances of God in this
present Year 1697, I think it no way Improper to prefix a serious persuasive,
deeply to consider the Operations of the Divine Hand, and to search them out,
as Hidden Treasures.

It is the Atheism, and Irreverence of the Divine Being, and his Government of
the World, that we Lavish out his Great Providence into no other Discourses,
but as of News; This is not the Business of a serious Christian, and of those
who have the Assistance of Sacred History, directing us what observations to
make upon those works; and the Sure Word of Prophecy Guiding us, what we are to
expect, by due Reflection, on what God has done according to Prophecy, to what
he will do to the End of the World: It is not enough for us with a show of
Great Wisdom and Foresight, to Dilate upon the Political Tendencies of Great
Events, least we Fall into the Hipocrisy of the Pharisees, who were able to
make Natural observations on the Face of the Heavens, but could not Discern the
signs of the Times: We ought as to make Improvement of Mercies, and Judgments,
to search and try our ways, and to turn unto the Lord; to Praise Him for his
wonderful Works to the Children of Men; So to Understand as the Sons of
Issachar the Times, that we may know what Israel ought to do; how to order our
Supplications, and Declarations of the Hand of God; For all his Servants are
yet ^itnesses in Sackcloth, who have ^ower to smite the Antichristian Earth
with Plagues, as often, as they will; And it is their Duty at all Times to will
to do it; to Prophecy to Prophecy, as God Commanded Ezekiel; That is, with
Resolution, and Constancy to declare the Judgments of God on the Antichristian
Papacy; and to shoot with the Arrow of the Lords Deliverance, not Twice or
Thrice, but Seven Times to its utter Ruin; and to Give no Rest to our God,
Till He make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth. It is the Great Sin of
Protestants, they do neither at this Time, with Becoming Zeal.

I will therefore present, as under one view, the Great Works of God this Year,
that are more Largely Discoursed in the following Treatise, and with some
Remarks, that have not been made therein.

1. The Peace ^n these European Nations Signed the very Day of the Ancient
Atonement, and Jubilee, and the Emperors Entry into it on the Day of Luthers
Publication of his Gospel* Positions in the First opening of the Reformation
1517; Oh! That as that was in the Beginning of Half Time, so there may be at
this End of it, a far Higher Jub l^e and Reformation.

2. The Turkish so wonderful Defeat, as struck with a Divine Terror, so upon
the Prophetical Hour of August, and it still continuing; Answering the
Beginning of the Beasts Forty two Moons; and so, I hope* at this Time declaring
His End.

3 The Prince of Muscovies so Illustrious Efforts, upon whom the Spirit of God
has appeared to Come, as on some of the worthies of Old; and by his Particular
Love to Protestant Princes, as if He were the First Fruits of the Grecian
Churches, and to be an Avenger of them on the Ottoman Power.

4 The Dawns of the Kingdom of Christ in any Beginnings of his Spirit pour^d
out; Zeal for Reformation; and Particularly in Ireland, where God has by that
Parliament Vindicated the Contempt thrown upon that Honorable Word of the New
Testament; Mystery; I hope, because Finishing Mystery, as He has Evan^glized
by his Servants the Pro-phets is so near;

And the Accumulation of his Great Works in All these things, on the lat^er
part of this Year, Gives Hopes, He is making haste with his Greater Works in
the End of this, and the Beginning of the Following Year.

The Instances against all this in the Popish continuing Grandieur, and its
seeming to Increase, The Elector of Saxony under whose Ancestors, The
Reformation found its First Protection, Giving back Himself, though not his
Power as Elector, to the Beast; Any other Prince doing so; The suffering
Witnesses in France and Savoy, not comprehended in, the Protestant Interest not
sufficiently secured by the Peace; I hope, These are all only an Argument, The
Great Prince of Princes is near to break all Antichristian Power without Hand;
and that when, It Cries Peace, Peace, Its Plagues shall Come in one Hour.

And that Man of sin with that Blasphemous Title; His Holiness; shall be Thrown
out of the Temple of God wherein He fits as God; by the Prayers of All Saints;
and the Lord whom we seek, suddenly will come into His Temple.

Now to All these Great purposes, Let the Lord God of the Holy Prophets, the
Amen, the Faithful Witness, the Blessed Spirit, as Seven Eyes of Wisdom and
Horns of Power, Running through All the Earth, Appear for his Kingdom and Bless
this Discourse, and Fulfill the Word of his most unworthy Servant.

Amen and Amen.
A Review Of what God has been pleased to do this Year according to Prophecy,
and particulorly near the 23d of the Month we style, August; with a most humble
Apology and Defense concerning the falling short of Events, of what was
expected according to the Interpretation of that sure Word of Prophecy.
HAving made so Long, and Large Declarations of what I have drawn from the Sure
Word of Prophecy, concerning this Present Year 1697. And particularly near the
23d of the Month we Call, ^ugust; And that nothing of so Great an Appearance
has yet been vouchsafed by our Good and Gracious God; It may be looked upon as
my Duty, to make either an Humble Acknowledgment of my mistake, and the
Deception, that the Just and Holy Lord has left me to therein, or to offer
some Apology and Defense for my self.

Now in the first Place, I would make the lowest and most self-abasing
Acknowledgment; That I am most unworthy of any such Gracious Communication, or
Manifestation from God in his Word; And most worthy, whom He should give up to
Error and Mistake: And that therefore, It would be no wonder, nor any thing
strange, If. He in just Wrath and Displeasure have so left me; All I have to
say, or plead against its being so, is Infinite Riches of Grace, Mercy and
Compassion in Christ to the Chief of Sinners.

But this being first Acknowledged, there is yet the Great Honor I owe to the
Word of Truth, and to the weighty Reasons and Arguments I have derived from it;
and the obligations that Lie upon me, to make the most Lowly and Thankful
Declarations for any Communications of Light to me, and of what God has been
pleased to begin to do this Year, and so has not left wholly exposed, what I
have spoken with Relation to 97. I would render therefore the best Accounts I
could, in Points of so Great weight and concernment to the Churches of Christ,
and even to the World in General, and to my self in Particular.

The General Proposal being then, to make a Review of this Year accordng to
Prophecy; I would reduce the Discourse upon it to these four Heads.

1. To observe in a General way, and to Acknowledge Freely, what is most
undeniably wanting in any thing, that has yet come to pass, of the Great
Expectations according to Prophecy, as yet in this 97.

2. To press notwithstanding; That due Confession and Adoration be made of, and
to Divine Providence in what has Eminently been done this Year, and upon the
very Time according to Prophecy; And to enquire diligently into its agreement
with Prophecy.

3. To consider what is to be expected, as Imported to us in that of our Lords
Oath; That the mystery of God shall be finished in the Days of the Seventh
Angel, when Rev. 10. 7. He shall Begin to sound, by observing the several
Applications of the Word Mystery to Things in the New Testament; And showing,
that every one of those things shall have their Complement, and Finishing from
the Seventh Angel Beginning to sound, Till the very Kingdom of Christ, and In
it.

4. To offer the best Conciliating Apprehensions, and Hopes with Relation to
Time, according to Scripture, and Prophecy, between the Failure of Expectation
in 97; With what is to be Expected in 97 Ending, and 98 Beginning.

1. As to the first Head, I must Humbly and Freely Acknowledge, we do not yet
behold the mighty effects of the Spirit of Life from God, upon the Witnesses in
their sufferings under Antichristian Powers; or the Universality of the
Witnesses of Christ out of their Sackcloth-state, and Mournful Prophecy of the
Kingdom of Christ in delay, and not yet being in its Illustrious Appearance:
They have yet the Seal of Concealment on their Foreheads, and do not yet stand
on Mount Zion with the Lamb, having his Fathers Name Conspicuously written on
those very Foreheads, where the Seal was before. That is, there is not yet that
Pouring out of the Spirit; They are not yet publicly justified, as the
Witnesses of Christ along the 1260 Years.

2. That the Stone cut out of the Mountains, that is not in Humane Hands; That
is; That does his Great Works immediately by himself, in breaking the Image of
the Four Monarchies in the last of them, and himself becoming a Great Mountain
filling the whole Earth, has not yet thus appeared; must also be confessed.

3. That therefore the Antichristian, and the Mohammedan State joined with it,
tho as a woe upon it, are not so broken yet, as that the Kingdoms of this World
should by the Ten Kings being overcome by the Lamb, be Proclaimed to be become
the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and He himself Universally
Acknowledged King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and his witnesses with Him,
Called, Chosen, Faithful, and known to be so. All which I had Hoped and
Expected, should have come to pass in this Year 97: and in the Prophetical
Hour, Viz. In the latter part of the Month August: Herein therefore and thus
far, I most willingly and humbly Acknowledge my Fault and Mistake: I come
therefore to the Second Head, and that is to observe, how far God has been
pleased to own his unworthyest Servant this Year, and in the very time of the
Year, in the Interpretation of Prophecy.

And there are two Things, which I would Remark upon, as very Eminent ^isposes
of Providence, wherein by Regarding the Operations of the Lord, and Searching
out the more hidden Things in the Works of his Hand, as those who Take Pleasure
therein; We may find a very wonderful agreement of Providence, with Prophecy in
this very Year, and at that Noted time of the Year.

1. The First is, That so Illustrious Providential Revolution, of setting Peace
in so many of the Kingdoms (into which the Western Roman Empire has stood so
long divided) after so long a War.

2. The strokes by the supreme ordination of Divine Government in the World, by
the Hand of the Prince of Mascovy, as a Prince of the Christian Profession
(according to those we Call) the Grecian Churches; and by the Hand of the
Imperial Power, that submits its self to the Roman Church (as it is also
called) and its Papacy upon the Turkish Empire.

And on each of these I would make their Particular, and Peculiar Remarks, and
First on the First.

Rem. 1. The settling Peace in the Borders of any Nation, and of Nations
together, after many Evils, and Harassings of War is a Great Mercy and Goodness
of God to those Nations, wherever It is displayed. This is very easily
Intelligible, and as easily Acknowledged by the Rejoycings, and Hopeful
Expectations from the present Peace, and the Triumphs wherewith it is Received:
And War is Accounted one of the Four Great Judgments of God in the World.

If we then consider, what an unreformed Nation we our selves are, and how
unreformed the Nations about us are; It is not according to the usual Method of
Providence to Remove Judgments without much Greater Effects of Ruin, or
Reformation; What then can we think, but that God bears with Patience the Great
Provocations of the Nations of Europe? Because they are Kingdoms, that
Peculiarly belong to the Kingdom of Christ; For the Lamb shall overcome the Ten
Kings, into a Voluntary subjection to his Rev. 17. 14, 16.
Kingdom; Which appears in that, They shall Hate the Whore, and burn her Flesh
with Fire. I cannot but hope therefore, God spares them from Ruining one
another, because he reserves them for that Time. Thus, because he would make
the Israelites a Type of the Kingdom of Christ; Although even at the Time of their
deliverance from Egypt, They Lifted up their Eyes to the Idols of Egypt, and
God lifted up his Hand to Destroy them, yet he wrought for his Name sake, and
did not Destroy them; And so I hope he does now.

Rem. 2. It is certain according to Prophecy, Peace is a Great Signal Ezekiel. 20.
9, 10.
of the Kingdom of Christ. And such a Time there shall be, When Nations shall
beat their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and their Swords into Esa. 2. Mic. 4.
Ploughshares; Nation shall not Lift up Sword against Nation, Nor shall they
Learn War any more; They shall sit every Man under his own Vine and Figtree;
Jesus Christ is the Prince of Peace, shall be no End* and of the Increase of
his Peace, even as of his Government there God will do that Astonishing Thing
in the World; He will Psalm. 46. 8.
make Wars to cease to the Ends of the Earth; He will break the Bow and Cut the
Spear in sunder, and burn the Chariots in the Fire; All the Instruments of
Cruelty shall, as by Gods own Hand be brought to an utter End; He will Still
All by his own Appearance, as God, when He in favor of his own People will be
Exalted in the Earth; when He is with his People, as in that City, whose Name
is Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there.

Obr. I know it will be said, There have been many times Treaties of Peace, and
that have been Consummated in an effective Peace, and yet no Kingdom of Christ
has succeeded; what Argument then can it be of such a Kingdom now, That there
is such a Peace?

Answ. 1. Yet every Peace is an Olive Branch, and a memorial of that Kingdom of
Peace; Even as every Judgment is an assurance of the Last Judgment; and every
War a Forerunner of the Great Battle at Armageddon, That shall bring All
Enemies under the Feet of Christ, and his Saints.

Answ. 2. The certain Argument of such a succeeding Kingdom of Christ does not
Lie Singly in a Peace, but in a Pea^e at such a Time, when by the Line of Time,
the Kingdom of Christ is so justly to be Expected; and so the Line of Time, and
the Peace do mutually strengthen, and assure one another; In the wisdom of
Divine Government of the World, There was an Universal Peace under Augustus, at
the Time of that First Specimen of the Kingdom of Christ, His coming in the
Flesh: It was not by it self a direct Argument of his coming at that Time; But
the Fullness of Time for his Coming, and the Peace did mutually Corroborate one
another, and give the Expectation of the Messiah then to appear: And so I hope,
it will appear at this Time; As some Years ago, In the Light of Prophecy, I
predicted; The End of this War, whether by breaking the French or by Peace,
would be speedily followed by the opening of the Kingdom of Christ.

Rem. 3. This Providential Revolution of the Peace, has given a stop to the
French Kings Aspirings to Universal Monarchy; Which as (most contrary to the
Bo^nds and Measures Assigned Him by Prophecy, To be but one of Ten Kings and
not the whole Ten, a part of the Iron and not the whole Iron; I have always
with greatest confidence, in the very height of the War asserte^; He could
never obtain; But He would find the same Disappointment, the House or Austria
found in Charl^* ^^ifth, Retreating into Solitude after the attempt; and in His
Son Philip of Spain, from that defeat of the Armada 88 Sinking lower and lower
to this Day.

Now in and by this Peace, an Eminent Hand of God has caused that Haughty
Monarch to Acknowledge; That he had Coveted an Evil Coveteousness, and
Increased That, which was not His; and therefore, tho He has not been spoiled
by the Force of War, or the Prevalency of Victory; Yet He is made to find; He
has in As^iring to set his Nest so High, and to stablish an Universal Monarchy
by Blood, Labored in the very Fire, and wearied himself for very Vanity; And
oh, That that which follows in Prophecy, might now speedily follow in Time,
brought to pass by the immediate Hand and Power of God; That the Knowledge of
the Glory of the Lord might cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea: And
then, All that is within his Poor Servants, Hab. 2. 14.
should Bless his Holy Name: But it is not very Remarkable, that that Prince,
who has Arrogated to Himself in the common Language of his People; Our
Monarch; as Preparatory to the Style of Universal Monarch; should so quietly
Resign and Give up his pretensions; and I make no doubt, however Insensibly to
himself and others, through the secret Force and Constitution of Prophecy; That
the Western Roman Empire, that was under one Caesar as supreme, till It ceased
in Augustulus; and then was to be Variegated into Ten Kingdoms as Ten Toes
under One Papal Head, or Supremacy in an Image, as Prophecy styles it most
Prophetically, (which it also styles the Beast) might so be, till his Time,
Times and Have a Time shall be Accomplished; When those very Ten Kings, who
gave their Kingdom to him, shall together as Ten, Recall it, and hate the
Whore; As therefore Prophecy has been in this Peace just to its word, They
shall be Ten till then; So I doubt not, It will be true in their speedy
subjection to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whose Right Alone, It is,
to be the truly Universal Monarch; And this shall be, when the Ten Kings shall
be thus overcome; It is therefore so signally set at that Time, and on that
overcoming; He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

And it is much the more Remarkable, That the Great Lord, who has Times, even
as the Hearts of Men and Princes, in his own Hand, should order this Peace in
the Year 1697. In which ending, I am bold yet to declare; The Times and Half
Determined to the Papacy, Expire; So that this Year must be the Ending of Half
Time; As then at the Beginning of Half Time, In the Wise and Holy dispose of
God; There was by the Emperor Charles V. being King of Spain, and Chosen
Emperor of Germany 1519. an offer made at Universal Monarchy, and was so
Repressed, as has been spoken, for the making Good of Prophecy; so in the
lat^er End of Half Time, He has permitted the same Attempt by the French King
for some Yea^s past, and having wearied it all along by the opposition rais^d
to it by the Confederacy, upon the very end of Half Time, this very 97, He has
by the Peace given this Boundary to it; That he may show, He magnifies his
Word, (and particularly of Prophecy) above All his Name;

Rem. 4. It des^rves just Reflection, That the Time of Negotiating, and
Transacting this Peace, must in the nearest and most Conclusive Treaties of it,
have run through the Prophetic Hour* Viz. From August 15th to the end of that
Month, and so into the following Month; So the public owning and signing of
it, was on the very 10th of the Seventh Month, the Day of the Ancient
Atonement and Jubilee; and that therein God has in some measure pleased to
own the Reference of his unworthyest Servant to that very Time; Oh, that it
might be an earnest of the Acceptable Year of the Lord, as of the Jubilee of
his Kingdom Approaching, though, as yet I must Acknowledge, much below my Hopes
and Expectations; I cannot yet but add; The Proclamations of Peace in England
and France, in this Month of October, Answer in Time in this last Year of Half
Time, to Gods Gracious Impulse upon the Spirit of Luther, to Proclaim an open
Evangelic War on Antichristian Rome, in the same Month of the First Year of
Half Time, Viz. 1517. And those, who Joined to herein with him, were Called
Evangelici, as in Allusion to the Word used in Prophecy, for the Finishing the
mystery God had Rev. 10. 7.
Evangelized his Servants the Prophets in, or made them Evangelics concerning,
which gives great Ground of Hope, there shall be some Highly Evangelical
Product of this Peace, and defyance of Antichristianism by it; Oh! Let us
Humbly wait and pray for it.

Rem. 5. It is very Greatly to be remarked, that God was pleased in the Last
1688. To have made an Extraordinary (Universally Acknowledged to be so)
Revolution in these Protestant Nations, of England, Scotland, and Ireland in
Bar of Popery (endeavoring to return upon them) and Universal Monarchy; That
has been owned, confederated, and allied with by some of the Greatest Princes,
that yet Give their Kingdom to the Beast; and has been disputed by the French
King, from the very Entrance of it, and in continuation, till this Peace; And
with whom the Abdicated King, the Late King James has had his Residence ever
since; Now that God has been pleased to own the Protestant Prince, this
Revolution brought in; to sustain him, and these Nations in so Long and
Expensive a War, in the midst of many great Losses by Sea, in a mutual
satisfaction, and confidence one in another; That he has preserved him in so
many Hazardous Passings, and Repassings the Sea, in so many Approaches of
Danger, and Jeopardyes of Life (as Scripture speaks) in the High Places of the
Field, where his person was so constantly Adventured; That he has been so
secured from Private Conspiracys, and Assassinations; and now so Highly
Agniz'd, so Publicly, so Solemnly and Augustly by the very French King, who
made it his Glory to disown Him; and is Returned this very Year of 97. Safe
with Public Tryumphs and Rejoycings in the Peace, equal to the Tryumphs of a
Victory, how Glorious soever; Oh, how many Grand Agreements has all this with
Prophecy! The attempts of Refunding Popery into these Nations, has been a
Design, as Ancient among the Depths of Satan, the Arcana Imperii, or Counsels
of Antichristianism, as the settlement of the Reformation here, and by all
Imaginable Artifices of Policy and Power; And it seemed the very Crisis for it
in that last Reign; That the most High decided against it with so High a Hand,
was very Glorious; That God has given so Great Advantages in Appearance for
the Return of King James by such a War, so Tedious, so Burdensome, in such an
absence of the King; And that the whole should be thus resolved into so very an
August Acknowledgment by the Grand opposer of Him; and that the Interest of the
same King James should be, as it were hushed into such a silence, and neglect,
as now appears, and by his very so Great Allie, is a very Exalted Hand of
Jehovah, for the Justification of the Reformation in these Nations; And that it
should be reserved for this Year 97. Is an Honorable Character fixed upon this
Year (as I hope) Immediately preceding the entrance of the Kingdom of Christ.

Rem. 6. That the War has been Carried on by such a Balance of Equality,
that, except we consider that Great Intention of Providence, to consine within
his own Figure Allowed by Prophecy, the French King, (in which It Confederated
so many Princes and States, however differing among Themselves) and the
securing Protestancy to these Nations; Except I say, we consider this; All has
been Laboring in the very Fire, and wearying the Nations for very Vanity; And
yet God has, as by an Immediate Hand of his own, Determined All into Peace;
This is, I have Great Trust; Because the next Thing he will do, shall be, to
Fill the Earth with the Knowledge of his Glory, as the Waters cover the Sea.

Rem. 7. I should Rejoice to find this Peace Propagating an Universal
Reformation of the open prophanesses, and wickednesses of the Nations; Which
the Societyes for Reformation in this City give some Hopeful Appearances of;
and it is much to be desired, The Power of the Magistrate would with it is own
Authority and Influence, Encourage such Honorable undertakings: And if it be
not so, as I doubt not It will, a Greater Magistracy will Take the matter into
its own Hand: But the very Motions however unformed, or Abortive they would, or
might prove of Themselves, are some Preliminary Motions to that Great
Reformation, the Kingdom of Christ will bring in, when to the People shall be
turned a Pure Language; And Men shall Fear the Lord, from the Rising of the Sun
to the going down of the same.

Rem. 8. It is Greatly to be Lamented, if the suffering Witnesses of Christ, in
any parts Comprehended within this Peace, have found no place of consideration
in it and Relaxation by it; But if they have not, I am the more Assured; It is
reserved for the Immediate Hand of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
overcoming the Ten Kings, and moving them, as by an Impulse from himself with
the Hatred of the Whore; and He will show his Servants, as a Light Arising in
the darkness of their sufferings yet continuing, the Morning Star in the first
Dawns of his Kingdom; Till it shall come to the Bright Morning Star of his own
Glorious Appearance in that Kingdom at the Highest Elevation of it.

Rem. 9. It is in the next Place of a most Hopeful Reflection to me, That this
Peace Falls, as a Blow upon the League between the French King, and the Turkish
Sultan, so as to dissolve it; For as I have heretofore argued, so I shall now
more Fully, and yet very Briefly Represent it: The true Account of the Visional
order of Breaking the Image, Dan. 2. Is, That the Stone smote the Image on its
Feet of Iron and Clay First, and so the whole was broken: This is most
Precisely and Definitively set down, v. 34. The Stone Cut out, which is not in
Hands, smote the Image upon his Feet, which were of Iron and Clay, and Brake
Them to Pieces: And again, v. 35. Then was the Iron and the Clay First) and All
the Image Broken, so, that it became as the Chaff of the Summer-Threshing
Floor: This therefore from compare of one part of this Prophetic Vision with
another, and with the New Testament Prophecy of the Revelation, must be the
Order The First part of the Image smitten is the Iron Feet of the Ten Kings
Rev. 17.
overcome by the Lamb, and the Called, Faithful, Chosen Witnesses with Him;
Then these Ten Kings, who had with one Consent given their Kingdom and Power to
the Beast, serve the Lamb by hating the Whore, and burning her Flesh with Fire;
This shaking, as an Earthquake, the Great City, and its Decemprincipality, or
Tenfold Principality Arising from the Ten Kings, so giving their Power to the
Beast, that Carried Her, Falls. Thus the Clay is Broken by the First Approach
of the Kingdom of Christ, weilding the Iron, or the Ten Kings to his service:
But then All is Threshed and Broken, as into Chaff, by the stone Becoming a
Mountain fuling the whole Earth; So there remains no Power but Christ's, and
his Saints with him, to whom the Dominion under the whole Heaven is given.

But now, v. 45. The Stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, brake in
pieces first the Iron, then nor the Clay, but the Brass. The True Order of the
Final Stroke was set down before, which could not be changed; what therefore is
given, v. 45. must be some previous and preparatory stroke, that Falls upon the
Iron and the Brass in a Conjunction; and the Greatness, that Each* had by that
Conjunction, comes to nothing: And by that change of the Order, this Previous
Stroke is shaded under the Full and Final Breaking of the whole, and silently
intimated by it. By the Iron I understand the French Power, in this Great
Spread of it self against so many of the Ten Kingdoms confederated, as it has
been of late years, and its Aspirings to be the whole Iron it self; that is, to
Universal Monarchy.

And this I look upon to be noted by the Iron in this place of Daniel; By the
Brass I Apprehend the Grecian Power, as now in the Hand of the Turk; whose Port
is the Grecian Constantinople: Now then this is a private Proph^tical
Watchword of the very Time, when the whole Image shall be Broken; It shall be,
when that Unnatural Conjunction between Him, who would be the whole Iron of the
Feet, and who will be called the most Christian King, and the now Belly of
Brass, the Turkish Power, the Professed Enemy of Christians, shall be Broken by
the Stone, cut out of the Mountains, in his Supreme Providence, and come to
nothing: Now this Conjunction we see thus brought to nothing by this Peace; the
French King not able to bear up his Former retensions by the Loss of Turkish
Aids; nor the Turk against the Emperor, by the Loss of French Assistances. And
in this very 97. why then should we not look for the whole Image to be soon
after Broken in its own Just Order now First given? And the Strokes upon the
Turk in the very Time of the Treaty are Justly to be looked upon as the
Proclaiming his Coming to an End, and None to help Him: Now if this be a True
Interpretation of this Prophetic Vision, (and I do not s^e what can be objected
to it) what a Great Assurance is it, That in this 97. the Great Change that
this Vision foretells must needs be very near to come into effect; and who can
once imagine, that so Divine a Vision, so exactly in every Thing framed, could
by Chance, and ^ot without some Great Design, and Purpose, Transpose the Iron
from the Feet of Iron and Clay, to the Belly and Thighs of Brass, and place the
Clay of the Feet between the Brass of the Belly, and the Silver of the Breast.
And I cannot but demand, what Fairer Exposition, or Interpretation of
Providenttal Event, could be given to such a Prophecy? Now I must be bold to
say, Whosoever has Wisdom, let him consider it; The Wise shall understand, but the
Prejudiced and the Careless will not understand.

Rem. 10. All this is much the more Remarkable in that Prince, who has been
the severe Enemy, and the open Persecutor of the Reformation, and yet continues
so; and therefore i^ the Kingdom of Christ be so near, as these Compares of
Prophecy give hopes; he must either be Removed suddenly by a stroke of
Judgment, or by so eminent a Conversion, as Persecuting Paul was an
Hypotyposis, or Pattern of; For he has Raged even to Madness against the
Reformation, and been Breathing out Threatenings against the Witnesses of it,
and so continues; And yet his Kingdom is one of the Te^, whose Kings shall be
overcome by the Lamb, and Hate the Whore. He must then either be a Great
Instance of Converting Grace, as it were from Heaven, (or of Judgment)* and
seeing the God of All Grace is most Glorious in the Former, and the Fruit of it
might be much Greater in the World; I look upon it as our Duty, to pray for it,
and desire it, if I may not say, to hope for it; That God, who has bowed his
Heart so far in the Acknowledgment of a Protestant King, so set up by himself,
may please also to Bow his Soul to the Protestant Religion, and to a Zeal for
it answerable to his former Persecutions, and to this very day.

Now thus far I have Remrak'd upon the First of the Providential Events of this
Year, as it is preparatory to the Kingdom of Christ, according to the
Interpretation of Prophecy, That Prophecyings may not be despised, but All
awakened Earnestly to Pray, and wait for that Kingdom; seeing there is so much
to be observed in this Providential Revolution of the Peace, as to be a Door of
hope, and a Day of small Things; and that in this very Year of 1697. And I dare
not Assume it to be more, I humbly confess, as yet; As in the Following
Observations upon the Great Strokes on the Turkish Potentacy, I shall further
Acknowledge.

I come now to the Second Grand Providential Event of this Year 1697. The
severe Strokes, The Great Governor of the World, and Lord of Hosts, has
caused by the Arms of the Czar of Muscovy, and of the Emperor of Germany, to
fall upon the Mohammedan ^ttoman Signiory; and to adjust them by Prophecy to the
near Approach of the Kingdom of Christ.

That I may present this in the Clearest and most Compendious Table, I shall
First consider Mahometanism in the General, as common to the Saracens and
Turks; and then peculiarly, as it is now seated in the Ottoman Turkish Emp^r^^,
and each in several short Notes of Observation; and Argue from them the Great
Hopes, that these Strokes upon that Mohammedan Imposture and Tyranny, are
Forerunners of the Final Dissolution of it, and of the Kingdom of Christ,
succeeding.

1. The very Essential State of this Imposture and Tyranny, is designed by God,
as a Mock-Antichrist to the Grand Roman Papal Antichrist, a Paraselene, or
Counterfeit Moon to his Moon, even as Antichrist is a mock-Christ, or in
Despite to our True Lord Christ.

1. Mahomet acknowledges Christ a Great Prophet, even as Antichrist does; but
robs Him of the Glory of his Divinity, and of being the only Supreme, True
Prophet, wherein He is an Antichrist.

2. He Abhors Idols; Herein He mocks Antichristian Idolatry, but sets up the
Idol-Prophet, Mahomet; Therein He is an Antichrist.

3. He pretends to an Universal Kingdom; Herein He mocks the Papal Antichrist;
One by the Spiritual, the other by the Temporal Sword, pretends to an Universal
Kingdom, but both undermine Christ^s Kingdom, and Both are Antichrists therein.

4. He offers a Fools Paradise, and Deliverance from Future Misery, but as
Counterfeit as the Popes Deliverance from Purgatory, by his Key of the
Bottomless Pit; Herein are they both Antichrists, but Mahomet, as coming last,
and upon the Papacy, is a Mock-Antichrist, an Antichrist in despite.

5. He pretends some Reverence to some of the Sacred Writings, but has brought
in a Nonsensic Alcoran, as vain as Papal Traditions, and Oral Laws.

2. The Time therefore of the Beginning of this Imposture and Tyranny was soon
after the Papal Supremacy, the one at 606. the other at 622. The one the
Antichristian, the other the Mohammedan Hegire, when its Tyranny came forth;
while the one lasts, the other lasts also; when the one ends, the other shall
end also: If therefore Antichristian Times determine in 97. Mohammedan Times
shall determine with them; why them may we not hope, this Blow on Mahometanism
is an Alarm-Blow upon Both Antichrists now ready to Expire?

I come now more particularly to consider the Ottoman Turkish Power, and to
Remark on that, as more precisely before us in the Events of this Year; and so
make these Remarks upon it.

1. The Ottoman Power Appeared in the Greatest Extremity, and lowest Condition
of the Witnesses after the Great Persecution upon Those we call the Vaudois;
and the most cruel Slaughter of so many of Them: In Revenge of which, God sent
the Ottoman Power, to Remonstrate against the Antichristian Salvagenesses.

2. They were designed by God to Raise the Mohammedan Imposture and Tyranny, to
the Imperial Throne of Eastern Rome, or Constantinople. C. 11. 45.
This is expressed by Daniel, as the planting the Tabernacle of his Palace
between the Seas, in the Glorious Holy Mountain, so Honorably styled, because
it was the City of Constantinople, that First Christian Emperor, and Great Type
of the Kingdom of Christ; This was in the Year 1453.

3. The Ottoman Emperor, Selymus, in, or upon the First Year of the
Reformation, 1517. seized upon Judea and Jerusalem, styled by Daniel, Chapter 11.
41. the Glorious Land.

4 There is an Absolute Determination of God; This Mohammedan Ottoman Prince
shall come to his End, C. 11. 45.

Seeing this is so determined, we have Reason to look upon this very Year as
the Year of his Approaching end, on these Reasons.

1. The Mohammedan Ottoman Emperor, Coming in as a Judgment upon Papal,
Antichristian Cruelty, and Advanced to the Throne of the Eastern Roman Empire,
That he might be a Mock Antichrist to the Grand Antichrist in the West; He must
in all the Reason and Sense of Prophecy, be Limited to the Times of the First
Antichrist; Because, when the Sin is Removed, The Judgment shall be Removed
also; And when the True Lord and Christ shall Consume the Great Antichrist by
the Breath of his Mouth, He will Consume All other Antichrists with Him: If
then the Times of the Papal Antichrist, shall End in this 1697. The Mohammedan
shall End in it also.

2. Accordingly we find; The Time Assigned to the Ottoman Power standing
prepared to obtain, and to hold in possession that Roman Eastern Empire, will
exactly agree from the Time of His Rising with the End of Antichristian Times;
For let us with the best and most of Chronologers, Date his Rising to the Year
1300. And Prophecy Assigns to him for the obtaining, and holding the Grecian
Empire under his Power, an Hour, a Day, a Month, a Year; Which by Fair
Prophetical Computation make up 397 Years, and so must end 1697.

3. The seizing on Jerusalem just at the Reformation, when the last 180 Years,
or Half Time of Antichristianism entered, is a very Hopeful Argument to me,
That this Ottoman Term of Power is this Year to End; For there is a Concurrence
of Three Great Periods, according to that very seizure of Jerusalem by the
Ottoman Power in the Year 1517. Which Fall on this very Year 1697.

The Period of the Antichristian Times, in the last Half Time being Remarked as
by the Reformation, so by the Particular stroke of God on the Papal Antichrist,
in the seizure of such a Place, to which so High a Devotion is pretended by the
Grand Antichrist into the Hand of the Mock Antichrist, and who Himself, to show
Himself a Mock-Antichrist, made the same pretense of Devotion to, and at it; As
History Reports of Selymus, that Turkish Saltan* who seized it: And it is
worthy observation, That the Enlargement of the Ottoman Empire at that Time,
and in those Parts, and Particularly on the ^oly City and Land, Gave the Fair
and Plausible pretension to the Papal Raising Money by Indulgences to withstand
and resist it; Which odious Cheat of Indulgences gave the Great Advantage to
the Reformation, as is well known; And it gives much Encouragement to Hope; So
Eminent a Consiguration against Antichristianism, as of the taking Jerusalem,
and the Reformation, and the latter so Derived from the Former, upon the Year
1517. Gives it an undoubted Title to be the Beginning of Half Time, or the Last
180 Years of Antichristianism, and so to be at an End this 1697.

2. The Period of the Jewish Captivity, and Jerusalems being Trodden under Foot
of All Nations; For seeing those Times upon Judea and Jerusalem, are Bounded by
the Gentiles Times Fulfilled, and that the Time of the Antichristian Apostasy,
are peculiarly by Prophecy Branded, as Gentiles Times of Treading under Foot
the Holy City: If the Antichristian Half Time (which is its last) Began 1517,
and Ends 1697. Consequently the last 180 Years of ^ewish Captivity, and
Conculcating, or Trampling under foot-Times must end, and Consequentially also,
Mohammedan Times, that hold Jerusalem and Judea under that Conculcation, must
end at the same time too.

3. The Period of Mohammedan Times Themselves, must be found in this very 1697.
For then the Time of Turkish planting the ^abernacl^ of his Palace, in the
Glorious Holy Mountain, Ceases; And Constantinople shall Return to its Former
Glory under Constantine, and be a Grand City in the Kingdom of Christ; The
taking therefore of Constantinople, drew so near to the Time of the Reformation
at the last Half Time of Antichrist, to Foreshew, Both those Antichrists of
East and West, shall be consumed together in 1697 Ending.

4. That Complication of Power, that seems at this Time to be Gathering against
the Ottoman Empire, looks like a Hopeful Symptom, Their End is now Approaching:
For so Daniel describing his End, says, Tidings out of the East and North shall
Trouble Him, and then the Dan. 11. ult.
Conclusion of All is, He shall come to his End, and none shall help Him. Now,
how very exactly does this agree with the present Juncture, Viz. The
Combination of the Muscovian Forces on one side with the Imperial on the other
side, in the same Design of bringing Him down: And what may come upon Him from
Poland, He is not Insensible of; Now All these Trouble Him; And that unnatural
Aid He had from France is deserting Him; So that Things make up the very Aspect
of that Prophetic Vision of Daniel upon Him.

5. If we consider the Muscovian Prince; He is of that Profession of
Christianity found among those we Call the Greek Churches, who, though they are
the other Wing of the Roman Eagle, or Empire, that Rev. 12. c. 13.
Carried the Church into the Antichristian Wilderness, and the other Horn of
that Lam^, that spoke as a Dragon, yet the Antichrist it self settled, in what
is Called the Western, or Latin Rome, and the other are not under the Black
Brand of that: These two parts of the Roman Empire are styled in Relation to
one another, The Rest of Men; And it is said of the Antichristian Rest of Men,
Notwithstanding the Judgment on the Eastern Rome, Rev. 9. ult. c. 11. 13.
They Repented not; But of the Rest of Men of the Eastern Part, when they saw
the Judgment on the Western Babylon, or Rome, they were Affrighted, and Gave
Glory to the God of Heaven by Repentance, which speaks to me in short
Prophetical Language, the Restitution of the Grecian Churches; And it
immediately follows; The Second, that is, The Mohammedan woe is past; I Rejoice
therefore, That God has made use of a Prince of the Grecian Profession, so
Victoriously over the Mahometans, by whom they are now held in slavery.

6. The Imperial Power, though yet given according to Prophecy to the Beast, is
yet made use of in the Sense, It is said; The Earth helped the Woman in
Drinking up the Mohammedan Flood; The Judgment falls especially on the Civil,
and Ecclesiastic Antichristian State, and therefore it does its utmost to
resist it; and particularly God has made use of the German Emperor, as a
Bullwark of the Western Roman Empire against the Mahometane and I hope The
Empire shall yet become an eminent part of the Kingdom of Christ.

7. That Great turn God has pleased to make in the Spirit, and Victoriousness
of the Ottoman Power, from so High a Tide to so low an Ebb; And under this very
present Prince, who seemed to recollect All its former prowess and magnanimity,
but it has proved like a last effort, or as they speak, like a Lightning
before Death.

8. The weight and severity of the stroke in so great a slaughter, and as by an
immediate Hand of Gods own, as in Times of old on his Enemies; Terror upon
them, Castingthem Headlong into the River, Does I hope Intimate a near
approaching Final Destruction; And that All this is come to pass in this Year
1697. According to the Line of Time, and in those Remarkable Months we Call
August, and September, and in the very prophetic Hour of August. I have so
Remarked upon; and so upon the Time of the Scripture Jubilee; In All which I
cannot but hope, God has been pleased to take off much of the Scandal of my
mistake; And this is the Consummating Reason of my Hope.

I have now dispatched the Second Head of this Apology, and come to the Third;
Or what, It is I expect, when Time shall be no more, but for the Finishing of
the mystery of God; Which I shall but just represent in the several uses, the
Spirit of God makes of the Word Mystery in the New Testament; And show, That
the Mystery of God in every of those Things, shall be Finished in the Kingdom
of Christ, Beginning and Going on to open it self into its Fullest Glory.

1. The Gospel, the Comprehensive Mystery, the Mystery of Faith, of Godlyness;
The Mystery of God, of the Father, of Christ; With All its Divine and Glorious
Truths, The Mysterys of the Kingdom of Heaven; shall be Finished, by the Full
Revelation of it in the Everlasting Gospel, Preached to every Nation under
Heaven; And particularly in that Branch, Christ Received up into, or rather for
Glory, Viz. The Glorious manifestation of Himself, upon which the Apostasy has
so long layn as an Eclipse, and Delay.

2. The Mystery of the Union betwixt Christ and Believers, in the Spiritual
Marriage, shall be Finished in the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, making her self
Ready, and the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb.

3. The Mystery of the Gentiles, Universally brought in, and illustriously
united as a (...), or One Body with the Israel of God.

And further, The Eclipse taken off, that is yet upon the Gentile Churches, and
their return to a Full orb'd Light, according to the Promises made to the
Churches in the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

4. The Mystery of Reconciliation, Reception, Salvation, and Fullness of All
Israel, when that Full Glory of the Gentiles is; Then shall be a Great
Appearance of the Fulfilling All the Great promises, and Prophecys we find in
both the Old and New Testament to that People; when the Gentiles Times are
Fulfilled, as was Noted; a Summary Assurance of which is the very Name of that
City, The New Jerusalem.

5. The Mystery of the Seven Churches, as Seven Golden Candlesticks, in the
midst of which The Son of Man walks, and the Seven Stars of the Evangelick
Ministry, seen in his Right Hand, in all the Glory of each; The Seven Churches,
as Types of the Churches, of the New Testament successively with their Angels;
And comprehending under them Those Grecian Churches of Asia, All brought into
the Glory and Purity of the Philadelphian Church; and the New Jerusalem, the
City of our God coming down into it, shall then be fully Finished.

6. The Mystery of the Antichristian Church, City, and the whole Hierarchy of
it, with All its Abominations, shall be laid open, understood of All, and come
to an utter end by the mighty Spirit of Christ's Mouth, by the Brightness of his
Appearance, and by the Judgments, He will execute according to Rev. 17. and C.
18. On the Woman's Forehead was written Mystery; The Mystery of the Woman, and
the Beast that Carried Her, and the Judgment of the Great Whore, were made
known to John by the Angel, and it shall be a Mystery Finished, that is, Laid
open and brought to an utter End.

7. The Mystery of the Divine will in Recapitulating, and Recollecting All
Things in Heaven, and Earth in Christ, even in Him, as the Head; in the
fullness of Times, of All Times (that is) in the Glorious Thousand
Years-Kingdom of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 10.

8. The Mystery of the Living Saints changed, who shall Inherit the New Earth,
during the 1000 Years, and walk in the Light of the New Heavens, or Jerusalem
above, in the sight of Christ, and of his Saints of the First Resurrection, and
in Bodies every way Proportioned to that Blessed State, and Healed with the
Leaves of the Tree of Life; This the Apostle shows, as a Great Mystery, 1 Cor.
15.

Now other then these eight Great uses of the word Mystery, or what is most
clearly referring to Them, I do not find in Scripture; and seeing the Spirit of
Prophecy has so comprehensively used the word Mystery concerning its
Finishing, and that each of these things is Styled Mystery in the Gospel, and
shall have so certain a Consummation, and Complement in the Kingdom of Christ,
We may very well Expound the one by the other, and be sure of their coming into
their Finishing, when Time of a former sort, that is, of the Time, Times, and
Half Time shall be no more; And because there are such direct assurances of the
Finishing of each of these in the Prophecy of the Revelation, How clear is it!

And now I come to the Fourth and Last Head; To give the duest and justest
Apology concerning no more Appearance of the Finishing of the mystery of God,
in All these Great mentions of it, already in this Year 1697; And to adjust
between the Humblest Acknowledgment of my own misunderstanding in what Has
fallen so much below; and yet with equal Acknowledgment of what has been
already reflected upon to have passed, as an Earnest and Pledge; And wherein
yet I have sure Grounds (as I most Humbly conceive and believe) in the sure
word of Prophecy concerning 97. And hereof I will give Account in this short,
but yet full Declaration of my self, and of my Sense herein.

The Year 1697. I must still look upon, as I have all along Remonstrated to be
the very Year, in which the Time, Times, and Half Time of the Antichristian
Apostasy, and of the 1260 Years of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and of the
Church in the Wilderness are to Expire and End.

But now, whether in the Beginning of the Year 97. as I first Hoped, or toward
the Middle of the Year, on the Twenty Third of the Month, we call August,
Answering to the Twenty Third of the same Month, 476. on which the Roman
Western Empire ceased in Augustulus, as I had Entertained Hopes, when I found
no such Appearances in the Beginning of the Year; or that in, and with the very
Ending of the present 1697. the aforenamed Terms Expire* Solomon says, The
Desire of a Man is his Kindness. I desire with all Sense of Unworthyness to
speak it; The earnest desire of my Soul in Love to the Kingdom of Christ, and
the Hope of it deferred, making my Heart even sick, excited my Zeal to prefer
the Times, that I had any Reason to pitch upon, that were nearest: And this, as
I now find, produced the mistake, which I desire with All Self-Humiliation to
confess before God, his People, and to own it as a Rebuke from Him; Though I
trust, in Love, that I might not trust in my own understanding, or be any way
Exalted in any Communications from his Word, but Lie low before Him; and that
his Truth, and Wisdom may be seen in my Folly and Weakness; and in this regard
I take pleasure in it; That his Power may Graciously yet Tabernacle over me,
and His strength be perfected in my weakness, and his Grace sufficient for me;
Under this Correction, I have come to consider; That this Year 97, must
perfectly run out, Ere the Time, Times and Half a Time, the 1260 Days, and the
42 Months End; And that, as God appointed the Beginning of the Sacred
Israelitish Year, to be in the Month Nisan, or about the Vernal Equinox; And
that this was the Time of the Children of Israel, Going out of the Bondage of
Literal Egypt; So that the Slavery under Spiritual Egypt should end with the
Year, and Deliverance begin in 98. beginning.

2. I always Accounted; The Apocalyptical Epoch, or the Beginning of Times
Given in the Prophecy of the Revelation, take Their Commencement from the Day
of the Lords Resurrection; which falls in, as is well known with the Beginning
of the aforenamed Israelitish Year; and consequently, the Beginning of the 1260
Years must be at the same time of the Year; and consequently also, They must
there end; when therefore they are ended, In the beginning of the Following
Year 98. shall the Passover from Spiritual Egypt be Celebrated by the Spirit
of Life on the Witnesses; Proportionably shall Follow the Pentecost of the
Spirit poured out; Proportionably also shall follow the Fall of the Greai City
in the Month called August, at the Cessation of the Beasts Months.

3. Herein shall be seen the Exactness of Divine Truth, and of the Justness of
Christ to his Oath, That there should be Time, Times, and Dan. 12.
Half a Time to the utmost Hour; The Antichristian State then Ending with the
End of 97. In the very Beginning of 98. The Sun of Righteousness shall come
from under the Eclipse by the Moon of Antichrist, and shine out with Healing in
his Wings; and so Things go forward to the Kingdom of Christ. And then comes in
the other Oath Indented with it; Time of such sorts shall be no more, Rev. 10.

If any should say, How if you are mistaken in the Beginning of 98, as you was
in 97. The Answer I must make, is, I should then lay my Hand upon my Mouth, and
say with Job, I am vile; Once, yea, Twic^ have I spoken; But I will do so no
more: I would, through Grace, Repent, and abhor my self in Dust and Ashes
before God, as having provoked Him so Justly to Deny his Presence and Powerful
Attestation, to what I have declared out of his word; Because He was not
pleased to Lead me to the true Interpretation of it; And yet I can no more be
persuaded, the Appearance of that Kingdom of Christ, I have so much spoken of,
can be far off, then I can be persuaded, The Prophecy of Daniel and the
Revelation are not true; Because I find so Great Assurance, the whole Scope and
Tendency, and the order of the Visions, and so many and great Events Recorded
in undoubted History and Chronology, do so set it beyond all doubt, That this
Kingdom must be near Approaching; But if the Humble hopes, I have in the End of
this, and the Beginning of the Following Year, and Prayers for it be not
Answered; I shall look upon my self obliged, to Acknowledge; The very
particular Year, when it shall be, God has hidden from the most Humble and
Industrious search, and Enquiry into the Prophecy of Scripture concerning it,
which I have the Testimony of Conscience, I have waited upon Him in.

Obj. If it be said, why will you then having been confessedly in an Error
concerning the Former parts of the Year 97. Presume on the End of it, and so of
the Beginning of 98.

Answ. 1. Because I find all the Great Reasons, I have Founded my Determination
for 97 upon, stand as Good and as Firm for the End of it, and for the Entrance
of the Kingdom of Christ in the Beginning of 98; as in any other part of 97.
And in this Regard more Firm, that hereby the Computation of Years from the
Resurrection of our Lord, whith is the Apocalyptick Epoch is more Ascertained;
It is more certainly known where to Begin and where to End: Hereby it is known,
the 2300 Eves, Morns of Years, Dan. 8. Begin in the Vernal Beginning of each
Year, and so End, where the following Year Begins. That the 1260 Years of the
Witnesses Sackcloth-Prophecy, and of the Churches Wilderness-State must Begin,
and End so; And that the Forty two Moons of the Gentiles and of the Beast,
must be Correspondently Governed; and so the mistake of August the 23 was only
in a Circumstance; as if the Lunar Years of the Beast, might have begun there
and so end there. But if the Beginning of all Account of Apolyptical Time, and
so of the End, be the Beginning of each Year in the Spring; Then must the Event
Answering the 23d of August, when the Roman Western Empire ceased, Fall into
the Year, not of the last of the 1260, Because the Time of the Months will not
be run out, while the Last is Current; but The first Year of the New Era of
Time, for Finishing the Mystery, and when the Seventh Angel shall begin to
Sound, must produce that Great Event in that Month, we Call August; and follow
the Rising of the Witnesses in the Beginning of that Year, Answerable to our
Lords Resurrection; and the Pouring out of the Spirit, Answerable to the
Apostolic Pentecost; and so the Fall of the Beastian-Power, and his Months
quite darkened, Answerable to that 23d of August when they began.

But if there had been the Change of the very Year it self, and so the Loss of
it. The very Frame of my Scripture Line it self must have been altered; If the
Year 97 Must end it self, that that whole-Course of Time may end and a new one
begin in the Spring of the following Year, and the Finish^ng, our Lord in that
Vision, Rev. 10. speaks of, Begin with it; All stands clear and firm in the
main; And for this therefore I wait and pray.

Answ. 2. When I duly consider the Imperial Victory, not only as I have already
spoken of it, but as I have kept in Reserve till now; That it is to be
compared, as with the Time of the Cessation of the Western Empire of Rome in
Augustu^us, so with the Determination of Prophecy upon, and with Relation to
that Cessation, and what it Intended, and Designed upon it; I cannot but
Acknowledge a very Extraordinary Hand of God in it; and such as owns a peculiar
Regard to it, and gives a Pledge of Future Expectation upon it; so that I
cannot with Just Estimation of, and Acknowledgment due to that, lay down either
my Hopes, or public Testimony concerning this Year Ending, and the Following
Beginning.

First then, I consider the Time of this Imperial Victory, I have so far, and I
hope not without Great Weight Remarked upon* and I find the Imperial Army so in
motion and preparation for i^, by the most Certain and Valuable Intelligences
we have Received of it from our 23d of August: and the very Victory it self
upon the 31st of that Month, according to our Old Style Account, within the
Virge of the Prophetical Hour, that I cannot but stand in Humble Admiration at
it: For every love of the Armies to that very Day of Victory it self, is to be
enfolded with, and united to it; So that herein is in undeniable Matter of
Fact, an Agreement thus far in Time.

Obj. I know the difference of New and Old Style may be objected; and that the
New Style, as being the Reformation of the Calendar is most Exact: And that
from this the Prophetical Hour in the Sixth Month, and so the Imperial Victory
Flies further off by the Ten Days difference; and the Peace in the Seventh
Month from the Day of Atonement and Jubilee.

Answ. 1. But in Answer to this, It is nothing strange, If God is pleased to
neglect that Papal Reformation of the Calendar, as coming within that
usurpation of his Changing Times, Dan. 7. 25, Who would not Reform his Changing
of Laws, even those Eternal ones of the Word of God; Although he must needs see
a Divine Hand had gone some considerable Number of Years before Him in such a
Reformation, by Luther, and other eminent Servants of his, Churches and States,
viz. from 1517. to 1582. But He, who by his Great Works of Providence, changes
Times and Seasons with Supreme Right, Justice and Authority, or Retains them,
pleases to Honor the Old Style with peculiar Respect to this Protestant
Nation, that still uses it.

Answ. 2. Although some Times God in his Great Works observes Time to the self
same Day; yet at other Times, He may, as he pleases* make some Variation; as
Solomon's Beginning to Build the Temple, is dated 2 Chronicles. 3. 2. On the second
Day of the second Month from the Going of the Children of Israel out of Egypt,
which was on the Self-same day of the Fourteenth of the First Month: This shows
God sometimes is pleased to Allo^ a Latitude: I cannot therefore but most
Humbly Adore Divine Goodness, in Approaching so near with so Em^nent a
Providence, as so complete a Victory over the Power of the Eastern Antichrist,
so Acknowledged an Enemy to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, upon the Time
Remarked by the Unworthiest Minister of his Kingdom.

Answ. ^ But it is much more considerable, That the Gracious God has, by
Striking that M^ck-Antichrist so near that very Day of the Cessation of the
West^rn E^^^^^, in the Year 476; yielding Rist to the 42 Moons of the Beast,
and the Ten Kings; given Warning, that according to the True Adjustment of
Lunar Time to Solar, Their Space of Reign then, strictly speaking, ended, and
that was their last August of Power; and before the Coming of that Month, in
the following Year, They shall be in Subjection to the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords.

Answ. 4. It is most Remarkable, That the Effective Treaties of the Peace at
Reswick, and the Victory over the Turks by the Imperial Forces were very hear
together, by which our Wise and Holy God was pleased to show; That He would
dissolve that Union between the French King, that would have been the whole
Iron, or an Universal Monarch, as has been said, and the Brass of the
Graco-Turkish Potentacy, and Bring that Potentacy Low at the same time; and
that by both He would preserve, as has been before Argued, the Ten Kingdoms of
the We^^ern Empire, till They shall as ^en be Overcome by the Lamb at the
Expiration of their Term with the Beast now so near Expiring.

And it is indeed very observable That as in the disposes of our True God, the
Power of the Eastern Empire was Thrown early after the settlement of the Ten
Kingdoms in the West, out of the ^estern Empire, and the Exarchate of Ravenna
made to cease for many Great Services, and Ends according to Proph^cy; So
although in a way of Judgment, God has suff^red Mohammedan, parti^ularly
Turkish Eruptions into it, especially in Hungary, and Transy^vania; Yet he has
still Reprima^ded the^, and the Attempts of the Greatest Princes among them, as
of their Magnificent Solomon upon ^enna, was shamefully disgraced; and from the
Last Bes^iging of it in the Year 80 That Empire has been Tottering and
Shaking: Because t^erein it has dared to pass the Bounds set it by Proph^cy;
Although it has entered into the Holy Land, Egypt has not escaped, Ethiopia
has been at its steps; Yet it never could stretch its Hands, as over other
Countries, Or overnow to Vienna, much less to Rome carried Alought by the P^pal
^east. This Stroke therefore has so overtaken and surrounded the Turkish
Armies in ^ungary, as if God would give Testimony; That at the same time He
preserved the Ten Kingdoms from the Aspirings of an Universal French Mon^^chy
by the Peace* He would also Vindicate Them from the Overspread of a Mohammedan
Turkish Overfl^w. In all which the wonder^ul Doings of our Great, and Holy God,
ought to be Triumphed in by Al^ His Servants; and most especially by the
Un^orthiest of his Servants in the Sure Word of Prophecy, as happy Forebodes of
his Kingdom at the End of 97. and the ^eginning and Going on of 98

And now upon All that has been spoken, I cannot but Rejoice, in Recalling
that Proph^cy I have ^ome Years ago in a former ^reatise enlarged upon; Found
in the Study of ^ustus L^psi^s, Ann 1606. and that has been near Fifty Years
Extant in the Exposition of D^ M^yer on those Books of Scripture, called, The
small Prophets; which I will again here Transcribe, for more universal Notice,
because I Know It to be ^ounded on Greatest Reason of Scripture, and Assured by
the Chrono^ogy of Prop^etic Events, and therefore I cannot but Think the
Composer Assisted by a Prophetic Spirit.

The Original Prophecy.
Post Mill Expletos a Partu Virginis Annos,
Et post sexcentos Rursus ab Orb Datos:
Nonagesimus octavus, Mirabilis Annus
Ingruet; Is secum Gaudia Laeta Fcret.
Corruet Hoc Anno Turcarum Invisa propago,
Roma Tuum in Libris Fabula Nomen Erit.
Omnia Tunc-Ibunt Munde, sursum, atque Deorsum
Imperia, ut populos sceptra Novella premant:
Vtque suum cunctas Verbum Diffundat in or as
Christus; and Imperitet Nomine Vbique suo.
The Translation.
From Virgins Son Thousand Years when Told,
And after them a Hundred more are Rolled,
Then Ninety Eight a Year of wonders comes,
And Joys on Joys it heaps to vastest Sums:
The Hated stem of Turks that Year shall Fall,
Oh Rome, in sacred Bo^ks Foretold Men All
Shall Call thy Name that Lie; Earths Empires move
Their upside down; a Novel Empire proves
The Universal Monarchy; Then Christ
To tb' Everlasting Gospel giving R^st,
Shall through All Tongues and Kindreds it diffuse,
And for Imperial style his own Name use.
I would now conelude all, with earnest desires of the constant Fervent Prayers
of the Servants of God, for the speedye^ Answer of that Petition; Thy Kingdom
Come; Come Lord Jesus Come quickly; and ^ith my Humblest request in some
Variation from the Apostles Words; Let no M^n trouble me; For I bear upon my
Mind and Condition, the Stigmata, or marks of the Kingdom of Christ yet in
Delay: Upon the Account of which I can in some measure say; The present State
of this World is Crucified to me, and I to it.

THE END.
Catalogue of Mr. Bever^^y (...), (...) the Bible in Grace Church Street.
1. THE Catechism of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Thousand
Years: Showing by Scripture, 1. That the great Articles of Redemption, 2. The
Resurrection, 3. The Mystery of the Saints not Dying but Changed, 4. The
Judgment, 5. The Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All; cannot be
Explained at full Dimensions without it: The Second Edit. with Adit. Price 6 d.

2. The Kingdom of Jesus Christ entering its Succes^on this 1697. According to
a Cale^dar of Time Price 1 s.

3. The Scripture ^ine of Time, from the first Sabbath, to the great Sabbatism
of the Kingdom of Christ, with the Vision of the Wheels explained, etc. Price 6
d.

4 A f^esh Memorial of the Kingdom of Christ demonstrated. Price 6 d.

5 A Discourse upon the Powers of the World to come, or the miraculous Powers
of the Gospel and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and their certain Return at
the (...)om of Christ in its Succession, with the great Charter for the
Interpretation of (...) (...)es of the Scriptures, etc. Price 2 s.

6. Those that are minded to have the Discourse of the Powers of the World to
come without the great Charter, may have it for 1 s. Price.

7. The Model of Gospel ^anctification, in several Generals, from Romans Chap. 7.
Chapter 8. following that great Discourse from Romans 5. 12. Price 3 d.

8. The Table of Sabatical Times, with its Scale of Years. Price 2 d.

9. A Scheme of the Prophecy now to be fulfilled, prefixed to the Line of Time,
from the first to the last Sabbatism, with mutual Aspects upon one another, and
on the Holy Line, are distinctiy observed: and what ought not to be done, in
regard of the nearness of the Blessed Sabbatism. Price 2 s. 6 d.

10. The Command of God to his People to come out of Babylon, Price 6 d.

11. Evangelical Repentance unto Salvation not to be repented of. Price 1 s. 6
d.

12. A Discourse, being the Substance of several Sermons on the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, from 1 Cor. 11. 23. Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. Price 6 d.

13. A Conciliatory Judgment concerning Dr. Crips Sermons, and Mr. Baxters
Dissatisfactions in them. Price 2 d.

14. The Model of a Discourse of the great Point, or Doctrine of Holiness to
the Lord. From 1 Pet. 1. 15, 26. Price 2 d.

15. A Conciliatory Discourse upon Dr. Crisps Sermons, on the observation of
Mr. Williams's Dissatisfaction in them, Price 6 d.

16. A brief View of the State of Mankind in the First Adam, upon the great
Context of the Redemption and Mediation of Jesus Christ, Price 4 d.

17. An Exposition of the Divine Standard of Prayer, stiied the Lord's Prayer.
Price 1 s.

18. A True State of Gospel Truth Established, upon the free Election of God in
Christ, The Agreement, and yet Difference between Law and Gospel. Price 6 d.

19. The Faith by which we are Justified, from Romans 5. 1. In six Sermons. Price
1 s.

20. The great Gospel Grace of Faith, being the substance of several Sermons.
Price 6. d.

21. The Blessing of Moses on the T^ibe of As^er. From Deuteronomy. 33. 25. 6 d.

22. Jehovah-Jireh, A Sermon on seeking God in Prayer. Price 6 d.

23. The Loss of the Soul, the Irrepairable Loss Opened and Demonstrated, etc.
Price 6 d.

24. A Sermon on the Death of the Queen, on Hab. 3. 2. Price 6 d.

25. Christianity the great Mystery, in Answer to a late Treatise, Christianity
not Mysterious. Price 1 s.

At the Places abovementioned is lately Printed Rich Redivivus, or Mr. Rich's
short hand Improved, in a more brief and easy Method, than has been set forth
by any hithertofore, now made Public for general Advantage. By Nathaniel
Stringer, a quondam scholar to the said Mr. Jer. Rich. Price 1 s. Where you may
be likewise supplied with Mr. Rich's Testament and Psalms, in short hand, Bound.


