THE UNIVERSAL Christian Doctrine OF THE Day of Judgment: Applied to the
Doctrine of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ. (Herein Guided by Mr.
BAXTER's Reply) To Vindicate It from all Objections. Showing as is the One, so
is the Other; (VIZ.) His Judging the Quick and the Dead; and His Appearing, and
His Kingdom. Which, seeing it must have some Duration, the Scripture 1000
Years, is on Great Proof Preferred By THOMAS BEVERLEY, An humble Minister of
that Kingdom.

II. PET. III. 7, 8. -- The Day of Judgment, and of the Perdition of ungodly
men. But Beloved, be not ignorant of this One Thing, That one Day is with the
Lord as a Tbousand Years, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1691.

The Preface TO THE READER.
BEcause Many will Deign to Read a Preface, that will not a Book; I shall take
Freedom to give a Prospect of the Whole in a Preface: And first, I am very
Sensible my Lot of Discourse, is fallen on such Ground, that each Point must be
Disputed for; not Adorned, nor Simply Taught; but Argued, and Won, as it were
by Inches; And which much Increases the Difficulty, The Land of Promise, as the
Map of it lies in Scripture, is not in any Entire Table, but in several smaller
Lines variously Planted, which must be Transplanted and laid Together.

And Who is Sufficient for such a Thing, as a Teacher? And as for Hearers, They
are not only Unteachable, or Dull of Hearing, but are Prejudiced, and Cry out
against this Heritage of the Lord, as a Speckled Bird: Some call such a
Discourse Whimsie, Unintelligible Nonsense, Foolishness; To other Graver
Christians, and even Teachers: It is a Scandal, an Offense, full of Causes of
Objection; And even to many more Favorable, unintelligible Mystery; Plain
Things, say they, are more Profitable: But none of these Things move Me, that I
should not Take heed to Fulfill this Ministry, I have Received of the Lord.

I intend this Small Tract, not so much as a Rejoinder to Mr. Baxter's Reply
upon my Answer; For, who am I, that I should maintain a Controversy with so
Honored, Able, and Faithful a Minister of Jesus Christ? I only with
Thankfulness take Advice from Him, what Points to Clear, what to Guard, what
Advantage to take for Defense; And had I not found some Arugments, which I have
not proposed, or not fully urged before; and so fit a Medium or Instrument of
Conveyance of this Doctrine, as the Parallel between it, and the Universally
received Article of Faith; Christ's coming to Judge the Quick and the Dead at
his Kingdom; (which must needs be a middle Kingdom,) I had been silent; Nor
shall I think of opening my Mouth any further in this Point, till I find
something Objected; which, what I have now said, if Duly Considered, will not
Answer, which, I am much in hope cannot be; For to be Conscious to have said,
what can be spoken by One, even as an Oath, ought to conclude One, and on Ones
own part to be an End of All Strife; Of small Questions and Exceptions, I know
there is no End: And I must confess with Thanksgiving to God, and with
Subordinate Thankfulness to Mr. Baxter; On His so often Naming a Middle Kingdom
by way of Objection, it was as it were by a Divine Prompting said to me; This
Notion of a Middle Kingdom, which the Day of Judgment must needs be, and which
I have long since understood the same with the Kingdom, is the Key of this
Great Mystery; and so I have Found it, and am so Fully satisfied in it; Even
above, all I have written before; that I am at perfect Peace, and will Contend
no more; I can look on any further Objection, but as the Talk of Loosers: For I
am sure, such an Appearance of the Kingdom of Christ, as the Day of Judgment
is, or such a Return with the Kingdom Received, as Luke 19. 15. or a Coming not
[into] as is to Loss, Translated, Chap. 23. 43. but according to all Scripture
Language [in his Kingdom] must needs be in the Middle between the Kingdom of
Christ hitherto, and to Eternity; And it must have a Space of duration defined,
for It is not Eternal, All Acknowledge; I therefore prefer only the Scriptures
naming a 1000 Years, with such Apparences of that Time, and according to the so
Known Axiom of the Jews, the People of God before the New Testament; The Day of
Judgment shall be a 1000 Years.

It is evident also from the Article Founded on 2 Timothy 4 1. Christ Judges the
Quick, or Living, even as the Dead at his Appearing and Kingdom, There must be
Saints Raised, and Saints, The Living, The Remaining, of which I Treat
according to Scripture Guidance, as by 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

The New Heaven, and the New Earth, must needs be at the same Time New, by such
a Luster of Christ's Appearance, the Sun of Rig^teousness; Even as the Heavens
and Earth are, as it were, New to us every Summer by the Suns Return; And it is
no more, then Go^ intended in his First Creation, such a Glory of it: And I
cannot but Give, Esaias. 45. 18. in somewhat a differing Translation, but such as
I suppose the Original will well Bear, to this purpose; upon naming the
Salvation of Israel as an Everlasting Salvation, World without end; It follows,
Thus says the Lord, that Created the Heavens, that Formed the Earth; He has
Established it, He Created it, not (says the Translation [in vain] say I out
of the Hebrew, for a [Tohu] such an Inanity of Glory, as It is now; He Formed
it, [to be Inhabited] says the Translation; say I, according to the Hebrew,
[for the Sabbath] even this Great Sabbatism, wherein Jehovah shall be one, his
Name one, none else, no Idols Name any more for ever. And then shall He Appear
that Infinite Foreknower, declaring the End from the Beginning, that He may be
known to be God.

And by All These Things, I hope Mr. Baxter will be satisfied concerning the
Specificness of this Kingdom, Beginning with a Judgment, and ending with a
Judgment, and its entire middle Space, an Appearance according to that
Judgment, viz. of the Saints in the Glory of the Restitution of All Things by
the Second Adam, the Redeemer, the Restorer of all the Ruins of the First Adam;
and an Appearance of the Wicked in Shame and Contempt; and both these for the
1000 Y. Receiving what they have done, in Body before the Tribunal of Christ;
Now All will Acknowledge as this Kingdom has not been yet; So it shall not be
for ever, but be delivered up; Here therefore is a perfect Specification,
except Specification be an unknown School-Term.

I Know in some Things, I differ from that Sweet, as well as most Judicious,
and Pious Writer Mr. Increase Mather, as Appears by his Accurate discourse; De
Signo Filii Hominis, or of the Sign of the Son of Man. I should be most Glad by
Friendliest Conference, or intercourse of Letters to conciliate; as concerning
a Scripture-Line of Time to this State, concerning Christ having his Palace of
Glory, not on this New Earth, but in the New Heaven, concerning the Wicked Dead
Raised; In which Points I perceive my Self to differ from Him, but as I Hope on
Great Scripture Grounds.

Now to Conclude All; This Kingdom is the Great Practical Doctrine, which, when
It shall be Universally Preached by the Everlasting Gospel, shall Bring in all
the World, Jews, and Gentiles to Christ; And besides the Blessed Effusions of
the Spirit, that shall go along with it, How must it needs in Reason prevail!
For what would the Great Value and purchase of, but a 100 Years in the Vigors,
and All Affluences of Life be, and in such a Heaven and Earth, as are now, and
if Men were so enclin*d, in all wise, and virtuous Converses?

Of what Inestimable Value then to every serious Considerer, even now, the
offer of so much a Higher, and Longer 1000 Y. of Life, as is proposed on so
Great Scripture Grounds? How may it satisfy that Appetite, Implanted by
Creation into our Natures, which is that very Olam, or World set by God in the
Heart of Man. Eccl^s. 3 11. the Desire to see the Glory of God in his Visibly
Glorious Creation, for a perfect Duration of Time?

But how much stronger will the Impression be upon an Enlightened, Convinced,
Awakened World under that Everlasting Gospel Preached? when that shall be Fully
declared, and ^^liev'd, that Few will now Believe, though it be never so
plainly Told Them; In the mean Time, seeing we All profess to Believe Fully the
Apostle Peter*s Doctrine of Looking for New Heavens, and a New Earth according
to his Promise, wherein Righteousness shall dwell. Let us Resolve what Manner
of Persons we ought to be in all that Holiness, and Godliness of Conversation;
and let us Grow in Grace, and the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ beyond the
Beginnings of his Doctrine, Going on to Perfection, and so unravel the
Apostasy, where it Began in not so doing; and above all, Let us Give All
Diligence, that we may be Found of him in Peace without S^ot, and Blameless,
and by Him be so Presented before the Presence of his Glory.

And let us consider, the Day is near Approaching; Concerning the Truth of
which, I make Appeal to Him, to show by his Arm made bare in unquestionable
Evidence of Fact, and Event, every Thing in its proper Time; And I am now
waiting at this Time, when the Kings are preparing to Go out to War for a Dawn
of the Morning Star on the Suffering Witnesses of the yet Afflicted Thyatyra,
the French and Vaudois; and that the Rod of Iron should begin to Break that
Potters Vessel, whom patience has yet spar*d from being a (...), (for what
ends will be seen,) who with a more then Herodian Insolence, and Cruelty, has
n^^ only let Rest on Him, as Herod, but even Hunted for such Attributions, as
to a God, and not to a Man, and so Inhumanely Vexed so many of the Church of
Christ, to please a Sacrilegiously Flattering Jesuitic Order. Now to the only
wise God be Glory for ever, Amen.

A REPRESENTATION OF THE Thousand Years Kingdom OF CHRIST, Endeavoring to
Reconcile it to the General Confessions of the Faith of Christians; and
particularly to the Judgment of the Eminent Servants, and Ministers of Jesus
Christ, with a Vindication from Further Objections.
I Can Sincerely Appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, I am in all the Substantial,
and Essential Points of Christianity of the Judgment of all the Wisest,
Soundest, and most Universally Approved Ministers of the Gospel, and
Christians, in the Faith at once Delivered to the Saints, and have no By, nor
Secret Opinions in Reserve, either concerning the Person of the Great Media or,
God and Man, or concerning his Kin^dom, as if it had not been from the
Beginning, or were not to be for ever in such Explications of it, as the
Churches of Christ most Agree in according to Scripture.

I make the same Appeal conc^rning my Belief of the Eternal Happiness of the
^aints, with, and by Christ in the Distinctness of Humane nature, Spirits in
Bodies of Glory, united by Him to the Father, and yet each one in his own
proper Personality, and so made Truly Equal^ to the Holy and Elect Angels; and
of the punishment of the wicked in their Spirits, and Bodies together with the
Devil and his Angels, even throughout a Strict and proper Eternity a Part
Post, as They speak, or for ever.

Except therefore my Doctrine, and Affirmation of the Kingdom of the Thousand
Years, can be shown* in a perfect Amity and Conciliation with this Gospel, and
Form of Sound Words; I Acknowledge It ought to be Rejected; I therefore Attempt
in very Brief, to show it to be in such a State of Agreement, and to vindicate
it from Exceptions to it.

I observe therefore one Great Complex of Articles of Faith, wherein All
Christians are, as much, as in any Point of Christianity at One; and They may
be thus Given:

1. That there shall be a Day or Time before the State and Kingdom of Eternity;
wherein Jesus Christ shall Come from the Right Hand of the Father to Judge the
World, and this, as Man, Acts 17. 31.

2. That Jesus Christ shall Come in the Glory, and Power of the Father to this
Judgment, and that It shall be a most Illustrious Appearance of his Kingdom,
that was not before, nor shall be after. For He comes in his Kingdom; and the
King shall say, etc. Matthew. 25. and He Sits on the Throne of his Glory. v. 3^.
v. 34.

3. That at the same Time, There shall be a Glorious Resurrection, and
Appearance of his Saints with Him; as Sharers in the Glories, and Triumphs of
that Day.

4. That the Saints, that shall at that Time be living, and Rem^ining upon
Earth; shall not Dye, but at the very same Time be Changed so, as that They
also may have their part in the same Glory, and Resurrection.

5. That there shall be a Resurrection of the Unjust, and of Those that have
done Evil to the Condemnation to the Dishonor and Contempt, and to the
Punishment that shall at that Day be Executed upon Them.

6. That the Heavens and Earth that now are, are Reserved for Fire at that Day,
and that Christ, as the Apostle Paul speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. shall be
Reveal*d in Flames of Fire, taking Vengeance; and that as the Apostle Peter
says; The Day of the Lord Comes as a Theif in the Night, in which, the Heavens
shall pass away with a Great Noise, and the Elements melt with Fervent Heat,
and the Earth, and the Works that are therein, shall be Burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
and again, v. 12. Looking for, and Hasting unto the Day of God, wherein the
Heavens being on Fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
Fervent Heat.

Now seeing the very Revelation of Christ, is in Flames of Fire, as Lightning;
and that our Lord compares his Coming to the Flood on the Old World, and the
Fire, and Brimstone on Sodom, the very same day that Noah entered into the Ark,
and Lot went out of Sodom. Luke 17. 27, 28. The Conflagration must be a
Conflagration before the Judgment, or Instantaneous with the Beginning of that
Day, and so I suppose is the Judgment of all Divines.

7. The Wicked Alive shall be speedily by this Fire, brought into the same
Condition with the Dead Wicked, Raised to share in the Common Perdition: For
the Heavens and Earth that now are, are Kept in Treasure for the Day of
Judgment, and the Perdition of Ungodly Men. 2 Pet. 3. v. 11.

8. Seeing the Apostle Expressly teaches, v. 13. That we Look for New Heavens
and New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell; It is most according to
Scripture, that the New Heavens and New Earth, should come as a Vessel out of
the Refiner's Fire, and Righteousness dwell therein. So that the New Heaven and
the New Earth, immediately Come out of this Fire.

All this I look upon as so Agreeable to Scripture, and the most undoubted
Sense of it, that whoever keeps Inviolate this Form of Sound Words, cannot fall
into any Great Error, I then making a Solemn Profession, that I am Fully
persuaded of all these Things, even to a Plerophory of Assurance, and supposing
All Sober Christians herein to Join with me, I pass forward with Greater
Assurance.

9. The particular Precise State of the Kingdom of Christ, as in this Judiciary
State, shall be delivered up at some Time to God and to the Father, and so the
Kingdom and State of Eternity succeed, I do also suppose, is the Universal
Faith of Sober Christians; Although the New Heavens and New Earth may be
supposed to continue for ever, as They are by Mr. Baxter; and, as I Remember,
by that so excellent Interpreter Calvin on the aforenam'd Text, and very
probably by many other Great Theologers, and Scripture-Interpreters.

Now from all these Principles laid together, several Points are Allowed upon
the Consideration of the General Doctrine of the Day of Judgment, that are
ready to be charged as Unreasonablenesses, or Antiscripturisms on the Doctrine
of tho Thousand Years Kingdom; which compared with what is taught universally
of Christ coming to Judgment, will be as a Load taken off from it.

1. Seeing the Day of Judgment is a middle State of the Kingdom of Christ
between the present State, and the State of Eternity; It is hence undeniable,
There is a middle Kingdom, or middle State of the Kingdom of Christ.

2. When a Dispensation, or Economy for the Divine Glory, as for Judgment
Requires it, It is no dishonor to Christ to come from the Right Hand of God,
where He is Exalted above All Heavens into the Lower State of the World, much
less Degradation from present Glory for Saints to Come with Him.

3. Nor does Christ suffer any diminution of Glory, when He Goes back to
Heaven, the Business of such Economy, as of Judgment, being dispatched.

4. There is sufficient Security in the midst of the Conflagration for the
Bodies of Saints, whether Risen or Changed, though we cannot define how.

5. Nor shall the Bodies of the wicked, however punished, be consumed in these
Flames.

6. There is no Absurdity on Scripture Account to suppose a manifold Change of
Body according to the Variation of States.

7. There will be Found Room for the Bodies of all, both Risen and Changed
Saints; as also of all the wicked according to the General Doctrine of the Day
of Judgment.

8. A New Heaven and a New Earth, and by Consequence a Restitution of All
Things, are in the very Letter to be Expected according to Scripture.

Now whatever may according to Scripture, and without any Contradiction to the
Great Principles Notions, and Sense of it, be supposed for a Lesser, or so
much, as Any Time, may be supposed for a longer Time, even for so long, as
Scripture gives us any Reason to extend it unto, seeing There is no Scripture
Inconsistency in the Fundamental Possibility.

And now there being such a Foundation laid in that, which is Agreed among all
Christians, if there shall be Any Inducement from Scripture to do it, we may
Build upon this Foundation.

1. That seeing Christ shall Appear from Heaven, with his Saints in a Kingdom
of Triumph, and Glory over his Enemies, and that there is no Signification of
the Time of duration, Contradictory to that of a 1000 Years; and at least one
Great Signification, It is a 1000 Years, Why may we not Conclude, the Kingdom
is a Kingdom of a 1000 Years?

2. Seeing there shall be a New Heaven, and a New Earth, that shall come forth
as a Vessel for the Finer out of the Conflagration, and that there is Great
Reason to think; That They shall be both inhabited: Why may not the Saints of
the Resurrection, Equal to the Angels, Inhabit the New Heavens, and the Saints
Chan^'d, who are so peculiarly called twice the (...); The Living* the
Remaining, (as a most peculiar Generation of Saints that Christ so Holds in his
Hand, as, that They can no more Fall, as may be Surmized, then the Saints
Above, who are as Angels confirmed;) Inhabit the New Earth, as Adam should have
done, a 1000 Years? Especially, seeing It is supposeable It shall be Inhabited,
and we Know not Any, who shall Inhabit it, God knows only who shall Inhabit
it, Except these Living Remaining Saints.

3. Seeing it is Agreed, The Administration of the Kingdom, as at the Day of
Judgment shall not Last to Eternity; and that Christ, and All his Saints Ascend
up to God, and that Kingdom of Judgment Ends; Why may not this be the Sense of
those so Weighty Words of the Apostle, concerning the Son's delivering up the
Kingdom, of his being Subject, and of God, being All in All? or what else is so
likely as this of the Son's Resigning up that Illustrious Appearing visible
Glory, that He shall be invested with, during that Judicatory Kingdom, seeing
it is a Kingdom of Triumph and Victory, that is so Delivered up? And why should
it not be the Kingdom of a 1000 Years? Seeing the naming a Kingdom, though of a
1000 Years, yet because It is but of a 1000 Years, Implys It shall end; And as
the Apostle makes plain, in that it is a Reign, till All his Enemies are put
under his Feet; It is a Kingdom of Victory and Triumph, Beginning and Ending in
putting down Enemies, as Judgment must needs do, and then Given up to God. And
thus there is an easy Slide from the Acknowledged, and most General Doctrine
of the Day of Judgment, into what the Scripture says of a Kingdom, or Reign of
Christ for a 1000 Years; For it is expressly said, There were Thrones, as of a
Kingdom, and Judgment was Given to Them that sat upon the Thrones, the very
word proper to that Day; and ^hey that Sat upon the Thrones, must needs be
Christ and his Saints; For They Lived and Reigned with Christ a 1000 Years,
Rev. 20. 4. And then, It is anew said; Blessed, and Holy is He that has part,
though not the Principal, viz. either as Saints Rising, though not Martyrs, or
as Living Remaining Saints; on such the Second Death has no Power. And then,
as at the End of the Judgment according to the General Doctrine, Christ Resigns
up that Judiciary Kingdom, and Returns to God. And as the Apostle says, having
Subdued All Enemies, He Gives up the Kingdom; even so the 1000 Years Kingdom
must be Given up, because it is a Kingdom only of a 1000 Years.

And thus the Kingdom of Christ Begins with a Judgment, viz. of determining,
who are Those his Saints, who shall Appear in the Glory and Blessedness of it,
even of that First Resurrection, as Saints Raised, or as Saints Living and
Remaining, but Changed; and who, as Enemies, shall lie at the Footstool of
Christ's Feet, Slain with the Sword of his Mouth, and as the Dead, and yet in
Visible Bodies under Contempt and Dishonor, and as the Trophies of the
victorious Wrath of Christ; And this Kingdom Ends with a Judgment, even the
Giving up all this Saints in perfect Immortality and Incorruptibility to his
Father to Enjoy him for ever, and with that perfect Subduing All the Wicked
Angels and Men, which the Apostle call^ a Catargesis, or destroying, and the
Apocalyptic Apostle a Casting into the Lake; And because This is Final, and
Consummate; therefore. He Represents the whole Judiciary Proceeding, and sets
out the Dead, as Gathered from all the Receptacles of Death from whence They
Came, and were Judged at the Beginning of the 1000 Years, which Judgment is
Affirmed and Ratified, and Filled up at the End of the 1000 Years, and the
Execution also; There being this only Difference between the Beginning and End
of the 1000 Years in Relation to Them, that They are at the Beginning, and
during the whole Space of the 1000 Years, made the Footstool of the Feet of
Christ, and afterward under the Final destruction of being Cast into the Lake.
This therefore takes away the Objection of the New Earth, having such an
abundance of Wicked in it; For They Lie as Captives, and Slaves of Justice,
that can neither Annoy, nor defile that State; So that there is a Glory of the
Kingdom of Christ in, and with his Saints above and below, during the whole
Time of the 1000 Years, and a Government every way Agreeable, and no difference
between the General Doctrine of Christians concerning the Day of Judgment, and
what I Affirm, except the duration of the 1000 Years; For who can but say? That
Day shall be a Day of Glory to Christ and his Saints, both Raised and Changed,
as in visible Bodies of Glory; of Horror, Dishonor, and Punishment to the
Wicked in visible Bodies of Contempt and Shame? That they can neither Trouble,
nor Pollute that Day, nor State, any more then They do the Kingdom of Eternity,
though They are never so many in their own place, or Hell; That these visible
Heavens and Earth shall be so changed by the Glorious Coming of the Judge, and
his Saints, That They shall be New Heavens, and a New Earth; That there must be
Room for all Good and Bad, in whatever shall be supposed to be the Pretorium,
the Hall of Justice at that Time; That Christ and his Saints come from the
highest Heaven for that purpose; That Wicked Men come from Earth and Hell. And
that Christ and his Saints Return, this Glorious Administration being at an
End, to that Highest Heaven, to God and the Father, with this Judiciary Kingdom
Given up to Him, and Satan and All the Wicked Cast to the Lake; So that I say
again, here is no difference, but only of the 1000 Years Continuance; And to
the Proof of that, I now proceed.

And I will do it in greatest Brevity in this Method.

1. I will propose the Scripture-Model of this State, which it self will show
the Rationality of it self, and as in a State of duration. 2. I will super-add
to the Arguments I have given, new Ones, That there is such a State to be, and
of a 1000 Years duration, and no more; and Answer the most Formidable
Objections more Fully. 3. I will Argue against any Hypothesis, or Scripture
Model, that can be given in Bar, of what I now give.
I Begin with the First, the Rationality of the Scripture-Model.

1. There shall be an Exaltation of the Humane Nature of our Lord Jesus, in
visible Glory, in opposition to that unrevealed State, wherein the Heavens Now
contain Him, and also in opposition to, and Recompense of the Depressions, and
Humiliation, it was under in his first Coming, Philip. 2. 9. etc. that every
Knee may bow to Him, and every Tongue confess that He is Lord, to the Glory of
God the Father; Every Eye shall see Him, every Mouth of his Servants shall
praise Him, and none of his Enemies be able to gain say: The Lowest Creation,
Things in Earth, and under the Earth, shall, as They can, Bless Him; This
Appearing is the Sign of the Son of Man, that shall be seen in the Clouds. That
All this shall be at the Day of Judgment, no Christian will deny; I lengthen it
out the 1000 Years.

2. There must be an Appearance of the Glory of the Redemption of Christ in its
full Luster; To this End, the Saints of the first Resurrection must be seen in
Robes, washed white in his Blood, as Kings and Priests to God and the Father,
and Reigning over, rather then upon the Earth, (...), as (...), over, not upon
many Things will I make thee Ruler, Revel. 5. 10. with Matthew. 25. 21. They have
Palms of Victory in their Hands; The Bride the Lambs Wife is Adorned, and it is
Granted to Her to be Arrayed in Linen, White and Clean, which is the
Righteousness of the Saints. The Armies of Heaven that is, These Saints follow,
Clothed also in Fine Linen, White and Clean; They have the Name of the Lamb in
their Foreheads, even as of God, Revel. c. 19. c 20. The Saints Living; and
Remaining, who partake of the First Resurrestion, are Priests also, not only of
God, but of Christ, and Reign with Him a 1000 Years. And from this Glory of
Redemption, It is impossible for the Saints, either of the First Resurrection,
or the Living Remaining, partaking of the First Resurrection to fall, as it is
for the Redeemer himself to fail; as I always assert, particularly in my last
Answer; For the Second Death else might, but never can, never shall have Power
over Them.

And for the Appearance of this Glory of Redemption, the Saints of the First
Resurrection shall have Bodies of that Spirituality, Incorruptibleness, and
Immortality, as to be equal to the Angels, so that in the Nature of the Thing,
as it shall then be Founded by God, They cannot dye any more, being the
Children of God, and of the Resurrection: And this is given first to the Saints
of the First Resurrection, as a peculiar Recompense for the many Terrors, and
Debasements, Death Brings with it. The Saints therefore Living, and Remaining,
who Dye not, nor shall suffer the Dishonor, Pain, the Terror of dying, are
upon the Balance of Things, for the Glory of God, and Christ, in this
Economy, not till the 1000 Years are ended, and They Caught up, invested with
this Glory; and are therefore said, till then, only to be Partakers of the
First Resurrection: They have therefore Bodies Cha^g'd into the most excellent
Paradisiac State, as Adam had before sin, and probably, as much excelling, as
the First Adam is excelled by the Second. And though they for many great
Resons, Beget an Offspring to the Mediator, and Eat, and Drink, as Adam should
have done, and All this in the Holiest, Purest manner, such excellent Bodies
can be Exalted into; and though They do not Immediately put on Incoeruption and
Iwmortality, till they are Caught up; Yet They in event, can no more dye, nor
fall away, then the Saints above, All which Answers many Objections concerning
them. And It Redounds Infinitely to the Glory of the Redeemer, and of the
Second A^am above the First, that in a possibility of dying, as to the Nature
of Things; They who might, as Adam, dye, and Fall; Yet secured by the Media^or,
They shall not dye, nor Fall, but They shall be Caught up, and put on
Incorruption and Immo^tality: And when Death and Sin are thus every way subdued
in the Saints of the First Resurrection, vindicated out of their Hands, and in
the Saints changed, preserved from their Sting, even under a possibility; Then
are They both Swallowed up in Victory by Christ, Appearing thus every way a
perfect Redeemer, on which Account, as one Reason, All is thus ordered; Then ^s
Death and Sin, and Hell, with all its Dead; and Satan, the Prince of All,
Thrown into the Lake, and the Triumphal Song sung; the Effect of which, endures
throughout All Eternity.

3. The Saints of Christ, principally the Martyrs and Sufferers, and the
Contemned, Abused, Persecuted, and Beheaded for the Word of God, and the
Testimony which They Held, with All who have Resisted the Impurity and
Corruptions of the World, shall Appear in Glory, sown in Weakness, but Raised
in Power, Sown in Dishonor, Raised in Glory, Bearing the Image of the Heavenly
Adam, the Quickening Spirit, the Lord, not only in Heaven, but from Heaven, as
in a Kingdom lower then the highest Heaven, Sitting on Thrones, and Judgment is
Given to Them for the 1000 Years:

4. For this Glory of Christ the Redeemer, and of his Redemption, and of his
Saints; There is a Glory of the Renewed Restored Creation in the visible
Heavens, and all their Influences Purified and Purg*d, and so made new; and the
Earth Renewed in the same manner, that the Saints of the First Resurrection may
Appear as a Firmament, and shine as the Stars, Dan. 12. even as the Sun, Matthew.
13. 43. upon the New Earth, and have a prospect of Beauty, and Purity. And the
Saints on Earth, Called Nations of the Saved.
All, as Kings of the Earth, Revel. 21* 24, 25. may Walk in this Light of the
New Jerusalem above, and Bring their Glory to it, in looking upon their
Communion with it, as their Highest Glory; and so the whole Creation may be
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God, for which it now Groans in its present Slavery, and with earnestness
Waits; Even as in all Mankind, There is an Appetite Implanted by Creation to
See, and Enjoy a due Time in the Glory of Gods Creation, fre^ from the Curse,
and Adorned with the Blessings of it; This we see how strongly it now works in
the Holiest Men and Women; however in Regard, This is not the Place, nor State,
nor Time, it be mix*d with much Corruption, and as the Apostle calls it, Lust
in a World, to which God*s Heart cannot be; and therefore He often chastises
with Great Severity the over eager desires in any of his Sts. of Any Thing
here; But then there shall be such a State, that the Lord Himself shall Rejoice
in his Works with all his Saints Triumphing in the Works of his Hands, when
there shall be an Apocatastasis, a Restitution of All Things, without which,
the Second Adam would not be as perfect a Restorer, as the First Adam was a
Desolator; But I Assert, and shall after prove the Flying away of this New
Heaven and Earth, and that therefore this O^conomy lasts but a 1000 Years, as
the Sabbatism of the Gl^^y of Creation.

5. There must be a State, Bearing some Proport^on to all the promises made to
Abraham and his Seed; of a City, and a Country, and of Nations, and a
Post^rity, as the Stars of Heaven, as the Dust of the Earth Genesis 13. 16.
and as the Sand on the Sea shor^ Innumerable, that He may be a Father of many
Nations, and Heir of the World; of all which, Canaan and Jerulalem, Genesis 2^. 17.
and the People of Israel were but Types; For this was a Heavenly Country, and
City, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11* and a Posterity of True, and Sincere
Believers; How can this then be better explained, then by the New Jerusalem
coming down from Heaven, and the Saints of the First Resurrection, a Posterity,
as the Stars, for whom he Knows how to make Room, who has done it for those
vast Globes of Light; and then by the New Earth, and the Saints Living, and
Remaining on the New Earth, who shall be as the Dust, and as the Sand: And He
will make Room for Them, who has stretched out this Earth for them that walk
upon it; and wherein besides the much less Cumber of Paradisiac Bodies, and the
Abundant Sufficiency of the Paradisiac Earth, and Purity of the Air, and the
Leaves of the Tree of Life, for the Healing the Nations; There is Provision for
all Enjoyments of the Saints in those Bodies; Besides all this, There shall be
no Sea to to take up Room, Revel. 21. 1. as there was not in the First
Paradisiac Earth, as has been made out by that Truly Excellent Theorist, Dr.
Burnet, Master of the Charter House; Giving Great Light to that Apocalyptical
Text, and Receiving Great Proof from it.

And herein for his sake, who God over All, Blessed for ever, came of Them; and
for the Believed Father's sakes, and according to all the Images, and Language
of Poophecy: The Spiritual Natural Israel shall have a Preeminence, and for
which They shall certainly be called, though it will Remain a Mystery, until
the set Time of the Gentiles Fullness be come; But in the mean Time for their
sakes, the N^w Heaven and New Earth is called New Jerusalem, and so many
Apocalyptical Figures are derived from Them, leading to that New Jerusalem.

6. There shall be a plain, sensible, and visible State of the Wicked in
Dishonor, and Contempt, in the View of All; For all the False Glory, Riches,
and Pleasure, They have here Abused, They shall Receive double, and that in
Bodies of Disgrace; The General Doctrine of the Day of Judgment concerning the
Wicked cannot but Acknowledge this to be according to Scripture; For It is most
certain, such shall be their Appearance, signified by their being Goats on the
Left Hand, Matt. 25. 33. in the Grand Assembly of the Great Day; ^ven in Bodies
of visible Shame and Horror; None will deny this in, and for that Day, and for
so long, how long soever that Day lasts; For what is no Incompossibility for
any Time of that Day, is possible for all that Day or Time; And at the End of
that Day or Time, They are Cast into the Lake, where, as to the Pain of Sense*
as well as to the Pain of ^oss, I Agree with all Theology, or Sacred Doctrine;
All that I Add, is in the Words of Prophecy; These Visibly Dead in ^aw, or
Condemned by their very Appearance, Lived not until the 1000 Years were
Finished, Revel. 20. 5* that is, not at all in the Great Senses of Life; For it
is Immediately said, The Second Death shall have no Power over the Partakers of
the First Resurrection, Implying, All the Dead, not Partakers Fall under the
Second Death; But seeing They were not yet Cast into the Lake, though for the
1000 Y. They lie unactive: They at the end of Them had that Kind of Revival to
Join in that short Attempt of Compassing the Beloved City, whether by way of
Temptation to Defection, as on Adam in his Paradise, or of such violence, as
Satan used upon Job, or both, (but neither with possibility of Success, to the
Glory of the Redeemer) They Joined as Devils of an Inferior order with Satan
Prince of Devils, under his Superior Influence of Wickedness, called Allusively
Deception: But in the very Attempt, Satan first, and his Angels of the Higher
Diabolic order, and then the Dead are Cast with Death and Hell into the Lake,
to the Devil and his Angels, Matt. 25. 41. whereby thereis an utter Suppression
of all possible Action against the Divine Kingdom for ever; but no Cessation of
that Action or Receptiveness necessary to the Suffering All, that is to be
understood by the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, as Scripture declares, which I
never so much as called into Question, much less once denied.

Now because it is so ordered by God, that here would be the last Attempt, it
is called a Gathering to Battle, as it were to try their utmost at this last
decisive Point, according to no unusual Symbol in this Prophecy.

7. This State shall be to the Saints above and below, a Preparation to an
Eternal Union to God and to the Father, by Jesus Christ, in such an inseparable
State of Oneness, as leaves no possible Thought of such Falling away, as of the
Angels from their First Estate; or of Adam from Paradise; as I always have and
do Declare; And this is the Glorioas Consummation of the Kingdom of Christ, and
not a dishonorable Spewing out of Christ's Mouth, as shall be presently more
fully Declared* This Preparation is conveyed to us in such Expressions, as are
most Evidently made Essential to the State of the New Jerusalem, and so (as
shall be seen) to the Thousand Years. They are also most proper to such a
Preparation, viz. The Lord God and the Lamb are the Temple of that City, They
gives it Light. The Throne of God and of the Lamb art in it; They See His Face;
His Servants serve him; his Name is in their Foreheads; They eat of the Tree of
Life, and drink of the Fountain of the Water of Life, as the Highest
Initiation, Pledge and Assurance of the Simp^e, Absolute Eternal Life, to which
Fountain the Lamb leads them. Rev. 20. 6. c. 21. 6. 22. 24. c. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. c. 7. 17.

Now if it shall be proved, the New Heaven and the New Earth of this State
shall Fly away, and yet that the State it self cannot End, but Issues into that
Absolute Eternal Life, wherein God is All in All; then it will be made plain,
this State however High above Expression, compared with that now, yet if
compared to that Eternal State of God All in All, it is ^ut Initiation and
Preparation, though of the Highest Degree, of Spirits in Bodies for an Union to
God in this Eternal State.

And our Lord Concurs in his Mediatory Prayer, John 17. 21. 23. That there
shall be a State of his Saints so Visibly Glorious, as to strike the Wicked,
called the World, with Conviction; That such a State (as it is Initially so,
while They behold it) cannot but Issue in Everlasting Union with God by Christ,
and in the Love and Glory, Jesus Christ, as the Eternal Word Mission'd by the
Father into our Nature, had with the Father before the World Began; And
therefore in regard of Personal Union of the Man Christ Jesus, with the Eternal
Word, he is said to have it even before the Existence of the Humane Nature; of
which Mission there shall also be Fullest Cenviction.

And what State can be so proper for this, as the Glorious Kingdom of Christ?
wherein the Wicked thus behold with Horror and Torment, what shall be for
ever, while they cast into the Lake shall be for ever shut out of it.

I come now to the Second Thing proposed, viz. To superadd some Arguments to
those already given in my Answer.

Argum. 1. The Stream of Prophecy in all its Expressions runs so vehemently
toward such a State; that, however hard shifts are made to Evaporate them into
Allegory, yet Prophecy it self will not be satisfied without such a New Heaven
and New Earth; wherein shall be Universal Holiness and Knowledge of God in
Visible Glory, in Universal Peace, sufficiency of All Things, Freedom from
Evil, no more Curse in Life, and no Death, and all in a State of Duration. Nor
will Atheists and Anti-Scripturists, cxacting the Fulfilling of Prophecy, be
Convicted, till those Expressions are so Fulfilled before their Eyes, as indeed
they shall be; For it becomes not the Oracles of Supreme Truth to (as I may
say) Excuse the unfulfilledness of Themselves in their Highest Expressions, by
the use of Allegory, or Metaphor, or Rhetoric; All shall therefore have a Just
Complement; And seeing many Refer to some Earth, and to some State of Time; In
some State of Time, and in some Earth, They must therefore be Fulfilled, and
that is in that State of the Thuusand Yoars Kingdom of Christ.

2. I Argue from the Prayer of Christ, styled the Lord's Prayer, which I esteem
particularly prepared for the State of the Kingdom, as in a New Heaven, and a
New Earth; Although all Things of the present State are also, I own, Admirably
Comprehended and Fitted to present Use of Prayer.

Now the Third Petiteon of that Prayer Teaches us to pray, Thy Will be done,
not only upon Earth, as in Heaven; but [As in Heaven and on Earth] as it is
Emphatical in the Original; where also it varies the Number from Heavens; In
the Preface Heavens; viz. Our Father which art in the Heavens, Plurally; to [As
in Heaven] in the Single Number, and on Earth, with a Singular Favor to a
Parallel New Heaven, and New Earth: And it leads us to pray for the Doing the
Will of God in such a Parallel Heaven, and Earth; that as in Paralellism, the
Will of God may be done, as in the One, so in the Other.

Besides, according to Common Interpretation of this Petition, A Prayer
according to the will of Ood, so exactly as our Lord weighed it out, and that
has been so long prayed by all his Servants in Faith cannot but be Heard; The
Spirit helping their Infirmities, (when they know not what in this Prayer, to
pray for as they ought) with unutterable Groans, and God knows the Mind of his
Spirit, though they do not so clearly understand this Prayer; So then, It must
be Heard: But it cannot be Heard, if there be not such a State on Earth, in
which the Will of God may be done, as in Heaven. For the Earth and the Earth as
in parallel to Heaven, so particularly named, is the Place or Basis, on which
the Saints that do it, shall Rest; So that the doing the Will of God in any
other State or Place, will not be a Fulfilling this Petition.

Nor will the doing it in Sincerity, according to the Measure of the Saints now
on Earth, answer the Petition. For our Lord in this Prayer, which is in such
Number, Weight and Measure, would not have laid a Paralled, wherein there is no
Equality nor Proportion, as Things are now, viz. Between doing the Will of God
on Earth and in Heaven; For every part of this Prayer, shall, ere he has
perfected his Intercession upon it, be Fulfilled in the Highest Sense of each
part; This we know is not yet in any, particularly in this Petition; therefore
a State shall be on purpose for it.

This also must needs Lock in with the foregoing Petitions; when ever there is
a Doing the Will of God so on Earth, his Name must be Sanctified as in Heaven
and upon Earth, else his Will cannot be so Done; because Sanctifying his Name
is so Eminently his Will, that his Will cannot be Done as in Heaven and on
Earth, except his Name be Sanstissed as in Heaven and on Earth.

Thus is it also with his Kingdom coming; That must needs Come as in Heaven and
upon Earth, whenever his Will is so Done; And it cannot Come till it is so
Done, and his Name so Sanctified; For what is his Kingdom but the Supreme
Honor of our Kings Name, and Obedience to his Will, so Universally as in
Heaven? And whither should this Kingdom Come but out of Heaven, where-now it
is, into a Lower Heaven and Earth? where indeed it is in regard of Supreme
Power always; But it must Come in a Sense, it has not yet Come. And if these
Three Petitions were Heard, As in Heaven, and upon Earth; The Earth must either
be a New Earth in preparation for such a Fulfilling, or the Fulfilling would
immediately Turn it into a New Earth: For such a Change on the Spirits and
Actions of Men, and such a Blessing from Heaven, as would immediately follow,
would make it indeed a New Earth.

If therefore our Esteem of this Prayer were not too much spent in an Ignorant
Formality and Superstition on Bare Words, it would soon give us an Unanswerable
Argument of such a Kingdom on Earth; and a Kingdom must have a Duration, and
what Duration but a Kingdtm of that Thousand Years, Prophecy having once named,
gives a Preference to? I say nothing of the Petition, taking in Heoven, viz the
Lower Heaven, which Scripture make the Habitation of fallen Spirits, that They
being Removed, these Three Petitions may be Fulfilled there also; Nor of the
following Petitions most Adjustable hereunto, which I have in a Full Discourse
on this Prayer made Ready, if God please to give Opportunity for Publication;
as also to show the True Laws of our Duty in using of this Prayer, wherein Men
are so prone to Run into the very Battology, Heathenism, or Vanity of
Repetition, as an Antidote againk which, it was given by Christ, and this came
in by the Gentilism that Antichrist has brought into the Outer Court; Taking
away that Daily Sacrifice, the Remains of which are yet among Protestants.

Argum. 3. With Great Assurance, and without any Reluctance of of Thoughts, I
further Argue, That the Apostle Peter in an especial manner Commissioned for
it, by the Divine Spirit, has given the first Light to the Knowledge of the
Day of Judgment, as a Kingdom of a Thousand Years, Epist. 2. Chap. 3. 8. The
whole Chapter is indeed a Great Prophecy of that Kingdom, and the State of it;
and it carries many severe Remarks on the Antichristian Apostasy; as those
Scoffers, who setting up that Kingdom in Counterfeit, Burlesque, and Abuse the
True Kingdom, and have and still Jeer it out of the Faith of Christians; The
Apostle in Spirit foreseeing this, Recalls the Sincere Disciples of Christ to
the Words of the Prophets first, who are so Abundant concerning this Kingdom,
but speak very darkly of the Day of Judgment, or not at all, but through that
Kingdom; and then to the Commandment, or (as the Learned Observe it to
signify) the Doctrine of Us the Apostles, of the Lord and Savior.

Now these Words are undoubtedly a Preface to what follows after in the
Chapter, and therefore to the Doctrine of the Day of Judgment, of the Thoufand
Years, of the New Heavens and New Earth, and the holy Inferences from it, with
a very Dreadful Thunder and ^ightning upon the Apostasy intermixed, and all in
close Connection.

He promises upon these Scoffers, that They s^all be in the very Last of Time,
(...), That their Lusts of the present World, the Grandieur and Sensualities of
it will oblige them to say, Where is the promise of his Coming? There is no
Kingdom of Christ, but what we have set up; Events of many Ages Demonstrate*
there is no other; These are yet neither Atheists nor Anti Scripturists, but
such Mockers as Esaias speaks of, Chapter 28. 22, etc. Who will not believe a
Consumption on the present Earth, to rise in a greater Harvest. They allow the
Great Change of the World by the Flood; the Change by New Heavens, and New
Earth, which the Apostle, Verse 13. Inetrprets, as one Principal Branch of the
Promise They Laugh at, and the Gangrene Eats beyond professed
Anti-Christianism, as if that First Resurrection were past already in that 1000
Y. Sta^^ of the Church since Constantine, and no other to be expected, but the
^inal Judgment and Eternity.

To this the Apostle Answers by laying down this Great Th^^^s, which says the
Apostle, Lies hid from Them, Resolving Obstinately against all Light, All
Things shall continue as they were; that is, They will be Ignorant of any other
World.

The Thesis or Position is, As the First World Destroyed by the Flood of Water,
that Lay; as the forenamed Excellent Theory has set out, within its own
Bowels; And yet that Destruction was not till 1656 Years after its Creation; so
long the Word of God Secured it, and there was yet a World after it; So the
Heaven, and Earth that now are, shall be destroyed by Fire, Hid as it were in
its Entrails, for about such a space of Time from the Apostle's writing; Till
that Appointe^ Time, the same Word of God Interposes, and Secures it.

But says the Apost. that you may Rightly Judge of the Position, I would by no
means hove you Ignorant of this one Thing, this Principal Thing in this Point,
that I am about to Lead you to, Of the New Heavens, and the New Earth; That as
the First Heavens and Earth, and the Host of Them Finished, and God's Resting
in them, was on the Sabbath, and Seventh Day; So the Day of Judgment, the Great
Sabbatism of Resting and Rejoicing in his Works, to God, to Christ, and his
Saints shall be a Day, but It is with God, in his Determination, and Counsel
concerning it a Day of a 1000 Years; and to so Great Day, He has made each
1000 Years of the Worlds Continuance a Day, and They are Six, as at the Worlds
First Creation; For in the Evening of the Sixth Millenary, That Day shall
Begin. Think not therefore the Lord is Slack, for He has with Great Wisdom
Balanced, and Weighed out for the First Seventh Day Sabbath, a Sahbath of a
1000 Years; For the Day of Judgment, that will be for Perdition to the Wicked,
shall be a Day of a 1000 Years Rest to the People of God; and to so Great a Day
of a 1000 Years, He has with infinite Patience to Bring All his own Elect into
it, weighed out also for each Day Leading to the First Sabbath Six Millenaries,
or 1000 of Years, which he Accounts, as Days to Gathe^ in all his Elect, as the
Apostle Paul, Heb. 4. Shows the Long suffering of the Lord to the several Ages
of his People, to be Salvation to Them, till that very Sabbatism comes, that
Remains to the People of God.

This is the Great Sense that lies under the very profitable, and Exscellent
Discourse of the Apostle, taken in Common Sense; But that There is this Great
Sense, I Argue not only from the Symbols of the New Heaven, and New Earth,
coming out of the Floo^, and from the New Heaven, and the New Earth, having Six
days, and then a Sabbath of a 1000 Years, Symboliz'd by the Sabbath, and the
Six Days of Creation before it; to which the whole Scope of the Apostle's
Discourse makes it plain, that He Refers: But I Especialy Argue from These Two
Things.

1. From the Apostle's Great Preface, showing a Mystical Doctrine, as such
Prefaces do; Romans 11. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 51. Now that the longest, and shortest
Time with God, the High, and Holy one, that Inhabits Eternity, the Absolute
Eternal Being, are All Alike, is an undoubted Principle of Natural, Rational
Religion; which All are supposed to Know; and therefore that Great Truth needs
no such Preface, as not to be Ignorant of that One Thing, there being many
other so Great Principles of that Order of Natural Religion, that ought not to
Lie hid from Any.

2. Because this would not all Answer the Apostle's Scope, either with Relation
unto the Scoff of them, that say, Where is the Promise of his coming, not
Satisfy, and Comfort the Sincere Christian concerning the delay of that
Coming; For what Comfort is it to the Sincere Christian to whom Each Minute of
delay of the Coming of Christ, especially under suffering, is as an Age, that
to an Eternal Being, a Day is as a 1000 Y. and a 1000 Years as One Day? and how
would the Scoffer Triumph in this? Each Day with God is a 1000 Years, how many
1000 of Years may be then to the Coming of Christ, when every Day with God is a
1000 Years? So many Days then, so many 1000 Years; And if He Counts a 1000
Years but as One Day, how long may He delay, e're the coming of Christ be? The
Comfort proper to this Case must be such, as is proper to the Creatures of
Time: What is proper to the Alone Paramount Eternal Being, Flys too High, and
Alought over this Case, however an Admirable a Truth it is in it self, and God
most Adorable in it.

Nor is there therefore Any Cause to vilify this Kingdom of Christ; Because It
is but a 1000 Years, and that a 1000 Years is with God but as a Day; Because
even according to the Letter of this Scripture, each Day of the 1000 Years is
with God as a 1000 Years, as well as the 1000 Years, but as One Day; when
therefore we may by this Apostolic Canon, if we had Respect to the Letter,
Count every Day of the 1000 Years Kingdom, as a 1000 Years it self; how Great
then would it be! But I have sole Respect to the Mystic meaning; That God, the
Lord of Time knows, how much, and no more, is proper to his Ends, has
Resolved; A Sabbatism of a 1000 Years, Beginning with, and Ending with a Grand
Judgment, and its middle Space a Judgment, or Government according to, and with
Relation to those Two Grand Judgments, and so most Fitly called Judgment, or
Day of Judgment, shall be a perfection of Time, and the Fullness of All Times,
and the duration of the Kingdom of his Son, as Son of Man; And that Six Days,
each Day as a Milennium, or 1000 Y. of his Patience, and Long suffering for the
Vessels of Wrath, Fitting Themselves to Destruction at that Day; and for the
Gathering his Elect from the several Ages of the World, as well as from the
Four Winds, shall go before it: And it self from its Beginning to its End,
shall bear this Character; Fullness of Times; without Nice distinction of one
part from Another, and so Eternity ensues; and this State, (which shows the
Fitness of the Symbols) shall have New Heavens, and a New Earth according to
Creation, according to the Great Promise, Esaias. 65. c 66. which also shows the
opposite State of the Carcases under a never dying Worm, and an Unquenchable
Fire, to mean much higher then the Carcasses of the Assirians, whatever Type
that slaughter might be.

Lastly, That this Prophecy of the Apostle Peter, has also Great Reference to
the Antichristian State, I observe by Indications, however They may seem small,
yet are most Significant.

1. The Vnlearnedness, Barbarity, and Ignorance, most Natural to Antichrist,
(however since the Reformation, Necessity has made his Party more Learned)
taken notice of in the Word (...), verse 16.

2. Their Apostasy, as Wandering and falling Stars, (as the Papacy it lelf is
also Symboliz*d by a Star falling from Heaven to the Earth, Revel. 9. v. 1) is
Signified by a Dis-firmamented State, in the Word (...), wandered from their
Firmament; and Christians exhorted to Take heed of falling from their own
Firmament, or Firmation, (...) Verse 17. That They may shine as that Firmament,
Dan 12. 3.

4. Their Wresting of Scriptures to their own Perdition Universally, more
Particularly the Prophecies for their own Papal Kingdom, and against the
Kingdom of Christ; And that Discourse of the Apostle Paul, 2 These. 2. They
Writhe wholly from Themselves, which, would They have Observed it, and asked,
as Judas their Type, Is it I? It would have Answered Them as Christ did Him,
Thou say.

This is a Great Brand by which the Son of Perdition with all his Adherents may
be known, whose Character is as the Judasses of the Christian Church, Son of
Perdition, and Two Times Going into Perdition; Compare John 17. 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2
13. Revel. 17. v. 8. v. 11.

These Remarks upon the Apostle Peter's Prophecy, as I style it, I have been
larger upon, to show I am Conscious of no Recoyl of Mind concerning it, and
though some Things may seem wiredrawn; yet the Manner and Symmetry of Prophecy,
the Great Rule of its Interpretation, will Justify me.

Argum. 4. I do indeed so Rely upon the Prophecy, Revel. 20. Concerning the
Thousand Years, that if I had only that Scripture, I should think it
sufficient, although it be but One; and, although it be Propheick: Because I
find the Letter so Express, as that the Thousand Years are no less than Six
several Times Named; And I Observe the Apostle's Discourse upon Melchisedech so
Weighty, so Large, with so severe a Reproof of the Unteachableness of
Christians concerning it, Heb. c 5. ^0. etc. 6* 1. with Re^erence to it
throughout, c 7. All of it; to be Suspended upon One single Oracle, and that
Prophetic also, Psalm. 110. 4. The Lord has Sworn, and will not Repent, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedech, Referring to a small
Historick Memoir, Genes. 14* 18. 19, 20. and that on purpose Contrived to be
Dark and under a Vei^ Yet the Apostle severely Reproves a Dullness of Hearing of
it; Whereas the Christians then might have said, We Desire only plainer, more
undoubted Truths, more genearlly Treated; Principles and fundamental Points;
But the Apostle Silently Threatens the Danger of Ayostacy on not Going on to
Perfection, by grounding his so Earnest Exhortation, to Go on, upon that Danger
of Apostasy, without so Doing. And indeed there is Great Reason to think, a
Prediction of the Great Antichristian Apostasy (in the Bulk not to be Repented
of, not to be Renewed to Repentance, according to R^vel. 16.) is lodg*d in it;
and that That very Apostasy came in upon the Ignorance of, and not Acquiescency
in Christ's Melchisedechian Priesthood, after the Power of an endless Life; but
setting up that Kingdom and Priesthood in Counterfeit. For what is the
Melchisedechian Priesthood of Christ, but a Priesthood on a Throne, Zech. 6.
13? And what is the Papacy but a Counterfeit of that, a Priest on a Throne?
(the False Propbecy Included also, as the True is in the Priesthood of Christ.)
And why was this Golden Calf Idolatry brought in by that false Aaron, as his
Vicar? but to supply the Absence of Christ, Gone up to the Mount; and not
knowing, That it is Witnessed of him, He lives, and is as Active for his
Church and Saints Above, as Below, while on Earth; so far as is necessary, till
he brings forth all his Saints Appearing also in the Glory of his
Melchisedechia^ Priesthood, as Kings and Priests also.

But to Return to the Prophecy, Revel. 20. I observe, as I have already
observed, There is not only the Shell or Words, but the Deep Reason of Things;
as All Prophecy, and most particularly all the Lines of the Revelation before
it, Run into It, and Center in it; and All Require such a Kingdom, of such a
State; of New Heavens, and New Earth; and of a Duration of Time, that may speak
Perfection, to Accomplish Them. And that Duration this Prophecy Declares to be
a Thousand Years, and then All to be Drawn up into Eternity, and no otherwise
to End.

Argum. 5. The Observation upon the Thousand Years I made heretofore in my
Patriarchal Line, p. 58. does much sway my Judgment still concerning the
Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, viz. By the Recollection of each Patriarch's
Life, whole, and together, is most Pompously set out; That none of these Holy
Men Attained a Full Thousand Years of Life, though some Life's swelled so much
above Nine hundred, as if they would mount to a Thousand; yet it was said to
Them, Hitherto shall you come, and no further, for a Thousand in Sacred Record
is a Number of Perfection, that is not Allowed to any Years of Life in Adam's
Apostate State, but Reserved for the Restitution of the Second Adam; and p.
165. As if the Thousand Years were a Tree of Life, Guarded with Cherubims, that
none might Take of it; Enoch had a particular Exemption of not Dying; yet no
One might be in a Visible State on Earth One Thousand Years; wherein I am
Confirmed by Reading, what Dr. Sherlock, so Reverend, so Learned, so
Considering, and so far from what is called Fanaticism, as every One knows,
has written, in his Excellent and Generally Acceptable Practical Discourse of
Death, p. 129, 130. Wherein it is most Considerable, that he Writes not, as
having Espoused the Opinion of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, nor was
Intentionally Writing upon it, But so Discerning and Quick-sighted a Person was
struck with its Beams of Light and Truth, while he was upon another View; And
thus he Writes: The longest Term of Humane Life, after the Sentence of Death
passed on Man, was a Thousand Years. And Comparing this Observation with that
Promise of a Thousand Years Reign with Christ, which is called the First
Resurrection, and is ^he Portion only of Martyrs and Confessors, and pure and
sincere Christians, Revel. 20. I have been apt to Conclude, To live a Thousand
Years is the Privilege only of Immortal Creatures; That if Adam had continued
Innocent, he should have lived no longer upon Earth, but have been Translated
to Heaven without Dying; For this Thousand Years Reign of the Saints with
Christ, whatever that Signifies, seems to be Intended as a Reparation of Death,
which They fall under by Adam's Sin: But then these Thousand Years do not put
an End to the Happiness of those Glorious Saints, but they are Immortal
Creatures; And though this Reign with Christ continues but a Thousand Years,
Their Happiness shall have no End, though the Scene may change and vary, for
over such the Second Death shall have no power. Or else this Thousand Years
Reign with Christ must signify an Eternal, and Unchangeable Kingdom, a
Thousand Years being a certain Earnest of Immortality; But there is an
Unanswerable Objection against that, Because we read of the Expiring of those
Thousand Years, and what shall come after them, even the Final Judgment of all
the World. This is a Great Mystery, which we must not hope perfectly to
Understand, till we see the Blessed Accomplishment of it.

I could not but Transcribe a Paragraph worthy of Letters of Gold; Not because
suitable to my Sense, of small Account; but because so Agreeable with Sense of
Scripture, if I can be sure I see, or know any Thing; And yet how little taken
notice of? To conclude the Argument, The Thousand Years are made by God the
Emblem and Hierogliphick of the Perfection of Time, and do literally express
that very Time, God has Ordained to be the Fullness of Time, and the Perfection
of it.

And so I come to the Third Thing proposed, to consider any other Hipothesis or
Model of Things in Bar of this proposed; And I find these Two.

1. That All this Kingdom of Christ, with its New Heaven and Earth, are
supposed rather to Fit the Kingdom of Eternity; Against this I Argue.

1. The New Heaven, and the New Earth, the Scripture speaks of, Revel. 21. v.
1. are certainly the very same that Fly away from the pure Crystal Throne of
Eternity, and from his Face that Sat upon it, Ready to Deliver up the Kingdom
to God All in All. This is certain, because the New Heaven, and New Earth, are
Concurrent with the New Jerusalem, as is most Clear, by the Conjunct Vision
John had of Them, Revel. 21. 12. I saw a New Heaven; And v. 1. And I John saw
the holy City. When he Saw the New Heaven, etc. and the New Jerusalem; The
first Heaven, and the first Earth were passed away. So then the Heaven and
Earth, that were with the New Jerusalem, were not the first Heaven and Earth,
but the Heaven and Earth that were at the same time with the Holy City; And
they fled away, as is most Evident by the close Connection and Order between the
Compassing the Holy and Beloved City, which cannot be supposed to be any other,
then the New Jerusalem, called by the Name of the Holy City, as c. 20. 9. so c.
21. 2. and the Beloved City, because the Bride. For after that Assault that was
after the 1000 Y. Satan was cast into the Lake, that had the Power of Death;
And then immediately the White Throne was seen, and Heaven and Earth fled away,
which must be the Heaven and Earth Cotemporary with the New Jerusalem, and so
with the 1000 Years; and seeing, as was said just now, They must be new Heaven,
and New Earth; Therefore the New Heaven, and New Earth continue not to Eternity.

For I cannot see where there can be any Doubt in the Connection, or Order, the
Divine Prophecy has so taken care; Satan's casting into the Lake must needs be
after the 1000 Years, therefore after the New Heaven and Earth; the Heaven and
Earth that Fled, must be Those that were at the Judging, and casting the Dead
into the Lake; Can we suppose then, that this White Throne, the Judging the
Dead, and casting the Dead into the Lake, was before the 1000 Years, and so the
Heaven and Earth flying also; and then indeed They must be the First Heaven,
and First Earth, and not the New Ones: But All that cannot be, because whatever
was not Written in the Book of Life, was then cast into the Lake; And it is
certain, Satan was not Written in the Book of L^fe; therefore he Could not be
out of the Lake at the Time of Death, and the Dead being cast into the Lake;
But he was not cast into the Lake, till the 1000 Years were past; So that this
whole Transaction upon Death, and the Flying of Heaven and Earth were all after
the 1000 Years, and therefore the New Heaven and New Earth, which Run along
with the 1000 Years, were the Heavens and Earth that Fled away, (...), which
was the Thing to be shown, and is shown: For if such a Connection, as this will
not prove, nothing can be proved by Consequence from Scripture.

2. Those Three Expressions of the Apostle, The Kingdom shall be delivered up
by the Son, The Son shall be subject, God shall be All in All; so strongly sway
with me, that no distinction of Acquisition and Fruition can weigh against
them; but that such a State, as of the New Heaven, and New Earth, and a Kingdom
of Christ proportionate to it, cannot be the State of the Kingdom of Eternity;
Especially when I Join to it, those Words of our Lords Mediatory Prayer, John
17. That They may be one in us, and that They may see my Glory; and that Glory
was the Glory Christ had with the Father before the Foundation of the World; So
that the Glory of the Humane Nature of Christ, and of the Elect Angels, and
Saints being first confessed; All the State of Glory is Brought to the nearest,
that can be, to that State of Glory, before the World began, and so not of New
Heaven, and a New Earth, and what is Agreeable to the Creation.

3. A Delivery up of the Glory of the Judiciary Kingdom, or of that proper to
the Day of Judgment, to the Father, and the Son's being subject, that is,
laying down that Luster of Appearance, proper to that Administration, cannot be
denied; And that, and no other, which is always Attributed to the Son of Man,
and to the Man Christ Jesus, and the delivering up that Kingdom, and no other,
is what I plead for; and no otherwise, then so far, as is necessary for the
making Good of what the Apostle has said; That the Kingdom is to be delivered
up, that the Son is to be subject, and God; to be All in All: From which, as
having some Higher, Deeper, and more Substantial Sense, then the distinction of
Acquisition, and Fruition, can Comprehend, I cannot depart.

4 The Superlative unexpressible Excellency of the Divine Glory from Eternity,
has so Great a Command upon my Understanding, together with that Expression of
the Apostles of God's being All in All, that although the Humane Nature of Christ,
as united to the Divine; though the Humane Nature of Christ and his Saints; the
Union of Saints to God by Christ, be Free, and wholly Grace; and were not
indeed from Eternity; yet Joining the so often mentioned Assertion of the
Apostle Paul, with our Lords of the Glory, before the World began, Assures me;
that the State of Angels and Saints, is Brought to the highest Nearness
Created, Nature is capable of, to that Glory, before the Foundation of the
World, even as the Humane Nature of Christ is so Advanced; and that that
Objectition, viz. that the Humane Nature of Christ had not an Existence in that
Glory, before the World, Argues to me the more strongly, that All this is so;
For it speaks that Humane Nature it self, therefore drawn more out of all
Created Glory, into the Glory of the Eternal Word, and that the Divine Nature
of the Eternal Word is our Object, and not the Humane Nature of Christ; all the
objective Glory of Christ in his Humane Nature, and of Angels and Saints being
seen in Speculo Divinitatis, in that Infinite Mirror of the Divine Nature; And
herein I Rely on the very Words of Scripture, that cannot be overruled: And
seeing God has been pleased to make the Humane Nature of Christ, and the Union
of his Saints to himself Unchangeable, as himself; (So far am I from supposing
a Fall from that State) the Exaltation of them to Closest Approximation to that
Glory to Eternity, that was from Eternity, is the Cessation of Economy, and
the perfect Eternal State; wherein the Saints are Equal to Angels, and need
them not for their Enjoyment, but as All meet in God: On the contrary, though
Devils, and Lost Spirits have all the Sense, and Action Agreeable to their Lost
State, Yet it is not such kind of Hostile Action, as now They are Exercised in,
but are in as perfect a State of Suffering, as, and above All we can conceive,
and so for ever, and in the most Unchangeable Misery.

And whereas a Political Conception of the Eternal King, his Laws and Subjects,
seems to Require Another State, or order then this, I Assert: Yet as from
Eternity, Supreme Dominion was Essential to God, even as Mercy, Goodness,
Truth, before any Subjects, capable to Exercise them upon; So to Eternity,
without any such Administration, as according to Political Laws we Apprehend,
and have known here. But who can sail in this Infinite Ocean now, without the
having All Thought and Understanding, Lost in that Infinity! But this is
certain, God is a King Eternal, as well as Immortal, Invisible, and the Only
Wise God, To Him therefore be Glory be for ever: And in All this I most humbly
Acknowledge Jesus Christ, God and Man, the Mediator, even the Mediator of this
union to Eternity; But the very Nature of a Mediator is not, that he should be
Our utmost Objective Rest, but that, as All Scripture speaks, He should Bring
us to God, even God All in All by several Degrees, the Highest of which is his
own Kingdom, and at last to the most Immediate union in and by Himself, which
is the Kingdom of Eternity.

And thus I have endeavored to make plain, that the Kingdom of Christ, as in
the Judgment Given to Him, as the Son of Man, enstated in a World to come of
New Heavens and a New Earth does not Last for ever; but is, as in our Law, a
Lease for a Year, to put into Possession, that the Eternal Inheritance may vest
in us: I come in the Last place to Clear my Hypothesis in these Great Points
from the Supposition, that there may be other Worlds besides the World present,
that is now near 6000 Years old, and that World to come of the Kingdom of
Christ, whereof I Speak, and then the whole delivered up to God All in All;
either as Angels and Saints in Glorious Bodies in union to Him; or as Lost
^pirits, and Spirits in Bodies, so Subdued quite below under his Kingdom in the
Lake, as to be Eternally separated from him.

Now I Briefly Argue against any other Worlds.

Reason 1. Because the Scripture in All, it says, Stints our Thoughts, and
Imaginations in this variety of Worlds, Rising and Repullulating, as it were
out of the First World, that we Read of the Creation of Genesis 1. An Extent of
Thought beyond this, Brings us under a Vertigo, a Giddiness of Apprehension,
that we know not where we are, and Inclines to Skepticism, a doubt of All
Things; and if we do not stop to Atheistick Su^pitions, Running out of the
Assurance of the Truth of All Religion; and of Christianity.

Reas. 2. Because Scripture Represents the Angels, and Saints of both the
Saved, and of the Lost, as so many, and those in such a variety. Angels never
sinning, but Elect, and Confirmed in Original Holiness; Angels Falling, and
never Recovered; M^n Created in Original Purity, Falling; and a number very
vast in it self Recovered; some dying, but vindicated from Death by the
Resurrection; Others in the Kingdom of Christ, that though they might fall and
die, viz. the living remaining, are yet secured by the Mediator; and the Lost
of Mankind, Fallen from their First Estate, and not Recovered, notwithstanding
the Grace of the Mediator, Scripture Everywhere also Magnifies the Riches and
Fullness, the Variety of the Creation, as declaring to the utmost the Glory of
God, that He thinks fit to Reveal in such away, especially as it shall be in
Christ's World to Come. Now the Infinite Riches of the Divine Being, showing it
self in so Great an Explication of its own so Variegated Wisdom, Ephesians. 3. 9.
etc. to Principalities, and Powers in Heavenly Places, in and by the Church,
when it is carried through all Oeconomies, especially that in the Fullness of
Times, (wherein Angels Themselves shall be Recapitulated, Ephesians. 1. 10.) into
the Eternal Kingdom, is All, Scripture Reveals; and it carries our Thoughts not
a Moment beyond, but winds up all herein; for that Search beyond it, looks like
the vain Puff and Swolness of a fleshly Mind, as not being wise to Sobriety,
but above what is written. And yet I know the Infinite Being, and Wisdom, and
Power of God, before some Holy, and Good, and so Zealous of the Glory of God,
may cause them to say, Who knows what God will do?

Reas. 3. Because it is not only unconceivable, but directly against the
Analogy of Scripture and Faith, That there should be any Glory of Creatures
Intellectual, or Animal, or according to the Mechanism and Frame of Heaven and
Earth, but what is All in Jesus Christ the eternal Word in our Nature. Now how
is it Conceivable either in Scripture or Reason, He should be Related to
Another, or any more Worlds, as to this? wherein he was made Man, the Son of
Abraham, the Son of David. Can there be any more Sons of Abraham, or of David?
Can the Eternal Word Assume any more or other Created Nature into Himself? He
must then see a World, or Worlds, wherein He has no Interest, as in that
Personality, wherein we Believe Him according to Scripture; This would be a
Diminution to his Glory; Therefore this is to me a most Conclusive Argument
against any Worlds before or after this.

Reas. 4. I add, the Manifestations of the Grace of God in Christ, even the
Riches of Glory on the Vessels of Mercy prepared to Glory and Honor, and of
his Wrath and Power, on the Vessels of Wrath, and unto Dishonor, are to the
Height, as the Apostle shows, Romans 9 22. Any more then would speak the
Imperfection of what has been, is, and is to be; which no way agrees with
Scripture, manifesting all to the utmost. From whence I conclude, such a
Supposal of more Worlds cannot Rationally Bar the Hipothesis of such a
Kingdom, as God All in All.

And thus I have endeavored so to state that Kingdom of the 1000 Y. wherein
not only his Enemies are in Fieri, or about, as they speak, to be subdued, but
it shall be brought to that Consummation and Perfection, which the Apostle
speaks of, and which is the very Character of the Kingdom of Christ, Heb 2. 1.
That all Things should be so put under Him, there should be nothing left, that
is not put under Him. But now we see not All Things so put under Him; by which
we know, the Time of his Kingdom is not yet.

There may yet be remaining many Spinose and Snarl'd Questions, the Answering
of which would still beget more, and make Controversies as endless as the
Genealogies the Apostle speaks of; I therefore designedly forbear Them. I know
the Like may be drawn over the most Fundamental Principles of Theology by a
disposed Questionist, as is very plain by the Parallel I have given betwixt
that so Acknowledged One of the Day of Judgment, and the Thousand Years
Kingdom, liable to the very same Captious Enquiries.

I will therefore wave any further Regard to those Perplexing Questions, with
Transcribing some few Observations out of that most Satisfying Discourse of the
Universally Honorable Mr Boil, in his Appendix to the so Graceful Pourtracture
of the Christian Vertuoso, of which he is Himself the Life; It is his
Reflections upon the Distinction of Above, and not against Reason, viz. page 6.
parag. 7. There are diverse Truths in Christian Religion, that Reason left to it
self, would never have found out, nor so much perhaps as Dreamed of; (and such
undoubtedly is the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ.) And p. 8. parag. 10.
There are Truths so Abstruse, that when They are proposed, as clearly, as
proper unambiguous Terms can propose Them, They do nevertheless surpass our Dim
and Bounded Reason. And such also are many Things concerning this Kingdom of
Christ; There are many Things in General, and in determinate Conceptions, (as
that Discourse most pressingly Instances) Concerning Time, Place, Local Motion,
Quantity; wherein though we understand One Another when we speak of Them, yet
if we thoroughly look into Them, there are such Difficulties as oppress our
Reason, and wherein the Men, who make such shrewd Objections against our
Hipothesis, will hardly be able to pitch on any that will not Allow us to Repay
them in the same Coin. So also are there in the Articles of Faith, much more in
these of the Kingdom of Christ, and yet none are therefore to be Rejected. That
also is Greatly Considerable to the Present Purpose, pa. 6. parag. 8. There are
many Truths, and more then we are wont to Imagine; that we want Mediums or
Instruments to Discover; that if They were clearly proposed, would be
Intelligible to us, even as Celestial Lights in those Inestimably Remote
Regions, for want of more Reaching Telescopes. These, and many more most
excellent Observations, in that short, but Massy Treatise, if well Considered,
would Reconcile our Thoughts to the Glorious Kingdom of Christ; however
hitherto Dark in the Main; and many Things relating to the Modus or
Circumstance, more Dark; But I make no doubt, those Reaching, Commanding
Telescopes will be brought forth for Use ere-long, by the Everlasting Gospel
preached; when what was Mystery before, will be no longer so; Even as what was
so in the Old Testament, became no longer so, by the New Revealing it; as the
same Honorable Writer Remarks. In the mean time, how Noble would it be in a
Royal Society of Christian Vertuoso's to call for, Encourage, and Receive all
Proposes concerning Prophecy, its Line of Time, and the Fulfilling of it! That
would bring so Adorable a part of Theology into Experimentality, to the Great
Honor of the Age. But if neither Divines, nor Vertuoso's will do it, God will
suddenly Grant a New Charter for a Royal Society of Vertuoso's for his Kingdom.

I willingly also forbear the saying any more concerning the Calling of the
Jews; the very Occasion given to deny it, being in the Sense of most
Christians, a kind of Invidious Thing: I only say, the Jews according to all
Prophecy, being kept in public View, as a Desolated and Obstinate Unbelieving
People, make it very Believable; They are pteserved to such a Gracious purpose;
Wherein it is most True, Insinite Power and Wisdom has Engaged it Self, in
Answer to the hardest Objections, according to Ezekiel's Resolve of that
Question; Can these Dead Bones live? O Lord God, thou know, Ezekiel. 37. 3. And
the Apostle's Theorem, concerning the Case; God is able to graft Them in, Romans
11. 23.

I am also willing to Accept that Reserve for taking in Papal Rome within the
Apocalyptick Prophecy; That as Pagan Rome was most certainly in its Time, so
Papal Rome may be Babylon also: Only I cannot but Observe, that the
Cassandrianism and Grotianism, of Suppositing Pagan Rome to all the Prophecy of
the Revelation, wherein the Learned, and according to his own Sentiments, most
Pious Dr. Hammond, Joined through the Antiperistatick Paroxism, He carried to
the Times He Lived in; (and against which Mr. Baxter has Written in General.)
This sure is much more Obnoxious then the Agreeing with Conformists, concerning
any Apocalyptick Notions; For it Argues much more a Divine Impression, when Any
are carried against, then down a Stream; especially in Favor of a Prophecy,
that will as certainly Take down the Grandieur, and Antiquate the Antiquity of
most of the Constitution, They Favor, within a short time, as even the Papal
it self; Let it be spoken without the Disfavour of many Honorable and
Undefiled Names of Sardis: The most Sagacious of the Jesuits so much understood
an Antichristian Rome, Revel. 17. That to avoid the Blow, They, as Balam and
Chaiaphas have Prophesied of an Antichrist that shall yet come to Destroy
Rome, and its Pseudo-Catholick State. And they are thus far in the Right of it:
That as the Papal State is the Antichrist to the True Christ; So the True
Christ's Coming will be Antichrist indeed to that Antichrist; an (...) to that
(...), a Christ directly opposite to Him, and that will come into his Room, and
so even perfectly bring Him to nothing with the Brightness of his own
Appearance.

Passing then from all these Things, I come to what Remains of Greater Moment,
and that is, Concerning the Churches in General; more Particular of
Philadelphia, and Laodicea, and most especially of Laodicea; upon which I must
acknowledge the most Difficult and Hardliest to be Reconciled Hinge of my
Hipothesis Turns.

1. I first therefore consider, what concerns the Seven Churches in General,
and that is, with Relation to the Angels of the Churches; Concerning which, Mr.
Baxter in his Reply; thus Writes, p. 14. For my part (says he) If I Believed,
that by God's Institution, the Church Catholic must have One Universal Humane
Angel, or Government, Monarchical, or Aristocratical, or mixed; I would
presently be a Papist; But he had said before; What is the Essence of Papacy,
but the Claim of an Universal Power over the Church in the Pope, or his
Council, He being the Head

Now in this I would earnestly Beg the same Candor of Interpretation, in all I
have Written, that in this matter I would Use; that is, To seek out the best
and fairest Sense that I could possibly find, wherein I had any Reason of Check
at what is Written; should I be so unjust, as to understand by Mr. Baxter's
being a Papist presently, on such Terms, any Thing else, but that as to that
Point of Acnowledging the Pope as Head of Unity, as they speak, He would be a
Papist; and only upon the Supposition of Divine Institution, and that the
Essence of Popery consisted in that; whereas to be a Papist is generally
understood to be an Embracer of all the Idolatry and Superstitions, etc. the
Pope has established by the Authority, which is supposed to be in Him, to
establish what he pleases, as He is such a Head. Should I Turn this every way
to Aggravate it, and Raise Tragical Suspicions and Discourses upon it? Far be
it from me; I take his Meaning simply, as He intended it: It is but the same
Measure, I desire.

But I come to the main Point, and thereunto I make Answer in these following
Particulars.

1. By the Churches, I do not understand so the Symbolized Universal Church, as
that the particular Churches named, should be Excluded; but each Church with
its Pastors Included: So that supposing a Proesto's to be understood by the
Angel; It would Arise to no more, then that all these Seven Successions through
the Universal Church were Represented in each Succession by these single
Churches, and their Angels.

2. I am very far from Thinking, that either Pope or Bishop, or so much as a
Proesto's is understood by Angel; but that Angel throughout this Prophecy
Generally, (I do not say in every Particular) Signifies a Collective Ministry
of sit Instruments to every Purpose; and so Angels of the Churches Intends the
Holy Pastors or Ministers of each Successional State of the Church, who were
Instructed in the Main Concernments of the Kingdom of Christ in each Age, and
Remonstrated them to the Churches. And therefore I observe a Care, as I
Apprehend, of the Divine Spirit Foreprizing any such Interpretation of the
Angels, a^ if They were single Persons; For says Christ, Chapter 1. verse. 20.
The Seven Stars are the Angels of the Seven Churches; Seven is applied to the
Stars, and to the Churches, but not to the Angels, as it were Declining the
Application of the Number to the Angels, the nearest and most immediate Symbol,
of whatever was intended, that there might be no Collection; They were single
Persons.

2. I observe such a Sympathy between the Angels of the Churches, and the
Churches, that in one Great Instance the Spirit turns off from the Angel to
speak to the Body of the Church: To You I say, and to the Rest of Thyatyra,
Chap 2. v. 24, ^^. And that is a Key to the Intention in every Epistle to the
Churches; Besides the Book, of what John saw, to be Written by Him, Chap. 1. v.
^0. is directed to each Church by Christ's especial Command; and to the Angels,
only as Speakers or Prolocutors, as to our Speakers in Parliament; and it is
still said, He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches; And the Promises are made to each single Person of each Church; so
that what is said to any One, is said to All; wherefore as to me it is most
plain, All Ecclesiastic Power, any further than it holds out the Word of
Christ, which every single Christian is to know for himself, and so to submit
unto, is no other than some Vein, at least of the Feet of Clay; much more when
it Takes upon it to be Sirly, or Lordly over Consciences; and most of All, when
to Enforce it self; It pleads, by Law Established. So far am I in my own
Judgment from being Guilty in this matter of an Over-zeal supported only by
Ignorance, or not according to Knowledge, that I was always aware, and Guarded
against this Consequence.

2. I come in the Second place to Apply my Thoughts to Philadelphia, and
Laodicea, as Churches of Another World, which that They should be, none of the
Asian Churches, or Christians for 1500 Years ever Believed.

Answer 1. This I look upon, as not Known to us, what was Believed in the Time
nearest to the Giving that Prophecy. Since then, Gradually a Horror of Darkness
came upon the Churches, especially, as to the Apocalyptical Prophecy, and most
especially, as to the Retired parts of it; And Ah las, how much does it still
Remain? This I look upon then, as so Little of an Argument against their being
so, that I pass from it.

Answ. 2. Each Epistle is writ, not so to the Churches of the Future World, but
that They are for the Learning, and Admonition of every Age of the Church in
their most Mystic Sense, (if They had Ears to hear, which very words show the
Sense to be highly Parabolick, and Mystic) and still much more in their plain
Doctrinal, Instructing or Reproving, Correcting, Consolatory Sense, and
directed to all Churches, and Christians in all Ages since; Even as They were
for the Churches of that Time, and more particularly, Written, Each Epistle, to
the Church then, to which each was directed.

3. As to the Church of Philadelphia, and the Objections concerning it, I have
so Fully spoken in my Treatise of the Reformation to be Reformed; especially at
Page 62. etc that I would only Recollect this Brief Satisfaction: That I look
upon some Low, and Depressed State of Saints of Christ, Symboll'd all along by
it from the Reformation Entering, until the Reformation it self shall be
Reformed; to which the Little strength, and such like Expressions are to be
Applied; That it is so Long, Over-Lour'd by the Height and Grandieur of Sardis,
especially those of it, who make Them of the Synagogue of Satan; That it
^nters its proper Time of Succession, when it shall Appear in Another Kind of
Glory at 97; when also the Kingdom of Christ enters its Succession at the end
of the Apostasy, and the Time of it, as I have always explained that
Succession. Then Christ has Right of a Kingdom, the Four Monarchies being at
an end, and prepares for its Glory by the Seven Thunders opened, and the Vials
poured out, wherein the Church of Philadelphia shall be Highly Serviceable;
This State lasts for Daniel's 75, Added to 1260 of the Apostasy, and making
1335, Dan. 12. 12, 13. shall be at our 1772. Then the New Jerusalem comes down
on the Philadelphian Church, in a Glory Transcendental to he Church States that
ever have been ^n E^^th; for a (...) ^he end of the 1000 Years, the Glory
Retires from (...) on Earth, This Loose^ Satan, and the Condemned, Captiva^^^
(...) ^og and Magog; to make whatever Attempt They (...) ^^ss^^ility o^ Change
in the State of the Saints of the first Resurrection Above; but on the Saints
Below, it has the Operation of the Abatement of the former Fervors of Bringing
all their Glory to the Jerusalem Above, and Earnest Desire of being Caught up
to it, as its intended; but are about to Acquiesce and Settle in a State by
Themselves on Earth; which Christ by no means Allows, nor Endures. Here enters
the Laodicean State; of which because I have, never at any Largeness, published
my Thoughts, I would be more large, when I have given these Pre-Cautions.

1. That neither on my Judgment concerning Laodicea, nor concerning Gog and
Magog, as the Captivated Dead or Condemned of the Thousand Years do I suspend
the Weight of my principal Doctrine of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ;
but therein offer the best Light, I am able to give in so dark Points, in
Agreement with my principal Doctrine, and the Symmetry of Prophecy, and Commend
my Self therein to the Candor of the Wise and Sober, without any occasion of
Offense or Exasperation.

2. That the strangeness of the Abatement of Fervours in the Living Saints, or
the Laodicean Church, will be easily taken off by considering; The Assurance of
the best ^reated State, depends upon the Degrees of Divine Confirmation, which
does not perfect it self into the very Nature of Unchangeableness, but in the
Kingdom of the New Jerusalem Above, and in the Kingdom of Glory; Yet from hence
no such Thing as a Falling from Grace in the Saints much less in the Kingdom of
Christ, though Below, can be Fairly Collected.

For there is an unchangeable Love manifesting it self in the midst of
We^kness, till the Saints are brought to the State of Incorruption and
Immortality; which is not but in the Kingdom of Christ Above; where the Saints
of the First Resurrection are, and the Living Remaining, are (as I always
Asserted) Cau^ht up without the loss of any One, and so Delivered up together
into the Absolute Eternal Life of God All in All; which States are by the
Decree of God in their own Nat^re, so Framed by Infinite Wisdom and Power, in
Conjunction with Infinite Love and Grace in Christ, as Unchangeable, as God
himself.

For the Manifestation therefore of the Weakness of any State, but of that
Absolute Incorruption in the Kingdom of Christ Above, and of Eternity; for the
Manifestation of the Power and Grace of Christ's bringing his Saints Below,
safe to these States through the possibility of Danger at the end of the
Thousand Years; for the Greater ^onquest over Satan, Sin, and Death; And
lastly, for the showing the Necessity of putting an End to all Church State on
Earth, without such a Glory of the New Jerusalem coming down upon it; which
Infinite Wisdom, for the Glory of God All in All, had Determined to be only a
Thousand Years; On all these Accounts there is a Permission of the Appearance
of the Danger; but it was no sooner given Leave to Appear, but there was
immediately a Catching up of the Prey, as it were, out of the Mouth of the
Lion, and with Violence pulling out of the Fire every One of the Saints below,
and without the Loss of One. In all which I desire to be Clearly, Justly, and
Heartily Understood.

3. There is less Wonder, that the Wicked Captived and Bound under
Condemnation, and the Glory of the Kingdom of Christ for the Thousand Years
shining just in their Faces, should break out into that Outrage of Gog and
Magog. For thus, as Dead all that Time, not in the Sense of Suffering and
Torment, but of any Spirit for Action against the Kingdom of Christ, They lay
Bound and Fettered; It is no wonder then, that upon the withdrawing of the
Glories of that Kingdom, Satan and that Gog and Magog break out into that
Attempt, upon these Accounts;

1. All the Conviction and Punishment the Devils have been under these Thousand
Years, and of the Damned throughout Eternity, does not according to the
Judgment of all Divines upon Scripture, at all abate their Wickedness, and Rage
against God; but in whatever they find their Chain loose and allowing Liberty,
They take it. This then will be the Case of Satan, Gog and Magog at the end of
the Thousand Years; They find the Chains of the Kingdom of Christ loose about
Them, so They Stir, They Move thus*

2. There is no doubt, Satan is the Name of the Highest Dominion, Power, and
Influence of Wickedness in Scripture; He therefore being particularly loosed at
the end of the Thousand Years, mightily Agitates and Enflames to the Highest
the Highly disposed Spirits of the Gog and Magog, full of Rage and Hatred of
the Kingdom of Christ, the Loss and Torture of which They will have Endured a
Thousand Years; besides the undoubted Foresight of the Lake for ever; And not
able so strongly Chained, to have moved against it; upon a Loosening of Satan,
and a Power of Action, as it were of some Liveliness, by the Thousand Years
Glory Retiring; They are under Satan's Energy, called Deception because of its
Folly and Falsenses, how Powerful soever; That they Gather, and Compass the
Holy City.

3. The Wisdom, Justice, Glory, and Power of God and Christ in a Supreme manner
permitting, Order also, and overruled this Effort.

1. That there might be a full Display of the Wickedness and Irreconcilable
Spirits of Satan, and this lost Gog and Magog of the Condemned, and of their
Fittedness for the Wrath of Christ's Coming Down; not as a Second Conflagration
of the New Heaven and Earth, which by a milder Exffection Fly away, when Christ
Delivers up the Kingdom; but on Satan and his Hosts, only Fire comes down, as
it were, Hell from Heaven upon Them, shutting them up for ever in the Lake;
where there shall be an utter Impossibility of Satan being Loosed, of Gog and
Magog Feeling any such Life or Action, or Gathering in Battle for ever.

2. When therefore all the Numbers, Strength, utmost Efforts of Rage and Spirit
in Satan and all his Legions and Hosts are thus at the Height; there is then
this Supreme Manifestation of the Glory and Power of God against these Armies,
whose Number is as the Sand on the Sea; That the Grace, Love, and Mercy of God
(...) christ in the R^s^^e o^ the (...) Castle, Camp, or Strong Citadel of his
Saints in the New Earth, the New Jerusalem below, the Beloved City, might be
seen at last in this Illustrious and Glorious Deliverance and Rescue. It is
therefore called a Battle, even as the Second Part of that Great Battle of the
Day of God Almighty at Armageddon; And now the Victory is Complete and
Irrecoverable, by the Catargesis, or Casting into the Lake, that after a Full
and Absolute Judgment immediately followed; And of this Battle, even as of that
of Armageddon; All the Great Battles, Deliverances, and Victories, as of Moses
over Amalek, Joshua, and David, Psalm. 18. Asa, Hezekiah, Constantine,
Theododosius his Last against Eugenius, and Argobastes, were Types.

4. By way of Recollection, and for further Preparation concerning the Church
of Laodicea, let us consider the Six-fold Repetition of the Thousand Years,
Rev. 20. and how they are Assigned; which will add Certainty, and Luster to
both the Thousand Years, and the Hipothesis, or Frame of Doctrine built upon
them

1. They are Assigned to the Binding of Satan, the Dragon, the Old Tempting,
and Deceiving Serpent, the Devil and Satan, the Great Accuser and Adversary; He
was laid hold on by the Angel, or Ministers of the Divine Power and Pleasure,
having the Key of that dark Vault of Impossibility for Satan to Appear or Act,
but in the Torment of his own Guilty and Miserable Spir^t; as the Chain also
Signifies; so much as in the smallest Instance; even as at all Times He is
Remanded into it, and Held in it, but according to the Permission of God; He
was now laid Hold upon, Bound and Chained, and Sealed up for a Thousand Years.
Here Satan is Considered as in the Essentials of the Prince and whole Host of
fallen wicked Spirits, full of Power, Might, and Rage, as well as Counsel and
Policy; the whole Number of these Intelligences, Spirits and their Action, is
as effectually, and to all Intents and Purposes Bound for the Thousand Years,
as it shall be, when Satan is Cast into the Lake for Eternity, and under the
Absoluteness of Kingdom, when all Enemies subdued, God shall be All in All.

2. The Thousand Years are Assigned to the Not deceiving the Nations, till
those Thousand Years are Expired or Finished. Now it is most Eviden^, These
Nations are not the Nations of the Saved, Chap 21. 24. and Healed by the Leaves
of the Tree of Life, Chap. 22. v. 3. For These were Destroyed from Heaven; But
there were at the same Time other Nations Saved, and Healed, a Holy and Beloved
City. There is therefore a certain. Assurance, the Nations here spoken of, are
the Wicked Reserved to Future Destruction* Now These, I say, are Really the
Dead, who (as I shall just now speak more) were Symbolized by Nations, or
Gentiles, more properly Aliens, as (...) often signifies, from the
Commonwealth of Israel, the New Jerusalem below. But for the Thousand Years
they are not to be stirred by Satan; They cannot be Deceived into any Action
against the Kingdom of Christ; The Glory of Christ's Kingdom is so Full in
their Face,

3. The Thousand Years are Assigned to the Martyrs, and all the Saints of
Christ, whose Saintship is Symbolized by the Not worshipping the Beast, etc.
That is, as Pure to God in all Ages before the Beast, and making up One Church
of the First Born with Them; as the Apostle calls this whole Number of Saints:
These are Raised in Bodies of the First Resurrection, and Reign with Christ in
his Thousand Years Kingdom, a Thousand Years.

4. These Thousand Years are Assigned to the Rest of the Dead not Living again,
till the Thousand Years are Finished; And these Dead signify to me Those, Chap.
19. Slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth; and on whose Flesh the Fowls, viz.
the Saints of Christ Triumphing in the Vengeance, and Washing their Feet in the
Blood of the Wicked, are Satisfied upon. It is Expressly said, They Lived Not,
which is Principally to be understood of the Highest of Life in the Highest
Senses of it; For as soon as ever The Saints were Raised, All the Wicked Dead
were Raised; But They Lived not, Living not so, as to Reign with Christ, as the
Dead Saints Raised, Saints of the First Resurrection liv*d.

But because They are of a Resurrection, though a Resurrection of the Unjust,
and to Condemnation; Therefore They are spoken of next to the Raised Saints:
But They Lived not, till the Thousand Years were Expired; As soon as ever that
is said, it is Added immediately, This is the First Resurrection; the First and
Only Resurrection to Living: But These Dead were not of it, and so They never
can Live in the true Senses of Life, though Raised; For They Lived not till the
Thousand Years of the First Resurrection were Finished, and so could not so much
as Taste of the First Resurrection, or Partake of it; and then They never can;
For they are immediately Forepriz'd; as soon as ever it had been said, They
were the Dead, who for the Thousand Years Lived not; It is said, Blessed and
Holy is He that is Partaker of the First Resurrection, over such the Second
Death has no power; Over All else it has: The Dead therefore, which These
are, are Cast into the Lake of the Second Death.

There may be also a Secondary Sense of the Dead not living, viz. Not
Appearing, as Gog and Ma^og, till the Thousand Years are Finished, as has been
shown; But This is (...) Principal.

5. These Thousand Years are Assigned to the Partakers of the First
Resurrection, Holy Saints, and in ^ State of Paradise-Blessedness, making up
with the Risen Saints; We All; as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 25. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. viz. who Come to us, and make us up to an All, to a Complement of
Saints, who cannot ^e the Dead; for They Die not All, but are Changed, and so
Participants of the First Resurrection; Not the Dead, for They are the Living,
and Remaining: These also, though they are not Saints of the First
R^s^rrection, yet Partakers; Though they are not said here to ^ive, yet They
are Priests of God and of Christ, and Reign with Him as Kings of the Earth;
Nations Saved, and Healed a Thousand Years; And so the Greatness of the
Redemption of Christ Abounds in the Sight of their short Danger; and They are
Caught up to Christ, and to all the Saints above, and are ever with the Lord,
and so the Second Death has no Power over Them.

6. These Thousand Years are Assigned not in their whole Line, but in their
end, to the Loosing of Satan for that little space; to the Insurrection of Gog
and Magog, against the Holy City; and the Casting Satan and the Dead into the
Lake.

Object. If it should be said, How can One and the Same sort of Persons be
Known to be the same, when Prophecy has so varied their Names, Calling Them
the Nations, or Gentiles; The Dead; Gog and Magog?

Answ. So Great a Prophecy as This of the Revelation, that has pronounced a
Blessedness upon Them who Read, and who Hear it, Expects, All should be most
Accurate and Diligent in Comparing it Self with it Self, bringing All Scripture
into a Compare with it, that so the Two Leaved Gates of its Truth may open to
Them, and the Secret Treasures, even Treasures of Darkness, as it seems to our
dim Understanding, may be Disclosed to Them; And if Any think the Trouble too
Great, They are shut Out.

In this Case therefore by Comparing, we come to understand, that there is not
only fair Inducement to think the Dead, the Nations, Gog and Magog, to be the
same, but Greatest Assurance, They must be the same.

There is fair Inducement, in that Gog and Magog, being Described as a Great
Multitude, whose Number is as the Sand of the Sea; They must be a Collection of
Nations, and therefore They are expressly called the Nations, Chap. 9. v. 8. and
a Hammonah of Nations, as of Old in the Type, Ezekiel. 39 9. Now we find such a
Collection of Nations, Slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, Chap. 19. For v.
18. Their Flesh is Exposed as a Feast to the Fowls in such a Collection of
Kings, Captains, Small and Great; And v: 19. They are said to be the Kings of
the Earth, and their Armies Gathered together under the Beast, as their Chief;
And when the Beast and false Prophet were Taken and thrown into the Lake, verse
20. (...), the Rest, even the whole Rest besides the Beast and false Prophet,
are v. 21. expressly said to be Slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth; And so
They became the Dead; therefore Chap. 20. They are called very properly in so
Neighbor a Context, (...), the Rest of the Dead; by the (...), of Chap. 19. v.
21. and the (...), put together; The Remnant slain, Chap. 19. 21. The Remnant
of the Dead, c. 20. 5. Slain and Dead being most Conjoined in Signification,
They appear to be the same: And these Rest slain, and so Dead, are in their
whole Number and ^ollection, the Gog and Magog so gathered together, as to the
First Battle at Armageddon So to the Last Battle of the Thousand Years, or of
the Day of Judgment ending.

There is beyond this Indu^ement, strong Argument; For who-ever Live in the
State of the Thousand Years, must be Partakers of the First Resurrection;
Because They are the Nations of the Saved, saved from the Sword of Him that
Sat on the Horse; As they are called, The Land brought back, or Rescued from
the Sword, Ezekiel. 38. 8. All Those are Healed with the Leaves of the Tree of
Life; They must be therefore the Living, for All that are Living are (...), the
very Left as under a peculiar Guard, and Care of Life; So They are called the
People left, and Escaped, and the Living, Esaias 4. 2, 3. and by Ezekiel compared
to Fishes in the Living, and Healing Waters; wherein whatever does Live, shall
Live; and the Dead, viz. the Raised-condemn'd, to Marshes, or Miry places, not
Healed, but Given to Salt, Ezekiel. 47. 9, 11. even the Salt of that Fire, never
Quenched, March 9. 47. From whence it Follows, whoever Escape in that Great
Tribulation, the Fire, the Sword, the Hail of the Day of Judgment, and
Perdition of Ungodly Men at that Battle of Armageddon, are the Living
Remaining, Written in the Book of Life, and shall Live; And All other are to be
Accounted the Dead, First Slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, punnish'd
with Everlasting Destruction, and then cast into the Lake at last: For so it is
Everlasting Destruction to be Slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, Because
All the so Slain are the Dead, not Partakers of the First Resurection; So the
Second Death gets the Power over Them, certainly and infallibly; They are cast
into the Lake that Burns with Fire, and Brimstone, which is the Second Death.

Having thus far Pre-caution'd concerning all Things relating to the State of
the 1000 Years, and the Little Space of Sathan's Loosing after the 1000 Years:
I will now in very Brief, Lay down some very short Positions, Clearing the
Doubts Arising from the State of the Living Remaining Saints, as It is
Symboliz*d, and Figured by the Church of Laodicea.

Posit. 1. The Great Reason persuading, The Church of Laodicea is the
Representation of the Saints after the 1000 Years, is, that, There are Great
Reasons to be Given, e^sewhere declared; That the Seven Churches are as a
Prophetic Seheme, prepar*d by Christ to Run the whole Line of Time, Allotted to
the Apocalyp^ic Prophecy; as it is first Given by those Churches, with Relation
to the Church of Christ, to the very end of All at the Kingdom delivered up;
and as more Generally, It is the Second Time, Fully Given in the Prophecy of
the Book, sealed with Seven Seals, and Gradually Opened to the Kingdom by
Christ.

Posit* 2 If it be so, Then the Philadelphian Church being the Church, on which
the Thousand-Years-New-Jerusalem comes down, and Rests, The Laodicean Church
that comes after it, must needs be the State of the Church upon the Glories of
the New Jerusalem above being withdrawn, Satan Loosed, and the Assault by Gog
and Magog, deceived by Him, preparing; For All These Immediately succeed the
1000 Years, if then, the Church of Philadelphia Agrees in Time with the 1000 Y.
and describes the State of the Church during those 1000 Years, the Church, that
Follows that, must describe the State of the Church after the 1000 Years.

Posit. 3. There is a wonderful Agreement hereunto of the Titles of Christ in
writing to this Church, viz. the Amen and Faithful Witness to the Last End;
about to Close the whole Created State, by delivering up the Kingdom; as well
as the Beginning of the Creation of God; the Name of the Church, Laodicea, as
in a Judiciary Power over the Nations of the Raised, Condemned Wicked, Lying
Captive at Christ's Feet, and so at his Saints Feet, as the Dead. The Promise
of Sitting down with Christ on his Throne, (They being Caught up to it;) and
that, as Christ Sat down on his Father's Throne, till the Time of his own
Kingdom, So these Saints sit, while the Last Act of Judgment on Satan, Gog and
Magog, on Death, and Hell, is in Sentence and Execution, and so until the
Kingdom delivered up; All these I say, Admirably Agree to the Last End of
Things.

Posit. 4. The several Branches of the Epistle must not be Rigorously Applied
to the Saints Living, Remaining in the New Jerusalem State, but carried only to
the Principal Scope; and whatever Exceeds that, must be understood, as in all
Parables of Scripture, to Flourish and Embellish the Figures, that They may
most to the Life, Express that Principal Scope; and the Rest must vale off, and
be Applied only to the Groundwork it self of the Figure; as here It must to the
Church of Laodicea, that was in Being, when the Epistle was written; and so
These Following Particulars are of Chief Remark, in which, let us then Hear,
what the Spirit thus speaks to the Church of Laodicea.

1. The Lukewarmness of the Church of Laodicea, Applied to the Living Remaining
Saints cannot be understood, but of the abatement of the fervors for the Glory
of the Jerusalem above, to which hitherto these Kings of the Earth, the Saints
below had Brought their Glory: But now those Glories from Above being
withdrawn, and the so Free and Illustrious Communications ceasing, These Saints
below, whereas They rather Acquiesce in their State below, at least, as very
well; should have Burnt in an Immediate Zeal to be Caught up, as Elijah in
Charriots of Fire to Christ above, and to be ever with Him.

2. The Spewing out of Christ's Mouth can by no means indeed be understood of a
disgraceful, dishonorable End put by Christ to his own Kingdom below, or on
his, the Living Remaining Saints; but only that seeing a Church State on Earth,
Born up in Glory from the Jerusalem State above, during the 1000 Years, could
by the decree of God, Assigning only a 1000 Years for it, be no longer; and
that his Saints not yet vested in Immortality, and Incorruption, would be
liable to Sathan's Assaults, and to Temptation, and to Fall from their Glory;
He would therefore Spew out for ever Any Church State, but what should be Fix*d
in Immortality and Incorruption, and so Immediately be delivered up through
Himself to God* and the Father.

This Spewing, or Vomiting out of Christ's Mouth, signifies then the utter
Impossibility for ever of any Lapsible Church State, or what is not so
Eternally secured; Seeing it is most Impossible, Christ should Return to his
Vomit any more.

3. The Church of Laodiceas, so high Account of it self, as being Rich, and
Increased with Goods, etc. but in Christ's Account being Poor, Mise^^ble,
Blind, and Naked, and Counseled therefore by Him, to Buy of Him Gold tried in
the Fire, white Raiment, and Eye Salve* as Applied to the Living Remaining
Saints, is no otherwise to be understood; then that All that Excellent State of
the Jerusalem below, was through the Beams of a free Communication from the
Jerulalem above, with which It was in Union; but that being no longer possible
because the Thousand Years were finished, there could be no Satisfaction in any
longer Continuance below, however They might be Tempted to mistake concerning
it; For the State of the Church so Deserted was poor, miserable, blind, naked;
and the Good State could no way be Recovered, but by the Pure Gold, the White
Raiment, and Eye Salve of Immortality, Incorru^tion, and Immediate Sight of
Christ Face to Face, in his Kingdom above.

4. By the Rebuke and Chastisement on Laodicea, as It may be Applied to the
Living Remaining Saints, is Figured, in t^^t Compass^ng the Camp or the
Munition of the Saints, Christ's main Intention and Design which was Love; the
end of it being to stir up that Zeal, and change of Mind, or Resipiscency,
producing an Earnestness to be Caught up to Christ in his Kingdom above;
according to the Necessity that must needs A^pear from so Bold an Attempt of
Satan, as soon as ever the Glories of Jerusalem above were stayed, which was
the Security of that below; And seeing there was but a Thousand Years
Determined to that Universal Glory of the Kingdom of Christ, and there could be
no longer such a Communication, and yet that there was not that Ardor in these
Saints to be Translated to the High^st State; Christ stops also those
Influences, that Fetter*d Satan, and the Gog and Magog; which They immediately
Feel as a Loosening of Themselves, and so They Come up, and Cover the New
Earth, and Compass the City; So that the Remove of the Saints is, as by a
violent Motion, as it were Spewing out; and by a Severe Admonition upon the
Saints, that Their Zeal for that Remove up, might Flame out, and so Christ in a
Zeal of Fire from Heaven, Devouring their Enemies, might Rescue Them: This
Translation is therefore called (...), 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Implying a Violence in
the whole Transaction; as of a mighty Rescue from a destroying Beast of Prey.

5. Christ Standing so Graciously at the Door, and Knocking, even at every
Door, and Assuring his Free Communion in Supping with his Saints, and They with
Him, shows in the Application to the Living Remaining Saints, that
Never-failing Love of Christ, as the Redeemer and Second Adam; that when those
Brighter Rays were Retracted and with held; yet would not Fail to Visit Them,
by no less Effectual, though not by so Resplendent Rays; and when He did not
Visit Them, as a New Jerusalem below, any longer to Continue; He yet looked with
a particular Care and Love to every Single Saint, to Loose not so much as One;
not One of those Saved, and continually Healed with the Leaves of the Tree of
Life, and the Water of ^ife, being possible to be Lost: Forasmuch as not One
was a Son of Death, for that were to be a Son of Perdition, and of the Second
Death, and so not to be of the Saved of the Nations, nor of the First
Resurrection, over whom the Second Death can have no power.

6. These Living Remaining Saints are therefore every One Over-commers, and so
every One Caught up to Sit with Christ on his Throne, as Christ Sat down on
the Father's Throne; They Sit with Him in those Great Acts of Judgment, and
when Satan is Cast into the Lake; And when Death, Hell, and the Dead, are Cast
into the Lake, the Great and Final Acts of Judgment, They put on Immortality
and Incorruption: They with all Saints meet Christ in that High Act of
Resignation of the Kingdom, and having been Kings and Priests before, during
all the Thousand Years, are in one Moment Perfected into an Equality to the
Saints of the First Resurrection, and So to Angels, to whom Those are Equal at
that Resurrection; that Possibility of Dying and Falling, of which for the
Glory of the Redeemer, and his Grace, and Mighty Power over Satan and the Dead,
there was but a Show and no more, even all Mortality is swallowed up of Life,
and so They are Ever with the Lord, who is Ever with the Father All in All.

And thus I have according to the utmost Grace and Assistance, God has herein
been pleased to give me, Set out the Kingdom of the Thousand Years, which is
indeed the First Resurrection, and there is no Second; All Second to it, is
Second Death; as I have and do Affirm Constantly. All Saints are either
Principals or Partakers; Here are the Two in Capital Letters written Rev. 20.
5. 14. This is the FIRST RESVRRECTION. This is the SECOND DEATH. So that
(however it be not Intentional, not Understood by Them that say it,) To say,
the Thousand Years are past already; Is to say, The Resurrection is past
already, as I have already Observed.

And if They are past already, how comes it to pass the Season since their
Ending, has been not a Little Season? as the Prophecy so Positively Asserts it
to be: For Beginning the Thousand Years at Constantine, and Ending Them at
1300, when the Turkish Euphrates Began to Swell over in the World, there must
have passed about 400 Years since, which Compared with a Thousand Years,
besides what still may be Expected, it is no Small Season; Nor does Prophecy
barely say, The season of Satan's Loosing is Small or Little; But it Describes
All Things in the most Rapid Motion to a Final End; Which will by no means
Agree with so long a Time, as has already Actually passed: But thus it Fares
with All, who will Deny Great Scripture Evidence; They are forced to swallow
Camels of Difficulty, for the Gnats they so strain at. But God forbid I should
seem to Charge All that do it with Hypocrisy; except that secret Hypocrisy
Remaining and Lurking in the Heart of the Holiest here: Nor do, or can I in the
least suspect the least Shadow of any Favor to the Horrid Anticristianisms of
Popery, in the sudden Resolve to be a Papist, if one Humane Angel, or Governor
over all the Christian Churches could be supposed to be the Institution of
Christ: For certainly if such a Love of Pre-eminence had not been Cursed by
God, as making Preparation for the Man of Sin, to sit so High in the Temple of
God, and to let into it the Desolating Abomination; That might have been the
most pardonable Error in Popery; Especially according to even Protestant
Episcopal Principles: For They beginning at Deacons, (as the (...), or First
Degree that the Apostle intended) go up to Priests, from Priests to Archdeacons
or Deans, from them to Bishops, from Bishops to Archbishops, and why not to
Patriarchs, as Primitive? And why not from thence, (as All Height would
Culminate to One) to the Pope, as the Head of Unity and Order, the Vicar of
Christ, the Successor of Saint Peter, who is Named, (...), as if a Scandal were
laid into that Philoprotensia, if I may so call it, that Primating Affectation;
But All Sincere Protestants, though most Episcopal, Abhor the Dreadful
Consequences from such a Primacy, as the Papaoy Claims; not only over
Consciences, but over Princes, and Civil Powers, in Ordine ad Spiritualia, or
to Infamous Ends, called Spiritual; which Spirituality, I am very prone to
suspect, was Foretold in the Holy Spirit's Choice of that Word [(...)] Rev. 11.
8. and that it does not only signify, Spiritually, viz. Mystically, but is
also Prophetic of that Great use Anticbrist should make of that Word
[Spiritual;] On which Account I cannot but pray, All Protestants might get from
under the Fathality of that Word, any way Secularly Applied; as also from any
Primacy Allied to the Feet of Clay; I have so Great an Honor, and Love for
many, who stand so high in, as They are called, Spiritual Dignities, who, I am
Bound to hope, are yet in their Truly Chief Situation, Stars in the Right Hand
of Christ.

But the Chief Reason I make this Digression, is, that I may observe, how far
One may be from such Portentous Consequences, that may seem yet to have some
Ground; Such are charged on me on Dr. Crisps Account; All which I detest with
Greatest detestation, as I Fully Believe he did, but minded only to Give the
Full Consolation to Consciences Arising from Christ, being an (...), a Ransom
in our Steed, a Sacrifice, a Surety, and Sin for us; and designing All his
discourses of These Things to be Confined to the Elect only, who shall All be
brought in by Christ, and Receive an Efficacious Spirit of Holiness and
Perseverance.

But to Return to the Thousand Years, which I have Affirmed to be the
Perfection of Time; Because It is the Fullness of Times, or of All Times, to
which the Scripture therefore Sets up as Pillars, Two (...), or It is Done, It
is Done; One of Destruction to the Wicked, One of Salvation to the Saints:
Therefore I Avouch a Scripture Line of Time from the First Sabbath, to this
Great Sabbatism in Express, either Historick first, or afterward Prophetic
numbered Nambers; And because This is a Divine Chronology, It is not subject to
the endless Contrasts and Feuds of Greatest Chronologers, never to be
Reconciled by Persons of Greatest Learning, Reading, and Judgment; much less by
Me less than the least of the Sons of Learning, not Worthy to be Named among
Them; Yet by the Grace of God, in this Matter I Am, what I Am, and hold in my
Hand the Unerring Clew of His Word.

THE END.
Some small Errata, The understanding Reader will pardon and mend. I only note
page 9. line 16. for Believed, read, Beloved, p. 13. l. 24. for pro. read
premises, p. 28. l. 35. for Effec. Read Affection, p. 29. l. 30. read, that,
before Kingdom.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER, Concerning the Thousand Years, further Cleared.
SInce the Finishing of the Foregoing Discourse, as I was in Earnest Thought
about the Clearing the Due Assignation of the Thousand Years; To the Saints of
the First Resurrection Reigning with Christ; To the Wicked Raised, but not
Reigning with Christ, and so not Living; And to the Saints, the Living and the
Remaining, or Left under a Guard of Life, Secured from the Sword of Him that
Sat on the Horse, and so never Dying. To every of which Classes, the Thousand
Years are plainly, and without any violence in the Threefold mention of the
Thousand Years, Verse. 4, 5, 6. Assigned: It yet seemed a Doubt to Me Worthy of
a further Illustration, Where the universality of the Raised Saints; Concerning
which, the Apostle is so clear, That Christ brings Them with Him, should be
placed: Because They could not with such Satisfaction be Reposed either with
the Martyrs and Non-Worshippers of the Beast, etc. Nor with the Partakers of
the First Resurrection, who, though Changed, are not ^aught up till a Thousand
Years after, which I never yet see Disproved: Although because Scripture is so
Positive, All the Dead in Christ rise first; They must have been Included in
One of those Two. And I did accordingly in the foregoing Treatise, Incline to
place Them among the Martyrs, page 30. line 1. But yet a Desire of a further
Explanation, remained with me; And, I hope, I may say, without vanity, God has
helped me. And I Found Their Seat is distinct, and in the First Place, viz. In
those words, I saw Thrones and They Sat upon them, and Judgment was given to
Them; most Agreeable with Daniel's Prophecy. Chap. 7. v. 26, 27. Who therefore
are the They who Sat on Thrones? I know it may be said, No More was meant, but
that the Thrones were Sat upon, as, They shall require thy Soul, Luke 12. 20.
and They may Receive You, Chap. 86. v. 9. But considering the following words,
Judgment was given to Them; cannot be thus any fair way Expounded. I conclude,
The [They] must Relate to some Persons spoken of before, and who should They
be, but Those Signified by the Armies of Heaven, Chap. 19 14. who Followed
Christ on white Horses, in Linen white and clean? Most Admirably Agreeing with
the Prophet Zechary; The Lord my God will come, and All Thy Saints with Thee,
Zech. 14, 5: With the Apostle Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. Those that Sleep in Jesus,
will God b^ing with Him; With the Epistle of Jude, Reciting Enoch's Prophecy,
v. 14. The Lord comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints, etc. When therefore the
Prophecy had Disposed of ^he several Enemies of Christ; as the Beast, and false
Prophet, Chap. 19. Cast into ehe Lake, and the Remnant Slain with the Sword of
Christ's Mo^th, and Satan the Dragon Bound, etc. Then it gives Account of the
Armies of Heaven, that were with Christ in this Victorious Dispose; And of
Them, It says, I Saw Thron^s, and They [Those Armies] Sat upon them, and
Judgment was given to Them; And so being in the Forefront, or First, Set on
the Thrones, must needs Reign with Christ the Thousand Years. Allowing
therefore not only the Scripture-way of giving Account of Things, not in such a
Method as Humane Writings observe, and much more allowing for the Secrecy of
Prophecy; This is to Me a Full Satisfactory Account, and I hope it will not be
unworthy the Consideration of All, who are Serious Considerers of these Things,

Then follows the Account of All Suffering for the Witness of Jesus, and for
the Word of God; Surely from the Beginning of the World; but with an especial
Reference to the Roman way of Punishment of such Offender^, showing a Direct
Eye upon Roman-Martyrdoms, by Beheading; as John the Baptist, and the Apostle
Paul said to be; But most particularly the Non-Worshippers of the Beast; who
are so particularly Recorded for Three Reasons.

1. Because hereby the Judgment upon Them as Heretics and Rebels to the
Government of Christ, as Antichrist pretended, is as an Attainder by an Illegal
Power, Signally taken off.

2. That the Prophecy all along before Insisting upon the Beast, his Image,
etc* might have the Due Honor given to it, by placing a peculiar Remark upon
the Principal Subjects of it; So that it is most Admirable, how any Rational
Considerer of the Prophecy, can suppose Pagan Rome, Falling about 300 Years
after Christ*s Resurrection, should Take up such a Prophecy, against so
manifest Assurances, that it must Run on to the End of the World; That even the
Wisest Papist cannot Deny it: But what Violence must They use to it, that
Believe the Papacy to be the Beast, and yet so begin the Thousand Years; That
they must be long ago before Him Finished? Could such a Prejudice be brought
from this Prophecy, or Scripture in general against my Doctrine of the Thousand
Years Kingdom, or such a Proof against me, as I have given, of the Flying away,
Revel. 2^. Of the New Heavens, and the New Earth; I would be so Retracting
indeed, as Immediately to Retract, and even to Recant; In the mean Time, as I
have Stated Things, I fear no Accessions to Mahomet by My Doctrine of the
Kingdom of Christ.


