A SOLEMN PERSUASION TO MOST Earnest PRAYER For the Revival of the WORK of GOD,
Bringing forth the Kingdom of CHRIST, when ever it Appears Declining under his
Indignation.

WHETHER In our own Souls. In the Nation to which we belong. In the Churches of
Christ throughout.


Upon Occasion of the late STROKE of Divine Displeasure in the Death of the
QUEEN of so Blessed Remembrance.

By T. BEVERLEY.

Amos 7.2, 5. Oh Lord, by whom shall Jacob Arise? For He is small LONDON,
Printed for W. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-Street, MDCXCV.

The PREFACE to the READER.
IT is indeed a Most Undoubted Duty, as to behold in All Persons in the General
Humane Nature, Dying, the Exemplification of our own Mortality. It is a further
Duty to consider in Christians the Patterns of a Holy, and Religious
Conversation, God offers to us in any of them. And This Duty is Raised by the
Honor and Dignity of Station, and such have been placed in by God: On which
Account, the many Discourses on so Great a Person, as our Religious, and
Gracious Queen, are Justified; But yet, as in All Princes, that can bear any
Relation to the Church of God, There is a Peculiar Attention, and Regard Due;
on which Account, It is Remarkable, Scripture Takes the Names of Heathen
Princes into its Records, which had never else Appeared, or been Heard of in
it, but as God made Them Instruments of his Grace, or Displeasure to his own
People: how much more is both the Life, and the Death of Princes, who are by
Profession joined to such a People; as the Kings of Israel, and Judah, though
so many Bad; But most of All, when they were themselves Holy Personages;
because All Princes over the People of God have an Eminent Relation to the
Mercy, or Wrath of God upon such Nations; and God Changes Times and Seasons (as
Daniel observes) by setting up, or Removing such Princes; And yet beyond All
this, there is a Consideration due to that Figure, Princes, and Governments
make in Order to the Kingdom of the Great Son of man, Our Lord Jesus Christ; On
Account of which, Daniel had so Great Visions of the four Monarchies, and
espec^ally of the Fourth, or Roman, so immediately (in its Expiration)
Consining on that Kingdom. And this is that Highest, and most weighty Point of
both Discourse, as in Public, so of the Prayers and Meditations of Christians
in Private, on such a Public Providence, as the Death of a Christian
Protestant Princess.

I having therefore through the Gracious Assistance of God set my self by the
Books of Scripture (wherein the Sure Word of Prophecy is for the Churches of
Christ Deposited) to find out the Time for the Accomplishing the Desolations of
the Sanctuary; could not but take Notice of that so Monumental Providence in
its Season, the late Revolution, 1688. Upon which I then made Public my
Observations, to be found still, I doubt not, in many Hands: I looked upon my
self therefore under as great Obligation to make most Humble and Awful Remarks
upon so Astonishing a Perez, a Breach or Stroke upon us in the Death of the
Queen, 1694. (when the Succession of the Kingdom of Christ is so much nearer
according to my Computation, as in 1697. within Little more than Two Years) who
sustained so Illustrious a Figure in it. And though I Framed it only into such
a Discourse as was most suited to a Plain Christian Auditory; yet because Wise,
and Good, and Considering Persons are not so Confined to Curiousness of Words,
or Artifice of Connection, but are most intent upon Things, and can take Short
and even the most Free and Natural Intimations of them under more Ample, and
Accurate Reflections; I have Exposed it to General View, mostly as it was at
first spoken; designing the Substance, and Materiality of what, I have herein
offered to deepest Consideration, and leaving the more Critical to Correct the
Errors of Form, that they, to whose Minds the most Plain Discourses have
easiest Access, may not lose the Benefit.

And I am Encouraged in making such a Publication, in regard of both the main
Design, which is to Consider, How such a Breach upon us is Posited toward the
Kingdom of Christ, and that Great Revolution of its entering into Succession in
97. as also to Present it in such a Native Freedom, and In-Artifice: and upon
one and the same Account in both; That is, I have Remarked, That no Divine
D^spose in our Memory has brought forth so Abundantly all Kinds of
Celebrations of any Person as of our Excellent Princess, both in Religious
Improvements of so Severe a Chastisement, As also Accumulating Highest Praises
upon so Worthy and Meritorious a Subject, speaking of her with Relation to Men;
but Abating whatever any may have spoken of Her, like the Blasphemies of the
Antichrist an Beast against them, that dwell in Heaven; For all such Praises
are in Sacred Style no other than Blasphemies, not only against God, but
Against Those so Celebrated. There is therefore, in my Esteem, no Room for any
more Publications on those first Topics. But I have also observed, none have
Pitched upon the Examination of so Remarkable a Dispose as dating the Review
from the Introduction of this Government upon the removal of King James by so
outstretched a Hand; nor carrying the Prospect to that much greater Change God
is about to make; nor giving direction, what the Servants of God are so to
direct their Faith, and Prayers upon, Now I having singled out these Points, to
Address my self unto the Servants of Christ, therein to Excite their
Meditation, and Practice; I have taken greater Considence in setting them in an
open Light, as not Treated upon by any before, on this so notable Providence.
And yet I have not neglected on just occasions to make those Memorials of
Praise that Scripture Allows, and has even set apart to them that Fear the
Lord, and to Honor the Remembrance of the Queen by them.

I have also Pointed upon those Duties of Practice, so necessary on so Sad and
Solemn an Occasion in General.

And on this very same Account, that others have so Abounded in all the Florid
parts of such Kind of Discourses, I have Hoped, that a Sermon in so Ordinary,
and Vn-Adorned a Dress will be the more gladly Suffered.

I have therefore been only Intent on this main End; that is, that every one
may earnestly seek of God the coming of the Kingdom of Christ in Power, in his
own Soul; And that Powers and Nations may in General wait for it, and wisely
Place themselves in a just subordination to it; being most Assured, if we are
not removed from this Earth under the immediate Views of it, as we know we may
soon be; even as this Great Princess has been; it will yet make such
Appearances from Heaven in coming upon us, as will Amaze the World to behold;
even its Kingdoms becoming the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ.

And though the Lord makes use of what greater and more Honorable Instruments
He pleases, as of our Illustrious Queen; or of smaller and meaner; yet He is
not tied to any: For his own Arm shall Rule for him, his Reward is with him,
and his Work before him.

And though on so great a Dispose, as this removal of so great a Personage from
us, we ought to hear his speech and to be afraid, to cry out Lord, revive thy
work; In wrath remember mercy; Yet to have sure Confidence he will, and is near
about, to take to himself his great Power and to Reign, how Angry soever the
Nations will be at it.

And if we are such, as Love his Kingdom and Appearance, However the Fig Tree
do not blossom, etc. However dark and black things look, yet we should glory in
the Lord, and rejoice in the God of our Salvation, and be Assured he will make
our feet like Hindes feet, and set us on the High Places of his Kingdom; And
though Nations labor in the very Fire, and weary themselves for very vanity,
yet it is so ordered by the Lo^d of Hosts, because he is just about to Fill the
Earth with the Knowledge of his Glory, even as the Waters cover the Sea. Oh let
him come into his Holy Temple, and let all the Earth be silent before him.

A SERMON Preached in MEMORIAL of the Awful Divine Dispose In the DEATH of the
QUEEN OF SO Blessed Remembrance to the Whole Nation.
HABAC. iij. 2. Oh Lord, I have heard thy Speech, and was afraid; Oh Lord,
Revive thy work in the midst of the years; in the midst of the years make
known; in wrath remember mercy.
I Have thought it necessary in regard of that Great Sense of the Death of the
Queen, God has been pleased to Imprint upon all the People of this Nation;
(who have indeed any Sense of his Providence, but to the Degree of Common
Sobriety) I have thought it, I say, necessary to Reflect upon that Late so
Tremendous Providence, and to set before you, what I look upon to be most
Seasonable, and most necessary for the Servants of God in the present
Circumstances of things to apply their thoughts unto.

And indeed, I do not doubt, but that Funeral Remembrances are very much
warranted to us by that Example of David bewailing the Death of Saul, and of
Jonathan, which we find 2 Samuel 1. 17. David lamented with this Lamentation over
Saul, and over Jonathan his Son. Also he bid them teach the Children of Israel
the use of the Bow. This, some Interpreters understand only to teach the Use of
Arms; of which at that time the Bow was one of the Principal, and became an
Emblem of the whole Military Skill and Action; But it seems rather, according
to the Judgment of other Interpreters, to be the Title of the Lamentation
David made over Saul and Jonathan; as some of the Psalms have Titles very
peculiar, suited to the principal Matter, Tunes, or Instruments used in
relation to them: So this Lamentation had the Name or Title of the Bow. And as
a Higher Commendation of it, it is said to be written in the Book of Jasher, of
the upright one, or uprightness; intimating some most Excellent Record, or
Records of Greatest Truth and Value, (Spoken of also Josh. 11. 13.) He goes on;
The Beauty of Israel is fallen upon thy high places: How are the mighty fallen!
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice; lest the daughters of the uncircumcised
triumph. That is, If it were possible, I earnestly desire, That the Enemies of
God, and of his People might have no occasion to Rejoice and Triumph in that
sad stroke on Saul and Jonathan; Especially, as if the Interest of God and of
his Kingdom suffered, and sunk at all in it.

For were it not on this Account, it might seem wonderful, that God should be
pleased to ordain, that part of his Word should receive this Funeral
Lamentation of Saul and Jonathan into it: Especially Considering that Saul was
a Prince Rejected of God, and that God was very Angry with, and very severe
upon; and that He was a Great Enemy to David, whom God was pleased to place the
Type of the Kingdom of Christ upon, and to remove it from Saul Himself.

But this was undoubtedly the Reason of it, Because Saul, though in his own
Person, he was a Prince so rejected of God, yet God had made him for a time, a
Type, and the first Type of the Kingdom of Christ; and though he rejected him,
yet he had Anointed him, he had given him a Kingdom, and set him over the
people of Israel; which Kingdom was so Eminently a Type of the Kingdom of
Christ; And therefore David the sweet Psalmist of Israel, and the Established
Type of the Kingdom of Christ, was employed by God, in an extraordinary way, to
make this Lamentation over him. And of this he gives a very plain notice; when
He said, The shield of Saul was vilely cast away, as though he had not been
Anointed with Oil. His being Anointed with Oil, was a Type of the Great
Messiab, of the Great Anointing, and on that Account David Lamented.

As this Lamentation may be therefore in General, a Foundation for a Funeral
Commemoration; so especially, and very particularly, when the Person Lamented,
had any relation to the Kingdom of Christ.

Now with regard to the Providence of God upon the Nation in the Removal of the
Queen so lately; we may say, that God has been pleased, as it were, by an
universal Consent, of even the soberest of the Nation, to Embalm the Memory of
so Excellent a Princess; and we may say of Her, as Solomon in the Proverbs;
Many daughters have done virtuously, But Thou excellest them all, Prove. 31. 29.

And as it is said of Tabitha or Dorcas, in the Acts of the Apostles; They
brought forth the works she had wrought. Which by the Context Appear to have
been prepared, as works of Charity; So we may say, Many have brought forth many
Eminent and Excellent Works of this Great Princess; They by the Gracious
Providence of God toward her Memory, have been more spoken of, and more
Commended and made known, than before; Although they were certainly and
sufficiently known to many Witnesses of Greatest Credit in the time of her
Life, and to many who had themselves the Experiments of the Great Tenderness
and Compassionateness of her Spirit; and more especially toward Them who
suffered upon the Testimony of the Gospel, and on the Account of Conscience;
Yet the notice taken of them since her Death, has more shaken the House of
Dagon than before in her Life.

But notwithstanding this, and much more that might be said, and has been
abundantly spoken by those who were most proper to speak of these things; there
is that particular Relation, Her Station and Interest in Government, and Her
Extraordinary Introduction into it, Providence gave Her, had to the Kingdom of
Christ: And this is that which I look upon as more closely, and precisely my
Duty to Consider, and to speak of to All that have a humble and deep
Consideration of the ways of God in relation to his own Kingdom, which
oftentimes are in the dark, and his footsteps in the great waters; and He gives
not Account of any of his matters. If He take away even persons that we may
think of great Service, and use to his Kingdom; yet who can hinder him, or say
unto him, what do thou? If he Removes the Person of greatest Honor and
Dignity, of great and public Good and of Support to the Protestant Religion,
yet none can call Him to Account, but must lie at his Foot; yet humbly
interceding, as the Prophet here does, Oh Lord, I hear thy speech, and am
afraid; And so to set our selves to pray, Oh Lord, Revive thy work in the midst
of of the years; In the midst of the years make known, in wrath remember mercy.

In Order therefore to the more close Discourse to this purpose, I begin in the
opening of the words according to the Context wherein they stand; This Chapter
therefore follows upon two great Visions Habakkuk had received from God in the
two foregoing Chapters.

The first of the Visions was the Desolation of Judah and Jerusalem, by that
bitter and hasty Nation of the Chaldeans, or Babylonians, Chap, 1. 5. Behold ye
among the Heathen, says God, regard, and wonder marvellously, for I raise up
that bitter and hasty nation.

The second of the Visions is the Judgment of God upon Babylon; set out in many
sharp and reproachful Remarks of the Divine displeasure upon them, cap. 2.

Now upon the first of these Visions, the Prophet had very sad and Afflicting
Fore-sights. And therefore he says, Oh Lord, I heard thy Speech, and was
afraid, ver. 2. I heard, and my belly trembled, rottenness entered into my
bones, c. 3. 16. For undoubtedly, the Spirit of God that fully understood its
own Counsels, Taught and Instructed him so to speak of that Babylonian Kingdom,
as the Head of Gold, comprehending the whole Image, Dan. 2. and so in a more
eminent manner, the Roman Monarchy, which is therefore styled Babylon: And
according to this the Apostle uses the very words of Habakkuk, Acts 13. Beware
least that come upon you, which is spoken of in the Prophets, behold ye
despisers and wonder, and perish, for I work a work in your days, which you
shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it you.

This is plainly taken out of this first Vision of Habakkuk. Now, How could
that come upon them, when the Babylonian Monarchy had ceased long before? But
because the Roman Empire, was to fill up and complete the Babylonian Image. And
that old literal Babylon was most peculiarly a Type of Mystical Babylon, the
whole Roman Potentacy, especially the Antichristian.

As therefore literal Babylon of old destroyed the City and Temple of
Jerusalem; so the Romans took away by a more lasting Destruction their City,
Temple and Nation. And as literal Babylon has a Woe pronounced upon it for
building a City with Blood, and giving an intoxicating Bottle; so Spiritual
Babylon is infamous for Blood, and its Cup of Fornication. Compare Habak. 2.
and Rev. c. 17. c. 18.

And Further, as the Jewish, so the Christian Gentile Church has been, and yet
continues under the same Tyranny Twelve Hundred Sixty Days of Years, almost
now expired, yet not fully ended: But till they are ended, the Church is in a
Wilderness-Condition, and the Witnesses in Sackcloth have lain slain and dead,
by reason of the Cruelty, and Persecution of the Mystical Babylonian
Antichristian Powers, and the Time, Times, and Half-Time determined to them.
Now Habakkuk foreseeing in Spirit, this long Calamity of the People of God,
both Jews and Gentiles under this Literal and Mystical Babylon, he is deeply
Affected with it, as has been declared.

Upon the second Vision, viz. the utter Destruction of the Babylonian Image,
and the both Literal and Mystical Babylon, wherewith the Vision of the Kingdom
of Christ is conjoined and interwoven, Habakkuk (Chap. 2. ver. 1. etc.) stands
on his watch Tower, to wait for the Issue of his Intercession, which in his
first Vision he had made (Chap. 1.) against Babylon. Now in Answer to that
Intercession, he is commanded to write a great Vision, and to make it plain,
that he might run that reads it, and which every one should live by Faith
upon, till they should see it fulfilled in Glory. For though it tarried long,
it should speak to the Full at last, and therefore to be waited for till the
1335 Days making Blessed, according to Dan. 12. ult. And what Vision is that
which God gives in Answer to Habakkuk's earnest Prayer from Chap. 1. 12. to the
End?

It is certainly what we find in the second Chapter consisting of these two
Great Heads.

First, Those several so Solemn Denunciations of Woes and Judgments on Babylon
in its whole Image and State, from Litteral Babylon down to its utter
destruction in Mystical Babylon through the Chapter!

Secondly, Those so Gracious and Illustrious Declarations, and Assurances of
the Kingdom of Christ; Chap. 2. ver. 14. The earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. And the Lord
is in his holy temple, let all the earth keep silence before him, Ver. 20. So
great a Remark of the Kingdom of Christ, as the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord filling the earth, as the waters cover the sea; makes clear the main Scope
of the Vision; And as Great a Display of the Kingdom of Christ is that other
Branch of the Vision; The Lord is in his Holy Temple, etc. Which Expression
has a close Alliance with that Prophetic Vision of the Kingdom of Christ
given to Ezekiel in the delineation of a Temple, Throne and City in his last
Chapters, on Account of which, there is such an often mention of the Temple
opened, and of God and the Lamb being the Temple of, and having their Throne in
the New Jerusalem, in the Revelation c. 21. c. 22.

Now that the Lord would revive, or give Life to that his Great Work of
carrying on the Kingdom of Christ, whenever it seems (especially) to languish,
or has been under any Embarrassment; this was the Prayer of Habakkuk, and
ought to be of every Servant of Christ, who loves the Kingdom of Christ.

And so the Prophet knowing that all those Great Works God has done in the
World, are preparations to, Pledges of, and are to be Completed, and Filled up
in the Kingdom of Christ, recalls, and recounts the Great Works of God, from
the beginning of the World, that so he may lead to that Kingdom all along his
third Chapter.

Now therefore, because all the time of the Babylonish Captivity, till the
Restoration by Cyrus, the Work of the Kingdom had lain, as it were, in a Swoon,
this earnest Prayer is Left on Record to the Servants of God in all Ages, to
power out their Souls to God in, on such Occasions.

We need not stand upon the Critical Middle of years, although the very
restoration by Cyrus after that Captivity in Babylon, was a most remarkable
Middle of Time, between the first Creation and Eternity; yet in any time,
wherein God has seemed to forget his Great Work for his Kingdom, or to do any
thing in delay of it, we may thus Cry out to him in General, In the midst of
the years revive thy work, in the midst of the years make known.

And so proportionably in our private Case, when we find any declining and
going down of our Hope in the Salvation of God, in our own Souls, the Grace of
Christ retiring from us, and his Spirit withdrawing from us: Or when in the
Public State of the Nation, the Glory of the Gospel is under any Eclipse, the
good State of the Government of a Nation, with relation to the Kingdom of
Christ is sinking, or loosing any of the Pillars of it; or when any sad
Providence is upon our selves in particular, that looks sad upon us, as
depriving us of the Comfortable Aspects of the Kingdom of Christ; we may Cry
out to God for a revival, a Remembering Mercy even in the midst of Wrath, a
making known in the midst of the years. And thus our late sad Providence, which
shows the fitness of the Text to this Occasion.

Three things therefore I Propose in this Discourse to speak of.

First, Of the Great and Earnest Intercession of the Prophet Habakkuk, as it
may be taken up and made use of by every Christian in secret, in relation to
his own Soul, and the inward State of it, or to his outward Condition, and the
Providence of God toward him in that, or with respect to his Family, and
nearest Relations: And all these with a look toward, and subordination to the
Kingdom of Christ. And herein I shall consider all these more strictly, when
they are at any time in a plunge and sinking of Condition, under any Eclipse,
or Cloud of Providence; Then in such a strait, we may go to God, crying out, Oh
Lord, Revive thy work in the midst of the years, make known, in wrath remember
mercy.

Secondly, I will take into Consideration the more Public State of the
Servants of God, that keep his Commands; of his Witnesses that hold the
Testimony of Jesus, when they are in Sackcloth, and even lying dead in any of
the Streets of the Great City; or when the Church is in the Wilderness, How
earnest we should be with God to Revive his work in the midst of the years, to
make known, and in Wrath to remember Mercy.

In the Third Place, I shall Apply it Particularly to the late Providence of
God upon the Nation, in which he seems (as it were) to have Reversed a late
Gracious Dispensation of that Providence to this Nation; to have reversed it in
such a Part, in such a Principal Part of it, by the Removal of the Queen.

And so I shall close with Application.

1. The First thing that I would Propose is this; There are many sad and dark
Vales of Providence, and as to the Presence of God, in every Particular
Christians Soul: There are many times, when we seem to Languish in the Ways of
God; when our Hearts grow very vain very Worldly; when we are ready (as it
were) to Die: The things that are in order to the Kingdom of Christ, they are
ready to die; As we find, Rev. 3. Concerning the Church of Sardis: Thou have a
name that thou live, and art dead. Be watchful, and slrengthen the things
which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works filled up
before God.

O, How often do we find that our Souls are Ready to lose their first love!
that they are going backward, that they are going downward in the Ways of God.
Certainly, Every one of us has reason to fear, and to suspect, that such a Time
has been upon us, or that it may come upon us.

David was very sensible of such a State as this is; and therefore in the 119
Psalm, he is continually praying, Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy word,
ver. 25. This Prayer returns upon him, ver. 88. Quicken thou me after thy
loving kindness: So shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth.

There are many Times, when God retires the Gracious Motions and Assistances of
his Spirit. What a dreadful complaint is that, that the Servants of God make,
in Isaiah 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to Err from thy ways, and
hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake. How often is
it, that our Souls have reason to Complain, that in a just Judgment He so
retires from us, as to make us to err from his ways, and to harden our heart
from his fear? So, Isaiah 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works
righteousness; those that remember thee in thy ways. But immediately he cries
out, Behold thou art wroth, for we have sinned; Yet (says he) in thy ways
there is continuance, and we shall be saved; Here comes in, in the midst of the
years, (as it were,) a rejoicing in God; When we are Free, and Established in
the ways of God, Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness;
But then, on the other side, Thou art wroth, for we have sinned: We give God
occasion to retreat the Light of his Countenance; the Motions of his Spirit,
the Comfort of his Presence: And yet, notwithstanding, as Habakkuk here says,
Revive thy work in the midst of the years, There is continuance (says he) in
thy ways, and we shall be saved; But then immediately he goes on again to
Complain: We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind,
have taken us away; And there is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs
up himself, to take hold of thee: etc.

When therefore we find the Graces of the Spirit of God looking in us, as if
they were Blasting; like Flowers, or Blossoms blasted with an East Wind; when
we find our Souls dead in the Ways of God, and Holiness; when we find our
Iniquities, and temptations to Evil have Prevalency upon us; then, what is our
Duty to do? but to cast our selves down before God, and say unto him, O Lord,
Revive thy work in the midst of the years; in the midst of the years make known.

When at any time we fall, as David, into Sin; that God would restore the Joy
of his Salvation, and establish us with his free Spirit. That he would not cast
us away from his presence, nor take his holy Spirit from us.

When we find our selves dead in the Use of Ordinances, we have no way, but
earnestly thus to cry out to God. When God plunges us under fears of Eternal
Wrath and Displeasure, to say unto him, In wrath remember mercy. And so in
regard of outward Providence; when God brings us into the dark, and not into
the light; (as that Expression is in the Lamentations.) when he seems to shut
out our prayer: And though we shout, and make a noise in Prayer, yet that still
he will not hear; Then we should insist, O Lord, Revive thy mercy to us in the
midst of judgment, In wrath remember mercy; Work a Salvation, even in our
outward Condition, so far as is necessary to our Eternal Peace and Salvation.

And in all these things, there ought to be a peculiar Eye to the Kingdom of
Christ; For the Kingdom of Christ, and our Salvation are united, and the Glory
thereof shines out together; even as now they are Reserved together in Heaven,
till they are so Revealed; and there they are always in a Readiness to be
Revealed, as the Apostle Peter Witnesses, 1 Pet. 1. 5. etc.

And even so all outward Salvation and Deliverance are upon the Title of the
Kingdom of Christ, Pledges of, and in Order to it; even as the Restoration of
the State of Judah, and Jerusalem by Cyrus and the Kings of Persia, that was
more immediately in the Eye of the Prophet Habakkuk, when he prayed for the
Revival of the work of God, in the midst of the years; and was a very Great
Type of the Kingdom of Christ, according to the State of that time.

2. In the Second Place, Thus in regard of the Public State of the Nation: If
there be an Appearance of things, that God is taking away from us the Enjoyment
of the Gospel at any time, the Enjoyment of his Ordinances; that he is taking
away the Peace, or the Freedom of the Nation; that we seem to be in danger of a
return of Evil upon us: For so indeed, is the State of things: Till the Kingdom
of Christ, we are between Light and Darkness: There are continual returns of
Evil, as I have often Observed. Look over all the Histories of Scripture, and
the Histories of Times since the Scripture; if there have been better Times at
any time, Darkness and Worser have come and followed upon them.

If you look upon this Nation; Indeed, It is very Remarkable, since the time of
the Dawns of the Reformation upon it: You know, First we had the Excellent
Appearances of Government, in that young Prince, Edward the Sixth: God took him
off suddenly, in the very rising of his Youth: And the dark and dolesome time
of the Marian-Dayes, of the Burning so many of the Servants of God, came on,
and Antichristianism returned and came back.

Now, at such a time, undoubtedly, the Servants of God were earnest with God,
that he would Revive his work in the midst of the years. And so it came forward
again, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. And we have had somo Appearances of
Hope of the glory, of a greater glory of the Gospel, and of Christianity, at
some times; and then they have been veiled and clouded, and darkened again: I
would not enter into Particulars.

But what shall we do at such a time as this? How should we cry out, O Lord,
thou have appointed a Kingdom to thy self, to thy Son: thou have resolved, that
the knowledge of the Glory of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the waters do
the sea; Some things have seemed to move toward it, and they have gone back
again, and down again; O therefore, Revive thy work, O Lord, in the midst of
the years make known, in wrath remember mercy.

This ought to be a Pattern to the Servants of God, in all times, when any
thing that God has done for them, has seemed to go backward; that God would
revive his work in the midst of the years: Blessed be that God, that can do it;
He can revive it; He can give Life, after we seem to be in a Swoon, and under
Faintings; yet God is able to do it; And therefore, our Souls should, upon this
very Account, be continually powered out, upon all occasions before him.

But then,

3. The Third thing that I proposed And that is, To mako a particular reveiw
and remark upon this late Providence:

And that Briefly; because I would give occasion to greater enlargedness and
seriousness upon these things in the thoughts of Christians; that (as I have
said) we may not lose the use of so sad a Providence, by letting it evaporate
in only an outward Formality, and Commemoration, and Commendation of the
Honor of so great a Person, God has Removed: We should not let it go off so,
but let it come to serious and deep Consideration.

I would therefore Propose these two things.

1. First, That which we may look upon, as Dark and Sad, in this Dispensation
and Providence.

2. In the Second Place, How we may reap Benefit and Comfort, and Encouragement
to beg of God, that He would revive his work in the midst of the years; that he
would yet carry on his work: And though this was a stroke of Wrath and
Displeasure, yet that he would return in Mercy.

1. The first thing that I would lay before you, as a Sad and serious
Consideration, is, That when God sees a People unreformed, when he sees a
Spirit of Profaneness, of Atheism, of VVretchedness, Senselesness of things,
and of Ungodliness; He takes away those Persons, that are as the Chariots and
Horsemen of a Nation; as it was said of Elijah. He removes those, that are in
themselves, blessings to a Nation: And so we should Consider this late
Providence, as a stroke upon the Irreligion, upon the Atheism, and upon the
Profaneness of the Nation: God takes away those, whom he makes Defenses; whom
he makes (as it were) Buttresses and Props of the Nation.

Thus of that excellent Prince Josiah, we read: because it was a very wicked
State of the People at that time, It was a very senseless State: And when God
gave them such an Excellent Prince of so very great Hopes, and of so great Zeal
for Reformation. In the 34th. Chapter of the 2d. Book of Chronicles, you may
read all along; And in the 35th. Chapter, what an Excellent Person he was: Yet
God took him away in great Wrath and Displeasure upon the Nation, Chap. 35.
25. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing-men, and the
singing-women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made it an
Ordinance in Israel: and behold, they are written in the Lamentations.

Certainly, many Expressions in that book of the Lamentations of Jeremiah, have
great respect to this very Josiah; Of whom we said, under his shadow we shall
live among the Heathen, Lam. 4. 20. The Crown is fallen from our head, Woe unto
us that we have sinned. Chap. 5. 20. And why was it? because God would not turn
(as it is said) from the fierceness of his anger, for all the Sins that Israel
had joined with Manasseh in; So we find it expressly taken notice of, that God
would not turn from the fierceness of his Anger, notwithstanding all the
Reformation Josiah had made; And therefore he took away Josiah. That Is the
First Sad Consideration that we may have upon us.

2. The Second very Sad Consideration, is;

That when God takes away Persons of very great Use; of very great Sense of
Himself; of very great Hopes to do good in that State and Condition, wherein he
has placed them; the Account that He is pleased to give of it is this; (which
indeed, may look very Sad upon us, and as if God would have us understand
Wrath and Displeasure by it) Isa. 57. 1, 2.

The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to
come; He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one
walking in his uprightness. This is the Note I would give; When Persons of
Eminent Piety, of Eminent Mercy, and doing Good, as necessary to Mankind, are
taken away, it is from the Evil to come very often; It is a Sign, that God is
bringing a Storm upon a Nation, a Storm of Wrath and Displeasure: When he takes
away Persons of Eminent Sense of Himself, or of Good to the Nation, or that are
Public Blessings; when he takes them away, it is a Sign, that there is Evil to
come.

3. The Third Consideration is this, and Indeed, that ought to Affect us very
much: For, you know, that God has, within these few late years made so great a
Change in the Government of the Nation, as tended to an Introduction to the
further Glory of Christianity, a greater Advancement of Protestantism, and the
Reformation among us; And you know, how Principal a Person the Queen was in
this very Revolution, which has been often spoken of, and Celebrated, as is
well known among us; Now, this is a Rebuke upon the Nation, that God would be
pleased, to take such a Person away; that in every thing, we may say, According
to the Opportunity, and the measure of Light vouchsafed to her, as Solomon
speaks of the Virtuous Woman; She did good, and not Evil, all the days of her
being in the Government; And was (as I said) an Eminent Person in that
Revolution; which we have, both in Solemn Acknowledgement to God, and in
General Discourse, looked upon, as a great Mercy to this Nation.

The Happy Union of the King, and the Queen in the Government was a great Mercy
to the Nation in these Regards;

1. That it gave such a Sweetness, and Conciliatoriness to the Government in
the thoughts of All, who were not Enemies to the true Interests, to the
Happiness, and Prosperity of it in regard both of the Religion, and of the
Freedom of the Nation. The King, and the Queen were Lovely, and undivided in
their Regnancy, in so happy a Configuration of Graces and Virtues, as in their
Union in Titles; in such a strict Fidelity to the Protestant Reformation, as in
their Joint Swaying the Scepter.

2. This Union gave Stability to the Government; In this Instance, as Solomon
says, Two are better than One, and the Union made it a Three fold Cord, that
is not Easily Broken.

3. It was a Security to it; For seeing, the King, and the Queen were so
united, as that the Government survived in each; the Sons of Violence had this
Discouragement of Attempting against either single.

4. It gave a presence to the Government, that in the necessary Absence of the
King for the Defense of the Nation in the Wars Abroad, the Government was yet
always present, and at Home, by the Queens Union in Supreme Power.

Now, I say, When God is pleased to take away such a Person, so Eminent in the
Revolution; It is, as if he would put a Disgrace, and a Dishonor upon the
Revolution as to usward. And, we have reason to Fear, lest God should Roll
back from us, the Good that he had began to do. And, As it is said, I will
Repent of the Good (not of the Evil; though God does also say that) But I Will
Repent of the Good that I thought to do unto you.

That therefore God should bring us again into the Dark; and if there be Place,
and Room for such a thing, as many of the Servants of God have Apprehended, and
(I believe) do Apprehend: Though (as I have said) it is not according to the
Apprehensions that I have I may Humbly Hope) had from the Word of God.

But, If there be Room for such a thing, as that slaying of the Witnesses, and
as their lying dead yet three days and an half of years; It may seem to be as
fair an Introductory stroke of God upon us for it, as may be.

Therefore, I say, We have Reason to Apprehend it, in this regard, and to
humble our selves before God; lest he Repent of the Good, he thought to do unto
us, and will not do it for us.

I Acknowledge, It is a very dark Dispensation of Providence; That, if the
Succession of the Kingdom of Christ be so near as 97, that so Eminent an
Instrument in the Hand of God within these Nations, should so suddenly before
it, be Removed.

But as I have said, His way is in the Sea, and his Paths in the Great Waters:
He gives not Account of Any of his Matters. If He take away so Great Persons,
who can hinder him? Who can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? He
will show he needs no ones Service, so as to depend upon it; he can raise up,
and fit others, as he pleases; and yet more abundantly provide for the Honor
and Happiness of Any, he has used, with himself; And whereas they are Removed
out of the Visibility of such Glory before the Eyes of All; even in that they
shall not be Loosers: For when the Lord comes, all his Saints, Great and Small
shall come with Him in Glory, on white Horses, Bodies of Glory in Fine Linen,
white and clean, which is the Righteousness of Saints. And so however Dark, I
say, this Providence may Look now in relation to the Queen, because we have no
Views of the Glory into which she is entered; yet then All this shall clear up,
and brighten into Luster and Open Appearances of Glory. But now,

2. In the Second place; According to those Hopes, and those Earnest Prayers,
that I desire every one of us may join, in pouring out before God; there is
hope (as Scripture speaks) in our Israel concerning this thing; and that God
will yet go forward, and perfect the Mercy that he had intended to us.

Therefore, I shall give you two or three Consolatory Considerations, in
relation to this.

1. The First is, That God has oftentimes been pleased to make a Breach, when
he was in the way of doing his People Good; And, as if he were Reversing, and
putting an end to his Work, and yet he has not so intended: As I Will name
briefly some Instances to you.

When Joshua was in the Course of Victory, over the Kings of Canaan, You know,
upon the Sin of Achan, there were very dreadful Discomfitures of the People of
God, by those whom God would Root out and Destroy; and yet, notwithstanding,
this did not prove an end of Gods work: But, as you find in Hosea 2. 15. (a
most comfortable place) when at any time God is pleased to make a stroke upon
his People, he thus speaks; I will give her her Vineyards from thence, and the
valley of Achor for a door of hope; Which was the place where the Children of
Israel were Discomfitted, and where God seemed to make a Breach upon them. I Will
give it her for a door of hope. God turned that very Valley of Achor into a
door of hope. So, when God seems to make an End of his Work of Grace, he may
make it a Door of Hope.

So God made a Breach upon Vzza: David could not tell what to make of it,
whether he would Establish him, and give him the Happiness of his House; David
was afraid of it; But yet, notwithstanding, in a little time after this, the
Ark was brought down to the City of David. So, I say, that was not an Argument
that God would put an End to his Intentions of Grace toward David and his
Family; though he made so Dreadful a Breach to strike Vzzah immediately, in
that he mistook, and was in an Error concerning the Ark.

So we have the Case in the 2 Samuel 1. when God took away Saul, and Jonathan his
Son; Saul's Kingdom was undoubtedly a Type of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
though it did not continue in Readiness Person and Family: But immediately, you
see; the House of David, David's Kingdom, and Solomon's Kingdom rose up. So, I
say, it is not an Argument, when God has an Intention of Grace, that he will
not carry it on, or that he does intend to put an end to it because he makes
some breach; yet we should pour out our hearts before God in all such Cases,
and say unto him, O Lord, in wrath remember mercy; O Lord, revive thy work in
the midst of the years.

2. The Second Consideration by way of Consolation, is this; That God has yet,
and does yet; and, as the Apostle says, we should trust, and earnestly pray,
that he will yet continue the King, and make him a great Instrument for the
Advancement of his Glory, and the good of the Nation. The Lord, yet has left
us a Nail in his Sanctuary (as the Expression is) a nail in his House.

God gives us yet our hopes, by such a Nail in his House, as he preserves among
us; And though we know No other Nail, except Christ alone, is fastened in so
sure a Place but that it may be removed, yet we may have Hopes that God that
has been pleased so immediately to make the King his Instrument in reviving
his Work in these Nations, when it seemed declining so Fast amidst the years of
K. James, will sustain and support him, till the very Time of the Right of that
Greatest King for entering into the Succession of his Kingdom; when the Time,
Times, and Half Time given by his Oath to Antichrist shall be at an End, and
such Time be no more for ever; as is also sworn by Christ; which I have made
out, as I doubt not to affirm, on such Grounds as will not Fail, to be at the
so near 97. from the Compare of the two Oaths, the first giving Times, and
half, Dan. 12. the latter defining those Times and half to be at an End, and
never to be renewed, Rev. 10. It should cause us yet, in relation to this, to
cry out, O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in wrath remember
mercy, in the Preservation of the Government to us, as there is an
Establishment of the Reformation from Antichristianism, and as there is an
Enjoyment of the Ordinances of the Gospek in so much Freedom. And then,

3. The Third thing I would mention to you, by way of Consolation (and so I
shall immediately conclude in Application) is this,

That surely, we cannot (I am humbly bold in the Word of God, to say to you) we
cannot be far off; We cannot upon any Account whatever, be far off, from a far
greater Revolution and Change that God will make, by the Succession of the
Kingdom of Christ. The very Labor in the Fire, and Wearisomnesses for very
Vanity, that we behold in All States, amidst all Persons, and on the account of
so great Persons as we now Memorialize, removed from us suddenly, is a certain
Assurance, it is near, even at the very Doors. For I dare Appeal to All the
World, whether though the World has been always full of Wars, and of Rumors of
Wars; yet whether ever there were Wars of so little Fruit, Success, or
Archeivement? Whether even there was such Labor of Nations, and of People in
the very Fire, all consumed without Fruit, and for very Vanity, nothing come of
it, as has been of late years: And is not this God has spoken, and Challenged
the whole World upon? Hab. 2. 14. Is it not (says he) of the Lord of Hosts, so
ordered, and contrived, it should be thus? Because the Knowledge of the Glory
of the Lord; that is, in the First Appearances, and Increasing Glory of his
Kingdom, rising like Ezekiels Waters, first to the Ancles, then to the Knees,
and Loins, and then like the Great Sea, covering All. This therefore, that we
are so Apt to Complain of, so much Charge, and Labor, and no Effect, is a
Comfortable Prognostic, the Kingdom of Christ draws near, and will by the
bitterness of the Former State be thus welcomed into the World.

We should therefore take Comfort, in this very third of Habakkuk, as the
Prophet goes on in his setting out the glorious Works of God of old: And he
does it to that very purpose to Comfort, Ver. 3. God came from Teman, and the
Holy One from Mount Paran, Selah: His glory covered the Heaven, and the Earth
was full of his praise. He stood and Measured the Earth, (Ver. 6.) he beheld,
and drove asunder the Nations, and the everlasting Mountains were scattered,
the perpetual Hills did bow. And so he goes on, setting out the Works of God.
And he Concludes, (let Appearances be never so Dark) (V. 17.) Although the
Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines; though things
be never so Dark, says he, yet I Will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my Salvation: The Lord is my strength, and he will make my feet like Hinds
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places.

He Alludes to such Expressions, as set out the Glory of the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And he has left it as a Song to all Ages: To the chief
Singer on my Stringed Instruments. That is, Let all the Servants of God in
every Age, prepare to Sing upon these Grounds that I have laid, to Sing to the
Praise and Glory of God, and to the glory of his Kingdom, even till Jesus
Christ our great Beloved shall make haste, and be as a Roe, and as a young Heart
upon the Mountains of Spices; upon the glory of his own Kingdom as the Anointed.

Certainly, I say, This cannot be far off, let us compute Time how we can;
there is such Evidence that we must needs believe it. And happy will it be for
any One of us, whom God continues in the present State in this World, to see
but the Dawns and the beginning of that Kingdom.

O how Comfortable would it be, to Live or to Dye, as God is pleased to Call us
to it, if we could but once see those Dawns! If we could but hear those Loud
Voices from Heaven resounding upon Earth; The Kingdoms of this World are become
the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ.

I shall now shut up what I have spoken, in very brief Application.

APPLICATION.
The First Application offered to us, is,

USE I. A Wise, and a Holy, and a Prudent, Christian Commemoration of the
Graces, and Virtues, and Excellencies that God has given to any Persons of our
Times; And so Particularly to this Eminent Personage that God has lately
removed from us. It does become the Serious and Holy Servants of God, and of
Christ, to make a Wise, and a Prudent Commemoration.

This is warranted to us, by what I say we have in the 2 Samuel 1. David speaks
thus; The Beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: How are the mighty
fallen! Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon.

They were Cities of the Philistines, the Enemies of the People of God, the
Enemies of Israel. O let there not be an occasion for them to Triumph and
Rejoice in it!

Let God do something Graciously for the Nation: We should earnestly Pray, that
God would do some Gracious thing for the Nation; That though they will be
Triumphing and Rejoicing, and making great Mirth upon it; yet notwithstanding,
that God may Laugh at them, with a far greater Scorn, and have them in
Derision, that are Enemies of his Gospel, and of his Kingdom. And, If any
Person, whom they thought, and did look upon as a Friend and Servant to the
Kingdom of Christ, and an Enemy to their Interest that are of another kind, of
another Region, of a Region below; that God would snatch their Triumph and
their Singing out of their Mouth; which we should earnestly Beg and Desire; and
we should beg it of God, that he would Interpose against it.

And therefore, we may make a Wise, and (I say) a Prudent Record of any Person
of Eminency and Service: And so we ought to do upon this occasion, by this
Example of David upon Saul and Jonathan. Therefore, according to all Freedoms
of Apprehension and Expression, we may do it. As David says, in 2 Samuel 1. 23.
Saul and Jonathan they were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their
death they were not divided Jonathan, undoubtedly, was an excellent Person
every way: And Saul, in regard of his Government, and bearing a representation
of the Kingdom of Christ, he is thus spoken of, by David: Though otherwise,
Scripture has set very black Characters upon him.

So we may say, The King and the Qu^en were Lovely and Pleasant in their Lives:
And it is the great Goodness of God that they have been Divided in their Death;
And that God has been pleased to Reserve and Preserve the King; and that he
would still Preserve him, our Earnest Prayer should be upon it; and any thing
of Mercy, that God does to the Nation, by those that he has set in so Eminent
Place and Station, and Sovereignty over it, we should Adore Him in.

And, you see here, there may be a Covering of Imperfections. You see that
David covered the great Evils that were in Saul. And the Spirit of God speaks
of it, and has Enrolled it in the Book of Jasher: That (I say) there may be a
wise and a Prudent and a Holy Commemoration. And much more when there was such
an Eminency as in our Case; for we may say, So great a Person, so Exemplarily
Fearing God, ought according to the Word of God to be praised; Her Memory to be
Blessed; She ought to be had in Perpetual Remembrance. We may say of Her, Many
Daughters have done Virtuously, but thou excellest them all; as was said before.

And so we find God oftentimes in his Word, speaks of his Servants; Moses my
Servant is Dead, says God. That was a kind of Solemn Memorial of Moses. And so
we find of Josiah, Jeremiah spoke of him in his Lamentations, to this Day, to
After Times.

Now therefore, That God has been pleased to take away one of the Pillars;
though (as it were) the Left-Hand-Pillar only, preserving the Life of the
King; We have Reason to speak of it with Apprehensions of His Goodness, and
also of His Stroke; the Stroke that looked like a stroke of Displeasure; In
that Regard we ought to Consider, as in a Day of Adversity.

USE II. In the Second Place, it teaches us to make a Holy, and a Wise, and
Spiritual Use of this Providence, in relation to our selves: 1. To Consider the
great Weakness, and uncertainty of our Condition here: 2. To take out any of
the Exemplars God gives us; the Exemplarit of good and gracious Persons; and of
the good we find in any of Eminency. And in that Eminent Person that God has
Taken and Removed from the Nation. We ought to Consider, wherever there is any
thing of Worth, and Loveliness, and Excellency in any of the Servants of God,
and any that have been Instruments of Public Good and Advantage.

USE III. In the Third Place; it Teaches us to be Apprehensive, lest God should
have still in Reserve a Scourge, and secret Stroke (as it were) upon the
Nation. You see, we don't know what a Day; and much less what a Week, Month or
Year may bring forth; how God may Change the Public State of Things, within
such a Time. And therefore it should teach us to lie Low before God; to Humble
our selves, and earnestly to seek him. And then,

USE IV. In the last Place; It should teach us to hope in the Salvation of God,
both in Relation to Public and Private; and in relation to the Glory and
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, earnestly to pour out our Hearts in Prayer
and Supplication to Him; that he would be pleased to manifest himself in great
Power and Glory, for the Glory of his Kingdom especially, and for the Glory of
the Gospel; for the Glory of the particular Nation and Community that we are
of: And also for great Grace, and Infinite Mercy every one particularly to our
Selves, to Cry out, O Lord, Revive thy work in the midst of the years; in the
midst of the years make known, in wrath remember mercy. For we have heard thy
speech, and are afraid: O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, etc.

And therefore, by way of Supplication, and lifting up our Hearts; Let us set
before us that 64 of Isaiah, O that thou would rent the heavens! that thou
would come down; that the mountains might flow down at thy presence. That
there might be such great works of God; As when the melting fire burns, the
fire causes the waters to boil: to make thy Name known to thine Adversaries;
that the Nations might tremble at thy presence. To make known the wrath of God
to his Enemies; and by terrible things that we looked not for, that he would be
pleased to show himself to us in Salvation.

A HYMN.
1.
O Lord, in sunder Heavens part,
Them open, Lord, to thee:
That coming Down in Grace to us;
Thy Glory We may see.
2.
O let the World thy Power Know!
The Nations All, perceive,
How great a God our Lord is, when
His Kingdom He Will Receive.
3.
Let Mountains all Distill and Melt,
At thy Great Presence near;
But let our Hearts, much more thy Grace
Feel them Aright to Steer.
4.
Such Efficacies Let us feel,
In Answer when we Pray;
So far surmounting all our Thoughts,
In their most free Display.
5.
That in a Holy Wonder We
May Fear, and Praise, and Joy
In thy Great Righteousness, and Live,
When Our Sins thou wilt Destroy.
FINIS.

