A SERMON Upon Revel. 11.11, etc. SUMMONING The Expectation of the Witnesses
Rising AND OF THE Great Concurrent Works Daily showing forth Themselves, and to
be Complete by 1697. TOGETHER WITH The Surprising Confirmations of the Line of
Time, and the 1260 Days of Years ending 1697. Designed as an Encouragement of
Earnest Prayer, With Assured Faith and Hope of the Blessing of God on the Arms
of Protestant Princes; and particularly, of our King, and the Change of the
State of the Suffering Witnesses in France.

By T. BEVERLEY.

Isa. 51.9. Awake, Awake, O Arm of the Lord.

LONDON: Printed for John Salisbury, at the Rising Sun in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1692.

A SERMON UPON THE Rising of the Witnesses; AND THE Great Works, that shall
therewith show forth Themselves, so as to be Completed by 1697.
Revel. 11.11, etc. And after three Days and an Half, the Spirit of Life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their Feet, and great Fear fell upon
them that saw them; And they heard a great Voice fram Heaven, saying unto them,
Come up hither. And they ascended in a Cloud, and their Enemies beheld them. In
the same Hour was there a great Earthquake, and the Tenth part of the City
fell; and in the Earthquake were slain seven thousand Names of Men; And the
Remnant were affrighted, and gave Glory to the God of Heaven. The second Woe is
past, etc.


IT has pleased God, beyond all my former Thoughts on this Scripture,
Providentially to lead me to such a Review of it, as thereby to show me, that
the great things of this Context must be Fullfill'd before the End of the 1260
Days; If therefore the Calculation I have given, be Just and Right, and
according to Scripture, of which I have before and do now offer my Evidences
from it so full, that I cannot but be Assured my self, It is so; And hope every
considering Person will be also assured as that the 1260 Days shall End 97. And
if so, there are so great Things to be done from this Year to that Time, that
we may very well be in a continual Expectation what God will graciously please
to do this Year, and every following Year; till all things are made ready for
the Proclamation of his Kingdom, as in its Succession, that is immediately to
ensue at the Sound of the Seventh Trumpet; which shall even then begin to
sound, when those 1260 Days shall end.

I come therefore to the closest Consideration of this great Portion of
Prophecy, I have proposed to Discourse of. And here I find six great Effects
that must needs come, according to this Prophecy, before the 1260 Days are
ended: Seeing then, there are but five Summers, and the sixth, wherein the
Kingdom of Christ is to enter its Succession, and 1260 Days so to End. There is
great Reason of Expectation, and of being every Year upon our Watch, to see
what God will please to do; seeing there are so great things to be done, and so
little time to do them in, How great then may our Expectation be? Indeed we may
not Limit the Holy One of Israel to any Time, who made the World in six days;
yet according to the General Procedure of Providence, which is not in the (yet)
Time of the sixth Trumpet so speedy, as it will be in the Time of the Seventh
that comes, and shall move so quickly, and speed all its Events, when the sixth
is at an End; Before that, because of the slow Motion of the sixth, the Two
Woes are said to come hereafter, Rev. 9.12. that is, by Leisure. So thr sixth
Trumpet, though its Motion shall be more swift at the End; Yet it is slower
than the seventh, which is said to come quickly; Not because it shall come
immediately after the sixth; for so the sixth did after the fifth; but because
it shall in a short Time accomplish its Great Effects; According therefore to
the present Procedure of Providence, I say, there is but so much Time left, as
is necessary to bring these great Effects to pass one after another (with which
Prophecy has charged it self) before the 1260 Days end.

Effect 1. The Spirit of Life must enter from God into the Witnesses, in so
Remarkable a manner, setting Them upon their Feet, that All that see shall
behold Them with Terror; They shall say, This is the Finger of God; This is
from Heaven; Something of this has been done in Ireland and Piedmont, but not
to such a Degree, as that Their Enemies, and Others, should find so Remarkable
a Terror at it.

Feet in Scripture signify some very Remarkable Tidings and Events: How
Beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings Glad Tidings. It
speaks steddiness and assurance of Success. It is said of Christ, His Feet
shall stand on Mount Olivet. It imports Self support, Zech. 14
Self-subsistence of the Witnesses, and to such a Degree, that All that behold
them shall say, Whereunto will this Thing Grow?

Observe it therefore, whenever you see those suffering, oppressed Protestants
in France and Piedmont, like Feet of Brass, now Burning in a Furnace, that they
may come out Refined and Purified, and Rest upon themselves in open View; Then
Expect, and Look for the Approaching Kingdom of Christ; It will be as a Signal
given, as a Beacon fired; It will be as the Fig Tree Blossoming, and sending
forth its Buds: Then Lift up your Heads, for Redemption draws nigh. Then it
will be nigh, even at the Doors. And why may not this be this Summer, if God be
pleased by this Discourse to stir up our Faith, Hope, Expectation, and Earnest
Prayer, our Humiliation, Fasting, Repentance, and Reformation?

Effect 2. There must be a mighty Voice from Heaven to Call These Witnesses up
into Heaven. And They shall Ascend, Chariotted by a Cloud: And this peculiarly
Their Enemies shall behold; and They shall behold it (as the Former also was
beheld) with Gaze, with a Theoric Eye, a Consideration, a Contemplating Look.
Now Their being Called up to Heaven, may signify Two Things:

1. Their being enfranchised into the pure Worship of God, according to the
Gospel, which, as it is often Represented by the Kingdom of Heaven in other
Scriptures; so has in this Prophecy a Secondary Sense of the State of the
Christian Church on Earth; as a Counter-part or Sample of what is done in
Heaven: So the Loud Voices in Heaven, just after the Text, v. 15. are so heard
in Heaven, that they Resound on Earth: so the War in Heaven, c. 12.7. was
Counterparted in that Famous Battle of Theodosius the Great on Earth with
Eugenius and Argobastes. So when the Purity of the Witness-Churches is from
that time Decreed, Established in Heaven, It is as if the Witnesses were called
up into Heaven, and Ascended in a Cloud, to Enjoy the state of the Ark of
Testament in the Temple, v. 19. c. 15.5.
seen and opened in Heaven speedily after; and Answered by a state on Earth;
and into that great Consessus or Glorious Assembly Representing the Arche-Type
or Original Pattern of a truly Glorious Christian Church State which we have
given, Rev. c. 4. c. 5. 2. It signifies the enjoying this pure Church state and
Worship, with the Favor Countenance and Encouragement of Supreme Power and
Authority, carrying and bearing them out in what they do; For so Heaven in this
Prophecy, often signifies even Power and Authority.
Thus Heaven signifies, Rev. 12.4. where the Stars of Heaven mean Supreme
Princes, that the Roman Dragon or Imperial Power Brushed down with his Tail, or
Train of Armies; and there is an Eye of the same sense in the naming Heaven all
along in that Context.

Now for Those who are Trodden down by Power and Strength, and have either been
Affrighted from Worshipping God according to his Word, to the great Wounding of
Consciences; Harrass'd and Dragoon'd (as they speak) into Idolatry and
Superstition, or Galley'd, Imprisoned, and Tortured to Death for Refusing;
whenever you shall see these Called up by a Loud Voice into Heaven, into such
an open avowed Worship of God, according to his Word, and according to their
Protestations for Him, and have Power and Authority in, and with and of
Themselves so to do; This will be a great Effect of, and according to Prophecy;
and because it is to Lead, and Go before the Face of many other great Effects
of Prophecy, and All before 97. It therefore requires to be done within a
Little Time; and when you see it, Know that it is a Dawn of the Morning Star,
and that one of the Foremost in the Train of these Great Effects for the
Kingdom of Christ is in your Eye; and so that the Rest are coming on, and the
very Kingdom it self Coming upon us.

Effect 3. There must, according to the Prophecy, be such an Earthquake, that
the Great Cities Tenth shall Fall; where, by Tenth, as I have always declared,
I understand its December Principality, that Complex of Ten Kings, that gives it
its Grandeur: For they giving their Power to the Beast, or Pope of Rome, and
its (Called) Catholic Church; and He bearing up that City and Church, that
sits upon His Supremacy, as on a Mountainous Height; whenever the Words of God
are so fulfilled in the Beast's having had his Forty Two Moons; that they shall
give their Power no longer, but withdraw their Kingdoms from the Beast, that
Tenth of the Great City must needs Fall. And it is very Remarkable, that as
here it is said, The Tenth of the City Falls first, in c. 17. it is said, first
They shall hate the Whore; that is, the Church of Rome. But then it is
intimated, that the Reason is, the Words of God are fulfilled concerning their
giving their Kingdom, Power and Might to the Beast for such a Time, viz. the 42
Moons. So these Two Things are made Reciprocal: For whenever They Hate the
Whore, Then will be a withdrawing their Kingdom from the Beast, the Words of
God being at the same time Fulfilled; When they withdraw their Kingdom from the
Beast, They presently will hate the Whore, and make her Desolate and Naked; But
either, and both ways the Tenth of the Great City Falls: That is, the
Greatness, whose Symbol or Figure in Prophecy is Ten or Tenth, because of the
Ten Toes, Ten Horns, Ten Kings, made Essential to the Antichristian State by
Prophetic Oracles; and within this Time, Dan. 2. c. 7.
even before 97. All these Kings shall thus hate the Whore, shall thus Reverse,
Recall and Reprize their Force, Power and Kingdom from the Beast, because the
words of God will be fulfilled. Some have done it, at least, in great part. All
shall do it then together, and All shall do it to Perfection. And it appears by
this Prophecy, they shall bring some Ruin and Desolation by Ravage and Fire on
Rome it self, as a prelude and fore running of that Final Desolation and Fire,
c. 18.

And what will you say, when you shall see the Empire, Spain, Portugal, Poland,
the Catholic, as they are called, Cantons, and even France, and that first of
the Rest, do this? You will Remember what I have this Day spoken in your Ears;
and you will then believe the Kingdom of God is coming nigh to you; when you
compare what I declare to you from the Word of God, and what you see come to
pass; and you will easily allow, That according to the usual Progress of
Providence, if This be to be done by 97, there had need be a speedy Beginning;
For you at this time, I am sure, will be more ready to say, The Time is too
short, and strait, even already for it to come so soon to pass. And yet I must
confess, either this must be by 97, or the Exposition, and Line of Prophetic
Time, I have given, must Fall.

Effect. 4. Seven Thousand Names of Men shall be slain in the Earthquake, this
mighty Change and Shake of Things: There is, I make no great Doubt, some
Allusion in these Seven Thousand to the Sabbatick Number, of so great Use in
All Things that concern the Kingdom of Christ; as it is said, Ezekiel. 39.9. They
shall be Burning the Weapons of Gog Seven Years, and cleansing the Land, of
Gog's Remains, Seven Months, v. 12.

But how Admirably also does this set out the Multitude of Names, Offices and
Places in the Roman Papacy, Hierarchy and Grandeur: so great a Multitude, that
One would be Tempted to think the very Letter of 7000 is fulfilled therein: It
requires much Learning in those Names of Men, to make a Register of their
Quality and Number; Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, etc. are
known as Stars of greater Magnitude. But there are those so out of common Ken,
and the Sporades, the innumerable Lesser Stars, that he must be more than
ordinarily Learned, that can call them All by their Names.

Now if you Live to see all these Slain, as the Witnesses have been, and as yet
they lie Slain in France, utterly Dispirited; and with Them, what ever is
Derived, not to say, Spawned from Them, or bears Alliance or Affinity with
Them; even among those who are on the Part of that Synagogue of Satan Venerated
under the Hoary Vizor of Antiquity, shall Fall at the very same Time by 97. or
very soon after, and They be Bowing and Valing at Philadelphias Feet; You will
then say, I have truly Expounded the words of the Lord to you; But if you find
no such thing, I must lie Down in shame, and confusion of Face, and own to you,
I am found a False Witness of God, and think my self, indeed, of all men most
Miserable, in saying God has Declared he will do such things, and by such a
time, in the sure Word of Prophecy, which he has not Declared, nor will do.

But I have no Fear, nor Distrust herein, and yet I am very sensible, as Jeremy
Speaks, When the word of the Prophet shall come to pass, then it will be known,
The Lord has spoken by him. So I, that pretend to no Impulse, to no
Impression, but to Argue upon the very written Word, and Letter of Scripture,
in compare with it self, may Humbly say; when these things come to pass, Then
you will know that by holding to the True Sense of the Testimony of Jesus by
his Prophets, That true sense is the Spirit of Prophecy, and I have aright
given it to you.

When you shall hear of, and see a far greater Slaying these Names of Men
throughout the Christian Profession than when King Henry the 8th, here in
England slew, that i^, Dis-Authorized so many Names of Abbots, Priors, Monks of
several Orders, and Distinctions of Friars, and laid them in the Dust; You will
then call to mind, what I now make known to you, and Believe, This is indeed
according to the Testimony of Jesus, and to the Spirit of Prophecy.

I wait therefore, to see what God will herein do, and when he will begin to
Work; For when he will begin, Nothing shall Let Him, His Reward is with Him,
and his Work before Him.

Event 5. The Remnant shall be Affrighted, (...)
They shall be Magor-Missabibs, Fear round about, all Fear; and so shall give
Glory to the God of Heaven; that is, there shall be abundance of Conversions to
the Power and Purity of Christian Religion; So that every way the Potentacy of
Rome, and its Papacy and Hierarchy must Fall; (...)
For the Remnant, All Successions of Men to the Kingdom of Christ shall Hear
and Fear: For They shall wisely consider Gods Doing and shall be afraid to Join
themselves to a False Religion, that God has so Remonstrated from Heaven
against. And this is indeed to give Glory to the God of Heaven.

Event. 6. The Second Woe, viz. That of the Mahomet an Turks, shall be wholly
cessated, and pass away: So that the Grecian Churches, however so Dark now,
under the very Black Wings of Antichristianism, shall come out of Both
Slaveries; They that have lain among the Pots shall be made as the Wings of a
Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with Yellow Gold. That Great Name
of Power and Tyranny, Grand Signior and Sultan, shall be dismounted from the
Hills of Constantinople, on which it is seated, as a Nova Roma, as it ought to
be; that it may be a Woe on Old Rome, and from that confluence of Seas, and
their Bosphorus; in Regard of which it claims to be as the Port or Haven of the
World. Thus Daniel of Old prophesied of that Turkish King of the North,
planting his Palace between the Seas. But then to the Wonder and Amazement of
the World, He shall come to his End, and none shall help him. However he is now
helped by France, All shall be Removed as a Cottage or Shepherd's Tent, and the
Seven Asian Churches, whose Candlesticks and Lights have been Covered so long
under that Night, shall begin again to look Bright. When you see this come to
pass, you shall know there has been a Scripture-Prophecy concerning it. And if
This be to be done by 97, how should we cry out, Awake; Oh Arm of the Lord,
Awake; put on strength, as in the Days of Old!

I come in the Second place to Argue upon the Time, when This is All to be,
according to this very Prophecy. And This is the general Expression of it;
After Three Days and a Half. Now this may look, as if the Three Days, and a
Half, were to be fully past, and ended; and so nothing would be to be Looked
for till 97. were fully come, and past, according to my Calculation of Time;
And then these Great Events would find place, and Room for Themselves to come
on. But as I have always endeavored to make out, These Three Days and a Half,
are Equal with the 1260 Days, except only, as a deep part is particularly
implied, when that whole and entire space is yet preserved, and expressed. And
it is therefore given in Three Days, and a Half, by a Little Variation from
Three Times and a Half, that it may bear a Resemblance to the Three Days of our
Lord in the Grave; viz. the Evening of the First Day, which is our Sixth Day;
or which we; not so Agreeably with Scripture Language; because in Gentile
Times; call Friday; the whole of the Second, which was the Seventh Day, and the
Jewish Sabbath; and the Night, till toward Morning of the Third Day, which was
the Jews First, and our Lord's Day. And this Rising was in the Night toward
Morning, (as the Jews, from the Creation, Account the Night of every Day before
the Day) For John 20.1. we are Assured, Early in the Morning, while it was yet
Dark, Mary Magdalen came to the Sepulcher, and found Christ Risen; yet, as it
were, on purpose to Expound to us the [ After Three Days and a Half here in
this Prophecy.] This very Manner of Rising of our Lord (so far as can be
perceived by Compare of the Evangelists) as soon as ever the Seventh Day, or
Sabbath, was past, and his Third, our Lord's Day, but just entered, he Arose.)
This very Manner of Rising, I say again, on the very Entrance of the Third Day,
In both, (...).
is called, Mark 8.31. After Three Days: even as here, After Three Days, and a
Half.

Thus there was Liberty for a Partial Rising of the Witnesses, as soon as ever
it was Half Time, which Fell out, in Luther's Appearance 1517. (exactly
according to my Account of Time), Then the 180 years of Half Time entered, which
shall therefore end 97. according to that Exactness.

And this first Appearance of the Reformation by Luther, was like the
Appearance of Christ in his Resurrection: It was some Time he had been Risen;
how long we cannot certainly find; e're it was any way known on Earth: He was
Risen All that Day; But He was very Retired, Appearing only to some very few of
his Disciples, as if still Dead. But in the Evening, even then when the Doors
were shut, for Fear of the Jews, Christ miraculously passed through the shut
Doors, and Appeared to the whole Eleven, except Thomas; and gave Them, with the
Solemnity of Breathing on Them, the Promise of the Spirit, tho the Spirit it
self did not come down till Pentecost was fully come. And thus I doubt not at
the Latter part of Half Time, tho All Doors seem now close shut, and there is
so great a Fear of False Jews, or Antichristian Tyranny, in so many places,
that the Witnesses cannot meet Boldly; yet that Christ will make his way
through all Bars; And as there was a Partial Rising at the First of Half Time,
that has been hitherto with much Reservedness; yet All will now open in the
Evening, and there will be a Spirit of Life, a Breathing on all the Witnesses
by the Spirit of Christ; tho the full pouring of it out will not be till the
Kingdom of Christ in its Succession, after 97. in the Days of the Seventh
Trumpet, when the 144000 shall appear with the Lamb on Mount Sion.

3. If we consider the more particular precise Time, In the same Hour, it may
yield us some further Light. Now, tho I would not be too curious and precise in
Minute Points of Time; yet I have Accounted the Hours of the Half Day which are
12, according to the Natural Distribution of Time; and in ^80 years there are
15 years to an Hour; so that we are somewhat past the Last Half Hour. We may
then hope, that as there was Half an Hours Silence set for the Churches
continuing in the Worship of God, so as not to suffer the Taking away the Daily
Sacrifice; and at the Half Hours End the Apostasy entered; and as at that Half
Hour made an whole Hour, Antichrist himself, Rev. 8.1. c. 17.12.
called the Beast, entered with his Ten Kings; so within this Last Half Hour,
The Apostasy shall cease, and at the End of the Hour, viz. at 97. The Kingdom
of Christ shall be in its Succession.

Object. There is one Objection, These Hopes of so soon Appearances of God in
the Witnesses may seem to be encountered by, viz. seeing the Witnesses are to be
in Sackcloth, during the 1260 Days; and that a Day for a Year is so Precise and
Limited a Time; it will allow no such Latitude, as that before the last Year
there should be any so Advantageous Change in the Witnesses Condition, as this
Discourse Represents.

Answ. This Argument is, I confess, so pressing, that it must be acknowledged;
The Witnesses cannot come out of their Sackcloth, till that very 1697. For all
these Effects I have now Named, being in a Concatenation; and then that
greatest Effect of the Kingdom of Christ coming into its Succession, not being
till that very End of the 1260 days; The Witnesses are till then willingly, and
even desirously in a State of Waiting, and of Prophecy in Sackcloth; Even, tho
called up into such a State in Heaven, as I have Described; Yet they Humble
themselves in Fasting, Sackcloth and Ashes, till that very Time is come, when
the Kingdoms of this World shall be Proclaimed to be the Kingdoms of the Lord
and of his Christ; The more the Light and Power of Christ Appears on the
Witnesses, the more they Prophecy in Sackcloth; that is, Foretell, Desire, and
in Humiliation wait for that Kingdom so to be Proclaimed, and cannot be
satisfied without it.

But that there might be such a Freedom left by God to himself to make a change
of the Witnesses State, so much for the better, as He did in the Beginning, so
in the End of Half Times; He cast the Time of the Antichristian Tyranny and of
the Witnesses Sufferings into Three Times and an Half, and nearer into Three
Days and an Half; That there might be a Conformity to the Faithful Witness
Christ Jesus; of whom it is said, It was impossible he should be holden of
Death, but must overcome it in the very first Minute of Time; and so far as
could consist with the Wisest allowance for the satisfaction of Divine Justice
for man's sins, and Truth of Prophecy. So the Witnesses must in and through Him,
and in Conformity to Him, have a partial Rising at the very beginning of Half
Time, and a Full one before the End of Half Time.

There remains only to draw up the Discourse into particular Use, and
Application.

Use. 1. Let us upon this Discourse diligently wait, and observe, what God will
please to be doing this, and the following years, to 97. It is a Sin at any
time, not to Regard the Works of the Lord, and the Operations of his Hand; But
it is much more so, when we are Warned and Admonished, and assured that the
Kingdom of God is come nigh to us, It is then such a sin, that there is great
Reason to Fear, God will pull such Down from their Present State, and not Build
them up in his New Jerusalem.

If we then shall observe these Things coming to pass; How should It Convince,
and Assure us of the Word of God in all its Truth! and certainly if God Answers
us now by Terrible things in Righteousness, which we could not have Looked for,
had we not been thus Awaked by his Prophetic Oracles; if we shall see the
Mountains of the Present State Flow Down at his Presence, and the Mountain of
his Kingdom not only Standing Fast, being Girded with Power, but beginning to
Fill the Earth, while the Valleys grow to such a Fruitfulness, as to Laugh and
also to Sing; How will it Assure us of All Things else we Find in Prophecy?

Use 2. Let us, by earnest Prayer, stand upon our watch Tower, and wait to see
what God will say to us; And if we seem to be Reproved by contrary Appearances
of Providence, what we shall Answer: I have Endeavored to write the Vision,
and to make it plain upon Tables, that he may Run that Reads it. I have been
Bold to Declare the Time, the Vision is Appointen for; If any Man's Heart be
Lifted up in Scorn and Unbelief of it; It is not upright in Him: For the Vision
will Speak, and will not Lie; Tho it should seem to Tarry this Year; Yet it
will not Tarry. God has given me herein, I Bless his Holy Name, the Spirit,
not of Fear, or Distrust; but of Love, and Desire, These Things may come to
pass for the Glory of Christ, and his Kingdom; of Power to Declare them; and of
a sound sober Mind, not Phantastry, or Enthusiasm, but of Reliance upon what is
Written; and I am waiting at the Foot of God, to see, whether these Matters
will hold Good or not. I beseech your Help by Prayers, and Earnest striving
therein, All you, who wait for the Consolation of Israel. It will not hinder,
but promote your Salvation; since waiting for the Kingdom of Christ, is both so
great a Grace, and Duty, pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; They shall prosper
that Love it: There are set Thrones of the Judgment of Christ. and his Saints.
Psalm. 122.6.
There is the General Assembly of Brethren, and Companions of Saints. For all
these Sakes, Let us not hold our Peace at such a Time as this; Let us give God
no Rest, till Jerusalem's Salvation go forth, as a Lamp that Burns, and become
a Praise in the Earth. If you say, The Profaneness, Carnality, Wickedness of
Protestants, and even of Professors of all sorts, is so great, we are Riper for
Judgment than Mercy, and can expect that only.

Remember; This Day, that is a coming, whoever are not Reformed by the Methods
of Grace before it; It will flame out upon Them, as an Oven. And why should it
be strange, There should be a mighty Grace of the Gospel first, a Ministry in
the Spirit, and Power of Elijah, to Turn the Hearts, etc. lest Christ come, and
smite the Earth with a Curse. And that for this, God should, as all along,
Ezekiel. 20. work for his Names, his Kingdoms sake, notwithstanding all
Provocations.

Use 3. This is the great Hopes we have of good Success upon the Undertaking of
Protestant Princes, and their Arms, and that such a Confederacy as they are in,
shall be Blessed, as a Means to Turn the Hearts of Princes, yet joined to Rome
and its Papacy to Hate it; particularly, of All Blessing on our Princes, and
Nation, and Forces by Land and Sea: Yea, it is the Universal Hope and Happiness
of all the Servants of Christ, of all his Witnesses, in whatever Suffering
Condition They are. They shall all Rise by a Spirit of Life from God, and stand
upon their Feet, under whatever Oppression, whether of the Throne, or of the
They on the part of the Synagogue of Satan, or their own private Unhappinesses.
They shall All be Ascending into Free Worship of God, and with All Authority,
and Amplitude of Condition. Let us therefore earnestly cry out, Awake, Awake, O
Arm of the Lord; make thyself Bare, as in the Days of Old, the Years of Ancient
Times.

Object. Whereas we may be Ready to say, Why is not this Time then more
generally Understood?

Ans. I desire your Consideration Haggai, 1.2. It was much such a Time in
Relation to Jerusalem, and the Temple of Old; They were between Cyrus his
Decree, and the Complemental Accomplishment of it; as we are between the
Beginning, and upon end of the Half Time; There had been about 20 years from
the end of the 70 of Captivity, set so often by Jeremy; The Vessels of the
Lord's House had been Visited, and Restored by Cyrus; Ezra 1.7.
Daniel had Computed and Found the Time of the Desolations at an End so long
ago; Yet they said, The Time is not yet come to Build the House of the Lord:
What Argument then is this, Men generally know not this Time? But God Derides
and Scorns their Hipocrisy, as I make no doubt, He does Theirs, who Live in
their Cieled Houses by the Benefit of the Reformation so far Vochsafed to us,
and God's Care over our Protestant Nation; And says the Time for the Kingdom of
Christ is not yet: Is it for you, Oh ye! pitiful, ungrateful Ones? And is it
not Time for me? Is it a Time for your Lordships, Dignities, Grandieur,
Palaces, and is it not yet Time for my Glory, for my Kingdom? This Causes All
the Blasts, Comings to nothing of our great Expectations, because the House of
God lies Wast, The Kingdom of God is not Minded? This Causes all the Misery,
Poverty, Complaint of Taxes, Wants, because we do not look to God's Kingdom?
When we do, From that Day let us Count God will Bless us. Oh! when will This
Spirit be given to Zerubbabel and Joshua? Surely it will come as a Spirit of
Life from God very suddenly upon his Witnesses, and stir Them Up; and all shall
Work together for the House of our God, and of his Kingdom.

FINIS.

