THE Loss of the Soul, THE IRREPARABLE LOSS, Opened and Demonstrated,

I. By the Excellency of the Soul. II. The Utter Incompetency of the World to
Answer it. III. The Misery of a Soul Lost. IV. The Eternal Sting of that
Question, What shall a Man give in Exchange for a Lost Soul?
IN A SERMON, ON

MATT. XVI. 26. What shall it profit a Man, if he gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul; or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul?

By T. BEVERLEY.

LONDON: Printed for W. Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1694. Where
you may be supplied with most of Mr. Beverley's, and Dr. Owen's Works.

TO THE Honorable Gentlemen, Supporting the Lord's Day Lecture in the Morning,
at Mr. Lobb's Meeting, near Fetter-Lane, London.
THere is no Apology to be made (my very Honored) for the Confidence of my
presenting this Sermon to you, but the Transcendent Weight and Excellency of
the Subject; and that wherever this Discourse comes, your giving such
Encouragement to the Preaching the Gospel of Christ, on which occasion this
Sermon was Preached, may be spoken of by it in Memorial of you, and of my own
Grateful Sense of my participation of your Favor and Good Will therein, who
Acknowledge my self most unworthy of any such. I Acknowledge, I have Darkened the
Counsels of so Great a Truth by Words without Knowledge; But who is sufficient
for it according to its Dignity? The Secrets of this Wisdom are double to All
can be said of it; But if there be any Thing spoken with the Evidence of Divine
Truth, or in Any Measure (through Gracious Assistance) Worthy of it, or
Acceptable to any of the Servants of Christ, or your selves in particular; I
desire most Humbly, it may by a proportion of Acceptance, be Transferred to the
Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ, and the Line of Time to it, I have so
labored in; yet not I, but the Grace of Christ with me; For, if the Lord has
enabled his unworthiest Servant to speak in this Great Point aright, and
according to his Word, and the Divine Reason of it, I hope it will hence
appear, He has Enabled me to give Good Heed to what I have spoken, and whereof
I have Affirmed, and on what grounds I have so Affirmed concerning the Great
Revolution of the Kingdom of Christ, so near as 1697. and which I cannot but
Humbly Look upon, as that Especial Dispensation committed to me, and therein I
magnify my Office. And so I commend All to Divine Influence, and Blessing,
Preparing by this Discourse for his Kingdom, and Assuring it thereby to us; And
for all Blessings, and most Gracious Presence of God with you in all your
Stations, Action, and Conditions, especially in Heavenly Places, and Things are
the most unfeigned Supplications of,

Honored Gentlemen, Your Most Humble Servant in that Everlasting Kingdom. T.
BEVERLEY.

THE GREATNESS OF THE Loss of a Soul: AND THAT There can be no Exchange found
for it.
MATT. XVI. 26. For what is a Man Profited, if He Gain the whole World, and
Lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?


THIS Great Oracle of our Lord and Master, is indeed one of the chief Bases, or
Foundations of the Doctrine of Christianity; It is one of the Pillars, the
Seven Pillars, on which Wisdom has Founded its House, viz. That there is no
Comparison between the whole World, and the value and worth of an Immortal
Spirit, considered, as in an Immortal State and Condition; an Immortal,
Unchangeable, and Everlasting Self: So that if a Man could Gain the whole World
with the loss of this Self, he could be no Gainer, because that which should
enjoy all, is lost. And further, He must be a loser beyond all we can conceive
or express; for he will come to Rue, or dearly to Repent this Loss: He will
come even Eternally to cry out, What shall I give in exchange, or as a price of
Redemption for my Lost Soul? though I lost it for a whole World gained by that
loss?

This is expressed by our Lord, in so plain and familiar a way, and so shooting
of it self into the Universal Sense, and Apprehension of Mankind, Every one can
weigh at this Scale and by this Beam, and cast this Account; If thou be wise,
thou shall be wise for thy self; But if thou scornest, thou alone shall bear
it, Prove. 9. Our great unhappiness is this, That we have not, as I may call it,
a Vital sense, and Apprehension of it; such a one, as that is, by which we
Apprehend, State, and Value, or rather immediately feel, and are touched to the
quick' (as we say) in all the concernments of the present Life, and self
preservation in it.

This Sense we cannot have, but from the Spirit of Truth, leading into All
Truth, by giving us a Vital Union to it, and with it; for though it be spoken Ten
Thousand times to us; though we cannot deny it; though we praise the Discourses of
it; yet we shall not else perceive such Dints, and Impressions, such always
accompanying Powers of it, as to Act according to it: Yet that I may present
this Discourse with all the advantages of Address I can by Divine Assistance
extend it to, and on which I most humbly pray the Benediction of the Father of
Lights, of Spiints. I will first, by way of Preparation, and Entrance, Consider
these Four Things:

1. Who is He, that has here spoken these words to all the World, to the whole
Human Nature, especially to all that are called Christians, and among them,
more especially to those, who are indeed his Friends, as he calls them in a
like speech, Luke 12. What is a Man profited, if he gain, etc. It is even He,
that as He is the great Lover of Souls, so He is the great Purchaser and
Redeemer of them; He that had computed, and knew the value of Souls, when He
came to dye for them, to Humble Himself to the death of the Cross, He weighed
with Himself, what was the worth of these Immortal Beings, for which he came to
dye; For as it is said of Abner, Died Abner as a Fool dies? Died He upon a
small or trivial an Account? How much more may we say of the Lord of Life and
Glory? Did He come to dye on any low account? He knew what He came to dye for;
He knew what the Immortal state of Spirits is; the Greatness of the Happiness
on one side, of the Misery on the other. He knew then the Souls of all Men; of
all that are now before him; He knew in a peculiar manner the Souls of his own,
what the Misery was He Redeemed them from, and the Happiness also He Ransomed
them into. Now in the view, and survey of all this, and as giving the Account,
as Solomon speaks in another Case; which His Soul had sought and found, He
spoke these words? What shall it profit a Man, if he gain the whole World, and
lose his Soul; and if he loses his Soul, What shall he give in exchange for it?

We deferr this to every Wise and Honest Man; We allow this Honor to him, that
He is able to speak of the Things wherein he deals, according to their true
worth and value. We give this Credit to Merchants that deal in Foreign
Commodities; to any great Purchaser; we look upon his Judgment, and estimate as
a Standard: Now He that knew above any in Heaven or Earth the price of Souls;
He who is the single and alone Purchaser of Them, (For as to any other, The
Redemption of Souls is Precious, and cease for ever,) said this. And he is
not only the Purchaser, but the Creator and Supreme End of them, They were all
created by him, and for him. Who then, as He, could Lift up his Hand, as it
were, to Heaven, and say, What shall it profit a Man, if he gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul; or what shall a Man give in exchange for it? He
saw, and searched it out, and declared it from his own certain knowledge in the
making Souls; and from his Experience in the Purchase of them.

2. Let us observe, how our Lord lays us in one Scale whatever is highest, even
the uttermost that can be supposed, though it never has, or shall be attained; He
does not speak of a little thing, when he lays a Soul in the other Scale; but
whatever can be supposed to Counter-sway, or Counter-ballance a Soul; Suppose
all the Honors, Profits, Pleasures of the World could be gained at the price
of a Soul, whatever the Covetous or the Ambitious, or Proud, the Sensualist, or
Voluptuary do, or would roll themselves in; Suppose a Man could have all this
with all immaginable advantages; All this, says our Lord, could not weigh
against one Soul. We know, it is a very little of the World we adventure for,
we engage our Souls for, There was never yet any Man that could say, He was
Master of the whole World, and All Things in it; But suppose a Man could say,
He had it, and upon the longest Term of Life, and at the highest Elevation, or
Exaltation; yet if we believe Him, who had all Reason to know it, All this were
not to be named with a Soul: Nay, in Solomon's Judgment, they are not
sufficient to defray the Charges of Life, the Vanity and Vexation of Spirit
that press upon this Life, in this state of Sin and Misery, one may say, it is
Mortgaged under.

3. The Foot of the Account, the Balance of the Account, at the lowest that
can be given, is this, That a Man would not be profited, if he should gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul; All that he got by it would amount to just
nothing: Our Lord Conveys it therefore under the shade of a Man Adventuring
upon the Sea, and getting how much soever can be supposed by the Adventure, and
then his Life, Himself be cast away; suppose it were a World in his Arms, What
would such a Man get? If that whereby we Taste, Enjoy, Take in, whatever can be
given into our possession be lost; All that whole World becomes immediately
nothing to him. For, whose then shall that World become? If Solomon says,
Seeing there are many things that increase vanity, What is Man the better! How
much more, if his whole becomes an absolute Cipher, a Nothing to him, What can
He be the better? This is experimental Truth. The Devil truly said, Skin for
skin, all that a Man has would he give for his Life: This is true in the sense
and verdict of Nature; God therefore, the Great Arbiter of Life, has this
Bridle in the Mouth of the most Atheistic, the Fools, that say either in their
Heart, or openly, There is no God, They are under this Despotic Absolute Power,
whatever they call it, they must dye, and they cannot secure against, how soon!
And this blanks all they can propose; Their Breath is at some ones Pleasure,
some Will, and Dispose that is not their own, but above it, It goes forth, and
in that very day their thoughts perish, concerning all things under the Sun;
And this proportionably falls on all who are Rich toward themselves, and not
toward God, Luke 12. 21.

4. By these words of our Lord and Savior, there will come a great and sad
review upon a Man's loss of his Soul; There is a survivor to this loss; that
will have an earnest desire to this Soul, to this Self again, that will cry
out, Where is that Thing that I may find out to give in Exchange, as a Reprizal
for my lost, and undone Soul? And what is this Survivor, but the lost and
undone Soul it self, reviewing, and looking back on it self, as so lost? So our
Lord intends to intimate to us, by adding, as a Clap of Thunder, falling upon
the Lost state of a Soul; What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? The
words are spoken in a vehemence, or in a Passion of Anguish, Horror, and
Despair, upon the sense of so miserable a Bargain.

Were it not for this after Account, a Man might please himself in this, if he
could Gain the whole World, or make some Noble, as it might seem, Acquist of
it; That he had laid his Hand upon the Prize, as he said; Hoc nobile Feci quod
perii, I have this satisfaction, that I have brought what I desired to pass,
though I perish in it: But this so terrible Review, this so dear Repentance
will sting and torment for ever; because such Exchange is not possible to be
found; such an Exchange is neither to be found above nor below, which a Man may
give in Exchange for his Soul. For when our Lord says, What shall a Man give in
Exchange for his Soul? It is as if he should say, There is no such Possible to
be found.

Here are two Questions then our Lord has put, which can no way be Answered,
but by submitting to his Advice, To lose our Lives here that we may save them
for ever, rather than to save them here and lose them for ever; by being put
upon the necessity of seeking an Exchange for our Souls that cannot be found.

These things being thus premised, I will now state the sense of the Words, and
so lay down the Proposition to be Discoursed.

In stating the sense of the Words, Three things are to be enquired into: 1.
What is meant by a Soul? 2. What by a Soul lost? 3. What by an Exchange for a
Soul lost?


1. That which is the shade and similitude, under which the Lord conveys his
Divine sense of a Soul, is Life.

We know, all Taste and Enjoyment is by the benefit of Life; If you take away
Life, Man to all Things here in the World is a Carcass, or lump of Clay; He
cannot enjoy: For the Body, by which the Soul had any enjoyment here is so, and
it is no other than a dead Body, and so cannot enjoy; Put all you can upon a
Dead Body, it is all one to it; All the Funeral Pomp and State in the World, it
knows nothing of; It does not rejoice in it; It is not at all pleased; It is
all one to it, to be conveyed down in the greatest silence to the Chambers of
Darkness.

So in the very same manner, Let a Man have all the World, yet if his Life be
taken from him, all that World becomes presently a Cipher, a Nothing to him, a
perfect Darkness; In the Verse therefore before the Text, v. 25. the same word
is used for Life, that is in this Verse of the Text, v. 26 Translated Soul.
Whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it; and he that will lose his Life for
my sake shall find it. Psyche is the word used, the very same word, What is a
Man prisited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Life? For then
the whole World is nothing to him. Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his
Life? Because it is so well known, All the World cannot buy back Life, if it be
once gone. This is the Shade our Lord uses.

2. The word Soul is to be understood yet more strictly and closely, for the
very Soul and Immortal Spirit; because that indeed is the very Power and
Principle of Life in every one of us: It is not the Body, nay, it not that very
Glorified Body of the Resurrection; It is not that does primarily, or
originally enjoy, or take in Happiness; but it is that happy and blessed Spirit
that shall be in that Glorified Body, and therefore the Apostle calls it a
Spiritual Body; that is, a Body every way fitted for the Use, and to the
Service of the Spirit: If any one therefore say to himself, I have a Being
within me, that acts in all the Members and Powers of my Body, that sees in my
Eye, and hears in my Ear, that tastes, and feels, and apprehends all Things, and
has the whole power of Resentment within it self, either as to Happiness or
Misery; and that this Being survives even to Eternity, a Resenting Being, that
carries all our Resentment, our Apprehension; If this Being that cannot dye, be
lost, it must be lost, by losing that which is the Life of it self, that is,
the Happiness and Blessedness of the enjoyment of God, and the Love of him, and
Likeness to him. If this Soul be then in a perpetual Torment, and for ever, How
can it enjoy any thing?

As we may see persons, that have all the things of this World about them, if
they have a Spirit sunk into Trouble, Disquiet, Ho^or, Melancholy, which is a
lost state in this World; a Poor Man that has not the Thousandth part of what
such a one has, shall yet enjoy much more than he: Such a one, says Solomon,
Eats in darkness, as it were in a Dungeon. How much more when a Spirit comes
into its own proper state, and ^ind nothing within, nor without it self
suitable to it, but all contrary to its Life and Peace; For it is granted to
Souls here to be in a state of Probation, and Trial, under the Grace of the
Mediator, and to some such degrees of enjoyment of the Creation of God, that
they do not feel, at least to such extremity the loss of themselves, and the
Horror of that state of being lost, although they are daily losing their Souls
in what of this World they enjoy; This is generally, and even almost
universally vouchsafed, because God looks upon Mankind through that object of
Love, that Son of His Love, to see whether they will return to him on the
Principles of his Grace; he endures therefore with Patience, and much Long
suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction, or while they fit
themselves to it: And this, and the Dealings of God with such, is one of the
great Mysteries of his Providence and Government of the World by the Mediator.

3. Soul often in Scripture Language, signifies the whole Person, as in the
Acts of the Apostles, besides the Old Testament, The number of them that
believed were so many Souls, or Persons, that is, Spirits in Bodies; and so
certainly Christ here means: In a parallel Scripture therefore, Luke 9. 25. It
is said, What is a Man profited, if he Gain the whole World, and lose himself,
or be cast away; Our Lord is here speaking of a Man, as I intimated, under the
resemblance of a Merchant, adventuring himself by Sea in the pursuit after
Riches: Now says Christ, If such a one Gain the whole World by the Adventure,
and lose himself, What has that Man got by all his undertaking; So if a Man
lose himself in that Great State of the Resurrection; of the Kingdom of Christ,
at the Glory that is to come; If he shall be then in a pityful, forlorn,
despised state, an undone, sorrowful Being, a Person Removed from all
enjoyment, and that he knows, and finds himself so; What will it profit such a
one, to have gained the whole World, and to be in that lost State?

And that our Lord intended this very state of the Resurrection, and of every
Man's self in that state, is plain by his going on, and declaring the Son of
Man's coming in the Glory of the Father, with the Holy Angels, and Rewarding
every Man according to his works; and then shall every one know, and feel the
loss of himself, who has thus Lost himself. So Souls, is used for Persons in
the First Resurrection, Rev. 29. 4.

2. By all that has been spoken, it appears what the Loss of a Soul is; It is
a loss from Holiness, Happiness, and Blessedness: which Loss, the Gain of the
whole World can never Recompense.

3. An Exchange for a Lost Soul, is some way or means of Recovering a lost Soul
into a state of Holiness and Happiness, in the enjoyment of God, Likeness and
Conformity to Him: And this it is the lost Soul will so earnestly cry out for,
and that cannot be found.

The Proposition I lay down is this: The Loss of a Man's Soul, is a Loss so
exceeding great, and the Exchange of Redemption, or for the Recovery of it, if
once lost, so impossible to be found, That when all this comes (as it shall
certainly be) to be clearly understood, and deeply Resented; It will fully
appear, To have Gained the whole World, much less any part of it, at such a
Rate, as the Loss of the Soul, cannot yield the least allay to the Bitterness
arising from such a Loss, but will exceedingly increase it; For a Man shall
come to those loud Complaints and Ejulations, those weepings, wailings, and
gnashings af Teeth; when he finds he has lost that into Misery, that has all
the Feeling, Judgment of Good, or Evil, Happiness, or Misery; the whole power
of Enjoyment or Resentment within it self; That he has lost himself, his whole
self, or person, Then will he cry out, Oh! who will give me a Ransom for my
Soul? for my Self? where shall I have it? He goes up to Heaven, down to Hell,
he searches the whole Creation to find it; Where shall I find, says he, what
will be taken in Exchange for a lost, undone Soul? For who can make his Bed in
the Torments of a Wounded Spirit, scorching worse than Flames? Who can dwell
with the Devouring Fire, the Consuming Anger of the Living God? or with the
Everlasting Burnings of an Enraged Conscience?

To make out this in full Discourse, and Argument, I propose Three Heads:

1. To show, That if a Man could dye with the whole World in his Hand, he would
be a Lost Man on this Account, That the World could be no provision for him, or
the least suitable in that True and Everlasting Self; his Soul, as in the state
of Separated Spirits; or Himself, in the state of the Resurrection; and so he
must be Lost on that Account.

2. That this Lost State cannot be slumbered away in silence, but he must, and
shall come to those vehement searches, after some Exchange for a Lost Soul, and
Self; and there being none to be found, those searches must needs turn into
Rage and Fury upon their so dreadful disappointment.

3. I shall therefore enquire into the way of losing a Soul according to our
Lords present scope, and drift of Discourse: because if we closely attend, we
shall find it out of the Road of our Common Thoughts.

And unto all these, I will subjoyn the most pressing Applications, that so
naturally flow from those Heads, fully opened, and enlarged upon:

I begin with the First; The True, Real, Solid Sense and Reason of Things, that
none of us can deny; That a Soul must needs be lost that has no Provision, but
the World, though it were the whole World; that is; If such a Thing could
indeed be: And though I must humbly acknowledge, I am no way sufficient for
these Things, or the mighty considerations pertaining to this Subject; yet they
themselves are so great, that if they be extracted out of all Discourse, and be
but felt in, and by themselves, they must needs prevail in our Thoughts; the
Holy Spirit thereunto working in us mightily.

1. There is no Comparison between a Man's Soul, a Man's Self in the Height,
and Depth, the Breadth and Length of his True Being, his True Self, and the
World, though it were the whole World; A Being Apprehensive of God, capable of
enjoying Him, capable of Eternal Things, of Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Spirit.

For what Compare can there be between a Being prepared with Sentiments, and
Capacities for these Things, and the narrow and pent up notions and dimensions
of our selves, as Creatures, that eat such Meat, and drink such Drinks, that
wear such Clothes, and dwell in such Houses, or Appartments, have such an
Equipage and Retinue? So widely different is the proportion between the World,
and an Immortal Spirit, an Immortal self: For the World is suited only to those
low Notions and Apprehensions of a Man's Self, and it can extend no further: So
that the Spirit, and True Self of a Man even now, in this State, in this Body
finds a want in the greatest abundance of these, Things, and cries out upon
them all, Vanity and vexation of Spirit; and though it be buddled up, and
muffled, and kept quiet by all Arts imaginable, yet it complains, and inwardly
mourns to it self; because it has not the true satisfaction, and enjoyment;
the Fibers (as I may so speak) of the Spiritual Stomach and Appetite, are so
often twitched with the hunger of something more Excellent and Divine; I mean,
Those deep and inward Sentiments, We are made for higher enjoyments than of
this World, often stir and move do what we can to the contrary. And if it be
thus now, much more will this be in that future state, when a Soul will be
fully explicated, unfolded, let our into its utmost Capacities; Then will all
the World plainly appear to be no other than the fitting the Coat of an Infant
to a Giant; Oh! how much too wide, and too large is that true Self for all
these, too extensive to be so provided for! To tell an Immortal Spirit, or a
Man risen from the Dead, of Meat, and Drink, and sumptuous Clothing, of
Houses, Estates, and Money; you speak, I may say, Infinitely below the Dignity,
and Majesty of such a Being: It will say to the World, All these thy things
perish with thee; That thou could think I could be provided for by them, or
that Eternal Things could be purchased with them!

Oh, that therefore now, we could say to our selves, Can I think of God, of
Christ, of his Spirit, of Eternal Happiness, or Misery? Have I Thoughts that
can embrace such Things as these! Am I great enough for such Thoughts? Can I
think of enjoying God, and Living in the purest entercourses of Reason, and
Holiest Understanding? Can there be an enterview between my Spirit and the
Father of Spirits, God in Christ? and do you talk to me of such poor and low
things as are first most proper to Beasts, and Creatures of Sense only? the
food of Brutes; the meat of Worms; and to me only in that low state and part
wherein I am allied to them.

I know how very hard it is for us in this low Carnal state, to take in the
Reason of this, as it were vain to entertain Beasts with the Discourses of
Mathematics, of Reason, or of Virtue; And hereby the Children of Men may know
themselves to be but Beasts, as Solomon speaks; a higher kind of Beasts: And it
were well for them, if their Spirits, who have thus conversed in Body, might be
suffered to go downward, as Beasts; so indeed, such Men would have them do when
they come to dye: But this cannot be, as God said to the Israelites, They would
fain have been as the Heathen Families, but He would Bring them under the Bond
of the Covenant of Israelites, of those He called his People; so such would
fain be as the Beasts; But this shall not be, God will bring them under the Law
of Spiritual and Everlasting Beings, and of the Family of never dying Spirits.

Let us but a little Appeal to our own Minds, and put them a while into their
own Action, into their own proper Exercise; and we shall find in their
Enquiries after God, after Righteousness, after the enjoyment of him in the
Blood, and Redemption of Jesus Christ, and the operations of his Spirit; That
they are made for these Things: And how poor then will all the things in this
World appear to be, when we come to the height of this Action and Activity.

And though we take so much pleasure and delight in these now, yet seeing we
can rise up to higher things, and frame notions of them, it is certain we are
made for those higher things, and they must be our state for ever; For it is
certain, this is a great Rule and Maxim, By the most excellent part in every
Thing, is its proper and lasting Good, to be known and judged of. It is
therefore our Degeneracy, and Depravedness, or to speak the most Favorably and
Charitably, It is our Childishness, and Imperfection, that we are so pleased;
and that we have not Higher, Greater, Larger, more Constant Thoughts in the
highest Things; as the Apostle says, When I was a Child, I thought as a Child,
I spoke as a Child, I did as a Child; but when I became a Man, I put away
Childish things from me. Men look upon the things of their Childhood with great
disdain, and so put them away from them, as nothing to them; when they come to
be Men they change both their overvalue of Trifles, and their undervalue of
Weightier things, they then had; This indeed, the Apostle speaks of our Highest
Seize in Grace here; and it is hardly allowable to apply it to the Case
we are upon; but in a charitable Condesention to our weakness, it may be
alluded to: But it is most certain, when we come to know what the enjoyment of
God is, what it is to drink of the River of his pleasures; when he shows us the
Path of Life, when we come to his Presence, where is fullness of Joy, and to the
Pleasures of his Right Hand, that are for evermore; What Trifles will all these
things appear to us! And on the other side, even the sorrows of a lost state,
will make us see what empty Vanities they all were: On both sides then, Oh,
with what a despisal shall we look upon the things we are so fond of now, that
we have been so endeared to here! Those things, that if we cannot have them,
we, as Amnon, are ready to die for, we shall then with Scorn and Hatred, put
out, and shut the door upon. If we could really think, with what an Eye Angels
and Saints look upon those things we make such a do with, that take up our
time, and we call Great Business; How do we say such a Time, we must take care
of such an Ornament for the Body, such a Provision for our Table, such
Conveniences, and Furniture for our Houses, such a concern of Trade, such a
settlement of our Revenue! and these are things that pass for great things, as
we think them now, especially Trade, Estate, or such like; For even some of
these, wise Men count Trifles now, and despise those who are taken up about
them; But even the highest, the weightiest of them, when we come to understand
them in another World, we shall wonder how we could lay out so many thoughts
upon them, in the neglect of things so much greater, that concern our much more
worthy Selves, in our Spirits, in our Immortal State: With what admirable
Divine Eloquence therefore Solomon says, Happy is the Man that finds wisdom,
and the Man that gets understanding; For the Merchandise of it is better
than the Merchandise of Silver, and the gain thereof, than of fine Gold: She is
more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to be
compared to her; Length of days in her Right Hand, and in her Left Hand, Riches
and Honor; Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; She
is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon Her; and Happy is every one that
retains her, Prove. 3. 13, 14, etc. Here now is the Provision proper to
Immortal Spirits, to the state of the Resurrection of the dead, and if we have
Wisdom in degree, and preparations to that Great State now, these things will
be our Choice.

There is a solemn Inquiry, Job 28. 12. Where shall wisdom be found, and where
is the place of understanding? Man knows not the price thereof; neither is it
found in the Land of the Living; The Depth says, It is not in me; and the Sea
says, It is not in me; that is, it does not Rise from the Riches of the Earth,
nor from the Treasures of the Sea: It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall
Silver be weighed for the price of it; It cannot be valued with the Gold of
Ophir; with the precious Onyx, nor the Sapphire stone; The Gold and the Crystal
cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of sine Gold.
No mention shall be made of the Coral, or of the Pearl, For the price of Wisdom
is above Rubies Thus the Spirit of God is pleased to go on like an Orator, and
to show us, that the whole World is not worth one Soul; and therefore it is not
worth Wisdom, that Wisdom to Salvation of Souls; and without which Souls are
lost, For He that sins against Wisdom, wrongeth his own Soul; All they that
Hate it, Love death. Thus the whole World is Inventoried, as it were; Its chief
Riches are weighed, and found too Light for Wisdom. In the same manner, there
is a sad Reflection on the Misery of Lost Souls, For Death and Destruction say,
we have Heard the Fame thereof with our Ears; a most lively, and elegant
expression of the state of Lost Souls; who in two regards may be said to have
Heard, or to Hear the Fame thereof with their Ears.

1. They that are Lost, and in a state of Death and Destruction, had, while in
this Life, Heard the Fame of Wisdom with their Ears, in those Discourses of the
Gospel, in that Law written in our Hearts in many motions of Conscience, etc.
but despised all its Counsel, and would have none of its Reproof; so they only
Heard the Fame, but never Received, or Entertained Acquaintance with it; It was
never as their Sister, or Kinswoman, as Solomon speaks, in intimacy with them:
Christ is said, in this very sense, to have Preached of old to the Spirits,
lost Spirits, now in Prison: So Death and Destruction have Heard the Fame of it
with their Fars.

2. The Fame of it comes near to them; They Hear it with their Ears, but cannot
come at it; as Dives in Hell, Hearing the Fame of the Wisdom of Repentance to
Salvation, desired his Brothers might take that Benefit of it, which he had
lost, and could make no purchase of, no Exchange for it, out of all that World
he had had. Death and Destruction can find no Exchange for a Soul, because they
have nothing to give in Exchange for Wisdom: Thus this Expression is parallel
to our Savior's, What shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul?

And thus now, It Is evident, The World, and all the things of it, are no more
Commensurate to the Greatness of a Soul, or of an Everlasting Self, in all its
Offertures than as if Man should say He would make a Garment for the Sun;
though never so Rich and Beautiful a Garment, you know it could bear no
proportion to the Beauty and Excellency of Light, or to the vastness of the Orb
of the Sun: No more can all the Riches, Pleasures, goodly Houses, or
Divertisements of the World extend to a Soul, or to a Man considered in his
future State. The very Quality and Dignity of a Being made to be for ever, does
so beyond all Expression, and Comparison exceed the Quality, and Intrinsic
value of the World.

So that a man loses himself, and his Soul, while he lays out his thoughts,
love, desire, and expends his Soul upon them; because they are only for the
Soul to serve it self in some small measure upon, for its higher end now; but
if it center upon them, it is lost; for they are not worth that in any degree.

2. If after this enjoyment of the World then (suppose the longest time that
can in any Reason, Example or Precedent be supposed) there comes on the eternal
duration of an Immortal Spirit, a self in an everlasting state; A man cannot be
profited, that enjoys the whole world, and loses his Soul. For if a Soul be
immortal, and for ever, then the State of that Soul and Spirit must be immortal
and for ever also; And then if the World be all the Provision that is made for
it, it cannot but be Lost upon that account, because the World can be a portion
for it only in this Life. Whether therefore a man lose his Soul by his bad ways
of gaining the World; or whether he lose his Soul by having made no provision
for it, but only the World, there can be no profit to a man, but extreme loss
by gaining the World, because he loses his Soul for it: For if this Soul be
lost notwithstanding all the World can do to help it, it is all one to the man
whether he have the World, or have it not: For a Soul lost, is for ever lost,
or else it is not lost at all, and if the World cannot redeem that loss, what
is a man the better for the World? it is still the same thing: Or if the Soul
be lost by having no provision for it but the World, and the World cannot go
into Eternity with it, and that so it being lost and miserable, What can it
profit a man to have gained the whole world, and lose his soul? The World
leaves him in the time of his greatest extremity. Oh how then will our Immortal
Spirit reproach us, or it self? For man by his Soul or Spirit has such a power
of self reflection, of self charge and condemnation; and in this state it will
exercise it to the height: It will say; What do you make Provision for me, for
a moment, for a minute, in comparison; for a span long, for a hand breadth of
time, when I must endure Ages of Ages? is this the love you have for an
Immortal Spirit, to make such provision for it, that is, to endure and last a
Line parallel to Eternity it self* and you have provided for it, comparatively,
as but for an hour, a day, a minute? would not a Child say to a Parent that
should make provision for it but for a day, a month, a year, that we may
suppose in a course of nature, and common providence, may live many years; Is
this the love you have for me, to make provision but for so short a time?

Oh with how much greater reason, force and sting will our Souls say to us! How
is it that when you understood I am prepared for Everlasting, you have only
laid up for me for the short time of this Life? For whose shall those things
be, you have provided? you know they cannot be mine, I cannot carry them with
me; or if I had all the World, it could do me no good, it could not redeem my
loss in this Eternal State, I must go out naked notwithstanding them. Oh let us
therefore always remember the Words Scripture sounds so often in our ears;
Everlasting, Eternal, for ever, always to come; as Matt. 25. 24, etc. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. And on the
other side; Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels: And these go away into everlasting punishment, and the
righteous into life eternal. Oh that every one of us, both speaking and hearing
could deeply consider this; I am to be for ever, and therefore what do you
speak to me of things that are to be only for a short time?

And if it be for posterity, that we are urged; even that is but a Notion of
this World, and of this Life; though it look big, and sound great, and carry a
fair and honorable pretention, and men upon it call their Lands after their
own Names, and their Posterity indeed approve their Sayings. All this,
notwithstanding the Spirit of God says; This their way is their folly. And when
men come into an Eternal Condition, this Bubble falls; there are no such
Notions there; For, says Job, their S^ns come to honor, and they know it not;
and they are brought low, and they perceive it not of them; But their Flesh
upon them has pain, and their souls within them mourn: That is, A man has not
the least abatement of the black and mournful state of a lost Soul by it. We
should therefore say; Shall I be miserable for ever, that I may leave an Estate
to my Family? Shall I be miserable to Eternity? Thus I may entail upon my
Posterity, what I shall in my own Eternal self have no more relation too, than
a Stranger, and yet be in misery for so forecasting for my Posterity:

It is certain the Tongues of Angels and men is not enough to express this
thing according to the weight of it. Indeed Words are nothing alone, but as
they are subordinate to the Divine Spirit pressing the things themselves; For
things press close, and make a strong impression upon the heart, Mind, and
Affections, when so set home.

Oh therefore that I might be the Minister of God, to utter Things to you, and
that he would enable you to take things to your selves out of all Expressions
and Words; that in all this case we may not be prevailed upon by vain Fantasies
and appearances from this World, and the Scheme or Guise of it, and find no
weight, force nor Authority in things so solid and real. For whether we will
hear, or forbear, it is certain this carries the greatest Reason; That we
should not incur an Eternal Loss for a momentary and present Interest. This is
according to all the Reason in the World.

3. From hence it follows, that all appearances in this World, and in the
outside happiness and prosperity of it, any further than it is subordinated to
the supreme ends of the glory of God, and of our Eternal Salvation, is
happiness, welfare, prosperity, enjoyment only in a disguise, in Masquerade, or
as on a Stage.

Now if an Actor on a Stage should forget what he really is, because he acts
the part of a King, or any great Personage, because he is under such an
Appearance and Character in a Play, and think himself to be such a one, how
great would the Delusion and Intoxication be (...) And such is the Fascination,
and as I may justly call it, the Fanaticism, and Enthusiasm the business and
enjoyment, and enrichments of this World transport men into: They make them
forget what a little and short interest men have in this World; how far from an
indefeisable state of Inheritance as they love to speak, a Term, not so much as
for Life, That is, a Provision so long as we are to be, and to live: For this
(as we have seen) is to Eternity, not so much as a Term for years, which is a
time certain; whereas This night our souls may be required of us; and then
whole shall those things be, we have provided? All therefore we do or speak, or
magnify our selves in though upon any thing in this World, is but so much
Theater, Farce and Masquerade, as to all that arises from this World.

And thus much we might learn from the Stage: Herein we are more foolish than
those Actors, however their Profession is justly more despicable than of the
poorest Mechanic, or Day-labourer; that they do not think themselves to be
what they act, but know their true State and Character, and use those
Theatrical Garments and Representations for a real support of themselves and
their Families, and consider in the midst of all those feigned Appearances,
their true Necessities at home. Even thus, as Christ instructs us, should we
make to our selves Friends of the mammon of Unrighteousness, make improvement
of all we seem to be here, that when we fail from all these, we may be received
to Everlasting Habitations.

But alas, how generally do we value our selves by our acquitting our selves,
as upon a Theater; we give our selves a secret Applause, as we are Men of Mode,
as we have behaved our selves in our Business, Trade, Appearance in Courts of
Judicature, in the Courts of Princes, in such or such Company; and Men will
praise us, when we do, as they think, well for our selves in these things,
because they are like unto us: We think our selves, what we are in Acting, and
forget that true Self at home, that, though it be indeed the Noble and Princely
part, the Lasting and Eternal part, the only True and Real Self, yet is put
under the disguise of a Slave; But, oh! how amazed shall we be, when that Self
starts out, and appears like it self; and we have lost it for a Thing, a Life,
a Being, a Happiness, so only in a Vizor! Oh! How will this Amaze and Torment
us for ever! when in vain we shall cry out, I never knew, nor thought my self
to be such a one, as I now find my self; and as Christ says; So is He that lays
up Treasure for Himself, under so false a Masque of self, and is not Rich
toward God, and his True Self; so shall we find it: Such Fools, such
Enthusiasts, heated with vain and wordly Imagination shall we be found. And yet
daily are seen such Servants on Horseback, false Selves set aloft; and Princes,
the True Self, the Immortal Soul made to walk on Foot.

Thus the Spirit of God, setting out the State of wicked Men in the World,
Psalm. 73. He sets it out, as in this Masquerade, till the Disguize and Vizor be
pulled off; There are no Bands in their Death, but their Strength is firm. They
dye oftentimes (as they say) in the Bed of Honor, with all Advantages about
them without fear of what is to come: They are not in Trouble as other Men,
neither are they Plagued as other Men; Therefore Pride compasses them about as
a Chain (He means) of Gold. They take state upon them, as great Princes, or
Magistrates, with their Rich Collars, their Chains of Gold; Violence covers
them as a Garment, They take Power, and Command to themselves, to enforce their
pleasure; Their Eyes stand out with fatness, They carry Great Port, and
Presence, as we speak; They have more, than heart could wish; They are Corrupt,
and speak wickedly; Concerning Oppression they speak loftily, Who dares
undertake them? Who can attack them, or make War with them? They speak Great
and Big, as if Heaven and Earth was their own; They set their Mouth against the
Heaven, and their Tongue walks through the Earth. These are the ungodly
prospering in their way. This looks very great for a Time; but it is all but as
on a Stage; It is all Stage Play, However, Good Men are ready to be troubled at
it, as if it were real; But I did but go, says the Psalmist, to the House of
God, then understood I their end; I saw the end of the Play, and it ends as we
say in a Tragedy; All Horror at the last; Surely thou did set them in
slippery places; Thou castedst them down to destruction; How are they brought
into desolation in a moment? They are utterly consumed with Terrors.

I am fully assured, All the Wit of Man could never have reached this height;
no Poetry, no O^a^o^y; only the Spirit of God, who perfectly knows, and speaks
Things, Things so great as to find themselves such loughty and massy Words,
when understood, as the Divine Spirit understands them.

How are they brought into desolation as in a moment! They are utterly consumed
with Terrors; As soon as they are got but never so little on that side the
Line, beyond this World, They are All in Desolation and Terror. As a Dream when
one awaketh; so, Oh Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their Image.
All their State here is but Dream and Image, mere Stage Appearance, Masquerade
and Disguise.

To bring all this home then to what we should be and do, according to the same
Psalmist; We should acknowledge our Brutishness and Folly, in being at all
concerned with such Specter of Happiness, losing in the mean time their
Precious Immortal Selves: We should resign our selves wholly to Divine Conduct,
To be led by his Counsel, till we are brought to his Glory; We should look
wholly to and for him, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on
Earth I desire beside thee; etc. All fails, even a whole World; All, except God
alone; All far from him perish: It is good then for us to draw near to him,
that we may declare the wonders of his Power in his Grace to us, setting us
before his Face for ever.

I come to the second Head, to show you, in what way according to our Saviors
Discourse, and the scope of it, we come to lose a Soul; For this is a very
critical Point, and that, if closely applied, would try us, as by a Jealousy
Water, whether we are Christ's or not? I shall endeavor to be very brief in
it, though the Things themselves require vast, and largest Discourse.

Now therefore I must tell you, that we, even Protestants, are under the name
of Christians and Protestants, a very Degenerate Race. We end, where
Christianity in its own True, Genuine, and Transcendent Powers begins. For
Christianity either finds Men Sober, and, as we speak, of Good Lives, as the
young Man in the Gospel, that was Lovely in the Eyes of Christ for all Moral
Accomplishments, Matt. 9. compared with Mark 17. or it presently makes them so,
as Zaccheus and other Converts, and then it plants them with its nobler
Principles, and Operations: It takes for granted, no gross Impieties, or
Immoralities should be amongst them, not so much (as the Apostle says) as once
named among them, as Becomes Saints; but then it has much higher G^aces,
Powers and Actions to Communicate to them; whereas among us, If a Man be no
Swearer, Professed Profane Person, no fordidly Covetous Person, Defrauder, or
Oppressor, Talks, and Lives Soberly, and Joins in the Duties of Public
Worship, and Acknowledgment of God, we are ready to say, This is an Excellent
Man: But this was not so in the Eye of Christ; For He in his manner of
Discourse, and Preaching ^a^^^ to the Sober and Moral Men, and our Men of Good
Lives (...) Religious Men, and that distinguish themselves from the Lewd and
Irreligious: Now says Christ to such, whom we are ready to think very very
safe, Take heed you are not the Persons losing your Souls; though you do it
with a great deal of Gravity, Soberness, and Becommingness in the W^rld; and
under such a profession of Christianity and Protestancy, that no one should so
much as dare to question your Salvation, Lest He offend and scandalize you, and
discourage All from being Christians; as the young Man, who went away
sorrowful, discouraged, and as we speak, disoblige^, k^ked off from the
Doctrine of Christ; and staggering the very Disciples, who cried out, Who then
can be saved!

I will therefore lead you into the occasion of these words of our Lor'ds; What
is a Man profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his Soul, etc? In this
Chapter, v. 21. Began Jesus to show to his Disciples, that he must go up unto
Jerusalem, that Head City, and Seat of the Jewish Religion, and the Doctors of
it, the Elders, Chief Priests, and Scribes that h^ld the Standard of it; of
whom He must suffer many Things, and be killed, and Raised again the Third Day;
I must (says he) be Mocked, I must be Buffeted, I must be Spit upon, I must be
Laughed at, and Drolled upon; and I must dye that ignominious death of a Slave,
of a great Criminal, and Malefactor; But I shall Rise again the Third Day.

Now Peter looking not at all upon the Rising the Third Day, but letting that
pass for a Phantasy, a Thing in the Clouds, as we do All Discourse of the
Kingdom of Christ at this Time; else that might have Reconciled him: But He,
altogether intent upon the Suffering part, began to take Christ to task, and to
Rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord; This shall not be unto thee, Let
not this thing be once thought of, That such a Person as Thou art should be
thus Treated, Deal more mercifully with thy self; For Thou who can do all
things, can hinder it if thou please: But Christ turned to Peter, and with
an unusual s^verity said to him, Get thee behind me Satan; For Thou savourest
not the Things that be of God, but those that be of Men.

Then he adds, This is a Thing, I am so far from being turned off from, that I
establish it, as a Rule for All my Disciples; If any Man will come after me, as
my Disciple, Let him deny himself, take up his Cross, and follow me, in all
this I have represented upon my self. And if any Man think much of this, and
chooses rather to save his Life, such a one shall lose it; but He that loses his
Life thus for my sake, shall find it.

All this is, as if Christ should say, I do not only say, you must leave your
Debaucheries, the Gross Pride, and Vanities of this World; but you must come to
that to be willing to lose your Lives, you must Take up your Cross, do that,
the Nature of Man so much abhors.

Now, (...) Peter having such a Love to Christ, said, Let it be far from thee,
so we are ready to say too, looking upon our selves, or any other, a Man of
Condition, a Man of Quality, as we speak; what, you come to Take up your Cross,
to deny your self, to go lower in the World! This shall not be. But Christ is
positive; If any Man, when required by me, to lose his Life, will save it, He
shall lose it; But if any will lose his Life, so required by me; He shall find
it in a higher Life, as I shall find my Life the Third Day. Now, says Christ,
Life and Soul, are, you know, the Power and Measure of all enjoyment; and if
you lose your True Life, Soul, Self, though you gain the whole World, what do
you get by it? But beyond this, If you come to Repent so great a Loss, and to
cry out, What shall I give as an Exchange, a Ransom for that Soul, that Life
lost, and no such can be found? How Miserable will you be! Here is the very
Reason, and Thread of our Lord's Discourse.

And herewith agree all his Discourses on this subject; Let us take them in the
Gospel Verity and Purity, the very words of Christ, Luke. 14. 35. There were
Great Multitudes following Christ; Many were taken with the Excellency of his
Discourse, with the Majesty of his Holy Conversation, and Miracles; But he
turned to them, and says, I would not have you mistake me, If any Man come
after me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, etc. and
his own Life also, He cannot be my Disciple; And therefore (says he) Consider
well, and the Point of Consideration He sets out by two close similitudes*
Implying, Christianity undertaken in the Truth of it, is like Building a Tower,
which he that does, had need sit down first, and count the charge; and it is
like beginning a War, in which equal Power is to be well stated; lest otherwise
All end in scorn and Ruin. So says He, Whoever undertakes to be a Christian,
to be my Disciple, must first consider, whether he can bear it out.

I say, To be a Christian; For Christ says, Disciple, and we generally say
Christians; And, indeed, by Oracle, as from Heaven the Disciples were called
Christians, Acts 11. 26. So to be a Disciple, and to be a Christian (however
the word, Disciple, be become a word of scorn among us) is the same thing. Now
if any Man will be a Christian, here are the Terms of it, and we must drop the
very Name of Chri^tian, if we are not thus prepared; And yet who is thus
prepared?

Take another Scripture, John 12. 2, 4. Christ considering his own dying,
compares the thing to a casting a Corn of Wheat into the ground; Verily,
verily, says Christ, except a Corn of Wheat fall into the Ground, it abides
alone; but if it die, it brings forth much fruit: He that loves his life
shall lose it; and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life
eternal. Here is the plain sense of lo^^ng Life, or a Soul, when we lose Life
Eternal; and to lose that with the gain of a Life, that the whole world can
make great, is a loss wholly unaccountable, intolerable, and irremediable,
notwithstanding the most passionate desires of an exchange, or remedy, which
shall ever inflame the loss.

Now a Corn of Wheat, says Christ, to this purpose, except it die, abides
alone: it can never be any more than a Corn of Wheat; and at last, as such, it
putrifies; but if it be cast into the ground, and die, it rises in all the
flourish of Nature.

So if a man say, He Will be this great man, this rich man, this man of Power and
Honor, this man of Mode and pleasure in this World, and adventure for what is
to come; say what you will, says he, I will not diminish from the Figure I am,
or can hope or attain to make.

Why, if so, says Christ, you may, as you can, be that Figure, but you shall
never be any more; and when you come to die, what becomes of that Figure? And
besides, beyond that, viz. when That Figure is to be no more; there arises the
Loss of a Soul, and of Life Eternal; which is beyond all expression, a Loss
dreadful, and without any reprisal, or recovery.

And to this very purpose is that so known Discourse of the Apostle James; Thus
the Truth of that Faith which justifies, appears by the mighty Operations of it
in self-denial, self-resignation, and of all our Interests in this World, as
Abraham and Rahab made: Such Acts of Faith, as the Apostle gives a Catalogue
of, Heb. 11. by which the Elders obtained so great, so good a Report; which if
well considered, would much abate the Controversal part of that Scripture; the
Apostle being not in discourse upon the constant Ordinary Works of Moral
Obedience, but of those Heroic Acts opposing to the Body of Profession that
mighty Spirit of Justifying Faith, giving up all to God and Christ.

I will therefore but name the Particulals, wherein this is to be shown, that
we are ready to forsake all to follow Christ.

1. It is certain, the very forsaking of all in the plain Letter, or Matter of
Fact, was the Case for three hundred years and more, after the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ; it was so disposed by the Supreme Lord of Time, if a man would be
Christ's Disciple, if he would take up him to be a Christian at that time, he
must undervalue for the sake of Christ, the whole World, and all Relations and
Interests in it, or else he could not be so: So that this was continually
brought to the Beam, to the Scale, whether a man's own Soul, or the whole
World weighed most?

Indeed after three hundred years, and something more, the Kingdom of Christ
made some appearance in the Christian Empire, and the Christians came to be in
a Condition of Honor and Estate, and outward, prosperity; and the Bishops, and
Hierarchy, as they called themselves, became the greatest of the Earth: But if
we believe Ecclesiastic History, there was a Voice from Heaven at that time;
This day is Poison diffused into the Church: But whether that were so or not,
certainly the thing was most true: For hence arose an Opinion That Christianity
in such a low and impure state, as the World was then in, and has continued in
to this day, did yet advance to worldly honor and greatness; or that the
profession of Christ and his Gospel, made men with no greater Influences of
holiness appearing at the same time, great, and rich, and Lords, then which
nothing is more contrary to the Kingdom of Christ, and which brought in
Antichristianism, a mock Kingdom of Christ, immediately upon, and even out of
the Christian Empire. But this was the State of what we call Antiquity before
the Christian Empire, or the time of the purest Christianity; it was a laying
down all at the foot of Christ.

2. It is certain every one of us ought to be prepared, to have a Mind Fixed,
and ready to give up All to Christ; else we cannot be Disciples of Christ;
suppose any of us have Advantages of Descent, of Place, of Estate, of Credit,
of Reputation, of Great Abilities of Understanding, of all the Splendour of
Living, Attendance, Equipage, Garb; If we cannot be willing to lay all this
aside, for Christ's sake, and to be wrapped up in the vilest Appearance, we cannot
be Christ's Disciples, and so cannot be Christians, For Disciples are called
Christians by Oracle.

And as I said before of the Christian Empire, until it came in there was
nothing but Poverty, Persecution, Disgrace, and all the Torments the wits of
Pagans could invent upon Christians; so in After Times, when Antichristianism
came to a height, there was no enjoying the Purity of Christianity, but the
Name of Heretics Entitled all those, who would be Christians, not according,
to what they called Holy Church, but according to the Gospel it self, to all
the Cruelty, Persecution and Torments, the Heathen had before found out, and
Practiced upon Christians; which now Antichristians took up against sincere
Christians: But for this last Age, and almost another to it, our Reformation
has brought in a greater Liberty of the Protestant Profession, and the same
Honor, Titles and Grandieur on Protestants; But we had need take care we do
not abuse it; For if we are not in the preparation of our Hearts, Dying, as a
Corn of Wheat, we cannot, in the Sense of the great Master, and Founder of
Christianity be his Disciples or Christians. And it is much to be considered,
All things of Worldly greatness, and Enjoyment are still under this Perjudice,
that the Kingdoms of this World are yet in Beastian Hands, of the Last of
Daniels Beastian Powers, the Antichrist the Pope; so that the Succession of
Christ's Kingdom cannot yet be The Kingdoms of this World; are not yet become
the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. It is therefore very observable,
that Counterfeit of the Kingdom of Christ, as it is a Mock Kingdom in regard of
the Worldly Grandieur, of Popery, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. So it
has served it self of the Counterfeit of the Self Denial of the Gospel in
tho^^ Austere, Self Denying Orders, under such strict Laws of Mortification,
and Despisal of this World; Both Teaching us, if we would Learn; That there is
indeed a Time of the Glory of Christianity in that Kingdom of Christ, but not
Carnal and Worldly, yet full of outward Glory, and Enjoyment; but that at the
present All is in Patience and Affliction.

3. Every one ought at least to look to this, to see, what instances of Secret
Mortification, Self Examination, Humiliation, and profoundest Abasement of
Himself before God; Self Condemnation in Sense of his own Unworthiness, and
manifold Transgressions, with all the Aggravations of Them; Self Denial, Holy
Self-Resignation, he Lives in the Practice, and Exercise of; laying our selves
low at Christ's Feet, bringing all the Glory to Christianity, and bringing as
many into it, as we can, Seeking not our own, but the Things that are Jesus
Christ's. Suffering Affliction with the People of God in the State of our Minds;
and Contributing All we can to the necessities of Saints; not Stretching our
Selves, as on Beds of Ivory, Drinking Wine in Bowls, Chaunting to the Sound of
the Viol and Organ, etc. and forgetting the Afflictions of Joseph; Waiting,
Longing for the Kingdom and Appearance of Christ. If such things as these are
not in us, we are saving the Lives of a short Figure, and loosing our Souls,
and the Life Eternal that are for ever; we are in a Dream, and making that
Image, God, and Christ will suddenly Awake, and Despise.

As a Conclusion, and as an Addition to the Second Head, I will enquire into
the meaning, and importance of that Vehement Question, signifying, that the
loss of a Soul cannot be slumbred away, What shall a man give in Exchange for
his Soul? And it speaks these three Things.

1. Suppose that a Person could have the whole World in his Hand to give; It
would be utterly Despised, It would be of no value; This must needs be so; For
if the World could be of value to Exchange for a Lost Soul, It must then needs
have preserved the Soul from being Lost. For a Man therefore to come and say to
God, here is the Estate I have gotten with the Loss of my Soul, here is the
Great Revenew I have attained, and left to posterity; Here are the years I have
spent in pleasure, and that I was blessed upon Account of by all that lived
about me, and Knew me; Because I lived in Pomp and State, in All I could
desire, and did as the Psalmist Expresses it) well to my self; will this, if it
could be All given Back, be an Exchange for a Lost Soul; no, the Redemption of
Souls is precious, and Ceases for Ever, as to any such Exchange; will the
Remembrance of it Appease an Angry God, or as Enraged Conscience? Alas, That
will be the Burden, and sting of that Condition; as the Apostle James speaks;
Your Riches are Corrupted, and your Garments Moth-Faten, your Gold and Silver
are Cankered, and the Rust of them shall witness against you, and eat your
Flesh, as it were Fire. You have heaped Treasure together for the Last Days,
James 5. 2, 3. etc.

2. Is there Any of the Creatures in Heaven or Earth, that can stretch out an
Hand, or an Arm of Compassion in such a case, as this is of a Lost Soul? Are
there any of the Angels, of the highest Principalities in Heaven, the Thrones
and Dominions there, that can step in in a way of might, and tenderest
Compassion, and say, Oh Soul, that art Lost, now will I help, now will I
Interpose, and bring thee off from thy Lost State, and Rescue thee? Or any of
the Saints that have known the Temptations of Human Nature on Earth, or known
any Particular Lost Soul? Alas. This is all impossible, as it is said in Job,
Call now, if there be any that will Answer thee; and to which of the Saints
will thou Turn? Job 5. 1. They all Justify, and Glorify the Righteous Judgment
of God in that lost State of the Person that has undervalued his Soul; They
praise the Mediator, by whom they themselves Consist, and the Redeemer, by whom
they themselves are Reconciled; They dare not appear Mediators, or Invade the
Honor of the one Mediator, but as they Praise and Adore free Grace in Christ
to themselves, so they in Relation to those Dismal Appearances of the Lost, as
it is expressed in Ezekiel c. 14. 22. are Comforted in what God has done,
Beholding the Righteousness with which he has done it; when they see the ways
and doings of Lost Souls, and know that God has not done without Cause All
that he has done unto them.

3. When the Savior, and Redeemer of Souls shall say, What shall a Man Give in
Exchange for his Lost Soul? It is as if he should say, Do not look that I
should be your Ransom, your Exchange; that your Ruin should be under my Hand,
or I Rescue you from it; While you were in the World, I offered you the wisest
of my Counsel, I offered you the dearest and most precious of my Blood; And I
said with tears, Oh that in your day yau would have known the things of your
peace, but now they are hidden from your eyes. I am now removed from being a
Savior to you, I am now altogether at a distance from you, or from showing you
any compassion, as it is said, Esaias 27. 11. They are a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them will show them no favor; So Christ will say, They have been
souls of no consideration, notwithstanding all I have said, therefore I have no
Commission from my Father, no Authority to interceed for these Children of
perdition; Only for those he gave me, while in the World, I am no Redeemer of
lost Souls on this other side of the Line of Life, and entered into Eternity.

Having now thus far insisted on this Point in a Doctrinal way, I close in
brief with the particular Application.

Savior's Words in such a sense as he will allow; That a man gets nothing, tho
he should gain the whole World, and lose his life, in that moment he gains it;
I ask him in his way of certainty, What is that man the better? If then it be
but possible, though not certain, there should be a Soul to rue the loss of it
self in a Christian sense; he knows what he can get; All is but such a part of
the World as he can get; it is but a World he has nothing to do with when he
dies; and there is this Bridle in his Jaws, do what he can, he cannot shake
that off, he must die, he knows not how soon; and there remains a possibility
of a Soul in a lost state, after all the World: What odds therefore does he
give against himself in making nothing of a Soul, for a little of the World, in
a Life, that cannot with all it has defray the charge of living, the vanity and
vexation of Spirit that certainly attends Life; and the certainty it must end,
and wholly uncertain how soon; and yet he stands the hazard of a Soul miserable
for ever, in its being lost, and for ever crying out for an exchange for it
self that cannot be found, any more than he knows what to give in exchange for
his life, if once lost. And why should he, of all persons, think a Soul
miserable for ever an impossible thing, tho not certain; or so much as
improbable; that thinks so many things have been, and are, that no one, as he
thinks, can tell how they come to be: Sure that man that will believe nothing
but upon sense, transgresses the very Law of his own Sense, that sees many
things come to pass, he looked not for, and will not believe, because he does
not yet see; and against his own Prudentials upon Sense; for he takes heed, and
guards against things possible, that he has never seen yet by the eye of Sense,
why not then against this so dreadful prossibility?

lose a soul for a whole world, how great madness is the loss of a Soul for a
little of the World? Men that live in Allies and Dungeons, and eat in darkness
all their days, and yet lose their Souls; Oh how earnest should all the poor be
to receive the Gospel preached to them, as the most fit Subjects of it in that
gracious Expression of Christ to them, The poor are evangelized; and to lay
hold on Eternal Life, to make a Virtue of that Necessity they are under. On the
other side, they that live in gaiety and splendour, and value it so much, and
have such abhorring thoughts of a contrary condition, how earnest should they
be to live so for ever, in a Divine Sense, being received into the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light, and not to fall into the miseries of a lost soul, as so
horrible a descent from their present state.

him often do, and especially with humblest supplication to the Father of
Spirits, the Creator of Souls; through Christ the Lover and Redeemer of Souls;
by the Spirit the blessed Inhabitant of all holy and wise Spirits; to impress
upon him this great Oracle, concerning the value of Souls and Spirits; and he
shall find by the Evidence, and witness within himself of the value of his own
Soul, There is such a sense of these things possible to us, that he that has
lost Houses, Lands, Wife, Children for Christ's sake may receive a hundred fold
in this life, even now, and in the very midst of Persecution, (which is the
greatest evidence of their Reality,) in the comforts and assurances of
preserving all unto Life Eternal: For Christ adds; In the world to come life
eternal, Mark 10. 29, 30.

that day of the Kingdom of Christ but dawning from on high, that shall make
all these things so clear, as to put the World into another state and posture,
as toward God, and all holiness; and the more earnest should we be, seeing the
day may by the sure word of prophesy shining in this dark place, be seen to be
near approaching; and how great relation this great Saying of Christ has to
that Kingdom, appears, in that Christ goes on immediately to his coming in the
Glory of his Kingdom, of which he gave a Type in the Transfiguration, Chap. 17.
following.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is an Exposition upon the whole Book of the Revelation, Explaining the
Sacred Text Word by Word, and opening and arguing the Divine Senses of that
great Prophesy.

Sold by Richard Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard, and are to be
had at Mr. Marshals, at the Bible in Newgate-street, and of Mr. Salisbury, at
the Rising-Sun in Cornhill.

Books Sold by William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-Street.
Books Written by the late Dr. John Owen.
In Folio.
1. HIs Exposition on the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, with Exercitations
concerning the Messiah? Wherein the Promises concerning him to be a Spiritual
Redeemer of Mankind, are explained and vindicated. His Coming, and
Accomplishment of his Work according to the Promises, is proved and confirmed.
The Person, or who he is, declared. The whole Economy of the Mosaical Law,
Rites, Worship and Sacrifices, is explained. And in all, the Doctine of the
Person, Office, and Work of the Messiah, is opened: The Nature and demerit of
the first Sin is unfolded: The Opinions and Traditions of the Ancient and
Modern Jews are examined: Their Objections against the Lord Christ and the
Gospel are answered: The time of the Coming of the Messiah is stated: And the
great foundational Truth of the Gospel vindicated. In four Volumes, Folio.

2. A Discourse concerning the Holy Spirit. Wherein an Account it given of his
Name, Nature, Personality, Dispensation, Operations, and Effects. His whole
Work in the Old and New Creation is Explained: The Doctrine concerning it
vindicated from Oppositions and Reproaches. The Nature also and Necessity of
Gospel Holiness; the Difference between Grace and Morality, or a Spiritual Life
unto God in Evangelical Obedience, and a Course of Moral Virtues, are stated
and declared. Fol.

3. The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, explained and confirmed. Or, the
certain Permanency of their (1.) Acceptance with God; and (2.) Sanctification
from God; manifested and proved: From, 1. The Eternal Principles, 2. The
Effectual Causes: And, 3. The External Means thereof, etc. Fol.


