The Wonderful Confirm^tion of the Succession of the Kingdom of Christ at 1697,
Derived from the 42 Moons of the Beast, then Ending; Given by Prophecy, so as
to be Calculated according to the Famous Cycle of the Moon, styled, the Golden
Number, found out first by the Famous Athenian Astronomer, Meton, about the
Year of the World, 3574. Embraced by the Fathers of the Nicene Council, about
the Year of our Lord 325. for the settling their Antipaschal, or Easter,
supposited to the True Christian Paschal of the Lord's Supper, and of the
Lord's Day, Ordained by Christ: Digested into these Propositions following.
Proposition 1. IT is evident Letter of Scripture That the Comprehensive Line
of Time from Cyrus to the Kingdom of Christ, or to the Sanctuary Cleans'd;
Given by Daniel very early, c. 8. (and therefore must needs comprize in it the
1260 Days, and 42 Months) is composed into Eves, and so has a Seed of Moons in
them, as Time of the Night.

Prop. 2. It is also as evident Letter of Scripture, That the Prophecy of the
Revelation Assigns Forty Two Moons to the Gentiles, and Forty Two Moons to the
Beast, as Time of the Night, to the Children of the Night, and of Darkness.
Rev. 113. c. 13.5.

Prop. 3. The same Prophecy has out of the 2300 Morns in the same Vision of
Daniel, assigned 1260 Days to the Witnesses, and to the Woman the Church, as
Time of the Sun, and of the Day, as to the Children of the Light, and of the
Day. c. 11.3. c. 12.

Prop. 4. The Moon is said by the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.19. to be Appointed for
Seasons, in their great Variety, according to the many Wanderings of its Motion;
But the Sun Sol viam suam novit; Luna non item.
knows its Going down, according to the Certainty and Steddiness of its Motion,
and Constancy to its own Path; Words very little differing from that saying of
the Wise; The Sun knows its and is firm to it; The Moon does not so.

Prop. 5. Accordingly, as the ^260 Days, settled by the Spirit of Prophecy, as
the sure and steady Gauge of Time, so the Moons are fitted by the same Spirit
of Prophecy, to describe some Unevennesses, and Inequalities in the State of
the Apostasy; viz. such as arise from the Beast's not coming into his
Succession so soon as the Apostasy began: To define which Time, and what space
it was, and how it was supplied and born up, the Moons of the Gentiles, and of
the Beast, are of most peculiar, particular, and especial Use.

Prop. 6. One of the greatest Performances of Astronomy, assisted by him who
Teaches Man Knowledge, has been to Adjust the Time of the Moon to the Time of
the Sun, that there might be both a double Character, and Assurance of Time, as
by knowing, not only what Year of the Sun, but what proportionable Time of the
Moon Answered to that of the Sun, that there might be by the compare a
Proportioning any Time Depending on the Moon to that of the Sun.

This, after several former Attempts, that failed, was perfected by Meton, near
the Beginning of Daniel's Weeks, and received by All the Knowing World since;
and Celebrated by that Great Name of the Golden Number, or the Decem-Novennal
Cycle, the Cycle of Nineteen Years: By which it is certainly found, the Motion
of the Sun takes up a Thirty Third Part more than the Moon, apply it to
whatsoever part of Time: Apply it then to 1260 Days of Years of the Sun, ^4^
Moons are 38 Days of Years less than the 1260. But besides, by applying the
Proportions of the Golden Number to Any Year, either of the Sun, or of the
Moon, of which we have the certain Epoch, or Time of Commencement, or to any
part of the same Year, we may equal the Times of the Sun and of the Moon to one
another, by taking away a Thirty Third part of the Sun's Time; or, which is
most Natural, by Adding a Thirty Third part to the Moon, because the Sun's
Motion is the most steady Gauge of Time. And this is done by Adding an Allowed
or Granted Proportion of Time, as if it were Real Time, and placing it as we
find fittest for our purpose; but under this Caution, if it be public Time, it
must be by public Agreement, as we double every Fourth Year a Day in the
Latter End of the Twelfth Month, we, too Pagan-like, call February; not that so
much is due to that Year Alone, but to every one of the Four Years, (...)
Fourth part, to keep the Course of Time somewhat near equal. And this is called
Intercalation. And thus Maimonides, to adjust the Jewish New Moons, to the Time
of the Passover, allows Seven Intercalary Moons, to Seven Years in every
Nineteen, viz. 3.6, 8, 11, 14, 17. 19th, year.

And to the very same purpose, the Entering Antichristian Apostasy, even at the
Time of the Nicene Council, made the same Use of this Cycle, and took it in: as
Thought: into the Service of Christianity; when they were growing then to be
the Synagogue of Satan, saying, They are Jews in observing a Pasch, or Easter,
in Remembrance of the Death and Resurrection of Christ; but are not, but do
Lie; For Christ ordained the Lord's Supper, and the Lord's Day on purpose to
Fore-prize such Humane Institutions upon Time: But however, this Golden Number
has herein all the Confirmation that can be, it being wonderfully Ordered by
Providence; Time of the Moon should be made so Remarkable in such a Solemnity
as that of Easter, so great in the Antichristian Synagogue, and on which in
Victor, the first Effort of Antichrist Fell; and which is yet Retained in
Protestant Churches, that did not Reform lower than that Synagogue, Rising in
that Nicene Council.

Prop. 7. There is just Reason, seeing the Spirit of God has positively Named
Moons, taken out of the 2300 Eves, (which must needs be the Time therefore of
the Moon) to observe where the Beast's Moons begin, and where they end. The
Succession of the Beast to the Seventh King, but no Head; is so positively
declared, Rev. 17. that it can be no way doubted or denied. For that Those
Seven Heads are Heads of the Roman Government and City; Even the most Zealous
Romanists, that are Judicious, neither do nor can so much as call into
Question; and has been fully made out; as also, That the Law of Succession
requires, That the Heads and Kings should not enterfere, but come orderly, one
after the other. God's Call out of Babylon.
So then the Beast, that was the Eighth King, must immediately succeed the
Seventh, but not enterfere with him, or come before he was wholly Gone off.

Augustulus then being the Last of those Christian Emperors of Rome, who made
up the Seventh King, when he went off, immediately the Eighth King came on, at
38 years after, the 1260 days of years began, or at Just Two Nineteens, Ordered
by Providenceso, to Lead by the Golden Number, to Time of the Moon.

That being at 475. ending, and in the Year 476. the proportion of Lunar Time
will Allow but 1222 Years to the Forty Two Months of Years: So then hereby it
is most certainly known, that the Beast's Reign must End at 1697 For so 1222
Added to 475 make. And thus that so Celebrated Golden Number Assures the
Kingdom of Christ in its Succession at 1697. seeing the same Law of Succession
holds in the Kingdom of Christ, that, as in all Successions, Admits no Gap.

And then according to the Law of Intercalation, the Beasts Months are supplied
by the Gentiles Months; because the Beast had Time, Times and Half a Time; Or
1260 Days of Years.
and he not coming into Succession time enough for that Time, Times and Half a
Time, the Months of the Gentiles, as his People, intercalate, or supply the
Beast's Months; where they are to be supplied, and where there is Supply ready
for them Viz. At the 1260 days beginning; For as soon as the Time, Times, Half
Time of the Beast begin in the Gentiles 42 Months, the 1260 Days begin also.
: And then the Gentiles Months become one with the Beast's, as they must needs;
because Power was given to him over Tongues, People and Nations, as the Time,
Times, Half Time were given to Him also.

Thus every way that Great Position, That the Kingdom of Christ shall be in its
Succession 1697. is Assured to us, and this way particularly, I cannot but look
upon it assured beyond any Possibility of Doubt; For we do but thus plainly
Reckon; The Beasts Moons or Months Begin 475 Ending, They can, as Time of the
Moon or Eves of years, make no more than 1222 years; These from 475, end
therefore with the 1260 days of years at 1697. And therefore I heartily pray,
we may take notice, the Kingdom of God is come nigh to us.

FINIS.

