A Scripture-Line OF TIME, Drawn in Brief From the Lapsed Creation, to the
Restitutution of all Things.

Discoursed at large, upon the 2300 Ev. Morn. Dan. 8. 14. And their Collateral
Lines, From CYRUS, to the Kingdom of CHRIST in the New Jerusalem.

By T Beverley.

Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the 1335 Days, viz. the Last of the
2300. Dan. 12. 12. We are not of the (...), the Apostasy to Perdition, but of
the (...), the Apostolic Faith, to the saving of the Soul. Heb. 10. 39.
Printed according to a Calendar, 1684.

ERRATA.
THE Errors in this Impression are either small by change of a Letter,
mispointings, sometimes want of Points, or of a Parenthesis; which it is hoped
the considering Reader will easily overruled by the sense. The more notorious
are thus to be corrected before the reading the Book. p. 5. l. 6. before the
end, for 230, r. 2300. l. 4. before the end, for as r. was. p. 12. l. 23. for
shape r. scope. p. 20. l. 17. for Revelational r. Revelation. p. 36. l. 13.
before the end, for 2302. r. 2300. p. 63. l. 23. for Kingdoms r. Kingdom. p.
66. 16. blot of p. 82. l. 28. blot was.

Second Part.
At p. 66. of the second part, some more noted Errata's are marked, which the
Reader is desired to mend before Reading.

IN the Title, for XXII. r. XVI. Sections. p. 39. l. 11. before the end, for
626. r. 622. p. 46. l. 11. after hundred blot the Comma. p. 47. l. 25. for
sufferings r. sufferers. p. 58. l. 1. blot all of them. p. 103. l. 12. after
Tribunes blot of the People. p. 110. l. 6. after Head blot Com. p. 11. l. 16.
after by, blot him. p. 127. at l. 13. Marg. Argument 2. p. 128: at l. 7.
Margent, Argument 3. p. 135. l. 16. r. Surd p. 146. l. 23. r. Tempt one. p.
151. l. 3. r. Grandiloquence. p. 163. l. 11. remove the Colon after (Smyrna) to
after (camein) p. 175. l. 20. blot the Figures after (with) In the Preface, p.
4. l. 10. after Discourses r. without. p. 4. l. 11. after compared, r. with.

THE PREFACE TO Those, who desire to Hear and Understand the Words of Scripture
Prophecy.
My very Honored Friends.
THE Scripture Line of Time, which I affirm, is that, which rises from the
excellent State of All Things at Creation; when followed an immediate
Deordination, flowing from the Apostasy and Fall of Man through the Serpents
Temptation; But by the interposal of the Promised Seed of the Woman, That State
was borne up from utter Ruin, and sinking, and a Prospect given of a
Restitution of all Things by a new Creation, when the Serpents Head should be
bruised; Now of this Restitution, all the holy Prophets have been speaking,
since the Worlds Beginning, and they have led along the Course of things to it,
in the Exaltation of Him, whose Name is the Word of God, (the Alpha and Omega
of the written Word) till He appears encircled with many Crowns, Revel. 19. At
which, That old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, is laid hold upon, chained, and
sealed up within his proper Abyss, or Bottomless Pit, and the New Creation is
established in the Kingdom of this Many-Crown'd King. Which Kingdom can never
be broken, nor leaves a possibility of any Succession to it self; But it is
delivered up into the Hand of the Father, from which it is received; before
which Delivery, or Resignation, shall be the perfect and final Contusion of the
Serpents Head; Himself, and all his Offspring, not written in the Book of Life,
being cast with Death and Hell into the Lake of Fire, which is the second
Death, Rev. 20. This blessed State therefore is not a single Sabbath, but a
Sabbatism of a thousand years, that remains to the People of God, conjoined
inseparably with the Sabbatism of Eternity, even as the seventh day Sabbath of
the Creation was connected with, united in, and immediately succeeded by the
Christian first day Sabbath, or Our Lords Day, at his Resurrection.

This Line of Time I then avow, is drawn from that former Sabbath of the First
Creation, to the Sabbatism of the New Creation, as from Point to Point, without
Ostentation, or formal Profession of such a Line; yet so that it is all along,
and especially the Commissures and Joints of the parcel, and particular Lines,
are ennobled with some illustrious Symbols of the down fall of Satan's Kingdom,
and of the Glory of the Kingdom of the Seed, or of the Teknogony of the Woman,
as may be abundantly made good in all Instances.

At what I have aimed, and for what end in the calculation of this Line, I have
prepared a full Discourse, may be seen by the Calendar annexed to this Preface,
what I have performed may be seen hereafter, if God permit the Publication of
that Preparation upon the whole Line. At this Time I have only presented my
Endeavors upon that grand Prophetic Line of Daniels 2300 Evenings Mornings,
which is by the admirable contrivance of the Divine Wisdom given first entire,
and so preserved, as not to be under any such Prejudice from the formidable
variation of Copies, as the Ages of the Patriarks are; and then the parcel or
collateral Lines either in numbered Numbers, or as I hope, will appear on very
good Proof, rise exactly adequate to the 2300; so that the whole, and the Parts
demonstrate, and assure one another; besides I vouch those undoubted, and
indisputable Lines, delineated in the Calendar, as far, as to Cyrus
indisputable, I do not mean so much, when they began, or how much Time they
comprehend, For so I know there are many Doubts through Difference of Copies,
or otherwise, but in this indisputable, that Holy Writ has taken care there
should be an Account of Time so far. And this I vouch, as an Argument, That he
who begun a Line from the Creation, continued it to Cyrus, and defined by
seventy weeks the space from the word going forth to the Messiah, has every
where filled it up, and continued it to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, seeing he
as easily commands Time future by Prophecy, as Time past by History; and I do
find both are certain and definite, to that preciseness, as to be twice, once
in History, once in Prophecy, said to be the self same day, viz. the coming out
of Egypt, Exodus 12. 40. and the Vision of the New Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 40. 1.

And that very Charactarism of Ezekiels 390, and 40 days, lying on his two
sides, I look upon as an especial contrivance of the Holy Spirit to mediate
between the Historical and Prophetic Pares of Time, that being part Historick,
viz. to the Time of the Siege especially, and more or less so to that Vision of
the New Jerusalem, and of very great Symbolical Importance also concerning the
state of the Twelve Tribes, till the Times of the Gentiles, that entered in
Nebuchadnezzars Universal Monarchy, were fulfilled; of all which, with the
answer of all Doubts, upon that and other the Visions of Ezekiel, relating to
Time, I have at large treated in that before promised Discourse, only I cannot
omit the Prophetical Cipher of Time, translated from the 40 Days for forty
years in the Wilderness is here solemnly given, with its Key, as of perpetual
Scripture use from thence.

I can with great Truth and Sincerity, make Protestation; It was no part of my
Design to enter a Dispute with any Persuasion of Christians, but only to pursue
the Line of Time, as it reaches that illustrious Sabbatism, for which I find,
Eminent Persons of all Persuasions, have very great Favor.

But doing this, I could not avoid, but that the Antichristian Apostasy, as
seated in the City, that in the Time of the Revelation given, and its Prince,
are so fathally enwrap'd in all parts of Prophecy, that they must be every
where attacked, yet I have taken care to do it only in the Terms and Phrases of
Prophecy, and as the necessary Explication of it, and its Times enforced.

Notwithstanding, I had no such Intention, I find no Discourses upon, or
against that Apostasy, in any degree comparable either in clearness, or
assurance, if disjoined from Prophecy, as when conjoined with it, either for
determination of Theological, Doctrinal Controversies, or Differences in
History, or Chronology, as when such corrupt Doctrines, superstitious
Innovations in Christian Worship, Usages, and Usurpations in Christian
Discipline, entered the World, and at what rate of Detestation they ought to be
Had; All these are more certainly and more briefly resolved, when Prophecy has
the umpirage; for little Intimations either derived from Grounds of Scripture,
or Reason, or from History and General Opinion, when Prophecy inclines, with
them, or supposes things agreeably with them; will weigh against vast Volumes
on the other side, with which Prophecy propends not; Thus I am much more
assured, by observing what is after fully discoursed from Prophecy concerning
Image Worship, however palliated; that it is that so much detested Idolatry,
forbidden in the second Commandment, then from all Rational Discourses with
Prophecy, however grounded on Scripture, but not compared without Prophecy for
a fuller Interpretation of it. I am much more assured, in what Class of
Religions, and Churches, that Religion and Church is to be reposed, that on
such Terms calls it self Catholic, by laying them into the Prophetical Scales,
then by the most considerable Moments of Discourse without Prophecy. I know
better, when a Church-Supremacy entered, by the Prophetical Era joined with that
(however it may be by any controverted) Agreement of History, that Phocas gave
it Anno 606, then I can know by some very learned Tracts concerning it. I
better understand of what small avail that Distinction betwixt the Court and
the Church of, etc. in Vogue with some great Names can be, by offering it to
the Prophetical Test, then by any other way of Exploration; although I look
upon the Distinction, as a Confession extorted by Divine Judgment upon both,
from Prophets of their own, that that Court is the Court of the Beast, and that
he ought to have such a Court that the Prophecy might be fulfilled; And what a
Church it is, I learn from the Prophetical System of the Churches, of which I
have given a brief survey, though it does not so expressly concern Time, yet as
most admirably illustrating, as well as concurring with other Prophetical
Iconisms, and Characters of Time. And to every part I have added Brief
Remarques, directing to that Faith and Patience of the Saints, to that keeping
the Commands of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, which are the use of all the
Discourse that at that Glorious Resurrection, It may be said of us; Here are
they that have so done. Revel. 14. 12.

Thus I have given Account of what is now drawn in full, and whole, and what
only in little, in short Calendary Proportions, which I intend, if God please,
to give in more proper Dimensions, as also to make complete concerning the
Churches, concerning the Voices, and Vials, concerning the thousand years, what
is rather in Perspective, then in just Figures of Discourse.

I have only to add, that notwithstanding, speaking, or writing the Word of
God, I must obey the heavenly Visions throughout, yet as that teaches me, I
yield all the Regards, Deferences of Honor, and esteem due to the Character,
Learning, Virtue, general Profession of Christianity, that I can render to
every Person, and much more to Princes, and all in Authority, however of a
Communion, I could for this Prophesies sake most earnestly pray, and even offer
my Life in the Service, they might not be of.

But nothing can be more effectual against Rebellion, Sedition, or any
Irregularity toward Government, and supreme Power, then the Right
Understanding of this Prophecy. For while Holy Prophecy styles them Kings, who
yet give their Kingdoms to the Beast, the plain Doctrinal, and Preceptive part
of Scripture, obliges, as to fear God, so to Honor those, whom It so styles
Kings, and then Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, giving of Thanks should
be made for them, and for all in Authority.

Nor is it possible any Pretense of setting up or advancing Christ's Kingdom can
justify any Rebellions, mutinous or seditious Commotions; seeing hitherto, It
is most evident, they have proceeded upon mistakes of Time, And when ever that
Kingdom shall Appear, The manner of Appearance is mistaken also, for it is not
as from Earth, but as from Heaven, Heavenly, Spiritual, Pure, Peaceable, yet
Efficacious and Almighty; Regular, Orderly, conducted by lawful Sovereigns,
even those, who till the Words of God are fulfilled, have so given their Power,
so that as well may the Doctrine of the Day of Judgment, which no created Power
can produce, or oppose, be made a pretense for Rebellion, as the Doctrine and
Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, or be complained as dangerous to Government, or
destructive to Humane Society.

That therefore we may be Aright guided by this sure Word of Prophecy, that
shines as a Light in a dark place, is my Grand Design in this publication, even
till it be wholly Unriddled, and Unveiled, as it shall be, when it Turns to the
Lord just then Appearing, however it be now Veiled, when it looks from Him, as
at a distance 2 Cor. 4. 3. v. 13. 16.
from that Appearance, and toward us, for our Instruction, and as inviting our
Diligent search first, and then our Expectation, Prayer, and earnest Desire for
the Quick Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, especially now his Appearance grows
so near; And that we may be thus guided, is also the most Humble and Incessant
Prayer of,

My very Honored, Your most Faithful Servant in this Work, Beverley.
If any Person, either Friendly, and from desire of further satisfaction in
this Point, or Unfriendly, and from Prejudgment, please to make any notice of
it to me, I doubt not by the Evidence of this Prophecy, and the Gracious
Assistance of the Spirit of it, to satisfy their Doubts, and remove their
Prejudice, upon fair Allowances.

The Contents of this Treatise are given in Tables annexed to each Part. 1
Part, Before the Apostasy in 10 Sections. 2 Part, During the Apostasy to the
last End, in 16 Sections.




A CALENDER OF THE Whole Time contained in Scripture, ennobled with the Events
of each Part of Time: distinguished by the true Year of the World according to
Scripture, the Years before Christ till the Incarnation, then the Year of
Christ, and of the Resurrection; to all which is applied the Julian Period.
Year of the World Year before Christ. Year of the Resur. Julian Period. TO the
perfect Creation, and first Sabbatism: 1 3987 764 765 To the Flood, containing
the History of Abel, and the Patriarks of the first Roll; of the Giants, the
Translation of Enoch, the seventh from Adam; The Ark prepared by Noah an
Eighth; and the Destruction of the old World. 1656 2331 2420 To Terah's Death,
containing the History of Shem or Melchisedeck, as he is after known to be,
with the Patriarks of the 2 d. Roll; Of Babel; the space of 427 Years. 2083
1904 2847 To the going out of Egypt, containing the History of the sojourning
of Abraham and his Seed; of the Promises; of Sodom, and the ^gyptian Bondage
and Deliverance; the space of 430 Years; 2513 1474 3277 To the building of the
Temple begun, containing the setting up of the Tabernacle of Testimony, the
Conquest of Canaan; the Time of the Judges, of David, the space of 480 Years:
2993 994 3757 To Solomon's Death, containing the Building of the Temple, and
his illustrious Reign, his Fall, and Repentance, 36 Years: 3029 958 3793 To
Ezekiel's Vision of the New Jerusalem, containing the History of the Kings of
Judah, the History of the Defection of the ten Tribes and their Kings, of the
two great Witnesses Elijah and Elisha, the Destruction of Jerusalem and the
Temple, the Captivity by Nebuchadnezzar; the space of 390 Years. 3419 568 4183
To the End of the Captivity, containing the Continuance of the Captivity,
Nebuchadnezzar's Victory over Egypt, Ezekiel. 29. 17. and Babylon's Fall, the
space of 40 Years: 3459 528 4223 From Cyrus to the Sanctuary cleans'd, and to
the King of fierce Countenance and understanding dark Sentences broken without
hand, a Line of 2300 Evenings and Mornings, or 2300 Years: with its collateral
Lines, which now follow; being also inclusive of the Daily Sacrifice taken
away. From the Words first going forth by Cyrus, to its complete being gone
forth by Darius, Hystaspis, and ultimately at Artaxerxes Longimanus's seventh
year, the space of 75 Years: 3534 453 4298 From thence to the Incarnation,
containing Antiochus's Tyranny, and other Troubles, the space of 453 Years:
3987 1 Yea. of Christ. 4751 To the Resurrection, containing the Birth, private
Life, public Ministry, and Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, to his Resurrection
33 Years: 4020 33 1 4784 To Alexander Severus's Death, the balance of Time
between the Resurrection and the Apostasy, containing the History of the
Universal Preaching of the Gospel, the space of 202 Years: 4222 235 202 4986 To
the Apostasy, or the beginning of the 1260 Days, Or Time, Times, Half TIme.
containing a Vindication of the Gospel by the most rational Apologies,
constant Sufferings of Christians till the Christian Empire, and then the
Christian Empire, till the taking away the Daily, or pure public Worship, the
space of 202 Years: 4424 437 404 5108 To the End of the first time, and
Beginning of the second, or first of the two Times, during the Fall of the
Western Empire, containing the rising of the Beast at 475, his Fall as a Star
from Heaven at 606, his manly Age at 666, from his Conception Anno Domini 59,
to that manly Age 725, of the space of 360 Years: 4784 797 764 5468 To the End
of the second Time or first of the two Times, and the Beginning of the third
Time; containing the Range of the Mohammedan Locusts, or Saraoens, and the
Beasts Promotion to a settled Age or of Consistency, the space of 360 Years
more: 5144 1157 1124 5828 To the End of the third or second of the two Times,
to the Half-time containing the Cavalcade of the Turkish Horsemen, and the
Beasts declining Age, the space of 360 Years more. 5504 1517 1484 6188 To the
End of the Half-time, or to the seventh Trumpet, containing the State of the
Reformation, and since to the Expectation of the Witnesses Rising about 1697,
ten Years hence, the space of 180 Years: 5684 1697 1664 6368 To the End of the
last Seventy Five Years of the seventh Trumpet, containing the seven Voices,
and the seven Vials, and ending in It is done, It is done, at 1772. 5759 1772
1739 6443 After this follows new Time, or the SABBATISM of the Creation; viz.
The cubical thousand Years of the glorious Kingdom of Christ.

AN EXPLICATION OF Daniel's Grand Line of Time, or of his 2300 Evenings and
Mornings, as given in his four last Chapters.
In these following Sections.
SECT. I.
Of the Vision of the Daily taken away, and therein of the 2300 Ev. Morn. or
the Vision called the Vision of the Ev. Morn. in general. On Dan. chap. 8.
THE Vision of the 2300 Evenings and Mornings, dates most exactly, and
precisely the Time from the very Beginning of the Persian Monarchy or the First
of Cyrus to the cleansing of the Sanctuary, at the new Jerusalem, and the
breaking of Antichrist without hand, or by the stone cut out of the Mountains
without hand, at the Kingdom of Christ, Dan. 8. 14. 25.

The order of the former Visions, duly considered, gives great light to this.

For first, there is in the course of Ezekiels Visions a long allotment of
Time, till the New Jerusalem, and a peculiar Sanction of the prophetical Cipher
of Time, or of a Day for a Year, Ezekiel. 4. 6.

That gives full scope aed room to those Monarchies to run their Time, as in
the Image, and the four Beasts in Daniel's two precedent Visions. (...). 2. c.
7.

The former of those two, or the Vision of the Image, gives only a general
Appearance of so many Monarchies or Kingdoms, or rather of a Monarchy
universal, shifting from one People and their Kingdom to another, and all
adverse to the Kingdom of Christ; for that could not appear while they were in
Play.

From hence arises such a Line of Time; as necessarily is required for four
Monarchies to display themselves; but because they may be shorter or longer in
their duration, they give no certain measures; only, as that there is no
History of Action elder than Moses's of the Creation, appearing in the World;
it is an Argument of weight against the World's Eternity: so on the other side,
the daily matter of History arising from many other Kings and Kingdoms, and
particularly of the Romans, assure us, the Kingdom of Christ is not yet come;
because while that lasts, the grand foretold Kingdom of Christ cannot come.

But now the next Vision of the Four Beasts, gives us in Prophetic Cipher the
very measure of the Beast's Duration, as that Beast is symboll'd by the little
Horn, viz. Time, Times, and half a Time.

But because this does not assure us when those Days begin, nor consequently,
where they end, the Vision we are now entering upon will teach us that.

And it has a threefold Aspect upon Time to this end.

1. It continues the principal Line of Time from Creation, which, because there
will not be Scripture History to maintain it, and also because, and especially
because, the Times of the Gentiles, (in whose History Scripture little concerns
it self,) are drawn by it without lesser Periods, but as the Accounts of the
Churches Case in relation to them after requires it; they are given in one
entire Line or Sum, 2300 Days, beginning contiguously from Ezekiel's 430 Days,
and continuously also to so many Days for Years uniting with the former
parcel-lines, and with the 430, as the last given Line; and so one whole Line
from the Creation is constituted by uniting these several Parcels, by a divine
Certainty.

2. It determines the particular Time from the beginning of the Persian
Monarchy, at literal Babylon fallen, to mystical Babylon falling, as also at
literal Jerusalem restored, to new Jerusalem appearing; for Antichrist broken
intends the former, and the Sanctuary cleans'd the latter.

3. It is a measure of the length of particular Lines given after this from
Time to Time, as they are given in Scripture, that, as it self is distinguished
into several Periods by them, so it is a Boundary to them, when to begin and
end; that together they may be symmetral to this whole Line, neither longer,
nor shorter, and therein be justly proportioned to one another; even till this
Line, called most emphatically by our Lord, the Times of the Gentiles, Luc. 21.
24. be fulfilled.

That the Vision then, and the Line of Time it carries away, be rightly
understood, these things are necessary to be premised.

1. That the principal thing in these Visions of Daniel (except that single
Vision next in order to that we are upon, that centers in Messiah's Coming and
Death,) is the glorious Kingdom of Christ, and of his Saints, having the
Dominion throughout the Earth, and the Destruction of that peculiar Enemy of
his Kingdom, who is justly called Antichrist, immediately preceding his
Kingdom, and before which it could not appear.

Upon the Account of this Kingdom of Christ, having its way made by the
Destruction of Antichrist, there are so many Representations of the other
Monarchies, of which else we may conceive, the Holy Spirit had no more touched
their Prophecy, than it does their History, which it never does, but in
relation to the Church, or to set out God's Government Universal over the
World, and his Judgment on sinful Nations.

We find therefore in these Visions of the Monarchies, Antichrist, next to the
Kingdom of Christ, is the greatest Subject; and more Words laid out upon him,
than upon all the rest: so it is in Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, The Feet and Toes
Dan. 2. v. 34. 41. etc.
take up a greater Proportion of the Dream and Exposition, than all the rest;
and then the Kingdom of Christ flows out upon the Image broken in the Feet. So
in the Vision of the four Beasts, the fourth Beast, and in that the little Horn
imploys the greatest part of the whole Vision in its Description and Judgment:
and the Kingdom of Christ then breaks out upon it; so proportionably in this
Vision: He then that would understand it, must be armed with this Rule, as
preparatory.

2. It must be worthy our Advertency, that the Antichristian State in these
Prophecies, and in the Revelation, is ranked with Heathenism and Gentilism, and
treated with much less regard than even Idolatrous Israel, or Judah; God not
taking any notice of them, as his People, but as mere Gentiles: so that I do
not remember any Parallelism of them with the People of Israel, even in their
Apostasy, but altogether with those that were Aliens, as Balaam, Jezebel, the
Daughter of Elth Baal King of the Sydonians; with Sodom, Egypt, and most
notoriously Babylon, and so is represented by the Gentiles treading the outward
Court. And thus the Corruptions of Divine Worship among the Jews were expressed
by entertaining the manners of the Gentiles, defiling themselves with them,
falling in love with them, bringing them into the Sanctuary. The Beast united
with the heathen idolatrous Monarchy, coming into the Seat of the Dragon, is
the grand Apocalyptick Figure for Antichrist, and nothing of Christ allowed
him, except to the other Beast having borns, as a Lamb, while he spoke as a
Dragon, nor of the Jews to the Antichristian Rev. 13. 11.
Gentiles, but that in the Beginning of the Apostasy within the prophetical
Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2. 9. They said, They were Jews, but were not, but lied,
and were the Synagogue of Satan; nor any thing of Jerusalem to the Seat of
Antichrist, except one only allusion to the City, where Our Lord was crucified
(where a Heathen Power presided in Revel. 11. 8.
his Condemnation, and that a Roman too) to signify its extreme Hate to the
True Christ. Its deep dye in Blood, and its irrecoverable Destruction, for
which Jerusalem was so infamous, and for which the Roman Church like the Jewish
Church, was broken off from the true Olive; and all considered as a Church in
Conjunction with it, as the Apostle had foretold. Romans 11. 6. make the Allusion.

On the other side, The True Christianity and Worship of it are symboliz'd by
the pure Jewish Worship; The Temple, its Measures, Ordinances, as they stood in
Isreal's best Estate, are the Ichnography of the Perfect, Pure, Christian
Church; But the drawing men from True Christianity, to Antichristianism; the
Persecution of Men for it, the last Deliverance from Anti-Christianism, and its
Persecutions are continually given out in Parallellismes, betwixt the same
Things heretofore between the Jews, and the Gentiles, and unite with the Jews
great Deliverance, and the New Jerusalem at last.

These two things are most necessary to be premonish'd, for the true
Interpretation of this Vision, and other Visions also, as we shall see, as we
pass along, to preserve all clear and free from Confusion.

And upon this Premonition, I say, this Vision beginning with the Persian
Reign, goes on through the Grecian, and so passes through the whole Roman
Monarchy, first and last, and describes a Line running parallel with the whole
Times of the Gentiles, after the Babylonish Empire, at the end of which,
Ezekiels 430 Days ended, as has been made to appear. And they being the last
Joint of the Line from Creation, this Line of 230 Days joins with it, and
continues the whole Acts. 3. 21.
Line from Creation to the Restitution of all Things.

Upon this Premonition I say further, That Antiochus, as the most Infamous
Heathen Prince for treading down the holy and pure Jewish Worship, from the
Days of Cyrus, while that Worship remained to be Gods Worship; from which
impure Pessundation, that Holy Worship was most wonderfully vindicated; and the
Time of his Tyranny being in the most intimate part of it in literal or natural
Account, near the Time of Antichrists 1260. Days, at a day for a year, and near
the whole 2300 in the whole of it, and being broken by an immediate Hand from
Heaven, without an earthly Hand, as Antichrist shall be; He is made a most
notable and eminent Type of Antichrist, and so with Relation to Him, and his
Time, a Line is drawn from Cyrus to the cleansing of the Sanstuary, polluted by
Antichristian Gentiles, and to the breaking of Antichrist without Hand;
Antiochus standing all this while in open view, as a Type, and his Time, as a
Typical Line of Time.

And yet while his Time will serve a Typical End, It is not exact enough to
either main Intention, to be the principal Thing to be measured by that Line of
Time.

And for the making good these Assertions, I shall now apply my self to the
solemn Proof of these two Propositions.

1. That the 2300 Days are a definitive Line of Time, from the beginning of the
Persian Monarchy, to the very End of the Monarchies, and till the Supreme
Monarchy of Christ; and so are to be joined to the end of the last Line, and
thereby to the several Lines from the Creation; that altogether may reach that
End.

2. That the Vision principally intends Antichrist in every Part, wherein
Antiochus stands, as a Type.

For the Proof of the first Assertion I use this first Argument.

There is a plain Concatenation or Connection of this Vision with the former, as
following orderly upon or after it; For that purpose and to make it known it is
so, Daniel tells us, This Vision appeared unto him, after that, which appeared
c. 8. v. 1.
unto him at the first; Now that this was not intended, as any Date of the
Vision, is very plain, in that It is more particularly dated by assigning it to
the third Year of Belshazzar, whereas the first was assigned to the first year
of the same Belshazzar, and so must needs be after the first Vision, even as
Belshazzars Third Year must be after his First.

These words therefore cannot, but be of further Importance, and signify to
us; This Vision comes after the Former in a just Order, and promotes the scope
of it, and adds further Light to it; Now it is most evident, the four Beasts
intending four Kingdoms, and Antichrist, the little Horn with his Time, Times,
and half a Time, and then his being destroyed, and the Kingdom of Christ
succeeding, are the Principal Objects of that Vision, and therefore they must
be so of This. And in some notable Instance thereof, It must exceed the Notices
of the former, and what can that be but in the Notices of Time? Wherein it is
so particular as to 2300 Evenings, Mornings, for to show it one Line of Time,
It is in the Hebrew 2300 Evening Morning, not 2300 Evenings Mornings, although
for Arguments sake with Ordinary Language, and in Agreement with the sense we
may express them in the plural Number, and it is also called the Vision of the
Evening Morning, as so many Evenings and Mornings combined into one, from the
Monarchy of Cyrus, the Persian, to the Monarchy of Christ's Universal Kingdom.

The Vision begins at the Persian Monarchy, goes on General Argu. 2.
through the Grecian Monarchy, and so to the End; and the Line of Time runs
parallel with the Vision, therefore the Line of 2300 Evenings Mornings must
reach from the Beginning of the Persian Monarchy to the Monarchy of Christ,
which is the known and most undoubted End of the Four Monarchies, and of all
Monarchy, but under him.

This Argument consists of these three main Propositions.

1. That the Vision begins at the Persian Monarchy. 2. That it runs on through
the Grecian Monarchy to the End. 3. That the Line of Time runs Parallel with
the Vision.
SECT. II.
That this Vision begins at the Persian Monarchy, and the Proof of it.
THat the Vision begins at the Persian Monarchy, I give these undoubted Reasons:

It is most apparent in the very Portal of the Vision, it was Shushan the
Palace, by the River Vlai, a River of Persia, whither the Prophet was
visionally conveyed out of Babylon, to show the Translation of the Monarchy
from the Babylonian to the Persian Prince.

The Babylonian Monarchy was yet standing, the Prophet a Subject of it in
principal Place; for he continued in his Preferment in Babylon till Cyrus the
Persian. He must therefore Dan. 1. 21.
be resident at the time of the Vision in Babylon, and not a Runnagate from it,
and his Loyalty; but was prophetically and visionally set down at the Palace
of Persia, to show where the Visions Date was to commence, viz. from the
Persian Monarchy.

If this were not enough, the Exposition of the Vision begins King of Persia,
and where the Exposition begins the Vision begins; neither of these can be
contested.

The Vision crops off the Babylonian Monarchy; The Head of Gold; and the first
Beast like a Lion does not under any Symbol or Representation appear in it.

The Monarchy was now indeed just expiring in Belshazzar's Third, which
Scripture counts upon as his last Year, and whereas the former Visions were
delivered to us in the Language of that Empire; that thereby All People,
Tongues, and Languages, which take care by one means or other to have knowledge
of the Imperial Language, might have notice of them. The Holy Spirit returns in
this Vision to the Hebrew Tongue, peculiar to the Church of God in the Old
Testament.

But the Monarchy was not yet fully expired, nor was the Image in all
succeeding Ages to be bereft of its Head; while therefore the Image, and the
Iconism of the four Beasts, completing the Image stood in the Eye of Prophecy;
Nebuchadnezzer is the principal in the first Monarchy, with the Heart of a Man,
after his Eagles Wings were plucked, importing his sober Acknowledgments of
God, upon the Humiliation, into which his Frenzy dejected him, even into a
state among the Beasts, but he seems to have risen out of Bestianism it self by
abasing himself before God. Dan. 4. ult.

The Beast in the Revelation, To show, the Monarchick Power of the Image
translated into that of the Beasts Kingdom survived whole and entire in him, is
resembled with every one of the Beasts, himself being the fourth; and to assure
us, he is the very fourth, he has neither in Daniel, nor the Apocalips, any
shape, peculiar to him, but what in the Apocalips is compounded of the Three,
as it were to say, All the Three existed in him, as in one Image. Revel. 13. 2.

The principal Reason therefore of omitting the Babylonian Monarchy, is,
because, The Prophetical Type of the four Monarchies, being fully satisfied,
and replenished, The great attendance of the Divine Spirit is to the Line of
Time, which it joins to the Jewish Lines, that went before, and particularly to
Ezekiels 430 Days, or Years, which just comprehended, and ended with the
Babylonish Monarchy, which Monarchy in a real Calendar I have before, more than
once said, began the Gentiles Times, during which Jerusalem lay, and was to lie
under Foot; but just here the Babylonish Monarchy is no farther given in Type,
although it remains in the former Types, to the last; but the Future Line of
Time is given in 2300 Evenings Mornings from the Persian Monarchy, beginning;
And this latter could not have been given with Prophetic Secrecy, and yet also
without Confusion, if the former had not been omitted, whose Time given before
could not enter into this, but it must confound Time every way.

But thus this principal Line reaches from Literal Babylon fallen to mystical
Babylon fallen, from Literal Jerusalem near to be rebuilt with its Temple, to
the New Jerusalem, which much adorns this Line of Time, and sets these two just
even from Point to Point.

It is true, The Four, as Universal Monarchies, are together the great Canale
of Time, till the glorious Kingdom of Christ, whatever great States or Kingdoms
were coexistent with them or any of them at any Time, or have arisen since, do
not mingle with this Stream, which runs strait on to this end, nor are any of
themselves adopted into it sooner than the just Time of their Succession into
Universal Monarchy; nor do they abide any longer in it, as a Calendar of Time,
after once they are fallen from that Universal Monarchy, each successive
Monarchy subduing the precedent, takes it up; and in the Roman Monarchy the
Dragon resigns his Seat and Power to the Beast, the Imperial to the
Antichristian, without any Conquest, to whom, as the seventh Roman Head and
Universal King, the ten Kings giving their Power, the fourth Beast still
survives; differently from all the rest of the Successions; for each Succession
was by Force besides this; so in This the whole Line is continued to the
Kingdom of Christ: But if any of these Kingdoms falls in its order of
Succession, and becomes great afterward on another Bottom, as the Persian
subdued by the Grecian, the Grecian by the Roman, the one afterward rising in
its own Name, the other in Mahomet's, yet they disturb not this order, nor so
much as enter anew into this Calendar of Time.

And because of this real substantial Calendar of Time in these Monarchies, the
first Act of Christ's Kingdom is recorded by the Apostle Paul to be the putting
down all Rule, Authority, 1 Cor. 15. ^6.
and Power, referring especially to these four Monarchies, the great Emblem of
such Rule and Power; viz. when the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms
of the Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11. 15. Then all this Calendar of Rule and
Power is at an end.

That therefore which is most considerable in the Explanation of this Course of
Time farther to us, is, That whereas the Gentiles Times, viz. this substantial
Calendar of the four Monarchies, began in the Babylonian, so long as that
Calendar is in presenting, the Babylonian is never omitted, but is the Capital
in it; but when it comes to this Numeral Line, or the 2300 Ev. Mor. it is then
omitted, because the Numeral Line runs not upon any Revolutions of these
Monarchies, but upon some eminent Providence of God toward his Church, either
of Mercy toward it, or its suffering under the Tyranny of some of these
Monarchies, especially the Bestian; as will be seen all along; which is a very
clear Reason why the Babylonian is first so chief in the Calendar of the
Monarchies; for that being one, and the first, it must be so in the Real: But
when it comes to the Numeral, it is of no use, because it had been given in the
last numeral Line, as then existing; it is not given in the following Numeral,
because it was then past, and would disorder the Account. The real Calendar is
taken from each Universal Monarchy that had the Jews, particularly the Tribe of
Judah, in Subjection, and so oppressed Christ's Kingdom; here the Babylonian
was the first, the Persian the second, the Grecian the third, the fourth the
Roman: under which, as Imperial, first, the Jews were desolated; The manly
Birth, or Christ, as King, was watched, as by a Dragon; Christians lay, as
martyred under the Altar, and then under it, as Antichristian, lies subdued the
spiritual Israel, till both That, and the Twelve Tribes, are restored by
Christ's Kingdom. So these are the Times of the Gentiles, before which neither
the twelve Tribes, nor the Apostolical Church are fully restored, or can be.

From all which, it is most evident, that though the Vision is not dated from
the Persian Monarchy, as if it was given for the Persian Monarchy's sake; yet
the 2300 Ev. Morn. begin just when that begins, and very fitly, because the
Persian Cyrus found the Temple fallen, and the daily Service of the Jews taken
away, and proclaims the Restoration, which makes the Date, as we shall see. And
this is the first thing that was to be proved.

The second Proposition follows; viz. That the twenty Propos. 2.
three hundred days of this Vision, as also the Things contained in it, run
down, and reach to the end of All, or to the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

Of this we have many Arguments in the Vision it self, which having briefly
directed first unto, I will endeavor by farther strong Proof from the whole
course of Prophecy to establish it.

Every Vision of Daniel's, except the following Vision of the seventy Weeks,
which has the high and noble Subject of the Death and Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ, making an end of Sin, and bringing in everlasting Righteousness;
but else every Vision runs expressly to the last End and Kingdom of Christ.

And whether even that does not after the Desolation of Judaism give a Prospect
of their Restoration also, signified by (...), or until the Consummation, until
which their Desolations are to last, and no longer, I leave to the Learned;
however, It certainly bears its part in carrying on Time to that end.

But the very Shape and Design of all the other Visions is most apparently That
End, and therefore I conclude, of This also.

The often mention of the End; Three Times the Vision, and the End are
conjoined; At the time of the End, the Vision shall Dan. 8.
be; and the Exposition of the Vision is to make Daniel know, what shall be in
the last end of the Indignation, and at the Time appointed, the End shall be.
Now what End can be so absolute, as to be understood by its naming only, except
that End of Christ's Kingdom, so well known by the former Visions, and by the
following Vision, chap. 11. v. 27.? When because of this End, to which every
thing has led, and made no delay beyond its Time, therefore all Designs of the
two Kings, designing a longer Monarchy, and to that end speaking Lies at one
Table, could not prosper; for the End appointed did not allow it to either of
them, the universal Empire of the Romans, spoken of in the Ships of Chittim,
coming on.

And what last end of the Indignation can be meant, but that of the Desolation
determined on the Jews in the very next Vision, that explains it together with
Ezekiel's bearing their Iniquity, till the New Jerusalem?

So the Vision being for many days, its being commanded Dan. 8. v. 26 27. 28.
to be shut up, the asserting it to be true, as John, Apoc. 21. 5. These
Sayings are true, Daniel's deep Sleep, Sickness, Fainting, being astonished for
days, answerable to the Visions being for Days, viz. many Days, argues to how
great a Period the Vision tends, and what a fatal course of things it was to
run.

And to conclude this Reason; That very Title of the Vision, of the Evening and
Morning, or of 2300 Ev. Morn. collected all into one, show the long Night of
three Idolatrous Monarchies, and longest in the Roman Antichristian, and the
glorious Morning of Christ's Kingdom.

There cannot be two Expressions of the noted End of Daniel's Visions, more
full and adequate than those two, however brief; The Sanctuary shall be
cleans'd in correspondence with Ezekiel's Vision of the New Jerusalem, and its
Sanctuary, and of the Saints taking the Kingdom. And the insolent King. shall
be broken without hand, even the Prince of fierce Countenance, Dan. 8. 23.
compared with c. 7. v. 8. c. 2. 33, 34.
whose Look was more stout than his Fellows, who had the Eyes of a man, to
understand dark Sentences, growing great, but not by his own power, but as the
Toes of Clay, and Iron, broken without hand, or by the Stone cut out of the
Mountain without hand.

Nor can any thing be more agreeable to the two Inscriptions on the End in the
Apocalyptical Prophecy, It is done, Revel. c. 16, 17. c. 21. 6.
It is done, one the End of the Beast's Kingdom, the other on the Kingdom of
Christ, or the New Jerusalem?

Now from all this of the Vision beginning with its 2300 Propos. 3.
Ev. Mor. at the first of the Persian Monarchy, and so running to the end, it
plainly follows, Those 2300 are not the Gauge of the daily Sacrifice taken
away, but of the whole Vision, from the Persian through the Grecian, to the end
of the Roman, Antichristian Monarchy, and the Kingdom of Christ; and so the
Vision, and the 2300 Ev. Mor. are equal.

So that the most literal sense of those Words, (Unto how long, or unto when,
the Vision of the Daily, and of the Transgression of Desolation, to give both
the Sanctuary, and the Host to be trodden under foot? And he said unto me, unto
2300 Ev. Morn. Then shall the Sanctuary be cleans'd.) The literal sense of the
Question, I say, cannot be, Unto how long does the Taking away, etc. endure?
For so are not the Words; But, Unto how long that whole Vision, whose principal
Visum, or Thing seen, is the taking away, etc. amidst many other Visa in the
whole Frame, as the Tares was of that excellent Parable, Matt. 13. 36. that had
several other Materials to compose it, and yet is called the Parable of the
Tares, and is indeed of the very same Import with this Antichristianism, and
Prophecy of it.

Now when such a Question is asked, and the Answer is given, to so long, the
most natural sense is, When no Time is fixed for the Beginning, that the
present Time should be understood to be it; and when it is added, And then
shall the Sanctuary be cleans'd, it is plain, a cleansing of the Sanctuary,
proportionable to the treading it under foot, must be understood to be the end
of the Vision, and of its 2300 Days. From all which, it is evident, The 2300
begin and end with the Vision. And it will be farther evident upon these
following Reasons.

The Vision is one entire Vision, though it consists of several Vision, and be
divided in the Events, what Date of Time is given with the Vision, as this one
Vision, agrees to the whole Vision and not to any single part, but as so united
with the whole; however therefore the Vision may be denominated from any single
part, as principally to be remarked, as the Vision of the Daily, etc. The
Vision of the Ev. Mor. yet in any thing relating to the Vision, as the Vision
it self, the whole must be intended, and not that part. The several parts of
the Vision have indeed several spaces of Time cut out of the whole space,
proper to themselves.

But as the Vision is one entire Vision, so the Date is one entire Date, and
can be no other to agree with the whole Vision.

The Vision is called ten times, The Vision, to show it is all one and the same
Vision, and the several parts of it are but as the parts of one and the same
Body, Lines of the same Image.

The Exposition of the Vision answers part for part to the Vision it self,
first given; saving, that in the Vision Antiochus the Type appears uppermost,
but in the Exposition the Antitype appears uppermost, and, as in Reason it
should be, is most apparent: and the whole Vision being expounded, is called,
The Vision of the Even. and Morn. all the 2300 being united into one, as it
were to unite the whole Vision, and the whole Line of Time, as close and entire
as possibly may be.

And which is most remarkable, Before the Exposition of the Vision, the space
of Time allowed to the whole Vision, of which the Taking away, etc. was the
chief (as in the Antitype however couched under the Type) is given before the
Exposition, or just between the Vision and the Exposition, that it might
distribute it self to the whole of both; and in the Exposition, it is therefore
so summed up, that it cannot be divided, but must remain entire to the whole;
for it is, as was said, but one Ev. and one Mor. applied to all the Vision; and
afterward, we shall find the Dividend, or Allotment to each part, and most
particularly to the Daily taken away; to each, I say, their part, of the 2300
Ev. Mor.

And lest any one should insist too hard on the Daily, understanding it of the
Jewish daily Sacrifice; besides, that any Word importing Sacrifice is
prescinded, and only Tammith, or the Continual, applicable either to Sacrifice,
or Service and Worship in general, used; it is also to be observed in the
Exposition, in the place of many Words concerning the daily taken away, we have
the whole Action in Expressions most proper to the Bestian Prince, according to
all Prophecy of the Old and New Testament, and not at all proper to Antiochus,
and nothing said of the daily at all; but the entire Vision is summed up in Ev.
and Mor. And all this we may conceive, least the 2300 Ev. Mor. should be
misapplied to that part, viz. of the Daily; which is proper only to the whole.

So then if the Line be commensurate with the Vision, it must begin with the
Persian Monarchy, and not with the daily taken away, for That, in whatever
sense expounded, was not till long after: in the same manner, If the Vision
goes on to the great visional End in Daniel, viz. the breaking of all the
Monarchies in Antichrist, and the Kingdom of Christ appearing in the Sanctuary
cleans'd, it cannot be applied to any taking that was begun, and ended long
before that End, as all takings away, of what kind soever, that have been
thought of, did, (and most particularly that of Antiochus) except that taking
away by Antichrist; which therefore is the only taking away here to be
understood.

And from every Particular of this Discourse it undeniably appears, These Ev.
and Mor. are not mere Natural Nycthemers, but 2300 Ev. and Mor. importing so
many Years; for a less space of Time could not contain so great a Vision and
its Charge.

If a Line of Time were given applicable only to the Time daily Sacrifice taken
away, there would be some certain Time fixed when that taking away was to
begin, according to all Usage in this Prophecy. The 70 Weeks are dated from the
going forth of the Word; the 1335, from the taking away of the daily: And in
the Apocalyptick Prophecy we shall find some certain Epoch of each numeral
Line: but there being no Epoch to these 2300 Ev. Mor. but the general Epoch of
the Vision one and the same, as we shall find, with the seventy Weeks, That
must be the Epoch.

Seeing the Answer (And the Sanctuary shall ba cleans'd) Exposition of the
Vision, touching the King exercising the Tyranny, Broken without hand, gives
the full End of all Tyranny on the Saints, and of all taking away their daily
Worship, as it was under Babylon continued to be taken away at that Time, and
after by Antiochus, last of all by Antichrist; it is plain, according to
Scripture-Usage, The End is principally intended, which such a course of Time
is to attain; As the complemental End of the 70 Weeks making an end of Sin,
etc. is chiefly pursued in the next Vision, The end of Wonders, and the State
of Blessedness in the 1335 Days of the last Vision: and here the Sanctuary
cleans'd and Antichrist broken, is the main Intention; and from the present
Vision, at that NOW given, to those Ends, there would be 2300 Ev. and Mor.

So that the taking away the daily does not spread it self upon the whole 2300
Ev. Mor. and so end with them, but e're all such Things as a tyrannous taking
away the daily Worship of the Saints would be at an end, it would be so many:
for the Vision indeed spreads it self upon all the 2300, being for those many
days; but the taking away begun but at its own Time, as we shall see, and ended
at the 2300 ending; so many from the Time of the Vision, and so was unto them;
that is, whenever it began it reached to the end of the 2300 of the whole
Vision, e're the Sanctuary was cleans'd.

That these 2300 Ev. Mor. are a Line of Time of so great Literal to Mystical
Babylon's Fall, from the Restoration of Literal Jerusalem to the New Jerusalem,
may be argued from several extraordinary Notes of Honor upon this Line, and
the Vision of it.

1. The very drawing it out to so great and unusual a length, is unparalled
in all the Scripture; so that if it were not great in its Beginning, as that
State of Things would admit, great in the End, as that State of Things imports,
and great in its subordinate Lines, it could no ways answer the Magnificence of
so great a Number, especially when the prophetical Abbreviation of Time was
come into use by so peculiar an Ordination of God in Ezekiel.

Even this does sufficiently argue, where it begins, whither it tends, what
space of Time it spans: Cipher or shorthand was of Old in prophetic use; a
Week for seven Years, Genesis 29. 27. c. 41. v. 26. Numb. 14. 34.
forty Days for forty Years in the Wilderness, seven Ears of Corn for seven
Years, seven Times for seven Years, Dan. 4. 22. But God declared, and promulg'd
it as the Law of Interpretation of prophetic Time, Ezekiel. 4. So we understand
seventy Weeks, Weeks of Years without control, or 490 Years, Dan. 9. 24. Now
if contrary to so many Instances of the prophetical Usage of such
Abbreviatures, it should draw out Years into their full Length, or Number of
Days, How could we understand the Divine Mind in it, especially on no greater
occasion than Antiochus's Tyranny, as shall be after argued? Prophecy, that
amasses Time by giving Years in Days, cannot rationally be supposed to wiredraw
Years into Days.

But this is not All: There are forty Days for forty Years, 390 and 40 Days
for so many Years; seventy Weeks for 490 Years; 1260 Days for so many Years,
and Months proportionable: But 2300 Ev. Mor. taken for so many Years, is very
august, and speaks a divine Zeal to grasp that great End of putting down all
Rule, and Authority, and Power, and Christ taking his Power to himself, and
Reigning, yet not so as to diminish from Government, but to perfect it to its
highest Ends, under himself, and his Supreme, and Universal Monarchy. To grasp
this, I say, within so great a Line given, from the very Time in which it was
given: This great Number is given by the divine Numberer.

2. For Jesus Christ the Lord of this Prophecy has the peculiar Title of
Palmoni, to which whatever sense we give, it Dan. 8. 13.
admonishes us to enquire for something extraordinary; and if we rest in what
is every way nearest, The wonderful Numberer, it comes exactly to the wonderful
Line, and the great Secrets to be found in it.

3. Gabriel, the heavenly Envoy upon all Declarations of the Kingdom of Christ,
as Dan. 9. Luc. 1. is employed in its Exposition.

4. Daniel's extraordinary Title (Son of Man) allowed him only in this Vision,
as bringing to him the glorious Appearance of Christ; of which Glory, Ezekiel,
being more often an Eyewitness, Cap. 1. Cap. 10. Cap. 43. 2, 3.
is more often called Son of Man. For if the Learned Dr. Lightfoot's Account of
this Title, as a Chaldaism, were good, Daniel, who was the more eminent
Chaldean, should be oftnest invested with it. On the contrary, He only in this
Vision is so styled, but Ezekiel often: and they alone enjoy it under the
supreme Son of Man of all the Prophets; and Daniel never, but here, showing the
high pitch this Vision makes, and its close approach to Christ's Kingdom: from
which his other Visions do but derive, or are but preparatory to it.

Nor is Daniel's Attention, and signalizing himself unworthy Cap. 8. v. 1, 2,
3. v. 15.
Notice, I looked and saw, I Daniel, and to me Daniel, very agreeable to
parallel Expressions of the Apocalyptick Prophet, I John.

But in short, I conclude from the whole, The prophetical Contexture has given
all possible Advantage to the Greatness of this Vision, and its Line: I will
now briefly add the Arguments from the whole Course of prophetical Scripture,
which will much fortify these Textual Arguments, even as they receive Strength
from them.

Every Scripture Line of Time argues this so great a Line Adam to the Flood,
from the Flood to Abraham, from Abraham to the Redemption out of Egypt, from
thence to Solomon, and so to his Death, are indisputable; and general Sense of
Interpreters carries the 390 Days or Years as far as the Temple burnt. After
the Captivity, few, if any, Christian Interpreters, doubt of the seventy Weeks,
as 490 Years, reaching to Messiah. Now if these Lines are not continued, filled
up throughout the whole space of Time, even as a Vacuum is in Nature, so would
such an empty space be in Time; it turns all to Confusion, we see how hard it
is to fix the beginning or end of any Line, for want of acknowledged continued
Lines; as we find by Experience, how few agree in either the Beginning or
Period of the Weeks while they universally agree in the definiteness of the
Line. Let then Ezekiels 430 days reach to Cyrus, as I have endeavored to
prove, and how justly will these 2300 days join them which were prepared as a
medium betwixt Historical and Prophetical Time.

And why should we think, God, who has taken Care for some parts of Time, has
not taken Care of all? Seeing the Provision else is maimed, and unequal; or why
for Historical Time, and not for Prophetic? Seeing Prophecy and History are
alike present to him; and to us Prophecy is the more noble, and requires that
assurance most: Why for the Church of the Old Testament, and not for that under
the Gospel, when Revelational is higher, and more perfect.

It is a vain subterfuge, That, when the Times of these Gentile Monarchies came
in, God trusted the Records of Time with them, which he did not trust with his
own People, without a supreme Hand of Revelation, fixing such Lines of Time, as
were most exact, either before by Prophecy, or after by History, as we see.

Now if this Argument have strength in it, where can we find such a Line, as
this, so aggrandiz'd, so extended from its Epoch to the last end of all?

We shall find this long Line of Time, distributed into its parcel, and
collateral Lines, and supported by them.

Daniel in the very next Vision gives us the first, in the Time, or space of
the words going forth, and from thence seventy weeks. Then follows the sealed
Time, which by the revelational Prophecy, we knew certainly laying it to
History, to be 400 years. Then follow immediately the thirteen hundred thirty
five; twelve hundred sixty of which are given, as we shall see in a ninefold
variety, and yet consent.

Now those two, four hundred Ninety of the 70 Weeks, and thirteen hundred
thirty five, can allow space but for 475 more. Having then so good ground to
fix four hundred between the Weeks, and the 1335, we may find in the Time of
the Words going forth space for the seventy five, but for no more. All which I
propose rationally to make out.

So then we have this great Proof of the 2300 Evenings Mornings, as 2300 years,
That we find them in the direct stream of Scripture Prophecy, and the
Conspiration of History hitherto, which is more satisfactory then History
giving us a course of Time, and its Events, one answering the other, for here
History and Prophecy meet, as we shall see.

After so solemnized a Prophecy, or Vision of the daily, or Tammith taken away,
we find the last seventy five in the thirteen hundred thirty five, so
remarkably epoch'd with the Tammith, daily, or continual taken away; and Daniel
assured his Lot at the end of them, as it were in the New Jerusalem, or the
Sanctuary cleans'd, to either of which, as the Inheritance of the sealed
Tribes, or the courses of the truly holy Priesthood, the word, Lot, invites
very lively our Thoughts; so that from hence we know in this after Vision, what
might else puzzle our Thoughts; viz. How many of 2300 days are to be assigned
to the daily taken away, seeing the whole Number appertains not to the taking
away, but to the whole Vision. We know, I say, the Daily taken away, begins at
the first of those 1335, and ends in the last of them, viz. in the Sanctuary
cleans'd perfectly, and not in the preparation only, at the 1335, ended.

And so having finished the first Position, concerning the Posi. 2.
just measure of this Line, I come to the second, viz. That the Vision intends
Antichrist in every Part, wherein Antiochus stands as a Type; And these two
last Positions confirm, and strengthen one another; For if the Vision and its
2300 days run to the end, they must run to Antichrist, seeing Antichrist is at
the End of all Things. And if Antichrist be at the end of the Vision, Antiochus
can stand in the Vision, but as a Type to Antichrist, who is at the End.

Further, if the Roman Antichristian Power be not the Antitype to Antiochus,
The Head of the Image is not only lopped off in this Vision, but the Roman
Entayl, which appears the principal, and at the End, in the former Vision, is
dock'd in this, even where the End is so often memoir'd, whereas indeed the
Imperial, Roman Power, given in the former Visions Revel. 13. 4.
as preceding the Antichristian, is in this Vision set in the Antichristian
Power, as the Dragon in the Beast, and so in the last Vision, c. 11. that we
may know, He is the principal in it, and so may understand him in the Apocalypse
accordingly.

Further yet, Antiochus is every way too small to be any more, than the Type in
so great a Vision; What remarkable End did Antiochus give, that-the End is so
often recorded in his Vision, he gave none to the Monarchies of the former
Visions, or to the Indignation against the Jews, nor to the delay of Christ's
Kingdom, there is no Monumental End, but of himself, and that not deserving
this Prophecy. His Days were not many, why then should the Prophecy be shut up?
Nor were they so far off, as the Things seen in the following Vision, c. 9. nor
till we encounter the same again, c. 11. c. 12. as running to the same End, do
we meet with any such mentions of the End.

Why was Daniel so faint, sick, astonished, in a dead sleep at Antiochus's
Tyranny? Who had known the daily so long taken away in the Captivity, who
foresaw the Romans desolating Wing of Abomination, and the Jews after Troubles,
recounted Dan. 9.
after Antiochus Epiphanes, in the Maccabean Story, betwixt these Visions and
the Messiah. But the so strange, the so unaccountable, foul, longsome, Apostasy
of Antichrist, lying so long, on the so excellent Religion of the Gospel,
ecclipsing the Kingdom of Christ, Full of all the most pernicious Effects is
deservedly Astonishing to Angels and Men, and captivating the Many, the Wise
and the Great against all Scripture, Reason, and even common Sense, and were it
not for that Captivation, as unworthy Confutation, as the Alchoran.

The very History of Antiochus, as it were proper to Antichrist, is only to be
found in the Antichristian Canon of Scripture, and only Typically given in
Daniels Prophecy, showing it of no great Account with God.

The Time, The understanding dark Sentences, the growing great not by his own
Power, are no way applicable to any historical Memoirs of Antiochus. A Prince
furious, active, enterprising, at the Head of his warlike Affairs.

Lastly, the very Ev. Mor. of this Line, a manner of Speech not used in
Scripture from the very first of Genesis, till now, lead us to the new
Creation, to the Restitution of all things, to the bright Mornings Stars
display of his Beams, and in the mean time, even as Days compounded of Ev. and
Mor. so these Ev. Mor. with equal Fitness and Naturalness, sustain the
prophetical Type of Time, Days for Years.

Of all which, let this be the applicatory Remark, to lead Remark.
us with Confidence, Assurance, due Preparation, Faith, Prayer, and earnest
Desire, to him who says, Behold, I make all things new, and immediately after,
as it were in remembrance Dan. 8. 26. compared with Rev. 21. 5.
of his Declarative Amen, upon the Vision of the Ev. and Mor. It is true;
imposes his perfectory Finitive Amen. When he says no longer, Seal, but write
in Capital Letters, These Sayings are faithful and true.

Whosoever then by following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, overcomes, shall
inherit all Things. Christ will be his Father; He shall be the Son of God and
of Christ. But the Fearful, who are frighted into Antichristian Cympliances;
the Abominable, etc. sunk down into the Defilements of all sorts proper to the
foul State, Falsehood, and the great Lie of the Apostasy, shall have their part
in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and the False
Prophet are.

Let us then live by Faith, and not draw back; for He that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry. Even so, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Amen.

SECT. III.
In which a Line of Seventy Five Years, precedent to the seventy Weeks, is
asserted, and endeavored to be proved. Dan. 9.
HAving in the precedent Sections established the Grand Line of 2300 Ev. Mor.
and their Determination to the Kingdom of Christ; I now proceed to the
Distribution of this Line, and first to the Line that must, however subordinate
and collateral, yet set out at the very same instant with the 2300 Ev. Mor. and
that is, of the Word going forth.

Now of this, It is most evident by Scripture, that it must begin at the
Persian Monarchy, or the Monarchy of Cyrus; for at Darius, the Mede, to whom
Scripture allows only one Dan. 9.
Year, it did not begin; for in that Year Daniel prayed, and had this Vision in
Return of Prayer, as appears enough throughout this Chap. At Cyrus's first year
it did begin; for so Ezra assures us, chap. 1. For must not that most
necessarily be the going forth of the Word, when Cyrus sent forth his
Proclamation, and put it in Writing, v. 1, 2. etc?

But although the Word began here to go forth, yet it is most manifest, It did
not here attain its effect; for then would it not have rested, and ceased to go
forth any farther? But we find it stopped after the Altar set up, and the
Foundations laid all the Reign of Ahasuerus, and in the Days of Artaxerxes;
which two, as we shall after reason, must be Cambyses Ezra c. 4. 24.
the Son of Cyrus, and the Counterfeit Smerdis: so that it as plainly went
forth again in the Reign of Darius, known in common History by the Name of
Darius Hystaspis. After that, although it came much nearer its Perfection, yet
it was contradicted in the Days of Xerxes Ahasuerus, by so severe a Decree for
the Destruction of the Jews, throughout all the Provinces; so that Artaxerxes,
called by Historians Longimanus, Esth. 3. 8.
illustrated his seventh Year with the Word completely going forth; The Echo
of which for the building of the Wall, was in his twentieth, and in his thirty
second the Quavers of that same Word, in leave to Nehemiah to restore Jerusalem
into its perfect Order and Polity: which plainly argue the Word gone forth in
his seventh Year.

Now although the great Perplexities of the Persian Chronology are no way to my
main Intention to be concerned in, yet the making it Evident, that the Going
forth of the Word must take up such a Time, as 75 Years, is of very deep behoof
in that Intention, both as it gives great Assurance to the former principal
Line of 2300 Years; showing how seventy five of them were spent, and also as it
will inlighten some Concernments of the Kingdom of Christ, to which all
Accounts of Time tend. Upon this whole Consideration I shall endeavor the
proof of such a space implied in the word going forth.

And first I shall observe that which I do not look upon so considerable as to
call it an Argument. The very Phrase of going forth implies some protracted and
prolonged going Mich. 5 2.
forth by the Word. The same Word is used of him, whose goings forth are from
everlasting. But more enforcingly to press this, I thus argue.

It is impossible to spare any of those great Decrees we have Ezra 1. c. 1. c.
6. c. 7. from the words going forth.

Not the first, because it was the first, so much foretold of formerly by the
Prophet Esaias, of so famous Memory, and that first broke the Bonds of the Jewish
Captivity. Who can with possible Reason suppose, That had no Interest in the
words going forth, in which Prophecy gloried so long beforehand, that was even
pointed upon by Gabriel, and from which the other Decrees were derived, as is
expressly mentioned in Darius's Decree, Ezra c. 6. compared with Dan. 9. 21?

Nor can the second Decree of Darius be denied a place in it, which so united
it self with Cyrus's Decree, that if either was the word going forth, both must
be so; for tho they were distant in Time, they were one in Substance, and by it
the Temple was built.

And least of all can the Decree of Artaxerxes in his seventh Ezra 7.
year, be impeached as to this Right; for it was the perfective Decree, so
liberal and ample, with such Peculiarities in it all along, that there is not a
word in the whole but yields an Argument: It excells all that went before, and
leaves no Room for any to come after; It carries a great Sense of God, revives
all his Statutes and Judgments; It gives the last Hand of Beauty, as Ezra
expresses it, to beautify the House of Jehovah; Ezr. 7. 25.
and all this by the Decree of the King, his seven Counselors, and Great
Princes. Such a Decree, as there was none like it before it; nor after it any
such. The King only writ Letters after it, to the Keepers of the Forest, and
after that Neh. 2. 8.
gave only a Paroll Leave to Nehemiah, without writing any thing: so that this
must be the Conclusive, Terminative Decree, after which the seventy Weeks
proceeded immediately.

By the building and restoring Jerusalem, we are to understand the Temple in
the first and most eminent sense; so the Enemies of the Jews remonstrated to
the Princes of Persia, because the Temple was the Glory of the City, and
carried the Building of that with it: this therefore they accused, but the Ezra
4.
Building of their own Houses was quickly permitted. God upbraids the People
therefore by Haggai, Is it Time for you, Hag. 1. 4.
Oh ye, to build your own Houses, and to let this House lie waste?

Now the Temple was said to be finished by the Command of the God of Israel, of
Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, King Ez. 6. 14.
of Persia, and does as it were point to the Angels Embassy to Daniel upon his
Prayer, that the Commandment was come Dan. 9. 23.
forth, that is, from God, and was to run, as a Line of Time, through these
three Kings, who are every one named, and the Kings between them comprehended
in Time, but left out as to the Building of the Temple. The Decrees of these
three Kings are most distinctly, and by this peculiar History of Ezra, given,
as an Explication of Daniel's Prophecy, and God's peculiar Care over it; the
want of which Care over Antiochus's History, argues him only a Type of
Antichrist, to whose Bible his Story is rejected.

This then is the natural Order of the words going forth, by which the Temple
was built. The original, and supreme Commandment was God's: The subordinate,
and ministerial Commandment was of Cyrus, Darius, and after them of Artaxerxes,
King of Persia, Ezr. 6. 14. Which last is indeed proleptically named, or before
hand, but is so remarked, The King of Persia, that he could be no other than
that Artaxerxes, whose Decree immediately follows, chap. 7. the History of
whose long Reign, and as long-lived Friendship to the People of God, makes so
great a Figure in the sacred Persian Story. And although it must be
acknowledged we have no Evidence from those sacred Records, that this
Artaxerxes was the Son of Esther by the Great Xerxes, yet his long continuance
to restore Jerusalem by his Decree, his Letter, his Leave to Nehemiah, first
restoring it fully in its Temple, then Neh. 2. 8. c. 13. 6.
in its Wall, lastly in its Order, and all with such a strain of Piety, Love to
God and his Church, savours of such a Descent, and that God honored his
Servant Esther with such a princely Son: however, his Education in a Pagan
Court, the Interests of Government, the Permission of Providence to Things to
go on in their own Course, the very Current of Prophecy in this second, Persian
Monarchy, might surprise his Proselitism to the Religion of the true God, and
so he is no farther honored in Sacred Story, than with that general notice he
took of the Laws of God, and his fear of his displeasure: for why, says he,
should there be Wrath against the Realm of the King, and his Son; viz. from
that God whom he solemnly styles The God of Heaven?

SECT. IV.
Gives the proof, That the Time of the Words going forth was the first Seventy
Five Years of the 2300 Evenings and Mornings.
HAving now settled the natural Order of the Words going forth, and finding
that it must needs possess such a distance of Time, as from the first of Cyrus
to the seventh of that Artaxerxes, who succeeded a Darius, in his Decree for
the Building of the Temple after the Estoppage of the Building Ezr. 4. 5, 6, 7.
in the Reign of Ahasuerus, and in the days of a former Artaxerxes, and, as we
shall see, of another Ahasuerus, Esth. 1. I come now to offer proof, This Space
was a Space of seventy five Years.

The first Proof I derive from the chief Scope of the Vision the seventy weeks,
which was the Allowance of such a space of Time for Daniel's People, and Holy
City, to continue such a People of God, and such a Holy City, until Messiah
came, and fulfilled all the Types of the Law and Prophecies concerning Himself;
which could only be fulfilled during the State especially of the Tribe of
Judah, till Shiloh came, and of the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Worship of it
in its ancient State and before the rejection of it: So that, whereas often in
Ezekiel and the other Prophets, the Babylonish Captivity and the Ezekiel. 16. 53.
Desolation by the Romans, are tacked one to another; The Waters or Ocean is
divided for these 70 Weeks, and then They return and close again till the End
of the Indignation, when these Weeks expire, ebbing back till the Flood by
Titus Vespasian desolated All.

Before therefore these seventy Weeks could begin, Jerusalem must be restored,
so far, as in its Temple; Its Wall, and its whole Order and State, must be
returning within the seven first Weeks of the 70, according to the Prophecy:
Now what more probable Proportion, than just so many Years, as Prophecy has so
evidently destined for the Space between the Fall of the Great City, Mystical
Babylon, and the Restoration of all Things in the New Jerusalem, which by the
general view we may see, and shall farther see, is a Space of 75 Years added to
1260, and making 1335. This may be therefore an introductive Argument.

We see most demonstratively, The Time must be so long Cyrus's first Year, to
Artaxerxes's seventh: now seventy five Years, according to the best
Chronologers, is about such a space. That Grave and most Learned Emendator of
Time, Tho. Lydiatt, who was very industrious in this very Joint of Time, allows
seventy Years, and others come nearer. If then in that great Maze of Chronology
at this very Period, Scripture umpires so with the best Timists for Seventy
five, we have reason to accept it; and that it does so, under the next and last
of Daniel's Visions, we shall have farther Advantage to prove; in the mean
time, It is no insolent Presumption.

That great Line of 2300 Ev. Mor. as we have found it, Prophecy and History,
giving space for seventy five, and no more, may stand as a strong Argument,
That this was a space of so many, and no more: For when we find every way, this
bids fairest to be the Number, and that for the ascertaining the Beginning of
the seventy weeks, which can never else be determined, it is necessary some
space must be determined, and no Number so fit 2 Pet. 1. 19.
as this Number, to make that Word of Prophecy so sure as to be more sure than
Eyewitness it self. This principal Line so satisfied, compleats all proof.

It is not unworthy Observation, That when the whole Words going forth, before
the seventy weeks, for the restoring of that eminent State of Jerusalem, its
Temple and Worship, and the first seven of the seventy for building the Wall,
full of Clefts and Breaches, justly to be accounted restoring Jerusalem, the
first by solemn Decrees, the second by some last sounds of those words of
Decree; The Years of the Persian Monarchy for the Transaction of this whole
Matter are just seventy five, as may be accounted.

Cyrus before the stop on Dan. 10. 1. v. 13.
the Building, 3 years. The Time of the Estoppage, 21 years. Darius to the
Temples Ez. 6. 15.
first Finiture, 6 years. Ahasuerus Xerxes of giving Esth. 3. 7. Esth. 6. 15.
and reversing his Massacring Decree, 13 years. To Artaxerxes his Decree in
Ezr. 7. 8.
his seventh year, 7 years. To his Leave to Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 6.
25 years.

When therefore, They have done the symbolical Service of accounting the
seventy five years, not otherwise accounted; The Time from the Weeks Beginning
pointed out to seven Weeks, or 49 Years in the Vision, has a Room allowed for
it in the Story, viz. 25 years from the Decree in Artaxerxes his seventh
throughout his Reign, which by all Historians, is agreed to be near forty six;
and from thence Let into the Reign of Darius Nothus, which seems on purpose
named to continue the 49 years current, for which there had been space, more
than enough, if the Weeks had begun sooner, then Artaxerxes his seventh, and
not enough, if they then begun without being Let into the Reign of Darius
Nothus, nor Nehem. 12. 22.
enough if they did not then begin, but at his 20th only.

Now it is enough known, Scripture thus improves its mention, or not mention of
Things, its so much mention and no more, into symbolismes, and so may very well
be supposed to do on these Persian years. For it minds not Heathen Chronology,
but to some great purposes; I shall give one Instance among others, and it is
that most visible one of Melchisedec, who in Shem standing at the Head of the
second Roll of Patriarks, without Father, Mother, Beginning of Days, or End of
Life, is so represented, by virtue of this Symbolism. Hebr. 7. 3. Compare with
Genesis 11. 10.

Arg. 4. There is nothing more evident, then that the Restoring Jerusalem in
its Temple, and the BVILDING of the Wall are two most distinct Things, both in
Daniels Prophecy, and in the History of Ezra and Nehemiah; so that they cannot
be confounded either in the valuableness of their Character, or in their Time.

One, viz. of the Temple is most distinctly recorded by Ezra, Ez. 1. etc.
Neham. 2. etc. Ezr. 9. 9.
the other by Nehemiah, The one is called a Reviving to lift up the House of
our Lord, and to repair the Desolations thereof, and this he calls giving a
Wall in Judah and Jerusalem; The other is called by Nehemiah repairing the City
of his Fathers Sepultures, which was no Dissimulation of the Intention in more
acceptable Words as some have thought; for no such needed to him, who had given
so munificent a Decree for the Temple of the God of Heaven at Jerusalem. That
of the Word going forth for the Temple is before the Weeks. That of the Wall is
within the Weeks, and so of Nehemiahs leave to settle the Order.

And yet all these are so united in the common Interests of Jerusalem, and in
some Air of the Word going forth for them, so that there may be most fitly from
the real Line of the forty nine years for building the Wall, so far as it is
given in Number, a Communication of a symbolical Line, according to the Years
of the Persian Monarchy, so as that 75 may be collected from the whole Number,
even as the word going forth, that is proper especially to the Restoring the
Temple is communicated also to the Royal Letter, for Timber to build the Wall,
and the word of Princely leave for Nehemiahs going up to settle the Order; so
that from the words first going forth to the Time within the Reign of Darius
Nothus may be conceived a Line of the whole word going forth before the Weeks,
and to the end of the seven weeks, viz. of 75 and 49 years which is the Point
to be made good.

SECT. V.
Of the Seventy Weeks themselves in brief. On Dan. 9. 20.
THis Line of the seventy Weeks is not only so generally allowed and agreed by
all Christian Interpreters, but also insisted upon, as a most fundamental,
demonstrative, and undeniable Proof of Jesus Christ the true Messiah, come in
the Flesh, against the perverse Obstinacy of the Jews, that I shall not levy
any Argument for the proof of it; nor say more for the Definitiveness of it to
490 Years, than that the distribution of it into seven weeks, sixty two weeks,
one week, and that one week into a half week, and a half week cannot possibly
stand, but in a most certain Determination of Time to greatest exactness.

Nor is it possible to be disputed, when those Years end, or what Situation
they have in Time, since they run so undoubtedly in the first half of the last
Week to Messiah being cut off, and to the causing Sacrifice to cease by the
Sacrifice of himself, and in the last half Week to the confirming the Gospel
Covenant with many; at the end of which, the Jewish Nation was rejected, and
their former Desolations in Babylon reflow upon them, and cover them with the
Ten Tribes in a general Cessation of being God's People or a Holy City any
longer.

The seventy Weeks then are divided into the seven Weeks of building the Wall
after the Temple restored; And viz. from Building the Wall Times with
Straightness or in Trouble. v. 25.
sixty two Weeks of Troubles allowing foam lucid Intervals; of which
Antiochus's Tyranny must be allowed a principal Instance: on which, as a Type,
is founded the prophetical Symbol of Antichristianism. Then comes the half week
of Messiah, of finishing Transgression, making an end of Sin, making
Reconciliation for Iniquity, bringing in everlasting Righteousness: All which
Expressions, I look upon as an exuberant setting forth the Absoluteness,
Perfection, and highest Effect of that one Sacrifice which Christ offered once
for All, by which he has for ever perfected them who are sanctified; by which,
Jewish Sacrifice and Oblation was made to cease, even by the offering of
himself by the Eternal Spirit, as a Lamb without spot, effectively purging the
Conscience from Guilt of dead Works, to serve the Living God; which Sacrifice,
in the Revelation is translated into that Propriety and Peculiarity of
Expression, The Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. and
the corrupting and annulling that Supreme Point of Christian Religion, and the
Service founded on it, and regulated by it, according to its own Purity,
Simplicity, and Transcendency, free from idolatrous Defilements, is a Cardinal
Point of Antichristianism, and a most proper Sense of taking away the daily
Sacrifice; of which I am often to make mention, and desire that from hence it
may be carried all along with the Notion of the daily Sacrifice, (though
mentioned but this once.) even this Sacrifice of Daily or Eternal Virtue.

The sealing Prophecy, and Vision, is not only the Ratification and confirming
all Prophecy by finishing of it, as Christ Joh. 19. 30.
declared, It is finished, so far as was requisite to that coming of Christ
into his Mediatory and Redemptory Kingdom; but signifies also the sealing of
Prophecy at that present Time, so, as thta the second Coming of Christ into his
glorious Kingdom Rev. 6. 1. and c. Rev. 7. 1. etc. Rev. 10. 4. etc.
should not at that Time be, but run through that course of sealing first,
during the Time of the seven Seals, then during the Time of 144000 sealed, then
during the seven Thunders sealed, under which Sealing we yet must remain these
next following Ten Years: Then all Things shall be finished spoken of in that
yet sealed Prophecy for the Glorious Kingdom of Rev. 16. 17. chapter 21. 6.
Christ, till those two words of Finiture are pronounced, It is done, It is
done.

Yet notwithstanding This, The most Holy is Anointed in his Resurrection, made
Lord and Christ, the true Messiah, Acts 2. 36. Act. 13. 3^.
even by Him who said, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

The Covenant of Grace in his Blood, and the Sacrifice of himself, He Confirms
for one Week. viz. the First half week by himself, For so it begun to be spoken
by the Lord, and then it was confirmed by them that heard him. Heb. 2. 1. etc.

To which the Body of the Jewish Nation, being so heinously Enemies, first in
cutting off Messiah, then in resisting all the Ministry of his Apostles, and
persecuting them to the Death. The Flood of Desolations returned upon them, by
that very Roman, Power, People, and Wing of Idolatrous Abomination, and
Desolation, that they invocated for the Death of Messiah, and so they remain,
and shall remain desolated till the End of that Indignation, during the Times
of the Gentiles, till that City, spiritual Sodom and Egypt, in which our Lord
was Crucified, shall be burnt with Everlasting Burnings, and the Captivity
never be returned, till the Captivity of the Old Jerusalem, the bloody, and
filthy City be returned, which shall never be; for the New Jerusalem shall come
down from Heaven, and constitute a Holy City below. Ezekiel. 16. 54.

This Richest Line of Time, laden with the Redemption of Remark.
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, invites us to it self, with admiring, and
adoring Thoughts, and commands the World to Kiss the Son with a Kiss of Homage
and Obedience: Great Occasions derive agreeable Names, Daniel is therefore
suitable to the Vision called a Man of desires, or beloved, expressing the
infinite Love, from which Redemption, flows, and which it begets in us back to
God and Christ with vehement Passions of Desire. And he is not only called so
in this Vision, but ever after it, to show the Honor put upon him by it. Dan.
10. 11. 19. And as this Vision stands in this Prophetic Line of Time, it
ensures it to us; For as at the fullness of Time, treasured up in it, Christ
came against all contrary Appearances, against all the Indisposition of the
World to receive him, and the Indesert of so Divine a Condescension; He came
according to the sure word of this Prophecy, Determining him as to the very
self same day, in comparison of which the Transfiguration before the Apostles,
as Eyewitnesses was less sure, according to this he came, and did not tarry;
and though his Transfiguration remonstrated his Right, yet it was in private;
His Decease as a Cloud received it, and though vindicated by his Resurrection,
yet the sitting down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High was on the Throne
of his Father, He shall sit on his own Throne, The Father will show him whom
the Heavens yet contain and Hide, the Transfiguration was an earnest of it, and
does assure it; yet we have a more sure Word of Prophecy, unto which if we take
heed and pursue its Conduct, as a Light in the dark, and obscure, the
fuliginous and dusky State of the Apostasy, it will bring us to that bright
Morning Star, as the Wise Men were by a lesser Star led to this Morning Star,
even to him, who Matt. 2.
as the King of his whole Church is to be acknowledged with those Presents of
Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense. Whatever most speaks Royalty, Dignity on his
part, Love, and Obedience on ours; and he will return it a Thousand Fold by
showing himself, and exalting us to the Mountain of Spices. Cantic. 8. ult.


SECT. VI.
Brief Remarques on Daniels last and largest Vision are made, from part to
part. c. 10. c. 11. c. 12.
THis last, and longest of Daniels Visions, I shall most briefly pass over,
Because the chief Things in it, that concern the Kingdom of Christ, have either
been already given, and are here recollected with some Explanations, or the
Line of Time to Christ is just Traversed, especially to introduce the End; or
else when it comes beyond the Weeks, the Death, and Resurrection of Christ;
Things are gone over again in the Evidence, and clearness of a New Testament
Prophecy; yet sundry things of greatest Use, and Remarque, to the fuller
understanding of what went before, and is to follow, will arise to us.

This last and longest Vision measures more particularly and distinctly the
whole space of the 2300 days, abating the two or three first years of Cyrus,
and so brings down Time to the End, so as that from the sealing of Prophecy, at
the End of the first half and the last of the seventy Weeks, Lines of Time are
given, the First implicitly along the Time of the sealed Book to be opened in
its seven Seals in the Apocalypse; Or in express Numbers. viz. the 1335, which
just at the end of the seventh Seal, begin in the Trumpets, and continue until
all Finished, or, IT IS DONE, IT IS DONE, and so arise to One thousand three
hundred thirty five years.

This Vision, according to the Pleasure of the infinitely wise Spirit of
Prophecy, varies from the precedent in this, That it is rather Enigmatical in
veiled and covert Expressions, then Iconical, or by way of Imagery; The first
Vision was perfectly Dan. 2.
an Image, whose Anatomical Distributions by the Head, the Arms and Breast; the
Belly and Thighs, the Legs, Feet and Toes, distributed Time: The second
Iconiz'd by four Beasts, had a Line of Time, in the Cipher of Time, Times, half
a c. 7.
Time, applied to a little Horn of the fourth Beast: The third pourtrays Three
Beasts, and makes a little Horn of the Third of them, a Type to the little Horn
of the fourth Beast of the c. 8.
former Vision, and the Veil of a Type being thrown over, There is a Line of
2302 Days drawn out by the Action of the Type Antiochus Epiphanes.
bearing some Resemblance, both in Action and Duration (of Time naturally and
not prophetically understood) to that Anti*typical little Horn; It is drawn, I
say, to the Kingdom of Christ, rising on that little Horns Ruin at the End of
the 2300 Ev. Mor.

The State of the four Monarchies, in the fourth of which the Kingdom of Christ
breaks the whole Image, is much the same in the main, in this Vision, as in the
former, The Antichristian King is guilty of the same Blasphemy against the God
of Gods, or the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, as in the former Visions
against the Prince of Princes, and the most high, and lastly the same Date of
Time, Times, half a Time is applied to him: yet notwithstanding there are some
peculiar Things which this Vision carries all along upon the whole Line of the
2300 Ev. Morn. by way of farther Explication, as also of the excellent Vision
of the seventy weeks, and of the Word going forth before it: which Vision of
the seventy weeks most resembles this Vision in this, that it is rather a
prophetical History, than Imagery.

The prefatory Description of Christ has several Magnificencies of Presence,
like those Revel. 1. and also Dan. 7. wherein the Divine Nature of Christ
appears in his Mediatorship. But in this they differ from the Majesty of
Christ, as on his Throne, wherein Ezekiel's Visions exceed, and for the sake of
which He is so often honored with the Title, Son of Man, so peculiar to
Christ's Kingdom, and wherein Daniel came nearest in the Vision of the
Sanctuary cleans'd, and the Corrival to Christ's Princedome broken without
hand, at the end of the 2300 Ev Morn. All which shall be then fulfilled in the
State of the Jews restored, of the New Jerusalem and the Kingdom of Christ,
Rev. 20. 4. and therefore there he is peculiarly called Son of Man, as before
noted.

To show it measures the same Time, as that of the Ev. Mor. Daniel, is much in
the same manner affected: It begins in its very Date, near the Beginning of the
Persian Monarchy; it runs most evidently to the same End. And having now made
these general Remarks upon it, I come to observe what is most particular in it,
in the way of a short Elenchus, or Table of it.

1. It is peculiar to this Vision, that tho Christ calls to mind in it His
supreme Assistance to His, at the first Year of Darius, who to distinguish him,
is called Darius the Mede, and of the Seed of the Medes, at the very Entrance
of Cyrus's Persian Monarchy; yet his third Year is the critical and precise
Date of it; for then that wonderful and unexpected stop upon so Royal a Decree
by the divine Permission was made, Ezr. c. 3. compared with c. 4.
showing the leisurely Progresses of the divine Kingdom, and, as is most
probably conceived, Cyrus in his third Year making foreign Expeditions,
Cambyses or Artaxerxes his Son, was left Viceroy; upon whom the Enemies of the
Jews gained so far, that though they could not plainly command a Cessation, yet
by Sleights and Artifices, They eluded the Decree, and frustrated the Work all
the days of Cyrus.

But Cyrus being dead in the days of the proper Reign of Artaxerxes, or
Cambyses the Son of Cyrus, the Adversaries of the Jews writ to him, and
obtained his Edict against the Progress of the Building. And in the Reign of
Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his Reign, wrote they also an Accusation, and
still prevailed.

Now by Ahasuerus, I understand the Counterfeit Smerdis, Ezr. 4. v. 5, 6, 7.
whose Reign being very short, it is said, In the beginning of his Reign: And
by Artaxerxes I understand Cambyses, who reigned indeed before Ahasuerus: yet
the Sacred History intending a fuller Account of the whole matter, gives first
the general Account, that all the days of Cyrus the Work was frustrated; then
takes in Ahasuerus first, because his Reign was short, and then gives the true
Series of Things in Artaxerxes, who was first in the days of Cyrus, possessed
against the Jews, and suffered an artificial Impedition of them. When he came
to Reign, he laid a Prohibition on their Building. When Ahasuerus began to
Reign, after the Death of Artaxerxes, the Jews, upon that change, attempted to
revive their Work, but on Letters to Ahasuerus, by their Enemies, were still
prohibited. At the Reign of Darius being twice discouraged, they lay still,
till arous'd by Haggai and Zechariah the Prophets, and confirmed by Darius in a
new Enterprise, they begin the Work again.

That which justifies this, as the True Order, is, That the History expressly
tells us, upon the Letter to Artaxerxes, The work ceased, and that it ceased
till the second Year of Darius the Persian, all the Days of Artaxerxes
Cambyses, all the short Reign of Ahasuerus, or the Counterfeit Smerdis; Under
Artaxerxes then, it began to cease; and till then the Cessation continued. And
thus often, Sacred Story postpones that, on which it intends to place the full
and largest Accounts, and therein directs the true Order yet; As here,
Artaxerxes is postpond to Ahasuerus, although before him.

And of this Delay of the Building, the Space otherwise unknown, is made known
in this Vision by the one and twenty days Resistance Christ found from the
Angel-Prince of Persia, against whom Michael the Angel-Prince of the Jews stood
with Christ.

Now these twenty one days, viz. days for years; for what could twenty one days
Resistance signify to such a stop of the Building, if naturally taken? Daniel
observed a symbolical Fast; three weeks of days, a day for a year, as Ezekiel
observed on each side; so that it is true, The weeks of days do distinguish
those weeks of days from the seventy weeks of years, and yet they are a Type of
twenty one days for years also: so that here we have an Explanation of so much
Time as the stop of the Building amounted to, as so many years of the Persian
Time, as was before explained of the Word going forth, and it justifies that
Account so far toward 75, where it is possibly most needed.

2. Here we have also the Intimation of the whole History of Esther, as
pertaining to the Decree of the Jews Destruction and Deliverance, comprised in
the short Note of Christ's speedy dispatch of this Vision to Daniel, and
returning to sight for the Jews with the same Angel prince of Persia, who, Zec.
3. 1.
as Satan, stood at their right hand to resist them, and this Reason to
believe, That Ahasuerus was Xerxes, who was the fourth King, richer than all
the former; viz. In compliance with that Character, The History of Esther thus
describes him, This is that Ahasuerus that Reigned from India to Ethiopia:
Esth. 1. 1.
and according to best History, He was the fourth to the three from Cyrus; for
Darius being of the Seed of the Medes, and the Mede is not accounted among the
Persian Kings, the Three after Cyrus then regnant, are Cambyses, Smerdis,
Darius Hystaspis, and Xerxes the fourth; who as stirring up all against the
Realm of Grecia, near the very Time of the Jews Danger, (as Christ signifies by
the King of Grecia coming when he returned to fight with the Prince of Persia
concerning Haman's Decree,) laid the Foundation of that War, Alexander the
Great, a Prince doing after his own Will, pursued so as to put an end to the
Persian Monarchy, and the Grecian succeeded.

And this I have treated the more largely, because it confirms and farther
clears what has been said of the Words going forth.

3. This Vision being drawn out of the Scripture of Truth, that is, out of the
former Visions of Daniel, which can be only Cap. 10. 21.
supposed Scripture of Truth in relation to these things. The Vision, I say,
passes on to the Successors of Alexander, and especially stays in the King of
the South, and the North, the Egyptian, and Graeco-Syrian Kingdoms, the
DHIL-KARNAIN Cap. 11. 5. etc.
or two Horns, as the Mahometans call it, or as this Prophecy also, the two
Thighs of the Grecian Empire, in whose Motions the 62 weeks ran, and the
Troubles of the Jews were, as Historians observe, most concerned; but
especially as Types of those after-Kings of the South and North, to which the
Prophecy tends.

For in that Acarith of the Grecian Monarchy, as the former Vision chapter 8. v.
23. expresses it, that long after part, the King of fierce Countenance, and
understanding dark Sentences, arose, viz. in the Time of the Southern Saracens,
Heirs of the Egyptian Potentacy, and the Northern Turks, Inheritors after, of
the Grecian Empire, to which the Prophecy especially directs it self; so
leading on also the space of the Weeks to the Roman Empire, till all things
went forward to the Antichristian State; wherein these three principal Things
are especially in our Eye, that are prepared to clear to us the Apocalyptical
Prophecy, into which this of Daniel Disembogues it self.

1. The Confederacies betwixt Antiochus, and the Apostatizing Jews are lively
set out, as very prophetically descriptive of the Gentiles, and the other
Beast, first preparing for and after conspiring with the Grand Beast of the
Revelation, and so by all manner of Arts corrupting the Minds of Men into the
Apostasy, that the daily Service of God may be taken away, and the Abomination,
that makes desolate, established in its place: and as They, who in the Days of
Antiochus fell under that Tyranny by Sufferings, and would not accept
Deliverance that they might obtain a better Resurrection; (for even Heb. 11. 35
then the End was known, and was for an appointed Time:) even so the Witnesses
and sealed Servants of God were in the same manner resolved not to defile
themselves, but were purified, and made white by Sufferings, for the Glory of
that End. And thus in this Vision, these shaded Lines of the Gentiles and the
other Beast, not given in the former Visions, are now given, and the End
vigorously represented, as encouraging the Saints of God in their Opposition to
those Corruptions.

2. The Agency of the Antichristian King is more fully set out in some
Particulars, that had been given some not at all, some not so clear as before,
as in these three things.

1. We have the Exaltation of himself above all Magistrates or deputed Gods,
every (...) or August Name, that calls Properly the Name of August Majesty, as
Acts 27. 1.
for civil Worship and Reverence, according to God's Ordination: so the Apostle
out of this very Prophecy describes him. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.

2. His mavelous Pretension to be the Vicar and Vicegerent of Christ on
Earth, in so absolute and immediate a manner, as to swallow up Christ's own
true Power. This is a speaking mavelous Things against Christ, the God of
Gods, or supreme Prince; an opening his Mouth in Blasphemy against the most
High, because such a Power is a Blasphemy against Christ's Divine Power: for it
is to sit in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself that he is God,

3. His Prohibition of Marriage is shaded under the Not regarding the Desire of
Women, taking it either as what Women of Virtue and Honor desire, Marriage
honorable in all, or Men's lawful Desire of Women in that Estate of Honor and
the Bed undefiled, in Detestation of Concubinacies and Stews: and this
Prohibition yet is on the pretended Accounts of Virginity, and immoderately
honored single Life; but indeed for base Advantages of Riches and Power; to
which those Pretenses are made serviceable, while in the mean time all
Impurities, even the Deeds of the Nicolaitans, are so allowed, as to be made a
Doctrine. Thus the Apostle also brands the Apostasy as forbidding to marry; 1 Timothy 4. 3. compared with Rev. 2. 14.

4. The Idolatry introduced by him, formerly unheard of and unknown in the
World: an Idolatry committed under the Pretense of honoring Saints and Holy
Angels, the Mother of Christ, and even Christ, the Spirit, God, the Trinity;
Names, the lowest of which are indeed of true and real Honor and Excellency,
according to the Scriptures; but as thus managed, A Blaspeming God, his
Tabernacle, viz. The whole Worship of the Gospel, called after the Language of
pure Israelitism, His Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, Saints and
Angels, who are especially thus blasphemed under the Name of Worship, by
putting upon them the Notion of Patrons, Patronesses, Defenders, Tutelary
Powers, Presidiary, Munitional, or Municipal Saints; which is such a new Host
of Heaven, such a new way of Idolatry, so proper to this State of Antichrist,
as in just Propriety to be said, A God, that his Fathers, not only of the Roman
Ancestors of the Beast, but even his first Father of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar,
had not known, a God strange to the whole Auncestry of Idolaters, that it is
most fitly and livelily expressed by the Prophecy: The Silver, Gold, precious
Things, with which their Shrines are honored, Their Presidency over such
Countries, the Land or whole Territory of the Beast being divided to them for
gain, each Saint in his proper District or Division, and so as to bring in Gain
most advantageously. And all these are thus honored upon the Account of a
Supreme over them in Name and Title, however often not only equaled, but even
submitted under them in Veneration and Resort, as we know the Name of CHRIST
bears up the whole weight, and yet is not only competitor'd by such or such a
Saint, in such a place, or as they speak by our Lady, but even by that very
sort of Idolatrous Worship of Christ eclipsed and drowned. And all this was
fulfilled, especially from that War concerning the Worship of Saints and
Images, 725 or 26, at the famous 666, as is after to be shown.

Now the Pourtray of these Things is admirable in this prophetical Table, and
the Travers from the God, who is superior, that is, Christ, to the whole
Gentry of Saints, in such a confused manner, as the Text gives it, The Maozzim,
and the strange God whom he shall acknowledge, and increase with Glory, and
shall cause them to rule over many, so passing out of one into another, that
the very Frame of the Context does above all Expression, by the Elegancy of the
Scheme, exquisitely present it, and it has been with wonderful Fidelity
expounded by that ever to be acknowledged Duumvirate of Prophetical
Interpreters, Dr. More and Mr. Mede.

5. It is very extraordinary in this Prophecy, that upon this very Idolatry,
and at the very Time when it was contested by the Iconoclastick Emperors, so
professed Enemies to Images, and Worship of Saints, and yet sanction'd by the
second Council of Nice, however palliated by that of Frankford, Cabbasut.
Notitia Eccles. p. 314.
which Palliation is yet abhorred, and the Truth of the History of that Council
decried at this Day; At that very Time the Mohammedan King of the South, by the
Saracens or Locusts, and after the King of the North, the Turkish Horsemen
according to the Military Language of Daniel's Time, with his Chariots and
Horsemen, like a Whirlwind, and with his Galleys or Ships passed and
overflowed. And this, in the same order, the Apocalypse after describes; and at
the same Degrees of Elevation: The King of the South first does but push; he
torments and hurts, but does not kill or swallow up in Conquest: The King of
the North comes after, and does overflow and pass over, and inherit a great
part of the Antichristian Territory, as the Beast would have it; that is the
Grecian Empire, and yet leaves to the Beast his proper Bestian Demesne still:
for the sake of which Mohammedan Kings of the South and the North, as well as to
draw a Line of prophetic History upon the sixty two Weeks, from the Wall built
to Messiah, There is so much said of the King of the North and the South, the
Seleucidean and Lagidean Potentacies in the Prophecy.

6. It is very observable, after a Description of the very great Conquests and
vast Tracts of the Turkish Empire, v. 42. etc. given, His End is foretold upon
the Mountains of Tzebi, or the pleasant Holy Land; and from thence the last end
of Things, and the glorious state of the Kingdom of Christ, in the Luster of
his Saints, and the Shame and Contempt of his Enemies, seems to be given; and
not from the breaking the Image in the Bestian State of it; which both here and
in the Revelation is the most definite Thing that can be, that the End should
be so placed on the Beast. These two Considerations yet will make a perfect
Reconciliation of that Objection.

1. That indeed, The End of Things is not given from the Turkish End, but from
the Day of great Trouble, such as never Dan. 12. 1.
was since there was a Nation. Now that Day of Trouble is the same with the
Battle of Armageddon under the seventh Rev. 16. 16. etc. v. 12.
Vial. The Turkish Power therefore coming to its End, and none helping it, is
under the sixth Vial, poured out upon the River Euphrates, that the way of the
Kings of the East, the Jews upon the Mountains of Tzebi, might be prepared,
where the Turk receives his final Overthrow, except the last Remainders of him
rallied from this Fatal Blow, on the Mountains of Tzebi may be congregated by
the Spirit, like a Frog, (that shall immediately after it go out of the mouth
of the Dragon) to the Battle of Armageddon, upon which immediately follows that
Resurrection described in the Glory of the Saints, the Ministers of Divine
Truth, who have turned many to Righteousness, in an Excellency, and the Enemies
of Christ rising to everlasting Shame and Contempt, according to Dan. 12. 1, 2.
etc. and Revel. 20. 4. etc. to v. 7. Where we may observe the use of the Word
Many, to show, there is another Determination of the Future State of Mankind at
the end of the 1000 Years; both of them written in the Book, and whose Names
are not found in the Book of Life: compare this with Apoc. 20. 15.

From hence therefore, compared with the Turkish Woe going off at the end of
the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 11. 14. It seems most probable, but I dare not in
Particulars be too definitive; There is a reducing of the Turkish Power at that
Trumpets end sending it to Euphrates from whence it came at the Beginning of
it; and a DE-PORTING it from Constantinople. At the sixth Vial there is a
drying it up in his proper Euphrates, in some Encounter on the Mountains of
Tzebi or Judea; and what Mohammedan Tail may remain, shall be wholly cut off at
Armageddon, when neither Head, nor Tail, Tyranny, nor False Prophetism, to hurt
with, shall be left in the World.

2. After the End had been thus given leading from the sixth Vial to the
seventh, Then the true orderly native course of that End is drawn within its
proper Channels and Successions of Prophetic Time; as is now in the next place
to be demonstrated upon this Danielian Prophecy.

SECT. VII.
Of the whole Line of Time from the Resurrection of Messiah, unto the Time of
Blessedness in the Lotts of the New Jerusalem, and its Royal Priesthood: On
Dan. 12. v. 4. etc. to the End.
AFter the full and ample Discovery, according to the Allowance of Prophecy, of
the State of the Honorable Resurrection of the Servants of Christ, and the
despicable Resuscitation of the Wicked, inclusive of all Misery, follows the
Delineation of Time.

Immediately upon this Declaration of this Resurrection, Christ commands Daniel
to shut the Book, and seal it to the time of the End; which End must be that
End, When many of them that sleep shall so awake. But in regard of the Laxitude
of the Expression, [The Time of the End] we must understand, The whole Time
from Christ's Resurrection to this Resurrection, is called The last Time, The
End, The End of the World, The last Days, frequently in Scripture; All
Progresses in which Time are still yet nearer the End, and so more the Time of
the End, and the last Days, than the former Parts are. This then being first
conceived; Under some sealing, more or less, The Book must continue till Christ
says, Seal not the Sayings of this Book, for the Time is at hand; relating just
to the Time of the Vials, when the Kingdom of Christ was not only entered, and
proclaimed, and all Things were in finishing in the seventh Trumpet; but the
Time of the Dead, that they should be judged, was nigh: when the Voices had now
prepared for the Vials, and the Thunders then were unsealed for the Vials
pouring out, Rev. 22. 10.

And this agrees with the sealing Vision and Prophecy at the very cutting off
of Messiah, although there was a Time of farther Trial of the Jews, the last
Half-week, yet it was then indeed sealed, the Jews having rejected and
crucified their King, who yet even by Pilate's Inscription, in Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, [This is the King of the Jews,] by his Resurrection, Ascension, and
sending down the Spirit, was Anointed. But till the End of the Indignation, The
Prophecy of his Kingdom was sealed from its Glorious Appearance, although this
Sealing had several new Sealings, after some partial and momentary Discoveries
of the Kingdom; which are most necessary to be here understood, and carried all
along.

It is most evident, It was here sealed, and answerably in the Revelation, c.
5. It was a Book sealed with seven Seals when Christ took it, at his very
Resurrection: and though the opening the first Seal was a Publication of his
Kingdom to the Jews and Gentiles, and he went out conquering and to conquer, c
6. 1, 2.
after the opening the first Seal; yet it could not then appear, for there were
six Seals still upon it; Now these Seals carry most evidently, as we shall see,
a Course of 400 years from the last half week, when the sealing was complete in
the final rejection of the Jews; For the first Seal opened, and the Gospel not
received by the Jews, the rest had greater Force of Sealing, which Sealing yet
was determinately made at the very Death of Christ, and the Indignation upon
that Parricide; And though these Seals carry a Course of Time, yet condecent to
the Type of the great secrecy of the seven Seals, There is no express Line of
Time drawn till the Kingdom of Our God is celebrated as come after the sixth of
the Seals opened, and the Rev. 12. 10. compared with c. 6. 12. c. 8. 3. 4.
seventh also opened as completing that whole Vision of the manly Birth,
Caught up to the Throne, and the Dragon cast down, Revel. 12. in Theodosius the
Great's last Victory over Heathenism, as we shall see in those Visions.

But then immediately at the sixth Seal, as it were by way of prevention of the
Kingdom of Christ, breaking out at the seventh; The 144000 were first sealed,
and this was such an c. 7.
obscuring Christ's Kingdom, under the Apostasy, That the Lines of Time were
according to the Decency of the Type concealed till the Thunders uttering their
Voices, and the Book opened. Apoc. c. 10. c. 11. without which Apocalyptick
Lines, these Numbers of Daniel could not be understood.

So till the End, viz. the seventh Trumpet, finishing all, and the Kingdom of
Christ proclaimed, there is a continuance of this sealing, in some Degrees,
even till the Thunders unsealed. Chap. 14.

But yet there are convenient Notations of Time along the Seals, For every
Event upon their opening leads us demonstratively enough from Time to Time, and
that general Character of this First space of Time of the Seals, after Christ's
Resurrection, is most significantly imprinted by that Motto, Many shall run to
and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12. 4.
which was so notably fulfilled in the Apocalyptical Ministry it self, and
after that, especially during the Three following Seals in those Gospel Voices,
of a yet continuing Apostolical Ministry, though inferior to the Apostles, and
daily growing flatter, but still saying Come and see, All laboring to have
then proclaimed Christ's Kingdom. For so Come and see imports all along c. 6.
till the Fifth Seal.

Christ having now commanded the sealing of the Book, with that Latitude, not,
to the End, but to the Time or whole Current of Time to the End, The Two Angels
on either Bank attending Christ, the Man in Linen upon the Waters of the great
River Hiddekel, as in the Preface. c. 10. v. 4. These two by divine Ordination
from that very word [The End] start this Question, Unto how long the End of
these Wonders? viz. That End, until, the Time of which Christ had just now
signified The Book was sealed; To this Christ is pleased, intending to reveal
this Course of Time to his Church by Daniel, to return an answer in the very
sight of Daniel by lifting up both his Hands to Heaven, and swearing by the
Eternal Being, living for ever, to whom all Time is but as the Drop of the
Bucket. That there should be Time, Times, half a Time, for the scattering of
the holy People, or the Revel. 12.
Woman's being in the Wilderness, which is the Apocalyptick Comment on it, and
when that was accomplished, According to the Correspondent Oath in the Revel.
c. 10. All these things should be finished in the Days of the seventh Trumpet.
Now it is most observable Christ gives an answer by this Oath, not of the Time
from the End of the Weeks, or at his Resurrection, but from the Time of the
Seals opened, confirming that sealing the Book to make a Line of Time in its
unsealing; For who can think Time, Times, etc. were together with the Seals,
seeing those three Times and Half are so plainly given after the Seals.

But because the Divine Spirit knew, that neither could the Cipher of Time,
Times, half a Time, be truly discypher'd but by it self, and that the Half Time
would open in some appearance of the Kingdom, and that this very Oath, that now
Let out this Time, would be reversed upon it, at that very prophetical
Juncture, Daniel is moved by the same Spirit, as not enough intelligenc'd by
this Oracle to desire a further Divine Responsal. I heard, says he, but I
understood not; and therefore I said, Lord, what the End of these things? Upon
which, Christ declares first a second sealing, and discharges Daniel from
farther Attendance in this matter after this last Oracle given him; v. 9. which
is again repeated v. 13. Go thy way Daniel, says Christ; [that is, the way of
all Flesh, or Dye at thy Time,] till Thou stand in thy Lot at the end of the
Days. Not the Book now, but the Words referring to the Thunders Vtterances, and
the Words within the open Book, are sealed, or stayed from an immediate coming
to pass till the very Time of the End, much farther promoted; viz. to the Vials.

And then Christ is pleased to give first this Emblem of the Time of the
Vnsealing, in these Words, Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried,
or refined, viz. by the Voices, and by the Efficacy of Divine Truth then
breaking out; but, as is discovered in the Vials, The wicked will do wickedly,
and will not understand by so great a Thunder of Truth; and therefore it is so
eminently noted of them in the Vials, They Repented not, but blasphemed: and in
proper Application to the same Time, it is said, He that is Unrighteous, and
Unjust, let him be so still, and He that is Righteous let him be farther
justified, that is, cleared from the Imputations laid upon him by the Apostasy,
and let him farther also vindicate and justify himself from it by a
Ministration of the Vials on the Beast, and doubling to the infamous Woman the
Cup she had given and thereby making Preparation to the Kingdom of Christ. Thus
is that great Time in its curious Emblematism in Prophecy. c. 22. 11. compared
with Rev. c. 15. c. 18. v. 6.

And because all this should by the Will of Christ be yet drawn out more
definitively, He is pleased to add, From the Time of the Daily, or Continual,
in the very same only word Tammith, (no where applied alone to Sacrifice;) from
that taken away by the Apostasy, I say are given exactly till the seven
Thunders unsealed thirty additional Days to the 1260 Days, viz. 1290 Days; and
to that very End so often mentioned of the Lots of Blessedness, by the Addition
of 45 more are given 1335; and all cast into Indictions; or eighty nine
Fifteens; a way of accounting Time so notoriously known to have come into use
after Constantine, as elsewhere shall be farther urged, and most evidently
characterizing this Time.

And it is much to be observed, This so clear Line is given here, as in the
Revelat. after a Supposition of the Book opened at the Half-time, and not
before, except in this Cipher of Daniel's Time, Times, Half-Time, not to be
understood but by the 1260 Days, and other Apocalyptical Lines.

Now from all this may be collected, by compare with the Apocalyptick Prophecy,
a Line of Time, as exact as from the very Ages of the Patriarks, allowing the
Hebrew Copies there, and the prophetical Days for Years here.

For first, the 2300 Ev. Mor. are so exact undoubted an entire Number, as to
leave no Dispute, if granted to be a Line of Time: The Weeks ending at the
Resurrection is so very full and complete a Vision, before this Vision not only
in the Order of Prophecy, but of the express Dates of Darius's First, and
Cyrus's Third. The sealing of Prophecy in that Vision just at the End of that
Vision of the Weeks, and the Book shut and sealed in this Vision, join those
two Visions close together.

The sealed Time and of the Book shut, by the Apocalyptick Prophecy, in so
orderly a Progress as by compare with History it is found, cannot but be
acknowledged to be 400 Years from the last half-week ending. Then the 1335 are
so close joined, that they cannot be forced asunder, and so riveted into the
End, both by being a farther Resolution to Daniel (in his Complaint of not
understanding) for his Knowledge of the End of Wonders, as also by the
Blessedness, and Daniel's standing in his Lot.

Besides, the Evidence from the Indictions so open and industrious, is not
small: But what could Daniel's Lot in the End of the Days be of or in, but of
and in the New Jerusalem, and its holy Priesthood? It is impossible then the
days should fly back from the End: these therefore being the whole of the 2300,
except 75, the 75 must be placed in the Forefront of all the Number, as we have
seen, what Reason from the Vision of the Words going forth has been found so
to place just so many: And if we allow that Number to be 75, there is as great
a certainty the sealed Time must be just four hundred; for one adjusts the
other necessarily; if 75 before the Weeks, there must be 400 between the Weeks
or 490 Years, and the 1335; if 400 there, then 75 here; for so the 2300
require. Now how each of these Spaces of Time, the 400 of the Seals, the Time,
Times, Half-time, or twelve hundred sixty days of the Trumpets, the Thirty of
the Voices, the forty five of the Vials; how these, I say, are all replenished
with their proper Furniture, we must be instructed by the Prophecy of the
Revelation.

What great Reason have we now to adore the Spirit of Remark.
Jesus Christ in this Prophecy of Daniel, and to search what or what manner of
Time it signifies in this sure Word of Prophecy, giving in prophetic Schemes
the very same Thing that the Transfiguration in so glorious a majestic
Appearance represented; viz. Christ the Sun of Righteousness with his Stars of
the first Magnitude, Prophets and Apostles, those wise turning many to
Righteousness, and then the lesser ministerial Stars, and the sporadick
Fellowship of Saints included, appear therein, as those who are so turned to
Righteousness. And this Prophecy having been so long in the World, and
traversing such spaces of Time, like a vast Tract of Earth, with Charts, Maps,
and Sculptures fitted to them, and that came with such Certainty and Assurance
into every hand, is inlighten'd and enlivened with new and fresh Delineatories
of the New Testament Prophecy, or the Revelation: Certainly, had not God in
Justice upon the Apostasy diverted the Thoughts and Labors of his Servants
from the Illustration and Demonstration of them, so that they have not
traveled herein, as in other parts of Christian Verity, nor by such a Concert
of Minds and Judgments herein; the Evidences both against Atheism, and the
Apostasy had much exceeded, what they arise to now; No Miracles except in
constant and present Motion before our Eyes, nor hardly then, being so
intellectually sensible Arguments of the Divine Being, of Christianity, and
against Antichristianism, as these Prophecies from Time to Time fulfilled. And
this very Prophecy of Daniel is a most certain Ground to expect such a Prophecy
as that of the Revelation; for one cannot be understood without the other: and
how admirably do they conspire? For just at that sealing at the end of the last
half Week, begins the unsealing also, or the Events coming to pass in their
just order, and the Apostolical Ministry, running to and fro to increase
Knowledge; and just Scals 400. Rev. c. 6. then 1260 in the six first Trumpets
c. 8. c. 9 Then 30 and 45 in the Voices c. 14. and Vials of the 7th Trumpet. c.
15. c. 16.
as they have hitherto proceeded exactly according to their Time and Place, so
far as within ten years end of the sixth Trumpet, so shall they proceed in the
seventh Trumpet in the Voices, and the Vials, till the last end of Wonders be
produced and perfected. Blessed, therefore, is He that waits, and comes
thereunto; he shall, tho out of this Body, certainly then stand in his Lot of
that New Jerusalem State and Priesthood, in a Body of the First Resurrection.

SECT. VIII.
Wherein is given a Prefatory Survey of the whole Apocalyptical Prophecy.
I Am now brought down, by the course of prophetic Time, to that very Point of
Time where the Series of Apocalyptical Visions begins; so that although the
Line of Time was by Daniel stretched over whole Apocalyptick Time, in the
Number given to him, and in a general way, some Umbrages of those Visions had
been presented by Ezekiel, and even by all the Prophets since the World began,
that so in the Mouth of not only two or three but many Witnesses, every word
might be established; yet it appertains to the Glory of the New Testament, the
Gospel, and Kingdom of the Mediator, there should be so great and stupendous a
Prophecy peculiar to it, as that of the Revelation, wherein God and Jesus
Christ are for ever to be adored, and had in reverence of all that approach the
Profession of Christianity.

I say, It must be of necessity agreeable to the Excellency of the New
Testament, there should be, besides many Incidental Prophecies, so divinely
majestic a Prophecy, as this of the Apocalypse, such a Temple of Prophecies,
whose Symbols should be so high and lofty, its Light more clear and full, its
Lines of Time, in what it pleased to give, more evident and certain; the
Doctrines intermingled more spiritual, the Promises more heavenly, and
explained; the Threats more dreadful and more open; that in every thing there
may be a Becomingness of All to the Old Testament, unveiled, fulfilled, and
excelled in the New.

And accordingly, we shall find all these, to the very height, taken care of
and adjusted; we shall see this all along the Iconisms and Figures of Things in
the Churches, in the several Visions, in the Doctrines, in the solemn mentions
of the Lamb, of his Blood so often memorializ'd, as an Antidote against the
Poison of Antichrist, as also the Ministeries of Angels and their most
peremptory Abhorrence of all Worship offered to them; Its only numbered Line of
Time, till the 1000 Years, is so often repeated and ascertained; that it does
in all things illustriously show it self to be that grand Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave him to show to his Servants to the transcendent Honor
of the Son, by whom he thus spoke last of all; Who is the Heir of all things,
especially of the World to Heb. 1. 1.
come, of which this Prophecy speaks.

So that to ravish this from the Search and Enquiry of his Church, or by
Imputations of immodest Presumption to bar from it the utmost Endeavors of his
Servants, to compare so great a Prophecy, and its Events, is to take from them
one of the principal Props of Christian Faith and Obedience, and to divest the
New Testament of so high a Glory as this sure Word of Prophecy, to which we
ought to take heed, as to a Light that shines in the obscure and even squalid
Air of the Apostasy, till the Bright Morning Star appear; and therefore
notwithstanding all Prejudices the Apostasy has raised against Researches into
it, Blessed is he that Reads, and they who hear the Words of this Prophecy.

That which this Prophecy reveals, is the glorious Restitution of all things in
the Kingdom of Christ, and his Reign with his Saints, the Destruction and
Consumption of all the wicked, so as to be no more as they have been in God's
Creation and Earth, Psalm. 104. 35.

The Sense, in which it reveals, is not only Prophetical, Doctrinal, and
Verbal, but Real and Eventual; and that immediately from the very Beginning of
it. All the Visions in their own Order, each in their Season, come quickly or
shortly to pass; that is, begin to come to pass, and so go on to their End,
according to the Types wherein they are imprinted.

This Revelation begins justly at the Resurrection of Christ, conjoined as in
one entire Act and Time with his Ascension, when all power in Heaven and Earth
was given to him, at the Lord's Day, dedicated by himself to the Glory of his
Rising, and the Publication of his Anointing, by the coming down of Act. 1. c.
2.
the Holy Spirit. Then could he say, Behold I was dead, am alive, and live for
evermore: Then he was brought near to the Ancient of Days, and received the
Assurance of his Kingdom; Then had he Right to be the Prince of the Kings of
the Earth, though he was pleased to stay, and to join Patience to and with his
Kingdom. And this was as in the middle Rev. 1. 9.
of the Five hundred sixty second Ev. Mor. from Cyrus, and in the middle of the
last of the seventieth of the seventy Weeks, and at the Time the Roman Empire
was come to Maturity in the AUTONOMY of Augustus and Tiberius, in the Time of
which the first Right of his Kingdom began: and e're that Empire in its last
State ends, it shall be set up in Glory.

For though the Apocalytical Prophecy was not actually given to the Apostle
John till some years after; yet, as Prophecy calls the future, so that which is
past, to the present Time; and represents in an entire Frame both together, a
Privilege, as to that which is past, necessarily allowed to History and to a
prophetic Frame much more, when it has occasion for it.

The Period of the Revelation (till the thousand years) is most evidently those
two Apocalyptical Pillars, bearing the two answering Inscriptions, IT IS DONE,
IT IS DONE, Apoc. 16. 17. c. 22. 6.
from whence the Kingdom begins.

So that this Book of the Revelation is justly to be styled the Book of the
Kingdom of Christ in its several Offers of Appearance, and rending the very
Clouds to show it self, in the Acts 1. 7. Dan. 12. 7.
Justice of its Claim; and yet retiring it self till the very moments appointed
by the Father, and sworn by himself. In which Regards, this Prophecy is called
(A Book) both in Daniel and here in the Apocalypse, on all occasions.

So that the thousand Years are properly within this Book, as the Book of the
Kingdom. There is also beyond the thousand Years a (...), a little Space, as it
were the Revel. 20.
Hour of the thousand-years-day of the Lord, or of the Son of Man, in which the
natural Apostasy of Humane Nature shows it self in the lukewarm Laodicean
Church, and in Gog and Magog, as at a blush; but the whole of any State, either
1 Cor. 15.
of Church, or Nation below, immediately is swallowed up in Flames, and Death
and Hell, with their whole Propriety, shut up within themselves, and the
Kingdom resigned to God ALL in ALL.

The Passage or Conveyance of this Apocalyptical Time, is through the seven
Churches, comprehending the whole Time within themselves, as also Symbols
proper to the Prophecy, as peculiar to the Christian Church; and then the whole
Time begins again, and runs in seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Voices, as
unsealed Thunders, seven Vials, as so many Conduits, Tubes, or Pipes of the
whole Prophecy, under the Conduct and Government of the Lamb with seven eyes,
and the guiding Operations of the seven Lamps, the seven Spirits of God, that
is, of the Divine Spirit in its sevenfold Operations. And in all I understand
the sabbatical Number derived from the first Sabbath, and terminating in the
last great Sabbatism of Christ's Kingdom, continued with the Sabbatism of
Eternity.

Thus the Prophecy is divided into two Systemes, or Complexes of Visions; The
Systeme of the seven Churches, that is proper and particular to the Church,
wherein the Churches, as Symbols sustain the whole Prophecy, which is worthy
the Spirituality and Clearness of a New Testament Prophecy, so to Order, and of
great Grace, Elegancy, and Condecency to God's great Regard to his Church: The
Second is that which embraces the whole State of the Church, but propp'd and
supported with such Imperial Events, as most nearly related to the Church,
adorned with such Symbols, such Notes of Time, such Events, as agree to those
Times, whereby History, both Common and Ecclesiastic, may be adjusted to, and
concerted with both, and the Truth of the Prophecy, and its true Interpretation
justisted before, and by all the World. And this is that Systeme, or Complex of
Prophecies, that first by the Seals runs through the Roman Empire; till the
sixth Seal, Pagan; and Christian in the sixth and seventh Seals; in those
things wherein the Kingdom and Church of Christ are most interessed, until the
Empire was blasted in the first Trumpet, and true public Worship also, by the
1260 Days of the Daily taken away entering; The Imperial City was thrown like a
Mountain into the Sea in the second and in the third Trumpet, when the Roman
Empire expiring in the West was surrogated, or new founded in the Beast
succeeding in his forty two Months: and so the Prophecy goes on in the other
Trumpets, till it comes to the Kingdom of Christ in the seventh Trumpet, in its
just Succession, to the last State of the Roman fourth Monarchy, according to
all Prophecy. And this till the thousand Years runs through the Voices of
Preparation into the Vials, and the Vials prepare to the thousand Years
glorious Reign of our Lord Jesus Christ.

So then this is the only true proper Division of this Prophecy into its two
Systemes of the Churches, and then rise the Seals, Trumpets, Voices, Vials, in
another Systeme, supporting all things relating to the Church by Imperial
Motions, Mutations, and Times. And in the latter Systeme, all these Tubes of
Time are each Set of them, and each of each Set so united one to another,
that they can neither be disjoined from their immediate sequence one upon
another, nor moved out of their order; so that the Trumpets follow the Seals;
the Voices the Trumpets; the Vials the Voices; and each Seal, Trumpet, Voice,
and Vial, follows immediately upon its foregoing Seal, Trumpet, Voice, and
Vial; and every seventh comprehends the following Sevens, the seventh Seal, the
seven Trumpets, the seventh Trumpet, the seven Voices, the seventh Voice, the
seven Vials; and each precedent Seventh has some grasp on all the following
Sevens. So the seventh Seal comprehends the Trumpets, the Voices, the Vials;
the seventh Trumpet the Voices and Vials; the seventh Voice the seven Vials; so
admirably is this Prophecy united and interwoven.

And to other Division than this of the second Systeme of Prophecies, I can by
no means subscribe; as of the Prophecy divided into the sealed and open
Book-prophecy; or the Prophecy of the Empire first, and then of the Church. For
that remarkable part of the sealed Book-prophecy, viz. the palmbearing Company,
by peculiar Right pertains to the open Book, or that must be so, if there were
such an open Book-prophecy; and much of the open Book-prophecy, allowing such a
one, must needs pertain to the sealed: but indeed there is no such Thing as an
open Book-prophecy in that place, where it is said to be opened; for the Book
was no sooner opened but it was eaten, and so absconded as soon as opened, till
opened by the Voices, c. 14. as shall be farther cleared: nor is there any
Prophecy of the second Systeme, but pertains properly to the Church, as within
first the Pagan, then the Christian, then the Bestian State of the one Roman
Empire, and lastly of the Universal Empire and Kingdom of Christ.

Now in this Order apocalyptical, Both Visions and Times in the first Systeme,
run through the six Churches, In the second through those four Sets of
prophetical Tubes, Seals c. 6. c. 7. c. 8. to v. of Trumpets, c. 8. v. 8. to
the end of c. 11. of Voices, c. 14. of the Vials, c. 15. c. 16. and so laying
these Chapters together, the order is most exact, except that in c. 7. There is
an Anticipation of the Triumph of the New Jerusalem from v. 9. to the end. In
c. 11. there is a Collection of the whole State of the Apostasy, during the
six Trumpets, into one Body together, as it consists of the Sufferings of the
Witnesses, and the Tyranny of the Bestian Apostasy, excepting some close
Intimations in the very Composure of the Symbolisms of those Trumpets [for the
great Reasons hereafter to be given,] that refer to the same Apostasy, and
begin at the first Trumpet.

And then in the twelfth and thirteenth Chapters the extravasated Account of
the Dragon, watching the Woman, and her manly Birth, the Dragon cast down, and
the manly Birth caught up, is to be reduced within its most proper Channel;
viz. the fifth and sixth Seals. And this prepares for the right understanding
of the Beast mentioned chapter 11. as derived from the Dragon, c. 13. arriving his
Number 666, which belongs to the six first Trumpets; and it is there fitly set
to prepare for the Vision of the Lambs Number. c. 14.

And as to the Chapters 17. 18. and 19. they are most evidently the Progress of
the History of the seventh Vial, and the full Relation of its Effects. To
prepare for which, an extraordinary Description of the Woman, or Great City
reigning over the Kings of the Earth, opposite to the Woman in the Wilderness,
is prefixed; and on her occasion a more perfect Portraicture of the Beast, and
of his ten Horns or Kings is given, in preparation to the Judgment executed on
all, c. 19. And then the Milennial State being drawn up, c. 20. it is carried
on to the end of Apocalyptical Time, as it reaches into the complemental State
of Eternity, which the Prophecy briefly absolves, and then returns upon its
more proper Subject, or the 1000 Years of the New Jerusalem. c. 21. c. 22.

Now this Order began with the Preface to the Churches Vision of the first
Systeme, c. 1. and then the Preface of the second Systeme, and lastly a
Postscript, returning especially c. 4. c. 5. c. 22. 16.
to the Vials as given by the first Angel of the Vials. This Order is, I say,
the whole entire natural Order of this Apocalyptical Prophecy; which is
contrived indeed suitable to the Secrecy and Mysticness of the Prophecy, so as
often symbolically to declare, when these Prophecies would have the clearest
and most efficacious Discoveries in the Church, viz. after the Half Time, when
the Thunders had uttered their Voices, and the Book open, was shown in the hand
of Christ. That was the just Season for the Discovery of the Apostasy in the
suffering of the Witnesses, and the Tenthly Fall of the City; and then after
the seventh Trumpet the whole Series of Visions concerning the Beast, derived
from the Dragon, will be best understood, and most fully believed; even as at
the Reformation there was most necessarily an Acknowledgment of a long
Apostasy, of the cruel Tyranny of the Beast over true Christians, and a visible
Pledge; The Ten Kings on the Head of the Beast, that carries the Woman, would
at length fall from it: but the End of that Half-Time will make a farther, both
Notoriety and Assurance of these things.

This allowed, the Prophecy takes no Freedom, but what is due to the gravest
History, to place, by way sometimes of Anticipation, sometimes of Recollection,
the Parts of the History so, as may best serve the Purposes of the History: And
yet we cannot deferr so little to the Majesty of Divine Prophecy, as is even
challengeable by Humane History; For that is justly entitled to a Right of
secret and insensible Transitions, Connexions, Transpositions from one part to
another, which require leisurely Meditation and thoughtful Pauses, to find
them; and yet are so placed, as when found they give Light one to another with
Usury.

Although therefore I rise up with greatest Reverence and Honor to those great
Names, who have thought otherwise, I can allow no Beginning of Apocalyptical
Time anew, either at the open Book chapter 11. or at chapter 12. but only a
Recollection of those things after their redundant Swellings out of their
Channels, one to the first Trumpet, the latter to the fifth Seal; Only The two
Systemes have each one and the same Epoch, given particularly to each: The
Churches are close and evenly cemented, and souldered one to another, and so
the Seals, Trumpets, etc. and their Connection even hermetically sealed; And
Both from the same Epoch, the Resurrection of Christ, derive themselves.

And as to the Interpretation of the whole, even as it is a Rule of great use
in the Interpreting General Scripture, that the literal Sense is to be
preferred where no Analogy of Faith or Scripture-Reason is destroyed by it; so
here the mystical sense is rather to be chosen, where no such Injury is
committed upon the Analogy of Scripture Truth: and yet as in the one case a
subordinate mystical sense may be allowed; so in this, a subordinate literal
sense may be allowed.

To give only two or three Instances. Hearing and Reading this Prophecy has
first the mystical sense of a close Conformity to the Rules of Faith, Worship,
and Practice, according to it; which makes All Blessed who so read and so hear,
though they do not interpret, nor concern themselves in the Interpretation of
this Prophecy; and yet there is in the literal sense an Accumulative Honor and
Happiness on those who join both these Senses in themselves together. As on the
other side, They who add and take away by Antichristianism from the Words of
it, by breaking its Holy Measures in Faith, Worship, and Practice, shall lose
their part in its Promises, and have their part in its Plagues; although they
neither added nor took away in the litteral sense, and yet They shall receive
accumulative Plagues who have done the first, and then by false and distorted
Interpretations added the latter also.

Thus Opening the Book of this Prophecy and its Seals, are principally the
several Effects of the Kingdom of Christ, and that principal one at the
Reformation, and not the Exposition of the Book, or a new course of Prophecy:
and yet it is subordinately true, There was then a greater Clearness and
Illustration of the whole Doctrine of the Christian Religion, and a new order,
as it were, of Holy Prophecy and Instruction; And this Prophecy did then Recall
its own Discovery of Things at that Time, after the Apostasy so long darkning
it and the Gospel, and enlarge its former brief Notes.

And so Coming quickly to pass has the literal sense, That then immediately
began Apocalyptical Events each in their own order, to come speedily and
immediately to pass, although so many hundred years run out 'ere all come to
pass; As an Army may be said to come presently when the Avaunt Corriers first
appear, although the Rere may be long in coming, because of the numerous Body
coming on orderly and in just Files. Thus every Apocalyptical Event was on the
Wing, and darted it self into Existence, without the least of slumbring or
lingering, when its Time was, to come.

But the mystical sense is, that whereas that sublime Event of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ rose up, as a Mountain dividing and parting the former
World and Time, from the latter Time, or the last Days, and All beyond the
Resurrection was as a Book closed and sealed up, so as that it could not, till
the Resurrection, make an offer of Appearance; Then it did, and therefore then
properly sealed down with seven Seals: and yet by their opening it was in a
daily motion to its Appearance. But those two Worlds were of such different
Lines of Communications, that nothing passed in prophetical Account into
Existence or Being, out of one into the other; even as the World, on the one
and the other side of the Equinoctial Line, are remarkably taken notice of, as
two distinct Parts of the World, how near soever they join who are on each side
next to it. Thus nothing on the other side the Line before the Resurrection was
so much as coming to pass that was to be after the Resurrection, or to have any
motion accounted to it. But after that Resurrection every thing pertaining to
the latter days is described as coming quickly to pass, each in its own Order,
and Time, and knowing its Place, and marching in its own Distances; none as
that Army, Joel 2. 7, 8. thrusting another, or breaking rank; but all duly
placed in their Climes, as on this side the Line.

And now having given this general view of the Apocalyptical Prophecy, and its
Order of Times, I will discourse briefly first on the Systeme of the
Church-Prophecy, or of the seven Churches, and observe their Concert with those
Lines of Time, that rule the Evenings and Mornings, or Nights and Days of
Apocalyptical Time.

SECT. IX.
Wherein a Proof is given, The seven Churches carry with them a Line of Time
contemporizing with whole Apocalyptick Time. Apoc. c. 2. c. 3.
THat these seven Churches are intended to bear by their Symbolismes a Line of
Time, equal to the whole Apocalyptick Time, I shall at present use no other
Argument, but these general ones, reserving the more particular Treaty upon
these Churches, to another part of this Discourse.

These Churches are, as the whole Prophecy, of a Mystical Christ therefore
prefixes, I will show you the Mystery of the seven Candlesticks, the seven
Candlesticks are the seven Churches; where the meaning is not, that the
expounding the Stars into Angels of the Churches, and the Candlesticks into
Churches, is all the Mystery opened; For even Angels of the Churches must be
acknowledged to be still Mystery, or a mystical Expression; except we would
understand them of natural Angels, as few or none do: But the meaning is, The
seven Churches contain a very great Mystery throughout the Vision of the
Churches; Even as upon the forehead of the Woman. Rev. 17. 5. was a Title
written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, etc. that is, Understand that whole
Inscription in a mystical Sense, or to carry the Mystery of the Apostate Church
in all Successions; so Understand the seven Churches, carrying the Mystery of
the Christian Church throughout. And it is observable, the word Mystery is
expressly applied to the True and False Church, As it is said here; The Mystery
of the seven Churches and their Stars or Angels; So there, I will tell thee the
Mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast, the Fallen Star, with the Key of the
bottomless Pit, that carries her, And proportionably this whole Prophecy of the
Kingdom draws down into it self the Great Mystery of that Kingdom spoken of by
all the Prophets since the World began, viz. THE TRUE CHURCH IN GLORY.

The particularizing upon the Churches, the so Apocalyptick Seven, assures us,
It will bear its proportion to all the other Sevens. And seeing, there are no
sevens to introduce them, nor to receive them, and carry them on; They must
themselves by their own Time, Sevens and Symbols embrace the whole
Apocalyptical Time, and its Sevens.

For the Book of it is the Book of the Kingdom, the Kingdom is the Mystery of
God, The Churches are the true Kingdoms, when they come to their Glory; and so
a Mystery. The Apostate Church is a Mock Kingdom, the Kingdom of Antichrist
foisted into the place of Christ's Kingdom, and so a Mystery, but a Mystery of
Iniquity. The Kingdom of Christ and his universal Monarchy is an Empire in a
Church, of which He is the Head; The last State of the Roman Monarchy is an
Imperialism by virtue of an Ecclesiastical Image made to it, which is a false
Christship that is an Empire in an Apostate Church, of which Antichrist is the
Head. How fitly therefore are these Things displayed in the Symbolisms of
Churches?

It is certain, There has been a Christian Church in all Resurrection of
Christ, to this Day, and shall be to the New Jerusalem, and to the End of the
World. This is grounded upon those two Places, Matt. 16. 18. Upon this Rock
will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell, either of Hell, as it signifies
the Grave, Mortality, and Death, or the Powers of Darkness shall not prevail
against it: and Matt. 28. ult. Lo I am with you always unto the end of the
World. Nor is this controverted among any Christians. From hence it follows, we
cannot be Time-bound, or straightened in space of Time, to place these Successions
in, For there must necessarily be a Succession of this Christian Church in
several Ages, and States, and so must continue till the End, which must as
necessarily run a long Apocalyptical Time, and so give a bottom to found such
Symbols upon, if it pleased, (as we suppose it did) the Prophetic Spirit to
give them.

As there must necessarily have been a Variety of States of one Church, so the
first of them must needs have been settled and founded in Doctrine, Worship,
Rules of Life, Order, and Discipline, by immediate Inspiration, divine
Authority, and Institution through the Ministry of the Apostles. This is most
evident from that Book of Scripture, written to that purpose, The Acts of the
Apostles; as also from all the Apostolical Epistles. From hence it follows, the
Apostolical Church, in its Apostolical State, was first in order: whether
therefore we will allow it to be symbollically represented or not in that first
Church of Ephesus, it is certain, that Labor and Patience twice repeated, that
trying them, which said, they were Apostles, and were not, and finding them
Liars, importing the exact consigning all Apostolical Truths and Rules into an
authentic Canon of Scripture, does most admirably represent that truly
Primitive, Apostolical State.

Besides the daily or every days Miscarriages from this excellent Heresies,
Errors, and bad Practices, to which degenerate and deeply corrupted Humane
Nature is so subject, and of which Apostolical Writings take so continual
notice; there was foretold an eminent visible, and notorious Apostasy, fixed,
and settled upon its own Base, out of which Antichrist was to come, and so very
fit to be taken notice of in this Book of the Kingdom.

Now this Apostasy was declared expressly by the Apostle Paul to be at work in a
mystery of Iniquity; and the Spirit says expressly, that in the latter Times,
which latter Times, as we have before affirmed, were then begun, though every
day more, and more, latter; Some, that is, not a few, but a certain sort of
men, that should make a Body or Species of Men, should depart from the Faith.
If then it had begun so 1 Timothy 4. 1. Written to Timothy, as then at Ephesus.
early, in some Lineaments of it, although not in that of Nicolaitanism, and
that it daily proceeded, and grew much higher after the Apostles Departure or
Death, ravening Wolves and Men teaching perverse things arising from Christians
themselves, Act. 20. 28. etc.
remonstrated also to this very Church of Ephesus; Their leaving their first
Love, the removing this Candlestick out of the Superiority and Excellency of
Primo-geniture, and conferring it on Smyrna, in the Crown of Life, and
Philadelphia in the Scepter of the New Jerusalem, are most lively Symbols to
such a purpose, though yet the Overcomers of this protoplast Church are assured
to eat of the Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God.

This Apostasy being to become so grand an Apostasy, it Church and its Bishop
deriving it self from the Apostles, should very elderly vere toward a
Synagogue of Satan, and there should be such an Assumption by it, and Deference
of Advantages to it, by many in the whole Christian Church, tending toward and
preparing for such an Apostasy, that it gained Pretensions (undesign'd yet to
it particularly) to entitle it self to such a blooming Antichristian Power as
was foretold to come out of the Apostasy; for if it could not derive high from
Antiquity, it could not rise to that Grandeur of Apostasy under the Profession
of Christianity: And yet in the mean time the Universal public Christian
Church may not only remain pure, but be first in deep Sufferings for Christ,
and so fill up the Number of Martyrs dying under the Pagan Draconick Empire,
but also receive the Crown of Life, and of the Glory of the New Jerusalem in a
Figure, by the Empire becoming Christian, as it did in Constantine.

Now what Type of such a State of the Church could be more express in all this,
than the Church of Smyrna? For whether it was so designed by the Spirit, or
not, it is certain, in Reason, such an Apostasy, Apostate Church, and falling
Star must have a Foundation in Antiquity, even while the Church was pure, and
in Sufferings; and that very Church and its Bishop bore a part in it, and yet
was every day more and more under the Aspect of that Caution given to it Romans
11. 17, 18, etc. and cspecially when it was crowned in Constantine.

The Apostasy must come to be such a high, enthroned Apostasy, true Church
under its self, that the very Apostatized Synagogue usurped the Title of the
true Church; and yet because God owns the true Church only, he speaks only to
that, as having under it, in his Account, the false Church, and as bearing in
the Type of the false Church, polluted with Idolatry, spiritual Fornication,
horrible Corruption of Manners, while indeed the true Church is oppressed, and
its Members martyred and slain as Antipapal Witnesses, by the false Church; and
the Antipas.
true Church carries the Name of the enthroned false Church, the high and lofty
Pergamus; and therefore the Things that would be great if the Church were
directly guilty of them, are called small things, and the threatening diverts
from that true Church, and falls on the false Church only, I will come to thee
and slay THEM with the Sword of my Mouth, and as a Church partly abhorring the
Pollutions of the false Church, partly excommunicated, and anathematized, has
the Promise of hidden Manna, in the former case, and of the white Stone of
Absolution, as to the latter.

Now I appeal to all Protestants, Whether this was not truly the State of
Things in the depth of the Apostasy? And I appeal to all judicious Considerers
of the Epistle to the Church of Pergamus, Whether such a State could be given
in more expressive and significant Shades.

It is then most evident, There must be a Time wherein the Mystery of Iniquity
began to work, seeing it did begin gradually; and that Beginning must be within
the Apostolical Times, for the Apostle declares it so to begin: besides, from
this Neighborhood it derives a Pretense of Authority, though indeed there can be
from thence no Authority gained to Antichristianism, seeing the Scripture, and
not Neighborhood to the Apostles Time, is our Rule, and seeing any Authority
no higher derived, is stained and blemished by that Apostolical Declaration,
yet a Face, a Countenance of Authority, will be thence derived, to deceive and
delude with.

It is also most evident, The Progress of it must afterward grow so high to be
a Synagogue of Satan, and after to be a Throne of Satan; so that from hence
may arise the Symbols of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus.

After the Time that Antichristianism did thus prevail, seeing true Church
after this Oppression, and being muffled up under the Name of a false Church,
called Catholic and Universal, and HOLY MOTHER CHURCH, at the same Time; yet
in regard of the remaining Power of Antichristianism united with the Powers of
the Kings of the Earth, the state of the true Church must needs be still
covered, under the Appearance of such a false Universal Church, over and above
it, and so must in that regard bear in Type the Name of that apostate Daughter,
Thyatyra, while in the mean time, its Charity, Jezebel Daughter of Ethbaal. etc.
Faith, Patience, Service, Works, against that false Church, grow continually
greater and greater to the very last: and its disownings of the Depths of
Satan, and not accepting them for Deeps of Religion, are very evident and
eminent to its Praise: The suffering Jezebel therefore, or the false Church
regnant over it because it cannot help it, are small things against it, because
but Types; for yet it is accounted so perfect, as to be commanded only to hold
its own, and no other Burden of Command imposed on it, but to hold fast what it
had already; whereas to suffer Jezebel, had it not been overpowered, had been a
very heinous thing.

Now so much therefore of this True Church as did so eluctate and force its way
out of the False, was, while it was forcing its way under one Notion, or
Denomination, and when it had forced its way under another, and while it in any
parts and portions of it continues in the midst, and within the Bowels of
Kingdoms and States still keeping up, and submitting themselves to the Power of
Antichrist. It may still retain its name Thyatyra, and although the Time, or
interval, it properly measures, when the whole True Church was comprised in it,
may be past, yet it may continue in Being, in no higher State, then of
Thyatyra, till the appearance of the Morning Star, and the fall of the Tenth of
the Great City.

Now it is most evident, there have been such earnest Motions of the True
Church from under the Tyranny of Antichristianism, There still continue such in
Antichristian States and Kingdoms, according to their Power, I demand
therefore, what more agreeable and expressive Lineaments hereof could be given,
then in the Church of Thyatyra first espying, and as under Affliction, looking
for the first dawns of Light, and after advanced to Rule the Nations, etc. in
the New Jerusalem.

After the Emersion, and actual manumission of several parts of the True Church
from Antichristianism, and a settlement Sardius Stone may be a fit emblem; But
this outward Elevation not so becoming, nor agreeable to the Patience of
Christ's Kingdom, such a Church may be too much taken up about Rites and
Jurisdictions, and such extern Decencies, and not press forward upon Things,
that remain in an order, and sequence to the Kingdom of Christ, and so fall
under severe Censures.

This Church represents Churches which are yet accepted by Christ, as True
Churches, they have on their own proper Title, Names, though but few, that have
not defiled their Garments. And these few, though best, are not yet made the
Church, but the whole though in a sleepy and defiled State are the Church, that
has the few Names, that had not defiled their Garments; contrariwise in
Pergamus and Thyatyra, the false Church, that calls it self the universal, is
not the Church, but the Few, suppressed, overcome Witnesses are yet the two
Candlesticks standing before the God of the whole Earth, which is a most
remarkable Difference, showing Sardis a True Church.

Now since the Reformation, it is known by general Observation, There are such
Churches, that are in a State and Splendour Sardian, but let the Application of
the Characters remain, till he comes, that says, He will Come at an Hour, this
Splendid, secure, Symbolical Church thinks not of, except the few undefiled
Names, and they of it that overcome, who have Promises of greater Glory with
Christ, then this outward; but this Church in its own Name has the Honor to
make a Line of Time from the Reformation to this Day, and shall till that
sudden coming of Christ upon it, when such a State will be at an End.

There have been Societies of Christians, that since the Reformation brotherly
Love, whose Door has been attempted to be shut upon them, as not allowed
Churches of Christ, or not in such a way of Worship, who have had little
outward strength, who have yet kept the word of Christ, and not denied his
Name, in a strict adherence to his word only, who have Enemies even of the
Reformed, who are relapsed down to the same Pitch the Apostasy was at, when
styled the Synagogue of Satan, in the Church of Smyrna, not receiving indeed
the Beasts Number of 666. but too far linked with the Corruptions of Antiquity,
after the Empire becoming Christian soon Antichristianis'd; who though for the
present at least seem irreconcilable with the Apostasy advanced to its Number;
yet have great Indignation against Philadelphia and its Members: These shall at
the Kingdom of Christ appearing, come and worship at this Churches Feet, and be
forced to acknowledge, Christ loved it, whose Crown of Honor it is, that it
has kept the Word of Christ's patience, embraced the Purity of Christianity in
a low and mean State; and therefore the Glory, the Kingdom the New Jerusalem
shall crown it, when the Hour of Temptation comes upon all the rest of the
Earth, and detects the Vanity of their Religion, even of their false or defiled
Christianity, and the Church State of those who have not overcome the
Impurities of them who called themselves Churches, Christians, Reformed, and
were not so, but did lie.

This Church is not yet come to its proper space upon the Line of Time, nor can
do, till the Witnesses rise out of their Sackcloth, and the Kingdom of Christ
be proclaimed at the seventh Trumpet: And how excellent a Type of all this, is
the Church Philadelphia?

There shall be a most perfect, happy, and glorious State Church before the
Resignation of the Kingdom to God and the Father, during the thousand years;
the very first Recidivations from which, shall be spewed out of Christ's Mouth,
and the whole of Church-States drawn up into Eternity: of which Loadicea is a
clear Emblem, viz. of the Recidivation and spewing out in that last State.

Now from All this, it is most evident, The Church of Ephesus may have place
from the first preaching the Gospel till the cruel Persecution of Dioclesian;
into which last and most cruel One, All the Christian Blood shed from the
Resurrection sunk down, as the Blood from Abel to Zacharias upon the Generation
of the Jews in the Time of our Savior, and was required of it: therefore, here
Smyrna began to complete the Churches Sufferings in being faithful unto Death,
and received the Crown of Life, in the Symbol of Constantine's Christian
Empire, and so down to Theodosius the Great; all which Time the Church
continued pure, although it began to be checked by a Synagogue of Satan. Thus
these two Churches contemporiz'd with the Seals: Pergamus and Thyatyra ran
along with the six first Trumpets under the Apostasy and Bestian Tyranny, till
in the latter part of the sixth Trumpet, Thyatyra eluctated into the
Reformation; then several of the reformed Churches settled into the Sardian
state, and draw the Line of Time, with the last 180 of the 1260 Years, in
Conjunction with Thyatyra, still existent, though not entitled any longer to bear
this Line, and with Philadelphia not yet come to bear the Line of Time, which
last shall bear the last 75 Years from the Witnesses Rising, and the Kingdom of
Christ proclaimed, till the New Jerusalem and its thousand Years settle upon
it, and that new Cube of Time begin: at the End of which, the Laodicean Church
no sooner begins, but ends, and an Amen is set to all Time by Eternity
receiving it. All which makes apparent, There is no Inconsistency, but a high
Condecency in these seven representative Churches, bearing a Line of Time
contemporary with all Apocalyptical Time; which ought to be shown.

Hereby we see, The Excellency of the Christian Church, Remark.
and of our Union with it, and Freedom from Schism, depends not upon the
Greatness, the Antiquity, the Primitiveness of Churches, but upon the Divine
Apostolickness of the Doctrine, Worship, Rules of Holy Life, truly Christian
Discipline, wherein we unite with them: The overcoming that evil of leaving the
first Love, that Christ had against the very first Church of Ephesus, not made
diminutive, as in Pergamus and (...), small or few things.
Thyatyra, was more as to the Excellency of true Christianity, than being of
that Church: The not mingling with the Synagogue of Satan, in the Church of
Smyrna, gave the Inculpableness and Honor to it and its Members: The not being
of the Apostate Church, when it called its self Catholic in Pergamus and
Thyatyra, but keeping to the Truth of the Gospel, constituted the true Church;
when the Proselites and Disciples of that Apostasy were the Proselites and
Disciples of Balaam, and the Children of Jezebel. The few undefiled Names and
Overcomers in Sardis, though a Reformed Church, were of greater Estimation with
Christ than the whole Church besides; some of whose rigid Zealots of its
Splendor and Power, Uniformity of Rites, it is to be feared, made the
Synagogue of Satan; and Philadelphia, though of little outward Power or
Splendor, yet holding fast the Word of Christ, and not denying his Name, and
keeping the Word of Christ's Patience, is preferred much before it, and
honored with the New Jerusalem: from which Blessed State Laodicea abating, and
growing cool, All Church-states in this World are so distasted by Christ, that
He spews them out of his Mouth, and receives only the Overcomers to his Throne,
and his whole Church into Eternity.

SECT. X.
Of the Third Line of Time in the Grand Line of 2300 Even. Morn. or of the
Seven Seals from the Resurrection: showing it extends to a space of 400 Years.
Apoc. Cap. 4. cap. 5. cap. 6. cap. 7. cap. 8.
I Have now finished the first Real and General Line of Time that runs from
Stem to Stern, from the Beginning to the End of Apocalyptical Time. I come now
to the second giving of the same Lines, which is not uniform and entire, as the
former of the Churches; but made up, not only of various Parts as that was of
seven Churches, but of various Representations of each part, as Seals,
Trumpets, Voices, and Vials, and each of these comprehends its following Order,
viz. the Seals, the Trumpets, the Voices, the Vials, under the Seventh of each
former, as has been already cleared, by which they are all kept in a close
successional Connection one with another, and the seventh Seal has its Hold
upon the whole, even to the last Day of Judgment, when the whole Book of the
Kingdom is resigned back into the Hand of God, out of whose Hand it was
received by Christ, sealed. 1 Cor. 15. 24. etc.

I am therefore now, and in the first place, to speak of the first part of this
second giving of the Line of Time, and that as in the Seals, before it came to
the Trumpets.

1. And because there is one general Preface to this whole Repetition of the
Line of Time, I shall first consider, how adequate it is to the whole Line, and
to the great Administrations of it, in a brief or summary Survey of it; For to
assure us, The Preface was to the whole Apocalyptical Book or Time, adorned
with new Figures and Sculptures; John heard the first Voice that spoke to him,
and it was as it were of a Trumpet, saying to him, I will show thee Things that
must be hereafter, Rev. 4. v. 1, 2. and immediately he was the second time in
the Spirit, where the Distinction of things hereafter from the things that are,
as Rev. 1. 19. was made only, as the Types of the Churches had a real Existence
at that Time, as Types in the then begun Christian Church; but the following
were derived from things to come. And after this there was no more any such
Voice of a Trumpet speaking to John: no more being in the Spirit, except a
being carried in the Spirit into the Wilderness, to see the Apostate Church,
and then to a Mountain to behold the Holy City. The Voice speaking again, c.
10. v. 8. evidently relates to the first Voice in that chap. saying, seal and
write not, v. 4. and then take the Book and eat, etc. and c. 1. 10. c. 4. 1, 2.
not to these Trumpet-Voices.

2. At this second Apocalyptical Volume, we have the great Theater of the
Throne, and the whole Grandeur of it, and adorned every way suitable to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and as it were in the first Apostolical Church settled
first in God; as the Doctrine of the One God, made known in the Father, the
Son, and the Spirit, is the Foundation of Christianity. For the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit, bear Record of it in Heaven; and these three are one in
that Record, as they are in themselves ONE.

3. About this Throne, at each Angle, or at each of the four Points of it, are
four Living Creatures, so I choose to translate (...); not Beasts properly and
distinguishingly in this Prophecy called (...); and these four Living Creatures
represent the Apostolical Church of the New Testament, as in four Ternaries, or
Threes of the twelve Apostles, in perpetual Action, and therein as it were
encircling the twenty four Elders of the pure Israelitish Church. The Elders
are upon Seats round about the Throne, and with Crowns on their Heads, as being
of old a Kingdom of Priests, and they are in this Prophecy introduced in
Service to the Kingdom of Christ, that shall be at the New Jerusalem together
with, and as by the Apostolic Church, who shall be Kings and Priests together
with them represented by these four and twenty Elders, Heads of the priestly
Courses, who are first placed, as leading the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and his
Kingdom by Prophecy, but yet in the very first Action the Order is reversed,
and the living Creatures are first in giving Glory. First, there is the
particular Song to the Divine Nature on the Throne, as the absolute Creator and
Lord of all; ending in this, For thy Pleasure all things are and were created,
and so are absolutely under his Dominion and Dispose, before whom they cast
their Crowns.

4. The grand Symbol of the whole Apocalyptical Time, and its Events, and of
the supreme Conduct and Government, till they issue into the Kingdom of Christ,
is the sealed Book in the Hand of Him that sat on the Throne, seal*d with the
seven Seals, which Seals have under them the whole Course of preparatory Events
to this Kingdom, and the Kingdom it self, till it be resigned back to God. Thus
Daniel saw Prophecy and Vision sealed up, Dan. 9. and the Book sealed, Chap. 12.

5. There is Proclamation made by the loud Voice of a strong Angel, for the
finding out a worthy Person to open the Book, and loose its Seals: And none in
Heaven or Earth was found worthy to open the Seals, or so much as look thereon.

All which, is certainly as Divine a Symbol to set out the supreme and sole
Excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, as far above all Principalities and
Powers, and every Name in Heaven or Earth, as could be found out, and
surpassing all Understanding or Invention finite, and is in surprise of any
Admissions of Angels or Saints into any parts of his Mediatory Office, the very
least, so much as an Ability to look thereon; as also to foreclose that grand
Antichristian Assumption of the man of Sin, for his very Supremacy is hereby
plainly declared to be Antichristianism, who undertakes not only to look upon
this Book, but to open the Seals; and herein he shows himself in the Temple of
God, as God.

6. The much weeping of John, that none was found worthy to open the Book, does
most exactly and critically point to the time of the Death of Christ, or his
lying in the Grave, when there seemed a Despair upon all the Creation in that
dark Interval, and a suspension of the Consolation of Israel, and when all the
Apostles had given up, as it were, the hopes of it, of which the Apostle John
was here a Symbol, and represented all the Apostles.

7. The same Article of Time is farther assured and confirmed by the one of the
Elders, as a Representative of the whole Israelitish Church, who lead to
Christ. Thus Christ opened the Scriptures of the Old Testament, especially of
Daniel, That Christ was thus to suffer, and to enter into his Glory, viz. of
sitting first at the Right Hand of God, till his Foes should be made his
Footstool. He sat down on his Fathers Throne, in his Father's Kingdom: He
shall have a Throne and Kingdom properly his own.

8. Christ hereupon exactly as in the Time, according to the History of the
Gospel, appears as on the sudden, and unexpectedly in the midst of the Throne
of the Elders, and the living Creatures, a Lamb, as it had been newly slain,
and now risen and ascended; and so the Epoch of the Apocalyptical Time is most
strictly defined and fully assured. And at this Point of Time he receives the
Book; which is the very same with sitting on God's Right Hand, till his Foes
shall be made his Footstool: for when the Book is unsealed, and the thousand
Years begin, Then there is a putting down all Rule and Authority. At the End of
the thousand Year, and the Day of final Judgment over, the Book is quite
unsealed in Death, the last Enemy overcome; and then the Book, the Symbol of
the Kingdom, is resigned with the Kingdom it self, into the Hand of the Father.

9. Hereupon the State of the Christian Church in its Apostolical Purity, with
the Order of the Living Creatures first, and then drawing that of the Elders
along with it, in a Song of Redemption, in Praise of the Lamb, with a Prophecy
of his Kingdom, in which his Servants and Saints shall reign above the Earth,
or over it, as (...) signifies in several Places of the New Testament, joined
with a Genitive Case, particularly Matt. 25. 21. 23. I will make thee Ruler
over many things, (...).

10. To sum up all; The State of the Church in the thousand Years Kingdom of
Christ is given in a second Song of Praise, wherein all things bow in the Name
of Christ, as Lord, and that not ceremonially, but in real Subjection, Phil. 2.
10. Things in Heaven and in Earth, and under the Earth, and that to the Glory
of the Father, For the four Living Creatures having said Amen to this high
Celebration of Christ, the four and twenty Elders, as having by the Apostolical
Church received an explicate Knowledge of Christ; to show, The New Testament
did not at all derogate from the Old; The four and twenty Elders, after they
had fallen down with the four Living Creatures, and joined in a Song of Praise
to the Lamb, now as making up the Concent, worship him that lives for ever and
ever; and conclude that which the four Living Creatures, or the Apostolical
Ministry began, and herein show the Resignation of the Kingdom of God at last,
that he may be All in All, Rev. 4. 10. compared with Rev. 5. 8. 14. For as all
began in God that made all things, so here it ends in him.

The sealed Book being now in the Hands of Christ, and all due Acknowledgments
made to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, immediately follows the
opening of the Seals, and therein the Course of Time flows out, and so flows
on; of which we are now to take a particular and strict Account: only I would
desire every Person that sets his Mind and Thoughts to view this so august
Inthronization of God and of the Lamb, That he would ponder within himself,
Whether the desolating either the Jews or the Heathen Empire, can be Events
great enough for so stupendous a Pre-Representation; or any thing less than
the Glorious Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ could answer to it.

And now, that we may establish the Line of Time according to these Seals, and
the Time of their opening, there are three Things to be considered;

1. What it is that is the principal Jewel and Treasure that lies under these
Seals; and so to be set free by the unloosing them.

2. What is the principal and supreme Visum or Thing to be seen in every Seal,
and the opening of it, and how it serves the disclosing that Jewel.

3. What is the true method of fixing the certain Time that the whole Course of
the Seals took up, and how it is to be measured and fixed.

If we can now determine and settle aright upon the Resolution of each of these
Particulars, we shall be able to understand this first Set of Apocalyptical
Visions, and to have ample satisfaction concerning them, and have great Light
into the following Visions also.

1. As to the First then, That great Treasure and Jewel of Truth that is
enclosed within these Seals, and so also, as we shall see, that the Trumpets
ultimately sounded unto, is the Glorious Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Every Event, and the Stage of Time it was to pass over, is as a Seal or Stop
upon this Kingdom, till it opens into Glory; and the opening of every Seal was
an Advance toward it: and although when the seven Seals were opened, there
appeared a greater and more prodigious Cause of Delay, viz. the Antichristian
Kingdom; yet every Trumpet was as an Alarm of War to the subduing that
Mock-Kingdom that rose in Despite and Opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. And
because all things were so set, and placed in their Season and Order, that no
one thing could come to pass before that which was set before it had had its
free Egress and Event, therefore every of these Events, and the opening of the
Seals to let them out, though they did not in the Issue open to the true
Appearance of that Kingdom, yet because they did as it were, what they could,
and there was a Remove of so many Prohibents, or Obstacles to that Kingdom; and
Time so advanced from Point to Point, that by the opening every Seal the
Kingdom of Christ might be nearer to its Appearance; therefore they are justly
understood, and expounded to be Seals, unloos'd, and opening to the Kingdom of
Christ.

Now besides those (...), or IT IS DONE, IT IS DONE, at the End of the
Apocalyptical Time and all its Events, whither they one and all run together;
besides this, there is this absolute Assurance, That the Kingdom of Christ was
under the Seals; The Kingdom made so magnificent a show of it self at the sixth
Seal, that had not the Servants of God been sealed in their Foreheads, that
they should not then appear with him in Glory, the Kingdom had even then
appeared; for in Constantine's Christian Empire, to the End of the Reign, or at
the Victory of Theodosius the Great over Heathenism, of which he endeavored
the utter Extirpation, that Kingdom so far came out of its Retirement, that
there was a solemn and loud Doxology in Heaven, that the Kingdom of God, and
the Power of Christ were come; and yet at the very same time, the Woman, is
recorded as fled into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 10.

2. The first Particular then being resolved with so much Evidence and
Assurance, we may with the greatest Clearness resolve concerning the second or
the principal Visum of every Seal opened: for it must be some State of the
Kingdom of Christ defined by the joining together the Voices that summoned to
the Sight and Observation so far, as these Voices continued; and then, when
they ceased, the State of the Kingdom of Christ must be considered by the Visa
themselves, as under the Cessation of those Voices, and by any sort of Voices
we can find equivalent to them. And in this Method, and no other, that I can
understand, we may justly and truly comprehend the Intention and Signification
of the Seals.

For if all the Seals carry on the Kingdom of Christ by so many Degrees and
Steps of Advance, as I have in some measure, I hope, made evident they do; By
undeniable Proof then it must needs be, That every Seal has some State of that
Kingdom protuberant or swelling out in its Appearance upon that opening, and
that the Voice that says, Come and see, calls to observe it, and the silence of
any such Voice moves Enquiry, Why there is no such Voice? and every Visum, or
Thing to be seen in both sorts of Seals, the Voic'd, or the seemingly silent
Seals, are to be judged of, as they have Relation to the Kingdom of Christ,
especially because we shall find the three last Seals without Voices, have
something to supply the want of the Voices of those four Living Creatures.

3. As to the Time, and its Space, that is measured out by these Seals; seeing
no Line of Time is expressly given with them, it is impossible to be found out,
but either, first, by some of the Visa, or things seen at the opening of these
Seals, that are so certain, as to be necessarily agreed in, and thereby
measuring from them, on each side of them, to take the whole Course; or
secondly, by the having good Assurance, what are the Visa of the first, and
last of these Seals, that thereby we may know, when they begin, and when they
end, by the most undoubted Accounts of History; or thirdly, by observing if
there be any Light concerning the just middle Point of their Time; or lastly,
by some other Line of Time, that may (how much larger soever so as to
comprehend it, yet) set Limits to it in its Beginning, Middle, and End, by some
certain Line of Time that must end just before it, and some other Line of Time
that must follow it; and that all taken together can answer that whole Line:
And all these ways I shall use, to come to the exact Measure of the Space of
the seven Seals, and what Measures of Time are and ought to be allowed to them.

Let us then examine the Importance of every Seal, first by what it discovers
of the Kingdom of Christ, upon the joining of the Visum or thing to be seen,
and the Voice together, or remarking upon the No Voice, and the equivalent
Supply with the Visum or thing to be seen, and then collect the Time of these
seven Seals.

The Visum, or thing to be seen of the first Seal, is, as is riding out of
Christ on his white Horse, with his Bow, and the Right of a Crown, conquering
and to conquer. This then was the Aim of Christ to obtain his Crown, in the
first place by the pure and holy Arms, and Power of his Gospel, in the
Universal, Perfect Ministry of the Apostles; and till the Effect of that was
tried, he makes show of no other, whatever farther Aim Christ might have, if
his Gospel was not submitted to.

Thus is Christ riding out prophesied of, of Old; Ride prosperously because of
Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness, Ps. 45. 3. And upon this Horse he rides out
with final Victory, Rev. 19. whose Name is the Word of God. This then, was then
the State of Christ's Kingdom, the making an Universal Offer of it self to Jews
and Gentiles, by that high Ministry of Persons immediately guided and
infallibly inspired, and accomplished with the Gift of Tongues, and Power of
Miracles, to make the Publication of that Decree, Thou art my Son; This Day
have I begotten thee: Ask of me, and as I have set Thee upon my Holy Hill of
Zion by thy Resurrection, so I will give Thee the Heathen for thy Inheritance,
and the uttermost Ends of the Earth for thy Possession: And if they will not
submit, Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like
a Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2. 6.

The Apostolical Voice, deep and loud as Thunder, royal as of a Lion, the first
Living Creature, Come and see, is a farther Assurance, That this was then the
State of Christ's Kingdom in this free and universal Offer of it self: It
bespoke the World therefore in the Language of the rest of that Psalm, Be Wise
now, O ye Kings; Be Instructed, ye Judges of the Earth, Serve the Lord with
Fear, Rejoice with Trembling; Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and for breaking
his Bands, and casting his Cords from you, He break you at last as a Potters
Vessel, with a Rod of Iron, or as the Stone cut out of the Mountain without
Hands shivers the Image, of which the next Seal gives a Type.

Now this Appearance of Christ's Kingdom, and the most Holy declared Anointed
in it, was absolutely necessary to make known the thing sealed, and to be
unsealed; and that the End might be known by the Beginning, and the whole
Compass of the Time of the Seals by Both. For nothing could make all these more
known, nor the stay, the sealing had on this Kingdom from appearing more
manifest, than this its offer to appear at the end of the last half week in the
Apostolical Preaching, and yet Prophecy and Vision concerning it sealed up so,
that it could not bring forth this Kingdom, till its just Time constituted by
the Father, and the Oath of Christ himself; and that in regard of the Obstinacy
of the Body of the Jewish Nation, and of the World of the Gentiles.

Immediately upon the refusal of this King upon the Holy Hill of Zion, He began
to use his Rod of Iron, and sent out the Red Horse of War, the Visum or Thing
to be seen under the second Seal, joined with the Voice of the Gospel, Come and
See; but abated and weakened, not a Voice of Thunder; Whereas had the Kingdom
been accepted, the Thunder should not only have continued, but multiplied into
Thunders and Voices, and grown louder and louder to introduce the Kingdom; But
the Antichristian Kingdom, upon the True Kingdom, rejected, worked on, and
enervated the Voice though it was still Apostolical, Come, and See; As the
Voice of an Ox, as if it self were Falling a Sacrifice at the Altar, deploring
the slaughter then coming upon the World; So this second living Creature.

The State of the Kingdom therefore was as retreated in the Gracious and
Merciful Offer; The Voice was not so Grand, and Sounding, but instead of it, He
that sat on the Red Horse of War, had a Great Sword given him, and It was Given
to Him, that He should take Peace from the Earth, and that Men should kill one
another: This certainly was especially verified in those Desolations of the
Jews under Vespasian, and Titus, and those succeeding Warlike Emperors,
Trajan, and Hadrian; under the first of which the Destruction of Jerusalem was
so dreadful and bloody, till the last ruins by Hadrian; That no Time, nor
History was ever deeper dyed in Blood, nor could this be without dismal Recoyls
of the Great Sword upon the Empire it self, within the Bowels of which it was
continually sheathed; insomuch, that Hadrian in his account of the final Wars
with the Jews, omitted the usual Preface in his Letters to the Senate, Ego
quidem, and exercitus valemus, We and our Army are well. This he suppressed, as
not agreeing to that Season of so great loss of Blood to the Romans.

This was a very affrightful appearance of this Kingdom, and of great Evidence
of its Greatness and Power of Revenges, especially upon the Jews, those
Murderers and Enemies that would not have Christ reign over them, and it
returned back upon the Gentiles also, and the Roman Empire, guilty of the same
Opposition to the Kingdom of Christ, though not against the same Light, nor
with the same unnaturalness; for as to them, He came more particularly to his
own, and his own received him not, and therefore having after the crucifying of
him, rejected his Dominion, the People of that Prince Vespasian Came and
destroyed the City, and the Sanctuary as with a Flood, and Torrent of
Vengeance, and now unto the End of the War, Desolations upon the Jews were
determined, and by the overspread of the abominable Armies was poured upon the
Desolate by Hadrian after the Desolation of Titus, Daniel. 9. ult.

Now this great Judgment and Desolation, as a grand Argument of the Truth of
Christianity, in Revenge of which this Desolation came upon the Jews, and the
Reverberations or Repercussions, and Returnings of it upon the Heathen Empire,
and their Persecutions of Christians, was a great Subject for the Apostolical
Voice to enlarge it self upon, and to persuade Men to pay Homage to the King of
Kings, who could thus avenge himself; and so of great Use was that Sound of the
Voice, Come and See, that beholding the Desolations that were made by Christ in
the Earth, they might be still, and know, that He was God, and exalt him in the
very Heathen Earth.

After this severe Vengeance of Christ by the Rider of the Red Horse, there
ensues the opening of the third Seal, and the Thing to be seen under it was a
Black Horse, and He that sat upon it had a pair of Balances in his Hand, and
the Apostolical Voice continuing as under the last former Seals, Come and See,
and it was the Voice of the third living Creature, the Voice, as of a Man.

Now that we may judge of the State of the Kingdom, under this Seal, it is to
be closely examined, what this Visum, or Thing to be seen imports, even the
Black Horse, and the Rider with a Pair of Balances in his Hand; and then the
distinct Voice in the midst of the Living Creatures.

It has been generally interpreted, all to Famine, as if the Seals were a
Course of Judgments, but besides that, neither the First, nor the Fifth Seals
carry any Signification of Judgment, by a more sagacious Inspection into the
spectacle of this Seal, after that forenam'd excellent Duumvirate of
Apocalyptical Interpreters, Mr. Mede, and Dr. More, and compare of it with the
Voice of the third living Creature, as of a Man; I am abundantly satisfied, the
Black Horse, and the Balances in the Hand of the Rider, are an Emblem of that
solemn Imperatorial Justice of the Emperors of this Third Seal, the Antonines,
especially that great Mirror of Justice to Magistrates, Alexander Severus, in
whom I account the interval of this Seal to End, who bore in his Hand
continually in all Administrations, that great Balance of the World, that
Balance of commutative Justice, given by our Savior; Do as you would have
done to you, and no otherwise; and this, as so remarkable in it self, and of a
higher Prophetical Use, as we shall Discourse, when we come to the Time affixed
to these Seals, and particularly to this; A Voice in the midst of the living
Creatures calls to the more solemn Observation of a Measure of Wheat for a
Penny, Three Measures of Barley for a Penny, and see that thou hurt not the
Oil, and the Wine.

And now the State of the Kingdom, in Relation to this Visum, I estimate by
those highly Rational, and Apocalyptick Discourses for Christianity, by Justin,
Martyr, Athenagoras, Apollonius, in his public Account of Christianity to the
Roman Senate, Clemens Alexandrius, Tertullian, Origin, Minutius Felix, who all
appealed to these Just and Manly Emperors, and offered to lay Christianity
before them, as Equal Judges, and that would but show themselves Men. And
Alexander Son of Mammaea, a Christian Lady.
Severus was so far prevailed upon by those weighty Reasons, that History has
reported him to have decided for Christianity; and as he showed a constant
Reverence to that great Apothegme, of the Savior of the World, so to have
built a Temple in Honor to him, upon which very last particular yet, I lay no
weight, as being too doubtful.

But the other Parts of the State of this Kingdom of Christ, born up by the
manliest Efforts of Reason, managed by those Apostolic Persons before named,
before those forenam'd Emperors, and Alexander particularly, are so beyond all
Historical Dispute, as to sway me much more, than those inquisitive searches
for some Dearth or Famine, that might be adjusted to the Time of this Seal; For
I account it a Rule in this, and all other parts of this Prophecy, That the
Interpretation depend, not upon dark and obscure Parts of History, but upon the
most Conspicuous, Open, and Clear, and that are most known, and notorious in
it; And it is to me a just Suspicion upon any Interpretation, that is otherwise
grounded.

After this gracious Trial and Essay upon the Heathen Empire, Cords of a Man,
and by the Bands of Reason, immediately follows the Fourth Seal, In which
opened, the Visum, or Thing to be seen is the Pale Horse, and in the Place of
any Imperial Rider sits Death, and Hades the Grave, or Hell follows it as its
attendant Emblem, and the Voice of the Fourth living Creature, as an Eagle
drawn by the Carcass, says, Come and see, This imports that Complication of
Evils and Judgments; The Sword, the Famine, the Pestilence, and the Beasts of
the Earth, and Power was given to Death over a fourth part of the Earth, or
every fourth of it, that is upon all Quarters of it.

Under this Seal then, in the Time of those many, cruel, and short lived
Emperors, between Alexander Severus, and Dioclesian, which were as Beasts of
the Earth, for savageness, and so are a most famous Historical Commentary upon
this Seal, is shown the mighty Vengeance and Wrath of God, upon an impenitent
and imperswasible Empire, and this by that Apostolical Voice, to Come and See,
or to consider it, the State of the Kingdom vindicating it self is so far
declared, that it was even ready to break in with Fury upon the Heathen World,
and that Patience so much injured and abused was now about to flame out in
utmost Wrath; so far therefore the Kingdom of Christ was advanced, as to have
made its last Trial of Grace upon Pagan Rome; and upon this undoubtedly, the
Apostolical Ministry insisted, in its, Come and See, as Ezekiel Ezekiel. 14. from
12 to 22.
of old; as God says there, When I bring my four great Judgments, The Sword,
Pestilence, Famine, and the Beasts of the Earth, though Noah, Job, and Daniel
stood before me, to turn away my Wrath, They should deliver only their own
Souls.

And now as to the State of the Church, all along these Seals past, There was a
plain Appearance of it in the Apostolic Voices, till just the Entrance of the
fourth Seal; From that Time these Voices ceased, which had so far, as supported
by the Characters of Imperial History, declared to us the Times and States of
the Church, as before drawn out in the Labor, and Patience, and Sufferings of
the Ephesine Church, while those Apostolical Voices lasted, although there was
such a Leaven of the Apostasy hid in it, that it was charged to have left its
first Love; one great Instance of which, was in Victor's Excommunication of the
Asian Churches upon the score of the unwritten Ceremony of keeping Easter at
all, much more unwritten as to Criticism of Time, which made that so great Fewd.

The Fifth Seal so plainly opens in the Sufferings of the Christian Martyrs, as
to assure us, This Prophecy, as also other Scripture-prophecies, and Notes of
Time, are for the sake of the Church, and not of Heathen Empires and States:
yet by the Course of the Seals, we may easily know at what hour of the Empire
it was, as by referring to the peculiar foregoing Church-prophecy, we know
under what Symbol of the Church it lies; and from both, That it was the last
and cruel ten Years Persecution, or ten Days Tribulation, begun by Dioclesian,
while the Christian Church was under that peculiar Symbol of the Church of
Smyrna.

That it was about the Time of Dioclesian, the Current of the former Seals, and
the immediately following Desolation of Heathenism under Constantine assure us.

That it was under the Symbol of the Church of Smyrna, its peculiar Character
of Sufferings, and ten Days Tribulation, make out; as also, in that there was
no longer any Apostolical Voice, but the Voice of Souls, that were gone out of
martyred Bodies, it signifies the Synagogue of Satan near an height; and from
that very occasion of the Tombs, Relics, Memories, and Veneration of Martyrs,
and Trust in their Negotiation out of the Body for those they left behind in
it, growing much higher. However, God graciously accepts this Suffering Church,
and lays no Imputation upon it, but only on the Sathanick Synagogue. He seems
to have more respect to the Souls Complaint than to the Survivers of that
Church; He appoints them white Robes, but as unconcerned in Mediations for any
in this World, they are commanded to rest; and there is on their Instance a
Signification of a new Roll of Martyrs under Antichrist, when the whole Number
of those of the first Resurrection should be complete, over whom the second
Death should have no Power.

This Seal then is the very Joint betwixt the Kingdom of Paganism falling, but
not yet fallen; and that short Appearance of Christ's Kingdom in the Christian
Empire till Theodosius the Great. The Army of Martyrs had not yet overcome by
the Word of the Testimony, which they held; The Kingdom of Christ was not yet
celebrated with that Doxology, chap. 12. But there was nothing came between
this Cry of the Souls and that Kingdom, although speedily surprised by
Antichristianism, into which Pagan Demonolatry was first transplanted on this
very occasion of Martyrs Sufferings, completed within this Seal especially.

And thus we have the State of the Kingdom of Christ in the Church within this
Seal assured by one of the most famous Monuments of Ecclesiastic History.

The sixth Seal is that great Seal opened, by which the Heathen Roman Empire
was demolished; and which carries most abundant Instruction of this whole Time
of the Seals, and also of the Kingdom of Christ in his Church during that Time.

1. That Heathen Idolatry that had seated it self, as in the Heavens, and from
thence reached down it self into the Earth, and in the Deep, is as by an
Earthquake removed from below, and as by a Tempest above is dismounted and
deposed from thence: so that here Satan, as the Dragon, was cast down from
Heaven, as by Lightning, according to the Vision, chap. 12.

2. The Emperors, or Kings of the Earth, and all its great Men, laid aside
their Greatness, even to their Imperial Purple and Diadems, as particularly
Dioclesian the Arch-Persecutor, and Maximian with him; moved not so much by any
thing as by a divine Terror, by the Fear of him that sat on the Throne, and of
the Lamb. And this is given as a lively Type of Christ's glorious Appearance in
the Destruction of his Enemies; Who will be able to stand in that Day of his
Wrath? What Mountains, Dens, or Caves, will then open to receive affrighted men?

3. From hence it plainly appears, What was to be opened by Christ's opening of
these Seals, even no other, than the glorious visible Kingdom of Christ, and
not his spiritual Kingdom only; As an eminent Assurance of which, He declared
himself in the preaching of the Gospel, and a Crown was given to him, as an
Acknowledgment of his Right, though to obtain it, he was to go out conquering
and to conquer. Here then in this Christian Empire, beginning at the sixth
Seal, and so going on in the seventh Seal to Theodostus's Victory over all the
Remains of Heathenism (after Julian) in the Senate, Magistracy, and People of
Rome gathered to a Head in Eugenius and Argobastes, This Kingdom appeared as in
an Emblem, and earnest of it self; and so it is celebrated chap. 12. with
Praise and Triumph as in Heaven, though even there surprised.

4. Here the State of Christ's Kingdom in the Church is solemnly declared, and
also as in the Christian Empire. In the Church, to show the high towering
Synagogue of Satan, There is no Voice of the Church, but of an Angel, crying
to the four Angels not to hurt, etc. a certain Indication of bad Symptoms
appearing at this, in it self, happy Change. 2. There was a pure Church and
Kingdom of Christ yet public and visible, but upon the Retreat; for it was
just now retiring, and about to be sealed, that is, under that over-growing
Synagogue. 3. This Kingdom of Christ in his Church was to have (abating the
general Unhappiness of fallen sinful Man) a more quiet and illustrious State
than heretofore, viz. in a Christian Empire; for till the whole Time of sealing
the Servants of God was past, the four Angels, that had the four first
Trumpets, were commanded to hold the Wind, that no such Hurt could be done upon
the Empire, as was after to be done when they sounded. This was Smyrna's Crown.
So that though God had determined the Period of the Blood-guilty Roman Western
Empire, as Imperial, yet it was kept off, till it became Pagan-Antichristian (a
new Paganism;) Then God gave it in Wrath, after a Time, an Antichristian King,
its former Imperial King being taken away in Wrath first.

5. The precise Time of Sealing, that is of covering all the True, visible
Glory of Christianity in the Christian Empire is hereby set, viz. until the
First Trumpet; For till all was sealed, no Wind could stir; when therefore the
first blasting Trumpet sounded, all true Christian Glory was covered, shut, and
sealed; and Apostate Christianity alone in any splendid public Appearance
could be hurt.

6. At this very joint of Time, upon the Christian Empire is grafted a
Pre-Appearance of the Glory of the New Jerusalem in the innumerable
Palm-bearing Company.

7. That Glorious Kingdom is notwithstanding the sixth Seal opened, apparently
stayed, and estopped in sealing the 144000 of Gods Servants, that the Glory of
Christ in them could not appear. For the Glory of a King is in the Multitude of
his People, the sealing therefore this square Israelitish Apostolical Number is
the sealing, and estoppage of the Kingdom it self.

The seventh Seal is the last Portion of this sealed Time, and it keeps its
hold on all future Time, till the Book and Kingdom are resigned. In which the
Visum or Thing seen was the seven Angels, that stood before God, to whom were
given seven Trumpets, and these Angels preparing themselves to sound, till they
just began to sound make up the Representation of this Seal.

The State of Christ's Kingdom is to be understood, 1. By the Silence, as
Characteristick a Note, as any of the former Voices; For in the structure of
this Divine Prophecy, the symbols are not only drawn and taken from the Events;
but He that both manages the Events by his supreme Power, and erects the
Schemes upon them, has designed, provided, and contrived so much of Event, and
Symbol, one for another, that it is a great Symbol, that there is no more of
such, or such Event, That, while it looks, as if it were a Reason, why the
Symbol goes no further, because the Event goes no further, It is even yet a
Symbol through the admirableness of this Mystic Prophecy, that just then, and
there, where the Event ceases, the Cessation of the Event comes in the place,
where that Cessation may create a Symbol; And this could be no way thus
modelled, but by so supreme an Author, who is not only the Artificer of the
Symbols, but the Opifex the absolute Operator of the Events themselves, The
Reason, why the living Creatures spoke no more after the Fourth Seal, was, not
only because there were but Four living Creatures, but also because the Pure
Apostolical Ministry there ceased; The Reason, why the Souls cried under the
Altar, was not only because the Martyrdomes under the Pagan Empire were then
completed, That all of that Roll might join in that appeal to God, but because
that was the most Pure and Excellent Voice the Church had then left to speak to
God in, the Voice of Martyrs Blood, that when they were dead, yet spoke, for
after this the Church spoke no more, so as to be heard till after the Apostasy;
nor did the four living Creatures or twenty four Elders appear any more after
this Seal till then; c. 11. 20. And this Cry was timed just before that amazing
change in the World, that Constantines Conversion produced. The Reason why an
Angels Voice remarqu'd the sixth Seal, except only as that so wonderful Event
of the Desolation of Heathenism spoke it self, was because the Kingdom of
Christ was greater in the sealing of so many of his Servants to be hidden under
the Antichristian Kingdom, then, that very Conversion of Constantine, which as
it let out the Kingdom of Christ, so far as in an Emblem, let out the Apostasy
and Antichristian Kingdom also by accident, that just then the 144000 were
sealed, and the Woman took her Flight into the Wilderness. Lastly, the Reason
why Silence and Prayers without any audible Voice solemnize this Seal, is,
because the pure Service was reducing to the silent, private Prayers of the
measured Temple, Altar, and its Worshipers, and the public Tammith Daily, or
continual Pure Worship was about to be taken away by the Gentiles Intrusion
into the outward Court. Chap. 11. 1. Compared with Chap. 8. 1.

Yet at this Time the Worship was both public and pure in Gods Account, and
the Prayers of all Saints came up as Incense before him, and the Prosecution,
the Kingdom opened in all the Seals, had made against Heathenism, was completed
in Theodosius's Famous Victory against it, imported in the scattered
Altar-Incens'd Fire of his and all Christians memorializ'd Prayer, in the midst
of the Battle with Eugenius; upon which followed Voices, Thunderings,
Lightnings, and an Earthquake, the usual Symbols in this Prophecy of all the
Acquists and Prevalencies of Christ's Kingdom.

So the State of the Empire was during this Time a State of Respite, Quiet,
Peace, or Victoriousness, and Greatness under the Favor of the Precept given
to the four Angels, that held the four Winds, which Precept was yet in full
Force and Virtue.

But all this was but for an Half-hour, an imperfect, decurtated Time, seized
and surpised from its Perfection, [as the Beast's Times have been, and much
more shall be yet within the Half*time:] The Purity of Worship was surprised by
the Apostasy, the Kingdom of Christ by the Antichristian Kingdom, being
immediately in Preparation; The Glory and Peace of the Empire no sooner
vindicated from Paganism, but merg'd in Antichristianism, and so pursued by
Vengeance that punished the former in the latter; and so also made way by a
high mysterious Counsel of Justice, for the Antichristian King, while it
destroyed the Antichristianiz'd Empire.

Now the just Time of the whole Course of the Seals opened, from the last half
Week, I estimate at 400 Years; For the Decency of the Type of sealed Time, it
is indeed given in no numeral Account: Even as the seven Thunders sealed are
ever after concealed, and under the Name and explicit Series of seven Thunders
never opened, and yet, as we shall see, produced in the seven Voices; So this
sealed Time, and of this seventh Seal ending, may be understood;

1. By comparing that great opening of the Kingdom of Christ at the first Seal
in the Apostolical Preaching, and the magnificent Appearance of it in the sixth
Seal in Constantine's Conversion, [and except that short Nubecle,] that little
Cloud of Julian's Apostasy, all along the Christian Empire to Theodosius's
Death. Parallels to each of which, nothing appears throughout the Time, either
in Common or Ecclesiastic History, wherein the Christian Church is concerned,
as showing Christ's Kingdom.

2. By comparing all along the 2300 Ev. and Mor. the 75 of the Word going
forth, the 490 of the Weeks, the 1260 of the Witnesses, and its concurrent
Numbers, and the 75 of the Voices and Vials we have, and shall farther find the
sealed Time determined to 400 Years, and ending at 437, when the Trumpets began
to sound; which ought to be shown.

3. By the Signature of the half Time of the Churches Purity, and of the
Western Roman Empires Duration before the Vacancy; at which Vacancy it entered
in the New and last In Augustulus.
form, viz. the Bestian, we may compute the Sealed Time.

This I account given by the Voice in the midst of the four Beasts in the third
Seal, in the very Reign of that Mirror of Magistratical Justice, Alexander
Severus, presented with the Balances in his Hand weighing out this Time just
at the half Time, or 202 years from the Resurrection, or 237 of Vulgar Account
from the Incarnation: to which 202 Years added, as the other half Time, the
Apostasy entered at 437, and then the Trumpets sounded to the Empires Ruin.

And how fitly is the daily Service, at its just and even Balance, symbol'd by
the exact care of just Weight and Measure, (according to the Charge on the
Prince in the Prophet Ezekiel.) without any Injury to the Wheat, Barley, Oil, and
(by Concomitancy no daily Oblation being without it) Wine, and as it were on
purpose to show us it was not the Levitical but according to the Unceremonial
Simplicity of Gospel Worship, the spiritual Sacrifice that is intended, Barley
is added, which had no Place in the daily Levitical Oblation. Now to explain
this Symbol, I desire a diligent Compare of Rev. 6. 6. Exodus 29. 40. Numb. 28.
7. Ezekiel. 45. 9, 10. etc.

Oh infinite and supreme Dispose, that changes Times and Remark.
Seasons as it pleases, having first drawn them in an entire Table, lying
always before it; where every Thing is beautiful in its own season, and so
every thing shall at last appear before Holy Angels and Saints; and even extort
the Confessions of Angry and Malcontent Spirits. How admirably has it sealed
and opened in this course of Seals, and for his own Glory suffered a new
sealing, by surprise, upon his Kingdom when that first sealing was taken off,
that he might bring Good out of Evil, Light out of so long obscurity of the
Apostasy, that even then when the Empire or Universal Monarchy of the World was
risen out of Heathenism into the Acknowledgment of the only true God, and the
one Mediator Jesus Christ, suffered it to relapse into the new Heathenism of
Antichristianism: Even so Father, who have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them to Babes, it seemed good in thy sight. For thou have
what Time thou please, [to whom a Day and a thousand Years are equal] to
display thy Kingdom in, within the most perfect Measure of Time, viz. a cubical
thousand Years, and then in a boundless Eternity.

To him then who sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, who has the sealed Book
yet in his Hand, and is even ready to unseal it into his Kingdom, within Ten
Years to be proclaimed, be Glory, Blessing, Salvation, Dominion, Obedience, for
ever and ever. Amen.
An Explication of Daniel 's Grand Line of Time, as given in his four last
Chapters.
SECT. I. OF the Vision of the Daily taken away, and therein of the 2300 Ev.
Morn. or the Vision called the Vision of the Ev. Morn. in general, on Dan.
chap. 8. Page 1. SECT. II. That this Vision begins at the Persian Monarchy, and
the Proof of it. Page 8. SECT. III. In which a Line of 75 Years, precedent to
the 70 Weeks, is asserted, and endeavored to be proved, Dan. 9. Page 24. SECT.
IV. Gives the Proof, that the Time of the Words going forth was the first 75
Years of the 2300 Ev. Mor. Page 28. SECT. V. Of the 70 Weeks themselves in
brief: the second Line of the 2300 Even. Morn. Page 32. SECT. VI. Brief Remarks
on Daniel's last and longest Vision, are made from Part to Part. Page 35. SECT.
VII. Of the whole Line of Time from the Resurrection of Messiah, unto the Time
of Blessedness, in the Lotts of the New Jerusalem; and its Royal Priesthood: on
Dan. 12. v. 4. etc. to the end. Page 45. SECT. VIII. Wherein is given a
Prefatory Survey of the whole Apocalyptical Prophecy. Page 52. SECT. IX.
Wherein a Proof is given, The seven Churches carry with them a Line of Time
contemporizing with the whole Apocalyptick Time. Page 62. SECT. X. Of the third
Line of Time in the Grand Line of 2300 Even. Morn. or of the seven Seals from
the Resurrection; showing it extends to a space of 400 Years. Apoc. c. 4 c. 5.
c. 6. c. 7. c. 8. Page 72.


Of the Great LINE OF Prophetical Time,
In XXII. Sections. viz. The 1260 Days of the Witnesses, and the Woman in the
Wilderness. Apoc. c. 11. 3. and 12. 6.
SECT. I.
Of the Ninefold Repetition of this Line, and its several Characters; showing,
1. That Time, Times, Half a Time, must each signify, first Years, then Years
of Years. 2. That Days must signify, either first, Days of Years, in the 1260
Days, and then each of the three Days, a Year of Years, and proportionably in
the Half Time, and Half Day. 3. The Months can be no other than Lunar Months,
and so must signify such Months of Lunar Years, as are proportioned to the
1260 Days, as Lunar Time is to Solar.
THE Great Line of Time, in the Eye of Prophecy, Position.
and upon which it is most intent, as drawn for the latter Times, and
approaching so near the final Accomplishment of all Prophecy at this very Time,
is the Time, Times, and Half Time, called also, Three Days and a half, Twelve
hundred Sixty Days, and Forty two Months; All of which, even as each of them
concur, though in different manner, as shall be seen, into One Line of Twelve
Hundred and sixty Years, and are coeval to the space of the six first
Apocalyptical Trumpets.

That this Line may be better understood, and Apprehended, It is first to be
well observed: in these following Grand Heads, or Generals of Discourse.

This Line of Time is nine times to be found in Sacred First General.
Prophecy; Twice in Daniel it is called Time, Times, Half a Time; once 1260
Days, though concealed somewhat by Dan. 7. 25. and Dan. 12. 7. Dan. 12. 11.
joining it with Thirty more; for twelve hundred and sixty are made to lie in
the complex of Twelve hundred ninety Days, In the Apocalyptick Prophecy, it is
first made known by Forty two Months*, then by Twelve hundred sixty Days*,
Apoc. 11. 2. Apoc. 11. 3. Apoc. 11. 9. Apoc. 12. 6. Apo. 12. 14. Apoc. 13. 5.
then by Three days and a half*, then again by Twelve hundred sixty Days*;
then is again reassumed, the Time, Times, Half a Time*; and lastly, the Forty
two Months are the second time assigned; the observation of which Repetition,
and Variation, and Order of both; in giving this space of Time, is of great
Instruction (as we shall see in its proper place) for the understanding
Prophecy.

That then, which I shall first address our Thoughts unto, shall be to consider
every Character of Time, given us in Prophecy, by its self, with its
Signification and Extent, and the Assurances it is of such signification and
Extent; then the Balances of the Characters one with another; and lastly, their
several Epochs and Periods.

The first Character of Prophetic Time, is Time, Times, Half a Time, or if
translated exactly, either according to the Character first.
Originals of the Old or New Testament, and according to the very Design of
Prophecy, it is Appointed Time, Appointed Times, Appointed Half Time, or,
Season, Seasons, half a Season; and so in that first Distribution of Time
according to the Motion of the Sun, and the Moon, the great Luminaries of
Heaven, it is used Genes. 1. 14. for Designed and Appointed Times; and this is
very necessary to be laid in the Foundation; For accordingly it will follow,
The measures of this Season, Seasons, half a Season, must be found out by
observing the measures of the other Notes of Time wherewith they are joined;
for that Character of Season it self speaks high, and notorious Designation of
this Time, Times, Half a Time; and that most remarkable Season (of which
after-use is to be made) arises from such a Designation, and not an immediate
Definition of the Space.

But then secondarily, Because a Year, and a Day, are the most natural and
ready Measures of designed Time, and so may in that forenam'd Scripture be the
Explanation of Seasons, Genesis 1. 14.
or remarkable and signalized Times, as they are immediately added to Seasons:
and because in all probability, seven Times passing over Nebuchadnezzar under
his Delirium, Dan, 4. 23.
mean seven Years, since they cannot mean Days or Months, or less than Years,
nor more, we may first consider Time, Times, Half a Time, as three Years and a
half, and that with Authority, because they are diversifyed into other such
Extents of Time or Spaces, as we shall see, that point to so much.

So then the signification of Time, Times, Half a Time, is taken from that
first most known and honorable Account of Time, the Suns Motion from Point to
Point in its annual Circle: This is a more honorable Circulation than that of
a Day, because the Sun more knownly varies every day from the Point from which,
and the Point to which it daily moves, which makes the change of the Year to
those several Seasons; so that although, as Solomon tells us, The Sun rises
and goes down, and hastes to the place where he arose, distributing Day and
Night to the World; yet he neither sets nor rises two Days together at the same
exact Point, but veres toward one of the Tropicks; although therefore a Day of
the Suns being with us is the most noble measure of Time next to the Year, yet
it cannot deserve the Name of a Time, of a signalized Time, as a Year does;
both because it is not so exact to a Point of Revolution, and because it is not
so full; a Year excelling a Day in being the greater and ampler, and so the
most perfect, known, and generally observed Circle for a Season, comprehending
that of a Day above three hundred sixty five times within it self; and is the
Suns perfect Emensuration of its way from one end to the other end of the
Heavens, and of its Visitation of the whole Earth with its Beams.

A Year must yet more excel a Month than it does a Day, because the Sun has
the Government of the Day, and of the Year; but the Moon, the much more ignoble
Planet, and Governess only of the Night, gives to the Months their Character
and Measure; and tho there are twelve Points of the Space the Sun emensurates
in a Year, viz. the twelve Signs in the Zodiac, and the Suns first Touch upon
Aries, to its gliding off from it to the next Sign, may be called a Solar
Month; yet neither is it the proper Month, which is defined by Lunations, nor
is it any Circulation of the Sun with it self, or with its own Motion, or with
its great end of encompassing the World with its enlivening Beams: there is no
space therefore that can properly merit the Name of a Time or Season in the
first place, but a Year first, and then a Day.

Times, absolutely so called, must needs also be most properly two Times, for
the first Plurality, or more than one is two; and the more so, because it is
set betwixt one Time, and half a time; for that Number, which exceeds, and
removes from Unity first, is two; and that which is bounded by half a Time in
its remove from one Time, can be no more than two; for if it had proceeded to
more than two, and had not been stopped or cut off, as the Hebrew significantly,
It had been three Times.

Half a Time therefore, as it refers to the Beasts Time, must be Time
decurtated, or cut off at the middle, (as the Garments and Beards of David's
Servants, half'd by Hanun in Disgrace and Dishonor) to the Beasts eternal
Infamy, and in recompense to his surprise of the Churches Peace, and Purity, at
its half Hour, as shall be noted. Apoc. 8. 1.


Time then, as One, denotes Beginning, as One is the beginning of Number;
Times, as Two, denotes Increase and Consistency, as it is a progress of Time
from One, and settles in the first even Number; Half speaks an endeavor of
Motion to be continued, but surprised, and cut off at its middle.

Now these Time, Times, Half a Time, might signify only the three Years and a
half they first import; but that they must signify more, we shall find very
full assurance: when therefore we shall have reasoned that it must be more than
three Years and a half, it will then appear most reasonable, that each Time
should have its most perfect Circle: And if a Year be the perfectest Circle of
Time, then a Year of Years must be the most perfect and full Circle, beyond
which there can be nothing, but a Repetition, or Multiplication of the same
again and again: so then the Time must be a Year of Years, the two Times must
be the same Circle twice told, and the Half Time the same Circle attempted the
third Time, and clipped off at the Semicircle; which is the Account of this
Character of Time, Times, Half a Time, and which is the first, and, as will
appear, the most comprehensive of the Characters of this Line: and tho there
may be other Revolutions of the Heavens, and of the Sun, particularly known to
learned Astronomers, containing greater numbers of Years, and there is a more
perfect Number also of Years, viz. the thousand Years given us in this
Prophecy, as we shall see afterward; yet there is none so fit to the present
Purpose as Days and Years, nor so full as a Year of Days, and then a Year of
Years, or of prophetical Days, most agreeable to Prophecy every way.

I come now to the second Character of Days: A Day then Character the Second.
is the first most known and observable date of Time, as it was first in use to
measure Time by; The Evening and the Morning were the first Day, as soon as Time
began: A Day Genesis 1. 5. etc.
then is the Time in which the Sun performs his Motion (speaking as the
Scripture does to general Apprehension, without regard to strictnesses of
Philosophy, whether the Motion be of the Sun or of the Earth) from East to
West, and gives Light to one of the Hemispheres, and then from West to East,
and so hastens to the Place where he arose as near as the aforesaid Variation
will allow, and gives Light to the other Hemisphere, as Lord of the Day to the
World of both Hemispheres.

As then on this Account Days are in all Languages expressive of length of
Time, so one Day was by God made choice of to signify a Year, and one Day by
Moses, Psalm. 90. and by the Apostle Peter is singled out to parallel with a
thousand Years; and Man's Day, by the Apostle Paul, is used to express the
whole course of Man's time of judging, in opposition 2 Pet. 2. 8.
to the Day of Judgment: and the whole course of 1 Cor. 4. 3.
Judgment is called frequently the Day of Judgment, as one Day; and as it is
taken a Day for a Year in this Line of Time, so we shall find in the three Days
and a half it is taken for a Day of Years, equal to a Year of Years.

Day threfore is a Standard of Time fairly to be accommodated to any Measure of
Time, the Conjunction it has with such Measure otherwise given requires: when
therefore three Days and a half are joined with twelve hundred sixty Days, with
twice forty two Months, and all these within Time, Times, Half a time, there is
a fair Reason to understand them of the very same Tenor of Time with what they
are so conjoined.

But as for the accounting a Day for a Year, that rests upon that Divine
Institution of a Day for a Year, first in a Case near and parallel; of the
Forty Years Commoration of the Church of Israel, Numb. 14. v. 34. (to omit
Jacob's old Style of Time, a Week of Years) in the Wilderness, and after that
by the solemn Institution, as of a prophetical Key, Ezekiel. 4. I have appointed a
Day for a Year; so that when there is a concurrence of Prophecy, and Things to
be transacted, that cannot be transacted in so short a space as of Days
literally and naturally understood; they must be so understood, as we are
directed by Prophecy to understand them; viz. a Day for a Year, even as without
Hesitation we compute into Weeks of Years Daniel's seventy Weeks, and so into
490 Years.

Now we shall find such Transactions, fitted to the twelve hundred and sixty
days, that cannot possibly be supposed to have their Motion in three years and
a half, so that they must be Prophetical days, or days for years.

And thus we have settled the two first, and most noble Characters of Time; A
year signified by a time, and a day, as it is used in the three days and a
half, and in the twelve hundred and sixty days, with their most truly
Prophetical Indications, viz. three years and a half of years, in the three
times, and three days and a half, and twelve hundred and sixty years in the
1260 days.

Let us then proceed to the third Character of Months, or the forty two Months.

A Month then, we know, is that Space of Time the Moon describes by Night, in
its progress through the Zodiac; Third Character.
For whatever Hemisphere it moves in, it is still Night it rules in, which
Motion is indeed so full of Variation and Incertainty in its Remove from the
Ecliptic Line, the Sun's certain Path, that it is said, The Sun knows its way,
but the Moon does not; even as the Phasis, or figure of the Moon is upon
perpetual change, even to a Proverb, upon the unadjustableness of any ones
Humor or Manners; Who can (says the Proverb) fit a Coat to the Moon? and so
is excellently adapted to describe the Antichristian Tyranny that changes Times
and Laws. Not only by rescinding the truly Christian Laws, by men's own
Additions, contrary to those Laws themselves; but also making perpetually
changeable, even the Counterfeits of them, by innumerable new Traditions;
whereas the Religion of Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, the same for
ever. Besides that Judaisme and Heathenisme, that had so many dependencies on
the Moon, is the Constitution of Antichristianism, and therefore the true
Church, so distant from it, is clothed with the Sun, and has the Moon under
its feet, and therein abdicates Judaism, Heathenism, and Mahometanism, (that
also claims a Kindred with the Moon) as the Votaries of the Moon.

Now this Moon, as Governess of the Night, as so variable in its Motions and
Measures, gives no Rule of Time by Motion from East to West, but only from one
Lunation to another, it denominates Months or Moons, being certain only in
this, to return from one Conjunction of the Sun to another; which, because it
gives a new Phase to the Moon, is therefore called in the Hebrew Novitas, and
the Lunations Novitates, or New Moons.

But I understand No Way that it can describe the Circle of a Year, but by its
Attendance on the Sun in its Motion, by so many new Conjunctions as will most
agree with the Annual Motion of the Sun; and the nearest This can be brought to
by the Natural Motions of the Moon, there will be between Ten and Eleven Days
betwixt the Motion of the Sun and the motion of the Moon upon twelve
Conjunctions (called therefore Synodical Months) of the Moon with the Sun; For
so many the Sun requires more to the finishing its Annual Course, than the Moon
needs to its twelve Conjunctions with the Sun. And this be spoken of Months, as
they are most properly to be understood of Lunations. For if we would interpret
them of Solar Months, besides another greater Obstruction, or Caution to be
entered against that Interpretation hereafter, they could be only progressive,
not Circular, and so not agreeable with a day or a year, there being more of a
Circulation of motion by that most Illustrious Prince of Time in a day than in
a Month. And therefore we account a Day the first Circle of the Sun's motion,
with Light from East to West, and so to East again; and a Year the most perfect
Circle of his motion, in going forth from one end of Heaven, and in Circuit to
the other end thereof, with Heat and Influential Virtue; in neither of which
Solar Months correspond, as to any Complement, and therefore not so fit Symbols
of Time as the Lunar Months, which have a circle from one Conjunction to the
Sun with another.

Now these Lunar Months are in conjunction with Time, Times, Half a Time, or
three years and a half of Years; and with Twelve hundred sixty Days or Years;
Twice Forty two Months of Years also, but the former coalescing, or falling
into One within the latter, as a River that had been a River before may be
supposed to do into a new Cut, or Channel, prepared to receive the confluence
of neighboring Waters, lying in the way of that former River, so near, that by
the great confluence of Waters, and the more ample Channel of the new River,
the old may be derived into it, and so make the much greater River, and having
made their way, as so united, some Leagues, the Old River, its Name, and
Memory, are swallowed up in the New: so are the Gentiles forty two months
merg'd in the Forty two months of the Beast, and both coextend the Twelve
hundred sixty days, and no more.

SECT. II.
Of the two Communities, and their twofold state described, within this Line
of Time, viz. The Church of Christ and its Sufferings, the Kingdom of the
Beast, and its Tyranny: showing also, there must be Season, or intimate Time
within Time, at large.
I Have thus far settled the General Sciagraphy, or Land-Scaph of this
Prophetical Line of Time, and shall now endeavor to make a farther penetration
into the understanding of it, and its several Characters, by enquiry into its
signification, its extent in every one of these Characters, and the Balance of
every one of them, each with the other, and that not by an over-critical
restraint of the following Disscourse to every Head, but in such a
communication of the Extent, the balance of the Characters one with another,
that the most perfect knowledge of the whole may arise from them together, as
they most naturally fall one into the other.

It is then to be known in the Second General;

There are two states of Things, and two kinds of Personages; Second General.
and in successive Communities, and Incorporations, each of them are to be
found; both which appertain to this Line of Time, and the Characters of Time
are distinctly suited to each, viz. to the tyranny of that King, the
Scripture-Prophecy calls the Beast, and his Gentiles, and to the Sufferings of
the true Church and Servants of God, under that Tyranny.

The whole mass of Time is therefore divided into the Time of the Night, under
the Conduct of the Moon, the Governess, as has been said, of the Night, and
into the Time of the Day, and the Light under the Government of the Sun, the
Prince of the Day. And this is agreeable to that long Line of Time, Dan. 8. 14.
viz. The twenty three hundred Evening-Morning; for so they are expressed in the
Hebrew, that while the twenty three hundred notes by such a number, the length
of the space, the Evening-Morning is all but one Evening, and one Morning; and
so it is called, The Vision of the Evening. and of the Morning, verse 26.

As then it is called the Vision of the Evening and the Morning, so the Evening
is but One, and the Morning but One. As they are 2300 Evening-Morning, ver. 14.
it is signified, the lesser portions of Time are taken out of that great
Number; Again, As they are One Evening and One Morning, it speaks the Time, One
continued Evening, with a bright Morning at the end of it; As they are twenty
three hundred Evening-Morning, it signifies so many Nights and Days, or natural
Nycthemers, or prophetical Years, in which the Children of darkness take the
Evenings, or Night, under the Moon, and the Children of Light have the
Mornings, or Days, for their portion, under the Sun of Righteousness, with
which the Church is clothed, and has the Moon, even when it seems most to
have the Ascendent, under its Feet; but their Morning or Day does not appear in
its Brightness, till All night's past, and the bright Morning Star shall appear.

The whole Mass of Time, I say then, or the Time, Times, Half Time, is
distributed into twelve hundred sixty days, twice named, but can be but one
and the same Twelve hundred and sixty; and twice forty two months, which, taken
as Lunar Time, and single, cannot be equal to Twelve hundred sixty days, or so
much Solar Time, and taken double, exceeds it, and therefore must, as has been
said, and shall be proved, coalesce, and knit one into another, as a due Point,
and so may be Two forty two Months, and this, as proper to the Children of the
Night, must be peculiar to the Beasts Tyranny; and the Days distinct to the
Children of Light, and their Holy Martyry, or Testimony, though under
Sufferings, and Death it self.

The first of these, or the Tyranny of the Beast, is expressed by changing Laws
and Times, and wearing out the Saints of the most High, by accomplishing to
scatter the power of the Holy People, by the Gentiles treading the Court, and
the Holy City under foot, whereby the Tammith, viz. the daily, or continual
Public Service of God is taken away, by making War with the Witnesses and
Saints, the Woman's Seed, and overcoming, and killing them, as may be seen by a
compare of Dan. c. 7. c. 8. c. 11. c. 12. and Apocal. c. 11. c. 12. c. 13.

The second State of Things, or the Sufferings of the Church and Servants of
God, is expressed by the Witnesses, and Servants of God worn out, given into
the Hand of the little Horn, or Beast, (for he is called both, Dan. 7. v. 8.
12. 25. compared) lying dead, cast down, stamped upon, scattered, the Witnesses
in Sackcloth, and the Woman in the Wilderness, so as to be hid from the Face of
the Serpent. All which appears in the places forecited.

Now that we may see, how these States, and so the Characters of Time are
Implex'd, and Enfolded one within the other;

First, the Time, Times, Half Time, are the common Womb and Continent of the
whole Time; And this Character is therefore given first, Dan. 7. 25. And that
it might be the more observable, it is given again the second time, Dan. 12. 7.
And then to give a farther notice to it, it is given a third time in the
Revelation, Apoc. 12. 14.

But because the just space and duration of time, times, semi time, cannot be
concluded certainly by themselves, they are slid into twelve hundred sixty
days, lying, as I have said, in the Bosom of twelve hundred ninety days, as
the just size, and exact standard of the whole Time, so that in its utmost
Extent, It, and all its Characters must be equal; and they can neither exceed,
nor fall short of Twelve hundred sixty Prophetical Days, or Years, that is,
neither the Time, Times, Semi, or Half Time, nor the three Days and a half,
which are but other words, as we shall see, for the Three Times and a Half; Nor
the twice Forty two Months can be either longer or shorter than the Twelve
hundred sixty Years; because therefore Forty two Months of Lunar Time (as they
ought to be interpreted, as has been shown) are not equal to twelve hundred
sixty Days, or Years; and that twice Forty two Months will much more exceed,
therefore the Forty two Months, twice given, must be two Forty two Months,
which, by the Characters we shall be guided to, we shall find at an exact
Point, coalescing, or uniting into One, as has been already said.

And because Time, Times, Semi Time, are both as long, and as broad as the
twelve hundred and sixty days, and yet have a more pregnant Intimate part,
viz. the Season within the Time, in regard of which, or as referring to that
Season, they are called (...), or Seasons, We shall find the States suited to
that Character, viz. Time within Time, or to Season, which is a more pregnant
intimate Time within a larger Time; so that they may both fill the Character at
its utmost breadth and length, of Twelve hundred sixty Years, and twice Forty
two Months, and yet more fruitfully Impregnate it with Season, within its more
intimate space; Every part therefore of this Character, time, times, semi-time,
has the full extent of Twelve hundred and sixty days, and yet a (...), or an
intimate Kernel of Time within it. And that we may be led to this Observation,
not only the words, Season, Seasons, half a Season, but those other words in
place of them, viz. three days and a half, are on purpose chosen, as we shall
see, when we compare the States, viz. of the Beasts Tyranny, and the Churches
Sufferings, with each Character of Time, which I come next to do in the Third
General.

SECT. III.
Of the matching each Character of Time with each of those States, as in a
General View.
THat the States of the Beasts Tyranny, and the Churches Third General.
Sufferings, may then be beheld at nearer Lights, in their Implication with the
Characters of Time, Let us in the next place Remark each Character of Time,
matched with its State, and the Order wherein the Characters are given, and
then collect their certain Enfoldedness within one another, and how justly
inferrible the Sameness and Oneness of the whole space is, although given under
so many various Characters, in the Union of the States; Each of which has yet
its singular Use: For they are not vain Repetitions, or mere Flourishes of
Symbolical Prophecy, but each Character, and each Repetition of each Character,
has its great particular Service.

First then, after the Real Line of Time given, as it were in Substance, in
four Successive Monarchies, and those represented in an Image, or Immense
Statue, Dan. 2. and then under the Iconisme of four Beasts, Dan. 7. The
Regnancy of a Prince under the Type of a Little Horn, is made the principal Aim
of Prophecy, and has the first Character of Time set upon his duration, viz.
time, times, half a time; and these are made so proper to him, that whenever
these are named, He, as the Proprietor, or Lessee of them from God, is to be
understood: For changing Laws and Times, and wearing out the Saints of the most
High, are so long given into his Hand.

Furthermore, because any fixed Limits of Time could not be known by Time,
Times, Semi Time, being Hieroglyphical, and a Number Vague, and Floating in the
vast Compass of four Monarchies; There is therefore a Third Vision, in which
the Babylonian Monarchy, as having no farther Place in Time, is cut off
altogether, Dan. 8. 1. etc. For it had been accounted in a Former
Scripture-Line of Time, viz. the 390, and forty five Days for Years, Ezeck. 4.
5, 6. And therefore if it had not been cut off, when a new Line of Time was to
be given; it must needs have disturbed that Line, and all Account by it. The
Persian therefore, the Grecian, and the Roman Monarchies are given in new
Symbols, and a Line of twenty three hundred Even. Morn. of Prophetical Time,
till the Cleansing of the Sanctuary, and the Breaking of that Prince, so
Insolent against Christ, the Prince of Princes, broken without Hand, fitted to
them.

And still to show the principal drift of Prophecy, at the Little Horn; it is
first particularly, and notably pourtraied in Antiochus, as a Type, and
therefore called, a Little Horn, and his principal Action is recorded to be the
taking away the daily; For so I translate it exactly according to the Hebrew
Verity, the Divine Spirit seeming to have designed a Liberty for the supplying
the Sense, either with Sacrifice before the Death of Christ, or with Service,
or daily Worship after Christ, according to the Rules of the Gospel; And it is
Remarkable, except in this Place, and its parallels, Dan. 11. and Dan. 12.
there is not any Example of Tammith, or the Continual, without the Addition of
Sacrifice; so that I cannot but suppose it so placed for an especial
significancy.

Now for the sake of Taking away the Daily, the Vision is called, the Vision of
the Daily, even as in regard of the 2300 Even. Morn. It is called the Vision of
the Evening and of the Morning; although it is most evident, the Vision
contains much more matter, than just of the Daily taken away, viz. of the
Persian Monarchy, and the former parts of the Grecian; and the 2300 Even. Morn.
embrace much more Time, than the mere duration of the Daily taken away by
Antiochus, as a Type, or even by the Antichristian taking away, as is made to
appear upon that Vision. For in the Explanation of that Type, when Daniel was
made to understand the Vision; in the Explanation of that Type, I say, All is
so expounded, as to be most agreeable to the little Horn, and his Action in the
former Vision, Dan. 7. and to his Bestian Apocaliptick Tyranny; Now this taking
away, first by the Gentiles begun, then continued by the Beast, lays a
Foundation for the beginning this Line of Time we are upon.

For, by reason of the length of a Line of Twenty three hundred Years, seeing
no particular Time can be ascertained by it; Therefore the next Visions, either
explicitly in the 70 weeks of years, viz. 490 till the end of the half Week,
or three years and a half after Messiah cut off, and in the 1335, in which the
Antitypical, Antichristian taking away of the Daily, begins, and endures these
very 1260 Days, which we are upon, or implicitly, viz. 75 years, during the
Words going forth to restore and build Jerusalem, first by Cyrus, (though
immediately interrupted by Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes, till the second of Darius)
then by the same Darius, and after him, by Artaxerxes, called Longimanus,
completed. All which is fully expounded on the Vision, Dan. 9. And implicitly
also in 400 years, from the last half week after the Resurrection, which is
plainly the Epoch of Apocalyptical Time (as is also made good on that part)
during the Time of the Seals opened, till the Trumpets began, and with the very
first of them the 1260 days; All which make up together the 2300 Even.
morning, the 1260 leaving 75, for the finishing all things to the blessed and
happy State; which is Daniel's end of wonders, Dan. 12. and the State of the
New Jerusalem after the destruction of the Beast, Revel. chap. 19. chap. 20,
etc. even as it is the cleansing of the Sanctuary, and breaking that proud
Prince without hand. Dan. 8.

All these things being so fixed, that they cannot be otherwise, for a Time
there must be for the word going forth, by a full Evidence of Sacred Prophecy
in Daniel, and History in Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther, and this Time is fairly
resolved into 75 years, and then the 490 years of the 70 Weeks, agreed by all
Christians, after which, the 1335 must needs be, and they must be the last of
the 2300. So there is only space for 400 necessary, which during the Seals
opening until the Trumpets sounding, viz. from three years and a half, or the
last half week, so long after the Resurrection, to the Vulgar Year of our Lord,
437. when the Western Empire under Valentinian, the Son of Placidia, began to
be violently shaken by the Wind of the Trumpets, and its Flourish blasted by
the Fire and Hail of the first Trumpet mingled with Blood, by the agreement of
all History, was four hundred years. By all which Account, we must needs be in
or about the Twelve hundred and fiftieth year of those dark Twelve hundred and
sixty, and no more of them then about Ten remain, when Christianity shall grow
much brighter and clearer, till the full cleansing of the Sanctuary, or the New
Jerusalem, at 1772.

Let us now then proceed to the Apocalyptical Account of this Line, and the
first Note of the Time is the Forty two Months, and that is first given, that
it might exactly touch the taking away the Daily.

For whereas the Priests of Jesus Christ, even all his pure Worshippers, were
to come into the Outward Court, the Type of Public Evangelical Worship, or
Spiritual Sacrifice, and to fill it, and his Kings, under his Universal Kingdom
or Monarchy were to Reign; They were all sealed up into a Beginning Retirement
immediately after the Christian Empire of Constantine, and the desolation of
Heathenism by him; in signification, that that perfectly cleans'd Sanctuary,
nor that Kingdom should not yet appear in Glory, but at the first Trumpet, the
Paganiz'd Antichristians crowded in under the very Title of Christ's Priests, or
Servants, and so took away the Daily, and prepared the way to the Beasts
surprisal of the Kingdom, upon which the Witnesses put on Sackcloth, and the
Woman, or Church, fled into the wilderness; so that the Forty two months, and
the twelve hundred sixty days began together, at the daily taking away, as
that Divine Person, Jesus Christ, the man in linen, had declared to the
Prophet Daniel, Dan. 12. and Apoc. 11. 2, 3.

And whereas there is in Daniel no mention of the Forty two months of the
Gentiles, nor of the Beasts forty two months, which we shall be to consider in
this Line also, it is with admirable contrivance of the Divine Prophetic
Spirit; For in as much as the Time, Times, Semi-Time, are so appropriated to
the Beast, as that they are never alienated from his Action, and the Servants
of God suffering under him, and are as descriptive of him as the very Name,
Beast; for Times in some cases are as descriptive of Persons and Things as
Names; as we all know, what is meant by our last 41, or 71, applied either to
Persons or Things; Further, in that Season, Seasons, Half-Season, are
absolutely proper to the Beast; and that yet they respect principally the
intimate part Time, of which has been spoken; therefore Time, Times, Half
Time, could not be attributed to the Gentiles, or the other Beast, Rev. 13. For
that had been an Entrenchment upon the Grand Beast.

And yet because the Beasts time of duration, much more of his Regnancy, was
not so early as the Twelve hundred sixty days, begun in the Sufferings of the
Servants of God, and that the Daily Service is no where said to be taken away
by him, but rather from him, or before him, and as in preparation to Dan. 8.
11. Marg.
his rising; there is of necessity some additional Character of Time to
coextend the Time, Times, Semi Time, as at large, and equal to the 1260 days;
when the Line comes into so distinct a Fixation; and none so fit, as taken out
of the 2300 Even. and so declaring their Lineage, as these Forty two months of
the Gentiles under the Influence of him whom the Scripture calls the other
Beast, both of the Eastern and Western Empire, of which two Horns, for the sake
of that so notorious Dicholomy or Division of the Roman Empire into those two
parts, and of a Lamb, for the pretensions they made to Christ, are the Emblem;
of which Beast more is after to be spoken; and whereof the Beast himself was no
small part before, from the first till his Regnancy. Ap^. 13. 10.


Now these Gentiles, and this other Beast, which were to be Subjects of the
Grand Beast, have these Forty two months assigned to them to prepare for this
Grand Beast, till his Rising, to cause an Image to be made to him, and to give
Life to the Image, that so the Beast, that had been wounded in its sixth head
might recover, and live in its seventh head, although it did not appear in his
Infancy, nor till He came to his Number, or manly Age, viz. at 666. when He
took upon him, as Prince, and Lord of the intimate part of Time, which is most
precisely (...), Season, Seasons, Half Season. All which is a full Answer to
any Objection that the Universal Monarchy of the Beast cannot be traced so
early as the Prophecy supposes.

Thus therefore the Gentiles tread the Court, and Holy City, the first Forty
two months, that is, so long of them, as till the Beasts Existence especially,
and indeed till his Time of Regnancy, and that as Principals in the Apostasy;
After that their Forty two months are merg'd in the Beasts forty two months,
although for the Decorum, or Grace of the Type, they are given entire Forty two
months.

And because the Beasts intimate Time or Season will be spent and exhausted,
and the Gentiles forty two months also expired before the 1260 days be
expired; He, the Beast, has therefore full Forty two months power of duration,
Revel. 13. 5. into which, as was said, the Gentiles forty two months fall, and
subside at the Beasts Regnant Time. And by these is the Time at large furnished
out for his Action, to keep the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and the Woman in the
Wilderness, and also to continue the Gentiles treading the Holy Court, and that
the Daily Service may remain Taken away, and to do many great Acts of Cruelty
upon the Servants of God, even after his intimate Time, and possibly to give in
little, and as in Epitome, a Recollection of the 1260 years, in the last three
years and half, or some such proportion of Time when the Time of the Witnesses
Testimony is so near finished, and all this by virtue of his large permissory
Commission, given to him by God, above that given to his Gentiles; though He
cannot expand, or spread, nor culminate, or rise any more to the height of his
intimate Time, when it is once past.

And if there be such a Prince, whom the Scripture calls a Beast, that is, a
Paganiz'd Idolatrous Monarch; the Gentiles must needs be his People, and in his
Service, else he must be a Prince without a People; so that though the Gentiles
forty two months are necessary before the Beasts forty two months, yet they are
not necessary to be a distinct time after; for the Beasts Power necessarily
supposes them; they serve therefore not only the Grace of the Type, as was
said, but the Secrecy of the Prophecy; both which require, these numbers
should be given entire, and parallel, even as Adams years of Life ran along to
his Death with the common Line of Time to the Flood, though it was necessary
only until the Time of his Begetting, and after that the Line was set upon a
succeeding Patriarch, and so in the whole Roll, every ones Life, though it did
not support the Line, yet corroborated it after the Paidogony or Begetting, and
so concurred with it to the last, even thus the Gentiles Forty two months
support the Bestial Line, till the Beasts rising, and concur in it with the
Beast, while they last, and when they are ended, there is no alteration,
because the Bestian Times include to the very last of them the gross Gentilisme
of them that dwell on the Earth; and the false Prophetisme, into which the
other Beast sunk down, as into a proper Character after the Beasts 666, as
Apoc. 19. v. 20. He is called, and c. 20. v. 10.

But further than this, the Beasts forty two months have a certain Epoch, viz.
at the Year of our Lord 475, in the cessation of the Christian Empire in
Augustulus. Compare 2 Thessalonians. 2. with Revel. 17. 10, 11. For the Christian
Emperors being the sixth King, but none of the seven Heads, was the (...), or
he that let or withheld, as the Empire was the (...), or the thing that
let or withheld, that the eighth King, that was yet of the seven Heads,
could not succeed: for an after King cannot succeed till the former is gone off
the Stage, especially where God holds the Line of Succession firm: so that by
adjusting the forty two Months of the Beast, as lunar Time to the 1260 Days of
solar Time, we find thirty eight Years difference; and seeing All the whole
Line must end with the 1260, the Time of the Beasts forty two Months beginning
exactly agrees with 475, thirty eight Years after the 1260 Years of the
Witnesses Sackcloath, at 437, and All end at 1697.

And because we have spoke much of the Intimate Time of the Beast, or of his
Season, Seasons, Half-season, within time, times, half a time, we have the
Pillar of that Time erected, Revel. 13. 17, 18. when his first Season was well,
or about eighteen Years entered, viz. at 666, when his Name or Nature was come
to his Number, and when he was come to his Age of 666 from his Conception,
which by searching the Root, and as the Understanding and Reason of a Man
searches Number, we find to be Twenty Five by the consent of all Arithmetic,
as the Time of his Conception, when the Mystery of Iniquity, like a Womb, was
at work for him, who, as a man of those Characters, 2 Thessalonians. 2. was indeed
(...), or a Beast; and from Twenty Five, after the Resurrection or
Apocalyptical Epoch, the first visible Variation from the Apostolical Twelve,
both in Time and Nature, when it became the Base of another Doctrine, Kingdom,
the Root of another Name, the Apostasy conceived, and wrought within the
Mystery of Iniquity, not openly, but secretly, and as in the lower parts of the
Abyss, out of which the Beast comes, as a Womb at 725, when the War concerning
Images began, and continued till all that refused that Worship were
anathematized by the second Council of Nice; I say, to that 725, when Leo
Conon, the Grecian Emperor, was struck by the Thunderbolt of Excommunication,
interceeded just 666 Years from twenty five Years after the Resurrection: and
if by the three days and a half by themselves, as also by many other
Circumstances leading us to the three days of our Lord's Death, we balance
Time, we shall find the Proportions; for, as Christ died in the last fourth
part of the first day, and rose in the first fourth of the third day; so was
the Condition of the Witnesses. Begin their 1260 days at 437, and at 707 began
the last fourth part of the first Day or Time; viz. the last 90 of the first
360, as Christ's Death began at the sixth Hour, or at twelve, the last fourth
part of the Nycthemer, and was perfected by the end of it to his Burial; so the
Witnesses from 707 to 797, the end of the first day, lay dead in the Street of
the great City. But it did not become the Type they should be buried: and so to
1517; then their first motion to a Resurrection began, and their complete
Resurrection at 1697, even to admiration answering the last half day.

And lastly, because Imperial Revolutions, as being under the eye of all
History, most livelily represented by their Emblems, and fixed upon their just
Rests of Time, must needs strengthen Prophecy concerning the Church of God,
when one join Hand in Hand with the other; there is therefore the Fall of the
Western Empire given by the Divine Apocalyptical Prophecy to the Fall of the
Eastern Empire, or the taking of Constantinople, by such wonderful Types and
Figures of the gradual Impressions on the Western Empire, (Apoc. 8. v. 7. to
the end) by such Images of the Mohammedan Saracens, as Locusts, c. 9. to v. 13.
and of the Turkish Horsemen, to the end of the Chap. and with such a Relation
to the Antichristian Idolatries, and their Impenitency therein; adorned with
such Notes of Time, as the five months, and five months, to the Locusts, and
the hour, the day, the month, and the year, to the Horsemen called for by the
Voice, from the Golden Altar of Incense within the measured Temple, when the
Daily of public Worship was taken away, as makes the Line out of measure
excellent, and adorable, as given by the Holy Spirit; to the killing the third
part of men, or taking Constantinople, 1453.

Behold then, as at a Review, the admirable Structure of it, and the great
Instructions arising from its order of Repetitions upon these short Particulars.

1. The intimate Time of this Line is especially most solemnly appointed and
designed, and the whole, as united with it; for it is made, and constituted not
without an Oath, Dan. 12. 7. to be Time, Times, half a Time, and therein
Season, Seasons, half a Season: and it is cut off, not without an Oath, at the
end of intimate Time, though the whole of the Time, Times, half time, be first
supposed to run out at large, and the whole both of Time at large and intimate
Time also cut off for ever at that end. Apoc. 10. 6.

2. The whole of this Line, and of the last seventy five Years, is measured by
even Indictions, or Fifteens of Years; the use of which Rising in the Reign of
Constantine became well known by the beginning of this Line, which is one great
Confirmation, that we are upon the true Time of it; for to declare this, as it
were with Industry, there are even thirty joined to the 1260, and more openly
Three Fifteens, or Forty Five to the 1290, that we may thereby be engaged to
look back upon the whole Line, and find it throughout so compacted, as may be
easily computed, and has been before observed on Daniel's Vision.

3. Each Community has its just share in the intimate and full extended Time
of this Line, and each twice given: The Beast has first his intimate Time,
twice given in Daniel; and by two forty two months, given first to his
Gentiles, till his own rising, and then forty two Months to himself; he has
the utmost extent of Time, Times, half time, as before declared; and drawn out
of the 2300 Evenings: In just correspondence with which, the Servants of God,
as collected and congregated in the Woman, the Church, that they might not be
accused as having Relation to no Church; and single in the Witnesses, and the
Seed, who have the Witness, that Apo. 12. 17.
the Church might not seem a Notion only, have each one and the same 1260 da.
drawn out of the 2300 mornings assigned to them; and the Witnesses three days
and a half, and the Woman three times and a half, or season, or intimate Time,
answering the Beasts intimate Time, who must have the Servants of God as a
subject to work upon while his Tyranny lasts.

Now that the Time at large, or the Twice 1260 Days, must needs be the same,
and differ only in notion, as the Church, and the Witnesses, or the Seed that
have the Witness of Jesus do, is most evident; because lying within the same
Continent of Time, Times, Semi Time, and being both of the longest reach, and
exactly of the same size, it is not possible they should begin or end sooner
one than another, as we have found it possible the Gentiles and the Beasts
months may do; For neither are they so united as the Woman and the Witnesses;
And their months, though of the same size one with another, are yet not of an
equal extent to time, times, half time, at their full length; nor to the 1260
days, the just measure of the three times and half; although both the Forty
two months uniting, as we have said, are neither longer nor shorter than the
1260 days, nor than the Three Times and half, the common Womb of all.

And even so the three Times and half of the Woman, and the three days and
half of the Witnesses must be the same also, seeing the Witnesses and the Woman
are the same, and the 1260 days the same, and no difference, but only
notional, as was explained. For if they were different, the Woman should have
no parallel to the three days and half of the Witnesses, nor the Witnesses
have any parallel with the three times and half of the Witnesses, which, as
most unbecoming so Uniform a Type, are impossible also in such a sameness.

Thus the Marches, or Out-lying Borders, as well as the Intimate Time are full,
on the side of both Communities, the Beasts Tyranny, and the Sufferings of the
Servants of God.

The last Seventy five years, by the Voices, Revel. 14. and by the Vials, Rev.
16. move on to the two utmost Pillars of Time. It is done, It is done, Rev. 16.
17. Rev. 21. 6.

Object. In the former or after Parts of this Discourse, I offer, as I hope,
most Convictive Proofs of all these things in particular, and answer all
Objections; I shall only at this time remove this one, viz. There seems no more
reason to understand the forty two Months, as Lunar Months, than the days of
Years, as Lunar Years.

Answ. There is very great difference, for if we look throughout the Scripture,
and the whole manner of Jewish Computation of Time, we shall find, They always
understood Months, Lunar Months; and the very Solemnity of their New Moons
absolutely required it, so that to understand them otherwise, must needs be to
understand against that constant use of Scripture, and the Importance of the
Name of their Months Scripture uses.

But now their Years were so necessarily Solar Years, for there can indeed be
no Year but strictly Solar, that they most industriously provided to Adequate
their Lunar Time to their Solar; by Intercalations, and Inserted Months, or a
double Adar, which was their last Month of the Year; we every Leap-Year by a
double Twenty Eighth of February; As may be seen by the Learned, in that
Excellent Tract of Maimonides of Intercalations; which gives great light to
this whole Matter: As shall be farther taken notice of in the after Management
of this Discourse.

Having given this general View of this Grand Prophetical Line of Time, which
appears to be of sovereign Use to the Church of God, by the so often Repetition
of it; I think it necessary to make these Practical Remarks upon it, for the
universal profit of all that read it.

It ought to administer no Scandal to us, that Christianity Jews, Mahometans,
Pagans; That it has not won upon the world to an universal Conversion to it;
That it has not prevailed upon Christians themselves, to higher degrees of
Religious and Holy Affections and Actions; That it has not reconciled Men more
to one another, and made the Wolf and the Lamb to lie down together; That it
has not filled the Earth with the knowledge of God, as the Waters cover the
Sea; That it has not derived down a more universal state of outward Blessing,
Prosperity, Peace and Happiness; For these are the great Promises, and
Pretentions of the Kingdom, Christ designed to erect in the World; now an Enemy
has done all this; in the Wisdom of God and Christ, the old Dragon, the
Serpent, Satan has inhabited, and acted a Bestian Empire, first as Pagan, and
in the very appearance of a Dragon, watching to devour the manly Birth of
Christianity; and since That Empire became Christian; in a Bestian Kingdom of
Apostasy; and this has surprised and cut off the blessed Emanations of
Christianity and the Gospel, and made the Christian World, except in some small
chosen Parts of it, like the Wilderness, like Heathen, Pagan Nations and
Kingdoms, full of Scandals, to the great hinderance of the other parts of the
World from submission to the Scepter of Christ, or taking upon them his Name
and Profession, and made ineffectual this Profession to the very Professors of
it.

And this has been, lo these twelve hundred and fifty years, wait only, till
the ten are run out also, and you shall see a greater change in the World, than
ever yet it has known; Christianity shall then prevail more in a little time,
than it has done ever yet; The Light of one day shall be as the Light of
seven, till it grows brighter and brighter, to the perfect Day of Christ's
Kingdom; the first Conversions to Christianity, though so great, as to be a
very strong Argument of its Truth, were small, in comparison of what this shall
be; for the Mystery of Iniquity began early to work; Ephesus, the Type of the
Apostolical Church left its first love, as soon as the Apostles went off the
World; and notwithstanding all the sufferings of the Primitive Christians,
under the Type of Smyrna, yet a Synagogue of Satan, an authoritative
Ecclesiastic Apostasy then overshaded it, till in the times figured by
Pergamus, all was covered with the Throne of Satan, a Supremacy of Apostasy;
and so things went on, and they are not yet recovered in the Best Christian
Churches; but they shall be after the space of ten prophetical Days, that is,
years; to that degree, that the Kingdoms of this World shall be proclaimed to
be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and so things shall go on amain
to the Restitution of all things, as God has spoken by his Prophets, since the
World began, the Lord will hasten all this in his own time; and if it be
wonderful in our Eyes, should it be therefore wonderful in Gods?

The Witnesses shall then put off their Sackcloth, the everlasting Gospel
shall be preached to every People and Language; the Monarchy of Christ Jesus
shall be an Universal Monarchy, and the Tenfold Principality, the ten Kings
shall fall perfectly off from the Beast, and the City, that is born up on high
by it, that has so long reigned over the Nations and Kings of the Earth, shall
fall.

Stay then you Atheists, and Despisers of all Religion, and assuage the high
Atheistical Humor, see whether God has not called the end, and declared it
from the beginning, and declared all along the great things to come, that you
and all may know that he is God, have so much Patience, as to see what these
ten years will produce at their end; but if you will not be persuaded, take
your fill of Atheism, and your farewell also; for the very Air you breath in,
will be too bright, and hot for Atheism to live any longer in.

Let us, considering at what Door this fatal Apostasy departure from the
Apostolical twelve, and so grew up to its number 666; let us, I say, fear the
least remove in Doctrine, Worship, and Practice from the foundation of the
Prophets, and Apostles, or from Christ, the chief corner stone.

We need not so much mind combating Parties in Religion, by names hateful or
reproachful to them; much less those little snatches at them by trifling
Reflections upon them; let us center our selves upon Truth it self, in the word
of God, and grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and that will secure us from this Error of the Wicked, and from falling
from our own stedfastness; this will cut off Offense from all but those, who
are resolved to take Offense; this will preserve us in due regard to Authority,
if we dissent from it, in matters of Religion; and yet we shall preserve our
Religion, while we keep close to those Images of things, Scripture has given
us, and observe those notes of Time it has fitted to them, and suffer History,
which is every man's Privilege to read, to hear, or to know, even by the Law of
Nature, to declare what fell out; and this we cannot be denied, since God has
furnished us in all things, and commands us to search his word, and to hear and
read the Words of his Prophecy, and count the numbers he has given, with
Wisdom and Understanding; and his Ministers are to expound to us, and then we
are to search and try whether those things are so or not; and in all things
received from the word of God we know, and all know, it is more reasonable to
obey God than Men.

These are two things, in which the Happiness and Welfare of Man consists, for
this World, and for that to come; both which he has made, as certain and
evident to us, as the Light.

One, and the First, and Principal, is true Religion, fixed in his Word, with
the present Consent of Natural Conscience, and the Awes of that, even whether
we will or no. If we would but rest in the clear, plain, and undoubted Truths
of it, and not be hasty of removing from them, till we have full Evidence from
them to conduct us farther into Divine Knowledge, without suffering our own
Fancy to mislead us, or our Credulity and sudden Belief of others, to hurry us
according to their Impositions.

The Second is Loyalty, or Subjection to the Sovereign Power set over us by
God, and what that is, we may easily know; For the Sword of Justice is
Supremely in the Hands of it, and the Government of that World in which we
live, that the Disorders of Mankind may not swallow up it self, depends upon
it; It carries before it a Terror to evil works, and a praise to them that do
well; Upon which account we must be subject, not only for wrath, but for
Conscience sake. And when this is in the Hand of a Prince, whose Ancestors have
been Princes throughout many Ages, when the Succession is Clear and Lineal; we
can have no greater Assurance, The Power that is, is ordained of God; And such,
blessed be God, is the Case of our Nation, that we can have no possible Scruple.

Now our Subjection is clear, what it ought to be, even in all things, but our
Religion, whether Revealed or Natural, for that is Gods; and to be rendered to
him only; All things else are Caesar's. A Christian, as a Christian, can have
no Scruple or Doubt in any thing else, whatever it be; This he can by no means
submit; It is to impeach Sovereignty in its highest Orb, even as it is to obey
a Subordinate Magistrate, sent by the King, against the King and his Supremacy.
But in all things else, he needs as a Christian ask no Question for Conscience
sake. What men may, as men, as the Subjects of such Laws, such Establishments,
as every Nation has peculiar to it self, insist upon, I leave to those Laws. I
know as Christians, the rendering our Lives, our Estates, if called for by God,
and the Edicts of Princes, cannot hurt our Consciences, but rendering our
Religion to any but God and his Word, will.

So these two things, Religion and Loyalty, can never clash, can never
interfere; for to deny the surrender of our Religion, can never hurt our
Loyalty; for to be Religious according to the Word of God only, and Natural
Conscience guided by that, is the highest Loyalty: This is all the Loyalty Man
can require; to render All things else without Resistance, and to Love, Honor,
Pray for the Prince that requires all; our Loss God will recompense in the
Resurrection of the Just. So a Christian has no need to be Disloyal, if he
understand his Religion aright: It is not our Loyalty to our Prince, to be of
our Prince's Religion, though it be right, it is our Loyalty to God in the
first place; so it is not Disloyalty not to be of the Princes Religion, if it
be not according to the Word of God, when we render All but our Religion, He
can require; And this we need not fear to do, because we cannot lose by it, our
Reward will be great from our Father, who is in Heaven; and as Christians we
should be ashamed to deny it; but in Religion, even to the least Ceremony of
it, except determined by natural decency or order, we have but one Father and
Master, God and Christ, and here he has neither Vicar, nor Vicegerent, but
his Spirit in his Word.

We should be content in this time of the Apostasy, with a Beast and his
Adherents, that carry the Pomp and Greatness of this World in a Religious
Equipage; it is even a suspicion upon what is high, and stately, and in
Opulency by Christianity; for Christ's Witnesses are in Sack-cloch, it is the
Time of the Delay of his Kingdom, and all his Servants are with him in the
Patience of it; they ought not to ravish Glory, and surprise Dignity before the
time, but to stay for it, till the appearance of Jesus Christ, the 1260 Days of
Mourning, and of the Church in the Wilderness are not yet run out, the Beast is
yet in Power; the Tenthliness of the City is not yet fallen, the Kingdom of
Christ is not yet proclaimed.

It is no wonder, there is yet so great a Rent and Division so it should be,
that Prophecy may be fulfilled, The Beast and his Adherents are obstinate to
the last, even when the Elevation of things against them shall be much higher
then now, when Evidences from Heaven shall be much more sensible, they
blaspheme and repent not. Christianity from so long an Antiquity, and the
profession of it shields and defends their Pretensions, and carries a shade
over them, even wherein they depart from it, and most Apostatize, this keeps up
the Controversy, and perpetuates the Dispute.

But within a Time, a short Time it will be decided; it will come to that
public Declaration of the Witnesses Ascension, of their Song before the
Throne, the positive Denunciation, If any man worship the Beast, and his Image,
He shall drink of the wrath of God, and etc, will put an end to all Dispute,
Revel. 14. 9.

In the mean time, let not any pretense stagger us, The man of sin ought to sit
in the Temple of God; his seat then must be founded in a profession of the true
Religion; his Antiquity signifies nothing; for he ought to be a Beast of forty
two months of years, or above twelve hundred years standing. His Pretenses from
any thing said or done before that 1260, how early soever, if it be not found
evident in Scripture, is of no avail; for the Mystery of Iniquity, the Womb out
of which He came, was at work, and in a Mystery so secret, so cunning, as not
to be discerned by many good men; and all to bring him to what he was, and is;
the Spirit of Antichrist was then in the World.

It is no wonder Princes continue so devoted to him, and his City, he calls a
Church; the words of God are not yet fulfilled concerning him, but they shall
consider, and change their Minds when God puts it into their Hearts; and
therefore we ought earnestly to pray for them, whatever their Persuasions are
now; that God would continue their Lives, for they shall then be Instruments in
his hand; that change so near approaching shall be most orderly, most regularly
by Princes themselves induced by Evidences from Heaven, of an extraordinary
nature; God will not be helped herein, but by his own Vicegerents, whom he has
appointed, whom he has ordained; no Sedition, Rebellion, may grow from hence;
It is to be quieted, appeased, and even rooted up by this Doctrine, even as it
is utterly condemned by it, for God will appear, and Princes with him.

But yet on this, nor on any other Account, can there be a Reconciliation, a
Composition with this false state of Christianity: there may be such Attempts,
for there will be a Synagogue of Satan rising anew at the very approach of
Christ's Kingdom, before the end yet of the 1260 Days: It appears as if there
would be so; for Philadelphia, the best State of the Christian Church before
the New Jerusalem, and with which it united, shall receive Acknowledgment from
such a Synagogue, that Christ has loved it. Revel. 3. 9.

But this Representation of Bestianism, obstinate, impenitent to the Last in
the Body of it, as it is the decisive Argument, and beyond all Volumes of
Dispute, because it is divine, perpendicular, downright, swift, and sudden in
its Determination; so it shows the impossibility of meeting halfway, accepting
Terms to any good Effect.

We know not what may be between this present Time, though but a Remnant, and
the end of the 1260 Days. There may be an Eye of the Witnesses killed, and
lying dead, three days and a half, a return of former Darkness in some parts at
least: I apprehend it not in this Nation; yet God only knows; it is not so
far revealed, so far as I have found; but I hope not: There may be a Synagogue
of Satan; a Project of Compounding; this I more fear: but let us obtain and
maintain a full Victory over the Image, the Mark, the Name, and the Number of
the Name. But it is certain, it is but ten prophetical Days, and the Witnesses
shall not only every where rise, but every where come out of their Sackcloath,
out of which, the true Witnesses of God are no where yet come: Then they shall,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

So many certain Notes, Characters, and Boundaries of Time as I have drawn
together in the compute of this Line of Time with it self, and that are given
as Assistants to it, though not immediately of the Essence and Body of it; can
be no more by chance than many Pictures exactly resembling several Persons
pertaining to a Family, and found in the Mansion of such a Family, and at such
Times when such Persons were known to be so appertaining to it, can be by
chance: Forced they are not; for things themselves conspire: Fancyful and
Arbitrary they are not; for they cannot be changed, or removed at Pleasure, nor
any like them made.

If then they are truly Scriptural and Divine, How certainly shall they be
fulfilled in their Season? All counter-Appearances can signify no more, than
the Israelites severer Usage by Pharaoh argued against their Deliverance by
Moses. All the Disaffection in the Age to Interpretation of Prophecies, or its
insensibleness of them, can no more disprove them than Christ's coming as a
Thief upon Sardis at an Hour it knew not, shall be disproved by the Sleepiness
and Unwatchfulness of that Church.

Let us then with Resolution, Constancy of Obedience, Strength of Faith, Labor
of Love, Patience of Hope, wait for, and come to the end of these ten days, and
from them to the 1335 Days, where Blessedness shall certainly be.

But if we should say, We may dye before those Ten Years are come to their
Period, and there is no Probability or Possibility we should live to the
seventy five beyond, or the 1335 of Blessedness:

I answer; The Saints of God living on Earth shall receive their share in all
the Glories of his Kingdom, and the several degrees of it: and they that dye,
hoping, waiting, desiring, praying, shall be raised in the very same posture of
Soul wherein they died: so that they, who by a general Faith and Obedience
waited, and came in Daniel's Time, and ever since, viz. by earnest Prayers,
Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, shall be blessed; even as they who by particular
Faith and Obedience wait, and come at the Time it self.

And in the mean time, the Souls of Saints above, the Spirits of just men, who
shall be perfected at that time, celebrate in Heaven all the Advances of
Christ's Kingdom, even as they pray for it: as the Souls under the Altar, cry,
How long Lord, etc. so they rejoice at every Rising of Christ's Kingdom; so do
the same Souls, Rev. 12. 10. So Rev. 14. 3. They, that sing that new song,
harping with their Harps. So They, Rev. 15. 3. So they, Rev. 19, etc. Such is
the universal Song of Triumph of the Palm-bearing company, Revel. 7. 10. Let us
not therefore despond, but be abundant in the work of the Lord, knowing our
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Why should it be thought an incredible thing* that God Known to God are all
his Works from the beginning to the end. The Scheme of all that has been,
before it was, or that shall be, is always with Him, as if it just now was, in
all the circumstances and Life of a present Appearance, in whose Eternity, All
present, past, to come, are all one. The whole Table of Time is always before
Him.

Does it then pertain to the Prerogative of Omniscience, that Future Things
should be known only to himself? It does so indeed, any further than he is
pleased to reveal them. But He that challenges the false Divinities of the
Heathen, that they could not declare things to come, has certainly given Isa.
42. 23.
Instances of his own Prescience, and Demonstrations of it to his People. Has
he not done so in all Ages, by his Servants the Prophets? Is he not as Liberal
to the Ages of Christianity, to the state of things under the Gospel of his
Son, whom he has constituted Heir of all things, and put in subjection to him
the World to come, of which we speak.

Or, is the Glory of Divine Truth so great, that even as immediate Appearances,
the Power of Miracles, and extraordinary Revelations have ceased since the full
Settlement and Sealing the Volume of Truth in the Gospel, so Prophecy needs not
now. This indeed has much of Reason, yet even as all Truth is comprised in
that Volume, so are the Grand Revolutions pertaining to the Christian Church,
in the same Volume; and therefore whatever God has done for the former World,
the very same has he summed up in the New Testament.

When therefore we have, besides the Interspersion of Prophecy in several
places of it, a Book wholly Dedicated to Prophecy, Blessed is he that hears
and reads the words of this Prophecy; Have we not reason then to expect the
course of things to the very end in it?

But does not the Prophecy it self say, The Things were shortly to come to
pass? So that what is to be found in it pertain'd to the primitive Age, the
Destruction of Jerusalem, to the Time when Christianity was well settled, and
till Pagan Rome became Christian.

It is true indeed, The Divine Revelator, Jesus Christ our Lord, does say, the
things were shortly to come to pass, that is, to begin to come to pass. They
were then upon motion; but as a great Army is said to come immediately, when
the Avant-Corriers are coming, or come, although the whole Body and Rear may be
considerable distances off, so this whole Series, and Chain of Events in the
Revelation come quickly, although the first and the last part differ so many
Ages. Is it not clear and visible, that there is the Beginning of Things, and
the End of Things in every man's Apprehension plain and evident, that is, from
the Resurrection, and to the Day of Judgment? and why then should we not
believe, there is the Middle of Things also? Why should we imagine, Prophecy
has made such a Leap over the Between Lying Times, seeing they were very
great? Did it not behove his Church and Servants to know of so great, and wide
spreading an Imposture as Mahometanisme? Was it nothing to it, Christianity
should be in so low and dark a state, as it was from the lowest Fall of the
Western Empire to the Ruin of the Eastern Empire, in both which the principal
Residences of it were; and so long space as from 666, to 1453.

But still, it may be said, If such a Prophecy be, it does not become us to pry
into it; it is the Ark of secret things, that do not belong to us. Why then
does Christ say, Blessed is he that hears the words of this Prophecy? Why
does he command him that has Wisdom and Understanding, to count the Number of
the Beast? Why does He, in explication of the Seven Heads say, Here is the Mind
that has Wisdom? Why had Christ the Revelation to show to his Servants?

But was it not all one, as if they had not been revealed, since the Revelation
was not pretended to be understood in former Times? I answer, we do not know
what was understood, the Apostasy so covered and muffled all Things, and does
yet so darken them; The universal prejudice against the Explanation of this
Prophecy is, I doubt not, the effects of this Apostasy: But that there has
gone a stream of Light from hence to the Servants of Christ, by the Witnesses
in every Age, is to me out of all question, and that it has discovered the
Things most necessary to that Age, although the Light has been not only
clearer, but the knowledge that such a Light has been, more certain to us
since the last Age and Half, and shall be every day clearer and clearer.

When therefore there are so many Types so very proportionable to Events, so
agreeable to the Notes of Time, and even so situated in the Course and Series
of the Revelation, except that in some Chapters, as 11, 12, 13, 17, 21, there
are on great occasions Recollections, and yet even those, in order to going on,
as I have abandantly shown; I cannot understand, why these things, and their
Explications should appear so strange and unreasonable to us.

But however, the Glory of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be
unspeakably Great, when the whole Administration of his Kingdom delayed shall
be drawn out of what he had so curiously depainted in the Prophecy of the
beloved Daniel, and the Apocalypse of the beloved Apostle John, and with
Admiration and Ravishment His Servants shall behold the one in the other.

Let all this persuade us, to have kinder, and more benign Inclinations to the
Interpretation of this Prophecy; which, if we are the true Servants, and Lovers
of Christ's Kingdom, we have no reason to fear: only the Apostasy, and Enemies
of it, have reason to fear it. And they indeed have, and do still operate
against its Exposition, as knowing it speaks no good of them nor to them, and,
which is wonderful, convey, inject, and insinuate the same Disgust into the
minds of many good men.

Seeing one great Reason of the unholiness of Life among Apostasy, prevailing
against the Power of Christianity and Godliness, under the Form of it; in this
we ought above all to overcome it. It is impossible so excellent a Doctrine, as
of the Gospel, should be environed and covered with such an outrage of
Profaneness and Wickedness, if the force of its Beams were not intercepted and
eclipsed. In this therefore, I say, we ought most particularly to overcome, in
all the luster of Christian Graces, whereby we may shine as Lights in the midst
of a crooked and perverse Generation. For to this Overcomming all the Promises
are made. Rev. 21. 7.

If we do not overcome the Apostasy in this, we do not overcome it at all; but
sink into it, while we never so much profess to abhor it; but if we overcome
it by sincere Faith and Repentance, and Fruits meet for those Graces, so that
we thus wash our Robes white in the Blood of the Lamb, we may, notwithstanding
darkness and mistake in some things, have right to enter through the Gates into
the City, to eat of the Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God, to
drink of the Water of Life that runs through the midst of it; but if we are in
the foul Impurities of the Apostasy, our dreadful doom is to be without the
City, as Dogs, and to have our part in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast, and the false Prophet are, and the Devil, that
deceived them, is at the end of all cast for ever. Rev. 20. 10. chapter 21. 8.

SECT. IV.
A more particular Allocation, or just placing of the States and Times one to
another, showing the necessity of their enfolded Equality to, and with one
another.
I Have thus far in a more general view of the Particulars of this Line,
presented the compute of the Times, and of each of their Characters, with the
correspondent States: I will now more amply and particularly remonstrate upon
the States, and so adjust them to the Times, and their Characters, as may fully
evince their close Connection, and the absolute and most necessary equality of
all the States and Characters of this Line, one to and with another.

And that we may plainly have together, and under one Glance, that which has
been spoken of, and is farther to be spoken of and made good, I thus delineate
it.

The States are the Beasts Tyranny, and the Sufferings of the Servants of God
under it; distinguished by various lively Remarks.

The Characters are those Notes of Time God has affixed to, and determined
upon these States, making up one Line of Continuance, or Duration of those
States.

These two* the States and the Characters, are thus to be suited one to the
other.

There is one common Continent, or Womb of Time, that incloses each State, and
all the Characters of Time given to each State, that is, Time, Times, half a
Time, with three days and a half, declaring Time at large, and intimate Time,
or Seasons.

There is one equal Standard-Line, making certain and definite the space of
that common Continent, taken out of the 2300 Ev. Morn, viz. 1260 going on to
1290. The State fitted to it is the taking away of the Daily, Dan. 12. v. 11.

Intimate Time taken out of that common Continent is twice given on the Beast's
side, viz. Season, Seasons, Half Season. The States fitted to each are wearing
out the Saints of the most High, changing Times and Laws given into his hand,
Dan. 7. 25. scattering the Power of the holy People, Dan. 12. 7. doing all
these to the utmost, or accomplishing to do them in the highest degree.

The same intimate Time is twice given to the Servants of God also; viz. Three
days and half to the Witnesses. The State fitted to it is to be killed, and to
lie dead, but not to be suffered to be buried or extinguished, Revel. 11. 7, 8,
9. and three Times and a half to the Woman, whose State fitted to it is to be
so in the Wilderness, as to be hid from the Face of the Serpent, but yet to be
nourished, Rev. 12. 14.

The Time at large is twice assigned on the Beasts part, Forty two Months taken
out of the 2300 Even. or Nights, given to the Gentiles. The State fitted to
them is treading the outward Court, and Holy City, whereby the Daily is taken
away, at the very Beginning of the 1260, lying in 1290, according to Dan. 12.
11. compared with Revel. 11. 2, 3. The second Time Forty two Months to the
Beast himself, Doing all he does to the last Continuance or Accomplishment to
the last Moment, is the State fitted to them, Revel. 13. 5. and both these
Forty two Months twist into one Space, equal to 1260 Days.

The same Time at large is twice adjusted to the Servants of God in twelve
hundred sixty Days, taken out of the 2300 Morn. or Days; once to the Witnesses;
and the State fitted to it is Prophecy in Sackcloth, yet with great Virtues and
Powers resident in them, Revel. 11. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and once to the Woman in the
Wilderness, yet as in a Place prepared by God, where they should feed her,
Revel. 12. 6. And these two 1260 Days are perfectly both one, neither longer
nor shorter than themselves.

Between the Time at large, and Intimate Time, or Season, there is a Pillar
erected to show where Season begins, and by proportion where it ends, viz. The
Beasts Number, as Lord of the intimate Time especially, and it is 666, from its
Root 25, after the Resurrection, to 725; and the State of it is, That no man
may buy or sell that has not the Mark, or Name on his Right Hand, or on his
Forehead, or the Name, or the Number of the Name, nor so much as live if he
does not worship the Image. The end of which intimate Time is by Proportion
1517, and so on, Rev. 13. 15. to the end.

But now besides this measure of intimate Time, because the Beast is Lord of
Time, Times, Half a Time, and so constituted by God, his Forty two Months are
an exact Measure also of the whole Line, beginning at that most famous Epoch,
so well known to History, the Cessation of the Western Empire 475, whence his
Forty two Months, to be set as Lunar Time to the 1260 Days of Solar Time, must
be 1222, and so beginning at 475, must end at 1697, with the 1260 Days
beginning 437, thirty eight Years before them with the Gentiles Forty two
Months; according to the Laws of this Line of Time, and of the Sun's and Moon's
Motion, collated one with another.

And to confirm the right Calculation of this whole Time to us, Imperial Time
is adjusted to it by the Emblems of the falling Empire in the West, till the
vulgar 606, when the Beast, as a Star falling to the Earth, enlightened that
Western Empire, so darkened before, that neither Sun, nor Moon, or Stars, shined
in its third part, and presently after arose the Mohammedan Hegira, or Account
of Time at 626; the which Imperial Time is accounted till the Fall of the
Eastern Empire, under the same Emblem of the third part of Men, which also is
to be cleared: within seventy Years of which, intimate Time ceases, and that
Change we call the Reformation ensued at 1517, represented by its most
significant Emblems, and the Mohammedan Power still continued, and yet is to
continue to the end of the whole Line 1260, which goes to 1290, and so to 1335,
the happy end of all the 2300 Ev. Morn. All which I cannot but hope will be
acknowledged a rational and clear Account of this admirable Line.

Now of every of these particulars, I undertake particularly to discourse; and
although, I confess the Order of Nature is first to speak of the Kernel of
Time, or the intimate Time, to which the Foregoing Time at large is but a
Preparation, and After-Time but an Accomplishment; yet because I must follow,
as the Divine Spirit has gone before, I begin with the Ambient Time of the
Gentiles Forty two Months, and of the Witnesses twelve hundred sixty Days in
Sackcloth, and of the Woman in the Wilderness, that first appear, and are
placed as in Complex one with another, before the Inner Time, or Season. In
beginning with which, Sacred Prophecy is pleased to make the way plainer to us.

To begin then first with the Gentiles, Treading the Holy Court and City,
which, as has been declared, does not run as a principal Character, but at
farthest, to the first part of the intimate State, or Season, and there is
supported by the latter Forty two Months of the Beast to the very end of the
whole 1260 days.

Now the knowledge of this either State or Character of Time, is peculiarly
given by the Apocalypse, and has no other Intimation in Daniel, than what is
common to the Time, Times, Semi-Time, and to the Twelve hundred sixty, joined
with the Thirty more, and so making Twelve hundred ninety, at the taking away
the Daily, and yet, because it is of very great Use and Necessity in this
Account of Time, therefore is given so distinct and express in this excellent
Apocalyptick Prophecy, which surpasses Daniel, even as the New Testament
exceeds the Old, and as Revelation, however mystical, excells Type, and Figure
of an older date.

Now the great Use of this Character is this, When the Beast does neither in
the Account of Prophecy, nor Accord of History, rise, till some years after the
Twelve hundred sixty years began, nor reach his State especially designed to be
set out by Daniels Prophecy, till many years after the 1260 years began, viz.
the very beginning of his most intimate State, at his so often mentioned 666,
in prevision of which, it is said, The Saints, Times and Laws are given into
his hand, Season, Seasons, Dan. 7. 25
and half a Season, meaning this intimate Time. Upon all this, it may well be
asked, How came the Daily to be Taken so early away? what is the occasion of
the Witnesses putting on Sackcloth, or the Woman's flying into the wilderness,
seeing all these belong to the Beasts Tyranny, who did not yet exist, nor till
so long after appeared Regnant, or why are the Twelve hundred sixty days made
to begin so much sooner than the Beasts Forty two months?

Now in Answer to this, The Gentiles treading under foot the holy Court and
City, appears timely, to give cause to all these things; and to show the
Agreement of Prophecy herein with it self; These Gentiles are no other, than
they, that are said, Revel. 13. to dwell on the Earth, whose Names are not
written from the foundation of the world in the Lambs Book of Life, whom that
(...), that other Beast, ver. 11. (of whose two Horns like a Lamb was spoken
before, and who is hereafter further to be explained) instructed to worship the
Grand Apocalyptick Beast, as one with the Pagan Roman Empire in its Idolatrous
Universality, called therefore the First Beast, and to make an Image to it,
viz. an Image unto its Idolatry, and to its Monarchy; which Things are
hereafter to be explained upon the Beast; but at present it is easy to be
understood. The newly Christianiz'd Pagans of the Roman Empire, were, under the
Change of the Emperors to Christians, violently changed to the Profession of
Christianity, and yet at the same time fond of their Ancient Pagan Rites and
Customs, as also, of the Glory of their Universal Empire, East, and West: Now
meeting with that Two-horn'd Lamb-like Beast, fond of the same Sensual
Religion, but in another sort of Imagery, as also of the Earthly Universality
and Glory, but of it, in another Appearance also; it may very readily be
conceived, how complyant they were one with the other in both these things, so
as immediately to fill up the Outward Court, and to Take away the true Datly
Public Worship of God, and so to prepare for the Bestian Kingdom under the
Seventh Head, before his Existence in his own Forty two months, and much more
before his Regnancy, to which he himself, as a principal or chief Member of the
other Beast, though not yet the Grand Beast, and after in his own Infancy, when
his 42 Months began, as that Grand Beast, was never wanting in his
Contributions; All which rightly conceived, does wonderfully conciliate the
Prophecy to the History; especially when I come to clear all Doubts upon those
two Beasts, Apoc. 13.

For thus, according to Daniel, All these things were negotiating for the
Beast, who was the Prince designed, and on whom all redounded in the Issue, and
these Gentiles under the other Beast were to be his Subjects, and the other
Beast his False Prophet, zealous of him and of his worship, and so the Daily
worship was Taken away from before him, or out of his way, the way of his
Rising, as Daniel foretold.

And thus, according to the Revel. the Gentiles tread the Holy Court, and the
Witnesses put on Sackcloth upon it, and the Woman flies into the Wilderness;
for what these Gentiles do, they do by the Conduct of that other Beast, who
from his Lamb-like Horns, yet spoke as a Dragon, in resemblance of the Pagan
Dragon, while they convey his Power to the Grand Beast of the Seventh Head.

How fitly then, the Gentiles Forty two months of treading the Holy Court are
made the First note of Time, will be easily understood, if we consider these
particulars.

1. That the Holy City first, and then the Outer-Court of the Temple was the
only due place of Sacrifice, of the Jews Daily of Public Worship, after God
had placed his Name there; So that no fitter Type of the Daily Christian
Services and Sacrifices, than the Holy City, and the Outward Court of the
Temple.

2. That nothing could more express the Taking away the Jews Daily Sacrifice,
than the Gentiles invading, crowding in, and filling the City and Court; For
how great a violation and defilement, even according to the Divine Appointment,
that was, appears by the uproar against the Apostle Paul, upon a supposition of
a Gentile brought by him into the Temple; so their Daily Sacrifice must cease
of necessity, upon the Gentiles coming into the Holy City and Court, by an
Authorized Violence, like a Flood, and continuing so to do; therefore the
Gentiles Treading the Court, makes a fit Symbol of the Jewish Daily Service
Taken away; Proportionably these Gentiles, or Paganiz'd Christians, taking up
the whole room of it, as if they were the Church and People of God, do as
notably answer the Type, as can be conceived by defiling the whole Christian
Public Service, and thrusting out the true Worshippers; These uncircumcised,
in Heart and in Flesh, not inwardly Gracious, nor keeping so much as to the
outward circumcision of the pure Worship of God, break the very Covenant of
Sacrifice, and Holy Service to God; for no such are to enter the true Christian
Temple, Ezekiel 45. 7. (...), what placing together can there be of the Temple
of God and Idols? Of True Christians and Pagan Christians, it is a very unequal
Yoke. 2. Cor. 6. 16.

This most admirably also answers the prophetical Type of the daily Sacrifice
taken away by Antiochus, Called Epiphanes.
for first the false and revolting Jews would make a Covenant with the Heathen,
and obtained License of the King to do after the Ordinances of the Heathen;
because the Land had more Peace then, whereupon they built a Place of Exercise
at Jerusalem, according to the Custom of the Heathen; and then in Gods Account
the daily was taken away from, or before that wicked Prince Antiochus, Dan. 8.
11. Then he entered Proudly into the Sanctuary, and so things went on to the
utmost Extremity and height; that all should leave their own Laws, and the
People be one, and whoever would not do according to the Commandment of the
King, should dye, and the daily Service was openly forbidden; so Jerusalem
became (...) a Habitation of Strangers or Gentiles, then the Sanctuary became a
Desolation, (...), It was desolated as a Wilderness, and became (...), an alien
to its Offspring and they to it, and then all was turned, (...), into the
Mourning and squalor of sackcloth at the Appearance of the Abomination that
makes desolate, which was set up the fifteenth of the Month Casleu, in the
145th year of the Grecian Kingdom; and on the five and twentieth day of the
same Month, they sacrificed upon the Idolatrous Altar, and that this might be
done without control, and the true Religion banished; they rent in pieces the
Books of the Law, wherever they were found, and wheresoever was found with any
the Book of the Testament, or if any consented to the Law, the Kings
Commandment was, that they should put him to death. Howbeit many in Israel were
fully resolved, and confirmed in themselves to keep close to the Divine Law and
Rule, in all things, and accordingly suffered.

But exactly three years after, as the History reports, the sanctuary was
cleans'd, and the daily service restored; and a year after that Antiochus dyed
as a Prince broken without hand. This is the sum of the Relation, 1 Macc. c. 1.
c. 4. cap. 6.

Now how admirably this prophetical Type of Antiochus's enacting the taking
away the daily Jewish service, the way being prepared by the paganiz'd Jews,
the Methods and Degrees by which all was done, the Restoration that followed,
and then the divine Judgment upon the Tyrannous Prince himself, how admirably I
say all this Answers the Table of things before us, is even amazing; as also
that the History was not only preserved by Providence (Divine Revelation being
then intermitted, till Christ, which is not without its significancy) that it
has not been only, I say, preserved, but inserted however unduely into the
sacred Records, by those, by whomsoever it was done, that by a Witness and
Prophet of their own, a Scripture of their own Canonizing, such an Eye of time
though much shorter, and such a Typical Delinetion, allowing for some lesser
Disagreements, so wonderfully exact should be ratifyed, and that this Map of
things might be not only extant, but so illustrious, as to have become in their
Account part of the Bible, and bound up so generally with it by their Influence
who were indeed concerned, it should have been blotted out from under Heaven.

But that in which we are at present most interessed, is, That by the Apostasy
of the Gentiliz'd Christians, the Daily of the public Worship of Christians
first ceased; and so in God's Account, the Mourning or Sackcloth of the
Witnesses, and the Wilderness-state of the Woman the Church, by that Gymnasium,
that Place of Exercise, or Academy for Idolatry, to train and school men up to
it, was brought into the Holy City: even thus the remaining Love to Paganism
began the Covenant or Composition between Gentilism and false Christianity,
exchanging the one into the other, and on the very same Account, because the
Land then infested with the barbarous Irruptions, needed such Maozzim, or
Patrons, and Defenders, as Idols before, and the Saints Departed now. And so
all things went on to the 666, the Number of the Beast, his Image, Mark, Name,
and the Number of his Name; so that one would be prone to think, The (...).
Treading the Holy City under foot by the Gentiles, (...).
the Witnesses Sackcloth, (...).
the Wilderness of the Woman, (...).
Her Seed at the same time aggress'd, were all taken from the Maccabean Words
we mentioned before; although it is evident, they have their Ground of Allusion
chiefly from Sacred Writ it self, yet by way of Argument, ad Homines, to the
Men themselves, this is no unworthy Observation, nor can it seem undesign'd by
Providence.

4. There is in this very Epoch of the wonderful Line we are upon, such a
Concurrence of Prophetical Notes both of the States, and of the Times adjusted,
that it is as if the Holy Spirit of Prophecy had said to us, Observe it; This
is the Beginning, the Era, and Epoch of it.

For first, the treading the Holy City and the Court, is in words the very same
with the place of the Sanctuary cast down, and the Sanctuary, and the Host
given to be trodden under foot, Dan. 8. v. 11. 13. in the Vision of the Daily
taken away, and of the 2300 Ev. Morn. From whence is to be concluded, that the
Forty two Months must, as was before asserted, be detached from the 2300 Even.
and that there the Daily taken away begins.

The 1260 Days immediately following in Account, as concurrent with the 42
Months, show, They are taken out of the 2300 Morn. and confirm this to be the
Time of the Daily taken away, because the Daily taken away is the Character of
the first Point of Time to the Twelve hundred ninety; of which Twelve hundred,
sixty must needs be part, seeing they go on to 1335 at the end of all; and so
many cannot be found in the 2300, which is the Date of the whole Vision of the
daily taken away, or in so great a Number, but in these 1290, joined with 1335.

The twelve hundred sixty being joined, and the same twelve hundred sixty, with
those of the Woman's dwelling in the Wilderness, do both set the Era, or
beginning of that State, to be even with the Daily taken away, and do also show
the Equality of Time, Times, half a Time, with the twelve hundred sixty days,
if taken at their full extent; for they are joined, Dan. 12. with the
scattering the Power of the Holy People, which scattering was 1260 Days, Revel.
12. 6. And Time, Times, half Time, compare v. 14.
there being not a plainer Expression of the Wilderness-state in an Old
Testament mystical Prophecy, than scattering; and that Word, accomplishing to
scatter, does subindicate some Power that began this scattering, which was this
of the Gentiles, and then that the Antichristian Prince accomplished this
scattering, both to the highest degree, and to the utmost moment it was to
last; and because he, as has been said, is Lord of the Time, Times, Half Time,
the very naming them is naming of him: And now, if all this be not
demonstrative of the Epoch, or Beginning of these 1260 Days, I shall be bold to
say, Nothing in Prophetical Scripture is capable of being demonstrated, so much
as by, and within Prophetic Scripture it self; which to assert, must needs
weaken the Evidence of Scripture by and from it self throughout.

I confess, it may seem, the Church is sooner in the Wilderness than the
Witnesses are in Sackcloth; for as soon as the Woman brought forth the
Man-child, it was caught up to the Throne of God; which Bringing forth and
Enthroning was certainly when the Empire became Christian in Constantine; and
that was long before 437, when the Witnesses put on Sackcloth, as I assert.

But to clear this, it is to be considered, there are three synchronous
Descriptions of the very Beginning of this Line of Time, or of the Apostasy.

The first is bottomed upon the substantial and sensible Foundations of
Imperial History, under prophetic Figures; viz. Of the blasted Western Empire,
embellished with very curious Types of the Apostasy then beginning, as shall be
shown upon the first Trumpet sounding, when we come to it.

The second is by the more Scriptural Images of the Witnesses putting on
Sackcloth, on account of the Gentiles treading the Holy City, or Court.

And the third by the parallel Shade of the Woman flying into the Wilderness.

The First has a plain distinct Indication of things preparing to the Apostate
State, in the Declaration of a new Roll of Martyrs, Revel. 6. 11. c. 7. c. 8.
v. 1.
in the sealing the 144000 Sufferings after the Christian Empire, in the
Silence in Heaven for only half an Hour, in the Angels preparing to sound; all
which were so many distinct Steps toward the Apostasy. This is the most full
and clear.

The Second has one like it, in the Reed given to John, with a Command to
measure the Temple, which was parallel and contemporary to the Sealing, by all
Rules of Proportion; as we shall see.

The Third is, the Woman's flying into the Wilderness; where indeed there is no
open mention of a Preparation, but the Event is given in one view, viz. The
Woman flying into the Wilderness; yet in that the Woman having been first
spoken of, her History, as to the utmost extended Time of the Apostasy, is
given together; so, as to make it evident, the so sudden Assignation of the
1260 Days in the Wilderness is given both to match the Preparation of the two
former Types to the Apostasy, as also to join the Witnesses, and the Woman's
twelve hundred sixty Days into one; and the true Order both of that Preparation
and Vergency, as also of the 1260 Days beginning is given in the second giving
of the Woman's Times and Half Time, as shall be made most clear, when we come to
parallel these three synchronous Descriptions in their Events at the First
Trumpet.

Now as to the Involution of these Three States, and Characters, as necessarily
contemporizing one with another, it is even self-demonstrative: for when the
Daily Service of God is taken away, and the Bestian Gentiles delay the Kingdom
of Christ in Preparation to the Antichristian Prince; the Witnesses must, if
there be such a prophetic Type, prophecy in Sackcloth, and retire to the Altar
of Incense, as to private Worship: and if the Woman be the same with the
Witnesses or her Seed; if They are hid in Sackcloth, and there be such a Type
as of her self in the Wilderness fed with hidden Manna; how can both be, but at
the same Time? And if the Witnesses be in Sackcloth, and the Woman in the
Wilderness, and there be such a Type as of the Gentiles treading the Holy
Court, That, and That only, being then in view (the Beast being not risen) must
be the occasion of it: And if there be such a Type as Sealing, which signifies
Secrecy, Retirement, and Delay, the efficacy of that must be at the same Time
with the parallel Symbols: for this ought to be a Standard throughout; The
Gentiles and the Beast causing the Sufferings of God's Servants, and the
Servants of God, the Sufferers must in all things parallel one another,
according to the Degrees of Elevation; for the Action of the one necessarily
produces Sufferings, the State of the other receives Sufferings, as
necessarily; so their several Symbols require there must be the Efficients to
work; there must be the Subjects to work upon, Both at the same Time.

There are yet two Symbols more, Tangents, or immedidiately joined with the
beginning of this Line, that come in to our Assistance; and they are the true
Worshippers, retiring within the Temple, enfolded with the Gentiles entering the
outer Court, and the Servants of God under the efficacy of their Seal, at the
first Trumpet.

That we may make all things then most clear, with relation to this Epoch, let
us more distinctly compare all the Symbols of this Prophecy, that immediately
touch it, and pierce as far as we can into their sense and meaning, and join
therewith that their immediate Touch of this Epoch: For if by all these we can
well fix it, it is an absolute, and undoubted foundation of the whole Time.

Now there are four Symbols, all meeting to begin this Time, upon each of
which, we may either Recollect the Substance of what has been already spoken
upon any of them, or dilate our Thoughts upon what in any of them has not yet
been explained, and see how any Intimations, or Notes of Compare among
themselves reflect Light from one to another.

1. That which comes first in the order of the Prophecy, as also in order of
nature, is, the sealing the hundred forty four thousand, into a Secrecy and
close Retirement; For a Seal on their Foreheads, and the Name of the Lambs
Father written on their Foreheads, differ, as a Writing sealed, and a Title
open, and in Capital Letters; compare Revel. 7. v. 1. etc. and Revel. 14. v. 1.
etc.

2. The Temple, the Altar, and the Worshippers therein, Reduced within close,
and confined measures, is the next given Symbol. And here it is necessary to
inquire, what is meant by the Temple, and the Altar, because the Temple
sometimes is taken for the whole Area or ground, upon which it self, and all
its Courts and Avenues stood, yea, even the whole City Jerusalem was reputed a
Court to it, and the Holy City thereupon we find it styled. But the Temple at
other times is taken strictly for that retired part of it that was under
covert, and into which the Priests only came; There were also two Altars, one
in the Outer Court, which was the Altar of Burnt-offering and Sacrifice; in
approach to which the Congregation came: and the Altar of Incense within the
Temple, to which the Priests only drew near, and the People stood without. Luke
1. 9, 10. 2. 22.

Now it may be a Doubt, what Temple, and what Altar are here intended, and the
deciding of the Altar will much contribute to the deciding of the Temple; And
that the Altar of Incense is alone intended, and the Inward Covered Temple, in
which it stood, before the Vail, or the Holy of Holies, these three things do
enough assure us.

1. The Altar of Incense is brought into view and observation, just before this
Time, of the measuring the Temple, (as shall be proved) and in distinction from
that Altar, under which the Souls lay as Sacrifices, compare Revel. 6. ver. 9.
ca. 8. v. 5. etc: as it were to intimate, that the Daily Public Worship, under
the Type of Sacrifice, was near its Taking away, and the private close Worship
at the Altar of Incense succeeding, and within the Temple, with both which the
silence agrees.

2. The Cry for the loosing the four Angels, bound in Euphrates, sounds from
this Golden Altar of Incense, whither the True Worshippers had been long
retired before the Time of that Cry, and were close within the Temple. c. 9. 13.

3. The very Symbol it self speaks an inwardest Retirement within the Temple,
and to the Altar enclosed within that; For whatsoever was outward, viz. the
Outward Court and City, was cast out to the Gentiles, who trod under foot the
Sanctuary, and Holy place of Public Sacrifice, viz. the Court, where the
Sacrifices and People had place, and so make up this Symbol: For the Gentiles
having the Outward Court of Sacrifice under their Feet, the Daily Service
became taken away; so the True Worshippers retired to secret Service at the
Altar of Incense, the Apocalyptick Type of Prayers, c. 8. v. 3.

3. The third Symbol is the Witnesses in Sackcloth, that, as has been said, is
a mournful Habit, and covers that Glory and Excellency wherewith they were
endued by the great Powers committed to them; and their Prophecy imports a
Delay of some admirable Things they declared, which till Twelve hundred sixty
days past could not come to pass.

4. The Woman in the wilderness, yet in a place prepared by God, where she
shall be Fed, as Elijah in the wilderness, in a high and wonderful manner, 1
Kings c. 19. v. 5. 6. makes the fourth and last Symbol. Revel. 12. 6. Now a
Wilderness condition is out of view, seemingly lost and forlorn; the Church
therefore in the wilderness, fed like Elijah, couples the Church with the
Witnesses, who are so eminently resembled to Elijah; and shows, they are the
same in substance Revel. 11. 6.
with the Woman, under only the different Notions of single, and collected, as
was before explained.

Now all these Symbols are of nearest Importance; for all speak Invisibility,
Secrecy, and a State out of view and sight, and which conceales its true
Excellency within it self; so does being Sealed, so does worshipping at the
Altar of Incense, and within the Temple, so does the Sackcloth of two so great
Prophets, so does a Church, or Woman in the wilderness, and all these are upon
Personages of the same Character; For so are the Servants of God, so are the
true worshippers at the Altar in the Temple, so are the Martyrs or Witnesses,
so is the Woman that brought forth the manly Child, and whose Seed keep the
Commandments of God, and hold the Martyry or Testimony of Jesus: And then all
these we shall find cope, and bind with the Gentiles Months in some or other
Prophetical Point and Regard.

All these so closely coordinated Symbols, would of themselves much incline us
to suppose, that they all begin together, especially when two of them have the
same measure of Time, viz. 1260 d. But because there can be no proof so great
of the Beginning of these Twelve hundred sixty days, nor of their whole, full,
and entire length, and the several other Notes of Time that will fall in, each
in their due place, as the Beasts forty two months, His Number 666, within his
Season, Seasons, half Season of intimate Time, the Five months, and Five months
granted to the Locusts, Revel. 9. v. 5. 10. the Hour, Day, Month and Year given
to the two hundred thousand thousand Horsemen, v. 15. 19, and that great
Period, at which Christ swore, Time should be no more, but that in the days of
the 7th Trumpet, etc. Revel. 10. 6, 7. Because, I say, all these things can no
way be so satisfactorily proved, as by subtending or stretching out under them,
and applying to them the course of historical Time and its Events all along, so
curiously painted out in this Prophecy, I propose this Method of Progress.

1. To apply to the sealing, to the Altar of Incense, and the
Temple-worshipers, to the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and to the Woman in the
Wilderness, the Notes of History correspondent to their Beginning, according to
the Prophetical Symbols, and beginning together with the Gentiles forty two
Months.

2. From this Epoch or beginning to pass by the Prophetical Symbols in
agreement with the historical Records to the Beasts forty two Months, and to
demonstrate their Epoch, Continuance, and Period.

3. By the same supports from Prophecy, and History, to pass to the beginning
of the five and five Months, and the space of Time thereby denoted, granted to
the Locusts, Revel. 9. 5. 10.

4. Within which space, the beginning of intimate Time, the reason of it, and
its whole duration will fall under Examination, and its 666, by Prophecy and
History.

5. About the midst of intimate Time, the Hour, Day, Month, and Year of that
vast Army of the Horsemen, will encounter our Enquiry, and the whole Duration
require to be stated from their beginning to the killing the third part of men,
or the end of that space of Time, but not of that Power figured by them, nor of
the Woe they brought.

6. At the end of intimate Time, and after the killing the third part of men,
we shall be brought upon the Time of the aforesaid solemn Oath, that Time shall
be no more, which will carry us to the end of this whole Line, and wind us up
with its self, and by every one of these we shall find the Line of this black
Time must end at 1697, as it began 437.

All which, by the guidance of the Prophecy it self, and the assistance of the
Holy Spirit of it will assure us by the most illustrious and stately products
of that whole Time and of greatest Concernment to the Christian World, that
these 1260 years are a most definite space of so many, and no fewer, nor more
in number, and that seeing they must be either Natural or Prophetical Time,
according to the Standard of a day for a year, for the Scripture-Register knows
no other sort of Time, nor can any instance be given of any other, therefore
they must be prophetical days, or days of years, and months of years, since the
Events destined by God to them, are so much too great and large for natural
Time in their own Nature, and in the prophetical descyphar, that no more, then
a year can be a year, and yet be crowded up within a Month, a Day, or Hour; no
more can those long Tracts of Time-some Action be fettered within three years
and a half, the highest amount of those Characters of Time, if naturally
understood, without a Contradiction in the very Nature of things.

SECT. V.
WHerein it is proved, the sealing so intermatched with the inner Temple and
Altar measured, with the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and with the Woman in the
Wilderness; and the three first Trumpets (in which the Efficacy of the sealing
entered) intermatched with the Gentiles treading the outer Court, with the
Dragons persecution of the Woman, at her first flight into the Wilderness, must
according to History, begin the whole Time, Times, half Time, the Gentiles
forty two Months, the 1260 of the 1290 Days, when the daily Service, Dan, 12.
11. was taken away, and the Witnesses and the Woman's 1260 Days altogether at
437, and so move forward till the fourth Trumpet, when the Beasts forty two
months began at 475.
THat I may settle the beginning of the 1260 Days, etc. aright; the Contents of
this Section must be answered, and made good in the Body of the Discourse
within it: I must endeavor these five things then to attain that End by these
Enquiries.

1. How far the seven Seals had brought down Time from seven Trumpets, must be
diligently inquired and settled, seeing one follow on the other.

2. The Importance of the sealing the Sevants of God after the seven Seals
opened, and the conspiring of that Symbol with the Retirement of the
Worshippers within the Temple, the Witnesses under Sackcloth, and the Woman
into the Wilderness, must be determined and settled; for the Sealing's Efficacy
begins All, even the very Trumpets which could not sound till the sealing over.

3. The Scope and Intention of the Trumpets is to be carefully estimated in the
strict Attention to the Emblem it self; and seeing the first four and the sixth
display upon third part of Men, what third part of Men it is they play upon,
must be found: for the Trumpets play upon that Third of Men runs along the
whole Line we are upon; and why all this Play upon a Christian Empire?

4. It must be duly research'd, what the Symbols of the three first Trumpets
convey to our notice, to what Time History directs us, that we may find their
Effects.

5. It must be justly stated, what the Dragon means, and how his Persecution of
the Woman can agree with the Explanation of the Trumpets, seeing both must be
at the beginning of the Line, because then was the Woman's first Flight into the
Wilderness, which was at the first of the 1260 Days.

Now if all these can be rationally according to this Prophecy, and the
Argument of History resolved, so as to unite with the Gentiles forty two
Months, and all of them to determine the beginning of this Line to be at the
beginning of the Trumpets sounding; and both to be at Ann. Dom. 437, and to
reach in the three first Trumpets to the Beasts rising, at 475; then that will
be done which ought to be done: for by necessary Consequence, the Line must end
at 1697.

I begin with the first; viz. to enquire, How far the seven Seals opened had
brought down Time from our Lord's Resurrection to the first of the Trumpets
sounding: for the Trumpets must needs follow upon the Seals, as is most
apparent.

Now, since it is very evident, the Resurrection of Christ begins the whole
course of Apocalyptical Time, I know not what can be more demonstrative of any
point of Time, than to find the Prophecy by the most lively Pictures, and
Emblems to draw the course of Events from a Time given, as from the
Resurrection Ann. Dom, Vul. 33, to a Time given, viz. to the Trumpets supposed
to be Ann. Dom. Vul. 437. that is from the Resurrection the Apocalyptical Epoch
or Time beginning 404 Years.

Now what could more congruously, and even undeniably, follow the Resurrection,
than Christ riding out in his Majesty and Glory in the universal preaching of
the Gospel by an Apostolical Ministry, and thereby claiming his Kingdom
according to the first Seal opened?

What follows more uninterruptedly upon that than that warlike set of
Emperors, and upon the red Horse of War, armed with a great Sword given them;
viz. Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Hadrian, respecting especially the Desolations
of the Jewish Nation, according to the Prophecy, Dan. 9. ult. which was
perfectly fulfilled by the last of these named Emperors, according to the
second Seal.

Can any thing more justifiably follow this Train of Emperors, than the grave,
just, rational Succession of the Antonines, or close with greater Esclatt and
Renown than in Alexander Severus, so famed for Justice, that the Balances are
most worthily put into his Hand, and by a Voice from the Throne in the midst of
the Beasts, the whole Scheme is directed upon the Church, and the Half-Time
fixed from the Resurrection to the Apostasy or taking away the Daily Service of
God; under the Type of the Wheat, Barley, Oil, and Wine, the Materials of
Sacrifice, the Type of the Christian Service; all which are the Result of the
third Seal opened?

Who can deny, that a Chain of salvage Emperors pressed upon the Heels of
Alexander, in whose Equipage, Famine, Pestilence, the Sword attended, and was
most fitly given with the Device of Hell and Death waiting upon the dismal Pomp
of these Beasts of the Earth in the fourth Seal.

Is it possible to oversee the Persecution raised by Dioclesian, that ceased
not by the space of ten Years, in which all the Christian Blood shed by the
Pagan Emperor was summed up; Is it, I say, possible to oversee this in the
fifth Seal, the Emblem of which is the Cry of the Souls under the Altar?

No more can it be denied, That that great Shake of the Power of the Spirits of
the Air above, and of the Heathen Idolatrous Powers below, is admirably
pourtrayed in the sixth Seal opened.

After which, we find an industrious Delay to the seventh Seal in the new
sealing; and the seventh Seal, when opened, did most leisurely produce the very
sounding of the Trumpets; for first, There was the silence of half an hour, a
short and imperfect Time indeed, but it stayed the Effect of the Sealing; for
not till that half Hour past, the Trumpets were delivered to the Angels. After
that there was a solemn Service of Christian Religion, signifying the daily
Service yet continuing, and upon the Acceptance of it a second demolishing of
Paganism by Theodosius Defeat of the last Rallyings of it; by Eugenius and
Argobastis; after Julian and other Heathenizers upon his Prayers.

Now from that Time, or Theodosius the Great's Death, within a Year after, at
395, or near it, all History dates the Declination of the Western Empire, and
Prophecy agreeably denotes the Angels preparing to sound, in the many
Impressions upon the Empire by foreign Invasions upon it, yet respiting the
very date of their Sound from the Time Theodosius died to 437, or 404 from the
Resurrection, somewhat above forty Years, but according to the Half time
exactly before observed, at Alexander Severus's death, An. Vulg. 237, or 202,
from the general Epoch, the Resurrection, with this half 404.

Let us now Review the wonderful Consent and Harmony between the Relation of
History in Things so undoubted, as to be encumbered with no Controversy, and
the Schemes of this Prophecy, the one keeping hand in hand with the other, in
such an even, uninterrupted, and just sucession, and course of Time, as does
abundantly prove this Line, and its Beginning, so far as is necessary in this
first particular, to be at 437, and consequently its End at 1697: All which
have been more fully Treated, and are here only summed up, to make the
Perspective the clearer and more entire.

I come now to the Second Enquiry, viz. into the Importance Sealing; wherein
these two things will deserve our particular Examination.

1. What the most natural and ready significations of Sealing are, and which is
here to be chosen, as most agreeable with the other Symbols of the Worshippers
Retired into the Secret of the Temple, the Witnesses Sackcloth, the Woman in
the Wilderness, upon the Gentiles Treading the Outer Court.

2. When the Efficacy of this Sealing began; for that leads the Time of the
Trumpets, even as the Trumpets fix the Time of the Sealings Efficacy.

As to the First; it is to be known, that Sealing imports three things;

1. Secrecy, and Retirement from general and ordinary observation. Thus the
Servants of God, by the Antichristian, Apostatical Times coming on, are hidden;
no eye but the eye of God, or of men enlightened by him, could discern all of
them: The Disguise put upon them by Antichristians casting them out for Gods
name sake, their Retiring from the common corruption of Public Worship, their
mourning for the Gentilisme brought in, and the Kingdom of Christ not
appearing, their not being suffered to meet as a Church, a Body, or
Congregation of Saints, and the Glory of God and Christ not shining out yet
upon them, brought them into the Secrecy of a sealed condition, immured them
within the Temple, and at the Altar of Incense, cased them in Sackcloth, and
scattered them as into a Wilderness; so that at length the Serpent himself
could not find them; and all this from the beginning of the first Trumpets
sound, at 437, till 1697, more or less.

2. Sealing intends Security and Preservation; Thus Treasures are sealed up in
Safety, and defended from violation and rapine; thus the Servants of God are
safeguarded by their Sealing, the Temple being the Secret of Gods Presence,
their Sackcloth Prophecy armed them, as by virtue of the Sealing, with a mighty
power of Miracles, and Fire going out of their Mouths to destroy their
Adversaries; the Church, even in the Wilderness, is deposited in a place
prepared by God for her, that she might be fed: and all to this purpose, That
they might, though they might suffer in the common Calamity of the several
Trumpets, yet not be hurt in their true Essential Glory by the Dragon, but that
they shall Reign when He is Bound; nor so shut up, but that the Temple shall be
opened, etc. nor be so overcome by the Beast, but that they shall Rise again,
ascend to Heaven in a Cloud, their Enemies beholding them with terror, and
appear in Mount Zion with the Name of God written in legible Characters on
their Foreheads, and at last, in an innumerable company, clothed in white
Robes, and Palms in their Hands, and the Church it self, as the Bride, the
Lambs Wife, be admirably Glorious.

3. Most immediately, and close to the purpose of the present Symboll, Sealing
speaks Delay, and Estoppage from a present Exposal or public Show. And thus
the Symbol of sealing is provided to claspe and indent with the former Symbol
of the Seals; for the whole Symbol is taken from sealing the Book of Christ's
Kingdom, Dan. 12. 4. till the end: when therefore at the sixth Seal opened, the
Empire became Christian, the manly Birth was caught up to the Throne of God,
the Dragon was cast down, and a Song of Victory sung upon it, immediately this
sealing followed to stay this Glory, and as it were to arrest its Appearance:
it was therefore hid from hurt, because the Glory did not appear to be hurt,
during the time, times, half a time, according to the Oath of Christ;
immediately therefore, in pursuance of the former Symbol, the Servants of God
are sealed, the Worshippers worship not in an open, but reserved Temple; the
Witnesses do not enjoy, but prophecy, and that in Sackcloth; the Woman flies to
her close Receptacle in the Wilderness; and even in pursuance of this same
Symbol, the seven thunders are sealed, as we shall see, Cap. 10.

And all this to that very purpose, that the Beast may have his time, times,
till the Morning of the half-time, when in Declaration of the Right of Christ,
even then to take the Kingdom, because the half-time was entered, as the third
Day was in the Morning of Christ's Resurrection, the Thunders began. But that
the Beast might have his whole half-time also, the Thunders were again sealed
down.

For were not the Kingdom of Christ thus under Seal, its Brightness would
immediately consume the man of Sin and his Bestian Kingdom, as will be seen at
the end of the 1260 Days, viz. Ann. 1697, in the first appearance of Christ's
Kingdom, and more fully at the Appearance it self 75 Years after.

Let us now inquire when this sealing had its Efficacy, and we shall find it
has its Efficacy distinguishingly, as to the fixing its Epoch, or Beginning,
at the first of the first Trumpet, and so on, during the whole Time of the
first and second Trumpets, until the falling of the Star in the third Trumpet;
So that the Trumpets and the sealing necessarily begin together, as they ought.

For we find it is thus expressly determined to the first of the first two
Trumpets; for nothing that was hurt in those two first Trumpets, viz. the
Earth, nor the Sea, nor any Tree, was to be hurt till the sealing past: And why
was it so? but that the Seal might have its defensive Virtue on the sealed;
which Defense was certainly as early as the hurt, else it could not defend. It
is expressly continued all the first and second Trumpet by naming the Earth,
Sea, and Trees; for all these were hurt in the two first Trumpets. But the
Fountains are not named, nor the Sun, etc. not because the sealing did not
continue; for we find the express mention of it, rising within the Time of the
first woe Trumpet, Revel. 9. 4. as of a thing supposed to have continued all
along.

But because the Spirit of God would lead us to the new date of Time, viz. the
Beasts forty two Months, negotiated by the event of the third Trumpet, or the
Imperial Star falling; which Star, as all History knows, fell at 475,
immediately on which, the Beast in prophetical Account succeeded, as the eighth
King. So that then, in the very space of the third Trumpet those Months began,
and the fourth Trumpet ran upon that new Line of the forty two Months,
concurrent with the 1260 Days, and so forward, till Both end at 1697: the one
as Time of the Moon, or Months; the other as Time of the Sun, or Days: by which
we know also when the 1260 days began; viz. by computing and adjusting the
Lunar Time of forty two months to the Solar Time 1260 days. If the months began
so famously at 475, The days, that both may end together within time, times,
half a time, must begin thirty eight Years before, or at 437, as has been
before intimated, so as to be plainly understood, but shall be fully proved.

Now because of all this, the Spirit of God comprehends only what pertain'd to
the first two Trumpets within the express security of not being hurt; viz. the
Earth and Trees of the first Trumpet, and the Sea of the second Trumpet, till
the Servants of God were sealed, Revel. 7. 2, 3. showing plainly, that then the
Efficacy of the sealing began: where first, the Earth, and all green things
were hurt in the first, and the Sea in the second Trumpet, and as it were, to
hint the Beasts forty two months, falling within the third Trumpet, and so
going on in the fourth; There is no mention of the securing the Fountains, nor
the Lights of Heaven, until the Servants of God were sealed; which the Beast
could not yet surrogate for, being in his Infancy till a Star fell to the
Earth, Revel. 9. 1. which, by all Count, was at the Time Phocas gave
Universality to the Bishop of Rome.

Then Rome seems to be again enlightened, not long before the Mohammedan Hegire,
when the Locusts came forth; and therefore then Divine Judgment pursues by
three woe Trumpets, because then the surprise of the Kingdom of Christ, by the
cheat of Antichrist reigning, more appeared.

But after another concurrent date of Time, viz. the Five, and five Months of
the Locusts, Revel. 9. 15. 10. given new in the fifth Trumpet, the sealing is
there mentioned again; and in the sixth Trumpet, where the Hour, Day, Month,
and Year of the Horsemen began, there is a parallel Symbol of Secrecy and
Security with the sealing, viz. the true Worshippers crying out from the Altar
of Incense, where they were hid, Revel. 9. 13. within the first of which, viz.
of the Locusts, fell in the Beasts intimate Time, or Season, with his Number
666, as shall be shown, Revel. 13. ult.

Now, by all these the Spirit of God does interpoint and distinguish the
beginning of the Lines of several Times, that fall in with the great entire
Line of the 1260 Days; and notes when they began; which new Lines, do some way
or other note when that great Line began, and when it shall end; viz. by the
Proportion those other Lines, however beginning after, hold to it; all joining
with it, when they are once begun: and by that Proportion, The Beginning must
be 437, and the end of it 1697, as shall be shown upon all of them. Wherein
also the Time remarked with the Voices of the seven Thunders sealed, will
admirably show it self at 1517, when the last 180 Years, or Half-time, began;
at which Time the Division of so many States from Rome first appeared also. And
the End of all at 1697, will declare it self.

So strongly, although requiring strict Attention and Observation, has God
secured the fixing of this Line, both in its Beginning and End, as shall be all
along by Gods gracious permission to proceed, made evident.

I shall but just salute the Third Enquiry, and finish the first Point
discoursed, viz. its Beginning: And because it joins in assuring this
Beginning, I must, as I say, salute it.

And this Third Enquiry is to Research what is the meaning Apocalyptical
Symbol, the Trumpets.

Now from the general Use, and universal Signification of a Trumpet, as an
Alarm to War, and the dismal consequences of it, these Trumpets certainly
signify the same, as appears by the course of the Trumpets; for every Trumpet
calls to some War, and the seventh to the Battle of Armageddon; They are
therefore so many loud Sounds of the Indignation of God upon those against whom
the Sounds are Directed.

These two first Trumpets then, as beginning at 437, summon the Barbarian
Nations to fall on, on all parts of the Empire, as they had began to do, by the
virtue of the Angels preparing themselves to sound. About this time, Gensericus
the Vandal-King took Carthage, the Hunns overran the upper and lower Pannonia,
(now called Hungary) Thrace, and Illyricum; the British Provinces soon after
fell into the Hands of Strangers and Barbarians. Thus the Glory and Greenness,
the Flourish and Verdure of the Roman Empire, was universally blasted by the
Hail and Fire mingled with Blood of the first Trumpet, running every way. At
the same time, no Green of true Christianity was unblasted by the Apostasy, and
Rome it self, as a great Mountain burning with Fire, was thrown into the Sea,
that is, it had been indeed taken under Honorius, in the preparation to Sound,
and immediately recovered: But now, at the Second Trumpet, it was made the Ball
of War, in a continual Taking and Retaking for many years after; so that the
Flames of War from several Parts of the World, and the People of it compared to
a Sea, congregated about it, and in the midst of the fearful Broil, the
Imperial Starr, Augustulus, the last Emperor, fell.

From hence therefore we obtain the clear Agreement of Time with the Symbol of
the First three Trumpets, as their Blast fell upon the third part of men, the
Figure of the Roman Empire, in Agreement with the Dragon, or Roman Emperors
drawing down the third part of the Stars with his Tail. Revel. 12. 14. Where
all Interpreters understand that Imperial Power. Now at the very time of the
Barbarous Nations, coming like the Gentiles into the chief Residences of the
Christian Religion, is the Symbol of the Apostasy of the Gentiles, treading the
Holy City and Court, and the Dragon Rev. 11. 2. c. 12. 13. 14.
persecuting the Woman, just now taking her flight into the Wilderness, fairly
made out, both as to Similitude and Time.

But that the Ministration of the Trumpets may answer the Ministration by the
Servants of God in his Church, at the Seals opened; besides this Semblance of
the Trumpets with War, Holy Writing leads us to another, viz. the Sacred use of
Trumpets in the giving of the Law, Exodus 19. And they were instituted by God to
call the Congregation of the Servants of God together, which was now not into
Public, but in Private at the Altar of Incense; There was also the Feast of
Trumpets, on the First Day of the Seventh Month, joined with the Reading of
that Law, upon which followed the Solemn Fast, on the Tenth Day, Levit. 23. 23,
etc. and Numb. 29. 2. Thus by these Trumpets, the Witnesses began their
Prophecy, and Testimony for the Commandments of God, and Doctrine of Jesus, and
in Sackcloth and Fasting. These Prophets and Watchmen blew the Trumpet
according to the charge laid upon them, Ezekiel. 32. v. 1, etc. And according to
this Blowing the trumpets, the Camp, the Congregation, the Woman the Church,
made its motions in the Wilderness, according to Numb. 10. v. 1, etc. So
admirably does this Symbol agree with the Gentiles forty two Months of treading
the Holy Court, with the Worshippers at the Altar of Incense, with the
Witnesses Prophecy in Sackcloth, and the Woman's Flight into the Wilderness, as
on Eagles wings, in regard of Divine Providence, as well as of the Roman
Eastern and Western Empire Apostatizing.

And how fitly does the whole Apocalyptical Time answer the Jews Feast of the
Passover at the Resurrection of Christ, united with the Feast of Weeks, at the
giving of the Spirit, and John's being in the Spirit when he received the
Revelation: and then follows the Interval of the Seals opened, like that
Interval of Feasts, till the day of blowing the Trumpets, and the Fast, or
Sackcloth; after which, follows the Triumphant Feast of Tabernacles, so
celebrated Numb. 29. by the Ennumeration of every Day's Services, like the
cleansing of the Sanctuary, by the solemn Observation of it at the restoring
Jerusalem, Ezra 3. 4. in Image of the New Jerusalem; and Nehemiah 8. after the
Feast of Trumpets, with Olivebranches, Pine, Myrrh, Palm-branches, ver. 15.
like dwelling in a Garden of Eden, and in Resemblance of the Palms, Revel. 7.
9. and as a prophetical Emblem of the Paradise of God, Revel. 2. 7. c. 22. 2.
compared: according to all which, the Prophet Zechar. so distinguishly
proclaims in that wonderful Prophecy of the Glory of Christ's Kingdom, Zech.
14. this Feast of Tabernacles, v. 16. and as if it were the entering a Caution
against understanding that, as the True Feast of Tabernacles, Nehem. 8. 4. A
solemn Fast follows, as it were irregularly upon it, Nehem. 9. to show, the
True Feast of Tabernacles was not yet come, but a long Mourning to intervene.
And how excellently do the seven Thunders uttering their Voices, agree with the
Trumpets sounding so long? For toward the latter Time of the sixth Trumpet,
and at the last 180 Days beginning, the Gospel Law was given in these Thunders,
like those of the Law, Exodus 20. v. 28.

Thus all things concurring, even to Miracle, or a Demonstration of the
Almighty Wisdom and Power of God, I cannot doubt, I have fixed upon the true
Epoch, or Beginning of the Line of 1260 days, at 437, and so upon the end of it
at 1697.

Let it then be certainly apprehended by all that love Christ's Remark on the
whole.
Kingdom, what God has so determined shall come to pass, and that He the Lord
will hasten it in its own Time, He will work, and none shall let it; The
Israelites went out of Egypt to a Day, at the 430 years end of their
sojourning, and no sinful Exodus 12. 41.
unsensibleness that God would deliver them by Moses, or their other sins could
interpose: Christ wrought Redemption at the very night of the Fullness of Time,
viz. at the middle of the last half Week, and no unworthiness of the Age could
Dan. 9. 27.
hinder it, though never so great: so nothing shall hinder the Rising of the
Witnesses and their Ascension at the 1260 days, Revel. 11. 9.
Ten years hence, no though there should be Three days and a half, not only
signifying the intimate Time, as has been declared, but a Blush, a
Recollection, a drawing the whole Time past again in little at the end: For no
Appearances, how great soever, shall surprise the Divine Decrees upon Time;
Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. There may be a deep Reshrouding Christianity, at
least in some Parts; The Israelites slavery sat closest upon them when their
Redemption was so nigh. We see what a change was begun 1517, by those seven
Thunders, when all was one Night piece; and the Voice so little from Man, and
wholly from Heaven; much more at 1697.

We see how at this day the Turkish Power, that has been so long the Terror,
Scourge, and Woe of the World, called Christian, Falls when God pleases; their
strong Holds are like the first ripe Figs, that fall into the Mouth of the
Eater. Their Nahum. 3. 12.
Warlike People are as Women. This is a visible Pledge God will be ready with
all things else; the Tenth of the great City falling, and that Turkish woe
passing away, when his Witnesses shall rise Revel.. 13. 11.

Our Duty is to stand still, to be in our Station of Subjection to the Powers
that are over us, and to see the Salvation of God, and He, that put it into the
Hearts of Princes to agree, and give their Power to the Beast, until His words
shall be fulfilled, will also put it into their Heart to agree to do, what
shall then be to be done by his Appointment. Our right sense of which, and
suitable Obedience to our Prince, will be an Honor to Christianity, to our
Hearing and Reading this Prophecy and a Safety to our Souls, (if it should not
be, as it is most likely to be, and we have the Royal Promise it shall be, and
I much hope it in these Nations, even according to this Prophecy) to our
Concernments in this World.

And thus I have brought to a Point the Beginning of this Line, at 437, which
is the Foundation of all, and accordingly we shall find the whole going on to
1697.

The End of this first Point, settling the Epoch or Beginning of this Line of
1260 Days.
ERRATA.
PAge 20. Line 3. for sixth read seventh. p. 23. 6th line before the last, for
Witnesses read Woman. p. 24. l. 15. As every Leap-Year we double February 24,
to equal the Suns Year to our Account. p. 58. l. 1. blot all of. p. 64. l. 14.
read Myrtle.

SECT. VI.
Wherein, The Third Part of Men, upon which the Trumpets have their Effects, is
more fully made clear to be the Roman Imperialness, and that the Symbols of the
Three first Trumpets do most plainly agree with the History, in full Answer to
the second and third Enquiry.
HAving given a general Account of the things named in the Contents, so far as
is necessary to settle the Beginning of that Line, upon the beginning of which
we have been so intent; it is now necessary to give a more ample Satisfaction
concerning the Third part of men, both that, It means the Roman Imperial Power,
as also why, the Empire being Christian, there was such an Effusion or Wrath
upon it, that so the whole Line may be thereby ascertained.

The first Time then, in true order of nature in this Prophecy, though not in
Place, or in the Contexture of it, this Third Part is found and made use of, is
in that Vision of the Dragon, Revel. 12. 3. Where, I think, hardly any
Interpreter does not think there is a Representation of the Roman Pagan Empire,
in one Line or other of that Table.

And indeed, when we consider the Prophecy has the Roman Empire for its great
Subject, seeing in the Days of that, and at the end of that, Christ's glorious
Kingdom is to be established, it is every where (where it can be) to be
supposed; and seeing here All things agree to it, and that the Careir of Time
was guided directly to it in the parallel Vision to this, viz. of the fifth and
sixth Seals, upon the Dragon watching to destroy the Prince, the Christian
Church was to bring forth, and to devour it, in which Cause so many Souls lay
under the Altar, and yet that the Lamb was on the Throne; from all this, we
cannot but suppose the Roman Pagan Empire intended.

The third part then of the Stars brushed down as it were with the Tail of the
Dragon, whatever spiritual Signification it has of the Sathanick Power, does
also suppose those Supreme Princes and States that the Roman Imperialism
dismounted, and made tributary, stamping upon them with its Legs of Iron,
according to Daniel. The Emblem is lively, Dan. 7. 7.
and elegant to present their Dominions, converted into Provinces, subjected to
the Roman Dominion.

So that from hence; That Empire Thirding the East and West of the
Sovereignties of the habitable known World, in the divine Judgment of it, is
symbol'd by a third part of Nature it self, viz. Earth, Trees, Sea, Fountains,
Sun, etc. for of the third part of the Stars brought under its universal
Monarchy, it was constituted.

And in this very Vision, where the Holy Spirit, who fore-knew and foresaw
what Interpretations would be made of what he writ, and what Interpretations he
would have to be made, and in what Time, and to what degrees of Certainty and
Assurance these Interpretations should rise; and so from thence, what was fit
to be laid in the Foundations, and what to be superstracted: The Holy Spirit
that knew all this, knew that in the Vision of the Dragon there would be found
the Roman Monarchy agreedly; so that there would be a fair Conduct to its third
part in Dominion: and wherever that Imperialness resided, whether in the East
or the West, it was mounted upon the Ruin or Subjection of the third part of
the Stars; and so the third part became the Figure of the Roman Imperialness,
not of the whole Territory of the Empire, but of the Imperialism or Grandeur of
Supremacy.

And what was most immediately and properly to touch that, is according to the
most solemn Symbolicks of this Prophecy said to touch and impeach that third
part.

For otherwise, the whole Empire is called in the Evang. Luke the whole
Habitable World, and in the course of the Luke 2. 1.
four Judgments of the fourth Seal, which ranged equally, as it were over the
whole Territory and Dominion of the Empire. Death is said to have Power given
it over four parts of men, or over every fourth part with each Judgment,
signifying the free Expatiation of those Judgments upon the whole Latitude of
the Empire, and, as it were, quartering it with a judiciary staff. But here the
Territory of the Empire, with its far and wide Dominion over the Earth, was
under the Ravage of Death, without any touch upon the Imperialisme it self,
although so many Emperors fell under it, and so there is no mention of the
third part, Revel. 6. 8.

So in the change of the Empire from Heathenism to Christianity, there was no
Change upon the Imperiality, which continued as high still in the Christian
Emperors from Constantine to the Death of the Great Theodosius, as it was
before: the Description therefore is as if Heaven and Earth were concerned in
the Mutation; but there is no mention of a third, Revel. 6. ult.

The opening of the bottomless Pit darkened the Sun and the Air, with the Smoke,
out of which the Locusts came upon the Earth, and they had Power to hurt men
universally: but Revel. 9. 6.
because the Imperial Sovereignty was not to be hurt in the very Imperiality,
there is no mention of the third part; but when the Turkish Number was to seize
upon the Eastern Throne, that had its first Establishment upon the third part
of the Stars in the East and West, the third part of men are said to be killed:
and thus the third part was under the force Rev. 9. 18.
of every one of the first four Trumpets, because every Trumpet was in an order
or series to the destruction of the Western Empire in the three first of them,
and upon the Remains of Senatorian and Consular Power in the last of them.

All which I look upon as a fair Resolution of that part of this Enquiry. As to
what remains, why so severe a Procedure upon a Christian Empire? If it had been
the Pagan Empire that had been under this Pursuit, it had not been strange: but
it looks so unreasonable upon a Christian Empire, as to call in question the
whole frame of the Exposition. Hereunto I therefore offer these two Solutions.

It having been decreed long ago by the determinate Counsel of God, and sworn
by Christ himself, that the Accomplishment of the Wonders of his Kingdom should
be delayed after the Seals of the Book opened, for the Time, Times, and half
Time of the Beast, or Antichrist; the Roman Empire did no otherwise pass into
Christian, but that it Antichristianiz'd at the same time gradually, and
insensibly covered the former Paganism with the disguise of Antichristianism,
worshipping Maozzim, and a God, their Fathers had not known, but Idolatrously;
and so on the other side it degenerated true Dan. 11. 38.
Christianity into a kind of Paganism, whereby they entitled themselves to the
Blood, Paganism had shed, even as the Jews by the Murder of Christ did to all
the Blood shed from Righteous Abel, etc. This went forward even from
Constantine, by silent and deaf steps; but by the year 437, when the Trumpets
first sounded, the Measure was filled up, and the Talent down weight, and then
the Imposture of suppositing the Kingdom of Antichrist for the true Kingdom of
Christ was complete: so that the Vengeance of God arose, and chased down that
Empire that was called Christian, but was now indeed become Antichristian.

God, that changes Times, and Seasons, and the States of Beast, the Seat, and
Power of the Western Empire, and the Eastern, as a kind of tributary Commendam,
for forty two Months, does by these Judgments void the Room for him, by taking
away the Western Imperialism, first, in its seventh King, that he, the Beast
might succeed, into his forty two Months. Then taking away all Consular and
Senaterian Power, so that it shined not the third part of the day, nor of the
night, that he, as the falling Star, might inlighten Revel. 9. 1.
it, and grow up to his Regnancy, or Number 666.

Upon both these Accounts therefore, the Eastern Empire was so much longer
spared; first, That it was not to be so deep in the Guilt of Antichristianism,
and Supplantation of the Kingdom of Christ, and as it were for his Servant
Constantine's sake; and then, the Room of it was not necessary for the
receiving a Successor till the Mohammedan Emperor, a thousand Years after;
although it was many Times under dreadful Rebukes of Divine Judgment, as also
under the Claims and endeavored Usurpations of the Antichristian King.

Having thus far endeavored to satisfy the third Enquiry, fourth; for the
course of Events is in History most notorious. The Event of the first Trumpet
was the Irruptions of the Barbarians on the whole Latitude of the Western
Empire, which thereby was as much blasted, as the Glory of Summer is by a Storm
of Hail and Lightning mixed with Fire.

The Event of the second Trumpet connected with the first, was, That that great
Mountain Rome, the City upon seven Hills, that had been under so many
Emperors, Pagan and Christian, the Mistress of the Nations; that had been
under the Pagan Emperors, Pagan Mystical Babylon, and was now becoming
Antichristian, Mystical Babylon; this Babylon was in the very Beginning of the
Apostasy arrested by Divine Judgment; for that City, which had been so lately
purged from Heathen Idolatry, and was to be the Antichristian City for so long
a Time after, God erects the Pillar of his Judgment early upon it; so that he
cast it into the Sea, as a flaming Mountain, not as Babylon of old, burnt, but
a burning Mountain, into the Sea of continual Turmoil and Estuation; so that in
regard of the Warriors of that Time, in their dreadful Disputes concerning it,
All Waters were turned into Blood. And yet because it was to be born aloft upon
the Beast of ten Horns, that it might not be consumed it burns as in a Sea,
wherein it was preserved, though burning; often it was taken, and sacked, and
made in the very literal sense a burning Mountain: but it was rescued, and
survived; for so it was decreed, till its final Desolation and Burning, Rev. 18.

At the Voice of the third Trumpet, the very Heavens of the Western Government
were so shaken, that the great Star of Imperialism fell, like Wormwood, into
the Rivers, and made them so bitter that many died of that Imbitterment of the
Waters, that became even Wormwood it self.

Whilst Rome, as a burning Mountain in the midst of the Sea made it to boil,
even into Blood, with a prodigious noise through the Nations, and made that
Tumult and Commotion in the midst of People, a burning Mountain, like Etna, or
Vesuvius, may be supposed to do; the Star falling embittered so deadlily the
Inland private State of the Empire, that although it was quickly quenched it
self when it fell; yet in the Time it was burning as a Lamp, which was some
time before its Fall into the Water, and when it fell it was like a Lamp
burning in Water, every moment ready to dye, and yet not presently extinct,
that it so consumed the sweeter Juyces, and benign Spirits of Government and
Commerce, that many Men died, that is, innumerable Families and Persons were
ruined, and utterly impoverished within the Empire, both by the loss of the
Aspect, and influence of such a Star, as also by the Confusion its Fall made,
and the Struggles it had with Death in its Fall and in the Water, all which
made the malign Effects much greater while the Fire and Water were in contest.

Now all these Symbols are so very evident in History, that there needs no more
than the very Appeal to it concerning them, and so wonderfully accomplished in
their Gravity, Significancy, and Sprightliness, as to speak Divine Inspiration:
What History of that Time knows not, These things were so? That first, all the
Glory and Honor of the Empires Grandeur was struck all over, as it were at
once, as with Fire and Hail from Heaven, every day bringing the News of
Invasions, and Revolts every where, That Rome was in the Flames, and in a Sea,
and yet by contrary Agencies of the several Interests of Princes like Fire and
Water, still preserved; on the other side, that the Imperial Torch, however
Flaming, yet falling into the Water would be soon quenched, while a burning
Mountain resisted the contrary Element; so Rome lived, but the Emperor died;
Rome Burns as a Mountain in the Sea, and though it turned the Waters into
Blood, yet it survived to ride aloft upon a new Universality. The Flaming Taper
did hurt, while it flamed, but falling into Water must needs be short-lived;
And it was to dye that another sort of Principality might succeed it, upon
which Romes Grandeur, a City Reigning over the Kings of the Earth, might have
the Guaranty of Prophecy, even as of Providence to secure it, for a longer time
than by all Computation it had made the Epoch of Vrbs Condita, or it had been
Built.

I am yet to state justly, and more at large, what the Dragon Persecution of
the Woman can agree with the Explanation of the Trumpets; seeing both must be
at the beginning of the Line, because then was the Woman's first flight into
the Wilderness, when the Dragon persecuted her; from whence arise these two
Doubts.

How can these Trumpets, that are the Alarms of Divine Antichristianiz'd
Empire, as was before declared, be the Dragons Persecution of the Woman.

When the Beast, or his Gentiles have the whole Time, Times, Half Time, and so
the 1260 of the Woman's Wilderness-state, under their Domination and Tyranny;
does not the Dragons Persecution of the Woman, and then of the Seed, contradict
the Assertion of this Time to the Beast?

That these two Doubts may be substantially resolved, and so, as to clear the
whole progress of this Time with Relation to the Beast; we must understand
aright concerning the Dragon; for a mistake in that confounds the whole order
of the Prophecy.

The Dragon then,, as it is presented, Revel. 12. 3. with Seven Heads, and Ten
Horns, has a double meaning; One proper to it, as the sixth, or Imperial Head
of the Roman Empire, which headship is always accounted to the whole Roman
Beast, in this Prophecy: But when the Christian Emperor arose, That Head
became wounded, and by degrees, the Power and Conduct of it Transmigrated from
the sixth to the seventh Head, and Eighth King; as is to be shown upon the
Symbols of the Beast.

But in all this, it is of great Influence to the right understanding of this
Prophecy to be known, there is a more abstract signification of Draconism, or
of the Dragon, viz. the Old Serpent, deceiving the Nations into the Worship of
himself, under the disguise of those many Idol Gods and Demons, they sacrificed
and did service to; when therefore this Idolatry and Demonolatry was demolished
by Constantine, and the Christian Emperors, and the only True God in Jesus
Christ, and his Kingdom acknowledged at the Head of the Roman Empire: Satan,
that Old Serpent was cast down from Heaven, and Christ the manly Birth caught
up thither; Satan, therefore, as an Intelligence within, at the Head and Spring
of all is to be understood in this Dragon, Revel. 12. 7.

The Roman Cesars, as having the Imperial Monarchick Government of so great a
part of the World, at the Birth of Christ, so along in the first Times of
Christianity, lay indeed in the midst of Nations and People, and watched all
the effects of the Kingdom of Christ, and were ready to devour the manly Birth,
that was to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, and who had right to do so at
his Resurrection, and all along since.

But at the Time, this Cesarian Dragon was acted by that Satan, that invisible
Spiritual Dragon, and his Angels, who made War against Christ, who carried the
Cesarian Dragon in a perpetual Hostility to the Kingdom of Christ, and also
most devoted to Idolatry; While therefore Devils were worshipped under those
several Names of Jupiter, Mars, etc. and an Idolatrous Power was at the Head of
the Roman Power, Satan is accounted in Heaven, and the rather so, because the
Title of Satan is not reckoned purely of Fraud and Usurpation, but By
Permission, and not only so, but even in regard of Justice, and divine
displeasure against the Apostasy of humane Nature, as it were of Commission; so
that he was overcome and cast down by the Blood of the Lamb, as the true
meritorious Cause, appeasing that Wrath, satisfying that Justice, expiating the
World; by the Word of his Testimony, as the Grand instrumental Cause, and by
the Martyrdom of Christians, who loved not their Lives unto Death, as a
subordinate dispose of God in honor to his Justice against the horrible
degeneracy of Mankind.

From hence, whatever Power acted by Satan, to an aspiring to a supreme
Residency in the Fourth, or Roman Monarchy, in the days of which Christ's
Kingdom was foretold to be set up, and of all Right ought to have been so,
speaking as to the Duty and Obligation of all Mankind, because of his Sovereign
Resurrection after his Death and Sacrifice of himself for the Life of the
World, and that then the Roman Monarchy was the Monarchy of the Oecumene, or
habitable Earth in Symbol of Prophecy; whatever Power therefore did not then
acknowledge that Kingdom, nor that Truth of Christianity, any way either seated
in, or attempting that Monarchy, is under a Character of Draconick; the Notion
of which came into especial date since that Resurrection of Christ, and his
Right thereby to an universal Monarchy: at which Time the Roman Cesareate
arisen to that universal Monarchy from the Time of the more public Notices of
the Right of Christ, inspired by Satan with a Draconick Subtilty, and
watchfulness waited to devour that princely Birth (of which Pharaoh's Cruelty
to Gods typical firstborn, lying as a Dragon in the Egyptian Nile was a Type)
and was therefore by the most notable signancy of the Symbol invested with the
Draconick Title.

But when the Acknowledgment of Jesus, as Christ and Lord, was made by the
Christian Roman Emperor, Constantine, and his Successors, Christ was then in
eminent Type caught up to the Throne of God, never to be dethroned, as we see
he is not to this day, notwithstanding the Combat of the Dragon and his Angels
by Julian, Argobastes the Roman Senate, and others, with Michael and his
Angels. But for all this the Woman, the Church was persecuted by the rolling of
the barbarous Nations upon that Empire, who were Enemies to the Profession of
Christianity at the first, and so to the Kingdom of Christ, and their Invasion
upon the Rights of the Empire as Christ's, and on the Roman Church, as eminent
in the Profession of Christianity, and having produced the Christian Emperor
was both as designed by Satan, and reputed by God a Draconick Persecution of
the Woman; even as after, the Mohammedan Flood which came out of the Dragon's
mouth, to have swallowed up Christianity, and that Empire together, as it were,
wherever it could be found, was on the very same Account a Persecution of the
Dragon; for the Mahometans were from their very original, Adversaries to this
Sovereignty of the Lord's Anointed, substituting an Imposture of Sovereignty,
and Prophetism in the place of it; and all this within the universal Roman
Monarchy, the Propriety of Christ. Their Deluge of Power and People impetuously
overflowing with a false Religion, is then most justly called a Flood out of
Sathan's mouth, acting as a Dragon according to the Notion of abstract
Draconism, and so raging and foaming with hostile Opposition to the Kingdom of
Christ, notwithstanding some seeming Acknowledgment of him in Mahometanism as a
Prophet, but truckling under that infamous false Prophet.

This then being the first Account of Draconism, it is very easy to give
Satisfaction to the first Doubt; for the same things that are remonstrated as
the Judgments of God, as permitted and ordered by him in his holy Government of
the World, and Execution of Justice and Judgment upon Offenders, are also most
maliciously and hellishly negotiated by Satan, as is most evident in the
History of David's numbering the People; that same misdoing of David is
attributed to the displeasure of God, and to Satan, as may be seen by
comparing 2 Samuel 24. 1. and 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. yea in that different Case, viz.
the Transaction of our Lord's Sufferings, Satan entered into Judas, to embolden
him to do what supreme Wisdom and Goodness had contrived to redeem lost Man. It
is therefore nothing strange, the Holy Angels and Satan met in these Trumpets,
each in their Place and Orb, that while the Holy Angels sounded an Alarm to the
Instruments of the divine Vengeance, Satan had his Contrivance to persecute
the Woman, both by the Barbarians and Mahometans.

But besides this Draconism of professed Enemies to Christianity, there is the
Draconism of the Beast, or the Dragon living, and being worshipped in the
Beast, or Antichristianism, beginning by the other Beast, who is afterward
called the false Prophet, speaking as a Dragon, which was the Synagogue of
Satan in the first growth, and his Throne in the farther Growth, when the
Beast came to his Image and Number, and the depths of Satan or his Government
in his ripest Age: and thus the Dragon gave his Seat or Throne, and great
Authority to the Beast; that is, Satan the Supreme Dragon in the idolatrous
and bloody Cesareate, now became Residentiary in the Beast, and conveyed both
the Hostility to the Kingdom of Christ, the Idolatry and the Bloodiness into
the Beast, and by his Negotiation under divine Permission ordered the very Seat
and Power of the Imperial Cesareate to the Beast, as the Heir both of his
Idolatry, Enmity to Christ's Kingdom, and persecutory Tyranny, and for the sake
of all these: in all Revel. 16. 13.
which Regards, it may well be esteemed Draconism to the last. And God in just
Indignation brings upon this Serpentinism of this Beast a Counter-Serpentinism
of Infidelism, a Counter Draconism, for serpens serpentem devorans fit Draco,
as before explained.

But yet the Draconism of the Beast is a diverse Draconism, its Hostility to
the Kingdom of Christ is not by downright Force and Resistance of open War to
the Name of Christianity, but by way of Surprise out of his Hand, and held, as
in his Right, and to his Glory, and yet in such real Opposition to him, that he
has sworn, His Kingdom shall not come, till that be at the full end of Time,
Times, and half Time. Its Idolatry is an Idolatry as it were consecrating it
self to the Honor of Christ, and is therefore, as in it self, so in the
prophetical Symbol, full in all its heads of the Names of Blasphemy; under this
Head, all the former Heads are flowered, and, as it were powdered with the
Names of Blasphemy; all former gross Idolatries and Demonolatries are
dissembled under True Religion, and Heathenism under Christianity, or more
truly, True Religion and Christianity are Travestied and Burlesqu'd into
Heathenism and Paganism, and therefore it is not Simple-Idolatry, but
Blasphemy, as we shall see.

But yet notwithstanding all this, Satan is but on Earth; for the Beast
holding the Kingdom, as in the Right of Christ, Christ thereby is still
acknowledged to be on the Throne, and in that the true God, Holy Angels, and
Saints, are thus blasphemed by Antichristian Idolatries, and that Satan and
wicked Spirits are abandoned and detested in Profession generally, though his
Kingdom has sometimes portentously broken out in Acknowledgments, as it were
to the Devil himself, by some of the Antichristian Cheifs. His Seat is not then
as before, as in a Heaven; he therefore in a Rage dashes one part of his
Kingdom against another, the Barbarian against the Antichristian, the Mohammedan
against the Bestian; because he, as a subtle Computator of his own Time, knows,
It can be but short compared with above four thousand Years Reign before, and
that as in Heaven too; in the Idolatry performed to Devils, viz. Fallen Angels,
or Damned Souls. And for so great a Pledge of the future Fall of Satan is that
Doxology and Song of Praise concerted in Heaven, Rev. 12. 10. as also in
Prevision of the full Glory of Christ's Kingdom decreed to him by God, from the
infinite value of his own Blood, and as a Retribution for the Sufferings of his
Servants, maugre all Sathan's Accusations, in which the Accuser himself was
condemned and cast out; and notwithstanding the succeeding Antichristianism.

And from all this arises a full Solution to the second Doubt, and not only a
Solution, but an admirable Harmony and Consent of the whole Prophetical
Symbolism. For when Satan fell from Heaven, in that desolation of Heathenism,
not only by the Christian Empire of Constantine, but the perfect Victory over
it by Theodosius; When the Devil and his Angels after the War in Heaven were
finally cast down, A Victory obtained by the Incense offered with the Revel. 8.
3.
Prayers of all Saints, as a Signal of the Church, yet continuing pure in the
public Worship, and that then was so great Expectation of the Glory of Christ's
Kingdom, as that Doxology exprsses, now mentioned; Now is the Kingdom of our
Rev. 12. 10.
God come; At this very Moment, to show, that though God was pleased to account
the Church pure, to the very moment, it could in his Righteous Judgment be so
accounted; yet I say to show its Purity was at a very low Ebb, and that it had
long wan'd, as also to show, that God had designed to permit a very different
state of Things to the Kingdom of Christ, the very next news of the Church, is,
that the two wings, Western, Eastern of the Great Roman Eagle had conveyed the
Church, the True Church into the wilderness, that Rev. 12. 14.
it could not be found.

This had been mentioned before, as soon as ever the manly v. 6.
Birth was caught up to the Throne of God; but that was only in preparation,
and to match with the other Symbols; But now the Church was indeed out of view,
by the Apostasy, introduced by the Gentiles the Beasts people under the other
Beast; so that the False Church hid the True, as in a wilderness: The Gentiles
crowded the True worshippers into a closed Temple, The Daily was taken away;
The witnesses were in Sackcloth, where then could the True Church be seen? All
was scattered, no Body of a Church appeared, but the Antichristian; to this
state things grew more and more under the Regnancy of the Beast till the Woman
was fled from the Serpent himself. All this is then to be accounted to the
Beast, serving the True Church by Gods overruling Hand so far, as that it was
out of the Dragons reach who was deceived, thinking to strike the True, but the
False lay bleeding.

In the mean time, Satan, however in his Serpentine, and draconick Nature,
jealous of any thing of Christ even in his own Kingdom, first persecutes the
Empire by the Barbarians, where He knew, the woman very lately was by her
bringing forth the Manly Birth; He struck at it by way of distinction in his
own Aim, but finding He could not reach it by the rude strokes of the
Barbarians, but the Eagles wings had conveyed it away, and finding that those
Barbarous Nations, settled by degrees into the Antichristian Christianity, and
so helped it forward into the wilderness, He then resolved to be sure of it,
attempted to swallow it by the Mohammedan Flood; But This neither distinguishing
it, nor succeeding because the Bestian Earth drunk up the Flood, not only
receiving it upon it self, but maintaining the name, Doctrine, Profession, and
Church state of Christianity, so far as is necessary absolutely to
Antichristianisme and its Kingdom, so drunk up the Flood by setting it self
against the blasphemous, monstrous, Mohammedan Imposture, and with a deadly
hate, because Mahometanism is no less against Antichristianity, than
Christianity, so the Serpent disappointed is wroth, and, as so necessitated,
determines now to sift for his Ends, by Draconism refined into Beastianism,
Heathenism gilded with Christianity, but pointed and edged with
Antichristianisme, which is a compound of the Dragon and the Beast: And because
this Antichristian state allowed such a thing as a Christian Church, tho but it
self only, He can make war only with the woman's seed; And to the purpose, and,
as we say, with a Vengeance. He makes War with the woman's seed, who keep the
Commandments God, and hold as witnesses, the Martyry of Jesus; that is, by the
Beast, whose History immediately follows. cap. 13. and to whom the Dragon
deputed his power and seat, even Great Authority; which Delegation, the other
Beast that spoke as a Dragon, viz. the False Prophecy received and managed for
him the Grand Beast, until He came to his Image and Number; and so the Dragon
and the Beast continue together, till the Beast is taken and cast into the
Lake, and the Dragon and all his Draconism, Bound, Chained, and Sealed up by
the Kingdom of Christ appearing, Rev. c. 19. c. 20. v. 1.

And this is the True History of Draconism, as entered into Bestianism, by which
it plainly appears, the scattering of the Power of the Holy People, or the
state of the Woman in the Wilderness, is wholly owing to the Beast and his
Bestianism, whose are Time, Times, Half Time, and that the Dragon and his
Persecution were wholly defeated by the Bestian Apostasy, conveying the Church
from the Serpent, till He wrought by the Beast, and made over his Power to Him,
in revenge upon the Woman's Seed, it self being still safe.

Now how admirable is all this, according to the Symbols, the Beast still in
all appearance and semblance secures Christ on the Throne, while it supplants
his true Kingdom and Power: for how could Antichrist's Kingdom stand if Christ
were not in Title upon the Throne? But how could it stand if Christ did indeed
reign? No, it presently falls then, or rather vanishes away.

Again, the Wings of the Apostatized Empire, while they convey the true Church
out of all ordinary Visibility, yet secure it in the Name and Notion of a
Church: the Beast's Earth thus helps it; for a Christian Church is his Claim,
and Title to his Kingdom: but it must be hidden; for a true Christian Church
visible destroys his Kingdom. Thus all things even to Astonishment at the
divine Prophetic Wisdom have a Harmony in Truth, greater than that of the
Spheres in Imagination.

Mahometans and Pagan Infidels by subverting Christianity necessarily overthrow
Antichrist's Kingdom also: it is in indispensable need of Christianity so far
as a Pretense goes, but the Brightness and native Glory consumes it; while
Christianity under a false mask supports it, true Christianity scorches it to
nothing, as will be seen at the Vial poured into the Sun; true Christianity and
the Church therefore must be hidden, and in the Wilderness, and its Seed
persecuted as if not of the Church, that false Christianity and the false
Church may reign in its Absence under its Name and Appearance.

Thus while the Dragon persecutes in his Aim and Intention the Christian
Church, the Apostasy pretending it self the Universal Church conveys the true
Church into a Wilderness, and so befriends the Notion of a Church, while it
conveys it out of sight; the Dragon by the Beast makes War with the Seed, and
scatters them, that they could not possibly be found in the Body of a Church;
not but that the Church was truly visible in the single Witnesses, however
anathematized: but it could not be reached in a Body, even by the Serpent
himself; for it was not in a Body; and yet the Notion of a Church was dear to
the Antichristians, for They and the Beast usurped it. At this Time therefore,
according to this Prophecy, it could be no Argument against the Church, Where
was it? or, It was not visible in a Body; for it was not to be visible in a
Body, but in the Suffering, scattered Seed. So that it was hid from the very
Serpent. And yet even to the end of the 1260 Days there is a Mohammedan
Draconism levelling at Christ, Christianity, and the true Church, but falling
almost wholly upon the false Church, and the Antichristian King, and his
Subjects; who is therefore always principally concerned to drink up this Flood,
and so helps the true Church by his Earth.

There is nothing at the present I can think necessary to add to this
Explication of the Apocalyptical Dragon, but that the whole Vision, Rev. 12. to
v. 13. is presented as in Heaven: so that the Assumption of the manly Birth,
the Joy upon the Dragon's casting down, upon the Kingdom of our God being come,
etc. is given, as in Heaven, and is reserved also in Heaven, till the glorious
Appearance of Christ; and there is no more but such an imperfect cognizance of
those great Things upon Earth as was given by the Christian short Empire, to be
expected, till that glorious Kingdom of Christ at the end of the Beast's Reign,
which may remove any seeming Objection arising from the sudden change from such
a Glory into the Apostasy, so soon after entering, and the Witnesses going into
Sackcloth, and the Woman into the Wilderness.

SECT. VII.
In which is given the description of the other Beast, and his first
Administration; of the Witnesses and their first manner of Testimony, both
before the Beast's forty two Months; with the Answer of an Objection, and
Reflections upon this Interval.
IN these Enquiries I have now explained, whatever I can conceive needful from
the Beginning of the Trumpets to the forty two Months of the Beast, except the
Delineation of that, which the Prophecy calls the other Beast, under whose
Conduct the Gentiles were brought into the outer Court and Holy City, so far as
the Action of that other Beast led to the grand Apocalyptick Beast.

And to inlighten this Interval of Time the more, viz. from the Apostasy
beginning in the 1260 Days at 437, unto the Beasts 42 Months 475, I find it
most convenient to consider most accurately the State of the Witnesses, as
Prophecy has given any Light to the pointing of the Time of their whole
Testimony, and distinguishing the various States of it: which Method I will
endeavor to follow through this whole Line of Time; viz. to observe the
Advances and Declinations of the Bestian Kingdom, and to adjust thereunto the
Declinations and Descents of the Witnesses into the deepest of their obscure
State, and their Re-advances till their Resurrection and Ascension: for the one
and the other States rise and fall alternately; whose motion herein, the Woman,
the Church was exactly conformed to, being indeed the very same one with
another, except the Notion of Single and Collected, Single in the Witnesses,
Collected in the Church, as before said. But because the Action especially was
sustained by the Seed, or the Witnesses, the Line of that Action is most
particularly drawn over them, the Witnesses.

I begin then with the other Beast: but I will adventure to lay no stress upon
the Word (...), or Another, as if it did necessarily imply Another Order, or a
various Sub-specification of these two Beasts; because I find this Word (...)
or (...), may be, according to this Prophecy, significant of no more than a
numerical, individuating Difference. But yet that these two are so different,
so solemn, and great, so momentously different Iconisms, as are given of each
of them, and their Action by the holy Spirit sufficiently argue.

That we may then have the perfect Pourtracture of this other Beast, who
managed all things from the Beginning of the Apostasy, during the wounded State
of the Grand Beast in one, viz. the sixth of its Heads, called the Dragon, and
the Infancy of the Grand Beast, viz. as united to its seventh Head, called in
this Prophecy most often, The Beast; We may thus behold Him the other Beast, so
far as his Description reaches, while the Grand Beast lay wounded, which was
till the forty two Months began: by which great Preparation will be made to
understand that Grand Beast.

1. This other Beast must, as Beast does every where in Prophecy, import a Body
of Men under some Superiority of Power. I must here remember again, to except
to the Translation of the Four, not (...), salvage Beasts, but (...), gentle
Animals, or living Creatures, Revel. 4. and elsewhere, least it should cause
any mistake; but else both in Daniel and the Apocal. Beast does imply a People
under, united to some Principality above: and because here the Principality was
in a Peerage or Aristocracy, it resides in the two Horns.

2. Because it is a Beast of Continuance, as plainly appears by its Action from
the very Apostasy to the Number of the Beast, viz. from 437 to 725; and after
that to the very Destruction of the Beast and false Prophet; it must be a
fluid, successive Body, as other Prophetical Beasts are.

3. The inward sense of it must be a Body of False Prophets under Chiefs,
mitred Prophets; for all the marks of false Prophetism are upon them: this
Beast therefore rises low, mean, feeble, stilly out of the Earth, without
warlike force, or noise: it works Miracles, pretends to call for Fire from
Heaven, like Elias; that is, it threatens Men with the Wrath and Judgments of
God; it deceives, it caused men to do by saying, or teaching. After its
Administration, as a Beast, is past, because swallowed up in the Grand
Bestianism, it is several Times called the False Prophet, as being expressive
of its very Essence, and wherein it is most nearly united to the Beast, Revel.
c. 16. 13. c. 19 20. c. 20. 10.

4. It must be Antichristian; and seeing Antichristianism is a false, mock,
abused Christianity, it must have of Christian also in it, else it could not be
Antichristian; it has therefore the Resemblance of a Lamb in its two Horns:
but it is Antichristian specifickly, working by Fraud to surprise the Kingdom
of Christ; ambitious, haughty, idolatrous, persecutory, cruel, thirsting after
blood; for it spoke as a Dragon: although therefore, it has two Horns, like a
Lamb, yet not the Lamb Christ Jesus; for he has seven Horns, Revel. 5. 6.
agreeable to all the Apocalyptical Sevens, except the Dragon's, and the Beast's
seven Heads: Seven, not because They were symbolically, but literally seven
Successions of Government, as the Rev. 17.
Woman's seven Mountains.

5. Seeing the great Subject of the Apocalype is the Roman Empire in its last
State, when the Kingdom of Christ was begun in the Gospel, and to appear in
Glory after that last State of the Roman Empire, the last of those four
Imperial Canales of Time; it must therefore be, that this pseudo prophetical
Beast under its two Horns is compounded of the upper and under, the dignified
and inferior False Prophets of the Eastern and Western Empire. And seeing we
shall find, that the Grand Beast is Roman, it will thence appear, This Beast
must be so, seeing its whole Ministry is about that Grand Beast, which is Roman.

6. It must be after the Grand Beast in some prophetical Respect or Notion of
that Grand Beast, for it is called the first Beast in compare with this other
Beast; yet this other Beast must be before it in regard of Action; for it does
all for it; viz. It is after it, as the Grand Beast is one from its very
Beginning, or Foundation of the Roman Empire, under its seven Heads
successively; it is after it in regard of Procuration, of the Cure of its
Wound, of the Exercise of its Power, while it lay wounded: all which speak it
in being before this other Beast. But it is before this very grand Beast, as
under its seventh Head; for it erects it into its Headship, by speaking as a
Dragon, by keeping alive the Bestian Power, and in exercise while the sixth
Head lay wounded, till the VVound was healed by the seventh Head succeeding,
and then it protected the Infancy, or low beginning of that seventh Head, as
will be seen under the beginning of the forty two Months; to which it has led
us.

From the whole then, these two Things arise to our main Purpose: 1. That this
other Beast must be the whole prophetic Office of the VVestern and Eastern
Roman Empire under its Superiors, or Hierarchy, so far as it was grown
Apostatical, Antichristian, and Pseudo prophetic, or into false Prophecy, from
the very beginning of the Apostasy at 437, to the end of it at 1697, and beyond
that, in what State soever it shall be, till it is cast into the Lake with the
Beast. With this Exception, before the Beasts coming to the Image, and Number
of it self, this Beast has the Regency, and so the Type of a Beast; after that
it subsides into bare false Prophetism, but such as is inseparable from the
Beast, and the Beast from it; so that they rule together, but the Supremacy is
in the Beast; and they fall, and are cast into the Lake together.

2. The Action of this other Beast, till the forty two months, is its shaping
its own Bestianism, both into the Body under it, and its Superiority over its
own Body. Its speaking as a Dragon, and governing the Gentiles, who are called
the Earth, and them that dwell therein, herein exercising the Power of the
wounded Beast before him, viz. the former Paganish Beast,, that with all its
Heads and Populacy, according to the prophetical Emblem, lived in a wounded
State for want of a Bestian Head, or Prince, from the Empire becoming
Christian, till the Antichristian King became its Head at the beginning of the
forty two Months. And this other Beast guided them, ruled, and conducted them,
as paganishly affected to a new Antichristian Paganism in preparation for the
seventh Head, without whose Succession the Grand Beast had been extinct. In all
which, by Head is meant Head in Power.

It may be objected against this whole State of Things, Arrian Heresy and
Persecution, which could not be untaken in the Notices of this Prophecy.

This Prophecy is not to be supposed to take notice of All fourth Monarchy, and
in that, the Antichristian Surprisal of the Kingdom of Christ after the
Destruction of pure Paganism: so that Paganism first, under the Pagan Empire,
Antichristian Paganism punished with the Barbarian, and Mohammedan Inundations
from which the True Church was hidden, and its Seed persecuted under the
Bestian Kingdom, is the only Symmetral, Even, Proportionate Course of this
Prophecy, till the end of the 1260 Days.

I come now to the last Thing necessary before the Entry into the Beasts forty
two Months; that is, to settle the State of the Witnesses, as in its general
view under the whole 1260 Days, and more particularly in this Interval from the
Apostasy beginning unto the Beasts forty two Months.

The Witnesses, as has been already declared, are the Seed of the Woman, the
True Church, who keep the Commandments of God, and hold the Testimony, the
VVitness, the Martyry of Jesus.

These are in Sackcloth, as the best of their State, the whole 1260 Days; but
their Time is distinguished by three great Pairs of VVitnesses in the Old
Testament, whose History explains the varying Types of their Condition; Joshua
and Zerubbabel, Elijah and Elisha, Moses and Aaron.

The first is of Joshua and Zerubbabel, who though in mournful Garments, as
Joshua, and in union with him, Zerubbabel, is represented, Zech. 3. 1. etc. yet
They were as two Olive Branches to the Church of the Jews, which was at that
Time, the Candlestick standing before the God of the whole Earth. And this is
the first Representation of the VVitnesses; for they are also the two Olive
Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing before the God of the Earth, Revel.
11. 6. compared with Zech. c. 4. And it comprises the certain Assurance and
Expectation of the New Jerusalem, and its glorious Sanctuary, even as the
typical Temple, and its Jerusalem were so far settled by those two great
personages: But beyond that, They had the Promises of the New Jerusalem State,
peculiarly made to them; to Joshua, Zech. 3. 7. places among the Angels
standing by in that Vision, as Attendants on Christ, to Zerubbabel, Haggai 2.
21. etc. When that Overthrow of Kingdoms should be, which could be no other
than that at the seventh Vial. Zerubbabel shall be a Signet; and to all God's
People throughout the Prophecy of Zechar. the same Promises are confirmed; and
so to these two Witnesses.

The VVitnesses then at this Time, by holy Doctrine, pure Worship, unspotted
Sanctity, begin their Testimony, and are truly Christian Prophets, or Persons
of a magistratical Character and Eminency, or truly fit for such a Dignity; and
as the Sons of Oil, or anointed ones, Zech. 4. ult. They empty the golden Oil
into the two golden Candlesticks, into the Souls of the Servants and People of
God, the Seed of the Woman, who from the beginning of the Apostasy to the end
of it, are Members, and make up those two Churches, Pergamus and Thyatyra;
which, as I have shown in its Place, run parallel in Pergamus at the beginning,
and Thyatyra in the latter part with the whole Apostasy, although the Church of
Sardis first, and Philadelphia at last, do indeed undertake the Line drawn by
the Churches through the whole Apocalypse, before the Church of Thyatyra, in
its real Subsistence, shall cease to bear that Type of the Christian Church, it
is appointed to sustain.

Now how admirably does this agree with the state of the true Christian
Witnesses for some considerable space after the Apostasy beginning? They did
indeed put on Sackcloth in God's Account, as soon as the Gentiles came into the
holy ground with their unhallowed feet, shod with Paganish Superstition.

But They at first, and for some space of time, rather emptied the golden Oil
out of themselves, than were under Persecution and Sufferings; They sent out
the Holy Doctrine, and crystal Stream of Evangelical Truth; The Worship of God
they directed, was transparent, clear, and pure, without Paganish Mixtures and
Ceremonies; and the Conversation they preached and gave Example of, was not
foul, rank, fetid, but holy, gracious, pellucid, of an excellent Odor and
Fragrancy.

And although History is not just, and sincere enough to give account hereof,
passing through the Feculencies of the beginning Apostasy, and suffering under
all its particular Injuries more than those of Time, and obscured, as under
that covered State, in which the Church now was; yet we are not under a total
want of such Monuments of the Witnesses Testimony. But for the Corruptions they
were to testify against, they are too notorious to be denied, as such
Beginnings of the Apostasy, even at this very joint of Time; and therefore by
the constant care of God in preserving a Seed that is accovnted to the Lord for
a Generation, and particularly by the Types of this Prophecy, we are most
assured there must be such Witnesses, and such must be their Testimony.

SECT. VIII.
Wherein, The Forty Two Months are measured by the exactest Rules of Prophecy,
and found by express Concurrencies of those Prophecies to begin at the
Cessation of the Christian Western Empire, and to end whenever the 1260 Days
end, (the Date of the Kingdom of Christ immediately ensuing) and therefore to
begin at 475, and by compare with the 1260 Days to end at 1697. According to
which, the State of the Empire, of the Administration of the First Beast, and
of the Witnesses during the Fourth Trumpet, viz. from 475 to 606, is
represented.
THE Point of Time I am now entering upon, has had a just Approach made to it
according to its Importance, which is very great: I shall now, through the
Assistance of the Divine Spirit, duly consider the most weighty sense of it
self; there being no Line of Time, whose Bounds are so definitive, the
Beginning so uncontestably evident in History, the End so illustrious, as this
must be to sense it self, in the very nature of the thing.

That I may therefore discourse hereof most regularly, I propose these four
Heads to fix the Intendment upon.

1. To show, That the Apostle Paul has affirmed, the coming of the Man of Sin,
or Beast, (whose End is according to all Prophecies concerning him, Destruction
by the immediate Appearance of Christ's Kingdom at that his end) has an
unmovable Bar to his Manifestation till his own Time; and that the Apostle
John declares that Bar to be an indefeisable Succession of a seventh King, not
come in his Time, to a sixth King, then in Being in his Time, and that seventh
King to endure a short time, and that then the Beast, the eighth King should
succeed, and that he could succeed neither sooner nor later. When therefore it
will appear that such a seventh King did succeed the sixth, and that that
seventh did decease at 475; if it shall also appear, as it will, that this is
the very same Beast to whom forty two months are determined, it will then be
most evident, his forty two months must begin at 475.

2. To show, That the Kingdom of the Beast must last till the Kingdom of
Christ, according to the same Laws of Succession, can succeed, and it can last
no longer; as also, that the Kingdom of Christ must succeed when that Kingdom
ends, and it can succeed no sooner; if then, it is expressly said, the Kingdom
of Christ shall immediately succeed the 1260 Days; and that according to this
Law of Succession, and the course of all Prophecy, it must also succeed the
forty two months: it then will plainly follow, the 42 Months and the 1260 Days
end together.

3. To show, That the 1260 Days must be Time of the Sun, and the forty two
months must be Time of the Moon; and seeing they must be adjusted to one
another, as ending together, and lying both within one common Womb of Time,
Times, Half Time; The forty two months, by the most exact compare of Lunar and
Solar Time, can be but 1222 Years; and therefore besides all Advantages of
Scripture-use of round Number, beginning at 475, they most exactly and most
necessarily must end at 1697.

4. To show, That the Beast indeed must have every way the Seminal, fundamental
Nature of such a Beast as he is described to be, at the very beginning of his
forty two Months, as the Infant has of a Man, but need not, nor cannot be
supposed to attain full prophetical Proportions, till long after, which Time
Prophecy has also dated to him by his Number 666. So that the description of
the Empire, according to the Fourth Trumpet, the Administration of the other
Beast, and the State of the Witnesses, may continue many Years after as they
stood at the forty two Months entering, and so Prophecy determines of them.

To begin then with the first of these, I find this Order and 1. That Daniel,
the Apostle Paul, and the Apostle John, speak all of one and the same Beast. 2.
That this one and the same Beast has forty two months determined upon him, as
the just State of his Duration. 3. That the Apostle John has declared that
peremptory, positive Law of Succession, that was the Let of the coming of the
Beast into his forty two months.

For the first, Although a multitude of Proofs from the Destruction by the
glorious Appearance of the Kingdom of Christ; so that his eminent Character is
Son of Perdition, in Conformity to that Apostate Apostle, Judas, so near the
Glory of Christ's Resurrection; so the Apostle John twice describes him, by his
going into Perdition, Apoc. 17. v. 8. v. 11. and his Destruction is solemnly
declared, c. 19. and then the Kingdom of Christ succeeds, c. 20. c. 21. Thus
Daniel in every Vision; The great Image was smitten by the Stone cut out of the
Mountains without hands, growing to a great Mountain, filling the Earth by a
Kingdom never ending, in its ten-toed feet, part of Iron and part of Clay, so
exactly compounded of the Beast out of the Sea, with his ten crowned Horns,
inseparably united with his false Prophetism, a Beast out of the Earth, Revel.
13. The little Horn is a Beast, delivered to the Flames, and the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven given to the Saints. The King standing up against the Prince
of Princes shall be broken without hand. At the Accomplishing to scatter the
Holy People, viz. by this Beast, as has been made to appear; All the Wonders
of Christ's Kingdom shall be finished, Dan. c. 2. v. 24. etc. compared with
Dan. c. 7. 11. etc. c. 8. 24, 25. c. 12. 7. The Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3.
etc. styles him the Son of Perdition, and foretells his being consumed with the
Brightness of the Lords; viz. Christ's coming, and the Glory of his Appearance.
Whoever then considers the most notable and notorious Destruction always
affixed to one and the same kind of Power, so even in all its manners of
Description, and such a kind of Destruction as is always declared to issue and
flow out from the Glory of Christ at his coming to his Kingdom, will find, It
must be one and the same Beast, since Christ has but one such Coming and one
such Kingdom, as these are described to be; nor indeed is there any more than
one such Beast so situated in Time, Place, and Succession, as this will appear
to be.

It is in the second place to be made out, that this is the Beast that has
Forty two Months determined to Him; and though there needs nothing to make
that good, but to take the two Chaps. c. 13. and c. 17. of the Apocal. and to
write down all the particulars of agreement between those two Beasts; and it
will be impossible for so much as the thinking Mind to doubt of their being one
and the same: But I will only insist upon the former Argument in this matter,
that Beast, that is so destroyed as the Beast in the c. 17. is to be destroyed,
must needs according to the former Argument be the same Beast. But the Beast
that has Forty two Months, determined to his Continuunce c. 13. v. 5. has
such a Destruction affixed to him as the Beast, c. 17. has: For who can assume
the Effrontery, or Boldness to deny, that the Beast, c. 19. who is taken and
cast into the Lake, v. 20. is the same with the Beast. c. 17. And the Beast c.
13. has this very same Destruction foretold to him; For he is to be Taken, and
to go into that Eternal Captivity of the Lake with his False Prophet
inseparable from him, according to v. 10. and his Ten Crowned Horns, or whole
Circle of Kings are to be killed with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, c. 19. v.
21. compared with chapter 13. v. 10. he that leads into Captivity shall go, etc.
and he that kills with the Sword, etc. now Christ's Captivation and Killing are
such as argues Divine Justice and Power, and such is that declared, c. 19, 20.

The Apostle John has declared that so obstinate unyielding Man of Sin, being
revealed, still in his Time, as the Apostle Paul most emphatically speaks,
signifying the impossibility of his Coming, till that his own proper Time; Now
the occasion of that great Apostolical Paragraph was an Expectation of a sudden
Appearance of the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Glory of Christ's Kingdom; this very Kingdom, of which we are now speaking;
which was the great Expectation of the Apostles, till they were better
Instructed, and of other Christians after them upon a general, but not
particular Apprehension of Scripture Prophecy; For that this Day was the day of
Judgment, there is no Sense for, in those lightsome Days before the Apostasy,
seeing all the Prophecies are big with a Glorious state of Christianity in this
World. To this the Apost. for their Information, and of after Ages much more,
speaks punctually; That it could not be expected so soon, and does most
vehemently obtestate by the very coming of Christ, and our gathering unto him
against the Expectation: for says he, There must be an Apostasy first, and the
Man of Sin must be revealed; but that must be in his own proper Time, and not
before; for there is a (...), a Person witholding, and a (...), an effectual
Thing, witholding, or each of these taking such Fast Hold of their proper Space
and Time, that the Bestian Prince cannot come forward till they by going off
let go their Hold, and then shall be revealed that lawless one, that Man of
Sin, which is an Exposition of (...), when it is to be understood of a Body of
Successors. So this is the Apostle's Sense, The day of Christ, viz. of his
Glory and Kingdom, cannot come, till the Man of Sin come: The Man of Sin comes
indeed out of the Apostasy as out of a Womb; but as no Birth can, so he cannot
come till his own Time: Satan is eager enough; every thing works to it as fast
as it can: the Mystery of Iniquity is now already at this very moment at work.
But every Thing that God has ordained will hold its own, its own Time, its own
Place; and such a Holding Thing there is, and such a Holding Person there is
that possesses, and fills that Time and Place.

Thus far the Apostle Paul goes in his Epistle, so far he was ordered by the
Holy Spirit to go, and no farther; the rest he refers to former Personal
Discourse. Now whatever prudential reason there might be of saying no more; The
great Reason was, the Holy dictating Spirit ordered no more; but that all
Scripture might be searched and compared: Holy Writers say so much in one
place, so much in another; so much one Holy Writer says, so much more is said
by another; by every ones part the Harmony is made up.

The Apostle John therefore speaking; as I have proved of the same great
Matter, and aiming at the Glorious Kingdom of Christ, the grand scope of all
Prophecy, declares the Reason why the Kingdom of Christ could not Come, because
there was an unalterable Succession determined by God before that Kingdom:
There were seven Kings, five of them he gives in the Lump, because Prophecy was
not concerned in them, or in the manner or order of their Succession; they are
only a Character of the Monarchy, a distinctive of the Fourth Beast by its
seven Heads, or Forms of Government, in a Succession as Kings signify, Dan. 7.
But in three of them the Prophecy then in motion by the Apostle John was highly
interested; The first was then, and it was in its course according to five of
the seven Seals: The seventh King was not yet Come, it was not very far off
comparatively, but it was not as yet Come, it was to come in the sixth Seal,
and when it came, there was a necessity upon him, he must continue by the same
Comparativeness but a short space, viz. during only the time of the sixth and
seventh Seals; Now this seventh the Spirit is industrious to assure us, He was
the Christian Emperor; though he was a King of that great City, and Empire,
yet he pertain'd not to the Beast; indeed there was a Declination to the
Apostasy in his time, but the Church was yet pure all those Seals, as appears
by them; it appears too it was declining, the Apostasy drew near; a declining
from one Degree to another there had been from the first Operation of the
Mystery of Iniquity, forming the Antichristian Prince no with great Curiosity
in the lowest parts of the Earth, where no Eye saw the way of the Sathanick
Spirit, but he, before whom Hell and Destruction have no Covering. However,
this Christian Emperor was none of the Heads, but wounded the Pagan sixth
Draconick Head. The Beast, he is the eighth, and is of the seven; Seven, what
but Heads? Clearly joining this Vision with the seven Heads, of Chap. 13. He,
that as the Son of Perdition goes into Perdition; I say again, Goes into
Perdition, that Perdition just before the Kingdom of Christ, and so has no
Successor, but Christ consuming him.

Now this Succession stands firm; God himself had fixed it. As then no Prince
can succeed till the former is avaunted, in so exact a Succession one cannot
crowd out another, no more than one Month or a Day following can crowd out the
precedent; but when any goes off, the next succeeds immediately: there can be
no Vacuity, Rex nunquam moritur, where God holds the Succession, and its Law
firm; and so it is to the very Kingdom of Christ.

Just then when the Christian Emperor deceased, tht Bestian Emperor
succeeded; and that was indisputably at 475, and then his forty two Months of
Duration succeeded: and it was a large Time, as Prophecy draws them out; and
they are still current; they must have been yet a long time ago begun, for
there was the sixth King in Being when the Apostle wrote, signifying his Time
then in spending. The seventh had no long time; That end of things the Apostle
declares, Chapter 18. c. 19. c. 20. c. 21. is beyond all Controversy upon due,
yea, but small Consideration, not yet come. Therefore this eighth King must
have been long upon the Throne, and now near the end of his forty two months.

For he came at the very first of them: He came then, though as an Infant
Prince a Prince as in the Cradle, yet then he came. Humane History is not more
competent to declare the Time when Antichrist was born, than the Jews could
pronounce aright when the Christ was born; yet some chosen Observers there were
of the one and of the other, some or alarming Indications: The Father Jerome
sounded it aloud, or rather by Inspiration before hand proclaimed it; but God
has judged it, he has declared it, and there can be no incertainty in it;
When the short-lived Christian Emperors and their Empire dyed in the West,
then it was; The true Seat of the Roman Empire, being at seven headed seven
hill'd Rome, was by a wonderful Operation of Providence, quitted by the Dragon
to be the Seat of the Beast; the Christian Emperors resided elsewhere most,
for still that was the Metropolis of the Bestian Empire; Constantinople did but
borrow the Name by a secret of Providence, of Nova Roma, as useful for some
Types of Prophecy; when the Christian Western Empire was cessated; then the
Eighth King succeeded, his Forty two Months then began.

I come now to the second Head of this Discourse; The come immediately after
the Beasts Forty two months ended; The Law of the Succession requires it, it
must be then immediately proclaimed; It does not appear all at once, no Kingdom
does so: But its Preparations are seventy five Years; So great, so glorious an
Empire, so just, so even, and cubical in its Thousand Years, must have an
honorable Preparation; And it is but short in comparison; During this time all
sorts of warnings are given by the seven Thunders unsealed, Revel. 14. all kind
of Justice done upon Offenders by the Vials, c. 16. The Beast has a kind of
dying Life, as an outdated Usurper not yet executed, but that has lost his
usurped Empire, and then Lak'd for Ever.

This Succession of the Kingdom of Christ is dated by Prophecy to the end of
the 1260 Days. For then the Witnesses rise, go out of their Sackcloth, are
arrayed in a white Cloud, Ascend to Heaven; they cannot Ascend in Sackcloth;
but for 1260 Days Sackcloth was their Shroud; it is then certain, the 1260 Days
End; It is certain also, the Kingdom of Christ is then proclaimed, for when the
second woe past away, the third comes quickly; No delay, and the third woe
Trumpet brought it, and the first Sound or Report is, The Kingdoms of this
World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, therefore lastly,
the forty two months must end with the 1260 days, for Christ abated nothing of
them by his Kingdom, overhastily, as is to be shown, and the Beast was to have
so many for his Reign.

The 1260 days, and the forty two months ending together, forty two Months
beginning at 475, they must be adjusted one to the other, as one being Time of
the Sun, the other, as Time of the Moon.

For as in all Languages, and parts of the World, Days must, and do signify
most properly the Time, measured by the Sun; so in the eastern, and most
especially the Jewish, and Scripture Language; Months signify only, and solely
the Time, as measured by the Moon, and are called Novitates Newnesses, or Times
measured by each new Congress of the Moon with the Sun, or new Moons: so that
however another way of speaking has prevailed with us, a Month of the Sun is
as improper, as a day of the night, or a day measured by the Moon; so that if
words can signify as they are always in Scripture used to signify, Months
must signify Time according to the motion of the Moon.

And further, as has been already shown, the Symbol is of the peculiar use in
this Prophecy to semble Time of the Night, of the Moon, that the True Church
has under its Feet, and as shall be more seen in a great Remarque upon the
Mohammedan Moon.

Because therefore days, months, years, as they are within this Line of Time,
must all lie within Time, Times, half Time, and equal 1260 days, or years;
There are twice Forty two Months, that knitting one within another, will supply
the shortness to 1260 Days, or Years, of the Forty two Months, either of the
Gentiles, ending thirty eight years sooner, or those of the Beast, beginning
thirty eight years later than those 1260 Days.

And, as the Moon could be no Moon, if there were no Sun to lend it Light; so
the Sun on a body prepared, and moving to it, as the Moon, casts a Light like
that of the Moon, certainly and without fail: In the same manner there could be
no Antichristian months, or Church, if there were not a true Church, and its
Seed, the Witnesses clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, all those 1260
Years, which cast those Months; And if there be such a body as the
Antichristian Church, moving to the Christian Church, as that does, it must
needs derive Months from its Days, equal one to the other.

And it is most apparent, that waving Scriptures round Number; Unto the
exactness of considerably less than a Years difference, the Time of Forty two
prophetical months, adjusted by the strictest Accountant to the time of 1260
prophetical Days, measured by the Moon's motion, from one new Conjunction with
the Sun to another, will be as 1222 Years to 1260 Years; so that if the forty
two months of the Beast begin at 475, the 1260 days beginning at 437, they will
both end necessarily at 1697; which is the thing that ought to be shown, so
great an Exactness, so surely arguing the true Calculalation of this Line, I
hope, all will agree, cannot be bychance.

I request then, I say, a strictness of Account, which to avoid both
longsomness and perplexity in this Discourse, I do not give, but by so strict
Account, two mistakes will be escaped, which may arise from a general
apprehension of this Matter; For it will then be found, the Calculation is not
to be made by accounting the Time of a Synodical Month to twenty nine days, so
many hours, etc. which makes the Lunar year 354 days so many Hours and
Scruples, nor by rating the 1260 days, as three Years and half, which wants
about five days of the true Solar Year, and then proportioning the Lunar Year
of 364 Days, odd Hours and Scruples to a Year of only 360 days; But the true
Scale of Time between the Sun and Moons motion in that which is called the
middle course of each, respecting their Conjunction one with another, is to be
taken; and I affirm to the most rigid Arithmetician concerning it, it will
prove exact to about half a years distance. That 1260 years of the Sun will
exceed forty two Months space of the Moon prophetically understood thirty eight
years. For as Maimonides, the most learned accountant of Jewish Time, settles
this matter in his severe computation of Time, in order to their new moons
Solemnities. There is eleven days within some hours difference betwixt the
lunar year and the solar, naturally given as 365 days; judge then how little
can the want of the five days to make up the solar year 365 days, alter the
account of 11 days difference in a year betwixt the Sun and Moon, which rises
from above 72 five days in a year, to make them nearer equal one to the other,
than eleven days difference carries with it of inequality.

But I fear to be over tedious in this matter, although the wonderful exactness
of the account does detain my Thoughts, assuring a Line of Time, confirmed so
many ways besides, to have its Epoch at 437, and its Period at 1697; by even so
unexpected an agreement of the Beasts forty two months, certainly beginning at
475, and therefore the Witnesses twelve hundred sixty days thirty eight years
before them, while the Gentiles forty two months are ready to set out with
those 1260 days, that so the time of the Bestian Tyranny, and the sufferings of
the Servants of God may begin and end together, as they ought to do.

I come therefore to the fourth head, to consider the state of the Empire of
the Beast at his first rising, or his forty two Months beginning thus at 475,
and to compare therewith the Administration of the other Beast and the Prophecy
of the Witnesses, as they stood in the interval from 475 to 606; For indeed
there is very little of a new scene of things opening till then; and therefore
the great business of this head will be to settle the essential Lineaments of
the grand Apocalyptical Beast according to the prophetical Iconismes of chap.
11. c. 13. c. 17. of the Revel. and to compare therewith the Imagery, given
Dan. c. 2. c. 7. c. 8. c. 11. and the Apostle Paul's Prediction. 2. These. 2.
and the Apostle John's short Accounts of Antichrist in his Epistles; wherein I
do not yet so much intend to display the Quality and Action of the Beast which
will be more advantagiously done hereafter; for at this time they were but
seminal, and so not discoverable, nor open, and there was an accidental
Variableness therein. But I design those invariable and unalterable Essentials
which are unmovable, although they appear each in their just Seasons, and
which are fundamental to the Beast.

Now herein I do solemnly avow, I will bring no preconceiv'd Idea, or Shape of
the Beast to the Prophecy, but search for that true one Prophecy gives, and
receive it from its hand as wholly unpossess'd of any Notions of Him
beforehand; and then referr to general and uncontroverted History, as to an
Umpirage most impartial, the Agreement of Things with Prophecy.

Nor do I design to prove any Name or kind of Power in the World to be this
Beast, but only to prove, That there has been and must be such a one to
sustain the Prophetic Characters during these forty two Months; and what will
necessarily follow, I cannot Fore-Fend.

To this Purpose I must make these three Premisals:

1. That when Prophecy gives an entire prophetical Scheme of a Monarchy or this
Bestianism, it represents, as entire and essential to that Scheme, Things that
did not fill it first; as History, giving the Character of an Empire, gives it
at full; or so of any Prince, and not as things were in their mere Infancy.
Thus those things are given into the Possession of the Beast at his forty two
Months beginning, which were not complete till many Years after; as his Ten
Horns, his Great Power and Authority, etc. Now this ought to be no prejudice to
the Prophetic Scheme, no more than that the Picture of Charles the Great, as a
Man or an Emperor, would not fit his Infancy, especially when Prophecy defines
the Time when he shall attain that Image, viz. 666.

2. When Prophecy gives the Portraicture of a particular last state of a
Monarchy that had a variety of States before it, it unites that last State as
so one with the former, and especially with that just before it, as that they
are spoken of as one common State just at one Time; for this belongs to the
Glory of Prophecies Prescience and Omniscience, to which, past, and present,
and to come, are one, to give things thus entire in one.

Thus Prophecy gives the Dragon, the sixth Head in the Beast of seven Heads,
seven Heads, when it wanted one as to present Event: and if it had to do with
any of the five fallen Heads in the Time of the Apocalypse given, it had done
the same undoubtedly, because the Scheme is but one although it be at several
Times filled up: so the Scheme has always 7 Heads.

And thus it gives the grand Apocalyptick Beast whatever was before it; the
five fallen Heads in the Lump, that they make a Character of it; nay, the whole
Image, Dan. 2. in the three Beasts, Dan. 7. the Grecian Leopard, the Persian
Bear, and the Babylonian Lion, are united to this last State of the Rev. 13. 2.
fourth Monarchy, and even whole entire Bestianism; because in it that Image
was to be beaten to Powder, Dan. 2. 34, 35. and the Lion, the Bear, and the
Leopard, who had their Lives prolonged, Time at large, and intimate Time or
Season, were now to be killed with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, when the Beast,
the Little Horn, is given to the consuming Flames, or to the Lake, Dan. 7. 11,
12. with Apoc. 19. v. 21. So that it is no wonder it is called the Beast
wounded in one of its Heads, viz. the sixth Head, before it came unto its
Succession or forty two months; that it is called in the same manner the first
Beast twice, Revel. 13. 12. for all Bestianism is so totally his, that the
Dragon, with whom he is more especially united, as his immediate Predecessor,
that has the seven Heads and ten Horns because it was the Roman Beast under
the sixth Head, yet is carefully forepriz'd from the Name Beast, that it might
not derogate from the Universal Bestianism of this grand Beast; yea though it
is he in whom this Beast was wounded. There is only a short Allowance of the
Name of the (...) the other Beast to him who is erecting this seventh Head into
its Supremacy and Dignity, because he is so one with him, as the false Prophet,
and but for the time he is so erecting him.

3. That the prophetical Scheme may be understood concerning this Beast, it is
to be duly stated, where the Situation of each part of this multiplice Scheme
is to be; there must be the Trunk or Body of this Beast, and that has its feet
of many Nations and People spread far and wide, the People of the Ten Horns,
like the feet of a Bear, and by those many sorts of People, its Body is
variously spotted about like a Leopard; this is the Populacy with their
subordinate Magistrates. There are the seven Heads, or supreme crowned
Authorities, each having successive Dignity and Sovereignty, as the Romans had
Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes of the People, perpetual Dictators, all
fallen in the Apostles Time, and so they signify no farther than the making a
Character of the Monarchy intended. In the Apostles Time were the Emperors, or
the Dragon in the Language of Prophecy, and the sixth Head; and the Beast, the
seventh and last, whose Mouth speaking as the Lion, Nebuchadnezzar, acts the
Body and Feet to the Cruelty of the Leopard, and Bear by his idolatrous and
fiery Decrees. There are the ten crowned Horns, whose Site is in this Head,
absolute, independent Monarchs and Princes, only as they agree to give their
Strength and Power to the Beast.

Now all these have so close an Union with the Grand Beast, that the Body is so
his, that he is the Beast, because he is the Head of the Body; the ten Horns
are his while they are Horns, for their Situation must be in the Head: the
former Heads are his, the five fallen to make him a Character; the sixth, the
Imperial Dragon, lives in him, is worshipped in him, continues to the last in
him, viz. the Monarchickness, the Idolatry, the Enmity to Christ's Kingdom
especially, even as he at the first is wounded in him. And the other Beast is
his, negotiating his Dignity and Supremacy, and at that complete, subsiding
into his False Prophet; the Dragon, the Beast, the False Prophet, sending out,
each the Spirit of Devils; and the False Prophet, taken as inseparable one from
the other, with him, and cast into the Lake. Thus he is every way the grand
Apocalyptick Beast.

Having laid this Foundation by way of Premisal, I come now to define this
Grand Apocalyptick Beast, according to his certain, essential, invariable
Characters, most eminent in Prophecy, most conspicuous in History: for I dare
not adventure so great a weight on History without Prophecy, nor suspend it on
my Interpretation of Prophecy without observing Divine Providence, conducting
the Event at every swelling Period, into most undoubted History. When both meet
to such Perfection, it is hard to doubt, and even sullen Obstinacy to deny.

The Beast must be the Apostle John's Great Antichrist, that Charact. 1.
was to come into the World, agreeing with the false Christ's our Lord
prophesied of, and the Apostle John's many Antichrists, 1 John 4. 2, 3. Mat.
24. 24.
who would steal the Kingdom of the Messiah from Him, by pretending themselves
to be Christ's; and so denying that great Article, that Christ was come in the
Flesh, to which the Kingdom of his Father David is assured without end, as
being his Root and Offspring.

Now this can be no way so effectually done, as by pretending to be the Vicar
of Christ, and holding his Kingdom in his Right, and as in Honor of him. And
he that does that, is the (...) the Opposite to Christ; and if it should be
disguised under Servus Servorum Dei, it would not excuse it. Now those open,
barefaced, False Christ's, the Judgment of God immediately seized, and gave up
to Destruction. But of such an Antichrist as this, Christ has sworn, There
shall be Time, Times, Half a Time, for Him, and that Christ's Kingdom should not
come, or the Wonders of it be accomplished, till these are past and fully past.

And the Apostle Paul assures us, before the Day of Christ can come, the
Apostasy must bring forth such an Antichrist, who must therefore sit in the
Temple of God, viz. the outward Court and Holy City, or the Profession of
Christian Religion, and in Christendom, and there must exalt Himself, must
usurp above All that is called God, viz. Christ, even in his humane Nature,
called and carrying the Name on his Vesture, and on his Thigh, (but not
Written, or set in public view, till just before the Beast's Ruin) King of
Kings, Lord of Lords; whom God Sanctified, and sent into the World, as Supreme
Prince, and under him truly Christian Supremes, who are also called Gods, John
10. 35, 36.

If then all History, and all Knowledge of Time, successively, for several
Ages, declare such a pretended Vicar of Christ; This is the most essential and
original Character of Antichrist, without searching farther into his Quality
and Action; For as whoever should pretend to be deputed to be a Divine God, is
an Idol; so whoever pretends to be a Spiritual Plenipotentiary Lord of Lords,
and above Princes, as Vicar of Christ, is Antichrist; for whoever says thus of
Himself, says, He is God; For Christ can have no Vicar General on Earth, any
more than God one Universal Deputy of his Power, claiming Divine Honor.

Such an Antichrist must needs Sit at Rome; For he must Charact. 2.
bear aloft the Woman, as a false Church, that was a Wilderness to the True
Church, when it was Hid, and yet Fed with hidden Manna; a howling Wilderness,
where the Lion, the Leopard, and the Bear Inhabit: In this Wilderness, John saw
sitting on the Beast this Woman, under the Name of that City, that in the
Appocalyptical Time, or when that Prophecy was Given, sat upon many Waters, or
People, and upon the Seven Mountains, or the City so famed for being
Septi-Collis, or seven Hill'd Rome, and which Reigned over the Kings of the
Earth, as no other City at that Time could be once supposed to do, so
Charactered either by its Hills, or being Drunk with the Blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of Jesus, Called on that Account Sancta Roma.
, as that City in all Ages has been; A City, whose Freedom was purchased at
great rates in all parts of the World, and so fitly said to sit on many Waters;
and to draw the Confluence of People to it to receive Law from it. Here
therefore for the fulfilling Prophecy, the Beast must have his Throne, even, as
under Pontius Pilate, the Governor of Judea, constituted by the Emperor of
Rome, Christ suffered, and Rose again into his Kingdom, according to the
Prophecy of Daniel; That in the Days of those Kings, God would set up an
everlasting Kingdom, the right of which then began; so that till Constantine,
that Roman Empire was a Dragon, watching to devour the manly Birth, that had
Right to Rule all Nations.

Now with this Dragon, the Beast was to be united, to receive his Throne,
Power, and great Authority from him; and in Him, the Dragon must Live and be
Worshipped; Therefore He that is the Beast, must be Roman, and Sit at Rome,
from which the Christian Emperors by Divine Conduct receded, that this
Character of the Beast might be left free to the Beast alone: And under Him it
must be Antichristian, until the very Glorious Kingdom of Christ, and then is
to be Burnt, when the Beast is Taken, and Cast into the Lake, that it may
answer the whole Ichnography, or Description, Rev. c. 17. c. 18.

Now that we may thoroughly understand this Character, and the certainty of it;
By the Woman that sits on the Beast, must be Apprehended Rome, as a City and a
Church, a False and Antichristian Church, fixed in, and made inseparable from
this City. No other can answer the Prophecy, so that the other Beast, called
the False Prophet, cannot be conceived by it; For whereas this City must be
burnt, as from Heaven, the False Prophet was taken with the Beast, and cast
into the Lake.

That it must be the very City, is plain by the whole Prophetical Type: This
had the Seven Kings, united with the whole Empire, that by their Residence in
it did also carry it and bear it aloft; This Sat on many Waters; This Reigned
over the Kings of the Earth: This had its Merchants, and its various
Merchandises, its Pomp and its Pleasures; This is the Eternal Rome, that after
its being Thrown a burning Mountain into the Sea, at above twelve hundred Years
old was preserved and rescued, and has stood twelve hundred Years more, so
Great as it is at this Day, and shall not be totally Destroyed, till the
Appearance of Christ. Its Epoch of Restitution is in Sacred Prophecy, as
Chronicular and Monumental as is its Building, or Vrbs Condita.

But, as it is a City, so is it an Apostatized Church, fixed to that City; For
on its Forhead is written, Mystery, the sense of which is, Church in a City,
opposite to the Mystery of the Seven Churches, but agreeable to the mystery of
Iniquity: It is the Great Whore, and mother of Harlots, with which the Kings
and People of the Earth have committed Fornication; And this we know, is the
constant description of an Idolatrous Church in the Old Testament, as of
Aholiab and Aholibah, Ezekiel. 23. It is Babylon the Great in this Mystery, and it
is spiritually called Sodom, the Impure City in its Spiritual Fornications, as
well as corporeal Nicolaitanism, and Egypt, the enslaving cruel City, holding
the Israel of God in Bondage; It is Spiritually that Apostate Jerusalem, that
is in Bondage with its Children, where our Lord was Crucified. It covers the
true Church, called for its sake Pergamus, and the high-rais'd Throne of Satan:
so it is Thyatyra, the Spiritual Jezebel, Daughter of Eth. Baal, King of the
Sidonians, Daughter of an Ethnic Idolatrous City, whose Merchandises are the
Instruments of Idolatry and Superstition, sum'd up in the Bodies of men, not
only attending its State, as the Scarlet, Fine Linen, Gold, Silver, Ivory,
Precious Wood, does; but its blind dark Religion, requiring servile stupid
Brutes for men, and Souls of men perishing for ever in its service against
Light, and Convictions of Truth, and defending it with a violated distorted
Reason, abused Parts and Learning, Revel. 18. 13.

And this Rome must be both the City and Church, for here, and in it the
Primacy of St. Peter, residing as Bishop, laid the Foundation of its so long
Greatness, under the Name of the Apostolic See: Constantinople was but an
Eminence, as small as the Fame of it Seven Hills, but as little Risings
compared with this, Eternal Church of Eternal Rome: The Ottoman Port has
swallowed that; Flames from Heaven rest upon this, so that the Smoke of its
Burning shall ascend for ever and ever, as both City and Church; For so
Prophecy has read its destiny, and it cannot be reversed. Strong is the Lord
that Judges it.

This City then is to be a Pyramid Pile of Smoke and Flame, ascending for ever
and ever, an eternal City of burning, as the City Sodom, a Lake of Brimstone
settling in its very Room, Place, and Situation; a Jerico so cursed, as to be
no more built, and an Apostate Church, suffering as spiritual Sodom the
vengeance of eternal Fire.

He, The Beast, must carry universal monarchy, as the Emperors (...).
of Rome did over as it were, the habitable World, for so his Union with the
Dragon imports; and yet that this may not be mistaken, it must be in an Image;
a real, martial, natural Cesareate is not in the prophetical Portraicture of
Antichrist, but in the Image of a Pontificate, or a Vicarship to Christ on
Earth, even as the Caesar's carried a Pontificate enchas'd into their
Imperialism or Cesareate; so the Beast bears a Cesareate or imperial Power,
enchas'd into his Pontificate.

The other Beast therefore, ministering to the Worship of the first Beast, viz.
the Roman Empire, as to be under the seventh head, but not yet erected into
public Dignity and Supremacy, found no way to do it, but by saying to the
Antichristian Earth, and its Inhabitants, that they should make an Revel. 13.
v. 14, 15. etc.
Image to the first Beast, that was wounded with a sword, and did live, was
wounded in the sixth head, lived in the seventh, but was not yet in Dignity to
be worshipped; to this entire Beast as in the seventh head was to be made an
Image of Idolatry, and an Image of Imperiality; an universal Power under the
Image of an (in ordine ad spiritualia) resident in a pontifical supremacy and
infallibility. And when this Image had by the continuing service of that other
Beast, Life given to it, to speak and to cause, That all that would not worship
this Image, c. 14. v. 9. c. 15. v. 2. c. 16. v. 2. c. 19. v. 20. c. 20. v. 4,
should be killed; and that all should receive a mark, etc. Here arose the
universal monarchy in an Image, and from this time, the Prophecy joins
continually the Beast and his Image together.

The Beast must answer that prophetic motto, or Inscription Caract. 5.
upon him, thrice given, and pointing at three several Seasons.

1. The Beast that Was, Is not, he is the eighth, and is of the Chapter 17. 11.
seven, and goes into Perdition; this is determined to the point of time
proper to his Succession, and then he must answer it.

2. The Beast that was, is not, shall ascend out of the bottomless v. 8.
Pit, etc. This is determined to the times in which the Beast first bore the
Woman. For the Beast that thou saw, viz. with the Woman sitting upon him,
was, etc. Then therefore he must answer that Inscription.

3. The Beast that was, is not, yet is, This is determined to v. 8.
the time, when the Inhabitants of the Earth wonder, whose Names were not
written, etc. When they behold the Beast that was, etc. This by compare with c.
13. must be, when he came to be worshipped, and that was not till he came to
his number when the Image had Life given to it, spoke, and caused, and then it
must be answered.

And in this very Inscription the Wisdom of God is much to be adored, showing
so exactly the gradual rising of the Beast first out of the Sea in his
Succession, then out of the Abyss or bottomless Pit at his Universality, then
at his number 666, when he came to be worshipped as a Head.

4. For in the first, he is truly said to be the Beast, that was, that is,
subsisted in the general Bestianism of the Roman Monarchy, that had been in six
heads, was to survive forty two months under this seventh head; and so in the
prophetic Scheme had a Being: Is not, for the Beast had at this time as little
appearance as could possibly consist with his Succession: succeed he did,
because that name of headship, under which the Beast was to live so long, was
left at that Time to Him, the supreme Name alone in Rome, and so continued ever
since. For after the Cessation of the Christian Emperor, neither the Kings of
the barbarous Nations, nor the Greek Emperor, ravished the Title of Rome, but
contented themselves with that of Italy, Lombardy, Exarchy of Ravenna, in which
the care of Providence over Prophecy, is worthy admiration; yet in the Time of
the Chasm, Interreign, or Gap between the sixth Head, the Pagan Emperor
wounded by the Christian Emperor, the seventh King, and no Head, and the
Beast, the seventh Head, but eighth King; It might well be said, Is not; For
this Beastian Head in Prophetical Scheme, felt that Wound, both by Sympathy, as
the Beast, that having no Head, in Dignity was truly Mottoed Is not, as also
upon himself, as seventh Head, the Wound fell, because he succeeded not, being
fore Let; and when he did succeed, he was but in Infancy, the Kings of Italy,
and the Grecian Exarch held him under, that it might well be said of him Is
not; but yet he so Is, that he goes into Perdition; that is, he is in his
forty two months current; which end in his Perdition, and of which the State
under the Christian Emperor was a great Pledge, as of Christ's Kingdom, so of
his Perdition.

In the second place, when he rises out of the bottomless Pit, and has
universal Supremacy, as Head of Rome, he eminently carries the Roman Woman
aloft in the same Supremacy, and yet in the former senses may be said, Was, Is
not, but shall ascend at his Time 606, out of the bottomless Pit; and as a
Character most evident upon him, as always inseparable from him, goes into
Perdition; for out of the Abyss he rises, into it he is thrown for ever; this
was after Phocas gave universality to him, as is next to be discoursed.

In the third, when the Dragon lives in the Beast, who converts Paganism into
Antichristianism, exercising the same Idolatrous universal Power in the Earth,
in an Image at 666, as we shall see; They worship both the Dragon, and wonder
after the Beast, admiring the artifice, when they see the Beast that Was, viz.
in the Draconick Head, Is not the very same Pagan idolatrous or imperial
Dragon, and yet Is is All. That very same thing is an Antichristian and
Pontifical Image at 666. His Perdition is not herein named, both for the Grace
of the Type, at his Inauguration, and because it is expressed before and after
in this engraving upon him. I leave therefore every one to judge, how admirably
Prophecy and matter of Fact agree in these Inscriptions.

He must be a Horn in the Seed, and Bud at his very Charact. 5.
Succession, so designed by Providence, so of right, as a supreme, though but
in Infancy, and in an Image; yet being a small and feeble Horn, he could not
get up, but under the favor and shelter, behind, and in the midst of the other
Horns, and then they became his Horns in open view.

Then he was one among Ten, into which the Empire being variously divided,
fell; so as to make that number at any time after its division; and Ten as a
complemental number is chosen.

Three were pulled up by him, by his Influence and Instance, before him, by the
strength and martial Prowess of others.

Let History then declare, what Three eminent Horns were pulled up, and we
shall find the Gothic Horn pulled up by Justinian the Emperor, the Lombards a
second, and the Greek Exarchy the Third for this little Horn, by Charles
Martill; by Pipin his Son, who was made King of France, by him Charles the
Great, Son, and Grandson to the two former, invested with the titularity of
Western Emperor; For let History further declare, for whose sake they were
pulled up, and whose Patrimony they became.

Nor let it be any blemish in Prophecy, that Daniel does not speak openly of
the Headship of this little Horn, nor John of the Hornship of this Head; for
one Type was peculiar to one Prophet, the other to the other, and could not
without manifest Injury to either Type, be conjoined, or confounded.

But Daniel subindicates his Headship, whom he styles a little Dan. 7. 8. Dan,
8. 23. Dan. 11. 36. c 7. 24.
Horn, by the Eyes of a Man, by a Countenance stout above his Fellows, by a
Mouth speaking great things, by his understanding dark Sentences, by his being
a King, doing after his own Will; in all which he was a Horn diverse from all
the rest.

On the other side the Apocaliptick Prophet does not dissemble his being a
little Horn, while a Head; for the Dragon gave him his Seat, the Ten Kings
agree to give him their Power and Kingdom, neither of which he could win by
puissance, and when the Words of God are fulfilled, they resume all with ease,
and at Pleasure; for he prosper'd only by Craft and Serpentine Dan. 8. 24.
Subtilty, inspired into him by Satan.

The Beast is always united with false Prophecy, that he Charct. 6.
himself is the Head, and principal of it from the first, and therein
negotiated his own universal Monarchy, Within his Purple there lies a rough
Garment to deceive; he is full of the Spirit of Antichrist, and so surprises
the Kingdom of the true Prophet, Priest, and King; He is Satan transformed
into an Angel of Light, a false Apostle coming with lying Signs and Wonders;
his Eyes are as a Seers, his Mouth speaks great things, His Efficacy is by
the deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them, that perish; his Name, Son of
Perdition, is derived from the Traitor Apostle Judas, who betrays Christ with
the hail Master, and a Kiss; he Blasphemes, he is worshipped by those who are
not written in the Lambs Book of Life; he is made supreme by calling Fire from
Heaven in false Anathemaes; he is inseparably united with the false Prophet,
and cast into the Lake with him. He is consumed with the Spirit of Christ's
Mouth, and disappears, vanishes, as a counterfeit at the sight of the true
Christ himself, being a false Christ, an Antichrist comprehending and embracing
false Prophetism, within his Tyranny of changing Laws and Times, and doing
after his own Will.

Now whether such a Tyranny in the Image of Pseudo Prophetism, has been in the
World, gradually rising according to Prophecy, since the decease of the
Christian Emperor, and supporting the forty two months, for above these last
twelve hundred years, (and especially from 606, and 725,) that has been no
Fantom, Ghost, or Mormo, but Flesh and Bones, hard substantial Tyranny? Let all
the Christian World judge.

And thus I have settled every way the forty two months, as Bestianism lies
under them, without any new Distinction of Time, under which nothing so
remarkably transcendent to the former account of the other Beast, and the
Witnesses appears, as will come into consideration in the Progress of things,
to which therefore I adjoyn the farther Treaty of them, and close this part of
Discourse with these few short Remarks.

Let the Prophetic Symbols be laid either to Ecclesiastic or General History,
and we shall find, History has nothing, relating to things, Prophecy has been
supposed to have designed its Symbols to and for; but that both in the Frame
and Structure of the whole Prophecy, in its Series, and Notes of Time, there is
a most exact and wonderful Co-ordination of one to and with the other. I mean
in Cardinal Points.

To ascribe them then to Chance or Fancy, what does it speak, but an Obstinacy
semblable to that of the Atheist, against all proof of a Divine Being, or to
the Pharisaick Despightful accounting to the Prince of Devils what was too
evident to be denied, and too great to be devolved upon natural Causes.

If the Mystery of Iniquity began in the very Time of the Apostles; if the
Apostasy began at 437; and that then the Gentiles had invaded the outward Court
of the Christian Profession, as within their forty two months, so to do; if the
Beast was at 475 in his forty two months, under the Guardianship of the other
Beast, with the two Horns of East and West, however pretending to the Lamb;
What Dependence can there be upon Antiquity, not supported by Divine Authority
of Scripture, or firm solid Reason? How much better are close Researches into
this Divine Prophecy to determine those Controversies, than Search into
Antiquity only?

As certainly as the Gentiles Power of entering the Holy Ground, and treading it
down with unhallowed Feet; as certainly as the Beast came into his forty two
Months at the due time; so certainly shall the Kingdom of the Lord, and of his
Christ, succeed at the end of these forty two Months: for it is not only so
according to the Word of the Watchers, and Demand of the Holy ones, but
according to the solemn Oath of Christ, with hands lifted up to Heaven, That
after Time, Times, Half a Time, Time shall be no more, but of the seventh
Trumpet finishing All, and the Beast going into Perdition.

There is no Injury done to Persons of Royal Dignity, or Dominion, by deriving
upon them what Divine Prophecy has affixed to them: their Persons, their
Places, may receive all due Honor and Christian Subjection notwithstanding.
Prayers may be made for them, as any way deputed by God; their personal Virtues
and worthy Actions may be had in due esteem, even as the Princes of the
Heathen, by Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, or of the Caesar's by the Apostles.

SECT. IX.
In which the Time from the Forty two Months beginning is set out till 622, or
the Mohammedan Hegira, by Rome 's dark State in the Fourth Trumpet; by the Angel
proclaiming the three Woe Trumpets; by the Beast becoming a fallen Star at 606,
and the Key of the Abyss given him, viz. in the Universal Pastorship by Phocas;
and the Ministry of the other Beast to him herein, and the state of the
Witnesses are also declared. Revel. c. 8. v. 12. etc. c. 9. v. 1. etc.
I Have in the former Section settled that so considerable Period of the
Beast's Forty two Months, and settled them upon their own Base; the Beast in
his most essential and fundamental Delineation: but this Part, rested upon the
Point of Time, that was even with his Succession; His Rising out of the Sea,
that Sea, into which Rome was thrown; into which those Fountains ran, where
into the Imperial Star, Wormwood fell, and embittered them: This gave
opportunity to the Beasts Succession, to his rising out of that very Sea, as
has been argued: for when Augustulus thus fell, the Name and Head into which
the Beast succeeded, was in the midst of the Tumults of the Winds striving upon
the Great Sea; the Winds raised by the three first Trumpets left supreme: so He
succeeded.

The Judgment of God upon the apostatized Christian Empire, made way for him to
rise to a supreme Apostate. God took away that apostatized indeed Imperial
King, but no Head, and gave the Apostasy a proper both Head and King in his
Wrath.

But he was at this time, and long after, a Beast, that Was and yet Is not.
There being therefore no other Name of Potency and Augustness, Rome, the
Absolute Rome, (for Constantinople was but a mutuatitious Rome, it borrowed in
Emulation the Name, Rome only;) because, I say, there was no other Name but
that of the Bestian Succession, in the time when he was under the Inscription,
Is not; Rome was very dark. All other Names, not only of Supremacy, but even of
Subordinacy, by degrees were eclipsed; yea, the Eclipse was total, 'ere the
Light returned: no Emperor, no Senate, no Kings, under the Denomination of
Rome, no Consuls. And Rome it self became a Provincial City under the Exarchat
of Ravenna, as low a State as the Mistress of the World could be depressed
into; more inglorious than an utter Extinction. Thus it was from 475 beginning,
to about 550, under Justinian the Emperor. Herein all History is at Peace, at
one with it self: and so things continued some time.

And how elegantly does Prophecy represent this under the symbolical Account of
the fourth Trumpet! The fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun, of
the Moon, and of the Stars, were smitten; and the Day shined not for a third
part thereof, and the Night likewise. The Bestian Name being as yet in a
Peerage, and out of that very Peerage to come in an Image into its luster, (and
the Image not yet made) could not inlighten this great Orb; for its Name
however, the only Name of Supremacy, was not yet known in its Bestian
Supremacy, but was yet as of another Order and Claim.

But now at the end of the fourth, and in the beginning of the fifth Trumpet,
it began to dawn; and so Prophecy will by its Dawn convey us upon this Line,
this wonderful Line, we have discoursed so long upon, the Line of the 1260
Days; with which the forty two Months of the Beast are now combined. Prophecy
will, I say, very speedily in the fifth Trumpet convey and set us upon a new
Line of the Mohammedan Hegira or Computation of Time; so that we shall run upon
it for the space of eight hundred and thirty Years together, with the 1260
Days, and with the Bestian Line, comprehending in short the most Ecumenical
and illustrious Points of History at that Time in the Universe; viz. of the
Bestian and the Mohammedan Grassation, or Invasion into the same kind of
Universal Power; and both upon the Account of Pseudo-Prophetism, the due
Observation of which, will persuade us of the Divineness of this Prophecy, and
that we are upon the true Explication of it.

As it were then, between the ending of the Time of the fourth, and the
beginning of the Time of the fifth Trumpet; there was a loud Voice, as of an
Angels flying through the (...), that upper Region, like the Voice of Thunder,
reaching down to the Earth, and saying, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the Inhabiters of the
Earth, because of the Voices of the Angels that are yet to sound.

Now it were wonderful, if merely by the chance of Imagination, running such a
Path, so great and remarkable Configurations both of Prophecy and History
should meet it so often, just where it would choose and desire to be so met.

For at this very Time, Gregory called the Great, Bishop of Rome, a Personage
of so great Eminence for Virtue, Learning, and Eloquence, declared aloud in his
Epistles to the Emperor Mauricius, and to John the Bishop of Constantinople,
So also to the Bishops of Alexand. and Antioch.
That Antichrist was near; That the Title of Universal Bishop was a certain
Indication of him; That it was Pride to assume such a Title; It was like
Lucifer, Son of the Morning, ascending the heights of the Stars, setting his
Throne above the other Angels, above the other Stars, affecting to be like the
Most High.

Now seeing no such could be fixed in the Firmament or Heaven of the Gospel, he
must needs Fall: How close then is this to the prophetic Language, I saw a
Star fall from Heaven; or as Christ in a like case speaks, I saw Satan fall as
Lightning from Heaven, as the Dragon fell, but found in the Beast a Kingdom on
Earth, as before said.

Just as when Satan fell from Heaven he had a Kingdom assigned him by the
Divine Permission and Decree; viz. God of this World, Ruler of the Darkness of
this World; This Star who is the Son of Perdition, whose coming is after the
manner of Satan, had the same in Proportion; the Key of the bottomless pit is
given to him, that is, permitted to him, given judiciarily into his hand by
God's wise and holy sufferance, and overruled of all things to his Glory.

This Fall then of this Star, is like the Angels leaving their own Habitation,
their first Estate, or true original Principality: Jude v. 6.
a Fall, not like that of the Stars, the Dragon swept down with his Tail, or of
the Star Wormwood, an involuntary Fall, a Fall from the Heaven of a political
Order and Supremacy, to a low State without Power; but a Fall of Apostasy from
his due Station, a planetary Defection from his own Orb, v. 16.
into a Kingdom of the bottomless Pit, to which Darkness is reserved for ever.

And whenever the Antichrist came, the Beast rose out of the bottomless pit, or
which is the same, this Star had fallen: there must be then Woe, Woe, Woe, for
the Vengeance of God at the same time made him way, and pursued him: every
Trumpet sounded against him; The first was to hurt only the Revel. 9. 4.
Men that were not sealed, of which he was the Prince: the second was upon
those who were guilty of Murders, Sorceries, v. 20.
Thefts, Idolatries. The Woman whom the Beast carried was guilty of all these;
was impenitent in them, although c. 11. v. 15. compared with c. 14. c. 15. c.
16.
God gave her space to repent. The Third Woe-Trumpet brought with it the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Destruction of Antichrist, or the Bestian Kingdom:
so there was Woe, Woe, Woe, on the Bestian Earth whenever Antichrist came.

Immediately after this Remonstrance of the Bishop Gregory, the Bishop Boniface
accepts from the parricidick Emperor Phocas, this Universality: so that in his
sense, Antichrist then came, and the first Woe-Trumpet, according to Prophecy,
is dated from his Fall. What can be more wonderful? as Gregory was at all a
good Man, his Prediction must be owned to a better Spirit, and to the Knowledge
Divine Prophecy gave him, and to the Impression it had made upon him; As he was
himself part of that Body, upon which his own Prediction ran, it was like
Nebuchadnezzar's prophetic Dream of Dan. 2.
the Ruin of that Image by the Stone, of which he was the head of Gold; or
like the Prophecy of Caiaphas, a very bad Joh. 11. 51.
part of which himself was concerned in: however his eminent Station gave the
Rebound of his Prediction, as through the World. And the time of Rome lying so
low, is noted most emphatically by Prophecy; viz. Rome without any eminent
Light of Government: and then follows such an immediate Appearance of
Antichrist, according to the Signal given of him by that Bishop of Rome, and
according to Prophecy the Star Fell. This is in some sense, I may say, but too
remarkable in so plainly declaring who is Antichrist, and that his Kingdom
holds by the Key of the bottomless Pit.

It is true, the Beast had been in his forty two months above a hundred Years;
yet, as a Tyrant, prophetically declared to be a Tyrant, is not yet so in his
Infancy or Under-state, no more than Hazael was a Tyrant when Elisha told him
what 1 Kin. 8. 11.
he, as such a Tyrant, should do; no more was the Beast such a Beast while he
was under the Inscription, Is not. So that though he was a Beast by way of
Succession, and some presagious Actions, He might yet not be a falling Star
till he now fell, and received this Key: for the whole Bestian Body, or
Succession, is considered in the whole Beast, not in its several Ages, nor in
the single Persons making it, some better some worse: all that enter its
Composition, are considered as one Beast in the prophetic Scheme, in any Age,
in any Bestian Qualities, more or less; yea though so moderate, as that they
should only bear up the Title, and maintain the Succession. And this removes
all possible Objection; as thus, Was he, that had been a Beast so long, a Star
yet to Fall? You see, he might be so while he was the Beast; Is not; and yet
not a falling Star; for this fall prepared his rising out of the bottomless
Pit, and so to show himself a Beast, whereas yet he could not appear so, but
must remain in his State, Is not, till this fall, and after it too, even till
he came to his number, that Prophecy might be fulfilled, when he ascends out of
this Abyss.

And though his fall was but to the Earth, yet because instead of the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, he pretended to, he had only the Key of the bottomless
Pit, he is justly said to rise out of it, for that he ascended, what was it, as
the Apostle argues in a much better Case, but that he descended first; Ephesians.
4. 9.
for seeing he rises to his Power by the Efficacy of his deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, by his sathanick Signs and Wonders, by his
excommunicational Thunders from beneath, by which he affrights men downwards;
and that much of his Potentacy lies in the management of a false Hell of his
own founding; It is very proper to him to ascend out of the bottomless Pit, and
the Power of the Keys, he assumes, is very ominous to him; for what he calls
Keys, is this, one Key of the bottomless Pit, and so in just derision of him he
carries this device in Prophecy, The Key of the bottomless Pit was given him.

I confess, The Patriark of Constantinople was the First in this Assumption,
the Emulation of which moved Gregory, it is to be feared, as a lower cause to
so high an Exclamation; but though he was First, yet he was not to have the Key
of the Abyss in Supremacy; for Prophecy sees not as Man sees by degrees, and as
in parcels, but at once; it therefore calls him, that fallen Star alone, who
was to have this Key, although the other was a falling Star also, and spoke as
a Dragon.

He is then, and he alone, He that has under Satan the Key of the bottomless
Pit, and though an Angel is called afterward the Angel of the bottomless Pit,
whom we shall find in its due place very diverse from this Star, who may seem
to have a better right to this Key; we shall yet find he was only a Warlike
King of the Locusts, under the Title of a Prophet, the false Prophet Mahomet,
but was not, could not be this Star, whose fall must be from Heaven perpetual,
even as his aspiring Pretensions to Heaven are so continual; (as shall be
further declared) as one who once had a fixation in Heaven, which Mahomet never
had.

He, that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, is he that opened it, and let out
the Smoke, he opens it, he lets out the Smoke, out of which the Locusts came,
but against his own Intention, he intended himself to ride in this Cloud, as in
an infernal Chariot alone; but with the Smoke Satan also ascended, and became
an Angel of the bottomless Pit in the King of the Locusts, who were the Flood
out of his Mouth, propagating his Kingdom by both the Star, and by the King of
the Locusts; The latter of which was principally a great Judgment of God on the
Antichristian Star, as shall be shown at large.

In the mean Time we find, the other Beast ministering to this delivery of the
Key of the bottomless Pit, under the decree and judicial Ordination of God. For
they made Trial for him, of the Efficacy of the Lamb-like Horns, joined with
the draconick Idolatry, and Persecution, and so exercised the Power of the
first Beast before him, while he, as one, and the chief Revel. 13.
among them, looked on. They essayed the calling fire from Heaven, and working
lying Miracles in his sight, to establish the Grandeur of false Prophecy; they
stirred up all to worship the first Beast, viz. The Roman idolatrous Supremacy,
and to make an Image of Universality to it in such a Roman Catholic Supremacy,
as of the Vicar of Christ on Earth.

And even the Eastern Horn that aspired for it self above this Beast, yet by
approving the Idea, by making the Experiment, by assuming the Title, provoked
and inkindled the Ambition of him, who by the divine Decree had the Permission,
got the Possession, and has for many Ages wedged himself fast into it, and
left the other Horn leisure only to be angry at his defeat, while his vain
claim justifies the thing as lawful, and desirable; and therefore gave the
occasion to the High sounding Voice of Gregory the Great.

And it is very observable, on this very account the Divine Justice fell all
along severely upon the Eastern Empire, and Patriarchate, by the two first
woe-Trumpets, especially at the taking of Constantinople, and to this day lies
heavy upon them: so that as the Grecian Emperors gave first to the
Constantinopolitan Patriarch, and then to the Bishop of Rome, this
Antichristian Universality; so most distinctly the Wrath of God was very
dreadful upon both the Empire, and the whole Hierarchy as so
antichristianizing; and so it continues, and will so far conjoyn them in the
Punishment of the Beast and false Prophet, as they shall not divorce themselves
from them by Repentance.

For this Prophecy looks upon both the Eastern and Western Hierarchy, as one
and the same Beast with two Horns, under the same grand Beast, and their
People, as one Body of Men, Gentiles, Inhabitants of the Antichristian Earth,
and Sea, and as two Wings of the same Eagle. And they all along are both
punished in, and with one another. It Is not the lesser Controversies among
themselves concerning Primacy, or some other matters, that can dissolve the
Antichristian Union, wherein this Prophecy leaves them; it must be sincere
Repentance, turning from Idolatry, Superstition, Enmity to the pure Religion;
and from Pride and Tyranny, enjoyed only by one, one of the Horns indeed for
many years as most nearly allied to the Grand Beast, but affected by both, that
must make that Wall of Partition, that has not yet been made, between the
Eastern and Western Antichristians, or between any parts of each and their
Antichristianism.

In the Interim from this very Time we are upon, the Beast, falling as a Star
to the Antichristian Earth, receives, as Latin, that is, strictly Roman, the
Universality of both East and West, as was always designed by God to be so
given or permitted, and so by degrees enlightens Rome, when all the Rulers of
the Day, and even of the Night, were smitten, gone down, and set; and now he
begins to carry the Woman on high, even at his first ascending, and so
gradually as he ascends to his Number.

And hereby the fallen Star appears to be the same Beast that rises out of the
bottomless Pit, to war with the Witnesses; and therefore must be the same that
wars with the Saints, who are the Witnesses, and who is led captive or taken by
the Lamb, and his Army of the faithful and true, and goes into Perdition; that
is, is cast into the Lake: and so the same throughout.

And when he is so cast into the Lake, an Angel of another Character does not
fall, but descends from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless Pit not
judicially given, but committed to him; not to open the bottomless Pit, and let
out the Smoke; not to loose nor draw out at greater liberty, and by provoking
God to give the Malice of Devils greater scope, by the Angel of that Pit,
raging like a roaring Lion, in a hellish Mahometanism; but to lay hold on him,
to bind him, to cast him into the bottomless Pit, to shut him up, and to set a
Seal upon him, that he may deceive the Nations no more for the 1000 Years:
which very Consideration of that so opposite Vision does much inlighten this of
the fifth Trumpet we are now upon.

It remains, that we consider now, what the Service of the two Witnesses might
at this time most agreeably with Prophecy be; and as so considering it, I look
upon this joint of Time, this Proclamation of the three woe Trumpets, to be the
very entrance of the Witnesses in the second Type of that eminent Binary, or
Pair of Witnesses, and Prophets, Elijah and Elisha.

The Witnesses had now a long time, as the Sons of Oil, emptied their golden
Oil by way of preparatory Furniture of those two golden Candlesticks, the true
Churches of Pergamus and Thyatyra, that stood, this whole Line of Time, before
the God of the whole Earth; and though we have not the clear and unmixed
Records of any such Testimony; for that were to lessen the Prophecy; besides
that the Indignation of the Apostate Church must needs have suppressed them:
they must needs have suffered more so than under the Injuries of Time: but I
say it were to lessen Prophecy, which says, They were covered with Sackcloth,
they were sealed, they were retired within the Temple, the Church was in the
Wilderness through the scattering of its Seed. It is not then possible,
according to the Prophecy, there should be pure, liquid Remains of their
Testimony.

But now the Antichristians, like Sanballat and Tobiah, and other the Enemies
of the Jews, disturbed their Service, and in building with them hindered the
Operation, and infused their Venom in some part into the Writings and
Discourses of Persons of a much more excellent temper in the main.

Now the Witnesses therefore, as we may in part see by Gregory (praised before)
passed into the Spirit and Power of Elijah and Elisha; they began now to have
fire proceed out of their Mouths, to devour their Adversaries; They began to
declare the Wrath of God against Idolatry, and Antichristian Pride, and
Blasphemy: And this entered as Fire into the Consciences of their Enemies, that
in this manner they were killed, as it were by the Sword of Christ's Mouth,
which he threatens to the Balamites in the Church of Pergamus; and herein they
imitated the Zeal of Moses and Phincas against the spiritual Fornication and
Nicolaitanism of that time; and also prepared the Servants of God in Thyatyra
with a holy Zeal against the Jezebelism, and Idolatry, and Fornication of that
Time also, when the Apostasy was increased.

But how can we hope for much of Monument hereof? The Prophecy of Gregory is
more than we could expect; and were it not that he served the Apostasy to many
other great purposes, we had not had so much of him; but God overrul'd so far.
Now the Witnesses were coming into the closest time of being sealed; and
therefore we have the mention of it revived within the fifth Trumpet; They were
sed with hidden Manna, They were hardly known one to another at the very Time;
Elijah knew not of the seven thousand Knees that had not bowed to Baal, nor
their Mouths kissed him, but thought himself alone: How much less then can we
now know them?

And which is very characteristical of this Period of the Witnesses Prophecy
and Testimony; They have Power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the Days of
their Prophecy; so that there arises a Famine, not of Bread, but of hearing the
Word of the Lord: and this endured for the intimate Time, of which we are to
speak in the next Period of the Witnesses, and the Remark of shutting Heaven
for three Years and six Months will be of great Conduct to us.

SECT. X.
Wherein is undertaken to be proved, That the Mohammedan Sarazens are the
Locusts designed in the fifth Apocalyptick Trumpet; and that the five Months
given to them comprehend Four hundred-thirty five Years from the Mohammedan
Hegira at 622, and so reach to 1057. upon Rev. c. 9. v. 1. etc.
I Pass on from this joint of Time, engraven with the real and substantial
Characters of the Angel proclaiming the three Woes, the Star falling, the Key
of the bottomless Pit given to him. All which I have explained.

I come now to speak of the Descent of this Star to the opening the bottomless
Pit, and of that Smoke that issued out upon it, and the unexpected Events of
Locusts coming out of the Smoke; which produce a new Line of Time beginning at
622, and not ending till 1453; but divided by Prophecy into two parts, the five
Months, and five Months of the Locusts, and the Hour, Day, Month, and Year of
the Army of Horsemen; between which will come in the Account of intimate Time:
and so we will discourse each in their order.

Antichrist then appearing in the Star fallen to the Earth to shine there, as
an universal Pastor, of which sort the Firmament of Heaven knows none, nor can
bear any such, so he must needs fall to the Earth; and the Beast here
transmigrated into by the Dragon, and beginning to exalt the Woman by carrying
his Universality in an Image, inscribed with the Name of the Woman, and having
received the Key of the bottomless Pit, in place of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, he immediately proceeds to open it, and lets out Error, Falsehood,
Blasphemy, the Doctrine of Balam, Nicolaitanism, Antichristianism, spiritual
Pride and Tyranny, like the Smoke or perpetual Vapor of the Abyss, and its
open Mouth, that darkened the whole Air of the Christian Doctrine and
Profession; and in this by degrees he ascends higher and higher, till he comes
to his number 666.

But Satan above him in this bottomless Pit, turning every way, and moving
more ways than one to advance his Kingdom, especially overruled, and governed
by God in fulfilling the course of his Judgment, so impregnates this Smoke, in
that time of spiritual drought, and of the Heaven shut as Brass, and the Earth
as Iron, a Time specific for these Locusts as drought is for the natural ones,
that unawares to this fallen Star, there comes a swarm of Locusts out of the
Smoke, and they prove armed, crowned Locusts, dreadfully annoying, and
Tormenting the Antichristian World. viz. by the Mohammedan Saracens.

Having thus far then prepared to it, I come to the main position of this
Section, the proof of which I am to undertake; that these Locusts are the
Mohammedan Saracens, whose five, and five Months measure from 622 to 1057,

The first Argument I derive from the Style, in which this Prophecy speaks of
their King. He is the Angel of the bottomless Pit, whose Name is Abaddon in the
Hebrew Tongue, and in the Greek, Apollion.

Now by this Description it is most evident some Potentacy is described, that
has its place in the World, and whose very Constitution should of all that
has ever been in the World, be such a one, as Satan himself, who is the only
proper Angel of the bottomless Pit, has, and would choose to appear in, be the
immediate Intelligence of, and the Spirit that acts it, above any Potentacy,
that has been in the World to this day.

But it is in the first place to be considered, that as the Locusts and
Horsemen, we shall find plainly united in their empoyson'd Tayls of Serpents,
so they are in their King, and his Title is therefore set in the joint between
the fifth and sixth Trumpet, to communicate with both.

The Potentacy then must be a Potentacy on Earth, and it must seat it self in
the Hebrew and Grecian Acropoles, or chief Cities, as the Hebrew and Greek
Tongues imports; like as the Inscription upon our Savior, This is the King of
the Jews, was providentially written in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, to show the
chief Residency of his Kingdom, in those so known parts of the World.

I appeal then to all Christians, whether since the days of Christ, or indeed
since the Creation; there has been an Empire in the World, that may be
comprised in one word, viz. Mohammedan, that for the foul, fordid, base
Impostures of its Religion, and Alchoran, the ignorance and bruitishness of its
very Profession, the Cruelty and ravage it has made upon humane Nature, to the
utmost signification of the Words, Abaddon or Apollion, or wherein Satan has
most immediately appeared as the Enemy and Destroyer of Mankind, can be said to
be under the Angel of the bottomless Pit, as its King; with such propriety as
the Mohammedan; Abating the confession of one God, and the abhorrence of
Image-Idolatry, there is not any thing, in which the utmost Effects of the
Angel of the bottomless Pit have not been seen; and even that good in that
Confession of one God is improved by his Malice, against the Knowledge of the
true God in the Son and Holy Spirit, and so may well be couched in the very
Words Abaddon and Apollion, as the every way most incomparable Dr. More has
with highest Ingeny and Learning observed.

The fallen Star, that had the Key of the bottomless Pit, who is sathanick
enough, in whom the Dragon also inhabits; who has been bloody to great
Extremities, yet is even essentially enough distinguished from him; He is a
Star fallen from another Sphere, descends with the Key, and ascends and lets
out the Smoke, but is in regard of the true Religion, he professes still, and
maintains, however debauched by Antichristianism, not a Native of the Abyss, as
this Angel is; he holds the Scripture, while he lets out the Smoke also. But
this Angel of the bottomless Pit, has no more of God, but what Hell has, that
believes one God, trembles in the acknowledge of him. All else is perfect Hell.

The Time most eminently and illustriously agrees. For after the Roman Western
State was in Justinians Time so wholly unenlightned; after the Christian three
Woes proclaimed by Pope Gregory the first; after Universality given by Phocas,
and received by Boniface, and that there was some time for opening the
bottomless Pit, and letting out the Smoke; out of that Smoke comes Mahomet the
false Prophet, and King of the Locusts, inhabited and possessed by the Angel of
the bottomless Pit, of which his Epileptick Fits were an Emblem, if not the
Effects of a very possession, according to the eminently judicious Mede upon
the (...), the possessed in the Gospel, he comes, I say, a false Prophet in
Armor, leading these Men-locusts, who have a King over them; for Solomon
observes, Proverbs 30. 27.
those natural Insects have no King that we may thereby know, These are
Men-locusts.

This Mahomet upon his Persecution for his hellish Imposture makes a flight
from Mecha, and sets up for Prophet and King; that flight becomes in the
Judgment of God, a famous Hegira; an Era or Date of Time at Anno Dom. 622. from
thence this Prophecy draws a Line, to the taking Constantinople 1453. of just
830 years, of which allowing five Months, and five Months to the Locusts and
their Action, and an interspersed five months after the manner of Locusts
before, between, and after the heat and height of their Action; their share
will be to 1057; that is, Four hundred thirty five Years, when the Turkish
Sultany entered into a remarkable Appearance in the World in Tangrolipix, as
then prepared for an Hour, a Day, a Month, and a Year. Which is most exact as
to point of Time, as will appear in that part to 1453, when Constantinople
became the Ottoman Port.

The Symbols or Parables of the Prophecy, and the Parallels of History are most
exact. The Locusts came out of the Drought and Smoke of the Apostasy. Thus
Mahometanism sprung, as is observed, out of the Idleness, Stupidity, and
Superstition of Monkery: for Sergius the Monk incubated the Alcoran. Their
Power, as the Scorpions of the Earth have Power; their having Stings in their
Tails, and their hurting with them, are all significant of their false
serpentine Religion, and their false Prophetism, which Scripture compares to a
Tail. Now the propagation of this their Venom, is the great pretense for their
Cruelty, and this envenomed Syrma of a devilish Religion strikes; under, and
for the sake of which, their enslaving is worse than Death it self.

Their hurting neither the Grass of the Earth, nor any green thing nor any
Tree, speaks the universal Blast of the Apostasy, and its Drought; that there
was no such thing in Appearance to be hurt, the Witnesses, the Worshippers, the
Servants of God, were all close; The Woman in the Wilderness, where the Serpent
could not find her, as before explained. No green Olive Tree appeared, though
still secretly they emptied their Oil: but in the Time of these Locusts,
Elijah's Drought had withered all Appearances, but what was secretly in the
Temple, in the House of God, Psalm. 52. 8.

The Emblems of their Warlikeness are very admirable; their Likenesses were, as
Horses prepared to the Battle; on their Head was the Glister of their Helmets,
like Crowns of Gold; their Faces as of Men; their Arabian Locks like the Hair
of Women; their Teeth as of Lions, their Breastplates of Iron, the noise of
their Wings was as the sound of Chariots and Horses running to the Battle, and
a warlike King over them: All these are demonstrative Emblems of armed men: The
description of Locusts, Joel 2. is so like this of the Apocal. 9. that I cannot
think, but that besides the litteral sense, it had a prospect upon them; And
These, as They came out of the Drought described c. 1. of that Prophecy, viz.
the universal Wither of all the Greenness of Religion; For so Scripture
Prophecy both designs beforehand for, and after derives from it self.

The Distribution of their dreadful Effects to a five months of Torment upon
men, like the stroke of a Scorpion, while it was a vexation to understand the
Report; we suppose, according to History, was their first invading the World in
general, and hovering over the Apostate Kingdom. The swiftness of their Success
was so prodigious, that it could not but be thought, that the Lord uttered his
Voice before his Army; and that as his Camp was very great, so he was strong
that executed his Word, that the Day of the Lord was very terrible, and none
could abide it: before their Face all People were much pained, and all Faces
gathered Blackness. The continual Tidings of their Victories and Successes was
to be continually tormented, as with Job's Messengers, or with the stroke of a
Scorpion, a not being killed, but a living in pain.

But when this Army drew nearer into Italy, and even to Rome it self, in the
second five Months; when it entered the very Gates of that great City, they ran
up the Walls, and entered in at the Windows to pillage and plunder, and were
also perpetually striking with the Tails of not only their false Religion, but
in Contempt and Scorn of the Antichristian Idolatry, and Image Worship: it was
worse than a speedy Death, or a total Conquest, the prophetical Death here
intended, especially when it came to cruel Slavery.

It was no wonder then, men sought for Death, that is, a quiet State, although
of being conquered, and in Subjection, and could not find it, it fled from
them; for God had determined them this lingering Torment, and not a speedy Death
or Conquest over them; and even these Locusts could do no more than what was
commanded them and given to them. Now their Power the five second Months was
more than the first; it was not only to torment with their terror and report,
but to hurt with a real Presence; but it was only to hurt, and not to kill, (as
the Turkish Cavalry was to do at Constantinople;) so they could do no more than
hurt, they could not kill: the Bestian Rome and Empire were to survive them.

Thus they had five Months, and five Months of Action, eminent grand Action;
but seeing they had the space of five Months more in their Fourhundred and
thirty years, they must be supposed to come out of a first Formation, and rude
Preparations; or to be at a distance from the effects of Torment and Hurt upon
the unsealed, Anticbristian, especially Western State: And at their latter end
of Power a winterly Torpor and Deadness seized them, and the Turkish Power
drove them into a desolate Land, and their stink, as of an Army of dead
Serpents, came up, that yet in their Time had done great things; and so is
their Memory at this day. And thus History and Prophecy will agree in the
account of their Time, at least in relation to the Bestian Kingdom, besides
supposable Interspersions or Truces of their Impressions upon the Earth of the
fallen Star or Antichrist.

The just, and natural, ensuing Woe upon this first, as close two Bestian Times
one to another, and yet distinguished too, under the very same Mohammedan King,
or Angel of the bottomless Pit, and in the Entail of the same serpentine
Religion, is a very persuasive Argument of the due Explication of these things
in Prophecy, whose Situation, Connection, and Sequence one upon another, even as
the Hour, Day, Month, and Year, upon their Five Months, Five Months, and their
Vacation, or Non-Term of Action, is close and inseparable: but this will rise
into a farther Observation upon that part of the Line; in the mean time, as a
strong support, it helps to sustain the Point we are upon.

The very great fitness of these Locusts under their King Mahomet, is every way
most admirable to be a Scourge and Woe upon the Antichristian Empire, and their
Months or Half Moon to be a portentous Paraselene or another Moon upon them.
They are a mock-state every way to them by the severe Vengeance of God; an
Antichrist to Antichrist, coming by Sergius the Monk out of their very Smoke,
let out by the Key-bearing fallen Star. Their King an Angel of the bottomless
Pit rivals the Star of the bottomless Pit: the Monarchy of the Beast, and his
ten Horns, is mated by the Monarchy of this King, and one Universality by the
other; the pseudo or false Prophetism of the one by that of the other; the
Miracles of the one by those of the other; the Superstition of the one, and the
Cruelty and Bloodiness of the one, by those of the other: both are sharers in
the Roman Empire; each has his Rome, one old Rome, the other new Rome; each of
which Imperial Cities are in this prophetic Emblem Thirds of Men. Both aspire
to the Possession of Jerusalem, as having the promise of Universal Monarchy and
Dominion; but both mistake the Jerusalem in Bondage, for that which comes down
from above, at which both will be vanished. Both are Draconick, and oppose and
stave off the true Kingdom of Christ; both oppress the Witnesses and Servants
of God, but the Beast by single War with them, the King of the Locusts, in the
general, and mistaking the false Church for the true, and its earthly Glory for
the Glory of Christ, and so cannot hurt the true Glory; both last, the one as a
Bestian Kingdom, the other as a Woe, till the end of the 1260 Days. Both are to
be utterly destroyed before the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

But the latter is a Judgment, and a Woe-Trumpet on the former, both, as it is
Christian in Pretense and Profession, to which Mahomet is a professed Foe; and,
as it is Antichristian, Idolatrous, and Superstitious; for so it is scorned,
and abused, and derided, as well as persecuted by Mahometanism.

Now to balance these two Antichristianisms one with another, and the Interest
of Satan in them, it is thus to be settled: in one, Satan is as an Angel of
Light, falling from Heaven, and making use of the Key of the bottomless Pit, as
if it were the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven; in the other he is plainly the
Angel of the bottomless Pit, and acts as the Destroy^r. Now the first must be
necessarily the most hateful to God, because it is the greatest Blasphemy; its
Moon eclipses the Kingdom of Christ most directly; and as it were in the
Draconick Nodi, surprised it when it was to appear, at the casting down Satan
from Heaven, and the manly Birth caught up to the Throne of God: upon which
Antichristianism, as the Finess of Sathanism, Mahometanism was provided, as a
Scourge and Woe of the coursest and thickest of the bottomless Pit, and the
blackest Appearance of the Angel of it: and therefore, though Mahometanism
shall be finally destroyed, and sent back to the bottomless Pit, yet
Antichristianism shall receive greater Damnation.

And so much for the fifth Trumpet that gives way to the sixth, even as the
Saracenick Caliphate did to the Turkish Sultany.

SECT. XI.
Of the Number 666. Showing the certainty it gives to this whole Line of Time,
both as to the Nature and Time of the Beast, upon a true and right Explanation
of it, Revel. 13. v. 15, 16, 17, 18.
I Cannot move farther upon the Mohammedan Time, or from the Fifth to the Sixth
Trumpet, until I have considered that famous Number in this Prophecy, Six
hundred sixty six, which I have affirmed to be a Pillar erected within Intimate
Time or Season; to which Anterior, outward Time is but an Ante-Room, or Portico.

This appears to us about 103 Years after the Mohammedan Hegira, and so early
within the Period of the Saracens; viz. at 725. According to the order
therefore I have proposed, I must settle that so illustrious Notation of Time.

For by it the Divine Prophecy has girdled this Tree of the spiritual
Babylonish Monarch, and given its measure from its Conception to its Akme, its
Top, or Height; and from thence till it shall be hewed down, although the Stump
shall continue some time after, till it is rooted wholly up, and cast to the
Flames.

It could not rise higher, although since then it has spread its Roots every
way to confirm it self, and dilated its Boughs to enlarge its Shade and its
Authority.

Now because this Number 666, as it rolls in the whole space of the
Apocalyptick Prophecy, is uncertain and fugitive, and apt to be laid hold upon
here or there, according to variety of Apprehensions concerning it; It must
first be fixed, as Prophecy designed it. Now to do this, Prophecy it self has
enabled us these two ways to take it.

1. It must be taken from its Height to its Root, and from its Root back to its
Height; and so we shall certainly find where it rises to 666, and from whence,
and how far it can spread.

2. It must be endeavored by observing the prophetical delineation of the
whole intimate Time or Season, to make a Judgment where this Pillar of it can
be only justly, and with due proportion fixed, so as to find from it the whole
Longitude both of intimate Time, or Season, Seasons, half Season, as also of
Time, Times, Half-time, or time at the utmost extent of 1260 Days, and the
twice forty two months. And this by solid Reasons from this Prophecy.

For the first Prophecy has admirably enabled us, and to Wisdom of a man, that
is, of a man of Reason. It styles this Number the Number of a man.

For as much then, as the numerative Faculty, and the notion of Number
springing from it, is peculiar to Man, as a Creature of Reason, and a Beast can
be supposed to have nothing of it; and because men of more acute and excellent
Reason treat Number otherwise than men of vulgar Apprehension do, the counting
of the Beast's Number is called Wisdom; and He that has that Wisdom is called
in a peculiar manner to count it, as by stones, the ancient way of numbering;
(...).
and so he shall find the Number of the Name of the Beast, and the Number of
his Time.

As Moses then was skilled in all the Learning of the Egyptians, so this
mystical Book is pleased to make use of the Pythagorean Learning in mystical
Numbers, and of the wisest knowledge of Arithmetic.

And as the Pythagorick Philosophy found out Proportions by reducing Numbers to
their square Root, so to adjust all things in mathematical Science; and then
gave the nature of things in the Hieroglyphick of Number, sometimes from the
Congruity they have imagined couched in Number, with such and such Natures, as
Ten was called the Number of the World, Four of Justice, etc. sometimes from
any chief Action in Time, or Times, of such a numeral Denomination, as the very
mention of such Years wherein any Potentacy stood highest, or fell lowest, is a
Cipher for those very things famous at such Times.

Just in the same manner Divine Prophecy must be supposed to remand us to the
Root of the Beasts Number, to find both his Name, that is, his Nature, as Name
in Scripture signifies, and his Times by both the Top and Root of his Number,
and what was most memorable at each.

Although therefore I shall willingly allow any use that can be made of the
numeral Letters of the Name, supposed most proper to the Beast, as (...), or
any that can be with truth made of any 666, with the Millenary omitted; as some
suppose 666 with the Millenary omitted, as accounted in the present Century,
not from the Incarnation, but from the Resurrection, which will be 1699: yet,
because these things are too slippery and uncertain, and may be adapted several
other ways; I lay no stress upon them: nor do they so much require a man of
Wisdom in Numeration, to count them (which is a Portal to convey us into the
true sense of this Number,) as any kind of conjectural Skill.

Agreedly then among all Arithmeticians, the nearest to the square Root of Six
hundred sixty six, is Twenty five, as that excellent Apocalyptical *
Arithmetician has elaborated Mr. Potter.
it.

And that this may be better understood, and more confirmed, it is made most
certain by the opposite Number Twelve, and 144 constructed upon it; the Import
of this Number Twelve, is pure Israelitism, and perfect Apostolism. It rises to
Rev. 21.
its perfection at 144, in the New Jerusalem, when that Number comes to its
cubical, solid Perfection; and it rises evenly and justly, till it comes to be
not only the measure of a Man, but even Angelical and Divine: the measure of a
Man, that is, of the Angel. Twenty Five is uneven, fractional, out of square,
sur'd, both from Twelve and from it self. As Soon as ever it becomes the Base,
the Root, and pretends to be the Square of another Number, It becomes a
Variation from the pure Israelitism, and the perfect Apostolical Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Conversation, and in every Progress, as it mounts
higher, so retaining all along a likeness and pretension to it, it varies yet
more from it, till it attains its complete Number 666. and is Antichristianism
and Bestianism at the full stature or number of a Man in this sense, that is,
at manly Age, and fully opposes the true Evangelical Measures, and comfounds
them so much the more, as it pretends to them. Till this Time it is traced as
between 25 and 26. Its ways are till then moveable, and not so well to be
ascertained and known.

This being so far adjustable in Nature, is also as adjustable in Time; for
from Twenty five after the Resurrection, the certain Apocalyptick Epoch, it
rises to its Top at 666, from that Twenty five, and then appears at its true
Elevation, as we shall see presently. Now that it so began at Twenty five or
six, we have a threefold Testimony; Of the Apostle Paul, that the Mystery of
Iniquity, viz. the Apostasy, as a Womb, in which the Man of Sin was curiously
formed, as in the lower parts of 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 1 John 4. 3. Revel. 2. 4.
the Earth was then at work, that it might bring forth the Man at his full
growth, at 666. The Apostle John assures us, Antichrist was then in the World,
and the supreme Apocalyptes, Christ, tells us, Ephesus, the Image of the
Apostolical Church, had even in the Apostles Times left its first Love; when
therefore Apostolical Time had doubled it self from Twelve to Twenty Four, and
was moving onward, as at a precise Time from Conception; the Mystery of
Iniquity began to work at 25 or 26.

And it is no wonder, the Man of Sin, beheld by the Apostle in Spirit, when no
Eye saw him in this his Embrional Condition in his first Principles, was thus
remarked by him; For then every thing receives its nature; Even as Jacob in the
Womb, as John the Baptist, as our Lord in his Conception is celebrated; so this
Man of Sin is dated from the conceiving of Sin, as well as from the manly
State, from the Conception as well as from the grown Man, till then Iniquity
fully accomplishing its Time brings forth Death. This Psendo Abrahamite, this
spiritual Edom, and Esau, struggled as another Nation in the Womb of the
Apostasy, while the pure Israelitism, without guile, lay in the Womb of true
Christianity; to both which, the outward Profession was a common Womb. This
profane Esau is he that sold the Birthright of the Gospel for a Mess os
Pottage, and the Heavenly Kingdom for an Earthly Dukedom; and wherein he got
the start.

Thus the Number of the Name of the Beast, and the number of the Beast, or the
time of his adult and man-like Bestianism, so closely related, so closely
joined, as not possible they should lead two several ways, both being the Time
of worshipping the Image, receiving the Mark, the Name, and the Number of the
Name, assure, beyond all doubt, that they are both one Nature, appearing
manifestly at one and the same Time; and by both mathematical and prophetical
Certainty, if the Top of the Number be 666, Twenty five must be the Root and
Bottom; and if the Root be Twenty five from the Resurrection, the top must be
666, from that twenty five, viz. 725, or 726; and so both from the nature
counter-Apostolical, under the pretense of Apostolical, as also the Root and
the top of Time being compared, It can neither be Mohammedan, not so early up,
as twenty five; nor Pagan that did not live so long as 725, but must be
Antichristian, or the Beast.

And by this wonderful Hieroglyphick of Number, God has surprised all defense
from Antiquity, out of the hand of Antichrist, that is not built upon his Word,
Truth, and solid Reason; for seeing the Mystery of Iniquity wrought so soon as
25, from the Resurrection; all Proof from Antiquity only, is but proof for
Antichrist, taken from the Mystery of Iniquity, beginning to work, and so not
to be for that cause allowed.

I come therefore now to the second point, viz. To see Pillar of intimate Time,
this six hundred sixty six can be only, duly, and proportionably placed; And
we shall find evidently where it is thus to be placed.

That we may then understand this, we must consider, that there is in Time,
Times, Half Time, an intimate Time or Season signified to us 3 ways.

1. By the force of the Words used in the Chalde, in the Dan. 7. 25. Dan. 12.
7. Rev. 12. 14.
Hebrew and in the Greek Originals to express this Line; It is indicted,
appointed Time, or Season, Seasons, half Season. Now Season is the most
virtual, lively point of Time; for though all Season must have Time to support
it, yet Time is only Season to those things, whereunto it is especially
appointed, and gives advantage; the very words therefore import Season within
Time; and thus the Apostle says, The Man of Sin is revealed (...), as it were
in the same Words with that of the three Seasons and half, in his own Season.

2. The intending and elevation of the Events speak the same; for as much as
Prophesying in Sackcloth is transcended by lying dead, as much as being in the
Wilderness, so as to be hid from the face of the Serpent, exceeds being in the
Wilderness only in general, as much as changing Times and Laws, and wearing out
the Saints, and scattering the holy People by the Antichristian Prince himself,
exceed the rude Gentiles, trampling the holy Court, or the Beasts mere Power of
Continuance; so does the intimate Time, or season of seasons., seasons, half
season, transcend the Time at large, and in general; and therefore all these
Notes of Time are first given, and then Inward time with this Exaltation of the
Effects.

3. The Three times and a half pointing and propending toward, though not
rigidly denoting three years and a half, (even as twelve hundred sixty days do,
and as forty two months of Lunar years do) they have two great Paralels; one of
Years, the other of Days; and both fitted to the very 1260 days of the
Witnesses.

The first of years is that of Elijah, declaring that there 1 Kings, 17. 1.
should not be these years Rain nor Dew, but according to his Word; Now the
Time of this Drought is most expressly affirmed twice, that we might take the
more notice of it, to be three years and six months; once by Christ himself, a
second Luc. 4. 25. Jam. 5. 17.
Time by the Apostle James.

And yet by the History we cannot find, that the Drought was any longer than a
part of the three years, and a part of 1 King. 18. 1.
the six months; for it is said, in the third year Elijah appeared to Ahab, and
Rain ensued; accounting then from the latter end of the first year, to the
beginning of the six months after two years, there might be no Rain, a part of
the first year, the whole of the two years, nor till the six months began; and
yet it might be in the third year, according to precise account of years; as
may be easily understood. For there may be three full years within a part of
the first of the three years, and of the six months, viz. the latter part of
the first year, and the beginning of the last six Months, comprehending two
whole years in the middle.

That of Days is the instance of our Lords three days in the heart of the
Earth; which by the full evidence of the Evangelists, we know, was but a part
of the first day, the whole of the second, and a part, or the first part only
of the third.

Now these three days both lay as an intimate part of Time within the three
full years and half of our Lords Ministry; and also a part of the three days of
his Death, was an intimate Time, within the three days at large of his state of
Death or dying.

According then to these paralels, but especially that of our Lords three days
of Death, to which the Death of the Witnesses is more eminently paralel'd, we
may find the intimate part of Time, Times, half a Time, we are upon.

Observing then our Lords three days, we find the half Matt. 28. 1. Marc. 15.
1. Luc. 22. 66.
day of the first of the three began early in the Morning, with Proceedings
against him; which were as Legal, Judiciary Proceedings by the Priests and
Elders in Council; they had by a private way examined him in the Night; in the
Morning as soon as it way Day, they held the Council Ecclesiastic and proper
to themselves, and condemned him as guilty of Death. About the third Hour they
led him to Pilate, that he might be legally and juridically condemned by him,
as the Roman Governor, like delivering over to the secular Power. At the sixth
hour they began the actual Crucifixion; viz. about twelve; but after the ninth
hour, that is, our three in Matt. 27. 46. Marc. 19. 34.
the Afternoon, our Lord died as a Sacrifice between the two Evenings, and
before that day ended, which was the first of the three he was laid in the
Earth, and there he continued the whole second Night, and the Day following;
which was the Jewish Sabbath; and till within the Night of the third Day, Matt.
28. 1. Mar. 16. 2. Luc. 24. 1.
which was the first part of it; and was our Christian Sabbath or Lords day,
and the first of the Week.

This is now the Scripture-sense of the three Days, of our Matt. 12. 40.
Lords being in the Grave, or Heart of the Earth, and so by Proportion we are
taught to understand the three days and half of the Witnesses lying dead, viz.
a part of each first and last, and the whole of the middle.

The very precise Time of the Night, at which Christ arose, is not indeed
revealed; but it was a part of the Third Day 'ere he rose. For it is well
known, the Night going before, and the Day or Light coming after, according to
the order of Creation, made the Jewish day; although therefore we know not the
very Moment, yet it is most agreeable to believe; In the very first part of the
Night, as soon as Christ had lain long enough to fulfill the Prediction, He
arose; for early in the Morning, while it was yet dark, the Women coming John
20. 1.
to embalm him, found him risen.

It is very plain then, the intimate time of the dying sufferings of our Lord
Jesus Christ entered at the second half, or the Morning of the first of the
three days, and grew more intimate, and was more filled with that transaction
by the second fourth part of that half; for the Evangelist Mark says, it was
Marc. 15. v. 25.
the third hour, viz. our nine of the Clock, and the Jews crucified him,
intending the whole proceeding before Pilate to his Crucifixion; at the third
fourth part, or the sixth hour, which is our Noon, after some short debate with
Pilate, They led him away, bearing the Cross to Golgotha; and then he was lift
John 19. 49. Matt. 27. 45. v. 46. Marc. 13. 34.
up to the Cross, and the Heavens were covered with blacks, as at his
Crucifixion; soon after the last fourth part, or the ninth hour, which is our
three of the Clock, He gave up his Spirit, and was speedily after entombed.

I do not intend to pursue this Parallel too close, or too minutely, nor to rely
too hard on History, to give the motions of time exactly enough; but I rest
securely on Prophecy, that there was a sufficient agreement between that and
the Event, at every just Time; The Idolatry and Tyranny, or Usurpation of the
Beast was risen by the Morning of the second 180, of the first 360, about 617,
eleven years after the Universality given by Phocas, when the Star fell, and
received the Key of the bottomless Pit. It was further advanced, and
strengthened by the first Council of Lateran 649, against the second fourth of
this 180 years, viz. 659; To answer the third fourth, viz. 717, it was promoted
so much further, that God who justly weighs all such Motions, sets up 18 years
after, viz. at 725, or 726, the Pillar of intimate Time 666. Between the two
Evenings, or within the last fourth part, viz. 787, at the second Council of
Nice, the Beast overcame, the Witnesses were slain, and so they lay dead for
two whole Days, or twice 360 years, till 1517; when after the half day begun,
The first motion to a Resurrection manifested it self, which could not be till
they had continued dead such a part of this last half day, as sufficed to
fulfill the Prophecy, that says, their dead Bodies should lie three days and a
half in the street of the great City.

And without laying too much weight upon Particles of Time, it is out of
measure certain, the Power of the Beast, the Idolatry and Tyranny of the Man of
Sin, within due distance of the time signified by this Prophecy, and of which
History near enough to Time, gives some very remarkable watchword, or rather
loud Voice, were at an elevation every way adequate to the suffering, dying
state of the Witnesses, according to the Predictions, that went before,
concerning both, in this Symbol or Exemplar of that great Proto-Martyr, the
chief and supreme Witness, the faithful Martyr, Jesus Christ, and those
Gradations or Steps of his dying, and rising again, so exactly measured out in
time within his three days, and their three days and a half; abating only for
the difference of the Paralels, our Lord was buried, they were not to be so, as
we shall presently observe.

Now for the further proving these things, I thus Argue.

Whenever the Beasts Name, and the number of his Name began, Receiving the
Name, and the number of the Name began also; For these are so essentially
joined together, as not to be divided, and indeed the Name and the Number do
not come into Record, but for the receivings sake of them, and then the Worship
of the Image, the receiving a Mark in the Forehead, or the right Hand, began
also. For all these are here of equivalent Satisfaction to the Beast, and they
are all along through the after Prophecy joined, as of equal Guilt, Sin and
Danger; however then, they may denote several Posts and Stations in the service
of the Beast, as it is indeed a great and wonderful Court, and has a most
stupendous diversity of Offices, Ministrations, Subordinations, and
Dependencies, and as vast a Populace; yet all these speak the same Devotion,
Subjection, Vassalage, to the Beast in one kind or other; and therefore the
Privilege of those who abjure any of these, as therein abjuring all, is
allowed equal by Christ: so that they are all indifferently and promiscuously
by this Prophecy used in all Cases, as we may see. If then the Number of the
Name, co-eval with the Number of the Beast, was at 725, all the rest must be
also at that Time. Seeing then it is evident All must begin together; If by
Evidence from History one was at 725, or as between 725 and 726, we may
conclude All the rest were so too.

But that one was, viz. the Worship of the Image, we have that so illustrious
Icono-Clastick History, at that Time. Now besides the force of the Allusion
between Worship of Images and the worshipping the Beasts Image; if we examine
it well, we shall find both united.

For as in the worship of Nebuchadnezzar's Image, to which pattern the Prophecy
undoubtedly refers, It seems the Worship of an Image made to his Glory, even of
that Image he saw in a Dream, of which he was the Head of Gold; or however most
certainly, his universal Power, and Monarchy commanding all Nations was
celebrated by the Worship of the Image, he had made; and therefore the Edict
runs in that Imperial Style; Unto you it is commanded, O People, Nations,
Tongues, and Languages.

But besides this, The worshipping this Image is called both by Nebuchadnezzar
himself, and by the Servants of the true Dan. 3. 14. 18.
God, The serving of his Gods.

Even thus, The worshipping the Image made to the Beast was both a Worship of
the Beast as part of that old Image made up of Idolatry and Tyranny, a Worship
of his Universal Power, commanding Nations, Tongues, and People, and also
justly called a Worship of his Gods, represented by Images; As worshipping his
Image, in the last Time of the fourth Beast or Monarchy, gives so significant
an Allusion to the Worship of Images set up at that time by his exorbitant
Power, in whom the whole Image and Bestianism shall perish.

Of all this Leo Conon Isaurus, and after him his Son Constantine Copronymus,
and the Successors of them, from 725 or 726, the Beasts 666, until the second
Council of Nice, are a notable Indication; for although we read not of any
precedent Decree by the Beast, commanding the Worship of Images, yet, the
general usage of so doing, made Image Worship, as an Idolatrous Colossus, to
which every one, in obedience to this Bestian Monarch, paid Devotion. And when
the Emperor denied thus to worship, it was an Offense as high, as against that
express Lyon-mouth'd Command of that King of Babylon, Unto You, etc.

And in that these Emperors were out of Rome's Diocese and Jurisdiction, it
was a style like that, Unto you it is commanded, O Tongues, People, and
Languages. And the Disobedience a Denial to worship the Image of Universality
made to the Beast in a Monarchy so universal, as to be above Emperors.

And if things were thus with so great Personages as Emperors, how must they
prevail in general upon Nations, Tongues, and Languages of an inferior
Character, and what must the Rage be against them?

Whenever the Number was complete, the War so often Beast should make with the
Witnesses, with the Seed, with the Saints must needs be also: for then was the
Obligation to worship, and to receive a mark, the Name, or the number of the
Name, carrying the Nature.

But the 144000 sealed, who had not defiled themselves with Women, of a
Virgin-worship, and obedience to the Lamb, distinct from the Beast and his
Woman of Fornications, he carries; The Seed, who keep the Commandments of God,
and hold the Testimony of Jesus; The Saints and Holy Worshippers in the Temple
must certainly remonstrate to this Idolatrous Tyranny, and abominate it: They
are those, who neither worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, nor received his
Mark, Name, nor Number, as is after the mention of this Number, often recorded
to their Honor.

Upon this, the Beast risen out of the bottomless Pit, who was to make War with
all these, and into whose hand they were given, would in his Rage and his Fury
make the War, that was given to him, to make with them.

And by wonderful Providence, without which a Hairfalls not to the ground, The
Name of the high Feud in this matter is in all Historical Records called a War;
From 725, or 726, or the Beasts 666, Icono-Machia, or Bellum Iconoclasticum,
The War of destroying Images Loade's History. And though Leo the Emperor may
seem to be the Aggressor, and to have begun the War; yet because the Cause on
his side was just, it is in Prophetical Censure, the Beast, that made the War,
and Leo Canon, is herein a Representative of all the Witnesses.

Speedily after the War must follow the dying of the Witnesses; the War began,
it was given to the Beast to overcome and to kill: and this was, as was said,
solemnly declared by the second Council of Nice, as also by the Excommunication
of the Emperor, and violating his Rights in Italy from him, as in Capital
Letters, Greek and Latin, as it were like the Jews Superscription on Christ,
All that worship not the Beast nor Received, etc. are damned Heretics.

And this, according to the known Blast of Excommunication, was both a
religious, a civil, and also a natural Death, as often as the Tyranny of the
Beast could make it so. This Interdict, Proscription, and Outlawry upon men,
joined with the Anathema, or Curse of Excommunication, like casting into the
fiery Furnace, was the very dying of the Witnesses, the dispiriting and
invalidating their Testimony; so that it was esteemed, not only dangerous as to
worldly Concerns, but a deadly Sin to hold with them: They were cursed, even as
he was, that was hanged on a Tree; All detested and abhorred them, as damned
Heretics, hated of God and Men.

And when the Beast had this Victory, They then cried out, Who is like the
Beast? Who is able to make War with him? They then in token of Triumph, sent
Gifts one to another, rejoiced, and made merry, because of these Prophets, who
tormented them, that dwell on the Antichristian Earth.

But though they died, As their Lord did, they could not, as he, be buried: His
Death was to be so assured by Burial; but these Witnesses, being a successive
Body, were to continue dying, and prophesying, as Christ did at his Death, viz.
in their continual Successions: Part of this first day, the whole two following
days, or twice 360 Years, joined therefore as two Times, till within 1517, the
last half day, or 180 Years; then the first motion to a Resurrection began, and
could not begin sooner. So that when that Resurrection began, we may know
assuredly, Intimate Time was expired. The last 180 Years, on which it was to
make an Impression, was come, and that therefore the twice 360 days were past,
or the two Times; and that some part of the first 360 days or first Time, had
also past, since Intimate Time began, so as to come from thence forward to
1517, and so to 1697; which is the Period to be proved.

Till that 1517 then, They lay dead in the Street, or Breadth of that Great
City, which extended it self over Nations, Tongues, People, as the old City
Rome did. The Sons of the Church-Rome were, as the Burgesses and Citizens of
that City every where: This spiritual Sodom, and Egypt, is for the sake of this
very Type called the City where our Lord was crucified, and lay dead, three
days as the three Witnesses three and a half, and is the very same City and
Church.

But the Nations, Tongues, and People, furnishing new Successions of them,
suffered them not to be buried; that their Prophecy might continue 1260 Years:
for the finishing their Testimony was not the finishing their Prophecy, which
was to last the 1260 Days, but their Testimony, as it was Testimony without
Martyrdom, was finished, and the Testimony of Martyrdom and dying begun, which
from its Beginning was to continue three days and a half, or the inward season
part of Time, Times, Half a Time, viz. to 1697.

And to show when it began, Prophecy, besides killing, makes use of the
Propriety of the Interdict, Proscription, or Outlawry of Excommunication; That
none should buy or sell who did not receive, etc. whether Great, Rich, or Free,
pointing on the Emperors, on whom the Interdict so conspicuously fell; then on
Small, Poor, Bond, signifying the universal Death of the Witnesses by the
extent of the Nicean Anathema's at 787. All which is so clear a notice of the
Time, that one would think it impossible to be denied.

Now that the Beast might be every way mounted to the height, to complete his
Number 666 at 725 or 26; and that the Divine Prophecy is cautious in not
setting it too hastily, may be easily believed, when we consider the early
aspirings of the Bishop of Rome, who before the Year 200, in the Controversy
concerning the time of celebrating Easter, had by Victor, otherwise a good man,
and Martyr, by way of Presage began to manage the Key of the bottomless Pit in
the Excommunication of the Eastern Churches; or if we consider what Accounts
Ammianus Marcellinus, a grave Heathen Historian in the Time of Julian the
Apostate, about 360, gives of the State and Grandeur of that Bishop in his
Time; insomuch, that he does profess the secular Glory, Richess, and Splendor
of it might tempt him to embrace Christianity, if that Bishopric might be the
Reward of his Conversion. And although this Greatness must needs in the
calamitous State of Rome be much depressed; yet it is plain, it waited all
opportunities of lifting up its Head, and at this Time to that height, that by
infallible Judgment of this Prophecy, the Beast was come to his Number at 725.

And to conclude this matter; from all that has been spoken of this Number, It
cannot except by accident predict the end of the Beasts Time; for however that
Denunciation, Revel. 14. 9. intimates the possibility of worshipping the Beast,
and his Image, and receiving his Mark; viz. by impenitent Perseverance in that
Apostasy, even after not only his intimate Time expired, but even after the end
of his 1260 Days, as I expound that Voice of the Angel; yet it is not to be
supposed, that the Holy Spirit would give the Number of the Name that was to be
received as a Test of Subjection to the Beast, as a Hieroglyphick of his End:
For what service were it to the Beast, or what dishonor to Christ, to carry
the Hieroglyphick of the Time God had determined to the Beast's Destruction?
Seeing the Mark, the Name, the Number of the Name, and of the Beast, are, as
has been declared, all substantially wreathed and wrought one into another,
and import close and deep Subjection to the Beast.

When we compare intimate Time in its beginning, and Symbol of the Witnesses
shutting Heaven, that it should not rain in the days of their Prophecy; it is a
very visible Resemblance of that Time with the Apostasy of the ten Tribes,
through the Seduction of Jezebel in the days of Elijah, and of that Drought of
three Years and six Months at his Word.

As then the Seducements of a spiritual Jezebel, that makes her self a
Prophetess, led away those, that by the Profession of Christ should be his
Servants, to Idolatry and Fornication, even so the same Jezebel, Rev. 17. is
plainly declared as in the Church of Thyatyra; so the Witnesses contemporary
with Rev. 2. 20.
this Jezebel have a power to shut Heaven that it should not rain in the twelve
hundred sixty Days of their Prophecy, but at their Word.

But then, as we have showed, Elijah's three Years and six Months comprehended
such an Intimate Time, that a part of the first year, and a part also of the
last six months, and the two years whole, comprehended the whole Time.

And thus in the Parallel of the Witnesses, we may begin the first Year near
the Time of the Star falling, when the Heaven became shut as to any Rain or Dew
of pure Evangelical truth: but we most certainly know, that when there was a
great sound of Rain, as of the seven Thunders, viz. from 1517. Although it was
but a Cloud, as big as a man's hand, that then appeared, we know, I say, that
Intimate Time was past, and that there could be from thence but 180 Years,
which must end at 1697.

Then it was, Thou, O God, did send a plentiful Rain, whereby Psalm. 68. 9.
thou did renew thy Inheritance, when it seemed as it were quite lost, and
become perfect Heath and Wilnerness. And had not the Thunders been sealed, the
Rain had been by this time as the great Ocean, swelling with the Knowledge of
the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea; but at the prefixed Time, the seventh
Trumpet shall sound, as the seventh Look of Elijah's Servant; 1 King. 18. 33,
34.
and the Rain shall be so great, as to put a final stop to the spiritual Ahab,
the great Antichristian King.

How much farther this Pillar, erected within Intimate Time, may guide us upon
the Periods of Time, remarkable after the Reformation, we shall have
opportunity to research upon that Juncture, as also concerning the due
Application of the Number of the Beast, upon both that and the next
distribution of the Line we are to entreat upon.

I conclude then this great Character of Time, viz. 666. under the Apprehension
of its Root at 25 from the Resurrection, to 725, with this short Remark.

By this sure Word of Prophecy we may see the danger of returning Remark.
to Antiquity, Antiquity not Cannoniz'd, Antiquity without the Assurance of the
Word of God, and solid Reason to bear it up in all its Behests. It would be to
repeat over again the steps of the Apostasy, and to produce the Number of the
Beast a second Time: it would be no better than Nicodemus's returning to his
Mothers Womb to be born; from whence he would certainly come with the same
Corruption, double.

Even such would be the State of Christian Religion, if rolled back into the
same Womb of Antiquity, not keeping close to the absolute measure of the Word
of Jesus Christ. It would prove a renewed Womb of Apostasy; it would grow up to
a second Six hundred sixty six.

SECT. 12.
In which is given an Explication of the Woe of the sixth Trumpet, especially
to the taking of Constantinople, and by Proportion to the Reformation, and the
end of that Woe, and an adjustment of the Hour, Day, Month, and Year, to the
whole Time, upon Revel. 9. 12, 13, 14, etc.
HAving now settled the whole space of Intimate Time, by the number 666, as it
reaches from 725, to 1517; and also the Times of the first Woe Trumpet by the
Reign, and Ravage of the Mohammedan Locusts, or Saracens, I come now to the
second Woe, or of the Turkish Horsemen, and to observe the prophetical Gauge of
Time, or that most notorious Period, they made by taking Constantinople,
styled, as we have proved, killing the third part of Men at 1453; and so to
judge of their Gourse of Time, running down to 1697, which they complete there,
with the ending of the Witnesses 1260 days, and of this whole Line of Time in
all its Denominations, and join in the proof, that then it must end.

Now that this Trumpet is the Symbol of the Turkish Horsemen, I shall first by
the compare of the universal Knowledge, (that not only History, but even common
Experience gives of them) with the prophetical Scheme, make it most credible,
they are here intended.

1. They are described, as four Angels bound in the River Euphrates, that is,
according to this mystic Prophecy, wherein the invisible angelical Powers
represented the Powers of this World, as guided and conducted by them, like the
Spirit of Ezekiels four living Creatures in the Wheels of worldly Events Ezekiel.
10. 13.
and Mutations, so various, so full of Revolution, that it is cried to them, Oh
Whele, Oh World.

2. A People, they were near the River Euphrates, both in their Original, and
their after Potentacy, always ready to overflow, but that they were bound, till
their due Time appointed by God; and four, either as a number of Universality,
or that they eminently appeared in four Branches, till the Ottoman surmounted
them all, and strengthened it self into Glory and Power.

3. They were loosed at the Voice, that sounded from the Altar of Incense, from
the Prayers of the Servants of God worshipping there while the Gentiles trod the
holy Court and City of outward Profession. There was a cry of the souls under
the Altar of Sacrifice in the fifth Seal, while the Church Revel. 6. 9. Revel.
8. 5.
was in a State of Purity, though declining. On which followed the first
desolation of Heathenism by Constantine; there was much Incense offered with
the Prayers of all Saints, under the seventh Seal, and by Coals taken from the
Altar of Incense, while the Church was retiring hither, as at its last Gaspes
of general Purity the Effect of all was the final Desolation of Heathenism by
Theodosius's Victory over Eugenius and Argobastes as before expounded; at the
measuring the Temple, the Altar, viz. of Incense within it, and casting Revel.
11. 19.
out the outward Court, and its Altar of Sacrifice, to be used by the
Gentile-professors of Christianity, (which was the taking away the daily
Sacrifice) the Servants of God retired to the Altar of Incense, as in a Temple
shut and not opened, till the seventh Trumpet* and from hence as in the deepth
of their retired State the Voice came, as the Effect of their Prayers, and the
Vengeance of the Temple upon the profane Gentiles; treading the holy Court
under their bestian Princes Protection.

4. The vast number of Horses agrees to the huge numbers, of Horsemen, the
Turkish Princes have by general Custom brought into the Field, and used in all
their warlike Expeditions and Assaults; and as this Prophecy, when it would
have any point of Truth, made both most certain, and most remarkable; it uses
some such vehement Remark, as this, I Revel. 7. 4.
heard their number, and saw their Horses in a Vision, as I heard the number of
the sealed, I John saw the New Jerusalem, c. 21. 2.
etc. so here, I heard their Number.

5. Their excellent polished Armor, like Brest-plates of Jacinct and Fire, or
the blue and livid Flame of Brimstone, Their insolent and terrifying Grand
loquence, Their false and serpentine tayl'd Religion, or imposture, which with
its Success was become Head of Policy, pretended Argument, and Reason of
Imperial Power and Grandeur, on pretense of which, they claimed universal
Power, and with which they made so loud a noise in Disdain of Christianity,
that with their Mouths and Tails they were so hurtful; and which is most
critical of the Time near the taking of Constantinople by Mahomet the Great,
those Guns and great Pieces.
formerly unknown Engines, vomiting out Brimstone, or the sulphurean Powder,
Fire, and Smoke were of signal use in the taking Constantinople, or killing the
third of men. All these agree.

6. That monumental period it self determines all; for what so great, as the
final desolation of the Grecian Imperialism, called the killing the third part
of men.

And herein is the difference most remarkable betwixt Casting Rome, as a
burning Mountain into the Sea, and smiting the third of the Lights of Heaven,
Then Rome revived, and the Bestian Glory inlight'nd it. But this third of men
are killed, and shall n'ere revive, to be an Antichristian Empire.

7. Now to all these so lively Emblems and Pictures of this Ottomanick Power,
in which the Turkish Dynasties both centred, and ascended their height; let us
adjust the Assignation of the Time; The Day, the Month, the Year, make in
prophetical Account 395 years, and they both ascertain, joined with the former
years from the Mohammedan Hegira, so great a space as 830 years of the 1260;
they parallel the days of years, the Month of years, the year of years, used in
descyphering the Times of the sufferings of Gods Servants, and of the Beasts
Tyranny, and are therefore compounded of lunar and solar Time, and as in
signification of the cleaving and parting the Bestian Night-piece, there is
most of solar Time.

The Hour is of most particular and signal Importance both as it is set, as it
were on purpose, to answer the one Hour of the ten Kings receiving Power with
the Beast; and also as an Hour signifying an entire Season at the setting out
of the Turkish Time, and when the Day, the Month, the Year are run out, the
Hour remains an Hour still, and makes a just season to the passing away of this
second Woe, at the end of the 1260 days, which long Time of Duration seems
imported in that (...), or hereafter, signifying a liesurely Motion; but the
seventh Trumpets Motion is as we shall find, very sudden, quick, and
dispatchful.

The Hour, the Day, the Month, the Year reaches then to the taking
Constantinople, and then going on, there remain just sixty years to the
Reformation, during which Time God expected the Repentance of the other, or
Western part of the Antichristian World upon so great a Judgment on that
Eastern part, in which the Western had so great an Interest by such an Union in
Antichristianism, while the Eastern Horn so earnestly affected, and aspired to
the same Primacy, and Universality, and also were guilty of much the same
Idolatry and Superstition, and as the Union was thus near, so the claim of
Dominion by the Western Horn over the Eastern, was very bold, confident, and
impatient of denial, and submitted to at that Council of Florence, 1439, just
before this killing the third part of men (as it were providentially) the more
apparently to interest the Western Antichristian State in this Woe, by the
Greeks which made them one before men, as they were always before God.

Immediately after the severe censure upon the impenitency of the whole Bestian
State, compared with the very worst of the Gentiles in all manner of Idolatry,
Sorcery of Seduction, Sensuality, Blood, hateful sacrilegious Thefts, Cheats,
Frauds, and Emunction of men's Estates on religious Pretenses; on all these, I
say, follows the divine Portraicture of the Reformation under the next Head.

Now the Argument confirming this true Motion of things upon the Line of Time,
as has been stated, is very forcible, for it shows the descent of it so many
years from that famous date of Mahometanism, at 622, so often mentioned; and it
leads to a Period so very grand in History, as the Expiration of the Grecian
Monarchy; after that, The continuing Impenitency of the Western Apostasy, and
Eastern also, as we shall see, was so notorious, as to improve it self, rather
than to abate any thing.

This Impenitency, the very essential Character of the Apostasy to its final
Destruction, draws the course of Time at this present Juncture down to the
Reformation, or the last 180 years; in the mean while, the Turkish Woe
continues its hour as an Evidence; That the 1260 days of the Witnesses Prophecy
in Sackcloth are not yet at an end; nor are they yet in full sense risen; nor
can the seventh Trumpet yet have sounded; because the second Woe, however in
this face of Affairs now in the World, it seems upon its remove, is not yet
gone, nor shall go; till all other things declared to come to pass, before that
shall have passed, shall be ready to their proper motion also.

The People of God at the beginning of this Trumpet seem like the Israelites
under the Egyptian Slavery, when the Conduct of those two Witnesses, Moses and
Aaron, appeared to them; they cry out to Heaven, groaning under their Burdens:
And there are many loud Sounds by way of Return from many eminent Servants of
God, declaring his Judgments upon spiritual Egypt, and smiting it with Plagues
in a free publication of the Vials of this Prophecy, to be fulfilled in their
Season; The Mohammedan Woes were the first Plagues, and the Vials the last: and
from this Time especially, the Strokes of these Plagues, were as often, as it
were, as they would, called down first by Prayer, and then foretold by the
Witnesses; but much more it shall be done, and much more their Duty to do thus
in the next State of the Witnesses within the Reformation, as we shall then
show.

By all which, by way of Remark, we may see, God did not leave himself without
Witness of his dreadful Displeasure upon the Apostasy, and Antichristianism of
the Bestian Earth, and Prince; against whom, these two Trumpets sounded; the
second of which cannot expire, nor cease its Sound and Blast till the Tenth of
this anathematized City Jericho fall, in the full Revolt of its ten Kings, till
the Earthquake slay the 7000, and the rest give Glory to God in the Conversion
that shall be at that time in the midst of a yet persevering general
Impenitency: and the Beasts forty two Months end, as to his Monarchick Power,
however he survive till the Brightness of the coming of Christ, in some low
state of Being and Attempt to recover his Power.

And even as the Grecian, Antichristian Empire was now desolated, the third
part of men killed, and the Imperial Seat turned to the Ottoman Port, so in a
much higher degree of Judgment Babylon shall then be burnt with a perpetual
burning; and not only the third part of men, but the whole rest of men, who
have not repented shall be killed with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, that is, so
utterly subdued, and condemned, as never to return to Empire any more, and the
Beast himself, and false Prophet, who had deceived them, cast into the Lake.

In the time of the second Trumpet, Rome had been thrown as a burning Mountain
into the Sea; where it was not only preserved, but as it were, new cast for a
future Glory under the Beast. But at that time its Smoke shall ascend for ever,
and its Glory sink as a Millstone, not to be recovered.

In the third Trumpet many men died, but not so many, as to rise to a third
part of men, showing the Imperial Bestianism Rev. 8. 7.
did immediately succeed, and keep that Imperialism alive, according to our
Explication of the third part.

In this sixth Trumpet, the third part of men died; the Grecian Empire is
irrecoverably ceased, but the Western Empire lives still in the Beast and his
ten Kings. But the whole Residue of men are killed, to show the utter end of
Bestianism, Eastern and Western also, when the seventh Trumpet shall have its
full effect. In the fourth Trumpet the Sun and the Stars were smitten in their
third part; The supreme and subordinate Magistrates, so that the day shined not
for a third part, and the Night likewise. Yet within a space after, the Bestian
Star fell from Heaven to Earth, and gave a new Light; but at that (...), It is
done. The Beast and all such impure Lights, such wandering Stars, are delivered
up to the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

And as a Pledge of such a Desolation, The Grecian Antichristianism, so far as
not repented of, so far as the Members of the Grecian Churches are not
Witnesses in Sackcloth, is kept up by God, in so despicable and ruined a
condition to this day, as a monument prophetical of the last Judgment on
Antichristianism: within the Number of which, I fear all such Impenitents fall.
All which may serve as a brief Remark on this joint of Time.

SECT. XIII.
This Section enters into the Half Time of the Reformation, and by the
Agreement of the Prophecy with the Event, demonstrates the Beginning and End of
that Time; on Rev. c. 10.
HAving thus far traversed this Line of Time, there remains yet the last part
of it, or the Half Time; very great, and remarkable in its Dawn, but to be much
more remarkable in its Setting and Close: and it is to be assigned to the
Reformation from 1517 to 1697.

We have found the order in which it has come on, very clear, brought down by
Prophecy, in Symbols so justly proportionate to matters of Fact, and Events all
along History, first to the Apostasy, and from thence, by as unquestionable a
Chain of Events, during that Apostasy, as has been before described, till the
Reformation; and now we shall find the Reformation, as admirably set out, and
no other things in the whole course of Time, answering to each Representation,
as those Cardinal Points of History do. What greater Demonstration then can we
have, that we are upon the right sense and scope of Prophecy? Since such
admirable Correspondencies, as if we our selves by our own Judgments had been
to contrive the one for the other, we could not, under Veils have desired so
much; and therefore they can no more be suspected of chance, then that the
Letters, Sillables, and Words of the Apocaliptick Prophecy, should come out by
chance into that exact System, wherein we now find them.

I pray therefore which of these grand Events can by History be contested? or
what fitter prophetical Symbols could be found out for them or in such a
Succession? And so we shall find in this particular of the Reformation so
recent and fresh in History, and all most in Memory at this day; and at this
day running on, so that the Instances of it are most notorious, confessed, and
even to be admired in the Wonders of Providence, that brought it to pass, and
yet sustain it.

When therefore the Bestian or Antichristian Kingdom was coming so near its
number, as that the Image of Supremacy had been made to the Beast at the 606;
confirmed to it, and Life given to it, to speak, and to cause, etc. by the
Lateran Council at 649. come to its very number at 725. The War was between the
Beast and the Witnesses, represented by the Jeconoclastick Emperors, and their
Constantinopolitan Council, damning Image Worship, 754, but then the Witnesses
were overcome by the Cessation of those Emperors, and by that Council of Nice,
787; and so they lying dead till their first motion to a rising, 1517.

While all these things were, the Judgment of God in just Degrees and Measures
pursued with Vengeance this Antichristian Kindom.

First by Mahomets setting up his false Prophetism, as near the Supremacy,
given by Phocas, as 622, to 606, by the Locusts or Mohammedan Saracens, ready to
enter their first five Months, and to strike as a Serpion, about the Time of
the War, with the Witnesses, especially at their Death, 787; And together with
the Apostasy strengthening it self, they advanced into their second five Months
of hurting with the stings of their Tails, and when a winterly torpidness
seized them, then by the Turks as a far greater and more severe, as also more
continuing Scourge. God Executed his Judgments on this Antichristian Empire.

But the Impenitency still continuing, Christ Appears, as it were from Heaven,
in the Reformation; and how evident is it, that the Reformation followed on
such a state of the Latin, or strictly Roman World; for can any pretend, there
was after the taking of Constantinople, any show of Repentance; Repentance of
their worshipping Demons, departed Spirits, or Images, and Pictures of Gold or
Silver, Wood or Stone, which neither hear, see, or walk? nor did they repent of
their Murders, those cruel Butcheries of the Saints and Servants of God, nor
of their Sorceries, those bewitchings of Men with a false sensual Religion,
their lying or magical and Necromantick Miracles, ascribed to Relics, Images,
and the Idolized Host, nor of their Fornications, allowed Concubinacies and
Stews, nor of their Thefts, their pious Frauds, and wiping men of their Goods
and Estates by Cheats, and to false and impious Ends; and that this high and
avowed impenitency was not only then, but has continued ever since, appears
too much by the Council of Trent, and the whole Tract of time after the
Reformation.

1. Let us then consider the Appearance, as it were of Christ from Heaven,
against this Impenitency. He, the mighty supreme Angel of the divine Presence
comes down from Heaven, though sitting in Heaven, in his mighty Administrations.

2. He is clothed with a Cloud, his Face as the Sun breaking out of the Cloud,
and creating a Bow as in the day of Rain, These Appearances are, as after a
Flood, not yet removed; the Clouds were yet hovering and flying, the Rain not
yet gone, the Brightness watery, and yet with significations of Mercy and the
Grace of the Covenant, That the Flood should be drawn off, and return no more
to cover the Earth.

3. His Feet as Pillars of Fire, signifying both the refining and purification
of his Servants, as also their Vivi Comburin, their Death in the midst of
Flames, as we know how frequent they were at that Time.

4. He had in his Hand an open Book, the Book of his Kingdom, as if he were now
ready to publish the Decree of his universal Psalm. 2. 7.
Reign, which had been so often stayed by sealing, and now after the Seals
opened, and the six Trumpets sounding ready to reveal it self.

5. As a signal of his unbounded Dominion, He sets his Dan. 12. 6.
right Foot on the Sea, and his left Foot on the Earth, as from the Sea to the
end of the Earth.

6. He cried with a Loud Voice, as when a Lion roars; when he received the
Book, He is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Then he prevailed to open
the seven Seals, now as the same Revel. 5. 5.
Lion, he holds the Book open, showing his just right to the Throne of David,
the Throne and Empire of the new Jerusalem, and roars from his Holy Habitation.

7. When he had thus roared, seven thunders utter their Voices, as in an Echo,
or resound of Heaven above to his just 2 Samuel 2. 10.
claim; and as Hannah prophesied of old, The Lord shall thunder from Heaven on
his Adversaries, so he on the Adversaries of his Kingdom, when he comes to
judge the end of the Earth, when God gives strength to this his King, and
exalts the Horn of his Anointed.

Now all these things were that powerful sound of the Gospel, and divine Truth,
by Luther and the first Reformers, like the Angels coming down from Heaven, and
rouling away the Stone in Preparation of the Lords Resurrection; This arous'd
Matt. 28. 1.
and amazed the World then, even as the Keepers of the Grave were as dead Men,
when Christ arose, and this was more a dreadful stroke upon the Bestian
Kingdom, then Mahometanism it self. For this was an Arrow levelled at the Heart
of his Kingdom, and declared it to be Antichristian, an Usurpation upon the
Glory of Christ, This was a dawn of the most terrifying Appearance of Christ,
and shaked the very Foundations of his State: This accompanied, with the
Separation of so many Princes and States from that Antichristian Empire, was
more formidable then all the Assaults of a false and barbarous Religion,
however accompanied with the Mohammedan Force; and yet even that remains a
scourge upon it since the Reformation, until now; and cannot cease to be so,
while Antichristianism it self shall survive.

But if things had thus gone on, The Kingdom of Christ had long 'ere now
appeared. Let us then consider the Agreement of the Symbols of Prophecy with
the stay of this Glory of Christ, that it did not proceed to the utmost in the
Ruin of Antichrist, and the Revelation of his supreme Dominion.

The first Estopple on the Kingdom of Christ, is the sealing of the Thunders
the constant Symbol of some breaking out of Christ's Kingdom; for they were
such powerful Voices of Highest and most Excellent Truth, that if they had been
written, as John, in Zeal to the Glory of Christ, was about speedily to write
them, and not sealed; They had rent the Heavens, and the Kingdom of Christ had
been proclaimed, as by the Voices of the seventh Trumpet.

The clear, shrill, and exalted Voice of Divine Truth, is Luc. 17. 24.
as the Lightning that with the Thunder shines from one end of the Heaven, and
that shines to the other end of Heaven, and brings forth the Day of the Son of
Man; which the Antichristian Kingdom trembles at, and is shivered by, as by the
stroke of Thunder.

But written and sealed are opposed in this Prophecy, as immediate come to pass
hereafter, are opposed one to the other.

There is a Recognition, and Renewal of the Oath of Christ, Time, Times,
Half-Time, Dan. 12. 9. Indeed the Front and Aspect of the Oath there is turned
another way; for then it was directed upon these Times, as to come, and the
Oath is, They shall be; here it points upon them, as past, and Christ swears,
Time shall be no more, but till the seventh Trumpet, and then all should be
finished, spoken by the Prophets of his Kingdom; which is such a Mystery the
World will not believe, however told them. They are angry whenever Christ takes
his Power to him, and reigns; and much more angry at Rev. 11. 18.
any mention of it before hand, at any unlocking or reading, viz. interpreting
Prophecy concerning it. But Christ swears, There shall be no more Time, Or no
Calendar of any Kingdom, but his own at the seventh Trumpet; it shall then
immediately succeed, and be proclaimed. Till then Time is allowed for the
thunders to remain sealed; Then they shall be opened, And if the Thunders had
not been sealed before the Oath, the Oath had cut off that Time also, but
because the half Time cannot be less then it self, The Thunders remain sealed,
neither more nor less than the half Time. So it is not (...) a Time, but only a
half Time, and a whole Time could be no more.

4. The eating the Book, Its being sweet in the Mouth, and bitter in the Belly,
and prophesying again signify altogether the retirement of Christ's Kingdom,
anew into Prophecy in place of present Accomplishment, and of that Kingdom then
appearing.

For therefore was Its sweet in the Mouth, because the Discourse of that
Kingdom, as in the Voice of Thunder was exceeding sweet, as importing its
present Appearance. But the Discourse of it, as matter of Prophecy, and the
Re-absconding it to that purpose into the Belly was exceeding bitter, as
signifying its Delay and Secrecy, for longer time yet, as Belly imports
secretly.

Whereas therefore the Book in regard of the half-season ended, was opened, as
if then to be accomplished, and the things written in it to be finished, Its
remanding into the Belly of the Prophet, concludes its delay, and this was
bitter. The Book therefore was sweet in any presence, bitter in any Delays of
the Kingdom. The Kingdom is not to be yet, while the half day lasts; It must
be, when that ends in the seventh Trumpet; therefore it remains in Prophecy.
And of the Servants of God continuing to Prophecy in Sack cloth, because of the
delay of Christ's Kingdom, and to prophecy again before many Peoples and
Nations, and Tongues and Kings, whom this Kingdom concerns, John is here the
Representative, the prophetical Scheme or Symbol. For this Prophecy is unto,
and so before many, who will not vouchsafe to hearken or attend to it; yet it
is unto them, before them, and will take hold of them. But while the Book is in
Prophecy, in the Belly, It is Bitter; and the Witnesses prophecy in Sackcloth.
So John Personates or Proxies for them.

The sealing then of the Thunders, as also the Voice of the Roar of the Lion,
by implication, retiring, the Eating of the open Book, or returning it into
Prophecy, Argue, It must remain in Prophecy, as it had done the whole Time of
the Trumpets, after the Seals opened, because of the 144000 sealed, and that
the Kingdom did not appear when it had in the Christian Emperors made so loud
a claim; And now by the Thunders utterances, a so public challenge of its
Right, yet it must return again into Prophecy, and be Bitter in the Belly. All
these are the clear and evident Importance of these Symbols in a due compare of
the Parts of this Prophecy between themselves.

And if we look not only into History, but Knowledge, it cannot be denied, but
that the Kingdom of Christ has not yet appeared in Glory; The blessed Effects
of Christian Religion, The great Prophecies concerning those Effects, that even
swell the Womb of Prophecy, have not yet been brought forth; The
Antichristianism, the Bestianism, the Apostle Paul, the Apostle Pet. Epist. 2.
c. 2. c. 3.
Peter, the Apostle John, especially in his Apocal. describes, has yet a too
sad Interest in the Christian World. Mahometanism covers a great part of the
habitable Earth, and till very lately, as in signification of the Time of
Christ's Kingdom to be proclaimed, near at hand, has been the Scourge and
Terror of Christianity, but more particularly, as according to this Prophecy of
the Antichristianity of East and West, and holds a very considerable part of
the Profession of it under Slavery; Pagaism, we know possesses (except
obstinately blind interspersed Judanism) the rest of the World; All which must
remove at Christ's Kingdom.

And if we consider the State of Christianity more Reformed to it self, to
speak in the Language, and Symbols of this Prophecy; There are very great Parts
of the Reformation, that are within the Bowels of the yet Antichristian
Princes, and so within the Dition and Kingdom of the Beast, when ever it
pleases God to give scope to that Power, They are all manner of ways
persecuted, and harrass'd, even as the Succession or (...) of the Church of
Thyatyra were to be, and their last Works and Sufferings thereby, became more
than their First, Rev. 2. 19. etc.
and are so far from being perfectly risen, and out of Sackcloth, that they
make an appearance of the Witnesses again Hungary. France.
slain, as in Neighbor Countries of late.

Other Parts of the reformed Church, have not pursued the true Principles of
the Reformation, the Regulation of all Things in Doctrine, Worship,
Conversation, and Discipline, according to the pure and perfect Rule of the
Word of God; but that Word in many things is regulated by Antiquity, not
considering how early the Mystery of Iniquity was at work, and where the Foot
of the account of the Beast's Number ought to be placed even at 25 or 26, from
the Resurrection; Revel. 3. v. 1. etc.
so that these, as in the Church of Sardis, affecting too much outward Pomp and
Grandieur, are to strengthen the Remainders which are ready to dye, that are to
fill up the Reformation, to endeavor to open the Voices of the Thunders among
themselves, and to prophecy more vigorously before Peoples, Nations, Tongues,
and Kings; concerning which Things the generality are so asleep, That there are
but a few Names, who have not defiled their Garments, but will be in great
danger, of a shameful Devestiture, or Degradation, when Christ appears. Revel.
3. 3. compared with Revel. 16. 15.

The Church of Philadelphia, although in a general Zeal to have a perfect
Square with pure Evangelical Truth, be indeed v. 7. etc.
in Being, yet not come to make the Apocalyptick Line of Time by its proper
Interval or space, nor can do before the end of the 1260 days, as it is drawn
upon these Churches to the New Jerusalem, which appears in Philadeph. and the
Right of a Church, Their Door of the Profession of Christ, according to his
Word is endeavored to be shut, although Christ as by immediate Power has
hitherto kept it open; yet They of this Church have but a little strength,
outward Power or Glory. Revel. 3. 7. etc.

The Synagogue of Satan is ready on all Accounts, and at all Advantages to
Dissinagogue them and cast them out, to control and brow-beat them, and that
Synagogue must be of the Reformed; so the naming them Jews imports, as in the
Church of Smyrna, Jews signified Christians in Profession, but becoming
Gentiles; so here it signifies Reformed, but so far relapsed, as to be falsely
so called; who are at the same elevation of Corruption, the Apostasy was at, in
the Church of Smyrna; Not long before the 1260 dark days came in, so that
though they disallow the Apostasy since that time, yet they are ready to
Cannonize it so far as to that Time it had proceeded, and might if they had
Time, find the same Path to the same End; Yet still they escape the Beasts
Number, 666.

Now in regard of all these things, it is most evident, The Witnesses must be
yet in Sackcloth, but they are, if they are not wanting to their own
Privileges, and Office, like Moses, and Aaron, commissioned to smite with
Plagues, as often at they will; that is, to declare the foulness of the
Apostasy, to Revel. 11. 6.
remonstrate the Bestianism, and Antichristianism of it, and to foretell the
seventh Trumpet, and its Voices and Vials in Ruin of the Kingdom of the Beast,
and the great Judgments to be executed on his City, Church, Himself, and his
false Prophet, and all the Impenitents of his Kingdom, from first to last; and
also to declare the Redemption of the whole Israel of God from this spiritual
Egypt and its Slavery, the opening the Temple, that the Ark of the Testament,
the Tabernacle of Testimony, may be seen in Heaven, and the Kingdom of Christ
appear in the New Jerusalem.

And this they may do as often as they will, That is, There is abundant
Evidence of Prophetic Truth to do it by; There are abundant Promises of
Acceptance, Favor, and Support in the doing of it; so that it is a Remisness
of Will, that is, of Zeal not to do it. For Blessed is he that hears, and
they that read the Words of this Prophecy, especially when the Time is so near
at Hand.

The last part of this Time, is the most Glorious, because Revel. 11. 11. etc.
it issues out into the seventh Trumpet, and then those great things will come
to pass in Preparation, of which all that was at the beginning of that Time,
was but a shade and semblance.

Then the Spirit of Life, in full and perfect measure, shall enter into the
Witnesses, and set them on their Feet; and great fear shall fall on them that
see them; there will be then so wonderful an appearance of divine Power and
Judgment; as upon the Apostles Doctrine and Miracles in the very first Times.
Where if things had gone on with the same Power from Heaven as at first, the
Kingdom of Christ had then appeared, but the Mystery of Iniquity surprised them
at 25 or 26.

There shall be a Voice calling them up to Heaven, and as in the Cloud, wherein
Christ himself ascended, They shall Ascend, and whereas only the Servants of
Christ beheld Him, Their Enemies shall behold them, which speaks the
publickness of their Ascension, and the mighty Influences, it will have.

And in the same Hour, the Tenth, that is, the December Principality of the great
City, viz. most necessarily, That great City in which the Witnesses lay dead in
the breadth of it, fell; For when the Ten Horns, that give State and Altitude
to the Beast, fall off from his seventh Head; the Woman that sits on the Beast,
which is this very same City-Church, must needs fall from that Height, with
which the Beast carried it, while exalted with his Ten Horns; which substantial
Reason, will recompense for the seeming Impropriety of such a use of the Word
(...); This Tenth being both in Dan; and this Prophecy so essential to the
Beast, that carries the Woman.

The Ascent of the Witnesses into Heaven, I understand to be some
Exemplification on Earth of the Glory, and Triumph, The Witnesses of Christ,
that have gone out of the World, suffering for Christ in any degrees of
Martyrdom, have at this time in Heaven, upon this change of the World to
Christ's Kingdom, as undoubtedly, the Saints have on all such Changes, even as
the Angels joy in the Repentance of Sinners; As the Saints in Heaven triumphed
at the Desolation of Heathenism, or the casting down of the Dragon. The
Exemplification then of this on Earth by the exalted state of the true Servants
of Christ there, is the Importance of these Symbols.

And in the same Hour opposed to the same, or one Hour of Revel. 17. 12, 13.
the Ten Kings receiving Power with the Beast, and giving then their Kingdom to
him, and therefore comes now into a fit Counter-parallel; There shall be an
Earthquake, such a mighty Concussion, shake and change of the State of the
Christian World, that Cities shall be removed, as it were, and not be the same
they were before; That great City, although it shall remain on its Heap, yet
its tenthly or Ten Kingdom'd-state shall utterly fall; seven thousand, not
Names only, but Names of Men, shall be slain; They shall be slain in their
Corrupt Antichristian state, and utterly abolished, and an Apocalyptical,
Evangelical seven shall take their Room, so that the Successors in their
Places, shall have such a Sense of this Great Judgment on them, as to Give
Glory to God; For that at this Time, the whole Antichristian State was
converted, and repented, I cannot understand, because of the after course of
this Prophecy; But a great alteraiion in the Posture of the Christian World
will then be made; It will be of another Model, as great a change as seven
thousand Orders of Men, falling under the sense and influence of this
Apocalyptical Prophecy, and modelled according to that can make, shall then be,
so that in the whole Succession to the Kingdom of Christ, signified by the
(...), They shall give Glory to God, the God of Heaven, in place of the Man of
Sin, who sat in the Temple of God, showing himself, that He is God, and in
place of Idols of Gold and Silver.

Then the second Woe shall pass away, Mahometanism, whatever Existence it may
have in the World, shall no longer remain the Woe of the Christian World,
because when Antichristianity, the Provocation of so great a Judgment is
fallen, the Judgment it self shall also remove; although Euphrates may yet
continue a River, till at the sixth Vial it is dried up, yet it shall not so
overflow, as hitherto it has done.

And this Woe is always to be esteemed the Boundary of the 1260 Days for their
ending; for till that Woe is past, they cannot end; for till then the Witnesses
do not rise perfectly, nor come out of Sackcloth; till then the Beasts forty
two Months of being a Bestian Power do not end, nor the 1260 of the Woman in
the Wilderness; but then they shall all end together. Therefore the Crashings
and Smoking of the Mohammedan Mountain at this Time, gives an alarm to the
Expectation of these things: and however the Antichristian Power, by its
Contributions, concur with the Ten Kings to the passing away of that Woe; yet
let it certainly know, that at that very same time, and by those very Ten Kings
falling off from it, its own Decarchy or Ten-horn'd Supremacy, shall fall into
the Dust also.

For, as we may be assured, The Reformation, the rising of the Witnesses, are
not yet at their top, because that Woe is not yet passed; so we may be assured,
All the Symbols, and Emblems of the Antichristian City, and Prince, as rolled
down from their height, and of the Kingdom of Christ rising, although being
future, we cannot so certainly expound them, yet they shall in their
significancy be fulfilled, and made good to the utmost, as those have been
before them, which we more fully comprehend by History. And that, all must be
fulfilled within the 180 Years from 1517, or from the Reformation begun then,
which must be by 1697. For that so the mouth of the Lord has spoken by this
Prophecy, I now proceed to argue.

I must rely upon the proof I have already offered along this Line; That I have
made true motions and progresses upon it in Events of so great Concernment and
universal Notoriety to the Christian World, as to be most worthy to be the
Discoveries of so Sovereign and Imperial a Prophecy, given by the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, received from his Father, to show to his Servants; digested
into a meth^^^ and Series of Time most exact, and contrived into such ^onderful
and self-demonstrating Symbols, as that they may be found out by them that are
stirred up by God to Read, and so proposed to those whom God enclines to Hear,
that Both may come to the Blessedness promised, by understanding them aright.
Rev. 1. 3.


In comparison of which Events, and their order and series, as I have presented
them; the little and close, the private and particular points of Story without
an equal and just Admensuration to Apocalyptical Time, upon which some Names,
so great, that for Reverence I dare not Name, have fallen, are but as Relations
fit for private Discourse and unfit for a grave History, or like the
Description of small Rivers, Hills, or Vills, unworthy the Title of a
Geography, and yet such a Prophecy, so much below its own Majesty, do such
Interpretations make it.

Now according to this so illustrious, so orderly Series of Events, it will
easily appear, by Reflection on what is written, The Reformation must
necessarily be determined to the last 180 of the 1260 Years, so as to determine
at 1697. But I shall yet offer these two particular Arguments.

The very Time of the Pillar of the Beasts Number erected, Iconoclastick War,
and so of the Beasts War with the Witnesses. The very Time of the Death of the
Witnesses I date to 787, represented by the second Council of Nice, damning all
that refused to worship Images; the one 72 Years before the two Times of 360
Years a-piece; the other only ten Years before. Let us now by proportion of the
three Years and a half of Elijah's Drought, and the three days of our Lord's
Death, adjust the Expiration of the Intimate Time, Times, half a Time; and as
near Ten years after the two whole Times of intimate Time expired, at 1517; we
find the Witnesses standing on their Feet, so eminently, as that they began to
esteem the Thunderbolts of Antichristian Excommunication, brutish; and (...),
in a solemn and Oracular manner, as from this very Prophecy to be called
Protestants. Which Appellation, however it began on particular occasion, and as
only in a providential Representation to agree History with Prophecy, as I all
along observe; yet it has been espoused by the whole Reformation: and it is by
secret instinct derived probably beyond their Intention from these two
Apocalyptical Witnesses. For what is Protestation or Protestancy but a public,
avowed Witness against the Tyranny of the Beast?

And that so solemn a Denomination is of no small Account, appears by that so
great Memorial of the Disciples being called Christians, Acts 11. 26.

And as the Pillar of Intimate Time was erected at 725 or 26, 71 or 72 Years
before the two whole Times; so seventy one or seventy two Years after the two
whole Times at 1517, lead us to the famous 1588: from which Time, the most
Catholic Kingdoms, so called, decayed in Pomp and Reputation, not to say the
whole Austrian Family. And had not the Thunders been sealed, and the Book
retired into Prophecy, the Parallels had been more illustrious; but Sixteen
hundred ninety seven shall, I am fully assured, answer for all.

The Disposal of this Time of the Reformation, as it has Witnesses Prophecy in
Sackcloth 1260 days; Twelve hundred sixty days, we are assured are three times
and a half at their full extent; for so long the Woman is in the Wilderness,
coequally in both. Whenever the 1260 Days end, the Witnesses Apoc. 12. 6. v.
14. Apoc. 11. 14.
ascend; then the sixth Trumpet, and its Woe passes away: Then the seventh
Trumpet sounds; Let us lay all this to the Oath of Christ, Dan. 12. 7. There
shall be Time, Times, half a Time, and all these things shall be finished, and
to the Oath, Revel. 10. 6. Time shall be no more, but till the seventh Trumpet;
then the Mystery of Christ's Kingdom succeeding shall be finished. These two
Oaths so solemn as to have no parallels; so equal and even in all their aweful
Rites, except we observe a difference in the mention of only, Hand in the
Apocal. and the Right and Left in Dan. as if signifying in the Apocal.; The
half-time was yet remaining; These two so solemn Oaths can by no means
contradict, but must confirm one another: one looks forward on Time to come,
and assures there shall be Time, Times, half a Time, and all things shall be
finished; the second looks back on all (but the half-time) already past, and
assures there shall be no more whole Time; but at the seventh Trumpet, to which
there remained only half time, All should be finished.

So the Half-time is secured to the Beast in a Party-Kingdom; 1. By sealing the
Thunders; for while they were sealed the Kingdom of Christ could not perfectly
appear, seeing their sealing continues that Delay of it, all along signified by
sealing. 2. By the express Allowance of time at large, till the seventh
Trumpet: For when it is said, Time shall be no more; But in the days of the
seventh Trumpet All shall be finished; It is a certain Implication, Till then
there shall be some Allowance of Time, although not a whole Time, nor so much
as a whole Half time, nor any Time at all of the Elevation, Intimate Time was
of, or of a Kingdom so entire to the Beast.

Whoever then knows these two Oaths will compare them; whoever compares them
will conclude, There must have been before the last Oath, Time, Times, and some
part of Half-time, that the first Oath may be true; he will also conclude,
There can be no more than Half-time, and not that whole; for there can be only
an imperfect Remnant of time after this last Oath: else, How can this last Oath
be true?

And yet it is impossible any part of the 1260 Days, or three times and a half
equal to them, should run beyond the end of the sixth, or the very entrance of
the seventh Trumpet; for it is expressly said, when the Witnesses ascended,
which they could not do till the end of the 1260 Days Prophecy in Sackcloth,
the seventh Trumpet immediately sounded. Thus these 1260 Days are every way
bounded by the seventh Trumpet: they cannot end sooner; for then there would be
Time after the Oath, more than the Half-time and the seventh Trumpet not sound,
which must not be. And they cannot run beyond the first of the seventh Trumpet,
because they must needs end when the VVitnesses so perfectly rise as to ascend;
as before said; which is before the seventh Trumpet, or 1697.

Whither then must these 1260 days reflow from the seventh trumpet beginning to
sound? Into the spaces of what trumpet or trumpets, as into their proper
Channel? Into the sixth trumpet they certainly do, but that cannot receive them
all; for allowing after the taking of Constantinople sixty four Years for the
making the Experiment of the Impenitency of the rest of Men, the half-day
immediately appeared: joining then the half-time or day of 180 Years to 64,
that Space receives only 244 by virtue of the Mohammedan Hour, or a defined
Space allowed them, beyond their Day, Month, and Year. To which day, month,
year, being 395, add the 244, and they are 639, which is the whole, and that a
very long space of the sixth trumpet, delaying the seventh also (that comes and
quickly dispatches) to hereafter. But seeing this trumpet holds but 639,
somewhat above half of the 1260 Days, they must be thrown back into the fifth
trumpet; which having room but for 435, as we have before found, from the
Hegira 622, the remaining 186 must regurgitate into the four first trumpets,
where they find just entertainment to 437; even as all these accounting forward
determine from space to space at the same 1697.

Turning things thus every way then, we may find, how the order of this
Apocalyptical Prophecy lies upon this Line of Time; and how, and with what
secret Invitations, the Characters or Dates of Time are called after the Voice
of the Lion, and the Thunders-Voices, at the Reformation to every prophetical
Symbol, either of the Sufferings of the Servants of God, or of the Apostasy and
Tyranny of the Bestian Kingdom, engraven with them; and first, why, although
the Characters of Time began at the Beginning of the trumpets, they are not
given till after the Vision of the Reformation, Chapt. 10.

1. First then, till after the opening of the Kingdom of Christ at the
Reformation, it was neither Condecent to the prophetical types of either the
dark, obscure, and concealed state of the Servants of God, nor the entireness
of the Beast's Kingdom, that either the Servants of God should be rescued from
their Death and Condemnation, nor the Beast discovered to be the Beast, as he
was at the Reformation; for how then should his Kingdom stand, or the
VVitnesses lie dead, each their Time? Prophecy therefore observes the order of
the Events themselves, foreseen and foretold, even as the Beast was believed to
be no Beast, but the Vicar of Christ, all the Time of his Kingdom entire, and
the VVitnesses Heretics and no VVitnesses: so in the Prophecy, till the Book
of the Kingdom opened by the Claim of Christ, we neither read of the Beast, nor
of the VVitnesses, nor of the Gentiles, nor of the Woman in the Wilderness, but
by some very silent Intimations. This Order became the Prophecy and its Emblems.

2. The History of the trumpets, taking in in the sixth trumpet, the entire
History of the 1260 Days, goes on to the end of the sixth trumpet in
particular, and of all the trumpets in general, even to the end of the seventh;
and that grand Scope or Aim in its Eye, the history of the Witnesses, comes
hereby to be delivered whole and entire also; as also of the Bestian Kingdom,
in one summary Platform, very agreeable to the Composure of the best histories,
that delay any principal Subject its Treaty, till the due season: whereas the
end of the 1260 Days of the VVitnesses, and of the Bestian Fall, could not have
been given as the end of the 1260 Days, if the whole had not been taken and
comprehended together; seeing till the end of that sixth trumpet, that end
proper to each did not appear; and yet something like it did appear before, at
the Reformation.

3. The end of the sixth trumpets Woe as it joins the end of the witnesses
Sackcloth, the Fall of the great City, and makes one the Bound to the other,
had not been set with so great advantage, so interlocking part of the 1260 with
the sixth trumpet; and especially the Reformation, singled out, as so distinct
a Time from both the time, and times, or the 1080 of the 1260 Days; and so made
a half-time, or 180 to it self, glorious in the Beginning, sealed in the
Middle, and glorious again in the End, if it had not been thus before the whole
1260 Days, given together.

For either there must have been more open and declared Distributions of the
time by it self, of the two times by themselves, of the half-time by it self,
than agrees with the admirable Contrivance and Mysticness of this Prophecy, or
else the distinction could not have been understood, nor made out, as now it
may.

But the Appearance of Christ, the Lion roaring, the Thunders proclaiming,
What, but Christ's Kingdom? The Book opened, and above all the Oath, time
should be no more, could no way comport with the former Oath, till the
half-time dawning; The Beast's Kingdom could bear no such shock sooner; for how
should he then have had time, times, half-time, viz. a part of the first, and
last, and the whole of the middle in entire Regnancy? So that Reading
afterward of 1260 Days, called also three days and a half, so significantly to
this purpose, and three times and a half, we know assuredly what Time of the
Day it must be, when such a roaring of the Lion was, and of the Thunders, and
such an Oath, that Time should be no more, and so much of the Beast's Kingdom
torn from him, as a Pledge and Earnest of the whole to be so rent from him. It
must be at the Half-time.

And had there not been a sealing of the Thunders, and an enclosing the Book in
the Prophet's Belly, we might have supposed, Then had been the end of those
Days, and the Reformation to have been all that was to be expected of Christ's
Kingdom till Eternity. But by both these determined, before the 1260 Days, or
other Characters of Time given, we have a most certain Gauge of the half-time
of the Reformation, and of the end of that ten-folded Kingdom, of the Turkish
Woe, of the Witnesses Sackcloth together: so that if the Beginning was at 1517,
The end must be at 1697, which is the Thing undertaken to be shown.

To show now in the second Place how in the just order of the Prophecy, each
Character or Date of Time may be assigned to each State of the Servants of God,
in their Sufferings under the Bestian Kingdom. It may thus be made not only
plain and intelligible, but admirably harmonious; and the interweaving of the
Prophecy with it self, and with the Prophecy of Daniel, be clearly understood.

After Christ's Claim of his Kingdom at the Reformation as described, Chap. 10.
The Vision of the Temple measured, and Chap. 11.
of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, and dying under the victorious Beast, and so
rising is given entire, in signification, that the Beasts Kingdom could not be
disturbed, nor his Time and two Times interrupted with any part of such a
Vision, till the half Time appearing; when that, and the Vision of that had
been given, and the first Glory of it sealed, Then things were ripe for this
after Vision; for any part of which, they were before unripe, unripe as to the
Condemnation of the Beast, and the Vindication of the Witnesses before the half
Time. Unripe as to the rising of the Witnesses, till the sealed Thunders had
Post-pond that rising. And so the Angel, that had bidden John, Eat the Book,
Ordered him a Reed, bids him arise, and measure the Temple of God, etc. For the
outward Court and City, the Gentiles should tread under foot forty two Months;
and then says the Lord, I will give Power to my two Witnesses, and they shall
Prophecy 1260 days, etc. Thus the Altar of Incense necessarily here intended,
being the only Altar in the Temple, leads us back to the Altar of Incense just
before the Trumpets, where the Prayers of All Saints were sent up; and where
attending without in the public Worship, yet pure, They were commanded into
the Temple, shut up at the First Trumpet, as from that Time, the 1260 Rev. 8. 4.
days. Hereupon the Daily Service was Taken away at the very 1260 Beginning,
joined with the 30 more in the 1290; and so the 42 Months, and 1260 Days are
related to so many Evenings and Mornings of the 2300 Evenings Mornings Dan. 12.
11. Dan. 8. 13, 14.
of the Vision of the daily taken away, and the entering in of the Gentiles,
first by Constantines Conversion, then by Theodosius's Victory over them,
forcing them into the Profession of Christianity, and completed by the
Barbarians inrode into the Empire at the first Trumpet, semblanc'd gentiliz'd
Christianity.

At the same Time, and for the same Time of 1260 days, the Woman, the Church,
after the deliverance from the Pharaoh-like Dragon, goes into the Wilderness.
Her Seed the 144000 of the twelve Tribes, and Apostolical Church being Revel. 7.
sealed, under the Witnesses, herein like Moses and Aaron also: But That
Prophetic History being before this systeme of the Trumpets is derived higher
from the Dragon, as necessary to Revel. 12.
introduce, and to derive down the History of the Beast, that follows, Chap.
13. And having showed both by the early sealing, As derived from the Dragon.
and the sudden Account of the Woman flying into the Wilderness, the violent
Inclination of things to the Apostasy after the Gentiles coming into the
Profession of Christianity with their Emperor; The very entrance into the
Wilderness is just at the first Trumpet, where another sort of Gentiles were
crowding also, as well upon the Empire as the Church; For then, as has been
made out, the sealing first obtained its Effect, although declared before.

At the Third Trumpets Complement of Effect, the Imperial Power ceasing, The
Beast enters his Existence, and has his forty two Months assigned for that
Existence, from first to Rev. 8. 10. with chap. 13, 5.
last; which forty two Months uniting with those of the Gentiles, run parallel
with the 1260 days; All which has been fully Argued.

At the Beasts Number 666. Intimate Time enters, and conjoyns it self with the
Witnesses three days and a Half, with Revel. 11. 9. c. 12. 14. c. 7. 25. Dan.
c. 12. 7.
the Woman's Time, Times, and half Time; with Daniels Time, Times, half Time, of
wearing out the Saints of the most high, and scattering the Power of the holy
People.

At this Intimate Time, or Hour as it is also called Emphatickly, The Ten
Kings, as his Horns receive Power with him; Rev. 17. 2.
He fulfils all Types of himself, both in Dan. and the Revelation; Armed with
their Power, He commands Himself and his Revel. 13.
Image to be worshipped by an Idolatry or Image Worship, so blasphemous to God
and his Saints, makes War with the Saints, and kills them.

Now in each of these Particulars, although they are as overflowings of the
Prophecy beyond its Conduct of things within the Trumpets, yet it is most
demonstrable, They must all return within the Trumpets and Time at large begin
with the Trumpets, and intimate Time be guided by the Pillar of Time, erected
within the fifth Trumpet. For seeing the Woman and the Witnesses 1260 days must
needs be equal in their Beginning and Ending, and the Beasts Intimate Time must
be placed, where the Witnesses Vanquishment and Death are, and that these must
be within the Trumpets, nay in that all Time must be before the seventh
Trumpet, and end at it; All Time therefore from thence in account, recoyls
backward, so as to find room for it self, even to the first of the 1260 Days
within the first Trumpet, which beginning at 437, ends with 42, the Concent of
all Periods, at 1697. All which ought to be evinced all along, and I do more
then hope, has been so evinced.

I have already prevented my self in the Remarques of this whole Line, by
placing them early in the first Views of it, and therefore now make only these
short ones, as a Conclusion.

We may be healed of any dangerous Wonder, that an Apostasy from Christian
Religion, so foul and thick, as to need no Confutation of its Figments and
Fables, the very Title, his Holiness, Vicar of Christ do so loudly proclaim
Antichrist; That such a one has endured so long a Time, has captivated, the
Wise, the Learned, the Politic, the Noble, the Royal, the Imperial, we see in
this Prophecy, It was to do so, and by this Oath of Christ it was, and is to
last Time, Times, half Time, even till the end of it. It is to do so, e're its
December Principality, Its ten horned Kingdom Fall. And although it began by
degrees, yet it has two most sudden Downfalls, one at the Reformation, as but
in preparation and beginning; the other at the end of that Half time then
begun, viz. at 1697, when His Fall shall be exceeding great.

Seeing it is most impossible Intimate time should return, Church of Thyatyra,
how great, how dismal soever, yet there cannot be a slaying of the Witnesses
any more, for Christ has sworn with the Rainbow cap. 10. 1.
on his Head, It shall be as the Waters of Noah to him: Isa. 54. 9.
There shall be no such Return for ever; nor can I apprehend the Church of
Sardis can in any parts of the Reformed Nations Rev. 3. 3. v. 9.
lose its State by a Return of that Apostasy; its only danger is its shame,
that without Repentance will befall it at the more glorious Appearance of
Christ's Kingdom; and especially those Parts of it that have relapsed to a
Synagogue of Satan, shall with double shame be forced to come and worship at
Philadelphia's Feet, and to know Christ has loved it, who endeavored to shut
its Door.

Seeing we are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, great Glory
that is to be brought unto us at that great Appearance that will be made of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ at the end of the half time or half day, or at the last
of the last 180 of 1260 Days, viz. at 1697, so often memorializ'd, although but
in preparation to that Kingdom it self 75 Years after: And if we shall not live
to it in this World, yet we shall lose nothing by it; for in Heaven, and with
the Lamb on Mount Zion, we shall with the other Witnesses rejoice in Rev. 14. 1.
so happy a Change as will even then be made; and so rejoice for ever, each in
our Lot of the Land of Promise, or the New Jerusalem.

The end of the second Point of this Line of Time, or its Period.
SECT. XIV.
Wherein is contained a brief Disquisition upon the seven Voices, as they run
along. Apoc. chapter 14.
THE last Line of Time upon the grand Line of Daniel's 2300 Ev. Mor. stretches
out it self beyond the so often repeated Prophetical Line we have been upon;
and yet it is most justly, and according to the Reason of the Line to be joined
with it, because the holy Spirit has in Daniel so joined to 1260, 30 more,
making 1290, and then 45, making 1335, as has been so often observed: so that
from hence, however joined, rises a distinct Line of 75 Years, consisting of
its lesser Distinctions, 30, and 45.

And with great Wisdom and Design they are undoubtedly thus joined, and yet
distinguished; for hereby is shown, 1. That it is the same principal Line of
2300 Ev. Mor. thus protended; 2. That the managements of Divine Power, as to
the Divine Kingdom, are of a distinct nature from what they were, any part,
even the last and best part, (that is, the Half-time) of the 1260 Days, or
since the Reformation, and yet that there is an Agreement too; so that the
Kingdom is distinctly advanced in the first 30, above the State of it along the
Half-time, and still farther and higher advanced in the last Distinction, or
the forty five; and yet that the Kingdom does not appear in Glory, until the
End of the 1335: all which appears very plainly both in Daniel and this
Apocalyptick Prophecy: where seeing the Voices and the Vials come after the
1260 Days, we may conclude by the Union, and by the Distinction together, That
the latter end of the sixth Trumpet adheres close to the seventh, and then by
the Voices first, and the Vials after them [both of the seventh Trumpet]
following so close one upon another, and by the Blessed State coming upon all,
we may be most assured, the Voices and the Vials answer to the Thirty and the
Forty five Years of Surplusage to the 1260 Days, so distinguished and so
conjoined.

Now that these Voices and Vials of the seventh Trumpet are yet to come, and to
come in the Order laid down, and within the Time laid down; these six Things
may indubitably convince us:

1. We may be fully assured, nothing so great, as the seven Thunders, could be
heard before the Reformation, so high, so loud for the Kingdom of Christ; so
they must be with the Reformation beginning.

2. There is most apparently a space allowed for the Thunders, remaining
sealed, after their Voices uttered; which space has so great reason, as has
been given, to be rated at a Half-time, or 180 Years, and so cannot be run out
yet since the Reformation.

3. Nothing so eminent since the Reformation, as the Fall of the Tenth of the
Great City, or the Turkish Woe ceasing, (whatever hopes now appear,) nor of the
seventh Trumpet so closely lynck'd with both, has yet been seen.

4. The Oath of Christ, that Time should be no more, cannot possibly allow such
a space of Time, or Delay, as the Half-time after Time, Times, Half-Time,
within the seventh Trumpet; or indeed, any Time at all, wherein every thing
should not be in motion, and zealous of finishing the Mystery of God, and that
within so short a Time, as 75 Years: so that as the Voices and Vials cannot
have yet been since the Reformation, so they cannot take up above 75 Years
after it. For to show them quick, they are styled Voices, soon given, and Vials
suddenly poured out; and what is quicker than the Voice of God's Thunder, than
the Spouts and Cataracts of Heaven?

5. If there be seven Voices or Thunders, they must needs unite with the
seventh Trumpet, and the seven Vials must issue from the seventh Voice, or else
the admirable Contexture of this Prophecy, its Symmetry, and Harmony, must
needs be lost; as therefore the seventh Seal comprehends the seven Trumpets,
during which the Kingdom remains sealed; even so must the seventh Trumpet, the
Voices, and to show the Voices are seven Voices, the seven Vials are filled
from the Blood of the Wine Press of the seventh Voice.

6. It is most impossible the Bestian or Antichristian Power should be in such
a State as at this day it is; If the seventh Trumpet, with its Voices and
Vials, had made their Impressions on it, it must needs have been torn and rent
in pieces thereby.

But because that so illustrious End of the sixth Trumpet and the seventh
Trumpet are to come, and that the seventh Trumpet is so expressly styled
Mystery, I shall with all Humility, Modesty, and Brevity, undertake not any
thing in their Explication, as to the very manner, or precise sense of
Particulars, but only in the general, demonstrate their Order and Sequence, and
observe their necessary main Importance: but whether even that Fall of the
Tenth of the City, and the concomitant mighty Works, do not with a great notice
of themselves, only given at the end of the sixth, issue into the seventh
Trumpet, and so are gradually fulfilled in the Voices and the Vials, and how
the Bestian Power, or the spiritual Pharaoh and his Egypt, is so much as kept
in a State of Being or Existence at all, and survives (as Pharaoh and Egypt of
old) under such Voices and Vials to the last, or as the City where our Lord was
crucified did under such a Ministry, and a course of Miracles, and Prophecies
fulfilling upon it, till destroyed by Titus, I confess my self unable to
account; but must leave it to that Time it self, that will be so full of Light
to explain it.

But that the Prophecy gives us an orderly course of seven Voices, although, in
reverence, as it were, of the Prophecy it self to its own Type of the Thunders
once sealed, they and their Order is so much covered, I shall thus argue:

There are in this Apocal. Prophecy, chapter 14. seven distinct Issues v. 1. v. 13.
v. 6. v. 14, 15.
each is annexed its signal Note of Distinction; so that while they are in a
Connection, they are also under a Distinction, v. 8. v. 18. v. 9.
and they are just seven, and most undeniably so. From hence it appears they
concert with all the Apocalyptick Sevens, in which Number the whole Prophecy is
all along conveyed.

To each of these, there is applied either a Voice from Heaven, loud Voice, or
a loud Cry, according to the Note of the seventh Trumpet, There were great
Voices in Heaven. Every one of these Sevens has therefore this Note, except
the Third, concerning the Fall of Babylon, omitted then, as it were on purpose
to distinguish it, and that it might not be mistaken for the Execution of this
Voice by the seventh Vial, c. 18. else it cannot but be thought, That Angel
discharged his Office and Trust with the same Zeal the other Angels did, and
that a Point of so great Concernment to the Kingdom of Christ as Babylon's
Fall, was neither whispered in a low Accent, nor coolley, or so much as calmly
pronounced.

To show there is a Connection of the Seven, when there had been no mention of
any Angel in the first Voice; yet it is second Voice, Another Angel. Now seeing
he cannot be called Another with respect to any precedent Angel, it must
undoubtedly be with Relation to the first Voice: and thus as there is a
Connection, so there is an Order; in the fourth Voice therefore, the Angel is
called the third Angel, to show there is a designed Order. And as to show the
same Order also, the first Angel was called not the first, but another; and if
Another, there must be a former; another cannot be without a first other; for
Another is a second other. So it appears again, there is an order of Voices
signified in this third Angel but fourth Voice; for the Order is again
expressed by Third, a most express Note of Order.

The very Importance of each Voice carries a Succession to Kingdom of Christ;
which that we may better understand, we must consider, Voice, and Voices, and
Thunder in their general Notation in Scripture, signify Doctrine, and an
Emanation of Doctrine; so John Baptist is called a Voice, and those two
Apostles Boanerges, or Sons of Thunder; and especially in this Prophecy,
Thunders, and Voices are always big with some Appearance of Christ's Kingdom;
This course of Voices must therefore be a course of Doctrines very productive
of Christ's Kingdom, and in the two last of earnest Prayers for it, that were
returned to (as Christ's Prayer, Glorify Joh. 12. 28.
thy Name,) by a Voice of Thunder, I have both glorified it, and will glorify
it again; and as the Place where the Apostles prayed, was shaken, so these
Petitions will be to the Acts 4. 31.
World as a Thunder and Earthquake, and yet the Kingdom it self, after these
Preparations, is in a still Voice of Grace and Peace.

We must then enquire from whence these Voices rise and spring, and we may find
three Origins of them.

1. They rise from the Church of Philadelphia, whose proper Interval, or
Support of the Line of Time, is at the seventh Trumpet, as has been affirmed;
And it is said, Christ set it an open door, viz. of divine Doctrine, reaching
to Christ's Kingdom. So the Apostle calls the Propagation of the Gospel 1 Cor.
16. 9. Col. 4. 3.
by his Ministry, the opening to him a door, wide and effectual, and the very
Publication it self, a door of Utterance.

2. They spring from the seven Thunders, that uttered their Voices but, as not
in due time to proceed, nor in the order of the Apocal. Sevens, were then
sealed, but are now written. The first Voice therefore, as the Voice of
Thunder, allies the whole Course of them to the Thunders; and the Persons from
whom the Voice of the first Thunder proceeds, had the Name of the Lambs Father
Written; which Number was first under Seal at the Apostasy beginning; then they
showed themselves at the Thunders, but immediately were sealed again, and now
unsealed, and written at the Thunders unsealed and written in these Voices. So
in the fifth Voice, Write. Now Writing in this Prophecy, as contrary to the
Sealing, signifies an Impresencing of Things; so unsealing and writing most
naturally begin together.

3. These Voices are begotten by the seventh Trumpets fruitful sound: for though
there were many Voices and Thundrings before and after, yet none made a course
of Apocalyptick Sevens but these.

I have thus far settled this divine Set of Visions, or the seven Voices, as
they conduct the course of Time, or the first thirty of the seventy five Years;
which are not indeed numerally given in this Apocalyptical Prophecy, either for
the secrecy of Prophecy or for the distinctest securing the right understanding
of that alone given Number, the great prophetical Line before discoursed, which
fall upon a Time of greatest Obscurity, and of all other least discernable; and
lastly, bebecause this Time, when it comes, will be fullest of Light. But this
notwithstanding by that whole Symmetry of Prophecy, and the compare of Daniel's
Numbers, viz. the Grand one of 2300 Ev. Mor. and the 1290 Days, and 1335 Days;
and comparing them with this Complex of Voices, it is enough clear and
demonstrative, This is an Order of seven Voices.

I will not do so much injury to so divine a Mount of Vision, as to give an
imperfect Landscaph of it, nor of the following awful one of the Vials; a
Mountain, in some Regards, like that which burned with Fire, and was not to be
touched; nor of that glorious Mountain of the Heavenly Tzebi, the Mountain of
Spices and Delights on which the New Jerurusalem is planted, as to give
imperfect Landscaphs of them by half Treaties upon the Delineations of them in
this and other Prophecies. Seeing therefore that part of the Discourse which I
design chiefly to the Line of Time, will not allow me a full Treaty, I will
satisfy my self with the Evidences of Prophecy concerning the spaces of Time,
destined to each, and the naked Summary of them, and reserve the fuller
draughts to another Treatise (if God shall vouchsafe me opportunity,)
concerning the seven Churches, of which I have only also given a short view,
and as in perspective. The seven Churches, the seven Voices, the seven Vials,
and the cubical thousand Years, I reserve to a distinct full Discourse.

This Set of Voices therefore, is the wide door, and effectual, c. 14.
that will be opened at those thirty Years ensuing the Rising of the Witnesses
at 1697, who are here set as a contrary Number to the Men marked with the
Beast's Number, and at that Number expired at the 1260 Days ending, and the 75
beginning in the Gospel, discovered first in that purest clearest Doctrine of
the Redemption of Jesus Christ the Lamb, in that, as it were, new Song of
Praise, communicated from the c. 13. ult.
triumphant Witnesses with the Lamb on Mount Zion, by the Holy Spirit to the
Servants of God here below, who are Followers of Christ in the Philadelphian
Church, in that, as it were, new Song, so long out of use, or not sung by
skillful Musicians that excelled, that shall now be full of all Sweetness and
Delight; upon which shall follow a Propagation of it to the whole World, as if
a flying Sermon were borne through the midst of Heaven, that all Nations, People,
and Tongues, under Heaven, might hear, founded on that grand Principle [The one
God Creator of Heaven, Earth, etc.] that had been so long abused by Heathen and
Antichristian Idolatry, dividing their Gods and Mediators to the several parts
of the Creation; upon which the Fall of Babylon, the City of Graven Images, mad
of Idols, mad of false Mediators, must needs ensue, as most naturally to be
declared next; And that Declaration is most worthily attended with that
righteous Denunciation, That if any one shall continue, upon so clear Evidences
from Heaven against it, to worship the Beast, their Case is irremediable, and
becomes like the unpardonable Sin. Which Denunciation shows the just and
necessary Situation of this Voice in space of Time, and so of the other Voices
so orderly connex'd with it: it could not be before the Beasts 42 Months ended;
for it must have immediately broken his Kingdom, as the Cedars of Lebanon are
broken with the force of Thunder: nor can we suppose it after the Effusion of
the Vials; for God gives warning before he destroys. Within these thirty Years
therefore it is necessarily placed together with the other Voices.

Between this, and the following Voice of the Saints Resurrection, is Recalled
an Inscription, engraven upon, as it were a Boundary-pillar of the Beasts
Tyranny, and the Saints Sufferings, c. 13. 10. Here, or thus far reach the
Faith and Patience of the Saints, viz. to the Beasts Captivation, and his Party
killed with the Sword. Between these two Voices of the Eternal Burnings of the
Lake, into which the taken Beast and his Worshippers are cast, and of the
declared Resurrection of the Saints, that Inscription here Recalled is
declared, as appearing in its Verification, Here, viz. Recorded in Glory, and
speedily to be Rewarded is the Faith and Patience of the Saints. Here appear,
as ready to enter into Glory, those suffering Witnesses spoken of c. 12. 17.
who keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus.

Next in order follows the Promulgation of the first Resurrection so nearly
approaching, which is not trusted only to a created Ministry, nor to a Sound
only, but the Holy Spirit takes it at the Rebound, and declares it by it self,
and commands it to Writing. Upon this follows a loud Voice of Prayer and
Supplication to the crowned Son of Man, Lord of the Harvest, to reap the Earth
by an abundant Conversion of Jews and Gentiles; which is graciously answered by
him to whom the Crown was given at the first preaching of the Gospel in the
first Seal, and at this Harvest he appears crowned, as the ultimate preaching
of it. And as the last of Remedies, a Supplication for Vengeance upon
irreconcilable Enemies follows, on which the Guilt of former and present Ages
of such Enemies, who as the Grapes of Sodom, or the Fruit of the degenerate
Vine, are cast into the Wine Press of the Wrath of God, the Demerit and Guilt,
comes out like Blood, from which are filled the Vials of the Wrath of God; and
that in the seventh Vial flows out upon the whole Circumference or Quadrature
of 1600 Furlongs, the whole Latitude of the City of Satan, even to the Horse
Bridles of the Armies of Heaven, with Christ, the supreme Prince, treading this
Wine Press, and executing ^^. 19, ^
the Vengeance of this Vial when he appears with many Crowns.

How glorious, and how terrible, will God be at this Remark.
Time in his Word? How admirable, and how dreadful, will be the Spirit of
Christ's Mouth, and the Breath and Rod of his Lips? That which is now accounted
the Foolishness of Preaching, and the Burden of Prophecy, grown into a Proverb
of Contempt, shall then be the perfect fulfilling of that Prophecy on his
professed Enemies, Isa. 30. 27. which I desire may be turned to, and pondered
by every considering Person that reads these Lines; And on mere Sardian
Professors, that are not among the Few Names, nor the Overcomers, It will be
Christ coming as a Thief, and they not knowing at what hour he comes; but to
all his Servants it will be with Tabrets and Harps, a Song of Praise, excelling
the imaginary Music of the Spheres.

SECT. XV.
Wherein is given a very brief Display upon the Vials. Upon c. 15. c. 16.
I Am now come to the last part of the 75 Years, or the 40 of the Vials, at the
end of which is Blessedness; and yet it self is a Time of Trouble, such as
never was since there was a Nation even to that same Time: and it is yet that
Time in which shall be the Deliverance of Daniel's People, even of Dan. 12. 1.
every one of them that is found written in the Book.

It is most evidently the Time of the course of the last Plagues, in which the
Wrath of God is filled up. But who can declare beforehand his Judgments, that
are as the deep Waters? I will therefore warily pass by the Banks, and
remonstrate only upon what is most plain.

And first, besides the contiguous, and even continuous Issue of the Vials out
of the last Voice, we shall find the Sword of Christ's Mouth fighting against
the Balaamites and the Nicolaitans, and the Rod of Iron assured to Thyatyra,
brought forth in the last Vial; and then the Hour of Temptation, that shall
come on all the Earth, foretold to the Church of Philadelphia, comes; from
which, by peculiar Favor, Christ will preserve it: Then the Days of Vengeance
prophesied of by our Lord (which shall yet be shortened for the Elects sake,)
are to be fulfilled in these Vials, to which that shortened Time agrees: Of
which Vengeance, the Destruction of Jerusalem was but an Exemplar; for in that
Destruction all things written were not accomplished, but in these, all that is
written shall be accomplished.

And yet there is a closer Relation this whole Vision has, and it is to be
found in those very first Words of this Vision, I saw another sign in Heaven,
great, and mavelous. This may indeed seem to be another sign, with regard to
the precedent course of the Voices; but because there is a very lively Juncture
betwixt a former Vision and the Entrance to this, and the beginning of that
Vision was called a great sign, and c 12. v. 1. v. 3. c. 13. ult. c. 14. 1.
there is added another sign, viz. of the Dragon, from whose both History and
Power is derived that of the Beast, that leads to his End, viz. his Captivity
and his Armies and People being killed with the Sword. The Vials are introduced
as another third sign to that, and consequently derives it self from the
Voices, and the Voices begin at the End of the Whatever divine Instruments lie
under this Type, it is certain, They are of unexceptionate Authority and
Commission from God, and of an undeniable Purity.
Beasts Number, and so go on to his being taken, and his Partisans killed by
the Sword of Christ. So the Angels coming out of the Temple in Linen pure and
white, and the Witnesses standing on the Sea of Glass before the Throne, having
the Harps of God, are the Continuation of the Vision of the Voices, advancing
to greater Glory and Perfection at the Time of the Vials: as shall be farther
manifested in a full Treaty of these Things, if God permit. This only may
suffice to the settling the Time, and the Continuation of both the Time, and
History of the Vials, to that of the Voices.

That only is to be by no means omitted, or inobserv'd: Till the seventh
Trumpet, and its Voices, and Vials, there is no mention of the four living
Creatures and the twenty four Elders, nor of the Temple, as opened, but only as
shut; viz. from the Half-time of the Churches Purity balanced by the Symbol of
the third Seal, which ended and the fourth just begun, was the last Voice of
the fourth living Creature, or of any mention of them, but only a farewell
mention in the sixth Seal, as proper to the Time of the sixth Seal, but as
there is grafted on the Appearance of the Kingdom of Christ in the Christian
Empire as an Emblem of it, a Scheme of the New Jerusalem: and here, as a Signal
of the Calling of the Jews, the Order grows toward an Inversion, and the
Elders are set first and before the Apostolical Church, represented by the four
living Creatures, and extending it self over the Christian Empire, [as is
intended in a future Treatise to be more particularly cleared,] whereas the
Elders present the true Israelitish Church. Rev. 7. 11. with c. 19. 4.

But to proceed to a summary Enumeration of the Vials, That they are an orderly
individed course of seven Vials, is so evident, that I shall not offer one Word
in Confirmation beyond the most visible Letter of the Prophecy. But the sense
and importance of this course of Divine Judgments, I conceive so heavenly and
spiritual, as to be impossible to be explained but by either immediate
Revelation, or the nearer Approach of themselves; only God has assigned to
them 45 Years, and has given Lineaments of each of them; the Particulars
whereof I referr to a farther Discussion, and present only this Breviate of
them.

But that we may know, they are not yet begun, whenever they begin they move
with so swift a Course, that it is impossible there should be any delay in them
after they are begun, or that Any of them should be entered, and not All of
them in their order swiftly poured out.

That Earth out of which Antichristianism and the Worship c. 16. v. 1.
of the Beast rises, that earthly and sensual Religion that is his Foundation,
by Divine Judgment upon him, sends out a poisonous Vapor, that becomes a most
loathsome and tormenting Boil upon his Worshippers; His Foreign Dominion
compared to a Sea, is not only staguated, but corrupts as the v. 3.
Blood of a dead Man: His inward Fountains of Riches, Power, and Pleasure, are
made like drinking of Blood, in just Recompense v. 4. 5.
of the Blood of Saints and Martyrs.

The supreme Kingdom and Monarchy of Christ, like the Sun, which Antichrist
surprised, and borrowed from it, as the v. 8.
Moon, his false Glory, now intollerably searches him. His Throne of Supremacy
is by the Vengeance of God made a Hell of utter Darkness to him. And in all
these He and his Bestians v. 10.
repent not, but gnaw their Tongues, and blaspheme. The beginning Glory of
Christ in the Jews returning to be the Imperial v. 12.
Metropolitan Church on Earth, and to reign as Kings, is made use of by God, in
just Judgment, to call to Armageddon the whole World of Enemies, as acted by
Furies, the v. 13, 14.
Spirits of Devils. Upon which Christ with his mighty ones, according to Rev.
19. comes down, and the whole Air is full of Divine Judgments: so that this
Battle just before the Kingdom v. 17.
of Christ, is with Burning and Fuel of Fire, and not Garments rolled in
Blood, of which all the immediate Judgments from Heaven, as on Midian, as on
the Assyrians, Esa. 9. 5. are Types; which last is joined to a clear Prophecy
of this Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

I can give no fitter Remark upon so unfathomable a course Remark.
of Judgments than the recording that Song of Moses, the Servant of God, at the
final Overthrow of the Egpptians in the Red Sea, and of the Lamb, c. 15. 9.
Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways oh King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, Oh Lord, and glorify thy
Name? for thou only art Holy, and all Nations shall come and worship before
thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest. And this course of Judgments
comprehends all the Dead, both small and great, to that very (...), IT IS DONE,
and at last to these Dead at the seventh Vial are gathered, All, whose Names
are not found written in the Book of Life; and are cast with Death it self into
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death.

SECT. XVI.
Wherein is given, in a most brief Account, the state of the thousand Years,
both as to Time and Excellency. On c. 20.
THE Time of the Duration of the Kingdom, which is the Sabbath of Time, when
all Anti-sabbatical Time shall be at an end, and NO MORE, is a thousand Years.

Now it may be a great doubt, How this Time is to be understood, whether
literally or mystically: if literally, How then will it agree with the whole
Frame of the Prophecy, which has very little that is not mystical, and of a
typical Signification, and most particularly all the Lines of Time? But if the
thousand Years be mystical, either they shall express no definite Time, or they
shall, if mystically multiplied, set the State of Eternity at incomputable
Distances yet from the last Time and Ends of the World we are now subsisting
upon, contrary to all the Reason and Faith of Christians, and the whole Analogy
of the Scriptures.

Now that which I would reconcile the Thoughts of all the serious Considerers
of Prophecy in this matter by, is, That here The literal and the mystical Sense
conspire, and closely embrace one another, The literal 1000 Years comprises
highest Mystery in it; for besides that in round Number as we compute Time, it
comes in as the sabbatical thousand, for which I perceive there is a general
Favor of all Christians, if not Jews, that have any Estimation of mystic
Types of Prophecy. Besides this, and that, the millenary Number has great
Reputation in Pythagorick mystic Numbers, as a cubical Number rising from 10,
and filling up the Perfection of Number; even as the millenary State is the
perfectest State of Conformity to the Law of Creation, given by God in the 10
Words we call the Decalogue, in which Sabbatism has so great Place and Reason.
It is also the Time, wherein Satan is bound, chained, and sealed up; the
Sanctuary is cleans'd, in the other (...), or IT IS DONE, in the New Jerusalem.
Besides all this, It is the great Emblem God has chosen to represent his own
and his Servants blessed Eternity in. This thousand Years is as one day to him,
to represent his and his

SECT. VIII. Wherein the 42 Months are measured by the exactest Rule of
Prophecy, and found to begin at the Cessation of the Christian Western Empire
and to end whenever the 1260 Days end (the Date of the Kingdom of Christ
immediately ensuing) and by compare with the 1260 Days at 1697. Page 90. SECT.
IX. In which the Time from the 42 Months beginning is set out till 622, or the
Mohammedan Hegira, by Rome's dark State in the fourth Trumpet, by the Angels
proclaiming the three Woe Trumpets, by the Beast becoming a fallen Star, at
606, and the Key of the Abyss given him, viz. in the universal Pastorship by
Phocas, and the Ministry of the other Beast to him herein, and the State of the
Witnesses are also declared. Revel. c. 8. v. 12. etc. c. 9. v. 1. etc. Page
114. SECT. X. Wherein is undertaken to be proved, That the Mohammedan Saracens
are the Locusts designed in the fifth Apocalyptical Trumpet, and that the 25
Months given to them comprehend 435 Years from the Mohammedan Hegire at 622, and
so reach ^o 1057. Upon Rev. c. 9. v. 1. etc. Page 124. SECT. XI. Of the Number
666, showing the Certainty it gives to the whole Line of Time, both as to the
Nature and Time of the Beast, upon a true and right Explanation of it. Rev. 13.
v. 15, 16, 17, 18. Page 132. SECT. XII. In which is given an Explication of the
Woe of the sixth Trumpet, especially to the taking of Constantinople, and by
proportion to the Reformation, and to the End of that Woe, and an Adjustment of
the Hour, Day, Month, and Year, to the whole Time. Upon Revel. 9. 12, 13, 14,
etc. Page 149. SECT. XIII. This Section enters into the Half-time of the
Reformation, and by the Agreement of Prophecy with the Event, demonstrates the
Beginning and End of that Time. On Rev. c. 10. Page 155. SECT. XIV. Wherein is
contained a brief Disquisition upon the seven Voices as they run along. Apoc.
c. 14. Page 177. SECT. XV. Wherein is given a very brief Display on the Vials.
Page 185. SECT. XVI. Wherein is given in most brief Account the Time of the
1000 Years, both as to Time and Excellency Page 189.


FINIS.

