A MEMORIAL OF THE KINGDOM OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ NEAR APPROACHING; Declaring
according to Prophecy, and Advising upon the State of Princes and Nations, and
of these Nations in particular, what our Israel ought to do, in Order to it;
Most Humbly, and yet with the Authority of Sacred Prophecy, Presented to the
KING, and to the QVEEN, and to the High Court of Parliament, and to All the
Judges of the Nation.
By T. Beverley, a most Humble Reader in the Prophesies of Jesus Christ.
IN the first place, I look upon it as my duty, to Produce my Credentials
before so Awful an Authority, to whom all Honor, Reverence, and Humblest
Obeisances according to the Ordinance of Christ, are from Me most due; Even as
from Them unto the Author of Prophecy, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

The Credentials I Lay before this August Presence is; Revel. 19.10.
The Testimony of Jesus concerning Things yet to Come to Pass, however
Received, is the Spirit of Prophecy.

The Angel, whose words these are, was the Primier Minister of Prophecy from
Christ, to the Apocalyptical Apostle John; John would therefore have Worshipped
Him; He Refused it upon this Account, beside other Great ones; The Testimony of
Christ in Prophecy, Received by John, gave John an equal Character in the main
with Himself, the Angel: Because the Principal Character in Prophecy is the
Testimony of Jesus in any Point of Prophecy.

Even so, whosoever are Guided by God into the True Sense of Scripture Prophecy
are therefore, and so far as They have indeed the Mind of Christ in his
Testimony, Equal, even with the Apostle, and with the Angel in the Spirit of
Prophecy; Seeing the Testimony, and not the Ministry of the Testimony, is the
Spirit of Prophecy; that is, not only of the Supreme, but of the Alone
Authority; and All the Ministers in that Testimony are Brethren and Fellow
Servants.

Now that God has been pleased of his own Free Grace and Pleasure, and because
so has it Seemed Good in his Sight to vouchsafe to me, I Humbly, and Heartily
Acknowledge to the Shame, and Confusion of my Face (before so Awful Supreme
Powers on Earth), the Chiefest of Sinners; He has been pleased on the most
Earnest, and Constant Attendances upon the Prophesies of his Word for these
Seven Years last past, by Meditation and Prayer, and by Compare of the Grander,
and most Indubitable Revolutions of the World, to vouchsafe to me a Clear and
Consistent Table of Prophetical Scripture, in Analogy to all Scripture, and to
which Those Revolutions have Answered, even as Face Answers to Face in a Glass;
So that Having such a perfect Scheme in Agreement with Event, I must needs have
the same Assurance that I Have of the Analogy of Faith, so Admirably Consenting
with all True Reason; Or that Anatomists have of the Compage of Humane Bodies,
or Astronomers of the Heavens, Although I easily Acknowledge there is much more
to be known, then I have Attained, or can Attain, although I press forward yet
with all my Might.

I have therefore made several Appeals in public to All the Learned in
Scripture, in Chronology, in History, to show the Inconsistences of the Scheme
in Any part, and have not yet Found Any, either so concerned for some Injured
Truth in any of Those Discourses, (besides the Charity due from Christians to
Any one in Error) or for their own particular Sentiments, that would undertake
to convince it of Absurdity; Although in the late Reign, One particular Printed
Writing, Grounded on that Scheme, Immediately directed against the Roman
Communion, Entitled, The Call of God out of Babylon was of so Public a notice,
as that some Books were seized from my own Hand by the then Officers of the
Press, and as they said, to be carried to the Council; And although I have
presented some Parts of Them to the Bishops: Particularly, One called The
Reformation to be Reformed. And I still Place my self at the same Judgment Seat.

My Second Credential is, That of the Prophet Jeremiah; When the Word of the
Prophet is Come to pass, Jerem. 28.9.
Then shall it be known, that the Lord has sent Him. I therefore Appeal to
Three Great Events, wherein Providence has Set to its Seal, that I have Truly
Judged according to Grounds of Prophecy.

1. That I have Freely, and as Publicly as I could, declared, that when All
Things seemed to be moving toward it, It would be wholly Impossible to
Re-Inslave these Nations, which were by the Reformation, such an Eminent
Appearance of Christ from Heaven, Rescued from the Papal Tyranny; And I thought
it my Duty to pray as publicly as I had opportunity, for the Conversion of
that our then Prince, as being Assured, He must else by Death, or some mighty
Hand (as it Fell out) be Removed from the Government within a short Time; His
Administration being Intolerable to Prophecy, in the measures which He was so
Resolved to take; And in the very Spring before his Removal, the Epistle to the
Reader in that Forementioned discourse, the Call out of Babylon, I thus
concluded; And as for All Ambidexters Two Handed Achilophelians or Judasses,
who think to find it in their Account to be on both sides; as They are now the
private Scorn and Despisal of the Age, so in Future Records, and not long
hence, They will stand as Pillars of Salt; which how soon after, it came to
pass in some very Remarkable Persons, we All know, and who in modesty to some
Dead, and some Living, are not to be named.

2. The Second Event is, What the Nation has made Public Acknowledgment of in
a Sollemn Thanksgiving. This Summers Expedition into Ireland of a Sovereign,
Established not only by Civil Sanction, but by Prophecy on the Throne of the
Former Prince Removed.

Now as to this Expedition by a Memorial presented just before it, and I Hope
still in many Honorable Hands of Those, to whom I most Humbly present this, It
was according to Prophecy predicted.

1. That the King's Personal Presence with his Army in Ireland should be for
his Honor: And in Answer to this, It may very well be called into doubt,
whether ever any Prince or General Acquired Greater Glory, according to the
Laws of Warlike Glory upon his own Personal Fortitude: But Prophecy teaches us
to Ascribe that Glory wholly to God, as the Supreme Man of War, (as Moses
styles Him) in that Action; and to Reserve only the Reflection, which is indeed
Greatest Honor, to the King, whom God Commanded not to Fear.

2. It was predicted, That God would make it Appear, He had Commanded Him, and
would by no means Forsake Him, but would be with Him, as in his Coming into
England, and would Return Him with Victory.

And thus it has come to pass, The King is Returned with the Solemn
Thanksgiving of the Nation to God, and universal Acclamations to Himself; And
if any are otherwise minded, They are, as in a degree, Silent in Darkness; For
God has been pleased to pass the King safe, as through a thick Wood of Deaths,
to Cover His Head as by Miracle in the Day of Battle; So to Poize the Motion of
that Messenger of Death, That it came so near, as it were to Tell Him, and All
that Heard of it; It could Go so far, and no farther.

And as to the Success of the Expedition, It is such, as that the Principal
City, and therewith the Supreme Civil Power was immediately, and so continues
de Facto vested in the King. And as a Seal of it; the Former Prince God Removed
from that Nation, even as from this, to declare Him the Second Time,
Intolerable to Prophecy; And as to the delay of a perfect Conquest over the
Irish, though Ireland be in a daily Motion of Self Restitution under the Freest
and Fullest Protestant Government since the Reformation, Yet It is to be
considered as under another Position of Prophecy, then England, or Scotland,
(the Natives having been so devoted always to the Papacy) until nearer the
Great Revolution, the Kingdom of Christ in Succession at 97. that it will be in
a less entire Settlement.

3. It was Affirmed according to Prophecy; That God would Secure the King's
Interests in this Nation during his Absence; And How even to Amazement was this
done in the most Peaceable, and even most Serene Administration of the Supreme
Government by the Queen! and in sending that Enemy upon the Coasts back again,
even after some Success, and Insolences of Appearance, without effect in the
main! and notwithstanding a design laid so sure, that it was thought
Impossible by the Designers, (as some expressed Themselves,) without Miracle,
The Government should not Revolve on King James. And in all this I have often
declared, God working for His own Names sake, that is, for the Kingdom of
Christ's sake, would pass over the mighty Provocatians of the Nation, as is
well known to us, He has done, in all, He has done for us.

3. A Third Great Event, which gives me Assurance; God has vouchsafed me a
True Judgment in Prophecy, is; That in the Beginning of the Summer in 87. When
the Turkish Affairs gave such a Prospect of the Ruin of that Empire; and as I
expressed it, the Turkish Fall seemed to be on the Wing, yet I did with all
Freedom, and yet with due Modesty in Honor to the Christian Name, Declare, and
Publish, as is yet to be seen; That That Ruin or Fall could not be, till the
Tenth, or Ten King'd Supremacy of the Great City of Rome should fall; that the
Turkish Woe might pass away so, as that the Antichristian Apostasy, on which
it was, and is a Judgment, might be first so Animadverted upon by God, that the
Sinful demeritorious Cause, and the Judicial Effect might pass off together.

Now how strangely that Turkish State has been Reprieved from Ruin,
notwithstanding the so many Stupendous Imperial Victories, and its Intestine
Confusions; and how God has given it the dreadful Face of a Woe again, is
worthy the Consideration of All that Bear the Name of Christians, whether Roman
or Reformed. And till the Forty Two Months granted to the Beast shall be at an
End, viz. 97. Its Constantinoplitan PORT shall not be DE-PORTED; Although this
Just now Re-Appearance of that Mohammedan Force as a Woe, and with Terror is
very contrary to the declared Judgment of an Apocalyptic Interpreter of our own
Nation, so Venerable, and so Learned, that I defer every Thing to Him, but only
this; That in many very Great Points, He has mist the True Key of that
Prophecy.

Now seeing in All Great Predictions (against which there are Confident
Prejudices, that They shall not come to pass) Those prejudices are as shutting
the Mouth of the Prophet, that He shall not be so much heeded, even in his
General Discourses, but styled a Fanatical, or Brainsick person; As God told
Ezekiel when he was to foretell the Destruction of Jerusalem, which the Jews
thought imposible, They should lay Bands upon Him as on a Madman: c. 3.25. c.
33.22.
And this Generally continues, till the Great Event Fullfill'd, as it also
Befell Ezekiel, till the City Taken, as in Symbol: So possibly I must wait for
that Great Opening my Mouth with Authority, until 97, or near it, if God
should please so Long to sustain me.

But yet as Ezekiel Prophesied at God's Opening his Mouth, even all along as we
find, till the City taken; And he that would, might Hear, and He that would
Forbear, might, until then, Forbear. So upon God's thus far Opening my Mouth,
by Ratifying my Predictions with so very notable Events; I look upon it as my
duty to present to the Supreme Authority, and Council of the Nation these
Assurances beyond what I have assured upon the same Grounds.

1. That the Aspiring of any of the Ten Kings of this Formerly
Western-Roman-Empire, to an Universal Monarchy, contrary to that variety of
Supreme Kingdoms, God has fixed in It, under the Emblem of Ten Toes in
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, Dan. 2. c. 7. Rev. 13.1.
and Ten Horns on the Head of the Fourth Beast, viz. The Roman Monarchy, in his
Vision of the Four Beasts, (and which the Apostle John saw Crowned;) This
Tenfold division is so settled by God, that It cannot be changed, until, As
They in Ten such Supremacies have Given their Power, and their Kingdom to the
Papal Beast as a Spiritual Universal Monarch, that is, an Universal Monarch in
an Image, as the Prophecy expresses it; So in the same Ten Kingdoms, as some
have already, They All shall Hate the Whore, or Roman Church, and so Recall
their Power from the Beast.

As therefore the House of Austria Aspired, and Fell Low in Power, and
Reputation in this Thirst after an Universal Monarchy; Even so shall France;
And as the dissipation of the Spanish Armada against England, was one very
Remarkable Turn of the Scale, with Relation to the House of Austria, even so
shall the French Attempts against England be Remarked.

2. The French Protestant Churches cannot be long without some Redress, because
the Time of the Antichristian Apostasy is now so near its end: From whence,
and not from the Three Years and half of the Witnesses lying dead, I collect
this Assurance; For I always looked upon that as a mistaken Interpretation,
however espoused by the Two so Learned and Reverend Persons Monsieur Jurieu,
and the Forementioned Interpreter of our own Country.

Revel. 2.18. etc.
But I look upon the Church of Thyatyra, as the Emblem of those Churches of the
Protestation, that lie in the Bowels of Princes who yet own Antichristian Rome;
of which there is none so eminent, and conspicuous, as the French Protestant
Churches, either for the Greatness of their Body, or for their Former
Vindications of Themselves, or for their Great Sufferings, with whom the
Vaudois are Allied; Now it is said, Their Last Works shall be Greater then
their First, and as their Sufferings, so shall Their Vindication be; and They
shall see the First Rising of the Morning Star to the Day of the Kingdom of
Christ in Succession, from whence I conclude; Their Deliverance is very near,
and They shall Break their Papal Oppressors, as with a Rod of Iron in their
Last Works.

3. Seeing there is an Extraordinary Concurrence of Gracious Signatures of God
upon our present Sovereign, There is Great Hope God will stir Him up to Appear
at this Time in so Honorable a Service, as Scripture styles it, as of Helping
the Lord against Those Mighties; And if God be pleased to stir Him up, He will
undoubted^y Appear with Him; For I am Bold in our God to say, I shall not be
mistaken in our King, as to some Extraordinary Service God has to do by Him,
the Time being so near; although Mr. Mede of a most Honorable Memory for his
Apocalyptic Key, was in that ever Noble Gustavus Adolphus, the time being then
so much further off; and that on these Great Reasons.

1. That He is the Third Descendent of that Great Prince of Orange, by whom God
was pleased in the United Provinces to propagate the Protestancy, and to give
that Curb to the grasp of that Time after the Universal Monarchy; And because
He Fell a Martyr in it, and Received no Recompense from the Bounty of God,
Equal, after the General Estimate of Providence, to that Service, I doubt not
God has Reserved it for his Posterity, and for the Prince that He has Raised
at this Time to be so Serviceable to the Protestant Religion, and Inspired with
so much Zeal and Courage for it.

2. Our King, as Prince of Orange, but now under Greater styles, is One of the
Princes, and Nobles of France, that as the First Works of those Churches were
principally by Princes, and Nobles proceeding of Themselves; In the same manner
shall their Last Greater Works be done; In which Regard, our King Appears an
Instrument fitted by God, as a Prince and Noble proceeding from Themselves.

3. God made England a Help, and a Succor by Queen Elizabeth to those
Afflicted Churches, though still the Greatest Effects were from Themselves; so
It is to be both Hoped, and Prayed, that as their Refugees have by a Superior
Providence working for them, Found even in the Former Reign, however of
contrary Sentiments, Sanctuary here; So much more Vigorous, and Potent shall
their Assistances be, under not only a Protestant Prince, but of so Eminent
Love to, and Zeal for the Protestant Religion; As Already there are Great
Evidences of the Love, Zeal, and Forwardness of the Supreme Council of the
Nation, and their Unanimity herein; and Greatest Effects are Hoped and Prayed
for from thence.

4. That very Oracle, The Last Works of the Church of Thyatyra shall be Greater
then the First, is to me an Account, why the Confederate Armies have had so low
effects of their Confederacy, Because their Princes and Nobles, of whom our
King is one, shall proceed of Themselves.

5. Above All I persevere, that within the Six next Summers, viz. in 97. The
Kingdom of Christ shall be in its Succession, the Antichristian, and Turkish
Tyranny shall Fall, and a Great Re-Reformation Ensue. And now it These Things
shall seem of value to so Sovereign an Authority, and to be every way Revered
most Honorable an Assembly; Let it please them to take Care, that
Consideration may be had, whether upon Just Grounds, what is, or has been
offered, can be Refused, viz. on due Debates according to Records of Scripture,
Chronology, History, Reason and Experience, without any other Reflections, then
what enter into the Merits of the Cause; For I Take to Witness the Searcher of
Hearts; that as what I have now written, is not in Flattery or Dissimulation;
so what I have formerly presented, with Relation to the Church of England, has
not been from any undervalue of the Personal Holiness, and Learning of any of
Eminency or Lowest Name therein, for whom I have all possible Love and Honor;
but on both sides from most Assured Grounds in Prophecy; That God will in an
Extraordinary manner be present with the King, if He calls Him to Greater
Services for His own Approaching Kingdom, as It is most Earnestly to be pray^d
He may, His Honor and His Safety being therein Complicated; and that those in
Highest Stations in the Church of England may know; The State of it, and their
present manner of State in it has but few Years more of duration, and that the
Great Senate of this Nation may by understanding the Times, and the Signs of
Them, know what They ought to do, a Revolution so Great, indeed being so near
as 97.

My most Humble Petition therefore is, That if to the most Dread Sovereigns,
and to the High Court of Parliament, It shall not be made to Appear; That what
has been publicly offered as a Table of Scripture Prophecy, and its Calendar
of Time, is upon Foundations, either Inconsistent with Themselves, or
Contradictory to Scripture, Chronology, History or Reason; There may be an Eye
Had in all Consultations, and Actions thereunto, as to the Testimony of Jesus,
and so to the Spirit of Prophecy; Seeing It is most Agreeable to all Christian
and Protestant Reason, God should give to so Illustrious a Sovereign Power,
Senate, and to so Great Protestant Nations, some signs of so Great, and so near
an Approaching Time; And that Your most Self Abased Minister of Jesus Christ in
these Prophesies may be supported, and enabled to Revise, Perfect, and Publish
his whole Table, and present it together to so Supreme Powers, as a Volumn that
will within Six next ensuing Summers, Justify it self, and further our
Accounts at the Kingdom, and Appearing of our Infinitely Paramount Lord Jesus
Christ.

And if This Petition Receive Favor, let also the Council of so Humble a
Minister of, and according to the Prophesies of Jesus Christ, be Accepted to so
Great Estates; In which, I Appeal to God, I most Humbly and Earnestly pray, I
may speak as, and only as the Oracles of God in these Four Moments of Advice
from Prophecy.

Advice 1. That the Arms of the Protestant Refugees of France of the Vaudois,
of Protestants in general, be more valued, and under God more Relied upon, then
mixed Confederacies, with Kingdoms and States, that yet Give their Power to the
Roman Beast.

Give leave therefore to Weigh in the Balance of the Sanctuary each part;
First, showing the disadvantages to be Feared in mixed Confederacies, in Two
Things.

1. It ought to be well pondered, that at this very Time, All Princes and
States, who yet Give their Kingdom to the Beast, are therein, as yet in a State
of War with the Lamb, that is with Jesus Christ, now about to Reprize wholly,
and perfectly his Kingdom from that Antichrist.

Now seeing the Main Cause of Dispute at this Time betwixt this Nation and
France, is a Protestant Government, and indeed the Protestant Religion in
general in the World; Whether the Lamb will Accept the Service of Them, who are
in Actual War, is much to be doubted; especially, when He has been, and is
still giving such mighty Demonstrations of his Presence with us, and of his Arm
made Bare in this very Protestant Cause; It may be very dangerous to overvalue
the Arm of Flesh in such a Confederacy. In this Case we should be as much
Ashamed, as Ezra of Persian Assistances; Seeing that the Hand of our God is for
Good on all Them that seek Him, and His Wrath is against All Them that Forsake
Him at this Time, as to the great Cause of Protestancy; For this God has now
written in this Nation with a Sun Beam.

2. The Success that has hitherto Attended this Confederacy, is not such as to
give any Hopes, God will manifest Himself with it; He has suffered all the
Motions of it to be Clogged, and Heavy, to prove Ineffectual, and on the
Loosing Hand; as it were to declare, The Principals in it, are not yet
Instruments fitted for his Service in the Prosecution of that Interest, He is
now pursuing in the World, and so particularly in these Nations.

3. We know, the most Native Administration of Government in the Grand
Confederates, is Persecution of the Protestant Religion, and Inquisition upon
it: What Wonder then, if such Blended Interests are un-successful? And it is
now the more considerable, that the Wheels of Providence, where Things are
Right set, will be, as we have seen, with a Divine speed.

But I do Freely Acknowledge, There are Two Things that seem to Countersway,
and Incline to the Confederacy on the other side.

1. That as it has been said, the State of the Western Christendom, (as It may
be called; but is indeed in the Greater parts of it Antichristendom) is by
Prophecy determined into Ten, or a Multiplicity of Kingdoms; On this Account,
Any of the Ten, though if not Revuls'd from the Beast, they are in Prophetic
Language, Horns of the Papacy, may yet be used by God, as heretofore, to hold
that Multiplicity Equal and Firm; and so may serve to Reduce any one, that
would swell beyond its due Situation, and Proportion of Room on that Head: And
this is indeed the Highest Amount of what has been, and very Hardly has been
done by the Confederacy as yet; God having suffered for great Reasons, as will
ere long Appear, so dangerous an Extravasation of the French Power, even as if
It were the Beastian Power, and in its 666. as some Learned Men have Thought
among us, but will soon so Retrench it, as to show that opinion to be mere
mistake, and I am assured especially by Those, I have Just now declared.

2. How far the Confederacy of Protestants with Papal Powers, may be of use to
Incline them to the Reformation, God having made use of outward Force not so
much, in Enclining Princes to Fall off from Rome in the Beginning Reformation,
as of more Evangelical Methods, Rational, and Free Communications of Truth,
Providential, and Friendly Obligations, much more now; But I fear the Time of
the great Re-Reformation, though so near, is not near enough at this Time to
hope yet for so Blessed a Fruit of the Confederacy, nor does any Thing Appear
like it.

Adv. 2. I would most Humbly Advise, that there might be under so Great an
Authority, and Influence, an Assembly of Men, Learned and Loving the Kingdom of
our Lard Jesus Christ, who might discover so Admirable a part, (Hitherto it may
be called a Terra Incognita) of Scripture, even the Stupendous Prophesies of
it; First, by Single, and then Compared and Joined endeavors; For They now are
big, and ready to Travel in their Completion; The Ignorance of which, is a
greater Reproach of Theologers, then some Diseases of Physicians, and is a
Judiciary Blindness on all Christians during the Apostasy: The Affairs of
Nations are more concerned therein, then in Forming Armies, and Equipping
Navys, which are but Subordinate to those Completions, and often not so much as
that, as we have seen.

I am bold to say, if I had, as now God has vouchsafed me, understood Prophecy
in the Years 48, 50, and so onward in the very Top of Those Powers over the
Nation, and kept close and steady to the Guidance of it; I should certainly
have Foreseen the Re-enstating the Church of England, that lay then in the
Dust, and so of the Royal Family that should do it.

And as according to Prophecy, even in the Full Tide of the Imperial Victories,
I declared the Impossibility of the Turks, being dismounted from the
Constantinoplitan Heighths; Even so, and much more might by such Compared
Researches, the Affairs of Nations, and Churches be so understood, as to be
Conducted with greater Judgment, and Resolution; And what could so great a
Protestant Assembly take with more Sageness and Honor under their Care and
Patronage, of more Honor then Ptolemy's 70?

Particularly the State of the present Government in the Assurance of its
Stability rests on the Resolution of one Illustrious Point of Prophecy, viz.
The Slaying of the Witnesses, whether It be past or not; For if it were not,
seeing the True Sense of it is a Suppression of All Protestant Churches for a
Time, It is not I, but the Thing it self speaks, This Revolution must of
necessity Revolve.

For as in Rescue of these Nations from the Return of Popery, This Revolution
came, even miraculously to pass, much more by the Fullfilling of Prophecy, then
by Humane Sagesse or Power; So if such a Slaying of the Witnesses were ye to
be; There would certainly to serve Providence therein, be a Return of Romish
Power, which must of necessity Roll back this Revolution.

But although the mention of the Three days, and a Half as the most Immediate
Precedent of their Rising, and its Great Concomitants seem to Favor such an
Apprehension, Although the Sense of many excellent Persons, and very
understanding in Prophecy, particularly if Truly His, that Prophecy of A. B.
Usher, incline that way and Lastly, Although the usual manner of God
Introducing his great Deliverances by very dark Prefaces, would much persuade
it; Yet as I am most Assured, the main Sense (as I have already published) of
the Three Days and a Half, Intends a much Longer Time, even the whole Deep Time
of the Antichristian Reign, parallel to the Lying of Christ in the Grave; so
there are great Considerations that assure me, There cannot be so much as an
Epitome, or Compendious Slaying of the Witnesses, or so dark a State upon
Protestancy yet to come.

1. Because the Time of the Witnesses Full and Total Rising, is so near, that
there cannot possibly be Time for the Operation of the Instruments of their
suppression, or Slaying, of their Lying Dead, and then for their Rising.

2. Because there is a State of Protestant Churches, that are so secured, as by
a Divine Determination; That They cannot from their First Settlement in the
Reformation be any more Reduced under Popish Slavery; of which sort, one of the
Principal is the Church of England; as Appeared by the sudden Jealousy, that
awoke at those Essays of Popery to Re-Invade it; and the universal Zeal of the
Nation to Stemm that Tide that was offering to Flow in, was a most undoubted
Impression from Heaven, upon so many that have too little Sense of the Power of
that profession upon Them to be otherwise moved.

And if It should seem to be any Objection, that the Church of England lay so
long suppressed as from 42, to 60. I have no desire to say it, but Truth
obliges me to say, that even that Judgment upon it was for its so Voluntary
Returns to more in the Synagogue of Satan, under the pretense of Antiquity,
then could be Allowed by its very own Standard of Reformation, and as a Sample
of the perfect Removal of that its very Standard (as not Sealed in the
Sanctuary, nor of Ezekiel's Just Temple-Weights, Measures,) and so to be by the
great Re-Reformation Broken.

3. Those Suffering Reformed Churches have but Time before the Full Rising of
the Witnesses, to do their Last Greater Works then their First, and to see the
Dawns of the Morning Star in their Vindication from, and Victory over their
Oppressors.

Adv. 3. Let it please so great Princes, and Councels, to set before Them the
Late Doings of God by the Turkish, again prevailing Force, and judge whether It
does not, as in a Mirror, show such a Lengthning out of that Woe on the so
called Christian World, while the Idolatrous Worship of Wood and Stone, the
Thefts, the Sorceries, and Fornications of the Romish Communion still continue;
And that this very Thing might be, and has been predicted according to
Prophecy; and therefore of how great Moment, Judgment according to Prophecy is,
even beyond Victory it self, It being predicted in the midst of Imperial
Victories.

And therefore the whole Council of God, as to the Powers of these Nations
cannot be declared by Preaching, without Research of Prophecy, especially
Concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and continual regard had to it, Let the
Reason or Rethorick of Such discourses be otherwise never so Great.

Adv. 4. Let it please the King, and the Queen, and the Nobles, and the Commons
in Parliament Assembled; that the most Powerful Scripture-way of Preaching and
Prayer, may have All Advantages of Encouragement given, to spread abroad in
Cities, Towns, and Countries; and most Eminently in Camps and Navies, that the
Spirit of Debauchery, Profaneness, and Atheisticness, that is so Prodigiously
abroad, may be quenched; And that Choice of Persons, who are to Adventure their
Lives, may be made so far, as is possible, of such, who have a Knowledge of
that Excellent Cause, Protestancy; for which They so adventure: For though with
very Un-Reform'd Protestants, as once He said with Wounded Men, God has and
will still work for his Names sake for a while; Yet nearer the Kingdom of
Christ He will not endure such Persons; Let us therefore prepare a High way for
our God, and make His Paths straight: And They who thus Honor God, He will
honor, but They who despise him, shall be Lightly esteemed.

Let us not therefore (to Conclude) Hope their Hope, not Fear their Fear, who
measure All safety, and Success by a Confederacy, though mixed on one side, and
Slavishly Fear a Papal Confederacy on the other; But let us Sanctify the Lord
of Hosts Himself, with an Emphasis, as we are commanded, and let Him be our
Fear and our Dread. Isa. 8.13.

Let us know, God Alarms the King, and these Nations, to serve Him in France;
And it is to he hoped and pray^d rather then that we should not, He will
necessitate us; For if we do not, it is most certain, the Government will Fall
into Dishonor first, and then into Confusion, Lastly, into Ruin.

Now if These Things be despised, disbelieved or Ridiculed, It is but what
Reception Prophecy, however Administered has always Found in the World; But it
cannot be Judged by Man's day, I count therefore nothing dear to Fulfill this
Ministry, and I shall always Rejoice in its Acceptance, so as may abound to
the Account of the Accepters; Especialiy in Yours, to me Most Awful Supreme
Powers; For whom I daily bow my Knees, as a Minister of Jesus Christ to so
great Principalities, Ministering to you the Divine Prophesies; and that Your
(not to say, mine) Offering up Your selves according to them, may be a
Sacrifice Acceptable to God, being Sanctified by the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.

