THE GOOD HOPE THROUGH GRACE.

The Jubilee of the Kingdom of Christ shall come upon the Counterfeit Jubilee
of Rome; and before the end of the Following Year 1700* shall begin to bring
under Desolation that Great City and its Papacy: Therein Uniting the Year 1697
with 1700. according to Prophecy.

Humbly Presented to the Faith and Prayers of all Sincere Protestants.

By, T. BEVERLEY.

Rev. xviii. xix. In one Hour is she made Desolate. LONDON, Printed for William
Marshall, at the Sign of the Bible in Newgate-Street, and John Marshall, at the
Bible in Grace Church Street.

TO THE HONORABLE His much Honored Sir Samuel Barnardiston.
Honored Sir,
ALthough I must ever Acknowledge a long Series of very great Obligations to
your Friendship, and Favor for me; Yet That is not the Sole, nor so much as
the Principal Reason of the presenting this following Discourse to your
Acceptance: The more Due Reasons of that are, That by the Freedoms you have
Allowed me of Conversation with you; I have very undoubted Evidences of your
sincere Love to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory; in its
present Spiritual Evangelical Administration; and in its Gradual Illustrations
of it self in Glory, Promised and Foretold to the latter Days. And yet more
particularly, as in All Things I had observed, your Patriottal Spirit, your
Great Love to your Country, the true English Spirit; so your Great Love to
Protestancy, and Bewailing, That no Greater Liberty and Security could be
procured, for the Suffering Protestants beyond the Seas, and particularly in
France. But I hope God supports you in so long a Life, to see the Openings of
his Kingdom. And That your Honorable Lady, whom I have long observed the
Truest Consort of All the Varieties, that God has been pleased to Dispensate
to you, may Rejoice with you in that so Great Joy, is the Humble Earnest Prayer
of, Most Honored Sir,

Your most Affectionate Humble Servant in our Great Lord, T. BEVERLEY.

The PREFACE to the Favorable Protestant READER.
THE Discourse following, I Humbly Present, as the Result of the most Close
Researches into the Sure Word of Prophecy, after the so great Disappointment of
the Hopes I had at the Year Ninety Seven. I Humbly Acknowledge to Infinite
Grace, it gave me not the least Doubt of the Truth and Divine Authority of
sacred Scripture, or particularly of the Prophetic Scriptures of Truth, which
the Divine Spirit takes such care to assure, Are the True Sayings of God, and
that These Sayings are Faithful and True; And I Humbly Bless Him, I have
besides all those Great and Weighty Arguments, that so many Holy and Learned
Men have Established the Autopisty, or self-evident Diviness of Scripture upon,
I have the particular Assurance of so Admirable a Prophetic Scheme and Frame;
God has given me, that I am sure none, but Infinite Prescience, could ever
have Projected, or so curiously have Wrought and Inlaid; and only to be Found
by Compare of one Prophetic Scripture with another, and when they are so
matched one with another, the Admirable Artifice is seen.

Now this very Adorable Workmanship led me to Ninety Seven by Prophetic
Iconisms, or Images, adjusted to Prophetic Numbers of Time, and justified and
verified by Matters of Fact, or as Prophecy calls them, Effects of Vision in
Ez. 12. 23. (...) the Matter of Fact of Vision.
universal History and Chronology, Corresponding to them.

And in the very last Year, after all Hope seeming to be past, it pleased the
Lord to show me that Character of Time, styled, Indictions or Fifteens of
Years; even studiously observed in adding 2 and 3 Fifteens to 1260, made up of
so exact Dan. 12.
Fifteens; making them, 1290; 1345; All which sure could never be by Chance.
This Note of Indiction, I say, what I had always accounted, I found enclapsed,
whole Prophetic Time, from Solomon's Death to the Blessed Time at the end of
the 1335 Days, all which make 2730 Days ^^ Indicted; As any one versed in
Accomptancy may easily find. And the very first, the 390 Days of Ezekiel's
bearing Judah's Sin, begin in set Indictions. Hereby I have found Ninety Seven
established by even Arithmetic Demonstration, as I have made out in a Treatise
on purpose, Printed 1699.

Upon all this, I could not remove from Ninety Seven; However, so great a
Failure looked so unfavourably upon it: What therefore God, upon earnest
unwearied Prayers, and so strict Enquiry, a^ the Holy Oracle, was pleased to
give in the Night at the House of an Elect Lady, near Sarisbury; and to enable
to Cultivate and Improve; I have here given to public view, consisting of Four
Heads.

1. The Certainty of a most Stupendous Judgment, to be executed on some City,
descyphered by Babylon, and this City proved to be Rome.

2. That the Time of this Judgment to be executed, is at some pompous Time of
Babylon, such as the Holy Year or Jubilee, and great Princes appearing for it.

3. That whereas the Time this Judgment to be Executed, was most properly
Ninety Seven; there is by a curious Artifice of Prophecy, a Reserve of 3 Years
and a half, reaching to 1700: With an Answer of Objections to search of Time
from Mistakes.

4. That such a Reserve is called God's Infraction or Breach of Promise, or his
Abruption, and Breaking off the Series and Contexture of Begun Providence; the
Notions of which are opened and applied to the present Case; there are also
Reserves in a way of Wisdom and Goodness, from Ninety Seven.

And all recommended to Faith and Prayer, under Divine Blessing; and Humbly
laid at the Feet of the Supreme Palmoni, or Wonderful Numberer of Time, the
Apocalyptes or Revealer, the High Priest, or Man Clothed in Linen, and the
Apostle of our Profession; That He may judge, whether his Word or not. To Him,
God over all, Blessed for ever, be Glory for ever, Amen.

THE JUBILEE OF THE Kingdom of CHRIST, Coming on the Counterfeit JUBILEE of
ROME.
Rev. xviii. vii. viii. She says in her Heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow,
and shall see no Sorrow. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, Death,
and Mourning, and Famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire; for strong
is the Lord who judges her.
THE Intention of the following Discourse, is to give Encouragement from this
Scripture first; then, to excite and even arouse the Protestant Zeal, Faith and
Hope; and to oblige the earnest Prayers and Supplications of the Reformed
Churches and Nations; and humbly to beseech the Princes and Governments of
them, by their Commands and Examples so to lead the way, that we may all Rev.
6. 10.
cry out with the loud Voice of the Souls under the Altar; How long Lord, Holy
and True, do Thou not avenge the Blood of thy Servants; on Them, who dwell on
the Earth! which is a Prophetic Periphrase of Pagan Rome first, and then of
Rome Antichristian.

And this at a Time, whereunto the Divine Spirit has directed us so plainly,
and specially to look for it; as at a proper Season God has forescen, and
singled out for the Execution of his Judgment on Babylon; even this her
Enchanting Jubilee, when she says, I sit a Queen; I am now on a Throne giving
out my Pardons and Indulgences: I am no Widow, nor shall know the lofs of
Children; Behold from all Parts, how they gather about me at this very time!

And at the time of so violent a Persecution upon the Servants of God, making
the same Protestation with our selves against the Papal Idolatry, Superstitions
and Tyranny.

If we are not concerned at such a time as this, we have only a Name to live,
as, Protestants and the Reformed, but are dead; as God Charges upon the Church
of Sardis, the Prophetical Emblem of the Churches styled the Reformed; We have
forgotten, how we Received and Heard, in that so great Appearance of God, by
the Rev. 3. 1, 2.
first Reformers; and Princes will too sadly seem to have lost that first
Protestant Spirit, etc. which acted those Princes in the Transactions at Spire
Am. 1529. Oh that therefore we might Remember, Hold fast and Repent: And if
there were a Spirit poured out from on high upon us, a Spirit of Prayer, who
knows but that in the midst of this false Jubilee; These two things, Widowhood
and loss of Children, Alienation of Princes and People, might come on this
Mystic Babel in one Day, in one Moment! If we could wrestle with God, as Jacob,
these Two Things would certainly come upon Her in their Perfection, as on Esaias.
47. 8.
that Babylon of Old, for the Multitude of her Sorceries and Enchantments in
this very day of her Jubilee.

To this very purpose, I will draw out from the Text, as it stands in connection
with This, the Former, the Following Chapters, Six great Propositions; and then
argue further upon them in compare with other Scripture Prophecies.

Proposition 1. There is undeniably a great Judgment denounced by God, and
largely described upon some City, Figured by Babylon the Great, that must most
certainly be Executed in its own Time, and upon the City designed, according to
the sure word of Prophecy, Cap. 1. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, that God
gave to him, to show to his Servants things shortly, that is, with great speed;
from that very time it was given; to come to pass successively; till the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in comparison of which all time
is short: Now because this Judgment cannot yet (as will appear) be possibly
supposed to have come to 1 Cor. 7.
pass, it must yet come to pass: And because so much has all along, and for so
very long time been coming to pass, according to this Prophecy; and yet this
Judgment has not been Executed, the Execution of it must needs therefore be
very near.

Prop. 2. There are Infallible Characters fixed by the Prophecy in these
Chapters before us, on the the City so denounced upon; assuring this City is
the present Papal Rome. For if Rome be the City Uncharacterized, as it is now
Papal, it is that City so threatened by this Judgment; For the Characters, and
the Judgment are inseparable; Now Rome will appear to be the City
Uncharacterized, and therefore on it must the Judgment here written be Executed.

Prop. 3. It is one of the great Glories of this Judgment; that the first
coming of it into Execution shall be with great suddenness and surprizal; and
when very Few (styled by Christ the Few Names in Sardis) have a Thought, or
Apprehension of any such thing: One Day, one Hour, one Moment, as of Ancient
Babylon, speak the very great Velocity of the Judgment.

Prop. 4. The Princes, that at this time Bear up the Grandeur and the
Haughtiness of Papal Rome, by giving their Power and Kingdom to the Beast;
called therefore His Horns, shall be by the Lamb, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords so overcome, as to be made Instruments in the Execution of the Judgment
in such Parts, and Degrees, as the strong Lord, who Judges, shall Commission
them unto; which shall highly Exalt, and make Illustrious the Judgment: As an
Indication of this, it is said C. 17. 16. The Kings shall hate the Whore; shall
make her Desolate, and shell eat her Flesh, and shall burn her with Fire; and
in this Text, her Plagues are Death, and one concurring with the other
Mourning, Famine, and burning with Fire.

Prop. 5. The Greatness and the sudden Invasion of this Judgment, as denounced
by God, are uncontroulably to be demonstrated, not only as to the possibility,
but the certainty of both; as from the Truth of the Lord, who has so long ago
denounced it, so from the Wisdom and Omnipotency of the strong Lord that
judges.

Prop. 6. The Divine Prescience and Wisdom, has chosen out a Time, and decreed
it for the Execution of this Judgment, when Babylon shall show it self in its
Pride, its Pomp, its Presumption, Security; For it is, when she shall say, I
sit a Queen, and shall see no Sorrow; and it is most undeniable its Jubilee is
such a Time, and when Great Princes shall so be at her Devotion, as for her
sake, with such a violence to persecute, and Protestant Princes stand by, and
have nothing to say against it.

Prop. 1. I begin with the first Proposition; that the Judgment here
forewritten must most certainly be executed: That there is a great Judgment
here described and denounced on some City, Figured by Babylon the Great, is
most uncontestable; every word in the Foregoing and this Chapter assures it;
and in the following Chapter, we have most solemn Doxologies and Thanksgivings
upon it; In Cap. 17. 1. The Vision begins thus; John is called to come to the
Angel, who would show him the Judgment of the Great Whore: In this C. 18. 1.
Another Angel having Great Power, and with whose Glory the Earth shone Appears;
and he cried mightily with a loud Voice, Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen; certainly and irrecoverably Fallen; and so the Vision goes on in the
most dreadful Expressions, and Pourtraies of a Judgment most stupendous: The
Kings of the Earth bewail, and stand afar off for fear of her Torment; her
Merchants throw Dust on their Heads, and cry out in their Lamentings, Alas!
Alas! and at last her Irrecoverable Ruin is set out by a Millstone, cast into
the bottom of the Sea by a mighty Angel pronouncing; So shall Babylon be thrown
down, and found no more at all, ver. 15. 19. 21.

If this Judgment then be Prophetically denounced by the Holy, the True, the
Mighty God; It must and shall certainly come to pass in the Time, and upon the
City designed: This is a Principle of Natural Light and Intellectual Reason so
clear, I shall no further insist upon it.

What then can be levied by way of Objection? I can possibly suppose but two
Things: Either the Authority of the Book of the Revelation must be called into
question, as not from God; or it must be said, the Judgment has been already
Executed.

Object. 1. As to the first, I shall say these three Things.
Answ. 1. That this Book has such a Majesty of Truth in the most awful
Representations of the Divine Being, of the Redemption of the Lord Jesus
Christ, of the Beauty of Holiness, and of the Abominableness and dreadful end
of Sin; That whoever has any Fear of God arising from the light of Natural
Conscience, or any Gust of the Excellency of Sacred Writings, cannot but
acknowledge it from God: Add hereunto those bright Rays, that shining from it,
every where enlighten the Purity of Divine Worship, in detestation of all
Idolatry and Superstition; and Illustrate the Glory of Martyrdom, for keeping
the Commandments of God, and for holding the Testimony of Jesus: In all, The
Glory of it, is as of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, given to him by God; and
who then will dare to set himself as a mark for that Commination; If any Man
take from the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God will take away his Part
from all the great Promises of it, and will add to him the Plagues written in
it; which both are most dreadful. C. 22. 18, 19.

Answ. 2. Let any one consider the Curious and Admirable Iconisms, Images and
Figures found in this Book; and if he have a Mind, that has Understanding to
apply them to the Events foretold from their first beginning, shortly, that is,
to begin from the time of giving it, immediately to come to pass, and reaching
down to this very time, he will find them so exactly to answer the prophetical
and predictory Types; as to justify this Book of the Revelation to be from
God, by that very demonstration of Divinity God appeals to Esaias 41, 23. Show us
things to come, that we may know ye are Gods; Hence therefore we may be assured
of the Divinity of this Prophecy, even from the prescience of God in it.

Answ. 3. The Prophecies of the Old Testament, in Isa. C. 47. and Jerem. 51.
and in Daniel throughout, are such an Exemplar of Judgment, on whatever shall
come under the Name of Babylon the great, (as Nebuchadnezzar memorializ'd it
for after Ages,) that if we are duly persuaded of the Divine Authority of the
one, we have all the just Inducements of the same persuasion of this
Apochaliptic Prophecy; and that the Spirit, who breathed the one, breathed the
other also; who foresaw Mystical Babylon in litteral, and prepared the Shades
of the Destruction of it, the Latter in the Former; which highly aggrandizes
the Evidence of the Divine Authority of the Revelation: For none but the Divine
Understanding could ever have excogitated such an Admirable Agreement.

Object. 2. As to the second Objection, That the Judgment has been already
Executed, and the Prophecy fulfilled, it shall be answered under the second
Position; that the City, which is here denounced upon, is Papal Rome, from
whence it will necessarily follow, It is not, nor can can yet have been
Executed; because the City Rome is yet in Being and Greatness, but by this
Judgment is utterly to be destroyed; But in the mean time, it may be envinc'd,
from the glorious Consequences, drawn out C. 19. C. 20. C. 21. C. 22. which are
so close connexed with this Judgment, which have not yet come into effect, that
therefore not the Judgment itself; for who can apprehend such Glorious
Appearances, as the Heavens opening, Christ's coming forth Attended with the
Armies of Heaven, such an Universal Conquest of Enemies, and such a New
Jerusalem, and Illustrious state of it, have ever enlightened a World continuing
yet so dark! He that can persuade himself to believe that, may believe any
thing most unreasonable: I come therefore to the second Position.
Posit. 2. There are Infallible Characters fixed by this Prophecy, by which we
may be most assured, It is the present Papal Rome to be Judged; For the making
out this Position, Two things are to be proved.

1. That Rome it self is the City intended.

2. That though Rome Pagan be intended, yet Rome Papal is the Babylon, on which
the Judgment is to be Executed, so fully here described: That it is Rome, There
are two undeniable, even Litteral Affirmations; that even the Popish
Expositors, who have so great Reason to ward off the Blow from Rome, yet they
have not the face to deny, the City must needs be Rome, and therefore some of
them fix on Pagan Rome.

But Rome, take it Pagan, take it Papal; Rome it self is the City to be thus
Judged, as the Divine Spirit has made known to us by saying, the Seven H^ads
are Seven Mountains on which the Woman sits; Now the Seven Headed City, was
as plain a Character of Rome, when the Apocalyptick Apostle writ, as if we
described London by the City, whose Shore the Thames washes, or Constantinople
by the Bosphorus coming up to it.

Again, the same Divine Spirit has told us, the City is she that has the
((...)) Kingdom at this very present time over the Kings of the Earth; which is
as plain a Distinction of Rome, as at the time of the Revelation given, as if
we described London by the City; where the Courts of the King, of Judicature,
and the Councils of the Nation are, and the chief Seat of Trade is; or
Constantinople by the Ottoman Port: Who that knows the History of the World at
that time, knows not; That Rome was the Seat of the Empire of the World at
that very Time: This being so plain, though other Proofs may be given, I pass
off from it, and come to the second part of the Position; That though Pagan
Rome is to be taken in, yet Papal Rome is the City to be Judged, especially,
Ultimately, Finally.

That this may be made out, I must lay in the Foundation; That, as the City
Rome is Evidently shown to be the Babylon, to be Judged; So the Supremacy meant
here, by the Beast, must be a Supremacy closely Related to the City Rome, and
Bearing up that City in Glory and Grandeur; as Pope of Rome, in the place of
Emperor of Rome, or any other of the Supreme Magistracys of it. For the City,
and the Beast that Carries it, are Inseparable; If it be therefore made out
that the Supremacy is Papal, on which the City is Born up when it is Judged; It
will most certainly follow, that the City to be Judged, is Rome Papal; Even as
if it be proved, that the Rome to be Judged, is Rome Papal; It is therein
proved that the Supremacy Judged is Papal Supremacy; For as is said; They are
Inseparable and Proportioned one to another: I will therefore draw out several
Characters of Papal Supremacy, and of Papal Rome, that are most Plain Matters
of Fact upon both, in Relation to, and Compare one with another, and that are
given in Prophecy upon each, as the most plain and easy to be understood
(waving what is more Critical and Curious,) and yet most Argumentative and most
Conclusive, as laid one to another, considered together; that Papal Rome, with
its Papacy, are here Represented to be Judged.

The Characters are these Following.

Charact. 1. It is undeniable, The Papacy lays claim to a Supremacy, as the
Vicar of Christ, Universal Bishop, Pope of Rome; as Universal as Emperor of
Rome heretofore over the Princes of Europe; and a Pastor above Princes, and the
Supreme Powers here upon Earth; So the Church of Rome, Universal Catholic
Church, The Mistress of Churches, or Lady, as Babylon of Old; or as Rome, when
Mistress, Lady of the World; All this is undeniable Matter of Fact in general
knowledge of the World at this day; and much more so before the Reformation.

And what more plain in Prophecy! In Daniel, in this Prophecy of the
Revelation; Beast is Interpreted into King or Kingdom, as a Succession of
Kings; Having Times and Laws given into his Hand to Change. Horns are Kings,
and so must the Little Horn be, and as more Dan. c. 7.
Stout then his Fellows, an Imperial King: In this Vision of the Revelation,
the Beast is the Eighth King, and of the Seven Heads, Supremes over Rome. To
show his Imperialness, Ten Kings are as Horns upon his Head, in Subordination
to him: Power was given to him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations; An
Universal Monarch. C. 13. 7. ^. 17. 9.


As for the City, it is Babylon The Great, the Great City, who says, I sit a
Queen. As she had sat upon Formor Kings, so she is Carried on high by the
Beast; The Kings of the Earth Live Deliciously with her, her Merchants are the
Great Men, the Grandees of the Earth made Rich by her Costlyness; And the
Greatness and Variety of her Merchandise speaks her Greatness; Now seeing it
has been Proved by the Letter of the Prophecy, Rome is the Seven Headed City,
that was Imperial at the Time of the Prophecy given: I appeal to all Persons
who know the State of Things now in Europe, and what it was in Ancient Time;
whether there be in the Roman Empire, that then was, any Supreme like the now
Pope for Universality; For not only the Kings, (excepting those who Renounced
him in the Reformation) but even he is who called Emperor, is no Emperor, in
Compari^^^ of the Papal Supreme, whom he himself owns, and pays Subjection to;
or any City that can pretend to be a Queen, as Rome pretends to be; as it calls
it self the Catholic Church. There can be no pretense of the Otoman Supreme,
or of Constantinople like it, Though that be so fixed as it is, as a Spightful
Rival of it by the hand of Vengeance, as might be further shown, if Seasonable
now: And therefore this Character, I look, upon, even Demonstratively
Distinctive of Papal Rome, and the Papal Supremacy: But if this can be thought
not sufficient, what follows will more assure it.

Charact. 2. The Papal Supremacy, However Prevalent it has been, and is; is
yet in the Balance of Worldly Powers, a weak, Precarious, Impuissant
Supremacy; and has no Martial Strength to support or Defend it self by; as is
well known in all History and Daily Experience; So that Great Statesmen
Puffendors Introduction to the Histor. of Europ. Cap 12.
and Politicians have been much Amused; How so Unarmed a Supremacy should have
so long continued it self; We in this Nation are Witnesses, how Uncontroulably
the King of this Nation (Henry the 8th at his own Pleasure) Revuls'd himself
and it from him; and Queen Elizabeth, after the Resumbmision of Queen Mary,
Abdicated the Papacy anew, as other Princes about the same Time did.

In the same manner let us Judge of the City Rome now; and we know it is not the
Residence of the Ancient Martial Spirit, and Prowess that Inhabited it; But, as
its Supreme, is Unarmed, so is the City upheld by the Kindness of the Ten
Kings, that shall Hate and Famish, and Burn it hereafter; and by the Fraud and
Cunning of the Pope, the Cardinals and other the Preisthood of it; an Imperial
City in a Mystery; that is a False Catholic Church held up by Art.

Let us observe now, How Prophecy speaks of this Character, both as to the
City, and as to its Supreme; and we shall find in Daniel; The Feet and Toes of
the Image, Dan. 2. Which make the last State of the Fourth Roman Monarchy or
Kingdom, were Part of Iron and Part of Clay; Partly Strong as Iron, and Part
Broken Fragile v. 42. Weak and Frail as Clay. And what could the whole Ingeny
of Man have found out more Curiously, and yet Significantly to Express the
Feeble Supremacy of the Papacy; Like Feet of Clay upheld by the Iron of the Ten
Kings; and in the other Vision the Ten Horns Surround and Cover the Little
Horn,; that else could not defend it self; his Power shall be Mighty, but not
in his own Power, C. 8. 24. In the Revelation the Beasts Supremacy is
continually Represented with an Image; Conioyn'd with a Spiritual Power, an
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, which is a Supremacy in an Image: And it is by Gift
under a Divine Decree, The Ten Kings Agree, and with One Consent give their
Kingdom, and Power, and Strength to the Beast: It is by Gift, and by Agreement,
and as by Balance on One Another's Power, as Event has proved.

Let us now behold the Character drawn by Prophecy, in relation to the City;
She sits indeed a Queen; But it is by the Sorcery of a False Religion, upon
Princes and People, by making them drunk with the Wine of her Fornication and
Adulteries; an Impure, Senseless sort of Devotion, and the False Hopes of
Salvation by it; a Drunken Dream fit to Enchant, and Enslave those who are
bereaved of All Judicious Understanding in Christianity; and pleased with a
Faith, Worship of God, and Conversation, suited only to a Carnal Sensuality:
All this shows us wherein the Strength of this City, or False Church lies.

And how Exactly do these Things Answer One Another! What we Every Day see with
our Eyes, and hear with our Ears, and have all manner of Assurance of in Papal
Rome; and these Delineations of Prophecy, carrying us out of all manner of
Doubt, that the City here described to be Judged, is Papal Rome.

Char. 3. In the Papacy of Rome, and its City, or False Church, we find the
Collection of All the Superstitions and Idolatries, that ever have been
(almost, if not altogether) in the World, under One Pretense, Color, and
Coverture, or other; Running like Filthy Drains, into this Foul Great Sewer;
enough to fill Volumes with their incredible Multitude and Variety; Such as if
duly considered, cannot but be thought most Strange and Horrid, in so Divine,
Spiritual, and so Intellectual a Worship of God, as Christianity teaches.

And how has Prophecy Represented this! In Daniel, by the Infamous Name of
Beast, common to Him, with other Idolatrous Pagan Supremes; So by His thinking
to change Times and Laws given into his Hand for such a Term, plainly
signifying Sovereign Power, Engaging it self in the Devising and Introducing
False Religion, as Jeroboam of old, 1 Kings c. 12. 32. 38.

In the Revelation He is Full of the Names of Blasphemy; that is, of Idolatry:
For so the Idolatry of such as make a Profession of the True God, is styled,
Isa. 65. 7. by the Judgment of the most Learned Interpreters: And indeed it can
be no other; For to acknowledge a Being so Holy, Wise; Jehovah, the Eternal,
Infinite Spirit; and then to put upon him the Folly, and Nothing, as the
Apostle styles it, of an Idol, is perfect Blasphemy.

And so it is to arrogate to be worshipped with him; And it is most observable,
the Revelation frequently Joins this Beast Worshipped, and his Image
Worshipped, plainly importing his Idolatrousness.

Aholah, and Aholibah, those Idolatrous Churches of Israel and Judah, are a
most Graphical Description of this City, or False Church, in the same Kind of
Style; Aholah and Aholibah, were set out, Ezekiel. c. 23. in all the Lewdness of
Infamous Women; Those False Churches of Israel and Judah; if it be Lawful at
all to use the Name of Churches in their Case, and particularly Judah have the
Title of an Imperious, or, as it may be rendered exactly to the present Case,
Imperial Whorish Woman, Ezekiel. 16. 33. So Rome is Pictured having in her Hand a
Golden Cup, full of the Wine of her Fornication.

Charact. 4. That which is so Generally to be observed in the Papacy, is the
very Height of a most Bold, Blasphemous Arrogance: The very Supremacy he usurps
in the Christian Church, shows his Luciferian Pride. The Title, HIS HOLINESS,
is most Sacrilegious, Seeing God Only Holy is, much more Alone Holiness it
self: His Claim of Infallibility above Councels, is a small Thing; for he
exalts it above Scripture it self; That (in the Sense of the very Pharisees)
Blasphemous taking upon him to Pardon Sin, his Indulgences, Pretended
Deliverances from Purgatory, his Counterseit Miracles, his Anathematising and
Cursing down All to Hell, who detest his Idolatries, shows him that Proud and
Haughty Scorner, who Deals in Proud Wrath: His setting his Throne, and Lifting
his Scepter above the Thrones and Scepters of Princes, is most Horrid, and
Intolerable Insolency: In All this the City is one with him, sitting alought
upon him, and Born upon him in all this Babylonish Lucifertanism. Esaias 14. 12.


Let us observe, how Scripture-Predictions show this his Sathanic Presumption;
Daniel calls it his speaking Words, High, Great Words against the Most High; c.
7. 25. Standing up against the Prince of Princes, c. 8. 25. Speaking mavelous
things against the God of Gods; and He shall magnify Himself above every God,
or Supreme: c. 11. 36. He sits in the Temple of God as God, showing himself
he is God. He exalts himself above All that is called God; (the Scripture
Expression for Princes) or that is, (...), is styled August; taken from the
Name of Augustus, the Greatest of Rome's Emperors; and become at that Time the
Imperial Title: Thus the Apostle describes the Beast, calling him the Man of
Sin in the Antichristian Apostasy, he was describing; and that we may know him
to be the Beast, he is called, (...), That Lawless Prince that does what he
will, Dan. 11. 36. and the Son of Perdition; as Revel. 17.

In the Prophecy of the Revelation he is thus set out: To him was given a Mouth
speaking Great Things: He opened his Mouth in Blasphemies against God, to
blaspheme his Name; The World wondered after him; They who dwell upon the Earth
shall worship him; whose Names are not written in the Lamb's Book of Life; He
comes, as Satan, with All Deceivableness of Vurighteousness in them, who
perish, on whom God sends strong Delusion to believe so great a Lie, as the
Papacy in its whole Frame, makes up. Compare herein 2 These. 2. 10, etc. Rev.
13. 3. 8, etc.

The City, that Sodom, and Great Whore, tbat corrupts the Earth with her
Fornications, Rev. 11. c. 17. That Woman Jezebel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, which Teaches and Seduceth the People of Christ, Christians by
Profession, to commit Fornication, to have Communion with Idols, Rev. 2. 20.
She has on her Forehead a Name written, Mystery, as if she were indeed the
Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Foundation of Truth, the Catholic
Church, out of which none can be saved: But it is the Mystery of Iniquity; For
the Inscription goes on, Mother of Harlots; So that a most Unintelligible
Composition of Wickedness makes up this Mystery.

I Appeal now to All, whether such Insolences of Arrogation ate to be found in
the whole World, as in the Papacy and its Church of Rome; or whether such Known
Matter of Fact, in All these Things, could be more plainly set out, than they
are by these Prophecies.

Charact. 5. The Great Fraud, Dissimulation, Worldly Policy and Intrigue, we
know in the Papacy, and the Pseudo Catholic Roman Church, all its Cheats and
Impostures make up such a Character of it, that we find that Great Swedish
Statesman, Puffendor, spends the whole Chapter forementioned in the Discourse
of it; who, the he does not appear to have the least Relation to Prophecy, yet
writes so according to it on that Subject; That it is very wonderful; even as
if he had aimed to Justify Prophecy by so notorious matter of Fact.

Let us then Review Prophecy on this Head, first in Daniel; The Little Horn had
the Eyes of a Man; a Look, or Aspect more Great, Rabbi-Like; of more
Perspicacity than his Fellow Horns; He had Eyes, and a Mouth that spoke Great
Things; the Mouth, as of a Man of Eyes, Dan. 7. 20. He understood Dark
Sentences; Through his Policy; He causes Craft to prosper in his Hand, c. 8. 25.

In the Revelation, c. 2. 14. In the Church of Pergamus, the Prophetic Symbol
of the Church of Christ Under the Antichristian Throne of Satan, the Papal
Supremacy; we read of that Politician Prophet -- Balam, who taught Balac to
cast a Stumbling Block before the Children of Israel, by drawing them into
Idolatrous Practices: In the Church of Thyatyra, the Symbol of the Protestant
Churches, under Popish, Persecuting Princes, stirred up by the Papal
Antichristian (Church, as it will be called) which is Represented by Ahabs
Queen Jezebel, then which none more apt in the whole History of Scripture could
be found, as might by a Compare be made apparent: But her Whoredoms and
Witchcrafts cannot be passed by, with which Jehu upbraided her so
reproachfully, as the Protestant Princes have done Rome: Oh that so many of
them had not fallen into Jehu's great Evil, not to have made a perfect
Reformation. But That which is most to the present Purpose, is, That she had,
together with her assumed Propheticness, the Depths of Satan, as the Arcana
Regni, her deep Maxims of Sathanic State, by both which, she enchants, be
witches, intoxicates Princes and Nations.

Charact. 6. There is nothing more notorious, than the dreadful Persecutions,
and Storms of Violence, the Papacy, and Its Roman City, or False Church has
raised against those who have embraced Christianity, and desire to enjoy it in
the Purity, and Simplicity of it; or have not submitted to that Tyranny they
have so grasped at, as has been described. And we see the Princes and Powers
of this World, that have been the Devotionists of it, have contributed their
Force thereunto; The secular Authority, as they call it; and which Prophecy
calls, The Ten Kings making War with the Lamb. And all this together has come
to that Extremity of Blood, Slaughter, and all manner of Torture, as continue
to this very Day; History and Experience are so full of it, I need say nothing.
The Waldenses, or as we call them, Vaudois, are a lasting Monument hereof, and
continue so before our Eyes.

Now this Cruelty of Christians (as they would be called) upon their own so
honorable Name, is so monstrous, that even Pagans cannot but be astonished at
it, and call into doubt that holy, harmless and compassionate Religion, so full
of Mercy, Peace, all good Fruits, when they find the Professors of it, and the
Papacy and Church of Rome, who would be Supremes of it, breathing out Slaughter
and Blood; to be as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, yea Devils let loose, set on Fire of
Hell, upon those who profess the same Lord and Christ; and such Princes; as the
French King to outdo the Neroes, Domitians, Decius's and Dioclesians; and the
Papal to equal, yea to exceed the Pagan Rome herein.

And it should make us bewail, that ever, what has been called Protestant,
should have any of these Stains upon it, and abhor the least Thoughts of the
Return of any such Thing in our own Nation.

Let us now take a View of the Portraicture of Prophecy and its Abundance, when
it gives us the Character of the little Horn; of the King of Fierce
Countenance; of the lawless King, that does after his own Will; of the He, to
whom Time, Times and Half are given; of the Beast in the Revelation; all which
are one and the same, Papacy of Rome, as has been already, and may be now made
out, even to the very Nicety of Prophetic Explications; and as to the
Pseudo-Catholic Church of Rome: Dan. 7. 21. I beheld, and the same horn made
war with the saints, and prevailed against them. Ver. 25. He speaks great words
against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High. Chap. 8.
24. His power shall be mighty, but not by his own power, and he shall destroy
wonderfully, and practice, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people.
Ver. 25. By Peace, as if he did nothing but in a Peaceable Way. Any thing of
Force lies wholly on the secular Arm; He shall yet destroy many. In the
Revelation, Chap. 11. 7. The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit
shall make War against the Witnesses of Christ, shall overcome them, and kill
them. Chap. 13. 7. It was given, by Way of Permission, but most judiciary
License also to make war with the saints, and to overcome. Ver. 15. He causes,
by his Supremacy in an Image, that all who would not worship the Image of the
Beast should be killed. Ver. 17. And that no man might buy nor sell, have
Freedom of Trade, (as it is now in France,) who would not receive the mark of
the Beast, etc. And till his Term expire, this must be; when it expires it
shall end: There is therefore set up, as a Pillar inscribed, as a Boundary of
Time. Ver. 10. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, Thus far it
reaches, till the Time of Judgment on the Beast and his Horns: Then, He that
leads, into Captivity shall go into Captivity; he that kills with the Sword
shall be killed with the Sword. Chap. 17. 14. The Ten Kings, Horns of the
Beast, make war with the Lamb and his Saints. But the Beast is taken, and the
Kings slain with Chap. 19.
the Sword of Christ.

And as for the City, or Papal Church of Rome, how abundant is Prophecy? Chap.
17. 6. I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and of the martyrs
of Jesus. Chap. 18. 6. Reward her as she rewarded you. Ver. 20. Rejoice over
her, Tbou Heaven, and ye Holy Prophets and Apostles, for God has avenged you
on her. Ver. 24. In her was found the blood of the Prophets and Apostles, and
of the Martyrs, all that were slain on the Earth. Chap. 19. 2. God has avenged
the blood of his servants at her hand. And Chap. 11. 8. The bodies of the
witnesses lay dead in the street of the great City; which by Compare must be
Babylon the Great, the great City, spiritually called Sodom, for its corrupting
the Earth with her Fornication; and Egypt for her Cruelty and Tyranny; and with
that as distinct a Remark, as could be set; Spiritually: All knowing their
Antichristian Usurpation on that Word; The Spirituality; for the sake of which,
I could rejoice, if that very Word, in Use in our Nation, Lords Spiritual were
utterly blotted out. Chap. 16. 3. The Angel that poured out his Vial on the
Waters, and Rivers of Babylon, its Papacy and Kings, said, by way of Praise,
Thou art righteous, Oh Lord, which art, wast, and art to come; because thou
have thus judged, for they have shed the blood of thy Saints and Prophets, and
thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And another Angel
from the Altar, where the souls of Martyrs cry out, How long Lord! Answers;
Even so, Lord God Almighty, True and ^ighteous are thy Judgments.

Seeing then these Things of the Persecutions of the Romish City in its whole
(...), or Breadth, its Papacy and ten Kings, are as clear as the Day; and that
Prophecy is so direct upon them, if this very Character were alone, it were
even sufficient to assure it is Papal Rome under the Eye of Prophecy; much more
in this sevenfold Concenterment.

Charact. 7. The Papacy is the last Supreme of the Roman Empire, and that
Supremacy the very last State and Time of this City Rome. Now of this indeed we
first say nothing beyond those Scriptural Reasons; That the final and most
destructive Judgments of God are to be expected on a City of so great
Idolatries, Filthinesses, Pride, Cruelty and the bloody Persecutions of the
Servants of God, and of so long Continuances therein; as not only other Cities,
who when they have filled up their Measures of Iniquity, have been judged by
God; but Jerusalem, which God made so great an Exemplar of Judgment; we may
also observe in the Course of Providence, and the Government of the World, All
humane States and Governments have come to their Periods; and Rome having had
so long a Duration from the Vrbs Condita, or first Building of Rome, and even
since it became Rome Papal, a Time as we may according to the most usual
Allowances of Time to Cities and States, the Sovereign Lord of Time has
determined, very well expect its Downfall to be near, and that it must needs be
sitting on its last Supremacy.

But when we calculate according to the sure Word of Prophecy, as we have
utmost Assurance, that Papal Rome is the Babylon, that is to be judged. So we
have no Room for Doubt that it is the last Supremacy; For as the City is
adjudged to final Destruction, so the Beast is thrice said to go into
Perdition. Chap. 18. 21, 22. compared with Chap. 17. ver. 8, 11. If therefore
the City sitting on the Beast, is cast as a Millstone into the Sea; That cannot
survive the Beast, to sit on any other; And if the Beast go into Perdition, as
he is also called by the Apostle, the Son of Perdition, [as the Judas of
Christianity, going into his own Place,] while the Woman sits upon him; there
is a perfect End of his Supremacy also; he is therefore said by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. to be first taken away by the Breath of the Lord's Mouth, and then
brought utterly to nothing with the Brightness of his Illustrious Appearance, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. And he is taken, and cast, alive, into the Lake; And even this
gives certain Proof, This is the last Supremacy; For there can be none after
the Eighth King, upon which the City sitting is destroyed: It could not
therefore be the Seventh King, which by being called (...), Another, a very
Forreigner, of another Kindred to the other Kings, No Head of Babylon, though a
King of Rome, is therefore certainly known to be the Christian Emperor, and
came after the Pagan Emperor, called the Dragon, who then was in his Regnancy,
when the Apostle writ. Let us then argue thus; which ever of the Kings is the
Beast, must be the Supreme; sitting on which Babylon, (proved to be Rome) must
be destroyed: It cannot be the Sixth King who then was, when the Prophecy was
given; and who might be supposed to have lasted til I now. For who can suppose
in any Sense whatever, Rome is upon the same King it was then! nor can it be
upon the Seventh King, but no Head on that Account; for he could continue but a
short Space (as has been elsewhere made out) it must be therefore some
Supreme, that has continued a long Space in Opposition to the short Space.
This therefore must be the Papacy which has lasted longer than any Government
over Rome without Variation in any Essential Point, and than (so far as I know)
any other in the World. Beside, it is expressly said, the Dragon, by which I
apprehend all Interpreters understand the Pagan Imperial, persecuting Power at
the Time of the Revelation given, is expressly said to receive a deadly Wound
from the Christian Emperor; on which, he, as it were, secretly conveyed over
his Power, Seat, and great Authority to the Beast, gliding it, as unobservedly,
by the Christian Emperor, unto the Idolatrous Antichristian Papacy; by whom his
Deadly Wound was healed; which is therefore the Eighth King, but Seventh Head;
Seventh from the Sixth Head, or Pagan Emperor, of whom, when the Apostle writ,
it is said, he now is. Then follows the Seventh King, no Head; then the Beast
the Seventh Head who has continued even above 1200 Years: So that the Time
from the Cessation of the Western Christian Roman Empire, when the Beast
received Power, and the Ten Kings with him at 476 of the vulgar Account,
exceeds the Time from the first Building of Rome to that Supremacy of the
Bishop, or Pope of Rome; so that no Title of Principality in Rome has by a
kind of Providential Fatality been assumed by any Secular Power, precisely over
the City Rome, but Bishop, or Pope of Rome; This argues beyond Possibility of
Denial from this so long Continuance of the Papacy in Opposition to the short
Continuance of the Seventh King, no Head, or Christian Emperor; that the Pope
is indeed that Seventh Head, and Eighth King, and so the Last, even the Beast
that goes into Perdition.

Posit. 3. It is one of the Glories and Lustres of the Judgment of God on
Babylon, That the first coming of it into Execution shall be with great
Suddenness and Surprizal. It is expressed in one Day, and one Hour, and in the
same Hour. I know Day and Hour may signify any determinate Season. But in such
very constant and pregnant Expressions of Suddenness, exceeding Suddenness is
intended. The same Expressions are used concerning Literal Babylon, Esaias 47.
Jer. 51.
In one Day, and in a Moment, one Post shall run to meet another, with the
Tidings, so sudden and unthought of Tidings; when Belshazzar thought of no such
Thing; the Dan. 6.
Handwriting appeared upon the Wall: And the same Night Belshazzar was slain,
and the King of the Medes took the Kingdom, the Babylonian Monarchy then
utterly ceasing. This was Prophetically Typical of Mystical Babylon: It is
therefore no Argument this Judgment cannot be executed a long Time yet, because
there are no present Appearances: Herein shall appear the Glory of this
Judgment, as one great Point of it, the Suddenness of it; In many of the most
high and lofty Works of God, Suddenness has been the peculiar Luster of them.
In the Creation of the World, He spoke, and it was done; He Psalm. 33. 9. Esaias
commanded, and it stood fast; He called to the whole Creation, and it stood up
together: In the Giving the Spirit, suddenly there was the Noise of a mighty
rushing Acts 2. 2.
Wind. In the Day of Judgment, sudden Destruction shall come, when they shall
cry Peace, Peace; 1 These. 5. 1.
upon all the Enemies of the Kingdom of Christ. The third Woe comes quickly,
in the hasty and sudden Effects Rev. 11. 14.
of it.

Now by this Suddenness it is not intended, That the whole Execution of the
Judgment should be in so short Time, though it is and shall be in short Time.
For the whole Progress of the Third Woe is quick and speedy as it passes
through the Tubuli or Pipes, till it comes down into the Ocean of Everlasting.
Yet, it shall not be in one Day, Hour, or Moment: But the first Invasion or
Assault shall be so. Then it moves by seven Voices, and by seven Vials of the
last Plagues, wherein is filled up the Wrath of Almighty God.

To the Ancient Literal Babylon, it is said, Esaias 47. 7. etc. Thou say, I
shall be a Lady for ever, so that thou did not lay these things to thy Heart,
neither did thon remember the latter end of it; therefore hear now this, thou
that art given to Pleasures, that dwell carelessly; thou that say in thy
Heart, I am, and none else besides me; I shall not sit as a Widow, neither
shall I know the loss of Children: but these two things shall come upon thee in
a Moment, in one Day; the Loss of Children and Widowhood; they shall come upon
thee in their Perfection, for the multitude of thy Sorceries, and for the great
abundance of thy Enchantments. But then it is destroyed for ever, sunk as a
Millstone. This speaks the Perpetuity of the Judgment. All this is most
Prophetically Typical of the Judgment on Mystic Babylon. We have found it was
literally fulfilled, as indeed in one Day, and one Night, on old Babylon, and
so it shall in the first Onset on the Mystical. But the Judgments of it are so
much of another Nature, they shall continue much longer in the Execution, like
the second Death; it suddenly surprises, but it continues for ever; so is the
Judgment of Babylon; her Smoke rises up for ever and ever. And, If any man
worship Chap. 14. 9, etc.
the Beast or his Image, etc. the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God without mixture; and he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the
Presence of God, and of the Lamb, and of the Holy Angels; and the Smoke of
their Torments rises for ever and ever. Thus, though the Beginning of the
Judgment be sudden, the Continuation of it is by certain Distributions of its
self, till it become an everlasting Lake of Wrath and Torment.

Posit. 4. The Princes that long bare up the Grandeur and Haughtiness of Papal
Rome, by giving their Power and Kingdom to the Beast; called therefore, his
Horns; shall be so overcome by the Lamb, as to be made Instruments in the
Execution of the Judgment in such Parts and Degrees, as the strong Lord shall,
when he becomes Universal Monarch, King of King, and Lord of Lords, commission
them unto. This shall highly exalt and make Illustrious the Judgment.

It is therefore much to be considered, and is a great Confirmation, that
Babylon means Papal Rome, as has been already at large set forth; that the so
strange and unaccountable Subjection of so many Kings to the Papacy, a feeble
Power, if we consider its Force of Arms, which Statists, and Men of Politics
have so wondered at, is here accounted for; It is indeed called Sorcery, and
Intoxication, being made Drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, the most
Lively Description of False Religion. But all is under the Divine Supreme
Ordination;

For God put it into their Hearts to Fulfill his will, and to agree together,
and to give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God should be
Fulfilled; And they have one mind to give their Power and Strength unto the
Beast; and hereupon they make War with the Lamb, and so Persecute his Truth and
Servants. And C. 17. 2, 13, 15, 16.
the People of these Kingdoms, Nations, Multitudes, Tongues, the Inhabitants of
the Roman Babilonian Earth, falling under the same Enchantment of a False
Religion, made Drunk and Commiting Fornication with her, are as a Confluence of
Waters to her, on which she sits: Was there ever, or could there be a
plainer Description in Prophesy of what is so plain matter of Fact, which has
raised the Admiration and Wonder of all Observers!

But when the words of God shall be Fulfilled, and the Time Allotted expired;
Then these Kings shall so far as God pleases, be the Executioners of the
Judgment; For as the Plagues in the Text are Death, Mourning, Famine, Burning
with Fire; so the Kings shall hate the whore, make her desolate, Eat her Flesh,
Burn her with Fire: It Is True, there are Kings that Bewail her, v. 13. 18. But
that pertains to another part of the Judgment, when it is Advanced to the
Eternal Judgment, with the Explication of which I have not at the present to
do; But how wonderful and Illustrious will the First Execution be, when these
Kings shall First Appear in it! Sure It will be very Great and Glorious.

Propos. 5. The Greatness and Sudden Invasion of this Judgment, as Denounced by
God, and by such Instruments as the Ten Kings, are uncontrolably to be
Demonstrated, not only as to the Possibility, but the certainty of both, as
from the Truth of the Lord who has so long ago Denounced it; So from the
Wisdom and Omnipotency of the strong Lord, who is the Judger.

This is not therefore in the least unreasonable, but the Highest Justification
from the Truest Principles of Reason, is to be found in the Expectation of the
Judgment upon the Beast and the City; Let it be never so sudden. For the Lord
is every way Infinitely Shrong, who Judges; God therefore in such, his great
works of what kind soever, appeals to the Consideration of himself, as the God
that stretches out the Earth, and that which comes out of it, that gives
Breath unto the People upon it, Es. 42. So in the Judgment on Old Babylon: He
that made the Earth by his Power, he has Established the World by his Wisdom,
and he has stretched out the Heaven by his understanding; when he utters his
Voice, there is a Multitude of Waters in the Heavens, and he Causes the Waters
to Ascend from the Ends of the Earth; He makes the Lightning with Rain, and
brings the Wind out of his Treasures. Jeremiah 51. 16. 17. It Is therefore a
very great Misprision of Infinite Wisdom and Power, when we make that an
Argument against the most Extraordinary, and most Miraculous Works of God,
which he makes an Argument for Faith and Expectation of them, as if he were
Tied by what he had done, to do no more, or had done all he could do; and
nothing to be Expected, but according to the Laws of Creation, and daily
providence and Leisurely Progresses, and not in those Immediate Effects of
Sudden Power; The great God argues differently, because those Works of his are
so great and so high; That therefore still so great and so high are to be
Expected; and that they should stand up so together, when he pleases.

And so we unwisely think, we very well argue, he that so Wonderfully and
Miraculously appeared in the First Times of the Gospel, has done all that he
will do, or thinks fit to be done, till the day of Judgment: But undoubtedly we
may better argue, he has much greater things to do, to make the very latter
times of the Gospel-Glory, as Illustrious as their very beginning, and entrance
was; Before his Kingdom, the Man of sin and Son of Perdition shall be Consumed
and utterly defaced; his Spirit shall be poured out; The Everlasting Gospel
shall be Preached; The Heathen shall come to the Lord from the Ends of the
Earth, and shall know his hand and his might, and that his Name is Jehovah; And
all Israel shall Turn to the Lord and be saved. For Strong is the Lord, who
shall do all these things.

Posit. 6. The Divine Prescience, and Wisdom has chosen and singled out a
Time, and decreed it for the Execucion of this Judgment, when Babylon shall
show it felf in it is Pride, in it is Pomp, it is Presumptive Security; For as,
has been said, it is when she shall say, I sit a Queen, and shall see no
sorrow, as Babylon of Old said; I shall be a Lady for ever, and shall know no
loss of Children.

All Scripture speaks of Sudden Destruction, when Men cry, Peace, Peace. It is
a Time when Men are High and Proud, and Haughty, that their Fall is near;
Nebuchadnezzar was laid hold on by Vengeance with those words in his Mouth; Is
not this Great Babylon, (from whence it had its Name in this Prophecy of the
Revelation, Dan. 4. C. 11.
Babylon the great;) The Great City, (said he) which I have built for the
Honor of the Kingdom by the Might of my Power, and for the Honor of my
Majesty. And while the word was in the Kings Mouth, the Judgment came upon him;
So while Belshazzar was in his Highest Jolity; Drinking Wine in Vessels of the
Temple; and Praising his Idols of Silver and of Gold; The Hand writing
appeared, and that Night he was slain.

Now it is certainly such a Time to Romish Babylon at this very day. The
Jubilee, especially the Centurial, is a Time, when she sits a Queen; is
espoused by the Princes, and is no Widow, when her Children gather about her;
the King of Poland so lately turned to her, and she thinks she can know no Loss
of Children; when she sits, as on a Throne, Dispensing Pardons and Indulgences,
And a time it is, when so Nebuchadnezzar-like a Prince is so Insolently
Vaunting, and so outragiously Persecuting, and Protestant Princes stand by, and
are so Tender of the Articles of their late Peace, as not to be at Liberty to
offer their Intercessions to the contrary.

Thus far I have settled the Great Positions concerning the Judgment upon
Babylon; To which I shall add to Corroborate what I have already laid down, and
to make way to the Remaining Part of the Discourse, these following
Observations.

Observe. 1. That together with the Judgment on Babylon, not when it begins; I
would not be so mistaken; but when it comes to it is Perfection and filling up;
There will be a concurrent Judgment upon the whole World of Wicked Men, the
World of the ungodly; the Time of the Dead will then be come, that they should
be Judged: The Judgments of C. 11. C. 15.
God will be made Manifest in all the Earth. Small and Great, Bond and Free,
are slain with the Sword C. 19. 20, etc.
that proceeds out of the Mouth of Christ, the word by which he Judges at
the last Day; In the Burnings of Babylon, the Cities of the Nations fall; The
Fire begins there and fpreads all over the Earth; Then will be the great
Earthquake and Hail, Cap. 16. Vlt. All these Expressions and many other are
made concurrent, with Great Babylon coming up in Remembrance before God, to
give her the Cup of his Fury; Now this ought to make greatly Remarquable to us
the Judgment upon Babylon.

Observe. 2. The Judgment of God upon Babylon is Celebrated with his Highest
Adorations, and Praises of his Servants; Showing at once the Highest Glory of
God, and the Happiness of his People in it: There were Loud Voices in Heaven,
of Praise; and, the Four and Twenty Elders fell down on their Faces, saying, We
Praise thee Oh Lord, who Art, who was, who Art to come; because then have taken
to thee thy Great Power, and have Reigned; Which is at Babylons being Judged:
For then is the Allelujah of the Lord C. 11.
God Omnipotent Reigning. Psalm. 149. Then is the Time C 19.
of the High Praises of God in the Mouths of his, of their Rejoicing in Glory;
Then do they sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God and of the Lamb, as we
find it at large; Then shall be the Four Courses of Alle^ujahs; C. 15. 3.
and all arising from Babylon, being Judged; that we have C. 19. 3. etc. And
then is the Glory of the New Jerusalem State coming down, as a Bride Adorned
for the Bridegroom.

Now then as the Eternal Judgment and the Allelujahs of Eternal Glory, and
Happiness are two so great points of Scripture Truth; So by these Scriptures,
the Judgment of Babylon is declared a Great and a high point of Scripture
Truth; Because with Cap. 21.
it are Complicated and Conserved the Truths of the Gospel, that have such a
Principality and Supremacy in it; and they are so Interwoven with it, that the
one cannot be Separated from the other; and the Judgment of Babylon ought
therefore to be most closely attended to, and not looked upon as a dark
Prophetical Truth, with which we have little to do; Let us then Humbly set our
selves, as Daniel of old, to search the Time in the Books of Prophecy, when
this Babylon, as that of old, is to be Judged; and the whole Consederacy of the
Enemies of the Kingdom and Servants of Christ, yea all both small and great
Wicked; And then the Glory of Christ and his Reign shall appear; And let us
have on to it with Earnestness of Prayer, Desire and Expectation of it.

Observe. 3. It is most undeniable, The Prophecies of Scripture have continually
given Numbers of Time, as when Laws and Times are given into the Hand of the
Little Horn, there is a Limitation of Time and Times and Half; when the Vision
of the daily Sacrifice was given for the taking it away, and the C. 7.
Treading it under Foot; There is a Time assigned from the very First Date of
the Vision to the Time of C. 8.
Justifying the Sanctuary, even 23000. Eves Morns, When the Question was unto,
how long the End of the Wonders; There is a Threefold Account of c. 12.
Time; Time, Times, Half a Time; 1290. Days and 1335 Days; In the Revel. C.
11. On the Gentiles coming into the Outer Court There are Forty Two Moons
Dererminate; and to the Counter Prophecy of the Witnesses 1260 Days; Three
Days, and a Half of the Witnesses lying Dead in the Street of the Great City;
1260 Days of the Church in the Wilderness, and Concurrent Three Times, and a
Half; Forty two Moons of the Beasts continuated Supremacy; And the Number of
the Beast; 666 with a General Rule, and a Solemn Elogium of the Wisdom of
Counting; Here is Wisdom; Let him, that has it Calculate, as the word properly
signifies: And I say it is a General Rule, There is the Same, or a Parity of
Reason to Count throughout; And there are the same difficulties to be overcome;
For who indeed can once suppose, the Blessed Spirit of Wisdom, the Spirit of
Truth Leading into all Truth, the Spirit showing Things to come, would have
given in the Scriptures of Truth, which we are Commanded to Search, and in the
sure word of the Prophecy; to which we are Commanded to give Heed as to a
Light, that Shines in a Dark Place; would have given these Numbers of Time, if
he had not intended they should be understood, and guided our Hopes and Prayers
to the Time of his Kingdom.

Observe. 4. The Time of Babylon, or Rome Judged is the Time of the Papacy going
into Perdition; The Time of the Papacy going into Perdition is the Time of Rome
Judged; For as the City and the Beast have been shown to be Inseparable; If the
one be Roman, So must the other be also; so are they also, as to the Time of
their being Judged: Herein they are Inseparable, when the one is Judged, So
must the other also be.

Observe. 5. That the Time of the Judgment of the City and of the Beast, that
carried her, must needs be very near, as will appear by that Account of Time, I
shall now present upon such Prophetical Grounds, as I hope, I cannot be
mistaken in.

Observe. 6. These Numbers all considered, and Adiusted one to another, Reach
down to Sixteen Hundred Ninety Seven of Vulgar account; and so as I have (in
another Discourse) even to Demonstration made out; That from Solomon's Death to
the very Glory of the Kingdom of Christ; There lie in a due Series, and
Connection of these Numbers, 2730 Years, and in a most Exact Succession of an
182 Indictions or Fifteens of Years; of which Eighty Four make the Just; Time,
Times, and Half Time, ending at 97: This with many other Assurances, especially
of the coming to pass of Events according to the Prophetic Figures, and the
Times settled for them, so exactly agreeing, show that Year, as the Year fixed
for the Commencing from it of the happy Revolution of the Kingdom of Christ; I
have in many Discourses affirmed this, and find no Reason to Retract it.

That, which will, I know, with all Severity be objected against it, is, That
things have not come to pass according to Prediction and Expectation at that
Year; And from thence will be enforced, That It is Presumption to enquire into
Prophetic Time, or to make any Determination upon it; I will therefore
endeavor to show; It is not Presumption, but a Duty to Enquire, what, or what
manner of Time, The Spirit of Christ in his Prophecys, has signified;
Notwithstanding whatever, can be Agravated against mistake: And that it is
better to search, notwithstanding mistake, then by Neglecting to search, to
think to be secure from mistake; And then in the Second Place I shall apply my
self to show, how the mistake is from Prophecy to be explained and set Right,
and yet Ninety Seven to be Vindicated, as the Great Prophetic Year.

For the first, That it is not a Presumption, nor Daring to C. 49. 19. Jerem.
C. 50, 44.
Appoint God a Time, or to stand, as a Shepherd, or Governor of Time before
him: But Duty to search Scripture throughout, even to the Prophetical Numbers
given us therein. It is not for us indeed to know the Times and Seasons, God
has set in his own Power; Yet to use all means, even by Books to understand,
what ever God has been pleased to give so far out of the Peculiar of his own
Prerogative, as to Reveal, though in Mystic Numbers; when he has been pleased
to Reveal, Things, They then belong to us: And He that has a Mind and Wisdom,
has an Obligation by Command to Count; and our Lord charges it as Sinful Rev.
13. 18.
Hipocrisy, not to search, Discern those either Prophetic or Moral Signs of the
Times: And I cannot find what can be said against the Commendation, the Apostle
gives to them, who give heed to the sure word of Prophecy, as to a Light, that
Shines in a Dark Place. Nor can I see;

Why it should be looked on as an Offense, that is placed as a Character of
Honor on the Sons of Issachar, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.
that they had understanding in the Times, which they attained undoubtedly by
enquiry into and Meditation upon any Oracles, God had been pleased in those
Times to vouchsafe: Daniel thought it no Presumption to enquire further of the
End of Wonders, when he understood not what was first Revealed; The C. 12.
account of the 1290, and of the 1335 Days to the very Blessed State was then
given to him, not so much for himself, who was to go his way to Rest until that
End, but for us the People of God in every Age.

What can then be objected against Searching into the Mysteriousness of those
Numbers? and what may be from the difficulty of Interpretation Argued? The very
same may be objected against searching into any of the (...) of Scripture, as
the Apostle Peter calls them, or the (...), as The Apostle Paul Styles them,
Things hard to be understood, Interpreted; and so we should be Confined only to
the most plain Scriptures, and of most Indisputable Interpretation; whereas the
Apostle Resolved to Leave the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, as well
secured; And to go on to Perfection in search after the more Retired Truths of
the word of God, as concerning Melchisedeec the Type of Christ, though hard to
be Interpreted. Heb. 5. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 16.

To the Objections Arising from the Danger, and mischief of mistakes; It may be
very well Answered by the due Consideration; That in very many things without
Error in the main Points, we Darken Counsel by words without Knowledge; And if
the mistakes in Job. 38. 2.
the most Eminent and Learned Servants of Christ, in Interpretation of
Scripture and Explication of Extra-Fundamental Points, most Inoffensively to
Substantiali Principles, were as Visible, as mistakes in Computation of
Prophetic Time, we might, if mistake were a Valuable Reason, be Discouraged
from Researches, either into Scripture Exposition, or the Truths of it, any
further then in those most undoubted Points, wherein all Holy Good Men agree.

It is True, Prophetic mistakes are, as I may say, surviving, and still in the
Eyes of Men; whereas the mistakes of the other sort, are, as they say of the
Errors of Physicians, under Ground and out of Sight: Yet in themselves no more;
or Less Culpable; being useful for the showing the Weakness and Fallibility of
Humane Understanding, wherein it is not under the most certain Conducts of
Truth.

And as in other Cases, Variety of Sentiments, and Enquiries show the undoubted
Excellency of Divine Truth; And Search into the word of God speaks it the
Greatest Business and Exercise of Understanding; And is like the Running to and
fro, whereby knowledge is Increased; whereas on the other hand a Kind Dan. 12. 4.
of Resolved sullen Neglect, in General brings forth Ignorance, and Stupidity;
and either a Superstitious Dread of Intermeddling with Divine Things, if some
what Removed from Common Catechism, or an Irreligious Carelessness; And in
particular, In Prophetic Points of Time, this kind of Reserving our selves from
all the search, we can make, is, as if God had given such parts of his word to
be only a Sealed Book; or the Cruces, the Torment of all search and enquiry
into them; or that we were Profanely Careless, How Things are to be according
to Prophecy with the Church of God, and with the Kingdom of Christ; or how the
many and Great Predictions of Scripture, and of the Spirit of God by the
Prophets, are to be Fullfill'd; But much Light, Knowledge, and awakenedness
concerning them comes in by search; and from hence also proceeds Light, when we
may humbly expect the Fulfilling of them, and thereby Faith, Hope, and Prayer
be excited amongst the Servants of Christ, arising from the Elaborate Treaties
of those, whose Hearts God has engaged to Separate themselves to Intermeddle
with this Wisdom, and Armed with Courage to bear the Reproaches of Men, upon
their being mistaken in openly Declaring and Publishing, what they have Found;
And then this opens a way to Paraeus. Napier. Brightman. Mede Goodwin. Moor,
Jurieu.
further enquiries of themselves, or those, who may arise after them, for the
setting Right in those mistakes. For so God has been pleased by many Servants
of his to make advances further and further, till the Day Dawn and the Day
Starr Arise in the very Hearts of all his Servants.

Nor can any one show, why mistakes in these Prophetical Enquiryes should tend
to Atheism, but quite the contrary; even as Different Apprehensions upon
Faithful and Diligent searching into other points do highly assure the main
Foundation. Nor do I find mistakes Springing from Faithful Endeavors, and
sincere Designs for the Truth, Glory, and Kingdom of God, although Clouded with
Infirmity, and our knowing but in Part, and Prophesying in Part, are through
Grace in the Mediator Displeasing to him, equally as Ignorance, Negligence, and
Gallio-like, not caring for any of these things; The Evils of the present
Sardian State, and even of the Angel or Ministry of it; That they do not search
with More United Enquiries; That they might, as the Watchmen of Sion see Essay
52. 8.
Eye to Eye, and lift up their Voices concerning these things.

There is a Great Instance of a Prophetic mistake, 2 Samuel c. 7.
and yet we find no Censure fixed by the Spirit of God upon it, where David
Discoursed with Nathan the Prophet concerning Building God a House; He spoke as
a Prophet; Go, and do all, that is in thy Heart; For the Lord is with thee,
undoubtedly he understood by Scripture Oracles Gods choice of the Tribe of
Judah and his Intention of Building a Sanctuary, like the most High and Loughty
Buildings, and of that Firmness to be like the Earth Estblished for ever: And
therefore Collected; It was to be Built by David; Whereas, it is plain God had
Determined, it should be Built by Solomon the Son of David: He was Right 2 Samuel
c. 7.
in the main, but Erred in the Person, that was to be the Builder; But we find
no severe Rebuke or Reproof; Only God is pleased to set him Right by his word
coming to him that Night, and Instructing him concerning Solomon. I have humble
hopes, that what may appear mistake in the very Circumstance of the Year 97, is
Yet Right in the Essential Matter of a very near Time to be United with it;
And, that what he has been pleased to Enlighten me into in his word, shall set
it Right; While I with great Humility and Modesty, and not with too Great a
Positiveness or Presumption of Assurance, but Submission to the Supreme
Governor of the World, and Lord of Time, as to his Dominion over all, so to his
Wisdom and Prudence in his Sure Word of Prophecy, Declare, what I find.

For the Vindicating the Year 1697 to be the Great Year, where the Scripture
Prophetic Line Centers for the End of the Times and Half; of the 1260 Years of
the Sackcloth, and the Wilderness State; of the Forty two Moons of the
Gentiles, and of the Beast: and yet that the great Effects of that Time did not
appear I shall lay down this Position, as the Foundation of what is to Follow;
The Great Effects to be Expected at the End of the Forementioned Times Position.
are to be by a Supreme Ordination of God, Transferred from Ninety Seven, and
are to be Humbly Expected at the End of Three Years, and a Half after the End
of Ninety Seven, viz. at 1700.

But in the first place, that I may clear the sense of this Position; It must
be considered; That Prophecy does not Reckon the Beginning and End of Years
either according to the Sacred Israelitish Account, in the Vernal Equinox; or
at our Vernal Equinox, which we call March 10th or 25. Nor at what we call
January 1. But according to the Beginning of the Civil, Jewish, Year at the
Autumnall Equinox: Of which we have an Unexceptionable proof; In, that The
Sabbatizing Sacrifice and Oflering, by the offering Dan. 9. 27.
once for all of the Lord Jesus Christ, is Fixed in the Middle of the last of
Daniel's Seventy Weeks, so Universally allowed to be Weeks of Years by All; The
Time of which Offering must needs be (as All agree) at the Vernal Equinox;
which was indeed made the Beginning of the Sacred Year, but not of the Civil
Year; For then was the Time of the Jewish Passover: If then the Vernal Equinox
was the Middle, or Half of the Week of Years, it must needs be the Half or
Middle of the Fourth Year, whose Beginning and Ending can be no other than the
Autumnal Equinox; to which Two Extremes ^he Vernal is the Half, or Middle
Point. And the Reason of Prophecy so accounting by the Civil Jewish Year, is
very plain; For that it should be some Account of Time, according to the Usual
Computations of the People of God, is most agreeable; because To them were
committed The Oracles of God; And seeing these Prophecies have Respect to the
Monarchic Periods; Therefore that which concerned the Sacred Constitutions was
not so Congruous to Civil, and especially to Pagan Dominions most intended: Let
us then account from the Autumnal Equinox 97, to the same 98, we have One Year;
to the same 99, Two Years; to the same 1700, Three Years; and from thence to
the Vernal Equinox of 1700, ending at 1701, according to the Computation of the
Years so Beglnning, as we speak in the Church of England; and we have the Three
Years and a Half, at or before the End of which I have most Humble Hopes,
through Grace, there shall be such Assurance from the Great Effects, that we
shall not doubt, the Year 1697, United with the Year 1700, is the very Time
Prophecy has set so Great Remarks upon, as the Time for the High Changes, and
Revolutions, God will please to make in the World.

Now if the Lord please, upon the Foundation of these Propositions, to Direct
his most Unworthy Servant, that has Reason to be Humbled and Abased, in Regard
of the Failure of the Great Expectation at 1697. and yet to show him, how the
Great, and Complete Effects then Expected, and that That Year made some
Offertures of Themselves, may be Transferred to this present Year of Jubilee,
1700, as a Year so Remarkable by the Providential Ordination of the Jubilee
upon it; a Time to which Prophecy so Points; without any Dishonor to 97, or
Injury to Prophecy. And that I may, without Just Imputation of Presumption,
Humbly Present that Fair Collineation of Prophecy, together with the Plain,
Undeniable Encouragement of the Text, I am upon, to stir up the Earnest
Prayers, and Humble Waitings of All his Servants, Loving and Looking for his
Kingdom; to see what God will please to do this Year; Oh how Great will his
Goodness be herein! and beyond this I will not dare. And if the Lord be pleased
to Honor this Enquiry with his Great Works,

I will therefore propose these Six Heads to insist upon, in order to so Great
Ends.

1. I will consider what is to be said concerning Ninety Seven, with Relation
to the Great Events I have assigned to it.

2. I will show, that there are Reserves in Prophecy, in some Cases, within it
self, of some further Time, that shall lie within the most Known, Noted and
Expected Time; and though it Reach out beyond it, it is yet United, as One Time
with it; and so it will be found in the Times now before us.

3. This shall be Endeavored to be made out, That in such a Case there may be
found in Prophecy a Curious Artifice, or Contrivance of the Divine Spirit of
it, that there shall be an Equipoize of it, that may without Injury to it, be
inclined the one way, or the other, by the Hand of Interpretation: And though
that Blessed Spirit, the Author of Prophecy, most Certainly Fore knew to which
it would be by Providence Determined; yet without Immediate Revelation from
Himself, no Humane Understanding could Determine. All which shall be
particularly shown in this Instance between 97 and 1700.

4. I shall observe with Scripture-Authority, That when there is a Delay of
Events, and Effects of Mercy, beyond the Principal Time, most Openly held out
in Prophecy, it is called Infraction, or Breach of Promise: And when Providence
Retracts what it had Begun, and given some Essays of, It is called Abruption,
or Breaking off what was so Begun; And That, Sin is the Demeritorious Cause in
Both These Cases, and herein also a particular Application to the present Case
shall be endeavored.

5. That the Certain Determination of a Time Accessory, and in Delay of the
Principal Time, is in neither made doubtful, or Uncertain; but it carries the
more Forcible Assurances from the Delay, upon that further Time. And this is
also Reduced to the present Case.

6. That the Closest Enquiries into these Things, according to the Word of God,
is on no True Account of the Matter, a Blameworthy Presumption, but encouraged
by Scripture.

Head 1 st. With Relation to Ninety Seven Past, I must take the Humble Boldness
to say, I have made a Review upon my whole Prophetic Scheme, Backward and
Forward; and considered the mutual Respects to, and Configurations of Prophecy,
one with another; and their Just Spaces of Time; and could find nothing that
should shake my Assurance, but had it much more Confirmed by that Plerophory,
or Full Assurance of Understanding; arising from the whole Prophetic Line,
being from Solomon's Death compacted under that Chronologic Period of
Indictions, or Fifteens of Years, (as I have most Fully in a Discourse on that
Subject, made to appear), even to the End of the 1335 Days, or the Blessed
Time: So that I cannot remove from Ninety Seven, as that Central part of Time
in the Prophetic Line, without distrusting the Truth of Human Faculties, and
even Arithmetic Demonstration.

But being very well Aware of this Great Pressure upon me, That seeing the
great Effects I expected at that Time, did not appear; It must necessarily be
inferred; That either the word of Prophecy, (which is to be abhorred) is not
sure; Or that Ninety Seven is not the Time, Prophecy has Directed us upon; For
it cannot be the Time, if it be not Illustrious with those mighty Events, as
the Great Effects of Vision.

On this therefore I most Humbly besought the Lord, that he would clear this
Difficulty to me; concerning which I cannot but have Greatest Searchings of
Spirit and Thoughts of Heart; And it has pleased Him, and does still please
him to Impress much on my Thoughts; That the Three Days and a Half Assigned to
the Witnesses Lying Dead in the Streets of the Great City, Should according to
the Prophetic Standard be, as Three Years and a Half laid to Ninety Seven; And
then shall those Mighty Works expected show forth themselves.

But that this may not appear Fancyful or Enthusiastic, I am obliged to turn my
self every way to the Law and to the Testimony; As the Prophets Searched (no
doubt) throughout the Sacred Records to find; What, or what manner of Time, The
Spirit of Christ 1 Pet. 1.
which was in them, did signify; So that I may find, How these Three Days and a
Half may be so added to 97, as to be Consonant, and Agreeable with Scripture;
and Prophetic Measures; and particularly how it may be Reconciled with what I
have Found, and can yet find no Reason to Retract, concerning 97.

Head. 2. I will come therefore to show; That there are Reserves of Prophecy in
some Cases within itself; and that it sets a further Time, when it has First
set any Time more open, and in view; and that further Time Reaches out beyond
it; It is yet but as one Time United with it; And so it will be found in the
Time now before us. Concerning two such Times United, as into one; I would set
in full, and open view to Run on every occasion into Consideration, these Rules
to Judge of them by, which have been already Intimated.

1. The Principal Time is held out more clearly and openly; The other by way of
Reserve is given; as a Mantissa or Surplusage, or as an Epitome or Recollection
of that Time; and cannot be found but by closest Attention to what has been
before Revealed; Or by New Revelation.

2. When such a Reserved Time is, the Principal, Primary, Determined Time is
not Removed from its Dignity. But it is always Decorated, or Graced with
offertures of some very Great Events, And though the further Reserved Time is
made most Illustrious with the whole Constellation of Events, yet that
Surplusage or Consummation of Time Rests upon the Principal, as its Basis and
Foundation both for Time, and also for those Great Events. Dan. 12. 4.


3. When such a Reserved Time is, it is Generally a very short Time, with
Relation to the Time that went before that Principal Time, and was to End in it.

4. When this Reserved Time is Expired, God is pleased so to order; It shall
never be Transcended or Exceeded, but the whole of Events designed shall be
Completed at it.

5. This lengthning out Principal Time by such a Reserve, or Mantissa of Time,
it is either in a way of Wisdom and Goodness for Gracious Reasons toward his
Churches; Or it is in Justice and Displeasure against the undue, and unsuitable
Frame and State of his People to such Mercies, as that Time designed should
have brought forth.

6. When it is in a way of Displeasure, It is Expressed by a word, that Imports
Infraction, or Violation, or as in our Translation, My (i. e. Gods) Breach of
promise, Numb. 14. 34. The same word signifies Abruption or breaking off the
even Contexture of Events begun; All which have been mentioned already.

I will now, according to these Rules, discourse this Head. But that I may do
it with Greater Clearness, I find it most advantageous to show, that in the Two
Last Rules, the various Instances of Reserved Times in Scripture, are
Deposited, viz. Reserves of Time in a way of Goodness, and Mercy; and in a way
of Displeasure, and Breach of Promise.

Of these Two Reservings of Time, being the only Kinds, viz. Mercy, or
Displeasure;

I will first give an Instance of God's Dispensations in a way of Goodness,
Grace and Mercy, in such a Reserve of Time.

The Death and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, was that very Fullness of
Time, that very To Day of his being Gal. 4. 4.
made Known the only Begotten Son, and for our Lords Entering into his Glory.
All Power in Heaven and Earth Psalm. 3.
was Given to Him, for his Spiritual Kingdom, which He then Received, and for
the pouring out of his Spirit; Then he Received the Sealed Book of all disposes
over the Kingdoms of this World. Rev. 5.


And yet there were Forty Days Surplusage of Time from the Resurrection of
Christ to his Ascension; And Fifty Days from his Death to the giving the
Spirit: Now the Death of Christ was plainly Foretold in the Middle of the Last
Week; And then he could not be Holden of Death, but must Rise again the Third
Day according to the Scriptures: But that he should continue with his Disciples
so long, and that from his Death Fifty Days should be made up to the Giving of
the Spirit was not so plainly Revealed. Indeed if we could have laid our
thoughts before, or now closely, consider the Distance of Time between the two
Feasts of the Passover, and Pentecost or the Feast of Weeks; and that the
Antitype must Answer the Type; we might find some Ombrage of it; But it was so
obscure, as hardly to be Traced till Revealed in the History of the Event,
though, so prefigur'd at such a D^stance. Now this was in Mercy; That our Lord
Christ might give those many, and Infallible Proofs of his Resurrection, and
speak to his Apostles, whom he had chosen, of the Things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God. But the Effect of Vision was herein much Lower, then in his
sitting down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on high in the Heavens, and his
making Intercession for us. So the most Glorious Effects were not till such a
Time after, yet still the Principal Time was not Removed from its Dignity; For
the Death and Resurrection in that most Eminent Period of Time, the Half Week,
Remains the very Base of the Forty Days; and to all After-Time, the very Hinge
on which it turns, till it shall come to the Fullness of All Times, the Kingdom
of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 10. And as this was but such a short Time, so it did but
sum up, and Recollect the Glorious Ministry of our Lord Jesus, and could not
be exceeded.

In the way of Judgment, I give a Second Instance; The very self same Night of
the 430 Years, Inclusive, of the 400 Years assigned to Abraham, Gen: 15. had
indeed the Great Event of the Going out of Egypt; yet that Glorious
Constellation of Events, Bringing into the Land of Promise, and Casting out the
Nations, was not performed till Forty Years after. This was indeed no way, that
we Know now, to have been found, but by God's so Immediate Revelation of Forty
Days Prophetically given, a Day for a Year: It was but a short Time, compared
with the 430 Years; And it could not be Transcended: The Certainty of the
Highest Complement of the Great Promise Fullfill'd, was there to Begin: And the
Forty Days of Years was but a Surplusage of Time, and a Recollection, and
Summing up of the Sojourning State of the 430 Years.

But that which I have especially to Remark upon it, is, That it was in the way
of Infraction of Promise, and Abruption of that Contexture, or God's Breaking
off from what he had begun to do in the Deliverance out of Egypt, signified by
that Hebrew Word, so Emphatic hereof, Numb. 14. 34, (...)


But yet this very End of the 430 Years Remained the Foundation of the Time
following after, and was not moved from its Dignity; For the passing through
the Red Sea, and Pharoah's Overthrow in it, the Victory over Amal^k; the
Nomothesia, or the Giving of the Law, the Rearing of the Tabernacle, Rested All
on this Time, and its Great Event; and the Forty Years are dated from it; which
were else but Thirty Eight Years from the Ill Report of the Spies, to the Entry
upon Canan; and the Ending of the Following Course of Time, to Solomon's so
Resplendent Reign; and the Building of the Temple is Dated from it; 480 Years,
1 Kings 6. 1. Even from the Going out of Egypt. And this Instance is the more
Remarkable; Because although this Time was Known to, and Resolved of God as
before, as all his Works, from the Foundation of the World; Yet it comes in by
way of Infraction of Promise; and it broke off the Contexture of Great
Deliverances: It is Given so in Prophetic Language therefore, a Day for a Year,
as in our present Prophecy, we are upon, and was upon the Account of
Provocation, and unsuitable Frame to Deliverances; and the End of this
Surplusage of Time touches the Entering into the Land of Promise, the Type of
the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

Another Instance of this Kind may be; The Seventy Years of the Babylonish
Captivity had their most Known and Celebrated Period in the First Year of
Cyrus, as the Universal Monarch in the Second of the Four Kingdoms, the Persian
Kingdom; we find therefore his Proclamation Twice Recorded in Scripture, viz.
in the End of the Second Book of Chronicles, and in the Beginning of the Book
of Ezra: But here was not the Complement of Effects; The Spirit of God Gives
Account of several stops and stays, till the very Seventh Year of Artaxerxes,
There the word of Restoring Judah and Jerusalem had its full going forth; It
was all yet, as one United Time of the Words going forth to Restore and to
Build Jerusalem. It began in the Decree, First of Cyrus, then of Darius, then
of Artaxerxes King of Persia. Ezr. 6. 14. which so full decree of Artaxerxes we
have C. 7. 12. etc. This he makes as Successor to Cyrus in that Monarchy, and
of which Nebuchadnezzar was the Golden Head; viz. of the Four Universal
Kingdoms; and so styles himself King of Kings; Now here Great Abruption had
been from what God begun in Cyrus. So that the work was stayed to the Second
Year of Darius. Ezr. 6th 24. Then another Seventy Years had slid in, Recorded
by Zachariah. C. 1. 12. Which had their Epoch or beginning as may be Computed
from Nebuchadnezzars 23 d Year. Jerem. 50. 30. At the last Captivation. And
here the Provocation was, as may be Collected from the Holy Writers at that
Time; the unwillingness of the Jews to Leave their Babylonish Plantations; And
those who did go up to Judah, neglected the House of God to Hag. 1. 4. Zech. 2.
6.
Build their own Ceiled Houses.

The Great Delay of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ due to him at his
Resurrection, is so Transcendental to all other Cases; and for which delay
Vision and Prophecy was sealed at his Death, until the very Time we are now
waiting for; I do not undertake to Insist upon at this Time; being so ordained
by the Father, and by the Mediator for Holy and Wisest Reasons too large for
the present.

Now in these Reserved Times they are so given in Prophecy; That they might
wholly have United with the Principal Times beginning and ending together; but
when they by the Event Run out beyond such Principal Times, It then appears
they were so Designed by Prophecy to do. And when they are in Judgment; They
seem, as it were to Usurp upon the Time immediately following Those Principal
Times; As the Forty Years in the Wilderness, Invaded so much Time of enjoying
Canaan before the Reigns of David and Solomon, Abridging and cutting it 40
Years shorter: In The stay of the Building, and Restoring the House of God from
Cyrus to Darius, and the full Restoration not made till Artaxerxes's Seventh
Year, The following Time of enjoying that Restored State was so much
Decurtated, Abbreviated, and Retrenched.

When such a Delay is in Mercy, as in our Lords stay upon the Earth beyond his
Resurrection; The Time following the Principal Time, as the Forty Days of
Christ with His, is Enriched with Great Appearances of the Bridegroom not taken
from the Children of the Bride Chamber; And yet it was a Delay of Christ's
Appearance in Heaven, and of the Spirit poured out.

I look upon these Instances as full Proof, That there are such Mantissa's, or
Surplusages, such Recollections, or Epitomes of Reserved Time, beyond the most
Noted and Principal Times, before which the high Events may not be Completed,
but then most certainly shall; I shall now in the following Heads apply my self
to Ninety Seven; whose Great Events have not yet been filled up.

Head. 3 d. I come therefore to the Third Head; And most particularly to show
the Curious Artifice, and Contrivance of the Divine Spirit in the so giving the
Times, and Half in the 1260 Days; That there may be a Reserved Time, and under
such an Equipoize of Interpretation; that the Reserved Time may be drawn up
into, and within the Principal Time; Or may be extended beyond it into some
further Time, and no Determination, but by the Providential Event.

The Time, that may be Reserved, and Extended beyond the 1260 Days, I have
already assigned to be the Three Days of Years and a Half; The end of which
shall have the whole Constellation of Events, Transferred from the End, or
Period of the 1260 Days upon it self; viz. from 1697 to 1700, As on purpose to
Fulfill; I trust; the word of the Lord; That what Time Babylon says, I sit a
Queen, her Plagues should begin to come in one Day. And herein I cannot but
hope, The Beauty and Symmetry of Prophecy shall be seen between 97, as the
Principal Time; and the Three Years and a Half as the Recollectionary Time
ending with the Jubilee 1700; To this very great purpose I lay down the
following Scheme of Prophecy concerning this Point, as in its Equipoize between
97, and 1700.

1. The first thing I observe herein is; That after the Great High Priest, and
Apostle of our Profession; The Man Clothed in Linen, had given in Answer to
the Angels, who asked, How Long to the End of these Wonders? Dan. 12. 5. etc.
That there should be a Delay of Finishing for Time, and Times, and a Half. He
also added; when He (i. e. the Scatterer) shall have accomplished to scatter
the Power of the Holy People; All These (viz. Wonders) shall be Finished.
Daniel complains, He heard, but he understood not. Now it is true, the Prophets
did not understand the Particularities of All that was Revealed to them
concerning Time; but were left to search, what, or what manner of Time, the
Spirit of Christ, which was 1 Pet. 1.
in them, did signify: Yet even their Doubts, Recorded in Scripture, were
under Divine Inspiration, and are so ordered, as to give Occasion to Further
Revelation; But Time, Times, and Half, were Revealed to Daniel before, to be
given to the Little Horn, to wear out the C. 7.
Saints of the Most High, which was the same thing with scattering the Hand of
the Holy People: That then needed not a New Repetition: The Thing therefore he
understood not, was, What Time the Accomplishing to scatter might take up.

He Appeals therefore to his Lord, and our Lord; My Lord (says he) what shall
the End of These (i. e.) Wonders be? His Question is directed upon the very
Point he understood not; and Receives Answer in Three Particulars:

1. That there will be a Closedness, and a Seal of Secrecy, set upon the
Determinate Time of Wonders Finishing, viz. till the Event determines it; The
Seal on the Foreheads of the Servants of God, Remains till the End; and till
the End, or very Accomplishing to scatter, They cannot be distinctly known; For
till then the Witnesses appear not Vnseal'd, or with the Father's Name writ on
their Foreheads, in a Risen State, on Mount Zion.

2. It is Given as a Diagnostic, or distinct Note of the Time between the End
of the Times and Half, or the 1260 Days, and the Time of Accomplishing to
scatter; Many shall be Purified, and made White, and Tried; which we may very
well understand of those they call, The New Converts, or the Reunited; who
have since been made White by Repentance, and Purifying Grace; who have been
made Wise, by Remembering what they had Received, and Heard of the
Gospel-Purity, and Returned to it, coming a new out of Babylon; while
Persecutors will not understand, but do more and more wickedly, Persecuting and
Scattering, till the Utmost End and Accomplishment of Scattering.

3. The Great Palmoni, or Wonderful Numberer of Time, insensibly, and yet as in
Answer to Daniel's Question, gives a further Delineation of Time in Thirty
Days, added to the 1260, making them 1290; under an Epoch, or Beginning,
Uncharacterized with the Taking away the Daily, viz. Sacrifice, and the
Abomination, that makes Desolate, set up; which I look upon, most Undoubtedly,
to be argued to be the Antichristian Apostasy, by the Papal Gentiles Entering
into the Outer Court, and so Taking away the Truly Christian Worship.

And to these Thirty of the 1260, are added Forty Five, making the 1290 1335.
Reaching to the very Blessed State of the New Jerusalem, in which Daniel is
assured a Lot: and, in the mean time to rest his Further Enquiries, and Himself
to Rest in Spirit with Christ; and his Body in the Grave.

Now then seeing these Thirty are added to the Times and Half, which the Spirit
of Prophecy has Expounded into 1260 Days of Years; And that there can be no
Time between the Times and Half, and Finishing, by the Express Word; except the
space of Accomplishing to Scatter; and that the same Spirit of Prophecy has
given no other, so much as supposeable space, but the Three Days of Years, and
a Half; Either those Three Days and a Half must be supposed to Unite with the
Three Times and Half, and to be One with them; or they must Extend themselves
upon the Thirty, and be the First Three Days of Years and a Half of them; For
they cannot lie between them, as a part of Neither: If so, either the 1260 must
be 1263, and a Half; or the 1290 must be 1293 and a Half; Either of which is
very contrary to Prophecy, which is most express in each; viz. Times and Half,
or 1260 Days; and 1260, with Thirty added, 1290 Days, and no more of Either.
Now here is the Equipoize of Prophecy: It could not be Determined before the
Event, whether the Accomplishing to Scatter might Unite with Time Times, Half
Time, as the last scattering; Or go further within the 30. But the Event has
Determined, The Three Years and Half Extend upon the First Three Years and a
Half of the Thirty, making 1260 1290. And the Curious Artifice of Prophecy is
herein seen; For thus the 1260 and 1290 are joined in the Taking away the Daily
by those Three Years, and Half being the Accomplishing to Scatter, and so
carrying the wearing out of the Saints so much further then the Times, and
Half, or 1260 Years; even unto the 3 Years and Half, First of the 30; and then
their Remainder Unites with the last 45 in Finishing; For as I have shown,
there can be no Distance between in the 1335 of Scattering and Finishing. And
the whole 1335 are Joined, as leading by various Delays and Appearances, since
especially the last Half Time of the Reformation; to the Kingdom of Christ. And
this is an Artifice of the Divine Hand of Scripture most Curious and Admirable.
And the same both Equipoize and Artifice, are also most Conspicuous in the 1260
Days of Years, and the Three Days and Half of Tears, Rev. 11. These 3 Days and
Half Hold the only Possible Addition of Time beyond the 1260 Days, or Three
Times and a Half for Accomplishing to Scatter; For we find no other Measured
space of Time Mentioned either in Daniel, or the Revelation, that can be so
much as supposed to lie at the End of the 1260 Days, and before the Seventh
Trumpet, Except these Days and Half alone; But these with all Harmony and
Symmetry of Prophecy, are Placed there; For they are Situated near to the 1260
Days to give a Mantissa, or Surplusage of Time to them, for the Accomplishing
the Scattering and wearing out the Holy People, that had been During their
whole Space; And they must be as near the Seventh Trumpet, because the Holy
Spirit is Express; Immediately upon the Accomplishing to Scatter, The Wonders
shall be Finished; And he is as Express, The Seventh Trumpet is the Trumpet of
Finishing; For when the Seventh Angel begins to sound, The Mystery of God shall
be Finished, as he has Evangeliz'd by all his Servants, the Prophets. Thus as
in Daniel, The Accomplishing Revel. 10.
to Scatter lies between the Times and Half of Weaing out the Saints, and the
Finishing Wonders; So in the Revelation, the Three Days and Half lie between
the 1260 Days of the Sackcloth Prophecy (which are also Three Times and a
Half,) and th^^e Seventh Trumpet of Finishing; And they must be One either with
the 1260 or with the First of those Thirty making 1260, 1290; Or else they
could have no Room; For the Divine Spirit Clasping 1260 so close, as to make it
immediately 1290; There can come in no Three Years and a Half possibly between,
that is not United with one of the Numbers; Which is even Arithmetic
Demonstration.

But now as to the Equipoize of Prophecy; It must be Acknowledged, that before
the Event Determined the contrary, the Three Days and Half might have been
Intended to be Incorporated with the 1260 Days of the Sackcloth Prophecy, and
the Beasts Victory over the Witnesses; answering to the Three Times and a Half
of the 1260 Days of the Church in the Wilderness; The Witnesses and the Woman
being one; and the Sackcloth, Being Overcome, Killed, worn out, Scattered, the
Wilderness State being one, as to the main Intention also; Only the Deepest
Time of Sufferings expressed by one more then the other; and so the Three Days
and Half; the Three Times and Half, the two 1260 Days had been all one Time,
and had begun and ended together. And I must Ereely, and Humbly Confess, This
was my Apprehension, and my hope it would be so, although I had always a
Jealous Eye upon these three Days and Half. But nothing but Event could
Determine to the other side, The Balance of Prophecy stands so even concerning
the Case; And indeed if Ninety Seven, as I affirm, and see no Reason to
Retract, be the end of the 1260 Days; It must needs be, that when the Three
Days and Half have done the Service of Three Times and a Half, Coequal with the
whole 1260 Days, and pointing to a deepest Time of Suffering, and so
Pararelling one another; The latter then do the Service of an Epitome, a
Mantissa, a Recollection of the whole, and Run so far as upon the Three First
Years and Half of the Thirty, which Thirty, are Principally for Finishing; And
though they suffer the Cloud of the Witnesses Summed up Scattering, Yet they
are Recompensed with the Glory of the Constellation of Great and Illustrious
Events at their Rising; Now the Three Days and Half doing this Manifold
Service, and bearing this variety of Aspects, is most usual in Scriptures
Improvement of its Types, so that I need not Insist further on it.

I will give only one Instance in a Case of near Affinity with this; The Three
Hundred Ninety Years C. 4.
of Ezekiels Bearing the Iniquity of the House of Israel, gave the very
Chronological space from the Death of Solomon to Ezekiels Temple; It first set
out the Sin of the House of Israel in the Ten Tribes making Defection from the
House of David; and then turns, as it were back, and settles the standard of
Prophetic Time a Day for a Year, as an Epitomizing of Prophetic Time to the
very End.

To Sum up this Point of Discourse then, I look upon the End of the Times and
Half, or 1260 Days of Years, as the most Unmovable Rest of the Three Years and
Half; And that, They are but as a Summary and Recollection of them, or a little
Surplusage added to them; And that the 1260 Ended at 97. And, That Ninety Seven
began in the Autumnal Equinox, of what we Generally Count 98 but in the
Prophetic Calendar; 97 Just Ending; I therefore as before, so now again give
the Account from 97 and to Ninety Eight in the same Prophetic Style one Year;
To 99 is Two Years; To 1700 still in the same Prophetic Style is Three Years,
viz. at each Autumnal Equinox; and at the Vernal Equinox of 1700 ending, in
Vulgar Account, but in Prophetical the Half of 1700.

The Last Half Year of the Three Years and a Half will Expire then, in the very
Middle of the Year, at the Vernal Equinox, The Time of our Lords Resurrection;
Illustrious, I Humbly hope, with mighty Effects of it, in the Rising again of
the Glory of the Gospel, the Witnesses, and all the People of Christ so long
lying Dead in the Breadth of Babylon; and its Antichristian Papacy then
beginning to be Judged.

I have now with all Humble Reverence of the Divine Oracles, Covering as it
were my Face, whatever of Light and Under^^anding God has given me, as yet not
Able to behold their Glory; And my Feet in the sense of my Unworthyness and
Great Darkness and Imperfections in Knowing, or Prophesying; I have yet with
Reverence and Godly Fear shown; That there is a Frame of Prophecy Curiously and
wonderfully made; By which Insensibly (however certainly foreknown to God,
which way every Thing would come to pass;) the Great Events should with such an
Equal Balance be made Inclinable to 97 or 1700; That Providence should with
the Truth of Prophecy, as it saw Fit, Determine upon either at the very Time;
I come therefore to the Fourth Head proposed; Viz. To consider the Reasons of
the Translation of the Great Events, to have been Expected at 97, from thence
to 1700.

Head. 4th. The Translation of the Great Effects of Prophecy; The Accomplishing
to Scatter the Power of the Holy People; the Rising of the Witnesses; and the
beginning to Finish Wonders; have been Translated from 97, and are Humbly to be
expected, e're the End of 1700, on this Threefold Account.

1. Principally, and in the First place by way of Infraction, or what Scripture
is pleased to call; Gods Breach of Promise; or Repenting of the Good he said,
He would Benefit his People with, at such a Time; Jreme. 18* 10.
We know in strict sense; The Faithful God, who notwithstanding our Unbelief
cannot deny himself cannot Break promise, nor can any of his Predictions Fail;
Yet he knows how so to order Things, that the Sin of his Servants should be
under such an Ordination of Providence, as if both Promises and Prophecyes did
fail for the Punishment of their Unbeleif, and Disobedience, and Unsuitable
Frame.

I have Reason therefore more to bewail the Disagreeable Frame of my own, and
other the Hearts of those who are called Protestants, and the Reformed; in not
being more Ready for those Great Effects at the Time, then the being mistaken
i^ the Explanation of Pr,ophecy, and the Prophetic Numbers, or even the
Determination upon Ninety Seven.

For it is most Evident, God has Reserved to himself a Prerogative of
Pronouncing Evil, very possitively, as in the Case of Nineveh; Jonah. 3d. Yet
Forty Days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; And yet God seeing their Turning
from their Evil ways, also Repented of the Evil, that he thought to do unto
them; So on the other side, he makes a seeming Breach of Promise in Delay of
the Good, he intended at such a Time; And yet as I have before Argued in
Nathan; So it is plain no Blame could lie on Jonah for the mistake of Time, but
for his too high Resentment of the Dishonor, as he Apprehended on himself, of
being Accounted a False Prophet; However God Justified him, not long after by
the Irrepealable Prophecy of Ninevehs utter Destruction by Zephaniah.

The Delay, or Translation of the Great Effects of Vision from 97 to 1700, I
Impute therefore in the First place to Infraction, or Gods Breach of Promise,
with Great Assurance and Boldness of Speech, as to the manner of Expression;
Because God has been pleased to use it, else I should not have Dared make use
of it; and then as to the Thing it self, I am Bold because I Find so Great
Reasons for 97, as the most Central Time of Prophecy and such Fair
Delineations, and so Curious a Hand of Prophecy, Reserving a Liberty and
Freedom of so Uniting 1700 within it, as Providential Righteousness and
Justice, by way of Infraction or Abruption; Or Wisdom in a way of Mercy and
Glorious Illustration of Vengeance on the Enemies of the People of God, saw
Fit. To give therefore a more full Account of Infraction, or Breach of Promise,
I would offer my Apprehension with all Humility and Modesty, and yet with
Uprightness and Sincerity; I say therefore, God had by the Prophecys of his
word Pointed to 97, as the Ending of the Sackcloth of the Witness Prophecy, in
their Prophecy Fulfilled in the Kingdom of Christ; and of other the Great
Effects but with a Conditional Reserve, if there were a Suitable Frame in the
Witnesses, both the Sufferers and the more self-Subsistent Protestancy under
Reformed Princes, Nations, and their Laws: I say, If there were a Frame and
Activity Suitable to so Great a Revolution; Such a Frame as Agrees with the
Spirit of Life from God, with their standing on their Feet, with their
Appearing with the Lamb on Mount Zion, having the Fathers Name written on their
Foreheads; But there was not such a Frame among Protestants of any Distinction,
or Denomlnation, of any Title, Order, or Degree; Hereupon Rises the Lords
Breach of Promise; For in the Room of such a Spirit of Life, the Sardian State
lies heavy upon the whole; They have a Name to Live, and yet are Dead; They do
not Fill up the Things that Remain, and are in order to the Kingdom of Christ;
They are in a very Sleepy, and Vnwatchful Temper, as to the coming of Christ;
so that it is like to come upon them, at an Hour, they know not. When the Lord
saw this, it displeased Him; then said He, they shall know my Breach of
Promise: What I had Determined at 97, shall be as a Further Delay. If they had
been in a Condition to have Smitten, as often as they would, with a high
Impulse of Will the Antichristian Earth with Plagues; to have Shot with all the
Arrows of the Lord's Deliverance; their Accomplishment to Scatter, should have
immediately commenced with Finishing of Wonders. But even the Suffering Part of
Protestants, and much more the Generality, being found in the Condition before
described (without any Reflection on the Protestant Princes); It looks, as if
in David's Numbering the People; the Lord was Displeased, and left him under
Effectual Motives so to Number, which brought a Plague on All; So God, Provoked
Justly with the Universal Declination of the Reformation from His Truth, and
the Purity of His Worship, and the Holiness of His Ways, withdrew that Spirit
of Zeal, Courage, and Resolution in the Cause, and Interest of God, His Gospel
and People; His Spirit not coming upon them, as on the Worthies of Old: Nor was
He pleased to give them that Resolution, To make no Peace, without the Security
and Freedom for that which they accounted the True Christian Religion; or with
them, who would, and do now, make Advantage of that Peace, to the Persecution
and Slavery of them, with whom they are, or ought to be, of the same Character;
who keep the Commandments of God, and hold the Testimony of Jesus. So that this
Peace was not at all to their Honor, before God, and His Servants; although
those under them ought to be Humbled, because their want of Faith, Love,
Holiness, Peace, and Union, so Dishonored God, that He, in Just Offense, left
Princes, States, Governments to themselves, not to Appear for God, as for their
own Interests.

Object. I know it may be said, Because the Time was not come, There was not
that Spirit of Life from God foretold by Prophecy coming upon them; and
therefore they could not Act according to it: And this alone was Argument
enough, Ninety Seven was not the Time of Accomplishing to Scatter, nor of
Beginning to Finish the Wonders.
Answ. It is most True; the Spirit of Life from God, not coming down, and
Entering the Witnesses, did show, It was not the Time: But it is yet True, the
unsuitable Frame of Spirit in Protestants did Provoke God to Breach of Promise;
the culpable Cause of Mercies denied or delayed, is the want of that Holy
Agreeable Frame, although the Gift of such Grace is from God; For in God alone
is our Help; yet still our Destruction is of our selves. It is always His
Spirit, that makes that other Spirit in us, that was in Caleb and Joshua: The
want of such a Spirit, as is Agreeable to what God has promised to do,
provokes Him most Justly to Breach of Promise, as to the Time held out to our
Eye; although he alone Gives that Spirit and Will at the very Time, when the
Promise must and shall certainly be Fulfilled. Want of Holiness, is a full
Reason of Want of Deliverance; although at the Time when Deliverance shall be,
H^liness shall be also: The peculiar Frame agreeing with the Kingdom of Christ
is the Frame, we find Obab. 17.
in the Church of Philadelphia, not in our Sardis. Rev. 3.


2. Let us now Consider the Delay, or Translation of the great Effects expected
at 97, from 97 to 1700, as the word Breach of Promise signifies Abruption, or
Breaking off the Series, and Contexture, God had pleased to have Begun, and
seemed to be Going on in; as therefore it cannot but be acknowledged, There was
not in 97, the glorious Appearance of the expected Effects; So on the other
side, it cannot be denied, There were such Beginnings, that if God had pleased
to go on in, there had certainly been, before this Time, a very great Change
and Revolution in the World* But no sooner were those Offertures made, but God
showed his Abruption, or Breaking off from any Thing he had Begun; Two great
Instances of which, we had in that Year.

First, The Treaty of Peace at Reswick, was a very Remarkable Dispose of God,
bringing the Antichristian Princes to a Necessity of making Peace, while
Protestant Princes and States had a Balance upon them and the Peace. This
looked very Hopefully, that the Interests of Protestancy, and the Reformation,
wherein the Glory of God, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the Safety of His
People, and their Peace and Quiet, was so undeniably Comprised, should have
found great Advantages; and by an Embarrassement on all further Persecution on
Protestancy, there might have been an Accomplishment of Scattering. This was a
gracious Honorary Dispose on 97; and at the very Autumnal Equinox, as the very
Time, that was to bear the Signal of the Witnesses Rising. Herein God was
pleased to set Judgment before those Protestant Sovereigns, and to show them
what they were to do; especially, considering what Just Pleas they had to
Insist upon, as particularly and eminently that Edict of Nantz, in behalf of
the French Reformed, where the Persecution has since been Pursued with so
great Barbarity.

But to show God's Abruption, as in the very Time, and in the very Act of the
Treaty concluded, and so his Infraction in the very Year of Ninety Seven, and
of the Peace concluded. And to Remonstrate both, as before all the Nations
about, as he has sometimes put a Word into the Mouth of his very Enemies,
especially when they are of Eminency; as Balaam, an exalted Prophet; Caiaphas,
the High Priest: So it is much to be Reflected upon, what the King of France,
that Prince of Persecution, writ to the Archbishop of Paris in the beginning
of the Month called January, in Popish Style 98, but in True Prophetic and even
Protestant Style 97: Requiring the Thanksgiving of Te Deum after the Popish
Manner for the Peace, thus He Began; The Time, which Heaven has Ordained (How
express for 97.) for the Reconciliation of the Nations; Sure the Protestants of
each Nation made up the Nations. This looked Fair for the Accomplishing to
Scatter; For the Protestants making up the Nations, and the Time for the
Reconciliation of the Nations being come, their Scattering or Persecution was
to Cease, or to be Accomplished, How else Reconciled!

But as if at the same Time God made an Abruption upon what was so promisingly
Begun in 97, and put a Reproof into that Prince's Mouth, upon the Protestant
Princes, and in them upon the Nations, and even the Churches; walking so much
beneath the True Spirit of the Reformation, and so provoking God to withdraw
His mighty Spirit and Presence from the Princes: That King thus expresses
himself.

That which I Glory in most of all, is, the Worship of the true Religion, as
Authorized by a solemn Treaty under Sovereigns of a Different Faith; the Author
of so many Graces, shows Himself too manifestly not to be Acknowledged; and the
Visible Characters of his Almighty Hand, which they Bear, seem to be the Seal,
he has Affixed to them to Justify my Intentions; Busied from this Time forward
in Causing him to be truly Worshipped in all my Dominions.

In all which, I have not the least Regard to the Assumings of that Haughty
Monarch, in which there is much of the Spirit, and Style of the King of
Assyria's Letter by Rabshakeh; when he asked, Am I come up without Jehovah? All
I consider is, What of Agreement there can be Found, between His Words, and the
Words of Prophecy, As when he says, The Time for the Reconciliation of the
Nations is Come; a Word of great Extent in Scripture-Sense, and Introducting a
great Change indeed among the Nations, and very Consonant to Scripture
Predictions; For I have all Reasons of Assurance to Conclude, It was so in the
First Institution of God, and the Treaty of Peace was a Fit Method in Human
View to it: When the Treaty therefore was Concluded, and a Peace, so called,
made without Reconciliation of the Nations, in that great Interest of the
People of God, the Freedom and Peace of the Reformation in France, Piedmont,
Savoy, the Palatinate, and other Parts; and He Himself the Principal
Persecutor, under the miserable Bigotry of Thinking, He Does God Good Service,
in Persecuting, as the Tenor of his Letter Imports; wherein he Appears Drunk
with the Wine of Babylonish Fornication.

Secondly, Another Instance of Divine Abruption, and so of Insraction, in the
same Year, was that Monumental Victory over the Mohammedan Army and the Ottoman
Sultan in Person with it. Now seeing, That Tyranny more immediately presses the
Grecian Professors of Christianity, and Has laid them under so great Slavery,
and Darkness; This Eastern Part of the Christian Church Falling into a like
Superstitious Ignorance, Any True Servants of God among them, were carried as
with the other of the Two Wings into a Wilderness-State, and fell into Re. 12.
14.
great Darkness from the Light and Purity of the Gospel, and so into Slavery
under Mohammedan Imposture and Tyranny, and thus have continued to this Day; And
in how Lethargic, or rather a State of Death; All those, whom we call the Greek
Churches, or Grecian Christians do at this Time lie, None that know them can be
Ignorant, There being only Remainders and the Ruins of those Ancient Churches,
even as of their Cities.

The Prophesies and Promises of Scripture Reach, yet unto them; and at that
very Year 97. Accordingly therefore about the same Autumnal Equinox of it; It
pleased Infinite Wisdom, and Goodness to Arm with a Mighty Power and Spirit the
Imperial Army, and the Leaders of it; and to give them a very Monumental
Victory, even a Victory, like as in the Day of Mid^a^, or upon any other of the
Ancient Enemies of the People of Israel, to their Greatest Consternation, and
the Breaking all their Measures and Designs; Hereto Add, what God was pleased
not far from the same Time to do by the Czar of Moscovy, a Prince of the very
Grecian Profession of Christianity; These Victoriousnesses had undoubtedly been
carried to the very Gates of Constantinople, Had there been but that Spirit of
Life from God upon them! But all lying in that Dead State; The Emperor in the
very God of Popish Antichristianism and the Bond of that Evil; The Russian
Prince in all the Superstition and Blindness of that Profession; There was then
First Gods Infraction as to the Year 97: The Great and Complemental Effects
shone not to expectation that Year as Light Day: And therefore there was an
Abruption, a Breaking off that Series and Contexture God had began; So all is
laid still in a Peace between the Port and the Empire; and a Truce betwixt the
Ottoman and Moscovian Princes; Which how God will Dispose of, we are yet to
observe in the following Course of Providence. Disposes of God with Relation to
the Ottoman Signiory are the more to be observed on these Great Prophetic
Considerations.

1. It pleased the Divine Spirit to place the very opening of the Kingdom of
Christ and Finishing of Wonders on that Mahometane Potentacy coming to its End,
and none to help it. Dan. 11. Last with C. 12. 1. etc.

2. That the Grecian Churches, as we Style them, Are the sad Remains of those
Seven Apoclyptic Churhches, made the Types and Emblems of all Christian
Churches till the Glory of the New Jerusalem; And therefore from the Time of
that given; However under such a Rejection Now, Yet, are Beloved for the
Fathers sakes, I mean Those Primitive Churches.

3. The Hour, the Day, the Month, the Year allowed to the Turkish Empire to
stand Armed and in Procinctu Reaches Rev. 9.
Just to 97: as has been by other Apocalyptic Interpreters, as by my self Less
than the Least, made out.

4. From the passing away of the Second or Turkish Woe, That great, and Blessed
Sound Commences. The C. 11.
Kingdoms of this World are Become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ;
But as Mahometism came first, as a Rev. 11.
Judgment on the Latin, as it is to be Distinctly called, or Western
Antichristianism; So it is to be Preferred in the Expectation of Judgment First
upon it self; That so Tyrannous a Pseudo-Proph^tism that came upon it, may not
be Removed before the Provocati^n of the Sin Oh how much Reason have we then to
cry to Heaven for that Spirit of Life upon us all; I hope, I much more Des^re
it upon my self, then the Honor of being a True Prophet concerning it, If one
could be Separated from the other.

Although I am afraid to defer any thing to Phantastry, I cannot yet but Just
Mention; That, That so unaccountable, even Phrenetic Superstition of the
Turkish Procession, was ordered on the First New Moon in the Month called
December. 97. and fell out on its Third Day.

That Procession was a Public Declaration, Their Affairs were come to
Extremity; Their Deprecation of the Displeasure of Heaven so Vehemently, spoke
an Apprehension of the Tottering, and Ruin of their Port and Empire. Thus
Providence Discovered, what was in the Womb of Prophecy, if there had not been
an Abruption; And that Abruption showed it self, in that, So great a Victory
was not made an Advance to further Victoriousness, and even Ruin of that
Empire.

And indeed I cannot but make a Parallel of it, with Esaias. 16. 21.
Moabs wearying himself on his High Place, and then coming to his Sanctuary to
pray. And the word of the Lord since, and from that Time is, That within Three
Years as exactly Numbered, as the Days of an Hireling, and the Glory of the
Ottoman Power shall be Contemned; And all that great Multitude and the Remnant
shall be very Small and feeble. Now these Three Years are to be Accounted to
End in the Month December in the Year 1700.

Objec. But may there not be on continuing Provocation, and Unpreparedness for
Mercy, a further Infraction and Abruption, even at the Year 1700.
Answ. By That Situation of the Three Years and a Half between the 1260, and
the Seventh Trumpet, and the so closely Conterminating on each; and Prophecy so
express and positive therein; That it should be Subjected to any such Balance
of Prophecy, is utterly Impossible; For though when there is an Equilibration
of Prophecy, there Providence, does, as it sees fit, although all way in it
self Determined; Yet where Prophecy is Peremptory and Absolute, Providence
always Acts according to it; And so it is here, that there can be no Fear of an
Infraction or an Abruption.

Having thus discoursed the delay according to the Scripture words, Gods
Infraction and Abruption; For he is pleased so to Style it, (...), My Breach;
The True and Faithful God takes such a Prerogative to speak his Intentions of
Grace at such a Time, under the Reservation of a Condition, That there should
be a Suitable Agreeable Frame in his People to his Promises; Or else a further
Time Reserved; But as I have made out, there is also a further Reserved Time
for Wise and Holy Reasons in a way of Grace, in the Retirements of Prophetic
Sense; And so I cannot but hope, There is at this Time That Wise, Holy and
Gracious Purpose of the Delay; That the very Just Season of the Judgment on
Babylon, should be taken according to what has been already laid down, and
needs no Repetition, that shall also concur with those of Displeasure. Viz. The
Popish Jubilee,

And seeing, according to what I have Humbly laid down; The Prophecys of
Scripture have placed nothing beyond these Three Years and a Half, ending with
the Year 1700; but the Finishing Wonders in Daniel, and the Seventh Trumpet of
Finishing in the Revelation: As I have most Abased Sense of my own Weakness,
Darkness, and Unworthyness; and Profoundest Reverence of the Divine Wisdom,
Holiness, Supreme Dominion; In which Regard none can stand before him, or as a
Shepherd appoint him the Time; So I cannot but Trust in his Mercy, and the
M^ghtiness of his Arm, He will bring it at that very Time to pass; and I
observe; That in Callenging of any Shepherd to stand before him, he especially
Directs to those, who, when they hear of the Judgments of God on the Enemies of
his People; Edom and Babylon; and So now on Babilonish Rome, think; They can
bring up Jerem. 4^ 50.
those, who shall Oppose the Councels of God, like a Lion coming up from the
Swellings of Jordan with all speedy Rage and Power, and oblige him to choose
another Time for the Execution of his Judgment; These are Jer.
they, who would stand as Shepherds before him, and appoint him a Time; Not
they, who would wait upon him in the way of his Judgments, and would Discern
the Signs of the Times thereof; For it is a Severe Reproof; The Stork in the
Heavens knows her Appointed Time, and the Crane and the Swallow and the
Turtle observe, But my People know not the Jerem. 7. ^.
Judgment of the Lord. Surely the Prophetic Scribe; especially in Accounting
the Numbers Time it sets; He made it in vain, the Pen of that Scribe is in vain.

It is true, the Apostle does most Vehemently persuade ^ These. ^.
not to be moved with Letter, or Spirit or Word, as if the Day of Christ were
at Hand; But then at that Time He gives the most certain Substantial Line of
Time in General to it; Viz. The Course of the Son of Perdition, till he goes
into Perdition; And then the Apostle John very particularly gives the Definite
space of Time, his Forty Two Moons of Years, that we may know how to Distribute
betwixt the Too Great Suddenness, or the Too Long Delay of the Expectation, and
yet throughout to maintain that Looking for and hasting on to the Day of God in
all Holy Desires, and Preparation by Suitable Conversation, while we daily
Consider; How he has Declared the End from the Beginning, that we may see and
behold it together, and be struck with Admiration; This is that Glorious
Challenge, God makes upon the Idols of the Heathen, in Justification of himself
against, them, Declare, Show to us the Things, that are to come, Do, Esaias. 41.
23. etc.
Work Good or Evil, Judgments, or Deliverances; that we may know, you are Gods;
To attend our God therefore herein, in searching out, and declaring what he
has first declared, is to give Glory to him; And this is the only End I have
through his Grace proposed in this Esaias. 41. 13. etc.
Discourse; In its Beginning, By setting out the certainty of Babylons
Judgment, at the Times of its Greatest Solemnity, of Pomp and Pride; and of the
Strongest Combination of the Horns of the Beast, the Princes of Europe to
strengthen, and exalt it; and for the Persecution of the Servants of God, who
will not Receive his Mark, nor Worship his Image. Now that in this Time, its
Plagues may come upon that City of Fornications, Drunk with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, as in one Day; I cannot but Humbly Beseech, and Recommend it
to all the Servants of God, who Love the Appearing and Kingdom of Christ, not
to be Discouraged with the Delay beyond 97; but to cry with the Spirit and the
Bride: Come Lord Jesus come Quickly: knowing the Time so undoubtedly Fixed, and
so near Herein,

The Grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all. Amen.
Books lately Printed and Sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in
Grace Church Street.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of the Reverend Divine Mr. Thomas Gouge. Who
Deceased Jan. 18th 1^99. By John Nessbit one of the Merchant Lecturers at
Pinners-Hall, Breadstreet.

2 The Government of the Thoughts Prefactory to the Government of the Tongue,
by the Author of the Duty of Man.

An Ellegiack Essay on the Pious Memory of that Eminent and Learned Divine Mr.
Matthew Mead, with his True Effiges newly Engraved to the Life, also most of his
Works with most sorts of Books to Learn Shorthand.


