THE Parable of the Ten Virgins, In its Peculiar Relation to the Coming, and
Glorious KINGDOM OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ.

OPENED, According to the Analogy of the whole Parable, and of Scripture in
General, and Practically Applied, for Exercising all the Churches to Holy
Watchfulness, Mark iv. 13.

WITH AN APOLOGY for the Hope of the Kingdom of Christ, Appearing within this
Approaching Year, 1697.

Wherein some of the Principal Arguments for such an Expectation, are briefly
Couched, and the Greater Objections Answered. Presented to the Notice and
Examination of the Archbishops and Bishops Now in PARLIAMENT Assembled.

By T. BEVERLEY.

Ezekiel. 10. 13. As concerning the Wheels, It was cried to them, in my Hearing,
Oh! Revolution!

LONDON: Printed for, and Sold byWill. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-Street,
and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street, 1697.

A TABLE of the Principal Doctrines of each SERMON.
The Sermons are Divided into Five, and Six; Each Part, viz. The first Five
begin with Page 1. and so go on. And the Six Last also with Page 1. and so go
on.
The Doctrine of the First Sermon, Page 1. THE Kingdom of Christ is in every
Thing, and throughout; The Kingdom of Heaven. SERMON II. Page 21. There is a
Marriage-Union betwixt Christ and his Church, and every Particular* Believing
Soul. SERMON III. Page 39. The Preparation for the Glorious Marriage-Solemnity
is Now, and All Christianity looks to that Solemnity. SERMON IV. Page 59. All
those that are Christ's, are to hold the great Feast of the Supper of the Lamb,
to Jehovah. SERMON V. Page 74. That the Coming of Jesus Christ has not yet
been, since He was here on Earth, neither yet is it immediately to be. The
Bridegroom Tarried.
The Second Part.
SERMON VI. Page 1. While the Bridegroom tarried, All these Virgins, both the
Wise, and the Unwise, Slumber and Sleep. SERMON VII. Page 18. In the very same
Circumstances, wherein any of us lie down in the Grave, in the very same we
must be awakened, and Rise up again. SERMON VIII. Page 38. It is a Point of
great Consideration, What the difference is, between the Wise, and the Foolish
Virgins. SERMON IX. Page 58. It must be sadly Acknowledged, and every one is to
take it to himself, That a Virgin, if a Foolish Virgin, shall not be admitted,
nor suffered to enter into the Glory of that Marriage Feast, the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. SERMON X. Page 24. Every one that hears the Word
of the Gospel, concerning the Coming and Kingdom of Christ, is bound to Watch,
as if it might be the very next Day and Hour; yea, though he had lived in the
Days of Christ, and had known certainly, that his Coming and Kingdom should not
have been in so many Ages, as have run out since. SERMON XI. Page 87. The Whole
is drawn up into Practical Application and Inference.
A Catalogue of Mr. Beverley's Books Sold at the Bible in Newgate-Street, and
at the Bible in Grace Church Street.
1. THE Catechism of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Thousand
Years: Showing by Scripture, 2. That the great Articles of Redemption, 2. The
Resurrection, 3. The Mystery of the Saints not Dying but Changed, 4. The
Judgment, 5. The Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All; cannot be
Explained at full Dimensions without it: The Second Edit. with Adis Price 6 d.

2. The Kingdom of Jesus Christ entering its Succession this 1697. According to
a Calendar of Time. Price 1 s.

3. The Scripture Line of Time, from the first Sabbath, to the great Sabbatism
of the Kingdom of Christ, with the Vision of the Wheels explained, etc. Price 6
d.

4. A fresh Memorial of the Kingdom of Christ demonstrated. Price 6 d.

5. A Discourse upon the Powers of the World to come, or the miraculous Powers
of the Gospel and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and their certain Return at
the Kingdom of Christ in its Succession, with the great Charter for the
Interpretation of the Prophecy of the Scriptures, etc. Price 2 ^.

6. Those that are minded to have the Discourse of the Powers of the World to
come without the great Charter, may have it for (...). Price.

7. The Model of Gospel Sanctification, in several Generals, from Romans Chap. 7.
Chapter 8. following that great Discourse from Romans 5. 12. Price 3 d.

8. The Table of Sabatical Times; with its Scale of Years. Price 2 d.

9. A Scheme of the Prophecy now to be fulfilled, prefixed to the Line of Time,
from the first to the last Sabbatism, with mutual Aspects upon one another, and
on the holy Line, are distinctly observ^d: and what ought not to be done, in
regard of the nearness of the Blessed Sabbatism. Price 2 s. 6 d.

10. The Command of God to his People to come out of Babylon, Price 6 d.

11. Evangelical Repentance unto Salvation not to be repented of. Price 1 s. 6
d.

12. A Discourse, being the Substance of several Sermons on the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, from 1 Cor. 11. 23. Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. Price 6 d.

13. A Conciliatory Judgment concerning Dr. Crisps Sermons, and Mr. Baxters
Dissatisfactions in them. Price 2 d.

14. The Model of a Discourse of the great Point, or Doctrine of Holiness to
the Lord. From 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Price 2 d.

15. A Conciliatory Discourse upon Dr. Crisps Sermons, on the observation of
Mr. Williams's Dissatiifaction in them. Price 6 d.

16. A brief View of the State of mankind in the First Adam, upon the great
Context of the Redemption and Mediation of Jesus Christ, Price 4 d.

17. An Exposition of the Divine Standard of Prayer, Styled the Lord's Prayer.
Price 1 s.

18. A True State of Gospel Truth Established, upon the free Election of God in
Christ, The Agreement, and yet Difference between Law and Gospel. Price 6 d.

19. The Faith by which we are Justified, from Romans 5. 1. In Six Sermons Price
1 s.

20. The great Gospel Grace of Faith, being the Substance of several Sermon.
Price 6 d.

21. The Blessing of Moses on the Tribe of Asher. From Deuteronomy. 33. 25 6 d.

22. Jehovah-Jieroth, A Sermon on Seeking God in Prayer. Price 6 d.

23. The Loss of the Soul, the Irrepairable Loss Opened and Demonstrated, etc.
Price 6 d.

24. A Sermon on the Death of the Queen, on Amos 7. 2. Price 6 d.

25. Christianity the great Mystery, in Answer to a late Treatise, Christianity
not Mysterious. Price 1 s.

At the Places abovementioned is lately Printed Rich Redivivus, or Mr. Rich's
Short hand Improved, in a more brief and easy Method; than has been set forth
by any heretofore, now made Public for general Advantage. By Nathanael
Stringer, a quondam Scholar to the said Mr. Jer. Rich. Price 1 s. Where you may
be likewise Supplied with Mr. Rich's Testament and Psalms, in Short Hand, Bound.

THE Parable of the Ten Virgins, Opened and Applied.
SERMON I. On Matthew. 25. from Ver. 1, to 13. 1. Then shall the Kingdom of
Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to
meet the Bridegroom.

2. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

3. They that were foolish, took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them.

4. But the wise took Oil in their Vessels, with their Lamps.

5. While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.

6. And at midnight there was a Cry made, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye
out to meet him.

7. Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps.

8. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are
gone out.

9. But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and
you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

10. And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready,
went in with him to the Marriage, and the door was shut.

11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

12. But he answered, and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son
of Man comes.


I Have often had it in my Thoughts and Desires, to open this Great Parable of
the Kingdom to you: Wherein (as Christ says) he has declared things, that had
been kept secret from the very Foundation of the World.

But, indeed, I fear an Inability to open this Parable, according to the
Greatest Importance and Sense of it.

I have yet, by the Assistance of God, and through the Great Author of it,
undertaken to offer to you the utmost of Light that I can, from so Rich a
Portion of Scripture; But still saying, Who is sufficient for these things? I
know, it contains in it self a Point of the Greatest Concernment to every one
of us: And the Greater, and the Fairer our Profession of Christianity is, the
Greater is our Obligation to consider it. For, you see, here is nothing in the
Text but a Virgin-State; and that imports the Purity of a Profession; the
Highest and the Purest Profession of Christ and of his Name. And yet, as you
may easily observe, what a great Danger and Hazard there is in the Purest
Profession, that we should come short of the Great End. For why were Five of
these Virgins shut for ever out of the Glory and Happiness of the End?

The Point that I aim at to discourse upon, I Will give you in the General: And
then show you, in every Particular, how the Parable Answers to it; And how
Great the Wisdom of Christ is. He spoke indeed (as it is said in the Gospel) as
never man spoke. No mere Created Man was ever able to find out such Lively
Images and Representations of Things as he did; and as he has given us the
Instance and Example of, in this very Parable. I say therefore, here is the
main Point that I propose to you:

That even the Highest, and most Excellent Professors of Christianity, have
great need, and an Obligation lying upon them, to take care, that while they
make so excellent a Profession, they have that, that will bear out, and will
last in that State of the Kingdom of Christ; and of the Glory of it; I say, the
Highest and Purest Professors.

Suppose any of us say, We are not as Heathens; and we are not as
Antichristians; and we are not as the Looser and General Professors of
Christianity are: But we are Virgins; we are of the Purest, and of the most
Refined Profession of Christianity.

Our Lord here allows it to us; we may be so, and yet, notwithstanding this; we
are to be under this severe Caution, That we are not found foolish Virgins,
that have not the Truth and Power of Christianity, or only a Profession that
will go out, as a Lamp extinguished and quenched, and cast out into utter
Darkness, when it comes to the strictest and highest Examination.

Now this our Savior has comprised under Three Generals, that you may observe
in this Parable, which I will at this time, (first of all, but in gross, and in
short) deliver to you; and then, Endeavor, by the Assistance of God, to be
more Exact upon the Particulars of it.

First, Therefore, that we may understand it, we are to observe, That this
Parable represents the Kingdom of Heaven; and, the Kingdom of Heaven is to be
understood, First, In the opening of it, in the Preaching of the Gospel, and in
the drawing of the Minds and Hearts of those that hear it, unto it. That Is the
first Notion of the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Kingdom of Heaven shall be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their
Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.

This speaks the whole State of the Gospel, from that Fullness of Time, as I
have Styled it, from the Apostle Paul, to the Fullness of Times, or of All
Times; from the time of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, from that
time, 'till the Bridegroom himself comes. The Kingdom of Heaven, It is the
Preaching of the Gospel daily and continually, to all those to whom it is
offered and tendered. And as to this, He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

Secondly, This Kingdom of Heaven, it is to be considered, As it shall open it
self in the Glory of the Appearance of Jesus Christ. For, the Kingdom of Heaven
does not lose it self, when the Preaching of the Gospel is at an end, and when
that, which we count the Day of Judgment, comes; but it passes then into
another State, into its Glory, and into its visible Appearance: It comes then
into the highest Celebration of the Nuptials, and of the Wedding.

For, they went forth to meet the Bridegtoom. And it is said, That the
Bridegroom came, and they that were ready, went in with him into the Wedding,
and the Door was shut. So the Kingdom of Heaven lasts from that Preaching of
the Gospel, from the Death and Resurrection of Christ, unto the Glory of the
Kingdom, in the Appearance of Christ, and of all his Saints with him. Which (as
I say, and as you shall after hear) is the highest Celebration of the Wedding,
and of the Nuptials.

The Second Head of Discourse on this Parable, in which our Lord has presented
this great Truth to us, is the Representation of those that make Profession of
him, in the purest, and in the most refined way; and therefore they are all
called Virgins: Even those that had not Oil in their Lamps; yet still they are
called Virgins. And those that were not only the wise, but the foolish; still
they are called Virgins. And what is the Reason of this? but that Christ might
press the harder and closer upon every one of our Consciences.

If you say (and you know we are ready to value and rate our selves by it) we
have a better Profession, and a better Worship; and we do not as others do,
whose way, and whose worship, and whose profession we condemn; but we are as
Virgins in our Worship. Therefore I say, Christ has given us the whole Frame
of the Doctrine, in a Parable of Virgins; in a Representation of a
Virgin-state. Indeed, in some places of Scripture, this Metaphor, or
Resemblance of a Virgin, imports the Truth, and the power of Grace; and where
there is no want of all that Excellency of Christianity, that is necessary to
the Perfection, and to the Glory of it, in this present State, but here it is
otherwise; and it is to this very purpose, that none of us might rest in an
outward Profession. And therefore we may observe the several particulars under
this Virginstate, that our Lord has Represented.

First of all, That Five were Wise, and Five were Foolish. And then,

In the Second Place, Wherein the Wisdom of the one, and Folly of the other
consisted. The Wisdom was, in taking Oil in the Vessel, with their Lamps: The
Folly was, in taking no Oil with them, but only in their Lamps; but thinking to
make a shift (as we say) with what was in the Profession.

In the Third Place, We have the Consideration of their Behavior, or of their
State, in the Time between the Preaching of the Gospel first, and then, the
Glory of the Nuptials. While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and
slept.

I must indeed let you know, That I Interpret this otherwise, than the
Generality of those that have Spoken or Written upon it, have done. For this
Slumbring and Sleeping, I do not look upon as the same; that they were in a
Spiritual Slumber, not Sleep; but I look upon it only as suitable to the
Parable, to be a Representation of the dying of those that make Profession of
Christianity; that is, throughout the Time, that great Space of Time between
those two Points, viz. the fullness of Time, and the fullness of all Times. There
are many gone out of the World, many of those that were Virgins in their
Profession; and they then Slumbred; then Slept; that is, they have died, and
gone out of the World, in this State of Profession.

Now, the Reason that I give, why I should so Interpretet, is this; Because it
is very plain, by what our Savior speaks, That the wise Virgins did never
Spiritually Sleep; they were not in a Spiritual Sleep; that is, It was not the
Character of their State.

And therefore I look upon it only thus, as Solomon says, They had come and
gone from the place of Judgment. So I say, they had come, and gone out of the
State of the World, and the Profession of Christianity; and they have entered
into a State, which to us that are here in the World, looks like Midnight
Sleeping. As now, if we speak of the Apostles that have died; they have (as it
were) deeply Slept, ever since the time that they went out of the World. And so
the Saints that we have known here in the World; we may say as the Scripture
does, They fell asleep; and there has been a Slumber upon them as to their
Profession; they have not manifested that LIFE and POWER of Christianity. And
then in the Fourth Place; here is the Case, and the State of these Virgins, upon
the coming of the Bridegroom. At Midnight there was a Cry made, Behold, the
Bridegroom comes: Go ye forth to meet him.

And that I look upon, to be intended of the Resurrection. That voice of the
Son of God; That they that are in the Graves shall hear; and they that hear
shall live, and they shall come forth out of their Graves. The wise and the
foolish Virgins, they die alike, and they come forth out of their Graves; that
is, both the one and the other Rise again, and appear before Christ.

In the Fifth Place; as soon as the Bodies, and Souls or Spirits, are
Reunited; immediately, all those that are raised, go to the Trimming of their
Lamps; that is, they immediately Reflect upon what they had been doing here in
the World; how they had Lived, what they had Acted; how they had answered their
Profession. They arise, and Trim their Lamps; they come with that Profession of
Christianity they have made.

And that is the Second Head of Discourse in this Parable. And then,

The Third is, the Result, Issue, and Event of all this. What was the different
State then, of the Wise, and of the Foolish? As soon as ever the Foolish
Virgins came to trial of their Lamps; immediately they found a want of Oil.
They found a want of that Power, of that Glory, of that Life of Christianity,
that should bear them up in the Time of the Wedding, of the Glory of the
Kingdom of Christ. And therefore, that you may understand this Parable, you
must consider, That amongst those Eastern Nations, their great Solemnities were
in the Night; their great Nuptial Feasts, and their great Entertainments; they
were in the Night: And so, every one did (as it were) bring their Lamps. Here
is the curious Color and Art of the Parable, or the Picture; every Person that
came to those Night-Entertainments? which were their greatest; As I tell you,
They brought with them, a Lamp, a Light to stand by them; and that so the Glory
of the Feast, or of the Entertainment, might arise from those many Lights that
were shining together, that every one brought.

Now, therefore (says Christ) the Foolish Virgins, came with their Lamps, and
they had no Oil; they had no Oil to bear out the Glory of the Feast, the Glory
of the Wedding, of that great Nuptial, the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, as it
is called, Rev. 19.

So, as soon as ever they found the want of Oil, they were in an Amazement,
they were immediately upon the earnest pursuit and care of the supply of that
want. When they found, we shall never be able to bear out with the Glory of the
Wedding, immediately they say to the Wise, Give us of your Oil. But the Wise
said unto them, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye
rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves. Go, and provide it; go, and
take care for it. This is spoken only, to fill up the Parable; not that the
thing could be so; but only to represent the thing as lively as might be. And
while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came. And they that were ready, went in
with him to the Marriage, and the Door was shut; presently shut. That is, they
went into the great Hall, to the great Room of Entertainment, to the Palace of
the Bridegroom: They went in, that were ready; and the Door was presently shut.
If any one was not ready; if they had not Oil in their Lamps, the Door was
presently shut. If they had not such a Provision, as would bear out that
Entertainment, and went to provide, they were presently shut out. And here,

In the last place, That is the great Use and Application that Christ makes of
it: Watch therefore; for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour when the Son of
Man comes. Wherein our Savior still bears out, according to the Nature of the
Type, and to fill up all the Parts of it, and all the Colors of the Picture

For, the meaning is no more than this;

Look well to this, That you have a Provision, a Treasure of Grace, that will
last out the whole Time of the Wedding-Solemnity: For, if you have not, you
will not be able to make a Provision then; you will be as those that are
unready.

Now, that this is the meaning of Watching, is very plain from hence; because
the Virgins that had Oil in their Lamps, and in their Vessels too; they
Slumbred and Slept, yet they went immediately into the Wedding.

But all those that had only Oil in their Lamps, and not in their vessels, they
were shut out; there was no possibility of making Provision for themselves at
that time.

From all which particulars then, that I have given you at this Time but the
Generals of, I collect,

Let it be our care, let us seriously look to it, that we make such a provision
now, that may last out that whole State; that is, That we have such Grace, as
will bear out the Trial of that Day, and that Time.

That Is the main Importance of this so great Parable, so excellent Parable;
that every one of us should look to it, That we have such Treasure, such real
Riches of Grace in the Blood of Jesus, and in the power of his Death and
Resurrection upon us, that will comport with that great Solemnity of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ. And let us not say among all the Professions and Ways
that there are in the World, we have chosen out what we think the best, and
the purest: It is not enough, that we are Virgins in our Profession, but we
must have this rich Treasure, this real Treasure of Grace in our Hearts. This,
I say, is the main Importance of this great Parable, and it Issues into this,
That we should take heed of pleasing our selves in a Profession; and that we
should be under the power of this Apprehension, That the most excellent
Profession that there is in the World, in the whole Christian Name, whatever it
is that shall have the Precedence above any other; yet if our Hearts are not
Enriched with the true Grace of God, and of Jesus Christ, we do not know the
Truth, as it is in Christ effectually. And therefore indeed, there is not any
place of Scripture that Imports a greater Severity, or makes more necessary
trial and search into our State and Condition, than this very Parable does. For
when it gives a Representation of the purest State that can be given; that is,
to call all Virgins; and yet that some of these are shut out for ever, from the
Glory of the Kingdom of Christ; How should it (as our Savior speaks in a like
Parable) engage us to strive to enter in at the strait Gate? For many shall
seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Many of the Children of the Kingdom
shall be thrust out; as Christ speaks in another place. This is the great care
therefore that should lie upon us, to secure the inward part, the vital part,
the true Power, the true Light of Christianity, that shall never be as a Lamp
put out in obscure Darkness. If you look upon the 14 Revel. you may see what a
high Importance this very Word, or Representation of Virgins has; says the
Spirit of God there, concerning those that were in the purity of Christian
Religion; These (says he) are VIRGINS, and have not defiled themselves with
Women, as other Professors of the Name of Christ had; with the Impurity that
others were defiled with. For they are Virgins, and they follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes.

So that though this be so great a Representation of the purity of Christian
Religion; yet you see here in this Parable, our Savior has taken this very
Representation to set forth the State, that yet shall miscarry in the End, to
Eternity. And so the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 2. I am Jealous over you with a
godly Jealousy; for I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you
as a chaste Virgin to Christ.

You see sometimes, this Representation, Metaphor, or Emblem of a Virgin is
made use of, to speak the highest and truest Purity. And yet, our Lord does (as
it were) abase and humble it here, in speaking of the Foolish Virgins; that he
might gain his main point and end: That is, to tell us, The most excellent
Profession, let it be what it will, it will not avail us, if there be not the
truth and power of Christianity in it.

I shall therefore, according to the particulars I have laid down to you,
endeavor to open this great Point all along, by those lively Resemblances,
that our Lord has given us in this Parable.

In the first place, I shall consider the State of the Gospel, as it is here
called the Kingdom; in its setting out, from the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
'till it attains that great Point of Glory, its manifestation in the visible
Appearance of our Lord Jesus: It is all the while, the Kingdom of Heaven. Then
shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened.

So as I have Represented to you, from Gal. 4. and Ephesians. 1. Here Is the whole
State, or Time of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and of all the course and motion
it runs: It begins in the preaching of the Gospel, and it ends in the Glory of
it, Gal. 4. 4. I look upon it to be a great Foundation of all that Discourse,
that I have endeavored to Instruct you by, concerning the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law. The first Appearance of Christ, it is
called the Fullness of Time; that is the beginning point of it. And then, there is
the Recapitulation, the gathering of all things again into Christ; and that is,
as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1. 10. In the dispensation of the fullness of
Times, he will gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in
Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in him. In the Fullness of Time, Christ
came to bear the sins of many* In the fullness of Times, he gathers all into
himself. So that the Kingdom of Heaven, it has its beginning in the first
Appearance of Christ; and it has its uttermost Glory in the gathering together
in one all things into Christ. And then it is delivered up into the Kingdom of
Eternity. We should therefore apprehend our selves, even now under the
preaching of the Gospel, that we are under the motion of the Kingdom of Heaven;
here is the beginning of it. And then we should look to our selves, and draw All
to the Issue, and last Result. For, the Kingdom of Heaven lasts till that great
Solemnity of the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb; it lasts to that very time, and
so it continues till the Kingdom is delivered up to God, all in all.

You shall find as soon as ever Christ came to be Preached, and to be declared,
immediately there is the use of this very Phrase, The Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
3, 2. John the Baptist went out, and said, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand. And so it is said of Christ; that He also went forth to Preach in
the very same manner; Repent (says he) for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,
Mat. 4. 17. So that here is the whole State of the Kingdom of Heaven, it begins
at the Preaching of our Lord Jesus Christ; and it goes on to the Perfection,
and to the Glory of the Kingdom.

Let us therefore observe what is the motion of the Gospel upon our Hearts;
because it is the Kingdom of Heaven. And we should look to the Power, and to
the mighty Influences that it has upon our Souls in that very regard; because
that it is the Kingdom of Heaven in its first beginnings, and in its first
Preparations, till it comes into the Glory of it self.

I shall therefore Endeavor at this time, to Discourse this Point to you,
concerning this Power of the Gospel, as it is the Kingdom; and Apply it, by way
of strong Reflection upon our own Hearts; And that we may consider what our own
State and Condition is, in relation to it.

First therefore, The Kingdom of Heaven is the offer of the Great Salvation of
Jesus Christ unto Souls; It is the Offer of that great State that shall be
hereafter. There is a present Offer of it to us now. The Gospel comes to this
very purpose, to invite us, by the present Preaching, and by the outward
Publication and Administration of it: It comes to Invite us to that great
Kingdom, that is called, The Kingdom of Heaven. The Gospel represents it self
now to us, with all the earnestness, and Wooing-Language* that we may be drawn
in unto Jesus Christ. This is the first thing wherein it is called, and worthy
to be called, The Kingdom of Heaven; because it comes with the offer of Heaven,
and with the offer of Life and Grace unto every Soul. Heaven is bowed down; God
rends the Heavens, and comes down to us in the preaching of the Gospel. It is
called therefore, the Kingdom of Heaven taken from one, and given to another.
The Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing
forth the fruits of it, Mat. 2. 43. Because this Kingdom makes an offer of
Life, and an offer of Grace to every Soul. It is that very thing that the
Apostle speaks of, in 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, reconciling the World
unto himself; and not imputing to them their Trespasses. Wherefore (says he)
we are Ambassadors for Christ, (ver. 20.) as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. God is pleased to make
an offer to every one that hears of the Kingdom of Heaven: He bows the Heaven
(as I said) down to you, and to you, and to every one of us that are under the
preaching of his Gospel. The Kingdom of Heaven stoops down, it condescends it
self to make a gracious Offer to every one that hears it this Day. If any one
will, let him come and take the water of life freely: As it is said, Rev. 22.
17. If any one has a Mind, and a Desire to the Kingdom of Heaven, when it is
thus offered. Christ therefore laid the Foundation of it in his own Coming.

He begins it by John the Baptist, that was to prepare his way, and he carried
it on by himself. And still, by one Series and Course of his Servants after
another, he has taken care, that in one part of the World, or other, ever
since the Resurrection of Christ, there has been an offer of this Kingdom of
Heaven all along, to the Sons of Men, in the public Preaching of the Gospel.
Indeed, I know, the Wisdom, and Glory, and Sovereignty of God has greatly
manifested it self; in that there are many Nations at this very Day, that have
not the Kingdom of Heaven Preached to them. And even amongst our selves, what
variety there is in the Dispensation of this Word of* the Kingdom unto us? As
our Savior calls it, The Word of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13. 19. When any one
hears the Word of the Kingdom. So that is the first Notion that Scripture
gives us of the Kingdom of Heaven; it is in the offer of Life, and Grace, and
Salvation by Jesus Christ, in the public Preaching of the Gospel. Now thus
indeed, Men may seem (as it were) at their choice, and at their Election,
whether they will accept the Kingdom of Heaven, or not, whether any one will
open their Ears, and hear.

How many say, If this be the Kingdom of Heaven; we do not at all desire it?
They turn their Backs upon it, and refuse, slight, and contemn it; because it
is not with Majesty enough (as they think) and it does not bring present Glory
and Advantage enough.

It therefore tells us, It is not the present State, it is not the present
Condition. We are ready to say, What does it bring us? And where is the Power
and Glory it brings along with it now?

This therefore now we are Taught, That the Kingdom of Heaven is only now, by
way of Doctrine; by way of Offer; by way of gracious Proposal to the Souls of
Men; it does not yet come in its Majesty, Glory, and in its Power. But as I
shall show you, in the third Particular, The Kingdom of Heaven never rests,
till it comes in its Glory, and in its Majesty.

This therefore is the first Expression of it; the preaching of the Gospel is
the Kingdom of Heaven; the Sounding of Christ and Salvation in your Ears,
telling you of an Everlasting State and Condition of Happiness, or Misery, if
you refuse. This is the lifting up of many, as our Savior speaks, which is a
very lively Consideration upon the Point that I am now upon. Mat. 11. 20. He
began to upbraid the Cities, wherein his mighty Works had been done; because
they repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago, in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the Day of Judgment, than for
you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down
to Hell; for if the mighty Works which have been done in thee, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, it shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom, than for thee. Here you see, we have the
preaching of the Gospel, and the offer of Christ; this is the Kingdom of Heaven
bowing, and stooping to you; making an offer of it self freely to you, and (as
we say) courting the Acceptance of Souls: We should look upon it as so: not for
the worthiness of those that Speak, or for the Ability with which they speak;
but the Source of all is, this excellent Doctrine of the Gospel, that we have
in the Word of God. And indeed, If we had not a Tongue to speak it, or Ears to
hear it; yet to behold the mighty Government of God and Christ, the evil of
Sin, and the excellency of Grace, and of the Spirit of God, and of the
Salvation of Christ, throughout; it is to put you into Heaven, to introduce you
into Heaven, even while you are here upon Earth. Do not think that it is a
small thing, that these excellent Promises, these excellent Doctrines, these
excellent Exhortations and Counsels are Administered unto you: For, it is even
Heaven upon Earth, this very Word of God; and, for the preaching of it, that is
only a further Ordination of God; that every one may have it spoken unto them,
and be persuaded, In season, and out of season; and that there might be a more
forcible Application upon the Souls of Men. But if we have but the Word of God
(this Scripture) lying in our Houses, we have the Kingdom of Heaven (I may say)
lying in our Houses, in this Sense I am now speakjng of it to you: You have it,
because you have this excellent Doctrine of Christ: And there are Scriptures;
there are many Scriptures, that are so exceeding clear and plain, that he may
run that reads. No one that has but this Book of God, either that he Reads,
or, that is ordinarily read to him; but he may say, I am exalted herein to
Heaven; because I have such an excellent Scripture, such an excellent Gospel
continually before me.

So the very Sound of it, the very Motion of it in the World; it is the great
Happiness of those parts of the World that have it. And we have great Reason to
say, in this place, in this City, in this Nation; and especially, wherever God
lights up a clearer Taper and Torch of his Gospel; we have Reason to say, That
Heaven is come down to us; and that we can go when we please, and Read one of
the excellent Sermous and Discourses of our Lord Jesus in the Gospel: That we
can go to the Epistles, and read those admirable Things that the Spirit of God
has given out by the Apostle Paul, James, and John. These things, you do not
Apprehend the great Advantage of them.

We talk of Heaven, and we would be glad to go to Heaven; and Heaven is the
great Burden of all our wishes, and all our hopes. Behold (says Christ) the
Kingdom of Heaven is here among us; the Truth of his Word lying open to us.

How dreadful therefore will even that Dust that gathers upon our Bibles, from
day to day be! I say what a Testimony will it be! And, as our Savior says to
those that he sent out to Preach his Gospel; It shall be more tolerable (says
he) for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for those that refuse it. And the very dust of
your feet (says he) when you depart out of that City, shake off, as a witness
against them, Mat. 10. 14. So the very dust of our Bibles will rise up in
Judgment against us; because, when God has opened the Windows of Heaven to us
in it; we have refused, and scorned, and despised, and (to Speak in our
ordinary Language) counted it as a Book out of date, because we have had it so
long. O! If you did but know what a value the Martyrs, in the Days of Queen
Mary, set upon it, when the Light was but just sprung out; what a value did
they put upon the Scriptures! And indeed, if God were cutting us short, and a
Famine of his Word coming upon us; we should then say, what a great Treasure is
God taking from us! And yet how many Hours do we pass in the Day, and not read
of Christ, and of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is so pourtrayed and explained in
the Gospel to us?

There is a Time that is set out to us by Prophecy; and there is great Reason to
hope that it is very near, when this Kingdom of Heaven, in the Everlasting
Gospel, shall Ride (as it were) Circuit, or rather, at one time be heard from
the midst of Heaven, throughout the whole Earth, Rev. 14. 6. I saw an Angel fly
through the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel to Preach unto them
that dwell on the Earth, and to every Kindred, and Tongue, and People. This
Everlasting Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, It shall be preached to every
Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People. Whereas now, in many parts of
America; and whereas now, in the whole Plat of the Regions; where the Mohammedan
Power is, and where Antichrist is, There is a concealment of this Gospel; a
denial, a shutting of it up from the Acquaintance, and Knowledge, and Reading,
and Hearing, of the generality of the People; it is here Preached in such a
way, as to make known the great Counsels and Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven
to Men. But,

In the Second Place: The Kingdom of Heaven, is in the mighty work and
operation of the Gospel of Christ upon our Hearts. Then, when we find Christ to
be the Pearl of great Price, and sell all to buy him; when we look upon him as
the only Treasure, and the only Riches; when our Hearts are under the
beginnings of Grace, and the powerful Operations of it; then is the Kingdom of
Heaven come to be within us, Matthew. 13. 31. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a
grain of Mustard Seed, which a Man took, and sowed in his Field: which indeed
is the least of Seeds; but when it is grown, is the greatest among Herbs, and
becomes a Tree; so that the Fowls of Heaven lodge in the Branches of it. This
is an Expression of the Preaching of the Gospel; which, if it be received, and
taken in, in the power of the Gospel upon the Heart, It is indeed, a little
thing, in the beginning; but it spreads more and more upon the Heart and Life.
And, the Kingdom of Heaven (ver. 33.) is like unto Leaven, which a Woman took,
and hid in three measures of Meal, till the whole was leavened. This is the
Preaching of the Gospel, and also the power of it upon the Hearts of Men. And
when it is a Seed that takes upon hearts, and brings forth abundantly Fruit to
Eternal Life, that also is the Kingdom of Heaven. And, ver. 44. The Kingdom of
Heaven is like treasure hid in a field, the which when a man has found, he
hides, and for joy thereof goes, and sells all that he has, and buyeth
that field. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant Man, seeking
goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went and sold
all that he had, and bought it.

This is the Kingdom of Heaven coming within a Man, giving him such a value of
Jesus Christ, that he looks upon all things else, (as the Apostle says) to be
no better than dross and dung, in comparison of the Excellency of the Knowledge
of Christ. You know the World, how Ambitious it is of the Riches of Pearl; how
desirous of the Glory, of the Luster and Splendor that it gives to them, that
wear it? Now when a Man counts Christ a Pearl beyond all value, beyond all
Esteem. This is the Kingdom of Heaven (says Christ) within a Man. It is not in
Word (as the Apostle speaks) but in Power. It is the Kingdom of God in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Spirit. viz. The Righteousness of
Christ, and that Joy, and Peace of Conscience that arises from it, by the
Spirit of God applying it to our Hearts.

Now therefore, All the Time that we live here in the World, we should be
gathering our selves into this Kingdom of Heaven; and to have the Kingdom of
Heaven within us. That is indeed the Oil in our Vessels, when we have the very
Spirit, and the very State of the Kingdom of Heaven within us.

I know that we are now in a State of Imperfection, and cannot rise up to the
Glory of these Things, but yet in the Truth and Reality of it; every one that
is fitted for the Kingdom of Heaven, he has this value of Christ within him,
this inward, sincere Love of Him, and Resignation of his Heart to Him; though
it be not come into the Glory: Though this Mustard Seed has not yet sprung up
into all its Amplitudes, and into all its Greatness. This therefore apprehend
within your selves; The Kingdom of Heaven (as Christ speaks) it does not come
with observation, that Men should say, Lo here, or lo there; but (says he) The
Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17. 21. He was demanded, When the Kingdom of
God should come? (ver. 20.) And he answered, and said, The Kingdom of God
comes not with observation; neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for,
behold, the Kingdom of God is within you; So I say, we should look for Heaven
within us. We can never go to Heaven (for that is but an Expression in
Comparison) except Heaven come down now into our Hearts, and except we carry
Heaven into Heaven, within our selves, within our Spirits. This (as I say) is
that Oil within our Vessels, that will keep up the State of Heaven in us, and
to us; not by any virtue of its own; but as it is a Grace given, and a Light
given from that Supreme Light; from that Light (as the Apostle John says) that
lights every Man that comes into the World. Let us not therefore say, Here,
or there, is that Kingdom; but let us look what we have of it in our selves.
That is the Lamp of Profession only, when we speak of a Kingdom without us.
That is the Vessel filled with Oil within; when we have this Kingdom within us.
The Kingdom of Heaven, as it is a mere Profession, it is Separable from us; we
may be parted from It, and It from us.

It shall be taken from you (as Christ says) and given to a Nation bringing
forth the Fruits thereof. So all the Kingdom of Heaven, in the profession of
it, will be taken from them that have it, as the Talent was taken from the
unprofitable Servant. That which we have (as Christ speaks) is taken from us.
And therefore, if any of us say, O how ezcellent is it to hear, or to speak of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, or of the Kingdom of Heaven! It is our Great
Delight. Then look to this, that you have it within you: For that Outward
Kingdom, though you delight in it never so much, it shall be taken from you:
As, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lo^d are these: And yet that
Temple was taken from them. So it may be said, the Kingdom of Heaven Are These.
But we must so hear, and so speak, and so converse, as having it within us;
Else remember, the Kingdom will be taken from you; separated from you for ever,
and you cast into that Kingdom of Darkness and Misery to all Eternity.

3. The Third Expression (with which I will shut up this Discourse concerning
the Kingdom of Heaven). You must not think, that the Kingdom of Heaven lasts
only while you are in the present State; But the Kingdom of Heaven will be
even throughout that Glory of its Appearance: And it is not seen, nor known
like it self, till it be known in that Glory, and in the Separation which shall
be between the Wise, and the Foolish Virgins, and between those that have had
only a Profession, and those who have had the Power: For, the Kingdom of
Heaven has its greatest Work, Its greatest Effect to show yet upon every one
of us: It never ceases to be a Kingdom, no not when it has made this
Separation between the one and the other; For then it takes into it those that
are its own; and will throw out of it self those that tho they seem to be of it
for a Time; yea when all things come into enquiry, into that Great Re-search;
It shall be made known at that Day* that they did not indeed pertain to the
Kingdom, who had it not within: Observe Mat. 8. 12. The Children of the Kingdom
shall be cast out into utter Darkness. That is, they that have had this Kingdom
in Perfection, but not the Power of it within them. So that I say, the great
Manifestation of the Kingdom of Heaven is, when it comes to sepparate between
the one and the other, and to have its own for ever within it self.

Observe therefore, Matthew. 13. Our Savior compares the Kingdom of Heaven to
such kind of things, that still it may be known, that it is not a Kingdom in
its Glory, till it comes to this Separation of things. We find ver. 24. says
our Lord, The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Man that sowed Seed into his
Field; But while Men slept, the Enemy came and Sowed Tares among the Wheat, and
went away. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit; then the
tares appeared also. So the servant of the house-holder came and said unto him,
Sir, did not thou sow good Seed in thy field? From whence then has it tares?
And he said, An enemy has done this. The servant said unto him, will thou then
that we go and gather them up? But he said nay, let both grow together till the
time of harvest; and in the time of harvest, I will say to the Reapers, gather
you together first the tares* and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather
the wheat into my barn. So you see here, that there is that great difference
between the Kingdom of Heaven now, and the Kingdom of Heaven, as it shall
manifest it self. It takes in Tares now, as well as Wheat. And so in the same
manner, it is compared unto a Net, that drew in both good and bad into it self.
But then it came to that, that the good are separated from the bad, and the bad
are cast into a furnace of fire, where there shall be weeping and wailing.

And now I may say to you (in some humble measure) as Christ said to his
Hearers; Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, yea, Lord. So
I say to you, Have you considered, and received, and in good measure understood
what I have been now speaking to you? That the Kingdom of Heaven sets out in
the Preaching of it; But where it is not the Kingdom of Heaven within us, we
have only a Lamp of Profession; And therefore, it will certainly come to that,
That before the Kingdom of Heaven has done, it will separate between one sort
of Men and the other. The Tares shall be gathered into bundles to be burnt; and
the bad Fish, though they have come to the Net, and come within the Net, yet
they shall be separated, and cast into the furnace of fire.

This is the Kingdom of Heaven, and this is the same thing which our Savior
intends in this very Parable, I have Explained to you. The Kingdom of Heaven
never ceases, till it has separated foolish and wise Virgins; And therefore it
is said, Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven: Which is a great Key to this
Parable, in this 25th of Matthew. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven. When do you
think our Lord meant? He meant, at that very Time that was spo^en of before, in
the foregoing Chapter; and on this occasion, I would give you this Note in
reading Scripture* that you may understand it; Observe, though we divide
Chapters one from another; yet many times the Discourse of Christ goes on; it
is the very same Sermon though in distinct Chapters. Now you shall find in the
46 verse, it is written, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when be comes,
shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over
all his goods. But, and if that evil Servant shall say in his heart. My Lord
delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunken; the Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when
he looks not for him, and in an hour when he is not aware of; and shall cut
him asunder, and appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And then, at that very time, shall the Kingdom
of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins; who have indeed their time all along in
the several Generations of Men, since the Resurrection of Christ; the Kingdom
of Heaven has been, and shall be in Motion (as I tell you) from the fullness of
Time, till the fullness of all Times. And then, at the fullness of Times, it
shall be likened unto Ten Virgins, Five Wise, and Five Foolish; Five taken into
the Kingdom of Heaven for ever, and Five that are thrust out. That is, whoever
they are, that are found Foolish Virgins.

For, certainly, to make the Parable more capacious, and to spread it the
wider, for the observation and consideration of all, the Number is made equal;
not that they are so in themselves; there are not equal Wise and equal Foolish:
For, alas! the inequality is very great, in comparison; the Foolish mightily
exceed the Wise, in the present State of things.

Though I make no doubt, there will be a different State, when the Kingdom of
Christ opens it self; there will be many, and many brought to Christ. So that I
make doubt, whether the number of those that shall be then brought into Christ,
will not raise the number of the Saved, so as to exceed the other; but, I will
let that alone. But what I now tell you is, That the Kingdom of Heaven will not
cease till it has made a Separation between one and the other: and so shine
out in the midst of them that are taken into it: And, I might give you many
great Expressions to this purpose; but the Parables in Matthew. 13. are
abundantly sufficient to show you, That till the Lord of the great Harvest
comes, The Kingdom of Heaven will not cease; and then there will be a
Separation made of the one from the other.

I shall now shut up this great Doctrine, with Two close Applications.

1. That we would (First) receive this great Doctrine, this Thunder and
Lightning, into out Consciences and Affections.

What! has our Lord said. That even those that are Virgins may be counted
Foolish? even those that may be counted of the highest and purest Churches may
be Foolish Virgins? The Door may be shut upon them? They may have Oil in their
Lamps only in this World, but not able to bear up in this Marriage* Supper of
the Lamb, wherein every one is to have his peculiar Lamp and Oil, to feed and
nourish an exceeding Light and Flame of Purity, of Holiness. May Virgins have
no Oil to supply at that time?

Oh then! with what serious Caution, Fear and Trembling, should I look back
upon my self, and observe, whether my Profession has the inward Riches, the
intrinsic Value and Worth in it, or not? Whether there be Oil in my Vessel, as
well as in my Lamp? Whether I have such a Holiness, as will bear out in that
Glorious Appearance of Christ, and of his Angels, and of all his Saints with
Him? Shall I not be put upon it in that Day, to run a begging, (as it were) for
the Oil in my vessel?

Have we not Eaten and Drank, may we say, together at the Table of Christ? Have
we not made Profession of Christ and the Gospel? Must we now be Separated from
the real Saints and Servants of God? Have I only had that which would serve me
to hear, and pray with in public, and to receive the Lord's Supper? Have I
only had that which is the Profession of the Reformed and Protestant Religion,
and not the Power? And must I now be turned out from it, and take my Habitation
amongst the foulest Antichristian* Idolaters, and the worst of those
Superstitionists? Nay, must I be turned out among the Heathen, among those that
have been the professed Enemies of God, and Jesus Christ, and in a worse case
than they?

These things, it is our Faithfulness, and love to our selves, and to our own
Souls, to declare them to our selves, and to meditate upon them; and to search
with great consideration into our selves, to know whether Christ be in us of a
Truth? or whether we have the Kingdom of Heaven indeed within us? whether we
are not running up and down with Observation, as Christ said, to say, where is
the Kingdom of Heaven? Where is the true Light of the Gospel? Where is the best
Profession, and the best Administration of Ordinances? And in the mean time,
that I do not look for the Truth of Faith, the Truth of Repentance, the
Spirituality of Knowledge, the power of Holiness upon my own Heart, and upon my
own Life. O that every one of us might make this use of it, to turn that Light
of Profession Inward* to search our own Hearts (as it were) with a Lamp
lighting inwards, and with Candles, that we may know how it is with our own
Souls. And then,

2. Let us look earnestly forward to that Appearance, to that Kingdom of
Heaven, which our Lord has here presented to us; It is to come to another
Being, to another Representation than is now. We see things now, but in a very
dim and a dark Light: As I have often told you, we are in the foul, and in the
dark place of the Apostasy yet. The Time is near at hand, when every thing
shall be seen in its full Light, and in its glorious Appearance and
Representation.

And then, Though it is a Day of Terror to all wicked, profane, and dissolute
Persons, under general Profession of Christianity. And though it be a terrible
Day also to Virgins that have Oil in their Vessels; that is, who make a great
deal of their Profession, and have no Truth of Grace; it will be terrible to
them, when they come to find themselves so sadly benighted and darkened, in the
very Heaven of their Profession; as the Expression is in the Prophet; Their
very Lamp goes out in obscure darkness.

Yet it is a Day of Rejoicing, and a Day of Glory in it self. And what great
Reason have we earnestly to pray, every one for our selves, and for them that
are in such a dark and hopeless condition, that they have not so much as Lamps;
even those that are under the Profession of Christianity, and yet are in such a
case; Now, I say, in regard to the hopeless state of all those; and that we,
who have a clearer Light of the Gospel breaking out, may have more of the
power; We have Reason to pray for the Approach of that Time, when the Kingdoms
of this World, shall be Proclaimed to be the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ; When the Spirit shall be poured out upon us from on high; and the
Everlasting Gospel shall be preached to every Nation, and Tongue, and People
under Heaven. O! that our Hearts were earnest for this Time, and this State;
and that our Souls would give God ^^orest, till he come* and Rain Righteousness
upon us; till he be pleased to open (as it were) the very Windows of Heaven,
and to Rain down great Showers of Gospel Truth, and Gospel Grace and Peace, as
He will do, before that Great, and Illustrious Day of the Lord come.

SERMON II. On Matthew. XXV. Ver. 1. and so on. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven
be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom, etc.


I Have begun to lay, before you the great Importance of this Parable, and
Reduced it to this Proposition, as a Foundation of Discourse on the Particulars;

That even the Purest, and most Virgin-Profession of Christianity, should look
well to it self, and take great care, that it does not trust even in the best
of Appearance of Things; I say, in the very best of Appearances; but that it
should look to the inward Treasure, and the intrinsic value of Christianity in
the Heart.

Because here the Foolish Virgins were pleased with the Lamp of Profession,
without the Treasure of Oil in the Vessel; and when it came to the great
Up-shot and Result, their Lamps quickly went out; they failed, even in the very
time; and so they were for ever shut out from the Glory, and the Joy, and the
Happiness of the Solemnity of the Wedding.

Having laid out this Point in the Particulars of the Parable; I came to the
first Particular, and that was to tell you, That the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is
throughout, from first to last, The Kingdom of Heaven; whether you consider it
in the Preaching of the Gospel, it is the opening of Heaven, and of the great
Counsels of the Eternal Wisdom of God in the Heavens; Or, whether you consider
it, as it comes into the Heart of every particular Christian; so it is the
power of Heaven, enabling them to set such a value upon Jesus Christ, that all
the Things of the World are of no Account, compared with the Pearl of Great
Price* Or, whether you consider it in the last Glorious Appearance of this
Kingdom, so it is Heaven; It is not a State that does so much as pretend to any
Sensual Enjoyment, to any worldly Satisfaction; to any of the Grandeur of this
World, or the Delights of it; but it is perfect Heaven; it is Heaven
throughout. This I have spoken of, and so I shall not add any Thing to it.

I come to a Second Particular in This General; and that is, to let you know,
from the Representation our Savior has here given; That the very Intent of
Christianity, the Great Design and Purport of it is this; It is a Preparation
to the Enjoyment of Jesus Christ; as the Great Bridegroom of our Souls, and as
the Bridegroom of his Church. For so it is said here, These Virgins They took
their Lamps; That is, As soon as ever they began to make a Profession of
Christ, and a Profession of Christianity; Immediately, in that very moment,
they had an Eye to the Bridegroom.

So that this is the Great Purport of Christianity, That we should have a
Spiritual Marriage-Union with Jesus Christ; and in Order to the Enjoyment of
him, in the Glory of his Kingdom, as the Bridegroom of our Souls. It is a very
Great Emphasis and Weight that the Spirit of God has put upon this Resemblance,
or Similitude of the Marriage Union between Christ and the Soul, and between
Christ and his Church.

And if I should be any thing able to declare and to open it to you at this
Time, in the Spirituality of it, and thereby solicit, and draw the Affections
of every one of us to Jesus Christ; I should in some measure Answer that which
John the Baptist Represents, John 3. 29. He that has the Bride is the
Bridegroom: but the Friend of the Bridegroom, which stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom's Voice. This my Joy therefore is
fullfilled. That is, There is no one, Preaching the Gospel, who ought to draw
the Affection of Souls and of Spirits unto himself, but he is to look only to
the Great Bridegroom; None of the Friends of the Bridegroom, That is, The
Preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, They are not to draw the Hearts of Men
to themselves. For what are they, as the Apostle says (if they are the most
Excellent) but Ministers, by whom ye have believed? But, as the Apostle says,
We preach Christ Jesus the Lord; and our selves your Servants for Christ's
sake: We preach Christ the Bridegroom, and our selves only the Friends of the
Bridegroom. And therefore every one should take heed, that there be no Centring
in himself* (that speaks of Christ) but only in Christ Himself. And so every
one of us should take heed, that we do not Rest and Center in an Ordinance, or
in a Discourse of Christ; but that our Hearts go up to Christ Himself. For he
that has the Bride is the Bridegroom: And the Friend of the Bridegroom
rejoices when he hears the voice of the Bridegroom. That is, when he finds
that he speaks to any Heart, and draws any Soul to him. How Happy would it be,
if in this Discourse the voice of the Bridegroom might be heard, and discovered
in any of our Hearts* and that it might be known, that this Preaching of Christ
has prevailed at all, upon any Soul! This is to Rejoice in hearing the voice
of the Bridegroom. O therefore that this Joy might be fullfilled in you that
hear, and in me that am speaking to you! But as he goes on) he must increase,
and I must decrease. That is, In all wherein we may seem to be serviceable to
Christ, or serviceable to the Souls of Men, that must go off: And then the
Kingdom and Glory of Christ Himself, that is It that must increase. And
therefore for those that hear, and those that speak, to meet one another in
that Great Solemnity, and in that Great Glory; and to find that all is gone
off, but only Christ; How Glosious and how Blessed will this State be!

I shall therefore endeavor to open this Great Point* in some measure unto
you: Though I know it is not possible to speak of it as it is to be spoken of.
But I shall therefore,

First, Lay down this, as a Great Scripture-Point, as a Great Scrippture* Truth;

That there is such a Marriage-Union betwixt Christ and his Church, and betwixt
Christ and every particular Soul.

In the second place, I shall endeavor to show you, wherein it stands at the
present.

First, In the Opening of it, I shall show you, That there is a State of it
Now. And then.

That there is to be the Glory, and the Height of this State in the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ. Therefore I shall endeavor to show you, wherein it stands now.
And then,

In the third place, How the Glory of it shall break out; and in what
Expressions the Scripture has assured that to us: And therefore, that every
one of us should look upon our Profession, as a Fitting, and a Preparation to
that Great Solemnity of the Marriage* Supper of the Lamb.

I. The first Scripture by which I shall make it evident to you, is indeed a
Scripture full of Mystery; full of Figure, of Metaphor and Emblem; and
therefore it may not be so ea^ie to your Apprehension.

It Is that of the Song of Solomon; It is an hard thing almost to advise you to
the Reading of it; because it lies hid under Veils; It ^ies hid under curious
Allegories and Representations. But that is the very ^ense of it, Chap. 1. 3.
Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee. Draw
me, we will run after thee: The King has brought me into his Chambers: we will
be glad and rejoice in thee; we will remember thy Love more than W^ne: the
upright love thee, Ver. 3, 4. All this, it is but Metaphor, Representing
Christ, as Drawing with the Savor of his Good Ointments: As Persons make
themselves Acceptable by those things that draw and win upon the Sense, and so
upon the Sense of Smelling. This Savor of his Good Ointment draws Souls to
Christ. That is, those Rich, Spiritual Excellencies in Him, win upon the Souls
of those that are indeed truly his, that are indeed Virgins; They draw the Love
of Souls after Christ: The Pardon of Sin; His Righteousness; His Resurrection
in the Power of it; His Death in the Power of it: His Life in the Power of it;
The Glory of His Kingdom: These Draw Souls. Draw me, we will run after thee.
And the upright love thee. All that have Sincerity in the Profession of
Christianity, they truly love him.

And thus there is a Thread drawn throughout that whole Book, till it comes to
the very Glory of the Kingdom of Christ. The last Words signify it; Make
haste, my beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or to a Young Heart upon the
Mountains of Spices. That is; The State of the Kingdom of Christ is just like a
Mount of the most Aromatic, of the Sweetest Perfumes of Glory and Happiness.
This is the first Scripture that lays this great Point down before us: And
there are many Expressions, especially in that Evangelical Prophet, the Prophet
Isaiah, comparing the Union betwixt Christ and his Servants to a Marriage; and
to a Marriage that shall be solemnized, at last, in Glory.

But the second Scripture that I would give you concerning it, is Ephesians. 5.
Where the Apostle does draw, or delineate this very whole Representation before
us, in the Beginning, and in the Perfection of it: And indeed, he introduces
the very first Institution and Appointment of Marriage, to bring it all to
this; That there was in it a much more Glorious Purpose, to prepare for, and to
Represent the Union betwixt Christ and his Church. In speaking therefore of the
Duty of Husbands to their Wives, he enters into this Great Discourse: says he,
The Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church;
and he is the Savior of the Body. Therefore as the Church is subject unto
Christ, so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing: And Christ,
as an Husband ( ver. 25.) He loved the Church, and gave himself for it; That he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, That he
might present it to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. For indeed, (as
I shall presently show you, out of a Great Type of the Law of Moses, in this
Thing) Christ takes those, whom he must Beautify: He takes those whom he must
every way fit for so great an Enjoyment as that of Himself: He takes them out
of Corruption, out of Impurity and Defilement, in a Miserable, and Loathsome,
and Captivated State and Condition: But he never leaves till he brings it to
this; That he may present them to Himself; That he may take them to Himself,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. And then (says he) for this Cause
a Man shall leave his Father and Mother, and shall be Joined to his Wife; and
they shall be one flesh.

This is a Great Mystery. But I speak concerning Christ and the Church. That
is, Here lies the Mystery, the Great Point that I intend to present to you;
that close Union that is betwixt Christ and his Saints. And it comes (as I told
you) to that Gloty, that He presents it to Himself a Glorious Church, without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

And if you would know when this is; It is at the time of the Kingdom of
Christ; at the time when he has destroyed False Christianity; that
Christianity that is called in the Professors, and Profession of it The Whore.
When that is quite taken away; that is, when all False Christianity shall be
driven out of the World, and forced out, by the Power, and by the Glory of
Christ; Then shall be this Glorious Solemnity of the Marriage of Christ, Rev.
19. 1, 2. And so on in the Chapter.

And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in Heaven, saying,
Allelujah; Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lordour God:
For true and righteous are his Judgments; for he has judged the Great Whore?
What is the Great Whore, but only False Christianity, called, Babylon the
Great, that has defiled the Doctrine, and defiled the Worship, and defiled the
Holiness of Conversation, and defiled the Spirituality of the Enjoyment of
Christ. That Is the meaning of the Great Whore. When therefore you see
Christianity is All Spirit, is All Heaven, is All Life, is All Purity, and
Truth, and Glory, and Babylon destroyed; when you see that, then Immediately
shall the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb follow: As you shall find in the 7th
Verse: Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the Marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. And to her was
granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white: For the
fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints. And he says unto me, Write,
Blessed are they which are called unto the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. And he
says unto me, These are the true Sayings of God.

That you may not say as the World is ready to do; even the Sober World, even
that which is the Professing World of Christians are ready to say, these things
are nothing, but Whimsie, nothing but Fancy, it is said, These are the true
sayings of God. To show us, that the things shall certainly, and must needs
come to pass: And it shall be, when Christianity shall be no longer in Form,
and it shall be no longer in Rites and Ceremonies; when it shall be no longer
in Humane Institutions, and Commands; and it shall be no longer in the shining
Grandeur of the World.

For, Men cannot see the Glory of Christianity, because they see such a Glister
of this World: But all this must go off, and what is Glorious indeed must come
in its place; It shall be all Spiritual, Pure, and Divine.

And, If any of us can Love such a Jesus, if we have such upright Hearts, and
are drawn with the Savor of His Good Ointments, and such a Name as His, be to
us, as Ointment poured forth; It is certain, our State is Good, we are of those
upright, that do indeed Love Christ. But, If we say, Here Is nothing of the
Bravery of this World; Here Is nothing of the Wit, and of the Pass-time and of
the Gaudery, and of the Retinue, and what the World is so pleased with, and
meeting together to talk of nothing, that signifies any thing, but shrivells
into mere Emptiness, and into perfect Vanity, and Froth: I say, except we have
these things, we don't know what to make of this Jesus, and of this
Christianity. Why then, we are but Foolish Virgins, that while we pretend; we
have nothing but a Lamp, and our Lamp, at the proper time for its shining in
Glory will go out.

And, so suitably and agreeably to this (you may see, and I desire you may take
notice of it, how Scriptures do agree, and Breath the very same thing) The
Apostle John in the Revelation speaks as Solomon, who lived many Hundred Years
before John; yet they both came into the very same Spirit, and into the very
same Representation. For, you see, that which Solomon Celebrates under a Song
of Marriage, a Song of Love; The Apostle John does in the very same manner,
Represent. I saw (says he) The New Jerusalem come down, That is, the State of
Saints, in this High, and Pure, and perfect Enjoyment of Christ. I saw it come
down as a Bride adorned for her Husband. Chap. 22. 2. I saw the Holy City, New
Jerusalem. Which is nothing, but the Pure, and Holy, and Perfect, and Happy
State of Saints. I saw it coming down from God out of Heaven, as a Bride
adorned for her Husband.

And now, the earnestness of all our desires should be after it. As it is said,
(ver. 17.) The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; And let him that hears, say,
Come. That is, let them who hear say so; as struck with a Symphony, even as one
Lute Answers another, the Lute upon the Wall, Answers that is struck, and
Tuned, and Played upon: So every Soul Tuned aright by Grace does sound alike,
with the Spirit and with the Bride, when he does but hear it say Come; It
immediately says, Come.

Thus I have showed you, that this Allusion, Representation, and Figure, is a
Figure Representing this great thing; Jesus Christ is the Bridegroom of the
Church, and every Particular Soul the Bride, or Lambs Wife; For, it is a wild
sort of Notion, that some people have of a Church: Who by it Principally mean a
kind of Jurisdiction, and Authority, and Power, and a sort and set of Men who
should enjoy it; They mean this by the Church they speak so much of; Whereas
the Spirit of God means by the Church chiefly Real Christians, sound,
sincere-hearted Professors of Jesus Christ, and Lovers of him; The upright Love
thee; This is the meaning of a Church by Christ, and not a kind of Authority
and Jurisdiction, that looks more like a Train, and a Court of this World, than
any thing of the Power of Christianity, and the Power of the Gospel.

I shall therefore come, in proceeding in this Discourse, to open to you these
two things.

First, That there is a State of this Marriage-Relation to Christ; understand
every thing (as I hope you do) spiritually and of the Power of Holiness in our
Hearts, and of the free Communication of the Righteousness, and Grace, and
Spirit of Christ, Till all appears in Glory; understanding it thus, (I say)
There are two great Spaces, Two Great States of it, one that is Here; and then
the other, that shall be in the Glory of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. And it
has pleased God to take great care, that both these should be Represented to
us.

First of all, the State of the Soul here; It is like an Espousal, it is like a
Betrothing, it is like that, that we call among us, a Contract of Marriage: And
according to Scripture, there is a distance between it, and the Solemnity, and
Completing and Consummation of the Marriage. And this is very necessary for us
to consider, that now is the time of preparing, and fitting Souls for that
Great Solemnity; And therefore we read of a Virgin Betrothed to an Husband,
before the Solemnity of the Marriage; upon which Account, to the Jews it was
appointed by Moses, that there should be at least, Thirty days between the one
and the other; And they looked upon it, as a Breach, and an Infraction upon the
Mosaick-Law, If there was not such a Time of Preparation; And some very
Conscientious Ministers of the Gospel have been of the Judgment, that there
ought to be such a kind of Preparation; And that it is agreeable to the Law of
God, for the Wisdom and Decency of such a Solemnity as Marriage; I shall not
insist upon that. But it is very clear, that such a thing was in use among the
Jews, and that the Law has very great regard and respect to such a thing, and
that the Scripture is drawn out in such a manner of Expression.

Now, It is nothing to speak of the Figure, that is not at all to my purpose;
But to let you know, that there is a Time of Espousals of Sculs to Jesus Christ.

According to this, and to Ground the Allusion to you upon it; we find, Matthew.
1. 18. The Birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise; When as his Mother, Mary was
Espoused to Joseph, before they came together: Before they came to dwell
together, and to have the Marriage Solemnized, while she was his Spouse; and so
the Gospel History goes on; So I say, there is an Espousal of Souls to Jesus
Christ; and that is in the present State, in the present State wherein we are
under the Preaching of the Gospel; wherein we are under the motions of the
Spirit of Christ; Here Christ begins, and he Sanctifies and Cleanses by the
Washing of Regeneration, and by his Word, that he may present every Soul:
There Is the method of it, It begins here in a preparation; And therefore we
should consider, whether we are under this preparation now for Jesus Christ;
Whether our affections are drawn to him; Whether we hear the Voice of the
Bridegroom speaking to us; Whether we have found the Savor of the Good
Ointments of Christ, and that it is not a Savor of Death, As the Apostle
speaks, in that great Scripture 2 Cor. 2. 14. Now Thanks be unto God, which
always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the Savor of his
knowledge by us in every place. The Savor Osme, that is the rich Perfume in
every place, as in Solomon's Song: says he, Because of the Savor of the good
Ointments, The Virgins Love thee. And, draw me, and we will run after thee; Thy
Name is Ointment poured forth: Now the Apostle speaks just, as if he had taken
his words out of that of Solomon's Song; Says he, Who makes manifest the
Savor, or Perfume, the Odor, or perfume of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. For
(says he) We are unto God a sweet Savor of Christ, in them that are saved,
and in them that perish; That is, whether Men are taken, and drawn, and
persuaded by this Savor, Odor, or Rich Perfume, or not, it is all one.
Suppose the Perfume does not go down into our Hearts, and into our Thoughts and
Affections, yet it arises up to Heaven, and there it is accepted; If there be
none of you, that hear, or, I that speak at this Time (Which I hope is far
different) who find the Savor, and Excellency and Perfume of Christ, and of
his Doctrine, and of the Knowledge of him; yet still this Savor, this Odor
rises up to Heaven, and God is pleased with the Savor, tho we find nothing at
all in it: But, says he, we are to some a Savor, or Odor of Death unto
Death* That is, if a Man says, I find nothing, that you can say, offering the
strong scent, and Knowledge of Jesus Christ; I do not find the Attractive, and
VVinning Virtues and Powers of it; They do not at all prevail upon me: This is
certainly unto Death; A Savor of Death, without Life, and unto Death: As it is
said of natural Odours and Scents, that they wrap, and twist themselves about
the Brain, and win upon the sensitive Power of a Man, and so they draw, and
please, and allure. In the very same manner, the Knowledge of Christ; When we
hear of a Crucified Savior, who dyed for our Sins, and to bring us out of this
Misery and Ruin, it gives us the Savor, it wraps it self, and Twists, and
Twines it self about our Minds, our Hearts, and Affections, and we cannot stir
away from it, because it is so excellent, so desirable; Here Is a Savor of Life;
here is a quick, and a powerful Savor.

But now, on the other side, when Men find not, when they feel not any such
thing; They say, this is a Dead Root; It has not the proper scent of such a
Root; and it is not such a Rich and an Admirable Ointment, as you speak of; we
find nothing at all in it. If we speak of Eating, and Drinking, and Buying, and
Selling, and Riding out, and Enjoying and taking Pleasure, and having great
Entertainments of Company; this we understand; But to say, Get into Christ;
mind Him; get the Assurance of the Love of God in Him; Pardon of Sin in Him: We
find nothing in this: It is a Dead Savor; Why then (says the Apostle) It is
to Death: It argues all is to Death.

Or, in another comparison, if we should bring (as Physicians say) a strong
Suffumigation to the Nostrils of a Person that is in a dangerous state (as the
way is, to bring strong Scents just under their Nostrills; those that are
proper to stir up the Brain): and no Effect follows; This is to Death; The man
is a Dead man. So when Christ is brought, and the Doctrine of his Salvation, to
a Soul; and there is nothing at all of Worth, Effect or Efficacy, This Death is
unto Death; Just as such a kind of Suffumigation brought to a Dying Person, and
no Effect, argues, That he will die presently, if the strongest Savours and
Perfumes have no Effect, and the Brain is just ready to be laid asleep in Death.

So Conscience, and Inward Sense, which God has planted in a man, in order to
Spiritual Life, if they stir not at the Savor of Christ, it argues a person
left of God, and he is under the Doom and Sentence of Death: If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them who are lost.

Further, To Represent the main Point we are upon, to you, to show you in what
a State we are now, give me leave to make use of a Type, in the Law of Moses,
in this Thing; because it does greatly Represent it; and I make no doubt, it
was intended to this very purpose that I am now speaking of. It is said, Deuteronomy.
21. 10. When thou go forth to war against thine Enemies. (I desire you to
take notice, that I speak only of it, by way of Allusion, and as a Type of this
Thing). When thou go forth to war against thine Enemies, and the Lord thy
God has delivered them into thine hands, and thou have taken them captive; and
thou see among the captives a beautiful woman, and have a desire unto her,
that thou would have her to thy Wife: Then shall thou bring her home unto
thine house, and she shall shave her Head, and pare her Nails; And she shall
put off the Raiment of her Captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine
house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month, etc.

From which it may appear, (as I told you before) That God did ordain, and
appoint under the Law, That there should be Thirty Days between the Contract of
Espousals, and the Marriage. Such Time there was at least to be, and especially
in the case of a Captive.

But here is the Thing that I intend:

We are all Captives, in a lost, and in an undone condition, in a ruined state;
And therefore, if Christ has a desire to any of our Souls, in Grace, and
Mercy, and Pity, and Compassion; there passes such a kind of Preparation, such
a kind of fitting of us, for such an Union to Jesus Christ; There is a Shaving
of the Head, and a Paring of the Nails; That is, the taking away of the Innate
Superfluity of Lust by Regeneration, the changing of the unholy, and
unspiritual, and unheavenly Temper of Heart and Mind, by Regeneration flowing
from the Blood of Christ; That it may be brought into a nearness, and
suitableness to Enjoy Christ: And there is the appointment of a Month, there is
an appointment of Time of Preparation, wherein the Souls of his Servants are
daily washed in his Blood, and in the Crystal Sea before the Throne; They
generally walk with him, and find a Suitableness, and an Agreeableness between
Christ, and them; till they come to say, they would never be separated any more
from him. They desire to be joined to him in an Everlasting Covenant (as it is
said in the Prophet Jeremy) that should never be forgotten; They desire to
forget all that, that they were used to, and united to before; and to be given
up wholly and entirely to Jesus Christ.

Now, as it was under the Law; If any Woman being Espoused to a Husband, did
violate the Covenant of the Espousals, and the Contract of the Espousals; They
were to dye for it. The Woman and the Man, that did so violate the Covenant of
the Espousals; Both the Man and the Woman were to dye, according to the Law of
God, by Moses; even as if the Espousals had been fully, and completely
consummated, by Marriage; There was no Difference in that Case between the one
and the other.

So I say, if now, in the Time of our Espousals, when we are under a Profession
of Christ, under a Profession of his Name, his Gospel, and Salvation by him, if
our Hearts be not true, and entire to him, and given up wholly to him; Our
Condemnation will be as Great, nay, it will be greater, than of the Heathen,
than those of the unbelieving World, of those that deny Christ; of those that
we call Anti-Christians, or Professors at large; It will be greater
Condemnation, because we violate the Love of our Espousals.

Here Is the great Wisdom of God, in Representing this thing to us; that we may
know how to behave our selves, and give up our selves, to Christ, and to devote
our selves to him, in this State of our Espousals.

In Psalm. 45. You have an admirable Representation of this, under Pharaoh's
Daughter, that was an Egyptian, Married to that great Prince of the God of
Israel, of the God that made Heaven and Earth; Where it is said, ver. 10.
Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine Ears, forget also thine
own People, and thy Fathers House; So shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty,
for he is thy Lord, and Worship thou him: The Kings Daughter is all Glorious
within, her Clothing is of wrought Gold, she shall be brought unto the King in
Raiment of Needle Work; The Virgins the Companions that follow her, shall be
brought unto thee: With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought; They
shall enter into the Kings Palace. Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy
children, whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth; And so the Psalm goes
on in that same kind of Representation; which is chiefly intended of Christ,
and his Church, of Christ and the Soul.

Therefore, I say to you, I say to every one; Hearken O Soul! Hearken, O Soul,
and consider; Forget thine own People, and thy Fathers House; That is, Forget
that State of Sin, and Vanity, and of the World; All that thou derivest from
the First Adam thy Father, forget it all; So shall the King greatly desire thy
Beauty; for he is thy Lord, and Worship thou him. And if any thing seem
valuable to us in this World; Let us forget it all, that we may give up our
selves to our Espoused King. Ay, but how shall I leave my pleasures? How shall
I leave this and that Enjoyment, this and that Relation that are so dear to me?
Why, says the Spirit of God, ver. 16. Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy
children, whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth, I will make thy Name
to be Remembered in all Generations, therefore shall the People praise thee for
ever and ever.

That is, there shall be a great Recompense to every one, that leaves this
World, and the things of it, in their Affections, to devote and give up
themselves to Christ. Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy children, whom thou
may make Princes in all the Earth. Thou shall have Recompenses enough; And
thou shall be Praised for ever and ever. The Graces, the Privileges, the
Enjoyments shall be great, and thou shall be Glorious for ever.

If therefore we could hearken, and incline to the Terms of Jesus Christ, if we
could be willing to shave our Heads, and to Pare our Nails, and to put off the
Garments of our Captivity, The King would desire our Beauty: Nay, indeed, He
Loves, and Does all this for us, and makes us willing to have it all done. For
a Spiritual Captivity is loved, while a Bodily Captivity is hated; We love the
Garments of a Spiritual Captivity, even our Lusts and Pleasures, and Worldly
Enjoyments, which are the Garments of our Captivity; and They are so precious
to us, we cannot Naturally endure to part with them, to be clothed with change
of Raiment, when Jesus Christ, the Great Husband and Spouse of our Souls is
offered to us: And This Perpetuates our Captivity.

And thus I have made use of the Similitude, because the Scripture is so very
admirable, and abundant in it.

I Will offer you One Scripture more, and so pass on to the Second Particular.
Hosea 2. God there compares his Church, and so every Soul, to an Impure and
Adulterous Woman, that follows after her Lovers: But, says God in the 6th Ver.
Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with Thorns, and make a Wall, that
she shall not find her paths. And she shall follow after ber Lovers, but she
shall not overtake them: And she shall seek them, but she shall not find them:
Then shall she say, I Will go and return to my first Husband, for then was it
better with me than now. Therefore (says God in the 4th Verse) I Will allure
her: That is, I Will speak to her very heart. And I Will bring her into the
Wilderness, and I Will draw her, and speak every way to her heart; And then in
the 19th Verse, I Will betroth thee unto me for ever; Yea, I Will betroth thee unto
me in Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies.
All this indeed, has a peculiar Relation to the Church of Israel: But it is
true of every Soul, and of every Spirit, that Christ speaks to, and draws to
love him, as its Husband, and Spouse: He does allure, and speak to their
Hearts, He does hedge up their way; If God see that any of His love the World,
or Relations, or any Thing better than himself, He Will hedge up their way; They
shall not find their way.

Thus you see there is a Time of Preparation, wherein Christ is fitting, and
preparing, and drawing the Soul to Himself.

2. In the Second Particular I will enlarge a little further upon this Point of
our Espousals, and draw to a conclusion; and therein show you, That we may all
discern wherein, and whereby the Soul is thus drawn to an Union with Jesus
Christ, to this Spiritual Union with him.

1. In the first place; It is by the Souls seeing, and finding that it is in a
miserable, and a Lost, and a Captivated condition without him; When it comes to
find it self in the Hands of Justice, In the Hands of Divine Wrath, and
Indignation: When it finds it self in all its Impurity, and in all its
Unholiness without Him, it comes then to desire him, to receive his offer, to
unite with him. Now, this is not only by way (as some, it may be, have
insisted upon it) by way of preparation, but it runs throughout all the present
State. A true Christian is continually looking upon himself, as a Captive; It
is not a thing of preparation only, But it flows out from the Efficacious
Grace and Spirit of the Lord Jesus; That every Soul that is thus united to
Christ, it finds, it does not know what to do with it self without him; Nor
that it is only drawn by fear, but (as I shall presently tell you, tho very
Briefly) it is drawn by Love to him. But I say, because we are Captives,
because we are brought out of another Land; a Land of Darkness, a Land of
Impurity, a Land not suitable to the Land of Promise; because we are brought
out of that, Therefore there must be a continual consideration of the
necessity, that lies upon us: And it is not Derogatory to our Love of Christ,
or to the Grace of Christ, that our first State, being a Captivated State is
known to us to be such a Captive State; And therefore to be made Free by such
Rich Grace, as that the Great Prince and Lord of Life should have a desire to
us, that he should look upon that of his own Grace, which is all the Beauty
that is in any, that God has Loved them with an Everlasting Love; the
Beautiful Person is only he, that God has from an Eternal free Love, and
Grace (when we were all together lost and undone in our selves) looked upon,
and made his Time, in the proper season of being brought home to him, tho we
are found in all our Impurities, To be the Time of Love. How great is it!

Now, when any one of us is under this Grace of God, Jesus Christ looks upon
us; He beholds the choice of God, he beholds the Love of God upon us; And such
a one is as a Beautiful Person in his Eye: And so he takes care to Shave the
Head, and to Pare the Nails, and to change the Garments of Captivity, and to
bring him home to himself. This I say, it is not preparation Hammered out, and
Anvil'd by our own strength, Power or Consideration; but it is a first Davvn
of the Grace of Christ, of the Love of Christ, through the Election and Choice
of God upon us

Here is the very Beginning of the thing. For, as I read to you out of Ephesians.
5. Christ Loves the Church first of all; and then he Sanctifies it, and Washes
it with the Water, and with the Regeneration of his lord, and of his Spirit: He
first of all Loves it Who Loved the Church, and gave himself for it. His Love
is like the first Love of Espousals, of drawing the Soul into a Condition, and
State of Espousals to himself. And so he Sanctifies and Washes it with Water;
and Regenerates and Renews it, and takes away the Prison-Garments, the
Captive-Garments; Which, it may be, look Beautiful to those that are yet
Ensnared; They look upon all the Enjoyments and Pleasures of the World, to be
the greatest Bravery. But now, when Christ comes to show them what their State
is, then they come to cry out, at the first, and so ever after, as the Apostle,
Romans 7. 24. O wretched Man that I am, Who shall deliver me from this Body of
Death! And you see, he speaks of it in the very same Language, (ver. 23.) I see
another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me
into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in any Members. It is a continuing
sense on every Soul in Christ.

2. The second thing wherein this is showed; It is in drawing the sincerest,
and Purest, and Chastest Love of the Soul unto Jesus Christ.

When Christ, by his Spirit, in his word, and by the Friend of the Bridegroom,
that is, by the Preaching of the Word of Christ, when he draws the entirest
affections of Souls to himself; Showing his Love to them, in the Pardon and
Forgiveness of Sins, he draws their hearts entirely, and unitedly to himself.
He does therefore, first of all, (as it were) send the Soul the Wedding Garment
of his own Righteousness; He sends it a Robe, a Vest, from himself, of his own
Righteousness, and of the sanctification of his own Spirit. And this enkindles,
and enflames the Love of the Soul unto Jesus Christ: The Apostle speaks in this
Language, in the 2 Cor. 11. 1. Would to God you could bear with me a little,
etc. For I am Jealous over you with a Godly Jealousy: For I have Espoused you
to one Husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. The Preaching
of the Gospel, and the drawing of Souls, it is the Espousal of them to one
Husband, and presenting them a Chaste Virgin. That is, with undefiled, and
Inviolable affections to Jesus Christ: When the Love of the Soul is thus drawn
to him, united to him, The upright, as I said to you before, Love him. And when
once this Love of the Soul to Jesus Christ is indeed kindled, where it is
sincere, and indeed kindled to him, O how strong, and how vehement is it!

It is true, it is from the Love of Jesus Christ made known to it: Even as you
know, Love draws and wins Love back again upon it self.

This is admirably set out to us in the eighth Chapter of the Song of Solomon.
Set me (says she) as a Seal upon thine Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm. Let
the Love of Christ be to me so, as if be set me as a Seal upon his Heart, as a
Seal upon his Arm.

This is the greatest Indenture, the strongest obligation and uniting of the
Lord Jesus Christ to the Soul, and of the Soul thereby to him again: for then,
Love is as strong as Death, and it is cruel as the Grave; The coals thereof are
coals of Fire, which has a most vehement Flame; Many Waters cannot quench
Love, neither can the floods drown it: If a Man would give all the substance of
his House for Love. That is, to buy that Love off from Christ; That Is the
meaning of it; If a Man would give all the Substance of his House, where Love
is once fixed, to draw it off, It would utterly be contemned. Now this we
should look to, whether we have such a chaste, and Inviolable Love to Jesus
Christ, That all the substance of the World would be utterly contemned?
whether Christ has Set us as a Seal upon his Heart, and Arm? It is impossible
then, it should ever be taken off.

3. The third is this, when once we come to be thus united to Christ, in the
Chastness and Purity of our Affections, in the sense of his Love to us, and our
Love to him; Immediately there follows, and all along there follows a
Self-Resignation, and Obedience: And it cannot be otherwise. For Love from a
worthy Person has a great command over those that are Loved; It has a mighty
command on the Persons Loved to engage to Love again; So that they are willing
to do any thing, to give up themselves to the will of the Person that Loves,
and is Loved upon his Love first. And this is most due indeed to our Lord Jesus
Christ; Because he is the most excellent of all that can be proposed to us; And
he Has Loved us, and Washed us in his Blood; And he thus wins us to his own
Holiness, Ephesians. 5. Says the Apostle, the Church is Subject unto Christ, as unto
the Head, the Savior of the Body. It is in a perfect compliance with the Holy
will of God.

Object. If you ll say, But how can we say this? We find many Imperfections in
our Obedience, many Motions in our Hearts, that are disloyal to Jesus Christ,
and are not at all according to the Obligations that lie upon us.

Answ. Because we are going on to perfection in this state, and because we find
that we are under a Degree of Captivity, and not perfectly freed; Therefore the
Soul cries out earnestly for the coming of the Great Bridegroom.

I shall but make Two or Three Expressions of Application, and so conclude this
Point.

1. In the First Place, I beseech you, that you would consider what your
Christianity is: If it be not so strict an Adherence of your Souls and
Affections to Christ, as every wise, and prudent, and good Husband requires and
expects from his Wife: I say, if it be not so, how is it possible that you can
say, That Christ is mine, and I am his? And therefore look well to it, and have
a Jealous Eye, as the Apostle said, I am Jealous over you with a Godly
Jealousy; So we should be All Jealous over our own Hearts, and the Motions of
our Eyes, to see whether there be such a Faithfullness to Jesus Christ, as
ought to be: When the Church is Subject to Christ, (as the most Excellent and
Virtuous Woman, and Wife, is to the most Honorable and Worthy Husband;)
There is not any thing then, that can, or ought, or is possible to come between
our Souls, and Jesus Christ.

And, If we cry out, Alas! We are not able hereunto, we do not find this.

I shall after, by the Grace and Assistance of God, press upon you; Every such
Discovery of the remaining defection and falseness of our hearts, It should
make us cry out earnestly, Come thou Beloved of my Soul; That there may be an
entire and a perfect Union between me and thee; Betwixt thy self and my heart.
This, it should make us weary of the World, and weary of Life, and weary of the
present State; We cannot find our hearts come up, as we desire they should. But
in the mean time, there is a True, and a Real, and a Substantial Faithfulness,
and Purity, and Chastity of Affections toward Christ in every Soul that is
His: That tho there are things that do not look so Resigning to Christ, as they
should do, and so perfectly complyant; Yet the Spirit is United to him: As the
Apostle speaks by way of Allusion to this very thing, in the 1 Cor. 6. latter
end. But he that is Joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. That is, in regard of
the present State of Flesh and Blood, there will be some Wanderings of Heart;
But the Spirit is Steadfast and Jealous over those Unholy and Impure motions
toward Sin, Flesh, and the World, and it gathers it self back, and it humbles
it self; And it bewails it self, in regard of the Trayterousness of the Flesh,
and corrupt part, wherein it does any way behave it self unworthily toward
Jesus Christ, that Savior of it self; He is the Savior of the Body, and
therefore the Church is Subject to him. And then,

2. In the Second Place; It should teach us very vehemently, to look and cry
out for that Time of free and full Enjoyments of Christ. I wonder we should not
be earnestly desirous, when I consider the Reason, the necessity, and the great
obligation which lies upon us; I wonder, we are not more earnest to dye, and to
be with Christ; we are apt to think there is a State of the World ordained,
wherein we should have such, and such Enjoyments, and bear up our selves for a
Time; While in the mean time, we forget Jesus Christ: But hereafter, it will be
endeavored to be made plain, in this Discourse, that either to go out of the
Body, and to be with Jesus Christ in Spirit; Or to have the whole frame of this
World unpinn'd and dis-joynted one part from another; That there may come that
Glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and that Marriage of the Lamb, and coming
down of that New-Jerusalem; (And our selves as a part of it) as a Bride adorned
for her Husband, is the Inward Groan of every Saint. These things should be
sweet to us: And we should not be Gulp'd down by the present Temptations of the
World, which have so much force, because our hearts are not steady to Christ; O
Let us look earnestly for that Love, which many Waters cannot quench, nor the
Floods drown.

And, If we find, that we cannot be, as we would be; We should therefore cry
out, Make haste, O Beloved; And appear upon the Mountain of Spices! That we may
be for ever quiet, and Pure, and Un-interrupted in our Love unto thee, and
receiving thine upon us.

SERMON III. On Matthew. XXV. Ver. 1. and so on to Ver. 13. Then shall the
Kingdom of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went
forth to meet the Bridegroom.


I Have entered into this Great Parable of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: And to
show you, That the Kingdom of Christ is from the very Beginning, to the End of
it, The Kingdom of Heaven; And that the Principal Point of the Kingdom, as Now,
is, The Espousing of the Spirits of his Saints unto Himself; That in the
Glorious Solemnity of the Marriage of the Lamb, They may be Bidden to that
Marriage-Supper: As the Expression is in the Revelation.

I shall now go on, as I intimated to you the Last Day, to show you, That This
Preparation for the Marriage, or for the Union with Christ, in that Great Glory
and Solemnity of his Kingdom, is Now: And all Christianity looks to That: I
say, It looks to that Glorious Solemnity. The Preparation is begun Now, and
then is the Glorious Solemnity. But in the Time of the Preparation, in the very
present Time, the Souls and Spirits of the Servants of Christ, move with an
Earnest Desire toward that Glory. They are, They ought to be moved to a desire
of the Glory of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. And All our Religion, All our
Christianity, All our Praying and Hearing, and Preaching, All the Graces that
we Labor after, our Faith and Repentance, our Holiness, our Obedience; All
these, they are to be Erected, they are to be lifted up, to be raised up to the
Glory, and to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; So that we ought to have an Eye in
Every Thing, to that State: For so you see it is here said, Ver. 1. There were
Virgins going forth to meet the Bridegroom. They took their Lamps, and they
went forth to meet the Bridegroom. Though the Bridegroom delayed his coming,
and did not come so soon as they might think, yet still they went forth to meet
the Bridegroom. All True Power of Grace and Holiness, and (as we speak) of
Religion; To be Religious; It is to go forth to meet the Bridegroom: This is
the Great Sense of it. Not that we shall be perfect here* in any Regard; But
our Perfection is in that Kingdom and Glory of Christ; It is in that Solemnity:
And therefore it is our Great Mistake, if we lay our Christianity lower than
This; If we don't Elevate, and Lift it up to This very Great Point, to meet the
Bridegroom: Our Lamp (that is, our Profession, and our Dealing in Christianity
now, and in all the Ordinances of it, and in all the Graces of it) is to this
very purpose, That we might be Daily meeting of the Bridegroom; That we might
be fit to meet the Bridegroom, and might bear up with the Glory, Greatness and
Excellency of that Solemnity.

I spoke to you the Last Day, of the Captive Person, that appeared Beautiful in
the Eyes of Him that had taken her captive: And, if it was so, that he desired
to Espouse her, she was to abide Thirty Days before the Marriage. That is,
There was to be a Time of Preparation. But now, I beseech you to consider, All
that very Time which we read of, in Deuteronomy. 21. 10. Her Head was to be shaved,
and her Nails to be pared, and the Raiment of her Captivity was to be taken off
from her; and she was to continue in the house of him that loved her; and to
bewail her Father, and her Mother, a full month. That is, Because she was taken
Captive, and taken from her nearest Relations; and was thus to be washed, and
her Head shaven, and her Nails pared. She was to be under such a Preparation
all that full Month, because a Pagan, a Stranger from the Commonwealth of
Israel: As I said to you, in the Expression of David: Forget thine own People,
and thy Father's House: So Christ gives us a Time of Preparation, a Time of
shaving our Heads, and paring our Nails, and taking off the Garments of our
Captivity, of our Corrupt and Impure State: We have a Month for this: That is,
such a Time as God allows his Servants here in the World; and such a Time as
his Church has before the Glory of the Nuptials, of the Wedding, and of his
Kingdom. And they are all this Time to bewail that State, that lost and undone
State, wherein they are by Nature: And all rhat Time now, that such Captives
were under this Months Delay, under this Months Preparation; Undoubtedly, they
had a Great Respect to the Honor, and to the Glory of the Nuptial Solemnity;
they did every thing with an Eye to that, and with an Order to that: And if it
had not been so to be Accomplished; All the Intention, All that was meant by
that of shaving the Hair, and paring the Nails, and taking off the Garments of
Captivity, had been to no purpose, she had been turned out again, and been a
Slave for ever, All these methods had been in vain; But because there was so
Honorable an Intention, as that of Marriage; That made all this easy and
sweet, and there was an Eye to it all along. In the very same manner, if we
have not an Eye to the Wedding; If we Love and Desire to stay in the State on
Earth, and not to come to the Honor of the Nuptials, to be the Bride and the
Spouse of Christ; We lay all our Religion and Profession too low.

And therefore, I shall desire to discourse this Point to you so, as may move
you most to draw up your hearts, not to a Christianity, as it is now, but as it
shall be in Glorious Solemnity of the Marriage of the Lamb: And to teach you,
that our Eye is to be all along upon that, and to discover to you the Greatness
of the mistake, in doing otherwise, I shall therefore discourse these Heads
upon it.

First, To open to you, what it is to be a Christian, and to be Religious, and
to be Godly, as we usually speak, with an Eye to that future State, to that
Glorious State of the Wedding of our Lord Jesus, And of our selves to be
Married in Glory to Him. And then,

In the Second Place, I shall show you the Great Reasons, why this, and nothing
else, is the Truth and Reality of Christianity. And then,

In the Third Place, I Will show you how it has come to pass, that this great
Aim and Designation of Christianity is fallen so very low, as it is in the
World. And then,

In the Fourth Place, I will Answer Objections to you by which you may seem to
think, or it may seem to you, that this is not so necessary, and absolutely
needful Doctrine, as I hope it will appear to you; And then,

In the Last Place, I Will close with the application of it.

First therefore, I begin to explain it to you, what it is to order our selves
so, as if there was nothing to come after, or as if we did not care how long
the Month of Preparation and Purification were drawn out; And what it is in
every thing to have our hearts raised and lifted up to this excellent end, to
this Glorious Point and Conclusion of the Marriage.

First therefore, you must consider, that we are all naturally upon this, to
fix a State here in this World; I say, we are naturally upon this, to fix a
State, as much as we can here in this World; We would have the Interest of this
World to stand; We would have Buying and Selling, and Planting, and Building,
and Marrying, and Giving in Marriage; We would have these things continue, and
the Breeding up of Children for it, in successive Generations; And we never
care nor desire to have an End of this; but we would have the World go on, and
we desire to live as long in it, every one of us, as we can; And to have as
much Interest in it, to have as much Enjoyment of it, to have as much of the
Riches, and of the Grandeur, and of the Honor, and of the Pleasure, and of the
Enjoyment of it, as we can: This is natural to us.

But now, when we come to raise our Christianity indeed; We are not so much
upon this World, but our Great thought is, concerning the future State, the
future Kingdom, and the future Glory: We are looking beyond this, we are
dealing with this World, as that that must wane, that must Decrease and Decay,
and we desire it should: We have inspected it; We have weighed it, and found it
too Light every way; And therefore we cannot be content with it; But we are
weary of the stay, and of the delay of it.

When we go forth indeed, with our Lamps to meet the Bridegroom, We do thus; I
say, we do thus. It is true indeed, we all profess this; We pretend to it; It
is the very necessary obligation of our Profession, to do thus, and to say, and
to carry it before all, that we do thus: But now, if you do but attend, and
hearken to the whispers of your own hearts, and to the discourses that are in
the World, and that we have one with another, You may plainly find, we desire,
that the World should be Eternal.

It is noted to be the great mistake and deception of some natural
Philosophers, that they believed, the World was Eternal, was from Eternity;
That it was always; And so it is an Eternal World, as they speak a Parte-Ante;
From the former part of it, it has been always: And, Indeed, it is as Great,
and as Ruinous a mistake in point of Practice, that we desire the World should
be for ever, that it should continue for ever in this very State, wherein it
is. It is true indeed, it is a very Atheistick Principle, to think, that the
World was from Eternity; And it would follow, if so, that it must be to
Eternity. But, I am not minding that Point now, but only allude to it; That as
they thought the World was from Eternity, So we desire it should be to
Eternity. And, it is as strange a thing to us, to be made to believe the End of
the World, and the End of the State of things, with any Definitiveness, or with
any certainty, as it was to the Jews, when they came to understand that Christ
did not intend an immediate Kingdom, in their Jewish State, and in that present
World. This present World is so exceeding Natural to us, That you see Men
Purchase, as if the World was still to last Ages: And who knows when it shall
have an End? And therefore Men desire to Propagate all the Worlds concernments,
even to Perpetuity.

But now, when a Christian comes indeed to consider; He always sets the Bounds
by his own thoughts to the World, he sets Bounds to the present Condition, by
Powerful and Effective thoughts of Eternity. Says he, this World is not to
last, I must deal with it, as with a World that is not to last.

Observe how the Apostle speaks: Indeed, I might give you many abundant
Scriptures, to show you how much their thoughts were upon the End of things;
The End of all things is at Hand. And the Apostle John tells us, the Fashion,
the Scheme of this World passes away. And, in 1 Cor. Chap. 7. That I would
desire you to consider of; Says the Apostle, Time is short: And it shall come
very speedily to that; That they that Marry should be as if they Married not;
And they that Weep, as tho they Wept not; And they that Laugh, as if they
rejoiced not; And they that buy, as if they possessed not.. Ver. 29. Now this
indeed* was spoken Sixteen Hundred Years ago; But we are now, as unwilling to
believe, that time is shorter, as any could be in those Days; And are as
tender, that any one should meddle with such a Point, that the present State
should be at an End: And every one desires Life, in his own particular; is
afraid of dying, and afraid of Growing old, of growing near to the Grave; It is
a very Melancholy prospect, (as we say) a Melancholy discourse, any thing that
looks to this point.

But now, our going forth to meet the Bridegoom, it must be much otherwise; We
read that the time is short; And the World continually passing and fleeting
away; Therefore remember indeed, what you pretend to, whether you do it, or
not; That you may bring your selves to the very thing, to do it; that is, that
you are daily going out To meet the Bridegroom.

For, on this other side; A Servant of God, he looks (as I may say) Bolt
upright; he lifts up his head, he raises up himself, to look up to that World
to come, whereof (says the Apostle) We speak, our Discourse is of that. We
look Bolt upright to that, we desire to get above this World, and to call for,
and pray for, and Covet that State of the World that is to come. It is indeed,
so great an Expression of the Apostle Peter, that I shall only make use of
that, in this present Case, and so pass on. 2 Pet. 3. 12. Says the Apostle,
Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the Day of God; When we are in
haste, that that day should come; This is to go forth to meet the Bridegroom,
when our earnest desires are to that

We Love all the Exchangings of this Life, the variety of the spending of our
Time in it; So much in sleeping, so much in Eating and Drinking; So much in
Dressing; So much in Buying and Selling; So much in visiting, and going about
to talk of things, that are of no moment. But now, a Christian goes out with
his Lamp to meet the Bridegroom: Even a Foolish Christian pretends to this, But
a Wise Christian really does it. And therefore, what cause have we to consider
this? To be ashamed, that we bear the Glory of this no more?

A Second Particular, in which I Will open it to you. A Man that is a Christian,
(But only a Foolish Virgin) he considers how much Religion will serve the
present Turn, the present Case.

For, you know (and it is very evident) that the World can be no more without
Religion, than it can be without Meat and Drink, and without Light; I mean,
some form, or some way of Religion; All Nations, and all Persons have found
some kind of necessity of it; For, first of all, we don't know how to put out
that natural Light, that is in every Man's Conscience; All the wit that ever
has been in the World, and the sharpest Atheistical Reason, could never
prevail to this, to cast it out of the humane Understanding and Conscience.

A Man may cast it out of Practical Conscience; But he can never cast it out of
that Intellectual, Convicting and Convincing Conscience: Now, because we must,
and would have some peace in our selves; We must have some Religion; Or else
Conscience will grumble, and be disquiet, and out of Ease, and out of Temper,
if there be nothing to Lull it, and satisfy it, that there is some sort of
Religion in Men. And then, Governors, and Rulers, even down to Masters of
Families, they find a necessity of Religion to Govern Mankind: It would not be
Governed, if there were not some Awe, and Power of Religion upon Men; If there
were not some Discerning of Good and Evil. So this brings something more of
Religion still. And then,

When Laws of Nations come to make Religion a Fashion, and to make it a thing
(as we speak) Established by Law; Then there comes a further necessity; For, if
a Man does nothing in Answer to this; He is looked upon, as a kind of a
Boutefeu, one that disturbs the world; And, Indeed, it is the greatest
Disturbance to a Nation, to deny Religion; To deny the Being of a God; To deny
the Distinction between Good and Evil. And then,

Men have hope that God will Bless them, when they are Religious; And
therefore, if they do not Pray, if they do not Read the word of God, and do
something; How (say they) should God Bless us? Here Is a further reason of
Religion. And then there is a Temper in Men, an Inclination, some in one way,
and some in another.

And God is pleased in the way of Common Providence, and Government of the
World to Imprint some sense, and awe of himself upon some more than others; And
yet all this may be laid to the very present State of this World, How else
should we live, Men say? or how should we expect a Blessing from Heaven? And
when Men are entered into a Profession, and are in a way of Profession; They
say, my Credit depends upon it, and my Reputation bears upon it, that I should
maintain and carry on a Profession.

But now, beyond all this, a True Servant of God, one that is truly Espoused
to Jesus Christ, and has Bride-like affection unto him, says, tho there were
not the least reason of Religion, upon any Account whatsoever of this World;
Yet I look for the Coming of the Bridegroom, and I desire to be given up to
him: For, there is my Happiness, and my Eternal Enjoyment; And therefore I look
not what will satisfy the World; For, if a Man be blameless in the Duties in
Public, and have them in his Family; All this is suited to the very Good of
the present World; If a Man minded his Interest in the present World, He would
take care of all this.

But now a Christian will ask, what Godliness is that, that will be accepted at
the coming of the Bridegroom? What is that Repentance, that Faith, that
Holiness, that Praying, that Hearing, that will be found unto Honor and Praise
at the coming of the Bridegroom? What must that kind of Grace be, that will
bear, and hold up, That will be as Oil in the Vessel, and in the Treasure, when
I meet the Bridegroom?

I am not concerned, whether the World speaks well, or ill of my Profession:
Not, but that a Man ought to have Respect to that, which is truly Praise
Worthy, and of Good Report.

But that, says the upright Soul, is not my End: But I have all my Relation to
the coming of my Bridegroom, and I look up to Him in all, how he is like to
accept of my Way, and of my Services. And this the Apostle, in another Case,
(But yet that may be very fairly, and well used in Relation to this) In that, 1
Cor. 7. 23. He that is Married, cares for the things, that are of the World,
how he may please his Wife. He that is unmarried (ver. 32.) Cares for the
things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. I would only a
little vary, and say.

That that Man that desires indeed to prepare, in every thing, to meet the
Bridegroom; He takes care in every thing, how he may please the Lord; How he
may Pray, and Hear, and Believe, and Repent, and Turn to God; How he may speak,
and think, and act in every Affair, and in every Business to please the Lord:
For (says he) with this, I am to meet the Bridegroom, And therefore I would
know how it takes with him, and how it is accepted by him. And this is for a
Man to go forth with his Lamp, to meet the Bridegrom, like a Wise Virgin, And
not like a Foolish one. For the Foolish Virgins (undoubtly) they had enough to
bear out in this World. I don't think, but our Lord's Intention in this
Parable, was to signify, that the Foolish Virgins were every way as fair to the
Eye, as the Wise Virgins were, in their going forth, and in their Lamps; But
here lay the difference; The Wise Virgins Aimed at that, that would stand, in
the day when the Bridegroom came; And they to go to the Marriage. And
therefore, let us look back in every thing, and compare our selves, with what I
have spoken: Let there be a Brief Application, and a Brief Reflection by every
one upon our selves, so far as I have gone.

I come now to the second thing; And that is, to prove to you, that if our
Religion should be no better, nor no higher; If It had no higher End, nor
business, than only to comport to the present State of this world, It were
nothing indeed, at all, if it be not raised much higher, in being prepared to
meet, and to Enjoy the Bridegroom. Therefore we should haste on, that is the
thing I am upon, to prove to you, that we ought to haste on to the Day of God;
And, I suppose a Man to live as unblameably, as every one would desire he
should; To be as diligent in the Duties of Christanity, as any one can expect
from him; To be as ready to do good, and to be merciful to any one; And as
Just, as Sober, and as Temperate, every way such, as you would desire him to
be: And yet, if he has not an Eye to this, to meet the Bridegroom; If he has
not a higher Aim, a higher Design of Soul, I Will show you (I hope to the
Conviction of every Person) that his Religion, his Christianity, his Goodness,
(whatever you will call it) It lies much too low; And,

The First Argument, by which I would convince you of it, is This.

Arg. 1. Suppose a Man never so Good in himself, yet it is plain, and
undeniable, that there is a mighty wicked world, every way round about: Now, if
a Man truly Loves God and Christ, the wickedness that abounds in the world and
so over-flows, it would make him desire that there should be another State of
things: Suppose he be a Man that Swears not, why yet, when he hears those
Vollies of Oaths and Blasphemies, that are every where about him; And so in
every other such Instance: This is a reason for him to desire, the Bridegroom
should come; Because there is such a wicked, such an Intolerable wicked World.

God's heart cannot be to this wicked world, tho Noah, Job, and Daniel, and all
the Great Worthies should stand before him for this world; Yet his heart could
not be to this world, because of the abundance of wickednesses that are in it;
Separate from it the consideration of, in Comparison, the few Servants of God
in it; And Oh the abundance of wickedness that is in it, and of wicked Men!

There was undoubtedly a succession of Holy Patriarchs to the Flood; And
undoubtedly, they had many Godly Children, and Godly Friends, one with another;
And yet for all that, God's Heart could not be to that Old World; But he must
needs destroy it: And so, God's Heart cannot be to this world; That now is, but
he is resolved to burn it about the Ears of all the wicked that are in it.

And therefore, because of this, a Good Man, tho he be never so Good, and
Suppose, he have very Great and High Enjoyments of God, in himself; and
suppose, he has many Godly Friends, and Relations, and Acquaintance, that are
really and truly Religious, and Holy Persons; yet, for all this, I cannot
(says he) endure this world; Or for all that, wherein I walk with God my self,
or wherein I have any, or know any that walk with him; After all this, after
all the Good, that you can find, or hope you can find in the world, yet there
are such an abundance of wicked in it, that because of this, his Zeal rises up
to the coming of the Bridegroom, and to the meeting of the Bridegroom: He looks
for, and Hastens on to the Day of God, because of this.

Now, certainly, this is a very undeniable Argument; Who can take Pleasure?
Knowing, that there are so many wicked Men Riding on Horseback; (To use that
Expression of Solomon) That there is in all places, Employments, Cities, Towns,
and Neighbourhoods, such great Ignorance of God, and contempt of Him, and Jesus
Christ, and such wicked Conversation; a Good Man cannot be satisfied, but he
must desire the Coming of the Bridegroom. Consider that Example we have in 2
Pet. 2. 7. God delivered Just Lot, (as the Critics observe, He was tormented
after the manner of the Torments of Hell) vexed with the filthy Conversation of
the wicked. For that righteous Man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous Soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds; or, with
their enormous deeds. So I say, when we consider the Great Enormities that are
in the World, who indeed, that is a Christian, but would say* Oh that the
Bridegroom would come, and put an end to this? Woe is me, that I sojourn in
Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar!

Arg. 2. In the Second Place, Suppose that we could overcome, and salve our
selves of this Reason of Desiring the Bridegroom's Coming, and might say,
notwithstanding this, That we and our Houses serve God; and that our
Conversation is as becomes the Gospel; and that we desire to converse with
Saints; and that we have an Heavenly Society upon Earrh; I say, suppose this
could be said, where there is not an High Sense of the Bridegroom's Coming; yet
David says, Horror has taken hold upon me, because they keep not thy Law. It
is time for the Lord to mork: (I wonder thou stayest so long) for they have
made void thy Law. And Rivers of Tears run down mine eyes, because they keep
not thy Law. All this, I say, plainly proves, That if a man could salve the
first Consideration to himself, yet he cannot bear out himself on this Account.

O! when any of us come to look seriously into our own Hearts, Lives and Ways;
can we say, That we are what we desire to be, and what we would be? Have we
such a Tenor of Thoughts, such a constant Chain of Holy, and Serious, and Wise
Thoughts? Do we keep our Mouths with a Bit and Bridle, while the wicked is
before us? Do we take care to speak always so, That our Speech is seasoned with
Salt, and that it ministers Grace to the hearers? Are our Hearts so in the
Enjoyment of God, and Communion with him; That we may say, It is Good for us to
be here? Or, do we meet, in such Ordinances Publicly Administered, with such
Power, and Powerful Preaching, Gospel Administrations, The Lords Supper,
Keeping and Observing the Lords Day, as we desire? Do we find that there is so
much in these, That we can our selves say, we have Reason to rest here, or to
continue in this State?

Or, do we not find a continual complaint? Like that of Paul, Romans 7. The Good,
that I would, I do not: But the Evil which I would not, that I do. I find then
a Law, that when I would do Good, Evil is present with me. And so in Verse 24.
He comes to cry out, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death.

If this World could stand, Yet This Body of Sin and Death is such, that I
could wish it were at an End. Who shall rescue and unchain me from this Body,
wherein I am Fettered and Held, that I cannot do the things that I desire to
do, to the Glory of God in it? So that there is a Chain upon our Minds and
Hearts, That the very consideration of it should make us earnestly desire the
coming of the Bridegroom.

3. A Third Consideration: Suppose now, neither of these Reasons sufficient,
why we should desire the coming of the Bridegroom; Yet, I beseech you,
consider, whether the Glory of Christ be not a proper and Condign Object of our
desires? Whether it be worthy of him, that he should have no higher, nor more
Glorious State in this World, than he yet has? Can you be content, that the
Nations should be given to Idolatry, or Mahometanism among the Turks? Would you
be willing the Papists should have so great a part of the Christian World,
still under their Darkness, and Superstition? Would you be willing that so many
Tyrants as have, and so many as are ready still to do it, should be Riding over
the Heads of the Saints and Servants of God, and that his Worship should be
cast down to the Ground? And that the Sanctuary should be Trodden underfoot by
the Gentiles? And that the Abomination of Desolation should stand where it
ought not? Could any Man, that Loves the Glory of God, and the Glory of Christ,
be content with this? Who does not (that is seriously a Christian) long, That
might be fulfilled? From the Rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same,
Thy Name, O Lord, shall be Great. That Christ should have his Portion given Him
with the Great, and with the Strong; That the Ends of the Earth should be His;
That Knowledge should cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea. If any Love
God, and Love Christ; I appeal to you, whether we could be content, Things
should be as they are, and not as they are thus foretold?

Let me make a plain, and a Familiar Comparison, and bring it to our selves: I
would suppose now, as I know, there are many that are Zealous in this Nation,
for King James: They know he is out of the Nation, and (as it were) an Exile
from them: And tho they may have a Great, Plentiful, Competent Estates, and
Great Riches: Yet they think, things are not well, and as they should be:
Because they say, things are not as they should be, to exclude a Just and
Lawful Prince as they think.

I make only this Allusion; My Judgment is enough known.

Suppose, any Profess to Love Jesus Christ; Then think with your selves,
whether it can consist with your Loyalty to Christ, with your desire of his
Glory, and his Kingdom, that it should be at so low an Ebb as it is? Now I am
sure, if you weighed these, and much more that might be said, and all of them
together; You would plainly say, that there can be no Truth, nor no Loyalty of
Christianity, without an Earnest Desire and Preparation in your selves
continually, for the Bridegrooms coming. Surely, to be Rich only, as to this
world, and after the rate and pass of it, and to our selves, can no way satisfy
a Wise Virgin in Christianity.

But now, Alas! We may see it very much otherwise; who can but observe it every
where, and with all manner of Persons, that we may converse with, of the
Higher, and Lower Degree, even of the First Three (as I may speak) in
Christianity; (As it was said of David's Worthies) I say, if you take even
those of the First Three; We cannot but say, there is too Great a Bias, too
Great a Propension, too Great an Inclination and Poize of Men, toward this
World; They are for every thing Pleasing, and Desirable, and Pleasurably
affecting in it: And they hold off as much as they can from a belief of the
nearness of the coming of Jesus Christ.

Now, how comes this to pass in the World? Give me leave, very briefly, to
Represent the reasons of this to you, and the way, or method, how these things
have come into the World.

I am sure, I may, without any uncharitableness, or untenderness, say, that the
Religion and Christianity of not one of a Hundred, but is only Calculated for
the present State: And they would, that all the State, and Trade, and
Government, and the Wealth, and Peace, and Plenty, and Prosperity of it,
should go on still, Than that there should be an approach of the Bridegroom and
Kingdom of Christ. The Reasons of these things, I Will give you in these three
Particulars.

1. The first is; It comes to pass by the Bridegrooms Delaying his coming, that
has given the Advantage and Opportunity to this State of Things; if Christ had
come as soon as he Rose, as soon as ever he sent forth the Apostolic
Preachers; Things would have been found in a far other temper, than now; For
when I come, (says Christ) Shall I find Faith on the Earth? But now it was so
necessary for Him, in the Wisdom of the Father, and in his own wisdom, to delay
his coming, that, he Swore; It was a thing of so great concernment, Dan. 12.
That there should be Time, Times, and Half a Time, before his coming should be:
So he did Chronize, he drew out Time, till his coming; And that has given
Advantage to all that Deadness of Christianity, to all that low posture of
things. So the Apostle says, 2 These. 2. That day cannot come except there be a
falling away first. Thus the day was Post-pon'd, it could not come; And so
observe, Mat. 25. Where the Bridegroom Delayed his coming, they all slumbred
and slept. Ver. 5. While the Bridegroom tarryed, they all slumbred and slept.

And in Match. 24. Pray observe, how the Spirit of God Insists upon this, that
there was a delay of the coming of Christ. ver. 48. But, and if that Evil
Servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, etc. So here is the
sleep, and space given, for the possibility of such sleep, such a low State in
Christianity, as there is by Christ delaying his coming. Some are ready to say,
he will never come, there will never be any such thing: Why is it not sooner? Why
has it been so long? Men have time to do something else; We must find somewhat
or other, to pass away the Time, till our Bridegroom comes: And so they fall
into a slumber: As many, in Morality have discoursed the great degeneracy of
humane nature, say they, the Intellectual Life is Slumbred by the Animal Life;
And, as some have desired to Allegorize the History of Adam and Eve; Adam, when
Eve was taken out of him, fell into a sleep; you know, God caused a deep sleep
to fall upon Adam; And so (say they) that lower Soul came to have the
Predominancy, and to get above, because the Life of Adam was in a slumber, it
was in a sleep:

Give me leave by this to express to you, my sense in what I am now upon; as
soon as ever the Professors of Christianity did perceive that the Bridegroom
did not come: The lower Life began to get above, and the Christians, even of
the first Times, began to slumber and sleep: We have many instances of it;
Demas has left us, having Loved the present World. Demas was not only a
single Example; But he was a Peculiar Pattern of the State of Christianity,
Having Loved this present World; So says the Apostle, there is no Man like
minded to Epaphroditus, that naturally cares for your State: For all Men seek
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2. So I say, here was
presently a Slumbring of the Power of Christianity.

And then, there is a Great Example of this Worldly Grandeur rising, in that of
Diotrephes, in the third Epistle of John ver. 9. He Loved to have the
pre-Eminence. Now, as I said of Demas, so I say of Diotrephes; It was not only
a single Example, But the Bishops of the Churches of Christ, began to Love
Preeminency, to Love Grandeur; To Love Prelation, and to set up one above
another: And thus the Apostasy began to creep in: And so Christianity
degenerated into a Worldly Interest, a Worldly Gain, a Worldly Greatness, a
VVorldly State. And here the Life and Power of Christianity fell asleep; It was
in a Slumber: And this Spirit went from one to another, and from hand to hand.
And tho the Reformation amongst us, has made a great change among those, that
are called Protestants, yet, we are not awakened. The Bridegroom must be nearer
his coming, before the Protestant Churches will awake.

And, besides, you see, even to this day, that Men in the Profession of the
Gospel, in the several ways of Men, Make Christianity a Point of Interest in
the concernments of the present Life; I speak not this, by way of Censure or
Reproach, but to represent things plainly to you, how it is, and how it comes
to pass, that we are not more in haste and earnest for the coming of the
Bridegroom. And then,

3. In the third Place; (And that indeed, which in part I have prevented my
self in) the Apostasy has come to swallow up so great a part of Christianity;
Even so openly, and avowedly in all the Papal parts of the World: And there
are such Roots, and Remainders, and Twiggs, and Twines of it, about the
Protestancy; That it cannot be, till Christ is nearer his coming, that the
World will be awakened to see the entry of his coming, Even the Protestant
World, and the most professing part of Christianity.

I come now to the Second Head I proposed: And that is, to open to you the
Answers to the Objections, that may be made.

Obj. 1. You may say (in the first Place) If this be the tendency of such a
Discourse, it seems a kind of Monkish superstition; a kind of Living alone, and
minding nothing in the World; it brings in a kind of a Penance an Endurance,
like that among the Papists; whereas the Scripture seems to allow us a free
Enjoyment of the World, and of the things of it.

Ans. Now, in Answer to this, I would only say, that one sort of extreme is
ready to swallow up another, if we do not take heed; A Man may remove so far
from such Ideas and Apprehensions as these are, that he may fall into a perfect
Worldliness, an Enjoyment of this World: I dare not say any thing against a
Wise, and Sober, and Holy, and Temperate use of the things of this world, and
a Diligence in our Places and in our Stations; But I say, we have every one of
us great need to take heed; For, we tread upon the Brinks of danger, we tread
upon the very Brinks of Destruction: And therefore, we should walk with the
greatest VVariness, and with the greatest Jealousy; There is, undoubtedly, an
allowance of these things. And yet for all that; Seeing it is such a State of
the world, as it is, (As I shall show you presently) we have Reason upon all
Accounts, to desire that it should be at an End; Because we walk so much upon
Snares, and Temptations in the present State; Notwithstanding, I don't say as
they, take heed ye Touch not, Taste not, nor come near to any of these things.

But this I am persuaded, There are some Remains of the Purity of Christianity,
in that which such persons pretend to, though they have Debauched them: They
have turned them into abominable Superstition, and into Great and Detestable
Idleness and Sloth, and to Horrible Impurity and Luxury, under the pretense of
such a Separation from the World. But yet still (I say) at the first, there was
some Vein of the Contempt of this World, and of Despising Things here below; In
the Justice of God, leaving Men to themselves, This was corrupted into Hateful
and Abominable Superstition, it is a Thing very Remarkable: You know there are
those that are called the Mendicants, or those that go up and down, and profess
nothing but Begging: But then, on the other side, There are no Courts so
splendid in the World, as that of Cardinals, Bishops and Archbishops. So that
it is a kind of Expedient, and Trick, to hold up the Pre-eminence of the Roman
Church, by a seeming Contempt of the World, in the other part. I told you,
Religion is necessary for this World, for the present state of it; so the
Beggary and Superstition of those that profess Poverty among the Papists, it is
absolutely necessary to uphold the Greatness and Splendour of the Court of Rome,
and those that depend upon it, on one side, by that Poverty on the other; For
it seems to Cogg Men into a belief, that there is an excellency in the Popish
Church, by producing in it such an Example of Contempt of the World; These are
the Lying Wonders that are amongst them, and fair pretenses, by which they
delude. But still I say, tho we have lost it, it cannot but be allowed, there
ought to be now, and much more there shall be a State of the management of the
present World, according to Christianity, so as not to run into Superstition;
And yet to raise the Glory of Christ, and his Kingdom far above this World.

Object. 2. I come to the Second Objection; How shall the World be maintained,
if all were such Earnest Pursuers, and Hasters on to the Day of God, as now,
what I have discoursed of, seems to lead to? Certainly Families would be at an
End; all Business would cease; and the maintaining of Kingdoms; of Laws and
Rights of Government; There would be an End of all These.

Answ. Now therefore I say to you, If any Man have his Soul pressed upon the
Kingdom of God, and the Coming of Christ, and the Coming of the Bridegroom; Let
us consider what an Answer Jesus Christ gives, Luke 9. 59. Christ had called
one to follow him: Says he, Whither shall I follow thee? I am willing to do
it; where must I go? Says Christ (Verse 58.) Foxes have Holes, and Birds of
the Air have Nests; but the Son of Man has not where to lay his Head: That is,
you must not take care for this, where you shall have a Rest, and whither you
shall go; you must Resign up All: But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and
bury my Father. And Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead; but go
thou and preach the Kingdom of God: That is, The Kingdom of God is of Greater
Necessity, then even that which seems to be so great a piece of Piety, and
Humanity, to Go, and bury a Father.

But you may still urge, How great would the Inconvenience of this be, if Men
should do thus? How would there be any support of the present State of the
World?

For that therefore I would refer you to another place, that is in the same
Evangelist, Luke, Chap. 14. 16. The Kingdom of Heaven (says he) is like unto a
certain Man, that made a Great Supper, and bade many. That Supper is the
Beginnings of Grace here, even to the Marriage* Supper of the Lamb. But they
all with one consent began to make excuse: The first said unto him, I have
bought a piece of Ground; I am a Purchaser; You must excuse me from being so
Religious; I am upon a Purchase. And another said, I have bought five Yoke of
Oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused: I am an Husbandman,
and I cannot take care so of Religion: And another said, I have married a Wife,
and therefore I cannot come, upon that account. And in another Evangelist, They
went to their Merchandise: I have a Great Trade, and I cannot carry on the
present State, if I mind so much the Kingdom of Christ. And therefore I say,
The Purchasing, and Husbandry, and Merchandise, and the Enjoyments of this
World, and Relations, they are great Hindrances indeed, to the Glory of the
Kingdom of Christ. But then,

The Second Thing I would say to you, which may give you Great Satisfaction as
to this: If there were such a Spirit poured out from on high; Don't think the
World would be so Inconvenient by it; It would be brought into a more High, a
Better, and more Excellent State; I am sure, If the Spirit were so poured out
upon the World; That Men did not excuse themselves from the Kingdom of Heaven,
by their Trade, Relations, and Families; And by their Interest in the present
World; I am sure, that the Trees of the Wood would yield forth of themselves
to us: The Hills would flow down with Milk, and the Mountains with Wine.
VVhenever God will bring the World into a Religious State indeed; Don't take
care as if the State of the World could not be upheld; For, it shall be
upheld, and be more Happy and Blessed, than it is now, Joel 3. 18. And it shall
come to pass in that day, that the Mountains shall drop down New Wine, and the
Hills shall flow down with Milk, and all the Rivers of Judah shall flow with
Waters, etc. Every thing shall be Happy and Prosperous; Instead of the Thorn
shall come up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Bryar shall come up the Myrtle
Tree, and it shall be to the Lord for a Name, and for a Memorial. When God
comes to make the world truly Good, to bring in a Profession of Christianity,
not in Word, but in Power; I say, when that comes to pass, there shall be such
a strange plenty to the World, such a strange Providence over the Creation: All
that, which we take so much care about, and with so much Sin, and hatred, and
envy one at another; It will come so freely, there will be no need of
disturbance of, and distracting our selves, or one another: When we come in
High sense to be the Servants of God, and to be in such a State; All Creatures
in Heaven, and Earth, would come, and lay down their Service at our Feet. The
Heavens would hear the Earth, and the Earth would hear the Corn, and the Wine,
and the Oil; And they would hear Jezreel, Amos 9. 11. Behold, the days come,
says the Lord, that the Plowman shall overtake the Reaper, and the Treaders of
Grapes him that sows the Seed; That is, the Harvest shall be sooner than the
very Plowing.

All Creatures, in Heaven and Earth, would offer themselves to us: And all the
Riches, that we dive for now, so deep into the Bowels of the Earth, and into
the bottom of the Sea, they would come up, and be at our hand, in that Day,
when the Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall be thus Universally upon the World, and
when the Desire of Nations shall come.

I would shut up this, in a very Brief Application to you.

Use. 1. In the First Place; Let it move us seriously, to fill up our Religion
with this Character of it; The Virgins went forth to meet the Bridegroom: There
was the great mark in their Eye, the great design in their Eye; Now, ask your
selves, I beseech you, is your Religion in meeting the Bridegroom? Is not your
Praying, Morning and Evening, because it is good Family-Order? It is a good
thing for Reputation, and Credit: Is it not because you are afraid, if you Rise
up and Lie down without Prayer, God will not Bless you that Day, nor give you good
rest that Night? He will not succeed you in your Calling; And in the Duties and
Business of it? Is it not because natural Conscience would cry out, and say,
what! Do you live like a Heathen, yea a Brute, and like a Beast?

I acknowledge, these are valuable Reasons in their kind. But sure, there is a
Higher, a Greater Reason to go forth to meet the Bridegroom; Because,
throughout all the Account, that can be given, why Men are Religious, if this
be not Principal, if this be not the Supreme End, that I would meet the
Bridegroom; It is not of the Excellent True Alloy; Therefore Buoy up your
Spirits, raise them, wind them up to this great height, I Will go forth to meet
the Bridegroom. I pray this Morning, that I may meet with the Bridegroom; I go
to hear this day, That I may meet with the Bridegroom: I would not have these
great things wound up only within the Circle of this Life, in this manner;
Here comes Business, and here comes Prayer; And so there is Sleep, and Eating,
and Drinking; All comes in a Round, and we would have this Round always
observed; And it calls to Public Prayer, and to other of those Duties: Now, if
we turn about only in this Circle, we run on Endlessly about; But our care
must be higher, Viz. To meet the Bridegroom.

Use. 2. In the Second Place; I Beseech you, consider whether your Religion be
of this excellent kind, that you would be willing to meet the Bridegroom?

Is it that, which I believe in my Soul, enlightened by the Spirit of God, my
Conscience bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost, that it will please the
Bridegroom? Are my Thoughts, Affections, manner of Conversation such?

And what reason have we, and do we Humble our selves before our Bridegroom,
when we consider this will not please; when we consider, this is not fine
enough, Ornamental enough to his Glory, of value enough? I would not meet him
with Tinsel, instead of Gold, and real worth.

I would not meet him with false Diamonds instead of real ones. So I would not
meet him with Hypocritical, formal Prayers without real Grace. And then,

Use. 3. In the third Place; I beseech you consider; I don't expect, there
should be many Subscribing to that Account of Time, that I have given out; Tho
it be upon great and strong Foundations in the Word of God; Yet I challenge
nothing from any, but so far as they see in that Light.

But I would only ask you this Question, upon the occasion of it; Suppose it a
true, and real Scripture Account, that I have given out, and that, within so
little a Time, there shall be yet so great a change of the World; And Men shall
begin to unhinge from the Earth, and Earthly Foundations; Would you be glad of
it? Or, have you not a secret Trouble and Enmity against it? And that you would
have the World still go on, and Ages to run on so; I say, try your selves, as
to this; I think, it cannot be any Injury, for any to propose this; Seeing we
should be continually upon our watch, for this very thing, when our Lord will
come.

Use. 4. In the fourth Place; I beseech you consider the great difference
between the City of the Servants of Christ, of those that are of the true Wise
Virgins in Christianity; And between the City of those that are not, or are
Foolish Virgins. I would but very briefly represent that to you in
Scripture-Expression, and so I will conclude.

If you consider the City of the Servants of Jesus Christ, consider it in that
of the last Chapter of Ezekiel, and the very last Verse, the End of that
Prophecy; And the Name of the City, in that day shall be, The Lord is there.
There shall be the Bridegroom; There shall be the Glory of the Prince himself:
That Is the City wherein Christ will entertain those, that have the Bride-like
Affection. And, Rev. 21. 2.

I John saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven,
Prepared as a Bride adorned for her Bridegroom. Here Is the City of those that
are Virgins in Spirit to Christ, in the sincere Love of him, that shall be
presented at that day, as Chaste Virgins to him.

But now consider on the other side, You have the Name of another City; And it
is very admirable, And I cannot but propose my Observation to you, that God
has been pleased, very lately to cause me to consider, and to observe; There
is the Name of another City, I say; And it is the Name of the City of the
Multitude. Ezekiel. 39. 17. The Name of that City shall be Hamonah. And they shall
cleanse the Land. The Name of that City shall be Hamonah. Or, The Multitude
thereof: Or its Multitude. That is, The Dead; Those that are slain with the
Sword of Christ's Mouth: The Gog-Magog: Tho they are Dead; That is, as to the
sense of Glory, and Life, and Happiness, and Peace, and Enjoyment, yet they are
in Being, for they have a City.

It were but in vain, that mere Dead should have a City; But those Dead, that
is, they that are not Partakers of the first Resurrection; Their City, the Name
of it is Hamonah, the Multitude of the World are of that City, and belong to
that City, and are taken at last into that City. Multitudes, Multitudes, as it
is said in Joel 3. Multitudes, Multitudes, in the Valley of Decision, and the
Valley of Excision: They are not only Judged, but cut off; They are slain with
the Sword of Christ's Mouth; As it is said, Rev. 29. 5. They lived not again
till the End of the Thousand Years. That is, they lay in Chains, under the
Footstool of Christ; At the End of the Thousand Years, God gave them leave to
move a little, and they make a New Attempt. And then Fire comes down upon them,
and casts them into the Lake.

And if you think all this is too Metaphorical, or too Nice, and Curious, and
that you cannot understand so well; I Will conclude all, with that of Matthew. 7.
13. Where you shall find the very Hamonah in plain, Doctrinal, Practical
Discourse it self. Enter ye in at the strait Gate* for wide is the Gate, and
broad is the way that leads to Destruction; And many there be which go in
thereat.

As the New Jerusalem has its Gates, and an Angel before it; So the City here
is the City of Destruction, as it is called, Isa. 19. It has its Gate; But it
is a Wide Gate: It lets in every one, that is not taken up into the New
Jerusalem; There be many; There is a Hamonah, there is a Multitude, that go in
thereat.

Therefore, let us seriously take heed, Look diligently to this, lest any of us
fail of the Grace of God, of the true Bride-like affection, by which we may
enter with him, with the Bridegroom, into the Wedding, when he comes, etc.

SERMON IV. On Matthew. XXV. Ver. 1. and so on to Ver. 13. Then shall the Kingdom
of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth
to meet the Bridegroom.


I Have (you know) made entrance into this Great Parable, which I told you, is
in an admirable manner prepared, and fitted, to be a Representation of the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, as I have showed you,

First, Even from the Beginning to the Complement and Perfection of it; It is
the Kingdom of Heaven.

I have shown you, that the very meaning of all Christianity is a Going forth
to meet the Bridegroom; And therefore, the present State, is a State of
Espousals, a State, wherein we are Contracted, and Affianced unto the Great
Bridegroom; For, that the Eye of every Christian, the great Aim and Design of
those that are Wise Virgins, is, that they may have a much higher Enjoyment of
Christ, than they have now; And because the Religion that is for the present
World, and the present State, will not serve the great Interest and great
purpose of our Immortal beings.

I shall now proceed to a fourth Doctrine, or Proposition from these words.

They went forth to meet the Bridegroom; And they that were ready, they went in
with him to the Wedding. So, the Observation that I shall lay down to you, is
this;

That all those that are Christ's, they are to hold (according to the Scripture
Expression) they are to hold a Great Feast unto Jehovah.

The great Intention, and meaning of the Gospel, is to assure us, that after
the Time of Preparation, and the Time of the Espousals, there shall be a
Glorious Festival; A Glorious Feast, The Marriage Supper of the Lamb; As you
know it is called: And I shall endeavor to open this to you, according to the
Scripture Light, concerning it; And then, I shall compare it with all the
Feasts, that we read of in Scripture, under the Law; And so I shall come to
make the Application of it, to our own State, and Condition.

First therefore, to make it evident to you, that this is a great Notion of
Scripture; That there is a Feast to be held; a Feast of Joy and Rejoicing, and
of Happiness, to be held to Jehovah. And it is this very Marriage-Supper (as
you shall see) of the Lamb.

That the Scripture delights in this Representation, is very evident, by sundry
Great Expressions of it.

Isaiah 25. 6, 7, 8. And in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all
People a Feast of Fat things, a Feast of Wines on the lees, of Fat things full
of Marrow; Of Wines on the lees well refined. And he will destroy in this
Mountain the Face of the covering cast over all People, and the vail that is
spread over all Nations; He will swallow up Death in victory, and the Lord God
will wipe away Tears from off all Faces, and the rebuke of his People shall he
take away from off all the Earth; For the Lord has spoken it.

There is a great Feast that God will make to all People: And it is set out by
such Kind of Resemblances and Similitudes, as express a Great, and a Plentiful,
and a Rich, and a most Delicious Entertainment among Men; Fat things full of
Marrow; And Wines on the Lees well refined. And in this Mountain (says God)
I Will destroy the Face of the covering, cast over all People, and the Vail that
is spread over all Nations. When this Feast comes, there shall be no Pagan
Nation; There shall be no Mohammedan Nation; There shall be no Popish
Antichristian Nation; There shall be no unbelieving Jews then in the World:
God will Draw off the Face of the covering cast over all People. And every one
shall see in the Clearness, and in the Beauty, and in the Glory, and in the
Majesty of the Truth of God, and of the (...) of Jesus Christ; That the
Religion of Christianity shall (...) be upbraided with this; Why are there so
great Nations that are under the Prophet Mahomet, as we are under Jesus Christ?
Are there not great Tracts of the World that are not known? And do not the
Jews, that have the Doctrine of the Scriptures in the Old Testament; Do they
not deny Christ? All these things (that I may speak in a Familiar phrase)
Christianity is twitted with, upbraided, reproached with. But in the day of
that Feast; All the Darkness of that State shall be drawn off. In all our
Feasts now there is necessary a sense of Death. As I remember, the great Prince
Philip of Macedon, when he had the most Sumptuous and Magnificent
Entertainment; He had first of all a Deaths Head served up, in the Beginning of
the Feast: As if he should say, tho I have entertained you now, like a Prince,
and with all the Imaginable Royalty that you can expect; Yet now after all
this; I and you must Dye. So should we do, in all our Eating and Drinking, if
we do but consider it, we do but only feed (as we have a Phrase) we do but
only feed Death; We do but pamper Bodies, to make a Feast for the Worms.

Now (says the Lord) in this Feast I will take away all Tears, and Shame, and
Reproach from all People, utterly take it off. O therefore! Who would not Aim,
and Design this, to be at this great Feast, that must be held to Jehovah? And
that he himself will hold for all his People, as the great Prince and Master,
and Lord of it:

So you know, there is nothing more ordinary in the Gospel, than to compare the
State of Things to a great Supper, Matthew. 22. He describes the Kingdom of
Heaven by such a Supper, as this. The Kingdom of Heaven (says he) is like unto
a certain King, which made a Marriage for his Son, and he sent forth his
Servants to call them that were bidden to the Wedding: And they would not come;
Again, he sent forth other Servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden,
behold, I have prepared my Dinner: My Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready: Come unto the Marriage; But they made light of it: And when
the King came in to see the guests, he saw there a Man, which had not on a
Wedding Garment. (Ver. 11. 12.) As I shall after endeavor to enforce in the
Application. But you see plainly, that it is a great Nuptial Feast, that the
Glory of the Kingdom of Christ is Represented by: So it is said, His Servants
wait for him: There is a place of great moment to what we are upon, that is
Dis-advantagiously Translated: And therefore I would desire that you would take
something the more Notice of it, Matthew. 13. 34. The Son of Man (says he) is as
a Man taking a far Journey, who left his House, and gave Authority to his
Servants, and to every Man his Work, and Commanded the Porter to watch: Watch
ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the House comes. And this, in
Luke 12. It is called, a coming because of the Wedding, ver 46. That Is the
Expression I would desire a little that you would take Notice of; And ye your
selves like unto Men that wait for the Lord, when he will return from the
Wedding; We Translate. But the word in the Greek will very well signify,
Because of the Wedding, or upon the Account of the Wedding. When Christ comes;
He comes because, or upon the Account of the Wedding: And that he may be
present at that great Feast, that is to be held unto the Lord our God. I Will
give you but one Scripture more; And so I hope you will be fully satisfied,
that it is the Wi(...) of the Divine Spirit, to Represent to us the State of
the Glory and Kingdom of Christ, by a great Nuptial-Feast, or Entertainment. It
is in the Nineteenth Chapter of the Prophecy of the Revelation, Verse 7. Let
us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb
is come. And Verse 9. And he says unto me, Write. Let this thing be taken
notice of, let it be written in Letters, that he that runs may read; Blessed
are they which are called unto the Marrioge-Supper of the Lamb. Blessed are
they which are called, and invited to the Marriage-Supper of the Lumb.

I shall now therefore proceed in these Two Generals, before I close all in the
Application.

First of all, to show you,, what the Importance and meaning of this Great
Supper, or the Great Feast, that we are to hold to Jehovah, is. And then,

In the Second Place, I shall give you a brief Parallel between all the Feasts
that were appointed to the Servants and People of God, in the Old Testament;
and this Great Feast that is to be held to Jehovah.

To give you therefore the Sense, and the Meaning of it, in these Two
Expressions.

First, It is a Time of the Greatest Solemnity, Glory, and Luster, and
Splendour, and Joy, and Blessedness, that the Creation ever knew, or can know,
in the State of a Creation. I say, it is a State, or a Time of the greatest
Magnificence, of the greatest Joy and Enjoyment, that ever was known in the
whole Creation; nothing ever like to that. Alas! the Days that we now know here
in the World; take those that have been the most Lightsome, the most
Prosperous, they are all Dark, and Gloomy, and Cloudy Days, in comparison of
that Day, of the Great Glory, and the Great Festival that he speaks of.

Indeed, it is very desirable to find the Hearts of any possessed seriously with
God, and with Religion, and with Holiness, and with Christianity, and with
Communion with God, and Enjoyment of him, according to the present State of
Things. But, if we did but know, how low the Condition is now, wherein we are;
If we did but consider, what a Dark, Black Cloud there hangs over all; a Cloud
of Corruption, a Cloud of Unhappiness, a Cloud of Sorrow and Affliction, it is
they live in; And it comes upon the most Eminent Servants of God; you know, in
what a Cloud they are wrapped up, as to all bodily Appearance, when they come to
Die; and what a Cloud of Corruption hovers over them; For, take the most
Excellent Preachers, and the most Holy Men, if you could follow them into all
the Retirements of their Thoughts and Ways, you would see, that there is a
Deadness, there is an Emptiness of God; There is a Low State, wherein they now
are; ta^^n up with many thoughts, with Variety of Imaginations here, against
which they wrestle, and are in Combat: And though it is most Desirable to
Them, to be Holy and Religious, to the very uttermost, yet alas! This Uttermost
here, is such a Nothing, compared with what shall be; That we have Reason
earnestly to look to that Great Festival, to that great Marriage-Supper; And to
desire that things might be Brighter, Clearer, and Purer, and more
Transcendent, than ever they have yet been.

Surely, there is some Divine purpose (tho we may not easily find it), Why the
Divine Spirit of God makes so great the Feast and Preparation of Ahasuerus,
Esther 1. 1. Ahasuerus, which Reigned from India, even unto Ethiopia, over an
Hundred, and Seven and Twenty Provinces. That in those days, when the King
Ahasuerus sat on the Throne of his Kingdom, which was in Shushan the Palace,
etc. When he showed (ver. 4.) the Riches of his Glorious Kingdom, and the
Honor of his excellent Majesty, many days, even an Hundred, and Fourscore
Days; and when those days were expired, the King made a Feast unto all the
People that were present: And there was the most excellent Furniture; the most
Splendid and Glorious Furniture, and Entertainment. All that they were served
in, were Vessels of Gold: And Royal Wines in abundance.

In all this State of it, Surely, there is a Diviner purpose in Scripture
relating it; Tho I shall not venture to give any Judgment concerning it: Yet I
make no doubt, that it was Intended, to be a Representation of the Glory of the
Kingdom of Christ.

For, Indeed, those four Monarchies, tho they have kept the Kingdom of Christ
thus long, from its Glory, and from its Appearance, yet there was some kind of
Image, and Representation of the Kingdom of Christ in them: And, it is very
observable, that the Persian Monarchs, above all others, Were greatly
serviceable to the Temple of God, the Type of the Kingdom of Christ. And so,
God chose, I am persuaded (I will not engage far in it) this great Feast of
Ahasuerus, with such a care of Sobriety: And it was given to Represent the
Glory, and Riches, and Magnificence (in a Spiritual sense) wherein the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb shall be held. So I say, All is a signification of that
Life, of that Light, of that Glory, of that Blessedness, of that Holiness, of
that Purity, that shall be in the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It Represents that exceeding Joy; As it is said, in Psalm 16. Thou will show
me the Path of Life: In thy presence is* fullness of Joy; And at thy Right Hand
there are Pleasures for evermore. Indeed, it is first applied to Christ, and in
him, to all His: Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer
thy Holy one to see Corruption. For, at this time, The Lord our God shall come,
and all his Saints with him; All his Dead Saints shall be raised to this great
Feast; He will not leave their Souls in Hell, nor suffer his Holy ones to see
Corruption. He Will swallow up Death in Victory. In that Feast, he will show them
the Path of Life: And the Entertainment of that Feast, is fullness of Joy, and
Pleasures for evermore.

And so, in that Place of Isaiah, I read to you; Where God w^^es Tears from all
Faces; And the reproach and rebuke of his People he shall take off. All the
Glory of the whole Creation of God, and of his mighty Power in it is made use
of to set forth a visible State of Joy, and Glory; It shall be on purpose
brought out for that day, for the Glory, and for the Honor of that Feast.

2. In the Second Place; Hereby is signified to us, that even this Festival, it
is but for an appointed Time. It is for a Limited Time: In regard of the manner
of it, in regard of the visibility of it; As it is a thing to be seen, so it is
for a Limited Time: For, it is received into absolute Eternity, And the Kingdom
is delivered up. (As the Apostle speaks) to God, and to the Father. It is for a
Limited Time; and it is in Preparation to that Union with God, to all Eternity.
And therefore it is Represented to us, by a Thousand Years, It is a Feast of a
Thousand Years. As Ahasuerus held a Feast of One Hundred and Fourscore Days;
Jehovah for Jesus Christ his Son, (for the Nuptials betwixt him and his Church)
holds a Feast of a Thousand Years; And when that is at an End, Then (as the
Apostle speaks) in the 1 Cor. 15. (That most Notable Place of Scripture, that I
have so often endeavored to Imprint the Sense of upon you) Then comes the End
(Verse 24.) when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power. And
(Then, Verse 28.) when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
also himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may
be all in all.

So, I say, It is a Limited Time; Even though That be a Great Time, and it is
called a Kingdom, that never ends, because the Glory does not go off; But, as
when the Nuptial Feast is over, Persons of Great Condition, and of Princely
Estate, you know, They are still in Glory and still in Luster; though it be in
a more settled State. So Christ, and all his Saints, they are in a perpetual
Joy, in perpetual Happiness, that does not end: But only the Glory and
Magnificence of the Wedding and Nuptials ends.

I shall now endeavor to parallel to you the Feasts of the Old Testament; and
to show you, That the Spiritual Sense, and the Spiritual Meaning of them, is,
This Great Solemnity of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. That you may know
therefore, That those Feasts that we read of in the Old Testament, are truly,
and indeed the Emblems and the Figures, and the Types, and the Shadows of
Spiritual Things; Even of this Great Kingdom of Jesus Christ: I shall give you
that Standard of Scripture, that ought to be a Rule to us, in all things,
concerning the Types of the Old Testament. Says the Apostle, Heb. 8. (It is a
Thing he often takes notice of) Verse 5. Which serve unto the Example and
Shadow of Heavenly Things; As Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to
make the Tabernacle. For, See, (says he) that thou make all things according
to the Pattern showed thee in the Mount. Because God understood his own
Kingdom, and this Great Feast that he would hold* Moses was to do nothing,
without special Command, and Precep^, and Direction for it: All was to Answer
Exactly, to what was to come; All was a Shadow and Example of Heavenly Things:
Moses therefore must be most careful, that he did not make Any Thing but
according to the Pattern. And so Heb. 9. 9. Which was a Figure (says he,
speaking of the Old Economy, and Frame of Things under Moses) for the time
then present, etc. Which stood only in Meats and Drinks, and such Things, until
the Time of Reformation. They were for the Time present; So we Translate: But
the word (...) in the Greek, signifies a Time pressing, urging, and an
Insisting Season; and (as I may say) against the Glory of the Kingdom of
Christ. And, indeed, so are All the Times, from the very Fall of Adam to the
Kingdom of Christ: Times that press, and crowd against the Kingdom of Christ:
For, if this Time present were but at an End, that lies as a Bar, and
hinderance in the way, the Kingdom of Christ would immediately break out: As
when that Time shall come, of which the Angel (Rev. 10.) swear, Time shall be
no more; when once it comes to that, Time shall be no more: A better State of
Things shall come in. The Kingdom of Christ shall immediately come in, as soon
as God has removed the present Time, the Time now pressing against it, The
Kingdom of Christ will flow in a* main: As when the Floodgates are drawn up,
when that which is as the Bar in the way, is taken away, immediately, like a
great Torrent, the Kingdom of Christ will come in. When time shall be no more;
that is, such a time, as hitherto has pressed against that Kingdom, though in
the mean Time It is made Subordinate, and leads to it; But that is a note,
rather by the way. The Thing that I chiefly intend is, that all things in the
Old Testament were but Figures and Types of things that were to come. I shall
therefore give you a Brief Compare: For, I will be as short in it, as posssibly
I can: You shall find, that one Great Branch of the Religion of Moses, or the
Worship of God in the Old Testament, and according to the Law of Moses; one
great Branch of it was the holding of so many Feasts in a Year to the Lord. The
23d. of Leviticus does give us a Description of all those Feasts: And, I shall
(as I say) in Brief, compare them.

First, There was the Feast of every Week, which was the Sabbath, the Jewish
Sabbath, the Seventh Day; And so the Seventh Year; and the Seven Seventh Year,
that is, which made up a Seven of Seven Weeks, of Years. All this, there was
observed in the Time of the Law. There is that which we now call the Lords Day;
It was then the Seventh Day of the Week, the Jewish Sabbath: That was a Weekly
Revolution, and then, every Seventh Year was a Sabbatical Year. And then, after
Seven Sevens of Years, there was the Jubilee, every Fiftieth Year. Now, all
this was a Figure of that Great Sabbatism, that remains to the People of God.

So the Seventh, both Day, and Year, and the Seventh of Seven Years, the
Seventh of Seven Weeks, or Weeks of Years; that is, after every Forty nine
Years, which is Seven Sevens; you know, the Fiftieth Year was a Year of
Jubilee, and Holy to the Lord; A Feast of Jubilee, of Great Freedom, of Great
Redemption, of Great setting free, both the Persons and Estates of Men; and all
was to represent what the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 4. 9. There remains, etc.
He went through all kind of Rests, that were under the Law; and ver. 9. Yet
beyond all, There remains a Sabbatism, a Great Sabbatising to the People of
God. So that this is the Great Sabbatism, that shall be held to God; It shall
be in these Thousand Years: That Is the State of perfect Sabbatism wherein
Persons shall not speak their own Words, think their own Thoughts, nor do their
own Actions, but shall be the Servants of God, and of Christ, with His Name
upon their Foreheads. Consider therefore this Expression of the Apostle, ver.
9. indeed we Translate it* (which is Great Pity, that it should be so
Disadvantageously Translated) There remains a Rest; so we say. But the Margin
being sensible (as it were) that They did wrong, in calling it only a Rest,
gives the Higher Style of keeping a Sabbath; not only such a Sabbath, as the
Jews kept, nor such a Sabbath, as Christians keep; but beyond all this, there
Remains the Blessed Festival of a Sabbath, in which we shall be free from all
the Cumber, both of Worldly Business, and also of Corruption, and Misery, and
Unhappiness. This shall be the Great Sabbatism of the Great Nuptials of Jesus
Christ, the Great Nuptials of the Lamb.

2. In the second place, There was the Great Feast of Passover: which was upon
the Deliverance from the Bondage of Egypt. I will not spend any time to
particularize it; you shall find, there was the Feast of Passover; of which,
we read abundantly, in Exodus 12. And after the Passover was slain, there was
the Offering of the first fruits. I Will give you a Brief Account of all,
according to the New Testament: There is to be the Highest Passover of that
Festival, that is, A full Table of the Redemption of Jesus Christ: A feasting
on the Pascal Lamb; the Redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ. For Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us, as the Apostle speaks; And in the Evangelist,
when Christ had ordained the Supper of the Lord; even after the ordaining of
it. This Passover shall be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. As he said of that
Fruit of the Vine, He would drink it new with them in the Kingdom of the
Father. So he says in the Evangelist Luke; This Passover shall be fulfilled
in the Kingdom of God. That is, When we shall have the full Enjoyment of Jesus
Christ, in his Redemption. For then the Paschal Lamb shall be set out to us in
the Fullness of its Effect; in the Fullness and Greatness of His Redemption; As
He gave Himself a Lamb without Spot, Sacrificed to God for us. That is, the
Great Sense of our Savior in those Words, This Passover shall be fulfilled in
the Kingdom of God.

3. Thirdly, For the Feast of the First Fruits; You know, In two Regards, we
may say, That it is a Feast of the first Fruits, or the Sheaf offered, both in
regard of Christ, and also in regard of our selves: In regard of Christ, It is
said, in the 1 Cor. 15. 23. Christ the First Fruits, and they that are Christ's
at his Coming; Every Man in his own Order, Christ the First Fruits, and they
that are Christ's, at his Coming. Then shall that Blessed First Fruits, Jesus
Christ, the Firstborn of every Creature; The First Begotten from the Dead, He
shall come forth in Glory of His Kingdom, and in the Glory of His Appearance.
It is a Feast of the First Fruits, because then Christ, who is the first
Fruits, comes forth in all His Glory, and in all His Blessedness. And, that it
is the Feast of first Fruits, in regard of his Servants; I shall give you two
Scriptures, and so pass off, James 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the
Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of first Fruits of his Creatures; And,
in Rev. 14. 4. These, (says he, speaking of the Hundred forty and four
Thousand that were Sealed) These are the first Fruits to God, and to the Lamb.

4. The fourth Feast, that we read of; It was the Feast of Weeks; As it is
called in that, Lev. 23. And it was after seven complete Sabbaths were past;
Then there was a Feast, which is called Pentecost: And at that very Feast, was
the great pouring Out of the Spirit of Christ upon the Disciples, Acts 2. 1.
And so there shall be the Feast of the Harvest, of all the Servants of God,
gathered in one after the Pouring out of that blessed Spirit of God. All this
shall be much greater than that was in Acts 2. This was but a Beginning; It was
but an Entrance of that which is to be done at the Feast of the Great Harvest.

Surely, never was there such a Feast of Pentecost; Such a Feast of Weeks, as
shall be then; Every one, who shall be admitted to that Feast, His mouth shall
be Full of the Wonderful works of God. He shall speak abundantly of the Glory
of God, and of Jesus Christ, and of the Riches of Grace; He shall speak
abundantly of the mighty Works of God, in that mighty Pouring out of the Spirit
of God.

5. In the Fifth Place; There shall be the Feast of Trumpets: As we read, Lev.
23. After the Feast of Weeks, was the Feast of Trumpets. And that Feast was a
Type of the Seven Trumpets in the Revelation, ending and filled up in the
Seventh Trumpet that we read of, Rev. 11. The Seventh Angel sounded, and
immediately there were loud Voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this
World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ, and he shall
Reign for ever and ever. ver. 15. With which you may compare what is spoken in
1 Cor. 15. 52. And in 1 These. 4. 16. Christ shall descend, the Trumpet shall
sound, and the Dead shall be raised Incorruptible. And the Saints shall be
changed. And he shall come down with the Shout and Voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trampet of God. Then shall that great Trumpet sound; And then shall be
the Feast when all the Dead in Christ, and they that have slept In, and By
Jesus, shall arise, and shall appear in Glory, and shall stand forth in that
State of an Incorruptible Resurrection; And then is the Blessedness of the
Saints changed, who live and remain here upon Earth. And here all the forenam'd
Feasts are together united in one.

6. In the Sixth Place; There shall be the Day of Atonement, the Day of the
great Atonement. As we read, of that also: A Day; wherein God was reconciled,
wherein the Entrances into the Holy of Holies were opened; All that was to be
in the Day of Atonement. And so there shall be in the State of the Wedding of
Christ; The Feast of Atonement, of Reconciliation, As the Apostle speaks, Acts
3. 19. When the times of Refreshing and of Restitution shall come. Repent ye
therefore, and be Convented, that your Sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: In that Great Day of
Atonement, and at the Great Wedding, All that make up the Lambs Wife shall
meet there, if they have been Enemies before to God and Christ, they shall be
Atton'd: They Will lay aside their Enmity one to another, and fall into mutual
Kindness, and Enjoyment one of another: Then, all things, as the Apostle
speaks, Col. 1. All things in Heaven and in Earth shall be fully Reconciled by
Him, Even by Him.

6. The last is, The Feast of Tabernacles; The Feast of a Paradisiacal-State.
The Feast of Tabernacles, The Feast of Goodly Boughs of Olives, and Palms, And
whatsoever was most valuable among the Plants, was brought out to make Boughs
with, at that time. And to this the great Feast of the Kingdom of Christ is
compared; Because it shall be the State of Paradise Restored: All the Glory,
and Beauty, and Excellency of the Creation, shall then be restored. We read,
therefore, Zech. 14. 16, etc. of this Happy and Blessed Feast of Tabernacles:
It is when all shall be Holiness to Jehovah. And it shall come to pass, that
every one that is left of all the Nations which come against Jerusalem, shall
even go up from Year to Year, to Worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to
keep the Feast of Tabernacles. It is the Feast of that State of Paradise,
where, Instead of Briars, and Thorns, shall come up the Fir Tree, and the
Mirtle-Tree. And it shall be to the Lord for a Name, and for a Perpetual
Remembrance. Esaias 55. 13.

I shall now Briefly shut up all this, in Application. And I desire you, that
you would refresh these things in your own Thoughts; And that you would bring
them to mind: You will find every particular Feast, that of the Passover, Exodus
12. You Will find at large; and every other Feast in Lev. 23. And, I desire you
would consider, and read that Chapter; And remember, that the Glory, and
Happiness, and Blessedness, and Spirituality of those Feasts shall be in the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Use. 1. The first use therefore that I would make of it, shall be this; To
make a present Invitation to you to this Great Feast, that is to be held to the
Lord our God; Even to Jehovah: That you would mind this; That you would
seriously mind it, and consider it, that all of us are now Invited. For now,
when we may go (as in that, Matthew. 22.) One to our Market; Another to our Farm:
Every one to this, or that Entertainment of this World; At this very Time, the
Invitation is made to every one of us, that we would consider of it.

Behold, this Sermon, and this Discourse, this Preaching of the Gospel, it is
sent to you, to invite you to this great Supper: He sent forth his Servants,
(ver. 3.) That is, the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, the Expounders
and Openers of Scripture to you, to call you, and to bid you unto this Wedding.
Now take heed! Take heed! That you do not go, one to your Farm, and another to
your Merchandise, that you don't go every one your own way: As it is said, They
made light of it, and went their way; They go every one their own way: Take
heed now, Remember, when that Wedding-Supper shall be, and that it shall then
be Proclaimed with that sound of the Trumpet, with the Voice of the Arch-ang^l,
Blessed are they that are bidden then to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb; If
any be bidden, They must be bidden now; They must be persuaded now, they must
accept the Invitation at this very time. For, now it is, as I tell you, You may
go to your Farm, and to your Merchandise, etc. Every one your own way: Now is
the Invitation made, and now it is to be taken; Now it is to be closed with,
now it is to be accepted: Hearken therefore, every Soul, that hears this
Discourse. Behold, thou art Bidden to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb: Thou art
invited to that Great Feast of the Kings Son: Thou art earnestly persuaded,
that thou would be present there, and that thou would partake of the
Splendour, Glory, and Magnificence, and of the Happiness of that Day: Take heed
now, that thou don't make Light of it, and say, what is this to me? You will
certainly Repent it another day; You will fall to Weeping, Wailing, and
Gnashing of Teeth, that you would not be persuaded, when you were thus
Graciously bidden by Jesus Christ, and by the Voice of his Word, and the Voice
of his Gospel.

Therefore hearken to this Invitation; Hear, whoever it be; As it is said, Isa.
55. Where there is a great Description of this very Kingdom, of this very State
of Paradise: As you may find, in the last Verse. Instead of the Thorn shall
come up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Brier shall come up the Mirtle-Tree:
And it shall be to the Lord for a Name, and for an Everlasting Sign that shall
not be cut off.

Now Ho, every one that Thirsts: So the Chapter begins; As you know, we make
public Sounds and Proclamations; So, Ho, every one that Thirsts, come ye to
the Waters, etc.

Wherefore do ye spend your Money for that, which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not, etc? And, if any should say, this is nothing but
only a Noise of Words, and of Discourse; says God ( ver. 9.) As the Heavens
are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my
thoughts than your thoughts. For as the Rain comes down, and the Snow from
Heaven, and returns not thither, but Waters the Earth, and makes it bring
forth and bud, that it may give Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater; So
shall my word be that goes out of my Mouth; It shall not return unto me void,
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall Prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it: Therefore, assure your selves, that this Word, It will not
return in vain; It will Prosper to that very End. You may be sure, such a Feast
there is to be: Therefore, take great care concerning your selves, what you
will do about it, how you will order your selves about it.

Use. 2. In the Second Place, I shall point out to you, how you may prepare
your selves: You must take care of this;

First of all, that you get a Wedding Garment. As it is said, Mat. 22. He saw
one there, that had not on a Wedding Garment. And he said unto him, Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a Wedding Garment? And he was speechless. The
Man was so confounded, he was so ashamed of the thing, that he had nothing at
all to say. The King came in to see his Guests, and he saw a Man that had not
on a Wedding Garment; The Man had nothing to say, he knew there was no Reason
for him to say any thing. And what is this Wedding Garment? It is an interest
in Christ, an Interest in His Righteousness, a being Clothed in Linen, White,
and Pure, washed in the Blood of the Lamb.

And tho the Person did not despise the Wedding, He made a Profession, as we
do, of Christianity, to come to it: Yet in the next verse ( ver. 13.) The King
said to his Servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him
into outer Darkness; And There shall be Weeping, and Gnashing of Teeth; For,
many are called, but few are chosen.

Therefore, look diligently to this thing; That tho you seem to speak fair, you
will come, and you will be there, and you do make a pretense; And yet you have
not the Wedding Garment, Christ, and his Righteousness; Oh, how sad will it be!

In the Second Place; You must look diligently to this too; That you have Oil
in your Vessels, and not only in your Lamps. This you see, is in Matthew. 25.
The Foolish Virgins never thought of Oil in their Vessels, but only in their
Lamps. That is, you must have Grace, you must have a Holy and Spiritual Life
from Christ. That will be able to last out, and to endure that very Time. But I
shall not speak more of it; Because I shall come in a full Discourse to Treat
of it.

Use. 3. The third use I would have you make, is, I would have you observe, and
consider but a little, How this Notion of a Feast, has been Corrupted, by the
Antichristian World; What a Company of Feasts have there been, of Man's
Institution? The Feast of such a Saint, and such a Saint; and Feasts that never
were appointed by God; Yet they have come into use, and they remain in
observation: And how came this?

It is by that Counterfeit Christianity, Antichristianism came in, Feasts that
never were ordained by God. And, I wish, with all my heart, there were not
Reason to bewail, not the Antichristian World only, but even our Protestant
Profession: There Is nothing looks more Scandalous, and more Strange, than
setting up Feasts, that the Gospel never appointed, nor Instituted; I say, I
pray with all my heart, that they that have Power and Authority in these things
may consider it. For, when Jereboam departed from the purity of Religion,
Instituted by God, in the Old Testament; He made Feasts, and Times of his own.

So the Christian World has done: And the Rellicks, and Refuse of it are still
among us: We keep up Times that never were appointed, That there is no mention,
nor Signature of, in the Gospel. I do not speak any way, to desire to Reflect,
or to be Censorious, but to speak the Truth of things, according to the Word of
God: For, it is only of Jehovah himself, to appoint his own Feasts. And He
has kept up to us The Feast of the Lord's Day, and the Feast of the Lord's
Supper, as Preparatory to that Great Festival of the Kingdom of Christ: And no
other are we to make, nor to Devise, of our own Hearts.

Use. 4. The Fourth, and Last Application is this;

That you would seriously consider this Marriage of the Lamb, this Great Feast,
how near it is. For, as the Jews were mighty careful to keep Account of Days,
and the Motion of Times, and Weeks; They were to Account (as
Scripture-Expression is, Lev. 23. 15. In that Case) so we ought to Account the
Time.

And, methinks, it is a very great Amazement, and a very great Sadness; That
there should be no more Diligence nor Care, Neither in the Public Ministry of
the Gospel, nor in Private Christians, to Count the Time, and to know how near
it is to this Great Festival: For, tho you may think you are Excused, Because
it is said, Watch, For ye know not the Time; Yet I shall show you, That has
quite another sense; And that it speaks, that every one should look, that they
have the Truth of Grace, and Oil in the Vessel, and the Wedding Garment.

This is the Watchfulness, that the Spirit of God confines us to. But, in the
mean time, we ought to be upon our Watchtower, and to know the Times appointed
by God; For, it is great Hypocrisy, (However we may think it Great Modesty)
that we do not Discern the Signs of the Times; To be Instructed in the Times,
from the Signs the Scripture has given us, from Time to Time: That we may come
to know, when this Great Coming of the Kingdom of Christ shall be; And that our
Hearts may be greatly preparing, and in a Readiness for that Great Day, etc. is
one Branch of the great Duty of Waiting for his Appearance.

SERMON V. Near the Time of the Shaking in London, etc. On Matthew. XXV. Ver. 1.
and so on to Ver. 13. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened unto Ten
Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.


THE Words that I shall place the present Discourse upon, are those, Viz. While
the Bridegroom Tarried, while the Bridegroom delayed; While the Bridegroom
Delayed his coming, While He whiled out the Time; As we in our English Language
speak, and as the Greek Word, (...) properly signifys: While the Bridegroom
Delayed, or Tarried, or spent Time; They all Slumbred and Slept.

I have, you know, in this Parable, shown you the Great Intention of it; That
it Represents the Glory of that Nuptial Feast, That Wedding, That Marriage of
the Lamb. And I have already opened the several Preparatory Particulars in it.

I shall now at this Time Discourse upon what I have proposed; The Bridegroom
Tarried; And, so I shall endeavor to lay this Foundation,

That the coming of Jesus Christ has not been, since He spoke this Parable,
Neither is it yet immediately to be. The Bridegroom Tarried. And therefore,
herein I shall endeavor to open to you,

First, How strange it is, according to Scripture-Discourse, that the coming of
Christ has been so long delayed.

And, I shall Answer to you, the Objections that arise from it against the
Truth of Scripture, concerning the Bridegroom's coming; And so how this delay,
and many Scriptures can be reconciled.

In the Second Place, I shall give you the two Great Reasons, especially, why
the Bridegroom's coming is Delayed. And then,

In the Third Place, I shall enquire the Signs, when this Tarrying of the
Bridegroom is like to be at an End.

And, I shall endeavor so to Discourse this, as to resolve you concerning the
Present Face of the World; That we are in a Time, you know all very well, of
very great Commotions of the Nations, and as the Scripture Expression is: We
hear of Wars, and Rumors of Wars continually: And, you know, God has, both in
other Nations, and in a part of this Nation (the beyond the Sea.) given us
Great Reason to consider that shaking of the Earth, that was so dreadful in a
part of our Nation, tho beyond the Sea; And that gentle Admonition, that he
has given us of it, so lately, in this very place, In this very City; I would
therefore Discourse that point to you, how far we may look upon these, as Signs
of the near Coming of the Bridegroom. And then, I shall close up the whole, in
the Application of it.

I begin with the First: And that is, to Discourse to you, how strange it may
seem, and disagreeable to Scripture, that the Bridegroom has so long Delayed
his Coming; And I shall remove the Objectons against the Truth and Verity of
Scripture, Notwithstanding the Delay of the coming.

First therefore, it seems very strange, that such an Evil State of the World
should continue beyond the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; Seeing there
is such an Infinite Grace of God in a Mediator, and that he pleased to give his
own Son to Lost Man, That whoever believes in him, should not perish, bat have
Eternal Life, It is no wonder, we may be ready truly to say, That the World
continued till Christ came, till He Dyed, and Rose again, and till there was an
Universal Preaching of the Gospel in His Name: But why should it last any
longer? So Great a Thing was done Then in the World, that there can be no
Expectation of such another. And therefore sure there was nothing now to do,
but for Christ to have a Kingdom, as Great, and as Large, and as Glorious, as
the Scripture assures he shall have.

For, as I have noted to you; and I desire that you would bear (as I have said
before) That Scripture in your Mind, Gal. 4. 4. When the Fullness of Time was
come, God sent forth his Son.

It is no wonder that Time should last, till The Fullness of Time came: But
that it should last beyond, is very strange; God sent forth his Son, made of a
Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Children. And God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son to all those that are his Children, to cry, Abba, Father. These were so
Great Things, that till this Fullness, indeed, it is no Wonder at all, that God
bore up the World; because he had such a Great Discovery of his Love, and of
his Grace, to make; and by which Men had been Saved all along before, even the
Fathers in the Old Testament: And by which, Salvation is to be alone expected
and received. 'Twas no Wonder therefore, (I say) that God bore up the World to
that Fullness of Time. But now, it is strange, that it should last any longer
than that: It is Wonder there has not been a Kingdom of Redemption, and of
Glory ever since.

But now, to Answer you in that Particular, and by a Place of Scripture, as
Notable as this Fullness of Time is. There is another far Greater Appearance of
the Glory of the Redemption of Christ; For you know, All That was in
Humiliation; It was in an Incognito-State, in a Disguise of the Son of God,
Humbling Himself into the Form of a Servant, and to Death, the Death of the
Cross.

But All This is to Appear in Glory; And as there was a Fullness of Time for
that First Manifestation of Christ; So there is ( Ephesians. 1. 10.) a Dispensation
of the Fullness of Times (not only of Time, but of Times, or of All Time) That
he might gather together in One, all things in Christ; both which are in
Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in Him. Till that Date be come, the
Kingdom of Christ cannot be.

Let me therefore desire of you, That you would keep these Two Places of
Scripture always in your Thoughts, with Relation to the First Coming of Christ;
and with Relation to his Second Glorious Coming and Appearance. There is the
Fullness of Time; and Christ was Revealed first in That, as a Saerifice Dying
for Sinners. And there is the Fullness of Times, of All Time; wherein all
things in Heaven, and in Earth, are to be gathered together in Him, even in
Him; In which He is to appear, without Sin to Salvation, Heb. 9. Last.

A Second Thing that makes it seem very strange, that God should continue the
World so long, even after This Fullness of Time, is this; Because the Heart of
God (as I have often said to you) cannot be to this World; Though He allows
some kind of State and Condition to his Servants in it; some Enjoyment, some
Supports, some Presence of Himself, and of his Glory, and Grace in Christ; Yet
it is far short of what is to be; Because This is a World that God cannot Love;
and therefore the Glory of Things shall not be in the Present State of the
World: Because, I say, it is a World that God cannot Love; As Christ said, My
Kingdom is not of this World; not meaning, That it is not a Kingdom, that shall
Appear, and be Visible in the Creation of God, in Heaven, and Earth, standing
in all the Order and Beauty of it: That is not the meaning. But, My Kingdom is
not of this World; That is, Not of this Present Corrupt State in it: It must
come to that, That Time shall be no more, (as it is said, Revel. the 10th)
before the Kingdom of Christ can be. There must be not only the Fullness of
Time, but Time must be no more, of such a kind as it has been: And the
Fullness of Times must come; And Then the Kingdom of Chrsst shall appear: But
as yet, it cannot: For the Scripture witnesses very plainly, and evidently to
us, That though God gives his Servants Food, and Raiment, and Habitation, and
gives to many of them, Great Conveniences, and Enjoyments of this World; Yet
it is not, because he loves the World, or likes their State and Condition in
the World: For, (says the Apostle James) Ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses, Know
ye not that the Friendship of this World is Enmity with God? Whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God, James 4. 4.

You see what a Great Contest there is between God and the World: And it can
never be comprimised; It can never be reconciled: Whosoever will be a Friend of
the World, is the Enemy of God. And therefore, though we value the Things of
the World at so High a Rate; and the Conveniences of the World we make so
Choice of; Yet, if we believe This Great Oracle of Truth; whoever will be a
Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God: And, the Friendship of this World is
Enmity with God.

O that we could carry the Thoughts and Considerations of This always upon our
Minds! And so the Apostle John tells us the very same thing, 1 John 2. 15. Love
not the World, neither the things that are in the World: If any man love the
World, the Love of the Father is not in him; For All that is in the World, the
Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; It is not of the
Father, but it is of the World.

And because the World is nothing but an Entertainment of Lust; and that God
cannot love it; Therefore the World passes away: The World is continually in a
Fleeting Condition; It is passing away: All this Form and State of things, that
we now see; the Order and Manner of Things now is hastening away as fast as it
can.

But you will say, Why does it not make more haste, when God does not Love it,
and when it is Enmity to Him? And when, If any Man Love this World, he is an
Enemy to God, and the Love of the Father is not in Him? O why should we make it
as if it were an Everlasting State, when it is not? But why is God pleased to
continue it thus long?

To that, the Answer is; Because, there is a Patience of God which is Exercised
now in the World, and he will Exercise that Patience to the very last of the
Time, he has appointed to the World.

In regard of this, It is, as if God should say, it is true; I do not Love this
World; I do not Love to see Wicked Men Rolling and Tumbling in it, in all the
Pleasure, Voluptuousness, Enjoyment, and Merriment, wherein they live; I do not
Love to see my Servants so taken up about it, and so apt to be Drawn, and
Tempted with it, as they are; And yet, for all this, Notwithstanding it; I will
let this World stand (says God) that my patience may be known and understood:
As the Apostle Peter speaks (2 Pet. 2. 9.) The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some Men count slackness, but is long suffering to usward: Not
willing that any should Perish, but that all should come to Repentance. The
meaning of which Expression, I cannot better expound to you, than by examining
it, what a kind of patience it is, that is intended? For Wicked Men, they are
wicked still, Notwithstanding, the Patience of God, and they will not Repent.
And, God takes them away, one by one, as he sees Good. And the World continues
very bad, from one Generation to another: And yet God Exercise his patience
toward it. You may understand it, by comparing this Expression with the first
part of the Chapter. They say (in ver. 4.) Where is the promise of his Coming?
For since the Fathers fell asleep; All things continue, as they were, from the
beginning of the Creation. Since the Fathers fell asleep; It is very Natural,
to understand it of those first Long-living Patriarchs before the Flood: Since
They fell asleep, and the Flood came, (say these Scoffers) There has been no
change of things here: The World has stood, just as it did from thence: And
herein is the Patience of God, the World was about One Thousand Six Hundred
and Fifty Six Years, when the Flood came. Now in Every such Generation of the
World, Every Thousand Years of the World, God has had as Great Reason to
Destroy the World, as he had Then: For, Wickedness has Grown to such an
Height, as it did then. And yet for all this, God Exercises the Patience and
Long-Suffering, that he does not Destroy the World again and again; and leave a
few, as he did then, to people the World anew.

But he continues Summer, and Winter, and Harvest, and the State of the World:
He has not Destroyed Every Living Thing, as He did then: Though there have
been Notable Judgments in All Times, as I shall presently speak to you.

A Third Thing, that should make us very much wonder, That God should keep the
World a-foot so long; It is in Regard of the Great Insolence, and Boldness of
Wicked Men. What a Boldness is this! That they should say, Where is the Promise
of his Coming? And that they should find something or other to say, It is
nothing, it is only a Thing that comes by Chance, or it is a Natural Cause,
that the World continues.

Now, let it be granted, That it is only a Natural Cause; Who is the Great
Ruler, and Conducter of Natural Causes, but God? And who has suited Natural
Causes to Times and Seasons, but God? Let the greatest Atheist find out as Good
Natural Causes, as he can: As for Example, the Causes of the Great Earthquake
at Jamaica: There is nothing not the least Thing that comes to pass, but by His
Wisdom, and by his Power; And that it goes so far, and no farther, It is fully
attributed to be to himself, and to no other.

And therefore, I beseech you, keep, as an Antidote against all the Atheistical
Talk that you meet with in the World, concerning these Things; keep continually
in your Mind what we read of, in the Book of Daniel. Several times indeed we
read of Great Things spoken of God. Dan. 3. Nebuchadnezzar made This
Acknowledgment to God: Whoever (says he) shall speak a word against the God of
Shaderach, Mesech, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces. He owned, and was
convinced of such a Mighty Power of God, that he would not endure there should
be a Mouth opened against him.

Indeed, It were very well, if Christian Nations would learn by the Example of
an Heathen Prince, That they would not suffer the Tongue of Atheists to walk
about so brikly as it does in the World: They set their Mouths against the
Heavens, and their Tongue rangeth through the whole Earth, as the Expression is
in the Psalms. I say, 'Twere well that the Mouths of Atheists were stopped, and
that they had such notice from the Supreme Powers, that they might be Daunted,
and afraid to Dishonor the Great God of Heaven and Earth, and to make nothing
of his Name, and the Works he does in the World. So in the 34th Verse of the
4th of Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar, This Heathen Prince, says: I Nebuchadnezzar lift
up mine Eyes unto Heaven, and mine Understanding returned unto me; And I
blessed the most High, and I praised, and honored him that lives for ever,
whose Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from Generation
to Generation: And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing; and
he does according to his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth: and none can stay his Hand: That Is a great
Expression, that I desire you to keep in your Minds; None can stay his Hand: He
can stay it Himself, but no other can stay it.

I would desire you but to consider, in regard of the late Remarkable
Providence toward This City: Of which, most People (I perceive) were Sensible;
some in Greater, and some in Lesser Degree: This Place of Scripture does very
much affect my Thoughts concerning it: Who can stay God's Hand? If He had said,
Let it tear up the Foundations of this City, and the Houses in it, who could
have stayed his Hand? I beseech you consider, Why might it not have been so
much more, as well as so much, or so little? And yet Men are ready to say,
Because God did no more, he could do no more, except Natural Causes had been
prepared to go on, and to go further: And because the Earth Did give a kind of
a Little Nodd, and no more, We are not sensible of the Great Hand of God; and
who it was that was pleased to stay his Hand: It was His Own Grace, and His own
Mercy, to stay his Hand: As if he should say, I Will let you see the Danger, and
no more than Just let you see it: And therefore, O that Men would praise the
Lord for his Goodness, and for his Wonderful Works to the Children of Men! And
that they would stand in Awe of Him, and consider his Doings. For God forbears
(you see) with an Infinite Patience and Long-Suffering: He lets Men Open their
Mouths against Himself, and does not cut them off in the very moment, through
his Mercies.

But, if you say, Will God always put up these Wrongs and Reproaches? Shall
Right to this Great Name of God never be done?

Yes, He will make the World sensible of Him by Repentance: Or else there is a
Day of Dreadful Recompense; As if God should say, I have Time enough; I have an
Eternity to show my Displeasure upon Them in; I have it Sealed in my Treasures;
Their Foot shall slide in Due Time; And therefore I Will bear with them a little
Time; Because There Is a Day of Perdition of Ungodly Men; As the Apostle Peter
speaks, 2 Peter* 3. The Day of the Lord will come. Men say; Where is it? Says
the Apostle, (Verse 10.) The Day of the Lord will come. And there is a
Reserving of Heaven and Earth unto Fire, against that Day, and the Perdition of
ungodly men.

And then, There is a Gracious Purpose of God: I desire that you would take
notice of that Place; Which ought indeed to be very much upon our Thoughts, in
this very regard; That it is Prophesied, and foretold, That they shall come
from the Ends of the Earth, Jer. 16. 20. Saying, shall a Man make Gods unto
himself, and they are no Gods? Therefore behold, I will this once. It is a very
notable Expression; Like that of shaking Heaven and Earth, yet once more (says
the Apostle) I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven; That those things
which cannot be shaken may remain; And that the things which can be shaken may
be taken away at once: Therefore behold, I will this once cause them to know, I
will cause them to know mine hand, and my might, and they shall know that my
Name is the Lord. And this seems to be a Gracious and a Merciful Intention; For
in Verse 19. O Lord my Strength and my Fortress, and my Refuge in the Day of
Affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the Ends of the Earth, and
shall say, surely our Fathers have Inherited Lies, Vanity, and things wherein
there is no profit. Jeremy apprehends great Grace in God upon this Prospect,
and so applies to Him in his own Case, O Lord my Strength, etc.

So you may see why God bears the Reproaches of them, that contemn him;
Wherefore do the Wicked contemn God? Says God, I Will have a Day of Perdition
for Ungodly Men: And I Will have a Day, when the Gentiles shall come from the
Ends of the Earth: And for once, they shall know my Might, and my Power; And
that my Name is Jehovah. I Will bring all mine Home, my Patience is for them,
that they might not Perish, but come to Repentance, etc.

A Fourth thing that makes it very strange, that God continues the World so
long, is, Because there are so many Prayers of his Saints for the Kingdom of
Christ, to come; And that the Wickedness of the Wicked may be brought to an
End; And that the Oppression and Persecution of his Church may be at an End. It
is a wonder therefore, that God should not hear the Prayers of his Servants,
and bring all these things to their great Issue.

But now, our Lord Jesus Christ has given us an Account of this, Luke 18. 7,
8. And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry Day and Night unto him,
tho he bear long with them? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily.
Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? He
will avenge them speedily, tho he tarry long.

You may think, those things Contradict one another; To tarry long, and yet to
avenge them speedily: Yet he will come, and he will avenge.

As it was said concerning the Souls under the Altar; Stay, till the rest of
your Brethren are filled up; And then there shall be Vengeance indeed to the
Enemy, and a Recompense to his Servants; And yet how little Faith concerning
this even among the Servants of God!

The last thing why you may think it very strange, is this; Because the Apostle
said so long ago, The Ends of the World were come. I confess, it may seem to
give an Atheist some hold, some advantage; You know how many places of
Scripture speak to this purpose, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Says the Apostle, All these
things happened unto them for Ensamples: And they are Written for our
Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come: And (says the Apostle
John) This is the Last time, and hereby we know it, this is the last hour; And
these are the last Days; All this is spoken, and yet for all this, the Kingdom
of Christ has not come: And Sixteen Hundred Years, and more are passed, since
these things have been spoken.

Now Indeed, these things look very strange, and might make Men think, that
there is no such thing, as the Coming of Christ; For tho the Apostles Preached
it, and they may say, indeed, Men that are Preachers, may persuade Men so; And
indeed, they say so; But we see nothing coming to pass; Did not the Apostle
John speak of the last Day, the last Hour, and the last Time? And the Apostle
Peter, of the very last of Times? As the word is very Emphatical in the Greek;
And yet for all that, it is not come.

To all this, I would only say these two things; Or rather, give you two
places of Scripture, how these things come to pass, In the 2 These. chapter 2. v. 3.
The Apostle tells us plainly, there was such a Noise (as I may so express it)
of the Doctrine of the Apostles, concerning the last Times; That all Christians
then were upon the Expectation, were upon the Gaze, when that Coming of Christ
should be: Now, says the Apostle, Let no Man deceive you by any means; For
that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first. Except there
be an Apostasy in the Christian Church first, That Day shall not come. And
therefore, don't wonder, tho it be called the last Time, in regard of the
Fullness of Time, and Christ coming at it, and because of the last of the four
Monarchies; Yet it is not so the last Time, but that it must give Room to an
Apostasy to come upon it: And so in the Revelation, as I have often spoken to
you. Chap. 11. And in the 12th and 13th Chapters. There are to be Time, Times,
and Half a Time: A Thousand two Hundred, and Sixty Days: Forty and two Months.
All which (as I have said often to you) make up Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years,
between the Preaching of the Gospel, the Christian Empire, and the coming of
Jesus Christ: And so I have spoken of the first thing, why there may arise such
thoughts upon this, that the Kingdom of Christ is not come yet to this very
Day. I come now to the Second thing, to give you very Great Reasons, besides
what I have intimated already to you, Why Christ has not yet come.

1. The First Account I would give, is, That so very Agreeable Representation
of the Time of the Duration of the Creation, and of the Kingdom of Christ in
Compare with it: The Apostle Peter has Given in his Second Epistle c. 3. 8.
when he was speaking of the Coming of Christ, and of the Long Delay of it; at
which Atheists took Advantage, and Antichristian Scoffers, to play upon it;
Saying, Where is the Promise of his Coming? The Apostle Resolves the Objection,
by pressing Earnestly on Christians, not to be Ignorant of One Thing, or not to
let it lie Hid from them; Viz. That One Day is with the Lord as a Thousand
Years; Referring to Each Day of the Creation, Designed by God as a Type of a
Thousand Years Duration of the Creation; They being then Six, before the
Seventh, then Sanctified and Blessed by God as a SABBATH, the Type of the Grand
Sabbath; They pourtray Six Thousand Years Duration of the Creation, before the
Great Sabbatism of the Kingdom of Christ; And that being Given under the
Representation of a Thousand Years, Revel. 20. Yet those Thousand Years are in
the Designation of God, That One Day of the Lord, That Illustrious Day, That
Day of Judgment, The Great Day, The Day; if then Jesus Christ comes in the End
of the Fourth Millenary, or Thousand of Years, as in the Fullness of Time; And
God has Laid out Six Thousand for the Duration of the World until that
Thousand Years, (Except what Shortning shall be for the Elects Sake, in the End
of the Sixth Millenary) as the Fullness of Times, or of All Time; It is very
Evident, The Coming of the Bridegroom, after His Death, and Resurrection, must
be under the Delay of about Two Thousand Years; as have now Already so near Run
out.

Argum. 2. If there be such a Number of the Elect to be brought Home to God,
and to Christ; And that They have lain scattered through these near Two
Thousand Years, and must be brought in before the Kingdom of Christ; Then the
Kingdom of Christ cannot be, till they are Brought in. But so the Apostle
shows, Heb. 4. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. Some must Enter into Rest to the Last. And of
this the Apostle Peter speaks in the same Discourse, as a Further Resolution of
the Scoffers Question, Where is the Promise of His Coming? The Lord is not
Slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count Slackness; but is
Long-Suffering to usward. Not willing that Any should perish, but that All
should come to Repentance, Verse 9.

That This has, in some General Latitude, a Respect to All Men, I would not
Deny; but that is the Lowest, and Least Part of its Intention; For so it has
not its Efficacy, nor its Effect; but take it with Relation to the Elect of
God, And so it has Full Effect; Not One Perishes, but Every Single One comes
to Repentance. If therefore there is such a Number of Elect to be Brought Home
to Repentance, who shall have their Lot in the Kingdom of Christ at his Coming:
His Coming then must needs be Delayed till All the Children of the
Bride-chamber be Brought into a Condition to meet the Bridegroom with Oil in
their Vessels* as well as in their Lamps.

Argum. 3. There is such a Space of Time Determined by God, Settled, Fixed and
Declared in the Sure Word of Prophecy, Lined out by Four Monarchies, that must
Runn out Themselves; And there is a Particular Assignation of Time to the Last
State of the Fourth, the Last of Them; Viz. Time, Times, and Half a Time,
Expounded into One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Days of Years, Revel. 12. 6.
14. And in this Time Wickedness Fills up its Ephah, or Measure; and is carried
as by the Wings of a Stork, and Settled for Ever upon its own Base: And to this
Assignation of Time, Jesus Christ Consented, and Testified his Consent, by
Lifting up Both his Hands to Heaven, and Swearing, There should be this Time,
Times and Half: And therefore no Injury is Done to Him: And that then, and not
before, All the Wonders of his Kingdom shall be Finished. On this very Account
the Apostle so Solemnly Declares, 2 Thessalonians. c. 2. 1, etc. That That Day of
Christ could not come, Except that Apostasy, the Last State of the Fourth
Monarchy, was Revealed, and Blown off by the Spirit of Christ's own Mouth, and
at Last, utterly Consumed by the Brightness and Glory of his Appearance, at
that his Coming: Before it could come to this, those Times and Half must be
Expired: Immediately therefore after the Death and Resurrection of Christ,
Vision and Prophecy were Sealed, Daniel 9. 24. with Relation to that Greatest
and Richest Effect of Prophecy; Viz. the Kingdom of Christ It was Sealed. But
then Immediately, at the very Beginning of Half Time, Christ took the First
Opportunity of making a Seizure; viz. at the Reformation, and of Swearing,
there should be Time of such sort no more; but in the Days of the Seventh
Trumpet; When he shall begin to found the Mystery of God, Viz. The Kingdom of
Christ, shall be Finishing, as he has spoken by all his Servants the Prophets:
Which shall begin at 1697, So near approaching; All which things have been
fully, by the Assistances of God, made out, and publicly set forth; And are
now only so far briefly Represented, as to give satisfaction to this doubt;
How comes it to pass, that the Coming of the Bridegroom has been thus long
Delayed? And no further Insisted upon in these Sermons Set for Preaching the
Gospel, especially (under the Grace of the Divine Spirit) to work upon the
Heart, and to engage in all Holiness of Conversation; I come therefore to the
Practical Reflection, on what has been spoken, in these short Applications:

Appli. 1. That we would take heed of the Atheistick, and profane boldness of
Scoffers; Who, because the Bridegroom on so Holy and Wise Reasons, as Scripture
has given us, Delays his Coming, say, where is the promise of his Coming? They
believe no such thing; And indeed, all Discourses against the Kingdom of
Christ, and the Prophesies of Scripture, or turning them into Allegory, and
Metaphor, Give Countenance, and Assurance to such Profaneness, and Boldness of
Scoffing; Let us aherefore be mindful of the Words of the Holy Prophets, and of
the Doctrines of the Apostles, of the Lord and Savior, 2 Peter c. 3. v, 1, etc.

Appli. 2. Let us beware of the Accounting the delay of the Bridegrooms Coming
to any thing in the Course of Nature, or, as if the World could bear up it
self, or Perpetuate it self; As they of whom the Apostle speaks, who are
wilfully Ignorant, that the World by the very Word of God, was settled so out
of, and yet in such a Neighborhood to the Water; that it depended wholly on
the Word of his Power, not to be overflown by it: And that the Heavens and
Earth that now are, are so Reserved, are Treasured up for Fire at the Time
Appointed by God, for Perdition of such, and of All Ungodly Men; That we may be
in a continual Dependence upon Him, and Preparation for the Bridegroom's Coming.

Applicat. 3. Let us have Just Apprehensions of the Patience, and
Long-Suffering of God, in the Delay of the Bridegroom's Coming* And that it is
no Sluckness concerning his Promise, As if He were altogether such a one as our
Selves. And Let us Account it Salvation; And so it will be, if we are His: For
He will let None of His Perish, but Every One of Them shall come to Repentance.
But if we are not His, though we Know it not, Yet His Goodness Leads to
Repentance, by its Gracious Invitations, and Excitements: And if through our
Hard, and Impenitent Hearts, It does not Lead us so, we Treasure up Wrath
against the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God
at this Coming of the Bridegroom, Romans 2. 3, 4, etc.

Applicat. 4. Let us not Think it Boldness, or Presumption, to Search the
Scriptures; and, 2 Peter 1. 19, etc. to Give Heed to the Sure Word of Prophecy,
as to a Light that shines in a Dark Place, Till the Day Dawn, and the Day Star
Rise in our Hearts; Especially to that Line, of TIME, Times, and Half Time: For
our Lord charges it as Hypocrisy, not to Discern the Signs of the Times, That
is, the Characters of Time, Scripture has Impressed upon it: And though there
are many Providential Signs, as Wars, Commotions, Earthquakes, Yet these will
not Define Time to us; Only the Line of Time can Do that: And let us Humbly
wait upon God therein; and take in All Other Marks God has Given by His
Providence therein.

But, as I say, The Line of Time is the Sure Rule by which we are to walk; and
I have full Assurance, if we behold, according to that, the Course of
Scripture-Prophecies, the Emblems, or Prophetical Types and Figures given
therein, the Numbers of Time proportioned to, and Running all along from Time
to Time, through those Figures, and compare All with the Providence, and Great
Events God has taken Care should be Recorded in History, brought to our
Knowledge, or be coming down to our very sight, we may be fully Confirmed, as
by a Threefold Cord, not to be Broken, and that it is a Line Reaching to 1697.

Applicat. 5. Let us have Continual Apprehensions of the Glory, and Greatness
of That Day; Let us consider That Day, Malac. 3. 18. When we shall Return; and
Descern between the Righteous and the Wicked; Him that Serves God, and Serves
Him not; Him that Swears, and Him that Fears an Oath; and between the Wise,
and the Foolish Virgins; and not put off the Thoughts of it; Because we see the
World so Earnest in Eating and Drinking, Buying and Selling, Building, and
Planting, Marrying, and Giving in Marriage: For so it was in the Days of Noah,
and of Lot, until the very Day: And so our Lord says, It shall be in the Day
of the Son of Man.

Applicat. 6. Let us so Consider, and Apply our Selves to the Examining, what
manner of Men we ought to be in All Holiness, and Godliness of Conversation,
and therein to Look for, and to Haste on to the Day of God; and with the
Spirit, and under his Influences; and with the Bride-like Affection, Cry out,
as Hearers moved with an Holy Sympathy or Likeness of Affection, Even Cry out
in Harmony, Come, Lord Jesus, Come Quickly.

SERMON VI. On Matthew 25. v. 1. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened
unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom, etc.


I Have in several Discourses, led you through the great Importance, and Sense
of our Lord in this Parable: Which is one of those, wherein (as he speaks,
Matthew. 13.) he opened his Mouth in Parables, and uttered Things that had been
kept secret from the foundation of the World.

I have spoken of several particulars herein; and will go directly upon what is
now before us, and to be spoken of: and that is,

That while the Bridegroom tarried; all these Virgins, both the wise, and the
unwise, slumbred and slept.

Now, it is indeed, a great difficulty to find out the very meaning and sense
of our Lord in this part of the Parable: For, it seems strange, that not only
the unwise, but that the wise Virgins slumbred and slept.

And, to give a sense of this, suitable to the meaning, and to the rest of the
Parable, I shall at this time, by the assistance of God, undertake; and so to
Discourse of it accordingly.

I observe therefore to you, That here are two Words used by our Lord: They
slumbred, and they slept. I look upon these Words to have two very different
senses, though they may seem to be perfectly alike, And that slumbring and
sleeping, (as indeed, Scripture and common Language, generally join both
together) mean one and the same thing.

But, I understand the First, concerning the spiritual state of the Churches of
Christ, during the delay of Christ's coming, and of the Kingdom of Christ. All
the whole state of the Christian Church, has been from the very beginning of
the working of the Mystery of Iniquity, it has been in a slumbring condition.

But then, the sleeping, I look upon that to be an expression of the dying of
the Servants of Christ, all along, from the Time of the Resurrection of Christ,
to this very Time; And the latter is consequent upon the former.

For, I am fully persuaded, That if the Power and Glory, and vigor of
Christianity; in a settled state of Christianity; if that had immediately
followed upon the Resurrection of Christ, and the giving of the Spirit, that
pouring out of the Spirit that was in the Apostles days; I do fully believe,
there had been no such Thing as dying: Even as when the Kingdom of Christ
comes, there shall be no more Death; So, if the Kingdom of Christ had
immediately proceeded, upon the first Preaching of the Gospel, there had been
no sleeping: If there had been no slumbring, there had been no sleeping.

And, I shall give you two great Reasons, why I understand the Word sleeping,
concerning dying: They slumbred; that is, the Power of Christianity did not
show it self upon them; And so they slept, that is, they died.

The first Reason I would give you of it is this, Because the Intention of our
Lord, in this Parable, is chiefly, That we may look to the Power of
Christianity in our own hearts, to such a power of it, as that we should be
able to appear with Christ when he comes to the Wedding; That our Lamps should
not then go out. The great Meaning, the great Scope of the Parable is this,
That we should look to have the very Life, and Truth of Grace, so in our
hearts, that we may have a Light of it when Christ comes, that will not go out
in the very time, in that very instant Time, wherein we should go with him to
the Wedding.

Now, it is very plain, That the Wise Virgins indeed, had this Light: For, it
is said of them ( ver. 10.) They that were ready (which is spoken of the wise
Virgins) they went in with him to the Marriage, and the Door was shut.

So that if the wise Virgins had slept in that sense, that the foolish Virgins
did; I say, if they had slept in the same sense, they would not have been ready
to go into the Wedding with Christ. So that these wise Virgins, they did watch,
and they did not sleep in the main sense of the Parable: For, they were ready
to go in with him to the Wedding.

Although therefore they did die, yet in the great concernment of Eternity, they
did not sleep away their time; they did not lose their opportunity of providing
a Treasure of Oil.

A Second Reason that I give you, Why this sleeping is not meant of the
spiritual estate of these Virgins, but only of their dying, is,

Because it is said, At Midnight there was a Cry made; And then they arose and
trimmed their Lamps.

Now this Midnight is that state of death, in regard of the Body, in which all
the servants of Christ lie, till that Resurrection, till that First
Resurrection that is spoken of. This is indeed, like a Midnight: For, when the
Bodies of Saints lie in the Dust, it is as if a Midnight were upon them, as to
that visible state and appearance of Body; though their Spirits are indeed with
Christ, yet their Bodies lie as in a Midnight.

And, if you speak of the Apostles of Christ, Peter, Paul, John, and the rest
of them; they are all of them (as it were) in a Midnight sleep, as to their
Bodies, And therefore, the Midnight is so properly to be understood; Whereas,
in regard of the Spiritual State of the Church of Christ, which is before his
Coming, before the Glory of his Coming, it shall not be a Midnight.

For, as I have often endeavored to make plain unto you, That as soon as ever
those Time, Times and half Time of the Antichristian Power are at an end,
immediately, a great Light, and a great Glory of the Gospel shall shine out,
that it shall not be a Midnight; Indeed, the Light will not be perfectly clear,
or precious, till the Glory of the Kingdom of Christ.

But I cannot but hope and expect, That within very few years, there will be
such a state of Christianity, such a state of the Gospel; the Everlasting
Gospel preached through the World; There will be such a new Mission and
Commission of the Servants of Christ, That it shall not be to be accounted a
Midnight in that regard: Nor shall the Coming of Christ be so on the sudden,
but that there will be great Light concerning it; When that Angel that flies
through the midst of Heaven, (Rev. 14.) shall have preached the Everlasting
Gospel to every Nation, etc.

These are the Reasons why I cannot understand this Word sleeping, to be a
representation of the spiritual state of the Church, and Servants of Christ;
But, I do understand by the slumbring, That there is such a deadish, such a
drousie, such a benumbed state of Christianity, as indeed we see in the very
best, to this day.

Therefore the Observation that I shall lay down, and endeavor to open to you,
is this:

That Christianity, in regard of the present state of Christians, and as they
have been since Ephesus (Rev. 2.) left its first love; since there was a decay
of the Glory and. Purity, and presence of the Gospel from the Apostles Time;
Since then, I say, Christianity, in the Power and Spirit of it, though it has
not downright slept; yet it has been, as in a slumber.

For indeed, I have often said it, and I cannot be in a remove from it; That
Christianity is not as it was intended by Christ, it should be, We have not
seen the State and Glory of it. And therefore I shall make it my business to
represent to you, by such Representations as the Scripture has given us, how
the Power of Christianity has faultred thus long; and that it will come to its
perfectly awakened State, when the Kingdoms of this World are Proclaimed to be
the Lord's and his Christ's.

And I shall date this failure, especially to two Times; and one of them will
fall directly upon our selves.

First of all, the Time when the Mystery of Iniquity was working in the
Apostles days.

For, you may plainly behold that, by the very express words of the Apostle;
that in his own* Time, there was a working of the Mystery of Iniquity; Then
began the great decay and bringing down of the Glory of Christianity, 2 These.
2. It Is a Scripture that I have often turned you to, and therefore I hope you
are acquainted with it. I am persuaded, the first Christians in the Apostles
days, needed as much to be restrained, in thinking that the Day of Christ was
at hand, as we have need to be spurred on, and to be provoked, and to be
earnestly persuaded to think, that the Day of Christ is at hand.

For, so the Apostle writes, We beseech you, says he, as if he was in a
business of greatest earnestness, and that he could not tell how he should
prevail enough upon them, to whom he wrote in it, ver. 1. We beseech you,
Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together
unto him, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by
Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter, as from us, as that the Day of Christ is at
hand. They were ready to think, The Day of Christ was to come just then:
Therefore the Apostle makes this earnest entreaty of them, that they would not
expect it: You see what a different posture we are in now: It is a hard matter
to persuade any one to take off their hearts from the World, and from loving it
too deep, and from thinking here is a security in this World, and we may do as
our Fathers have done before us, for so many Hundred Years in the Profession of
Christianity: We may be buying and selling, and getting Estates, and laying a
foundation in this World; Who is it, that does not count it a sort of Madness,
to dissuade them from such a thing?

But the Christians of that Time, they needed as earnest a persuasion, That
they might not think that the Day of Christ was so near at hand. And so Christ,
in the 19th of Luke, speaks that Parable that they should not, because they did
think The Kingdom of Heaven was nigh at hand: He spoke a Parable, on purpose to
assure them, that it was not so nigh: But Alas! we need strong persuasions to
the contrary.

And, I may say the contrary to the Christians of this Time, I beseech you
Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus, and by our gathering together unto
him, that you would not be shaken in mind, by the general way of Peoples
Profession, and Preaching and Hearing, as if the Day of Christ were not at
hand. And as the Apostle says, Let no man deceive you by any means, for that
day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that Man of Sin
be revealed, the Son of Perdition. So I say to you, That day is near
approaching; For that falling away, that Apostasy from Christianity, it has
been, and it is now very near to its expiring: And therefore the great reason,
why it could not be then, it is now a reason, why it must speedily be; because
the Apostasy has been so long; because the Time, and the last Date, by God,
and by Christ is almost run out, and expired: that is, the Time, Times and half
Time.

Here therefore, to speak and bring home the thing to the present purpose I am
upon; Since this Apostasy began to work, since that very Time, Christianity
has been in a slumber. For, in this second Chap. v. 7. says the Apostle, the
Mystery of Iniquity does already work. Now, as soon as ever the Mystery of
Iniquity began to work: immediately there began a slumber upon the Christian
Religion: And therefore one would wonder, Indeed, it is a place that one would
wonder to read, and to find, in the Epistle to the Philippians, what the
Apostle speaks, Chap. 2. 20. For I have no man (says he) likeminded (speaking
of Timotheus) who will naturally, genuinely, sincerely care for your state: For
(says he) All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

I speak of him, as an extraordinary Person, says the Apostle. By this we may
plainly see, it was a great variation from what you read in the second and
third Chapters of the Acts, where they minded nothing but only the Promotion of
Christianity: No one called any thing their own; they minded nothing but
Christianity it self. But Christianity has been in a slumber ever since; or
else we should be Christians of another Life, of another Spirit, of another
Power; I say, were it not that Christianity has been in a slumber so long.

And this is with a great deal of spiritual Wit, (if I may so speak) and a
great deal of spiritual Elegancy set out to us in the Song of Solomon. I shall
have occasion to make great recourse to the Description that is there given to
us. Sol. Song, c. 5. v. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh; it is the voice of my
Beloved that knocks, saying, open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my
undefiled: for my Head is filled with Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the
Night.

What Is the meaning of this? Indeed, I know Men are ready to say, That these
things are only Imaginations and Whimsies, and Apprehensions of ones own that
speaks of them.

But I have found a clear Thread, and Line drawn from David's time, till the
very Glorious Coming of Christ, in this very Song of Solomon. And I find, that
the Time when the Apostasy came in, is just under the very description that we
here have.

As therefore, when after a clear Day, a Sun-shiny-day, at Night, the Drops of
Dew, you know, they fall thick upon the heads of those that are in the Air. So
Christ does declare, A night should come, at that time upon his Church. My head
(says he) is wet with the drops of Dew of the Night: Because Christianity was
drawing its Ceremonies long; they began then; at that very time, they begun
then to draw out the shadows of the Evening: A great many Ceremonies came into
Christianity, and a Form and Way of Prayer suitable and agreeable to it, and
such ways of Preaching as prepared for it. And then they came to be more intent
upon the Remembrance of such a Saint, and such a Martyr, and keeping their
Days; and drawing as many outward Forms and Ceremonies of Religion as they
could, and they neglected the Power of it. And this Christ observes, and calls
it, the Drops of Dew, the Drops of the Night upon his Head: And then the Church
of Christ began to slumber.

And this is the first Time that is to be taken notice of in regard of the
slumbering, even of the wise Virgins; Of which I shall speak presently more
particularly to you.

The Second is this; And I desire that none would be offended, or think me
censorious in speaking of it: For I design nothing, (I can truly Appeal to God)
but only to speak the Truth, and the Reality of Things, in a Point, where
Scripture calls for the speaking of it. That is, This Slumber has been since
the Reformation; As soon as ever the first Power had shown it self; There was
indeed, a mighty Spirit of Truth, and Spirit of Holiness in the first
Reformation; Men and Women were then Christians of a high Rate, of a high
Degree, of a high Excellency: How willing were they to suffer in the days of
Queen Mary, in our own Nation? How did they love one another? How did the Power
and Glory of Christianity appear in them? But, I hope, it will be no scandal to
say this, That it has been in a decay for a Hundred Years: For it is the very
express words of one, that is, Dr. Burnet, that we know by the Name of the
Bishop of Salisbury; he spoke it plainly and openly in this City, That the
Reformation has Sermon, Of not falling out by the Way.
been losing ground for these Hundred Years. And whence is this? But only a
great slumber has fallen upon the Profession of the Protestant Religion for a
Hundred Years: And the Glory and Power and Excellency of Christianity, we have
not yet restored to its own Beauty, and to its own Glory.

And this, I have endeavored several times, (both in Discourse and in Writing)
to make plain, That the Church of Sardis is the Representation of the
Generality of the Christian Churches, under the Reformation. And, I desire,
that you would but read, and weigh the Description that is given of that
Church, Rev. 3. 1, 2. And to the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, These
things says he that has the Seven Spirits of God, and the Seven Stars; I know
thy works, that thou have a Name that thou live, and art dead. Be watchful
(says he) and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die. Be
watchful: What Is the meaning of that? But only to show, that the State of the
Protestant Churches had fallen into a great slumber, a great drowsiness: And
therefore it is, that we know so little of the Power of Christianity at this
day. And says he, I have not found thy works perfect before God. Remember
therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast and repent. If
therefore thou shall not watch (observe that) I will come on thee as a Thief,
and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee; if thou do not watch.

Here we plainly see what is opposed to slumbering, it is watching. And when
Christ says, Watch, so often, and so much; it signifies, that his Church would
fall into a slumbering condition; it had a Name to live, it was not perfectly
dead: But it was not vigorous, and powerful in the ways of Christianity, And
therefore watch, and strengthen the things that remain, which are ready to die.

I Will give you only two Arguments, why I am of this Judgment, That this very
Parable I am upon, does look directly upon the state of the Protestant
Churches; and so upon our selves, as in the Profession of the Protestant
Religion, at this very Time; I Will give you the two Arguments, and then I Will go
on in a more practical way of discoursing the particulars, of this slumbring of
Christians in the Profession of Christianity.

The First Argument I give you is,

Because it is now the Time, It is now the Time especially, when our Lord
delays his coming. For there shall not be Time, Times, nor so much, as half
Time any more whole and entire; For at the Reformation Christ began to make an
appearance of his Kingdom, and of his Coming; And it is certain, the bringing
in of the Reformation, as all true Protestants own, it was one of the greatest
Works of Providence that ever has been known in the World, and especially
since the days of Christ. It was strange and wonderful, in the Times when God
did it* that he should bring in a Reformation against such high Pretenses, as
that of The Catholic Church, as Rome was called; and against the Papacy and
Hierarchy, that took upon themselves to be the great Patrons of, and Pretenders
to Christian Religion, and the* true Votaries and Servants of it, to have all
things good within themselves. Now, That such a poor inconsiderable Person as
Luther was, should make opposition to such a Body; when as the Kings and
Princes of Europe were utter Enemies to the Reformation: It was a Mighty Power
of God. And, as I have often showed; Rev. 10. is the very Representation of the
Reformation; Christ came down from Heaven, clothed with a Cloud, and with a
Rainbow upon his head. And he set his right Foot upon the Sea, and his left
Foot upon the Earth, and cried with a loud Voice, as when a Lion roareth, and
swear by him that lives for ever and ever, That Time, and Times; and even of
half Time, that it should be no longer. Who would not (I say) but have
expected, that Christ should immediately have come, and changed the World, and
brought in his Kingdom?

But our Lord delays his Coming only, till the Hundred and Eighty Years are
made up; of which, there wants only now but Five Years. And, at the present,
there is a great delay; though I make no doubt, It will not be long. But yet
Men think, Christ has delayed his Coming; and where is the Promise of it? and
that he has quite forgot it. In this Time therefore, of the Lord's delaying
his Coming, there is such a great slumber upon the Christian Church.

In the second Place, I have this great Reason, that moves me much to think,
that the present delay, that the Parable speaks of, under that spiritual
slumber of the Churches of Christ, has run along with the Time since the
Reformation; Because Christ says, in the first Words, Then shall the Kingdom
of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins: When? Why it shall be at that Time, as
in the 24th of Matthew; though we divide Chapters, yet the sense is not
divided, nor our Savior's Sermon divided; but our Lord is still going on in
his Discourse, Mat. 24. 48, 49, etc. But and if that evil Servant shall say in
his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his
fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: The Lord of that
servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of; and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion with
the Hypocrites: There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

There was never a greater Hypocrisy in the World than the Papacy: To which
they say (you know, in Reverence) Your Holiness; as we say to Princes, Your
Majesty, or Your Highness. And they say, Your Holiness, a Blasphemous
Assumption; and therefore he shall appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites;
Because he has been the Evil Servant, that has said, My Lord delayeth his
coming. And so he begins to Eat and Drink with the Drunken, and to Smite the
Menservants, and Maidservants: That is, to Persecute the true Servants of
Jesus Christ, and of the Gospel.

Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likned unto Ten Virgins, which took their
Lamps, etc. when that Judgment is.

So that the Time before the punishing of this Bad Servant, and the cutting him
off, and Devoting him to the Wrath and Indignation of God; Before this, there
falls such a Slumber as this.

Now therefore, Having made the way, I shall Endeavor to go on, and to speak
to these two things.

First, To show wherein (as to our particular) we are to observe a Spirit of
Slumber; and that the power of Christianity does take small hold of us. And
then,

In the Second place; I shall Endeavor to show you, wherein the Wise and
Foolish Virgins Differ; though they are both in a Slumber; and they Die alike,
they Sleep alike, yet there is a very vast and great difference betwixt them.

In the First place, This is a very great Argument that we are under the
Slumber of Christianity; That we are not really in a Holy Transport, in all the
Services, and Enjoyments, and Ordinances of Christianity. Indeed, we make a
shift to pass through the Form, to hold up the Form of Prayer, and of
Preaching, and of the Lord's Supper, and of good Discourse sometimes one with
another: But we have not that mighty Affection, we are just like Persons in a
Slumber: You know, they understand something of what you say to them; and they
make some kind of Answer: But they are so low and so imperfect herein; that we
may be sure, they are not in the Vigor of their Senses, and of their
Understanding, and of their Reasoning, and of their Discourse.

Surely, If we were raised to the Power of Christianity, we should have more of
those High Elevations of mind, that the Apostle speaks of; and that the Holy
Men of Old, in former times, speak of. We should have such flaming Desires
after God, and after Christ, that our hearts would be Ravished, and we should
be drawn (as it were) out of our selves, in these things; Whereas we do but Nod
(as I may so express it) in our way of Christianity; Or, when we seem to do
something, we are presently in a kind of Slumber, so that there wants the Power
and Life of it. When David says, How sweet is thy Word to my taste? Sweeter
than the Honey, or the Honey Comb; It was another State than we are in; All the
119 Psalm is a perpetual Rapture and Ecstasy of Heart; All that time he was
awake: So, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Earth that I
desire beside Thee?

And, My Heart and my Flesh Fails; but thou art the strength of my Heart and
my Portion for ever. My Soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy
Judgments at all times.

All our Converse with Christ, and with the Holy Ordinances of Christ, and all
our Drawings nigh to God, They would be with a Holy Transport. So in the 42.
Psalm, says David; As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my
Soul after thee O God.

You cannot really suppose, but that if we were fully possessed with Religion,
indeed, we should be carried out of our selves, in Love, and Service, and
Thankfulness, and Obedience, and all the Powers of Holiness and Religion;
Whereas now, If a Person be but Civil to Religion, If he will but sit
patiently, and hear a Discourse of it; Or if he can but endure to be called off
from the World, to God; we look upon it as a great Attainment. But I say, If
Christianity were not under Slumber, in the Spirits of Men, we should be in a
high Transport; That, as the Apostle speaks in the 2 Cor, 5. The love of Christ
Constrains us, because we thus judge. The Word (as the Learned Observe)
signifies such a kind of Transports, as when Elijah was taken up by the Spirit,
and carried hither and thither; So the love of Christ constrains us, that is,
Transports us every way, Ver. 14. Wherefore (says he) henceforth know we no
man after the Flesh (Ver. 16.) Yea, though we have known Christ after the
Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him so no more.

Surely, This is the Slumber of Christianity, that we are taken so much with
outward appearances, with outsides of men. The Apostle observed the Slumber of
Christianity, upon this account in his Day; James 2. 2. If there come into your
Assembly a man with a Gold Ring, in goodly Apparel, etc. Here Christianity
began to be in a Slumber; not but that due regard ought to be to the several
Ranks of Men: But in this regard, we know Men too much after the flesh, so that
it argues Christianity much in a Slumber. Do but read, I beseech you; (don't
think I speak, either vainly, or without due consideration of what I say) Do
but read those places of Scripture, that are so Eminent in setting out the
Glory of Christianity: While we look not (says the Apostle in 2 Cor. 4. 18) at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

Now I say, who is it, that loves thus to look upon the things that are seen as
nothing, and the things that are not seen as all? So (says he) We know that if
our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved. (chap. 5. 1.) we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. ver. 2.
For in this we groan earnestly, says the Apostle.

Who groans earnestly? I do not speak at all to be censorious, or to tax Men
beyond Reason, or any way to justify my self; but only this I am clearly
sensible of, That the General Character of the Church of Sardis is fallen upon
all the Protestant Churches, and upon all Protestant Persons: As David says in
another case, There is no one that does not Slumber, (I may say) no not one.
Though there are some Christians more lively, and more wakeful, and more
apprehensive than others; yet there are none but Slumber; for the General
Character of any Church, it falls upon particular persons, in a very great
measure.

Now I say, those high Ecstasies of spirituality, of Heavenliness, of Holiness,
of Purity, that are to be found in Scripture, make it plain, that the excellent
and glorious, and powerful Spirit of Christianity is in a Slumber, as in us.

And hereby, I would desire you to take notice, That the Discourse of the
Kingdom of Christ is not, as if some sensual or Worldly Glory were to be
brought in; or that men were to be pleased with that: For the thing that I
expect, when the Kingdoms of this World shall be proclaimed to be the Kingdoms
of the Lord and of his Christ, are quite of another nature: That whoever of us
are alive at that day, whether I or you, or any of us that truly love and fear
him, and love the Glory of his Kingdom; I make no doubt, but the Glory and
Power of Christianity shall sprout out afresh upon them, as the Psalmist says,
Then the Lord awaked, as one out of sleep, and like a mighty Man that shouteth
by reason of Wine (Psalm. 78. 65, 66.) And he smote his enemies in the hinder
parts; he put them to a perpetual reproach: So we shall be able to smite the
Lusts and Corruptions, and the power of Temptations that now so prevail upon
us; we shall be able to chase them, and to put them to flight, and to drive
them before us. We shall be able to love God and Christ, and to be mortified to
this World; we shall be able to express our selves abundantly in the ways of
holiness, and to rejoice in God accordingly; and it is no other Kingdom that I
expect, But all shall bring in this, with its happy consequences; I say, we
shall be able to lay off, and aside from our selves, all the Vanity, Pride and
Love of this World, and all, not only the Gross Sins that are in the World, in
regard of which, men are scandalous, and Christians evil spoken of every where,
But those Sins that the World does color and varnish over, and speak very
kindly and fairly of; all the deadness in Hearing, in Praying and Discoursing.
Alas! our Discourse of Religion, it is but a kind of Formality; we don't retain
any thing of it: But when this Slumber is taken off of Christianity, it shall
be much otherwise.

In the second Place, When the Slumber of Christianity is taken off, we shall
see much clearer Scripture-Truths, and in the Salvation and Redemption of
Christ: All the Dispute and Anger about these things will go off, for the
clearness of things will be seen. And then, that Dispute that is upon us now,
concerning the Kingdom of Christ; Some are utter Enemies to such Discourses of
it, even good persons; and some are ready to scorn, and laugh it out of
Countenance; and few there are that believe it, and are in the Truth of it;
What is the Reason of this? but because these Scriptures are not so cleared.
And so, very many excellent and Eminent Servants of God, they are afriad to
Discourse of the Free Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ without
Works, lest it should make men loose, and make men licentious; and therefore
they are streightning and curbing, and glancing all they can against such
Discourses as these are. The reason is, because the Spirit of Slumber is so
much upon Christians, Isaiah 29. The Lord has poured upon you the spirit of
deep sleep, and has closed your eyes; the Prophets, and your Rulers, the Seers
has he covered. And the Vision of all is become unto you as the words of a
Book that is sealed, which Men deliver to one that is learned, saying; read
this, I pray thee, and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the Book is
delivered to one that is not learned, saying, read this, I pray thee; and he
says, I am not learned. Now, this Spirit of deep sleep, I hope, is taken off
from us by the Reformation, and by the clearness of the Gospel, in that manner
that we enjoy it, in the main, now in the Protestant Profession; but there is a
Slumber still remaining: Or else Men would hear and learn with far greater
ease, and in another manner Discourse with one another: It will be wonderful
when the Tongue of the dumb shall sing, as it is said in the Prophet. I am
verily persuaded, That those that say least in Religion now, there will be such
a change in them, by taking off the Spirit of Slumber, That the Tongue of the
dumb shall sing: He that knows not how to speak, and is afraid to speak of
Religion, because he thinks he has not knowledge enough, his Tongue shall sing
in Discourses of the ways of God; That is, he shall speak with great clearness,
and great acceptableness.

In the Third Place; We shall have a greater value for the state of Glory that
is to be revealed, and a greater undervaluing of the present state of this
World: We shall not think we are undone, if we have not of this World, and of
the things of it, in such an abundance, as we would have.

Or, if we cannot lay such foundations of Estates for the time to come; Men
will begin to say, That this present World is like a Cottage that is suddenly
to be removed. And if Men had foreknown, in Jamaica, some Days or Weeks before,
that their Houses should go down (as one may say) so quick into the Earth, and
be swallowed up, and even the Earth it self so changed, what value do you think
they would have had for those Houses, or Grounds? and how many Years Purchase
would they have valued all at as we ordinarily speak? So I say, when our
present state is like a Cottage that is to be removed; that great value and
esteem we have of the World shall go off.

If you will say, This is only a sort of Levelling Doctrine or Discourse; I do
not intend it should move any one as for the present, but only to an
expectation, and to take off our hearts from the present evil World: And I only
desire to tell you, what shall be when you shall see such a Glory and Light of
this World to come, appearing and shining out: I do but desire that you would
remember what has been spoken to you out of the Word, and in the Name of Jesus
Christ, what has been spoken of these things that are to come to pass.

I Will give you but a brief Account of the Difference between the one and the
other, (the Wise, and Foolish Virgins) and so conclude in the Application of
it. And I take it out of that 5th. Chapter of Solomons-Song. Here Is the great
Difference that is between the one sort, and the other sort. Ver. 2. I Sleep
(says she) but my heart waketh. That is, there is a Principle within me; there
is a Spirit within me: A Spirit within every Wise Virgin, that keeps a watch
even while it is in a Slumber. As you know, many Persons, they have a wariness
of things, though they are in a sort of Slumber; yet they are presently
sensible if any thing comes, either as to advantage, or disadvantage.

So there is a Spirit in every true Christian, that is aware of the Great
Concernments of Eternity, that knows the Excellency of Christ, and that loves
Jesus Christ; and that knows the Vanity of this World, and the things of it:
Even while they are in a Slumber, their heart wakes concerning these things.
And then, again, you read, They cannot be quiet, they have such kind of Items
and Intimations from Christ, that they are presently aware: That when Christ
speaks, presently the Beloved, the Church of Christ, the true Church answers
him: ( ver. 4.) Says she, My Beloved put in his hand by the hole of the Door,
and my bowels were moved for him: Indeed, she could not get quickly up, Indeed,
says she, I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on? That is, I have set
my self in a way of Religion, that I hope, will do, and will be enough, and it
is as much as others do; and as much as generally is to be found among
Christians, and as much as can suit with the present state of this World; but
Christ gave her an Intimation and Item from himself; And presently, says she,
My Bowels were moved for him; And I arose to open to my Beloved; and then she
went seeking up and down the City: And the Watchmen said, it is too much for
you to take upon you; they take away her Vail from her; they impeach her
Modesty as it were: But she goes on, I Charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, if
ye find my Beloved, that ye tell him I am sick of love: There is an earnest,
and vehement, and inward affection in the heart, that is in every true, sincere
Christian, in every wise Virgin; Though they sleep, yet their heart waketh:
There is a Principle and a Power, that shall never be deserted and forsaken of
God, even in the midst of this inclination to Slumber: God will bring it forth
in Power, and to Perfection; and so you may Trace the thing along in your own
souls: Do you find that a little Intimation makes you very earnest and vehement
after Christ? Do you find that there is such a stable desire of Christ, and his
Grace and Spirit, That you desire he should know, that you are sick of love?
And that you declare to the World, that you love him above all things else.

And so, I shall proceed no further in this Discourse, but only close with
Application.

1. In the first place, It teaches us, That we should not magnify the present
state of any Church, or Churches whatsoever, or their way; for all of them come
far short, though one much shorter than another, yet all come short.

And so we should see in our own state: Alas! it is but suitable to the Day, or
rather (as I may say) to the Night that is yet continuing, and is not yet past
off from us. Though indeed, God is exceedingly to be magnified and adored, in
all the good of the Gospel and Christianity that we see in the World. I am far
from putting a Blemish or Diminution upon what God has done; seeing there are
so many Excellent Preachers of Christianity, and so many Excellent Christians;
and such a great Light of the Gospel, as we have: That such as were heretofore,
would have wondered at the Goodness and Grace of God, if there should have been
such a freedom of Preaching his Word every where, and gathering Souls to
himself: And that there are so many of his Servants have a desire toward his
Name, and toward the Remembrance of him: And therefore, I say, I desire to
fore-caution as to that part; That I am not at all censorious, but
acknowledging of the Infinite Grace of God. But yet I say still, That I would
not have you think, we are at the Excellency of Christianity, as it is in
Public, or as it is in Particulars: I make no doubt, but he that fears God
now, shall fear him much more; and he that loves Christ now, shall love him
much more; and they that speak and think of his Name, shall do it much more,
when this Slumber is taken off: I tell you, you cannot do now what you would
do; you cannot love God and Christ; you cannot be so free, and undistracted,
and retired in to the way of Christianity, as you would be. And therefore look
upon it, That the present Day is the Day of the Slumber of the Glory of
Christianity; and therefore, let us bewail our selves, that we can get up no
higher awakened: much more, that we cannot shake off that Slumber that is so
much upon us.

But still I say, we must expect a clearer, and lightsomer, and a brighter Air
of the Gospel, and Sunshine of it: We must expect the Sun of Righteousness
with healing in his Wings.

Do but consider how you come on upon a Duty, and how you come off; and how you
lose what you would retain; and how hard it is to gain, and how quickly it is
gone off.

Our souls should be in a constant posture in this World; our Vessels for
ordinary uses, should be Holiness to Jehovah; but if one Treats of this way, or
that way, one finds, that the Glory of it does not sparkle and glister as it
should, I speak not what I speak from my own spirit, but what God will speedily
make good to all those that shall live in that Time, Then they shall say, How
has the Glory of Christianity changed me! We shall find the Vacancies and the
Emptinesses and Blemishes that are upon us, shall be filled up, and taken off;
and we shall walk in a higher Power and Spirit of Christianity: And therefore
let no one boast, in regard of this or that Church State, whatsoever it be; For
certainly, All is under a Spirit of Slumber now; and there shall come a far
more excellent State upon the Churches of Christ; and so it shall descend upon
every particular Person. And then,

2. In the Second Place, Let us earnestly aspire to this state in our selves;
as David says, I will not give Sleep to my eyes, nor Slumber to my Eyelids,
till I make an Habitation for the God of Jacob, So let us aspire now, as high
as we can; and let us earnestly desire this Glory of the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that shall awaken us as a Man is awakened out of sleep, as the
expression is in the Prophet.

For, I am persuaded, God will awaken all his Servants, as one is awakened out
of Sleep; And therefore, let us earnestly long for that Time. And whatever God
is doing, or seems to do in the World, let us observe what Tendencies it has to
this Excellent State of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; and then this.
Slumber shall be perfectly taken off. And then,

3, In the Third and last place; Let it comfort us exceedingly in God, and in
Christ: And let us say, The Things that God has prepared and designed, they
are Things That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor have entered into the
heart of man to conceive. For that in the 64th of Isaiah, is to be applied to
the Coming of Christ. O that thou would Rent the Heavens, and that thou
would come down; and that the Mountains might flow down at thy Presence. As
when the melting fire burns, the fire causes the Waters to boil, etc. And
then (says he) Things that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, yet he has
prepared for him that waits for him. Since the beginning of the World, Men
have not heard, nor perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God,
besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him.

Consider it at your own Freedom; This State is near coming forth; such an one,
as has not been seen, or heard of since the Foundation of the World: In which,
we shall no longer complain, at the rate we do now; That all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, and That our Iniquities like the Wind, take
us away: And That we do not stir up our selves to take hold of God: But then
there shall be a General Stirring up of one another, to take hold of the Lord
our God.

SERMON VII. On Matthew 25. v. 1. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened
unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom, etc.


I Have in several Discourses, endeavored to express to you the Divine Sense
and Meaning of our Lord in this Parable, who (as I told you) Opened his Mouth
in Parables; and in this Parable, in a very Eminent Manner; and has made known
things hid from the very Foundation of the World.

The Points that I have already Discoursed, it may be necessary to give you
only just a Remembrance of; and to come to that, that is now to be proposed:
The first was this.

That the Kingdom of Christ, in all the motions, in all the parts, in all the
Dates and Times of it, is the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is not to be looked upon, as an Earthly or a Sensual Kingdom, but the
Kingdom of Heaven.

In the second Place,

That True Christianity is an Espousal unto Jesus Christ: The Scripture has
delighted to set it forth under the Resemblance of Marriage and Espousals.

Thirdly, That all the Eye of a Christian is, not to the present state, (though
it be necessary in the way) but it is to the future, and to the higher state.

For, as I opened to you out of the Old Testament, it was the Command of God;
That there should be a Contract between the Person that had taken a Beautiful
Woman Captive, and her that was taken Captive, if he desired to Marry her;
There was to be a time of Contract; Thirty Days God did precisely appoint; That
it might shadow to us, That the present state is but a state of our Espousals
and Contract. And therefore, our chief Intention, the Great Eye of the Soul,
must be to the Solemnity and the Glory of the Nuptials of the Marriage it self;
The Virgins took their Lamps therefore, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.

In the Fourth Place, I opened to you, the great Solemnity.

Fifthly, That notwithstanding the Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension of
Christ into Glory; there is a great Delay of his coming.

And though this seems very strange and unreasonable it should be so; I
endeavored to open to you the Reason that Scripture has given, why it is so.

In the Sixth Place, in the last Discourse, I opened to you this, What a
Drousie, and Sleepy state of Christianity has come upon Christians, and upon
the Profession of Christ, by reason of the Bridegroom's tarrying.

I shall now go on to speak of this, viz. At Midnight there was a cry made,
Behold, the Bridgroom comes, Go ye out to meet him.

I have considered, and weighed the Parable in all the parts of it in all the
Scope of it; and I cannot find that it can relate to any thing, but to the very
Glory of the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. For, immediately, it comes to
this; That the Door was shut: They that were ready, went in with him to the
Wedding, and the Door was shut. Christ professed to them without, when once the
Door was shut; I know you not. And there is no such thing as that, before the
great coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore this Cry at Midnight, is
no other, than that which the Apostle speaks, in the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. For the
Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God: and the Dead in Christ shall rise first.
This is the great Cry that shall be made, it shall be the Cry at the Trump of
the Archangel, the Voice of the Archangel. And so in the 1 Cor. 15. The Apostle
speaks the very same thing, that it should come to this; There should be an
immediate Raising of the Dead. Ver. 52. In a Moment, in the twinkling of an
Eye, at the last Trump (for the Trumpet shall Sound) and the Dead shall be
raised Incorruptible, and we shall be Changed. This therefore is the
Midnight-Cry, Indeed, there may be some Resemblances of it, by sudden
Judgments, and by sudden Affrightments upon the World, As we may easily
Apprehend, of late, at Jamaica, It was to them like a Day of Judgment.

I say, It must needs be like to such a Midnight-Cry, when an immediate stroke
of God came upon them; A Thundering, and Lightning, and an Opening of the Earth,
and a Rising up (as it were) of the Sea, to sweep down the Inhabitants into it
self, this looked Just like the end of the World.

And though God gave us a little Item of such a thing, though it did not so
come upon us, as that beyond the Sea; yet we may easily Consider, it might have
been like a Midnight, if God had done with us as he did with them.

But yet still, this would not have been that Midnight-Cry, but even to those
that are gone down into the Depth, in that place: Yet still there remains a
Midnight-Cry that shall awaken them.

'Twas like a Midnight-Cry upon Sodom, when it was from Heaven Consumed by
Fire: But yet, it is very evident, that Midnight-Cry remains still to come,
upon that very Sodom and Gomorah. And therefore I say, Though I allow Allusions
to such a Scripture as this, when any Judgment that has been, or may be is set
out to us; there may be an Allusion to it, even as the Scripture bears us out
by its Authority to do so. but yet, I say to you, That it is very certain, That
the Midnight-Cry remains to those, that have been under such a Midnight-Cry.

Says Christ, Mat. 10. 15. It shall be more Tolerable for the Land of Sodom
and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for that City, You see here, Sodom
and Gomorrah are to be under the Cry of the Day of Judgment.

And so I say, Those under that Judgment lately in that Colony that part of
this Nation, though beyond the Sea, there remains still, and they are bound
under the expectation, and waiting for a Midnight-Cry; though they have had
such a one already upon them. And, if such a Judgment should come upon this
City, or this Nation, that would not excuse any that were swallowed up; but
they must expect such a Midnight-Cry to come upon them.

And, this I desire you to take notice of, That it may open to you, and inform
you of this Midnight-Cry. Whosoever therefore shall go down into the Grave
before the Coming of Jesus Christ; you must lie down with this assurance, this
certainty; That though you go never so quiet to the Grave, though you are
conducted to those Lodgings and Apartments of Death, with never so much order,
and with never so much silence; yet there must be a Midnight-Cry to awake you
out of those Graves; every one of us must be awakened by the Midnight-Cry, and
all that have gone before us, must awake, by this Midnight-Cry; Arise every
one, and go forth to meet the Bridegroom.

Now this is the Point therefore, that I shall endeavor to open to you,
concerning the Case and Condition that persons shall be in, when they are
awakened thus of a sudden: For I told you, those Slumbrings express the Drowsy
State of Christianity that is even now; but this sleeping properly expresses
Death; And the Midnight-Cry that awakens out of that sleep, it is that Trump of
God, and that Shout and Voice of the Archangel: And that will be a Cry indeed,
and so shrill, that no Grave can hide, or remove us from it; but it shall
certainly sound in the Ears of the Dead, that they shall presently, at that
very Summons, at that very Cry, they shall rise up immediately, and whether
they will or no, They must go forth and meet the Bridegroom.

I shall therefore propose to Discourse this Point:

That in the very same circumstances (pray consider) that any of us lie down in
the Grave; in the very same we must be awakened up again; We must be called out
of the Grave, in the very same State.

Whoever has gone out of this present World, a Believer in Jesus Christ, a
truly repenting person, a sanctified and justified person, as such, they shall
rise at that Cry.

And they that have gone out in their sins, in their Lusts, in their Impurity,
in their false profession of Christianity; in that very same condition they
must rise again.

The Virgins that were wise, they rise wise Virgins at the Midnight Cry.

And the Virgins that were foolish; they are not mended by all that time that
they have spent; either their Bodies in the Grave, or their Spirits in what
state soever, but they rise foolish Virgins: For so you see here, ( ver. 8.)
The Virgins all arose, and trimmed their Lamps, and the foolish said, the
foolish were foolish still; and they said unto the wise, for the wise were wise
still.

I shall therefore Endeavor to make this Point as plain to you, and as
forceable as I can, by way of Practice and Engagement upon us, to look well
about us, and to consider what our State and Condition is, because we shall
rise the very same that we lie down.

And therefore I shall lay it out in these Heads of Discourse:

First, I shall open to you, That those that rise at that Midnight-Cry, They
shall certainly presently know, what their State and Condition is; and yet
notwithstanding that (which is the great wonder of the thing) they shall so
act, and they shall so endeavor to demean themselves, in mending their
circumstances, wherein they lay down, as this Parable represents, and yet shall
not be able to do it. This indeed, may seem very wonderful, as I shall
endeavor to open to you. And then,

In the Second place, I shall show you how every person shall rise in such a
kind of circumstance, like one that hears the Midnight-Cry.

But more particularly, I shall open this in a Foolish Virgin state; that is,
in a State wherein we seem to be truly Christians, we hope so of our selves,
and others hope so of us, and yet we are not so.

And, I shall open to you, what a kind of struggle there will be,
notwithstanding such foolish Virgins must needs know their State in the main;
yet the thing will be administered by God in such a mavelous manner, That they
shall endeavor to mend and to change the disadvantage of their present
Circumstances. And then, I shall conclude with Application.

First, Therefore, I shall begin with this; That Every person, at that
Midnight-Cry, must needs presently know his own State, his own condition, with
relation to Happiness or Misery; And This I shall open to you, in these three
Evidences or Arguments, That every person must needs at that Mid-night-Cry,
immediately know and discover what their State and Condition is.

1. The first Argument or Evidence of it is this; Because the Spirit of a Man
comes to the rising of the Body, with the Notices, and with the Impressions of
what State it has been in, from the time of Death, to the time of that
Resurrection.

The Spirit of a Man, I say, that has gone out of the Body, it comes full of
the sense of that state and condition, wherein it has been in all that time:
For, there is not such a kind of oblivion, or forgetfulness, or slumber upon
the Spirit, by being reunited to the Body, that it does not know, nor
understand the case, or the condition, that it has been in all that time.

Dives indeed, in Hell, knew his own State and Condition; but it may be
supposed, That when a Spirit has been out of the Body, when it comes into the
Body again, it only knows what it was in the Body, when it left the Body, and
not what the State and Condition has been all along since it left the Body.
But we should consider, when the Scripture speaks these things, we have great
reason to believe, as I shall show you, these Representations seem so disposed,
that we may understand, men shall endeavor to change their circumstances then,
yet for all that, they come under apprehensions of that state and condition
they have been in all along.

And therefore ( John 5. 28.) our Savior seems to speak, that they do (as it
were) come right forward into the state of Condemnation that have done evil.

Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation. They come immediately forth, each to their own
state; that state wherein they have been since Death, and at Death: So Dan. 12.
1, 2. There shall be a time of great trouble: And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the Earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and everlasting contempt. For the Spirits that have been with God and Christ,
they come with the blessed assurances of that state and condition: And they
that have been in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the Great Day, under
the knowledge of that, they come under the Judgment of eternal fire; as the
expression is, in the Apostles Peter and Jude.

Every one, They come (as it were) breathing, and carrying upon them, the
favor, the odor of that state and condition wherein they have been.

The Spirit of a Man knows its own state, even when it returns into the Body:
And there is this great Scripture that does assure us, if you should think,
that what I have already given, does not rise up to the very Point, Romans 2. 15.
You shall see in what manner all come forth at that day, They show the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts, the mean while, accusing, or else excusing one another: in the
day (observe that) in the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel: Here Is the manner in which they come forth in
that day; they come with Thoughts either accusing or excusing: And then (says
the Apostle) is the time when there is that vigorous Accusation or Excusation
of Conscience; it is in the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel: So that Men rise, even in that
Midnight-Cry, when they come into Bodies, with Thoughts full, either of
Accusation or Excusation; They come with all their Thoughts about them, they do
not leave their Thoughts either in Heaven or in Hell; but they come with
Thoughts either accusing or excusing. That Is the first Argument.

2. The second Argument is this, They know in what Company they come, and
whether they are in the Glorious and Blessed Company or not: For it is very
evident, the Saints come together with Christ; and therefore they are assured,
because they know the Company they come along with: So in 1 These. 4. says the
Apostle, The dead in Christ, God will bring them with him: So they come with
Christ; they know that they come in his company, and they are assured.

There is a great deal of difference (you know) between those that come along
with the Judge, and make a part of his Honorable Retinue and Attendance, and
those that come out of Prison, and behold the Face of the Judge, as sitting in
Judgment upon them, 1 These. 4. 14, 15. For if we believe that Jesus died, and
rose again, Them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For we say
unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the
Coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep: They shall
certainly come with Jesus Christ; And so, Zach. 14. 5. The Lord my God shall
come, and all the Saints with thee.

They come in the Glory of the Company of Jesus Christ. And this our Savior
calls, a Being set at the Right Hand. It is the very same thing with that, Mat.
the 25. He shall set the Goats on the Left Hand, and the Sheep on the Right;
That is, they come with him on his Right Hand. And in that Scripture, Rev. 19.
It is said, The Heavens opened unto Jesus Christ; and the Armies which were in
Heaven, they follow him on White horses. Ver. 11. And I saw Heaven opened, and
beheld a White-horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True:
His Eyes were as a flame of Fire. Ver. 12. And it is said, The Armies which
were in Heaven followed him upon White-Horses: Ver. 14. That is, The Saints in
Bodies of Glory; For the White Horses, and the Fine Linen White and Clean,
that are there named, mean the Glory of the Saints, in Bodies of the
Resurrection. On the other side, the Wicked, they come Aloof; they come no
nearer, nor no faster than they must needs; they are forced and called for, as
Prisoners in Chains and Fetters must come, that are brought: And so they must
come in this way, Sinners and Wicked Persons, that have not Repented nor
Believed in Jesus Christ; that have not the White Horses to Ride upon, and the
Fine Linen White and Clean to be Arrayed in. And it brings in,

The Third thing. For, the very Bodies, the very Clothes, that the one and the
other will have on, do enough assure them, exactly what they are, whether the
Saved, or the Miserable; whether the Happy or the Unhappy: I say, The garments
wherewith they are Clothed. For, while Saints have Linen White and Clean; the
Wicked, they are Dark and Duskie, they are in Prison-Cloaths, and Prison-Raggs,
they have Fetters about them: They know by that, as well as Men know by theit
Garb, what the State and Condition of one another is. Now this I look upon, to
give the Reason to that Expression, Rev. 16. Just when Christ is coming, he
said, Just at the very time when he is coming (Ver. 15.) Behold, I come as a
Thief; Blessed is he that Watches, and keeps his Garments lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame.

Blessed is he that watches, etc. That is, Blessed is he that looks well to
it, that when he rises again, he may have a Robe of Immortality; That he may
have a Garment suitable to that State, Suitable to the Glory and Excellency of
that Time.

Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his Garments; has so taken care, to
lay off the Clothing of the Body; that when he comes into it again, it may
instead of all the Darkness and Corruption, In which it lay down, it may be a
Body of Glory; a Body Incorruptible, as it is said, in the 1 Cor. 15. 52. The
Dead shall be raised Incorruptible. They shall be Raised, He speaks evidently
of the Saints of Christ, They shall be raised in a moment Incorruptible.

And that is the first thing that I have laid down and endeavored to Argue to
you; The time of Christ's coming, That will be the time, when that Midnight-Cry
shall be, and that when we shall be in the first hearing of it, and come forth,
we shall know in what state and condition we are.

First, By the Notices given to us from our Spirits, from our Thoughts
Accusing, or Excusing at that very time, in that very day. And then,

Again, from the Company we are in; whether we come with Christ, or whether we
are those that are brought before him, whether we will or no. And then,

Thirdly, By that Habit of Body, wherein we shall be; either a Body of Glory,
or a Body of Shame and Contempt.

And yet, notwithstanding This, which is the wonder of the Thing: and I
confess, after my utmost thoughts and enquiry into it, I cannot satisfy my
self how it should be: That notwithstanding this, Men are just in the same
Circumstances wherein they lay down, and as if the Day of Judgment had taken
them then, in the State and Condition that they had been in in the World, that
which was their Prevalent, and their Superior, and their Final State, that
which truly gave them their Denomination.

Now, I shall only give you this Account of it; though indeed I do not know
how: It is a Wonder of the mighty Wisdom and the mighty power of God, that a
man should so rise; That these Foolish Virgins must have notice, that they are
Foolish Virgins, by what I now Argue to you; and that yet they should Endeavor
to make the best of their Condition,

And I would do it in a word or two, because I would discourse the Point of the
Foolish Virgins, especially to you at this time, and according to this Parable.
Suppose a Man be a common Swearer, a common Drunkard, a common Impure,
Luxurious Person, a Person that lives in Debauchery: This Man, suppose such an
one die without having repented, and having returned to God, or the change of
his course: This Person shall rise, he shall rise in all the horror of such a
state when Judgment comes upon him: However, Men will not be persuaded of it
now, or be brought to abhor or change such an insolent way of life, as they
live in, nor will consider it now; yet they shall be raised in circumstances
suitable to that very state in which they died.

As now, suppose a Man should be taken in an Earthquake, or by such a Judgment
as they in Jamaica, or any other place; and that he was sensible of it a little
before, what a danger he was in, and that it should come upon him while he was
in his Cups, and Roar of Profaneness; when he was scoffing and laughing at
Religion; What do you think such a Person would do, if he had but a little
notice of it before? I Will give you a plain Representation what a Case such a
Person would be in, by the very same Case, by a precedent (as I may properly
call it) that has been before. If you look therefore into Dan. 5. you shall
find the very same Case, Belshazzar (ver. 1.) made a great Feast to a Thousand
of his Lords: And they brought the Golden and Silver Vessels, and they drank
Wine, and Praised the Gods of Gold and of Silver, etc. In the same hour came
forth Fingers of a Man's Hand, and wrote over against the Candlestick, upon the
Plaster of the Wall of the Kings Palace, and the King saw part of the Hand
that wrote. Then the Kings Countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
him, so that the Joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote one
against the other. This is the very case of such Persons.

I may boldly pronounce it in the Name of Christ, and in the Word of the
Gospel, and of Truth; Look upon your Swaggerers, and those that make nothing to
scorn Religion; That make a Scoff at Sin; That never open their Mouths, but
with an Oath, or in a Blasphemy; That these very Persons, supposing they die in
this State, and with these Sins unrepented of, They shall rise in the very
same, and with the horror of Judgment on them. They shall see (as it were) the
Fingers upon the Wall; and their Joints shall be loosed, and their Knees smite
one against another: They Will say to the Rocks, Fall on us, and to the
Mountains, hide and cover us: Distress and Anguish shall come upon them, as it
is said, Prove. 1. It shall come like a Whirlwind: Then shall they call upon me,
and I will not answer. Men that scorn and scoff at Religion now, they shall be
forced then to cry, but they shall not find God; But then I Will laugh (says
God) at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes.

In the second Place, Take a covetous Worldling, that does not so much as think
there is any thing more, but to look well to this World, and he guilds his
Covetousness over with so much Religion as is necessary for his present
Concernment, to secure him from any thing of danger: I say, he keeps all his
Worldliness within compass, with something of Religion; but he does not really
consider what a great state, a state of Eternity is, and what a little, the
present state of the World is.

Now, would you know in what a Case such a Man shall rise in? He shall rise in
an amaze, and say, I never thought of the World to come, I thought of the
present World; I knew how ill it would be with my Family, if I did not take
care of that; but never thought of the other World; I had so much Silver and
Gold, and Fruits of the Earth laid up for many years, and said, Take thine
ease, my Soul, Eat, Drink and be Merry; and he never considered the greatness
of this Eternal Condition.

Now, Observe what Christ speaks Luke 12. 19. when he said, Soul, Take thine
Ease, Eat, Drink and be Merry, for thou have much Goods laid up for many years:
Then God said to him, Thou Fool! This Night shall thy Soul be required of thee:
And then, whose shall these things be which thou have provided? So is he that
lays up Treasure, and is not rich toward God.

I never thought (says this Sensualist) of such a thing as that, this was a
strange Notion in my lifetime; a Notion, that I did not know how to
understand, or to think it any thing but Fancy, and mere Discourse; but now I
find what it is, not to be rich toward God.

And so I say, By these two Persons, I have briefly set out to you, what the
Circumstances shall be in which Men shall rise that have not minded God and
their Eternal Condition.

But, according to the Subject that is before me, I shall open to you,
especially, the Foolish Virgins, that we may all take care; for it is indeed, a
very nice Case; I say, a very nice Case; That a Man should be a Virgin; that
any Person should be a Virgin in the account of Jesus Christ; and yet, because
he is a foolish Virgin he is utterly undone: That is a Virgin, that has the
Truth of Religion, that has the Truth of Doctrine, the Truth of Worship, and
he must needs be supposed to be a Person of a sober outward Conversation; or
else, he could not deserve the Name or Appearance, or Style of a Virgin; He
must not be a Swearer, Drunkard or Unclean Person; He must not be one that
wallows, or tumbles in evil; for who would call such an one (with relation to
God and Religion) a Virgin? And yet, notwithstanding this, because he is a
foolish Virgin, all the Misery here expressed, comes upon him.

Let us therefore consider our selves; I would hope, That we might have a very
good Title and Pretension to this Style of a Virgin; and that we hold the Truth
of the Gospel, and the Purity of Worship, and the Holiness of Conversation, in
regard of all outward Appearance; and yet, let us look well to this, That we
are not Fools therein: And therefore, I Will set out to you, in several
particulars, according to the Wisdom of our Lord Jesus, in this Parable: I Will
show you the danger of being a foolish Virgin, and in what kind of
Circumstances they shall rise, and how it shall be with them (as it were) from
first to last; as our Lord has here given to us, and yet I Will do it with
brevity; for the things will be very plain: And if we would be but faithful to
our selves, in taking notice of them, and laying them up in our hearts, and
examining our hearts according to them; There needs not much to be said, but
thought and considered, and meditated upon much by every one of us, in relation
to each particular.

The First thing which expresses the circumstances in which foolish Virgins
shall arise, is this,

They will presently begin to make the best of that Name of Profession, and
that Name Virginity that has been upon them: They Will be ready to say, I have
had a Lamp; I carry that to be sure with me, I have had a Name of Profession
and Christianity upon me: I have Endeavored to Hear and to Pray, and to
Receive the Lords Supper, and to keep the Lord's Day: I Will be certain to take
that along with me; for all the Virgins arose, and Trimmed their Lamps. The
wise indeed had Right to do it, and they did it upon good grounds, and the
foolish did the very same thing, and therefore it is significantly expressed in
the Text; All those Virgins, not only wise but foolish, They arose and Trimmed
their Lamps: That is, they set out their Profession as large, and as
favorable, and with as much advantage as they could.

Now therefore, Here is our great Point, to look to this, That we have not only
the Lamp of Profession; but that we have the Truth and Sincerity of Faith and
Repentance, of Holiness, of an Interest in Christ, and in his Blood: I Will give
you two Scriptures to this case, one on the side of the wise Virgins, and one
on the side of the foolish Virgins, and so pass on. And I would desire you
would take notice of these Scriptures, that may be helpful to bring these
things to your Minds; That all of us may enter into deep Reflection, and
serious Examination upon it. In the 1 Pet. 1. 22. says the Apostle (speaking
of these things) seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the Truth
through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren, etc. Being born again,
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God; and, now
observe how he had Discoursed of this Point before ( ver. 17.) And if ye call
on the Father, who without respect of persons judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. In what fear does he mean?
not in a slavish fear (as I shall show you presently) but in a holy care, in a
holy awe, in a wise and judicious search into things; and so he speaks ( ver.
7.) That the Trial of your Faith being much more precious than of Gold that
perishes, though it be tried with Fire, might be found unto Praise and Honor
and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. O let every one take this Scripture
into Mind, into serious consideration, and pass the time of our sojourning
here, in a holy, and wise, and judicious Awe and Fear: That the Trial of our
Faith, though it be tried with Fire, etc. Observe how notably the Apostle
speaks, as if he should say, Your Faith will be tried with Fire, with the Fire
of that Day, whether it be true and right Faith or not; And it will be tried in
a moment, and instantly, because a short work will the Lord make upon the
Earth. For (as I told you) it will appear presently, by the Thoughts we have
about us, by the Company we come with, by the Bodies we have on; And this will
be in the Face of the Fire you must come; and if it be only a drossy-Faith, it
will not stand the Fire; it will not be able to endure: If it be only a painted
Faith, it will presently come to nothing: And (therefore says the Apostle)
look that your Faith be found to Honor, and Glory, and Praise at the appearing
of Jesus Christ.

And then, on the Side of the Foolish Virgins; Consider That in the 13th
Chapter of Luke 26. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy
Presence, and thou have taught in our streets. They shall begin to say; when
they find the Door shut upon them, They shall begin to say, Lord, We have Eat
and Drunk in thy Presence, and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall
say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are; depart from me all ye workers
of iniquity, ver. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for many, I say
unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

I expound it Especially (though I don't deny, that at this time, there are
some Half-seekers that cannot enter) But it is especially at that time, of the
coming of the Bridegroom; They shall seek to enter, and they shall not be able.
When once the Master of the House is risen up, and has shut the Door, etc.
Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets.

So here is the First thing; they endeavor to make the best of their
profession, that they have had here in the World. So will all foolish Virgins
do in all their Duties, of all that they have said for God, or any good works;
but If the power of these things have not been, it will not be able to carry
any out, though we shall endeavor to make the best of our Profession; that is
the first Description of the State of the foolish Virgins, when they arose.

2. I come to the Second thing that our Lord here mentions, And that is,

They shall presently be sensible (pray observe that) that their Grace does not
hold out, that they were but counterfeit, that they were but dross, that they
were but Tinsel: For presently they say, they want supply, Give us of your Oil,
for our Lamps are gone out: It is a sad and woeful thing, That a Man should lose
all the Prayers, and all the Profession that he made here in the World: And
yet, when he comes into his Body again, though he was sent out of the World
with Prayers and Duties (I don't speak to discourage you in any of these
things, but to provoke you to it, to look to the Life, and to the Power)
presently say, My Lamp is gone out; all my Hearing and Praying is come to
nothing, they did not go down to the root, to the bottom of my Heart and Life,
they are become nothing, Our Lamps are gone out: This is suitable to the
expression we read in the Proverbs: It is said, that the Lamp of the wicked
shall be put out in obscure darkness. O how great will that Darkness be, when
that Light that is in us, shall be plainly found, and felt, and perceived to be
Darkness! O what a miserable thing is it, when a Man shall be forced to say,
All my Religion and Profession, it is gone out, it is a Lamp gone out! Our
Lamps are gone out: It is a most hideous Representation of the thing, as could
be made: We walked in the Light of our Lamps, when we were here in the World;
And now, when all comes to the Trial of the Day, and of the fire, when it comes
to be Examined, indeed, Our Lamps are gone out. Just as if a Man were entering
into some dark Vault; as you know, Miners, they go with Lights, and as soon as
they come into the dark and black of the Vapors, their Lights presently go
out, and they know not which way to go, nor how to guide themselves: And so in
that Day, it will be a very lamentable and terrible state to us, to be forced
to say, That Our Lamps are gone out.

3. In the Third place, you may consider this now, that they would light their
Lamps again: They would furnish themselves with Oil from those that they have
joined with in the World, while they were here in the World; They said unto the
Wise, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out. There is an Endeavor to
pin themselves (as it were) upon the Saints and Servants of God, with whom they
held a Converse and Correspondence here: They say, Give us of your Oil; Shall
we be no better, That you have prayed and professed with us; and that you have
heard the Word of God with us, and that we were joined with you; shall this do
us no good? Give us of your Oil. But you see,

4. In the Fourth Place, There is no manner of Relief that way; no good at all
will be done us, if we have not the power of Faith and Repentance in our
selves; If we have not real converse, and Communion with, and Union to Jesus
Christ, it will do us no good at that Day, that we have had our Conversation
and Worship, that we have had our Communion with the Servants of God.

It is said ( Matthew. 8. 11.) That many shall come from the East and West, and
shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven,
but the Children of the Kingdom (there is the great Emphasis of the thing) shall
be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth:
Though they were the Children of the Kingdom, and though they had a Right
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in regard of the Glorying they had made of being
their Children: So that it is not our Converse and Communion with Saints, or
our being of a Church; it will do no Man any good to be the Son or Daughter of
such a Church, (as some Men love to speak) or to be a Member of such a Church,
as others speak: I say, these things will do us no good, if we have not the
Power and Life of Grace in our hearts, Let every Man prove his own Work (as the
Apostle says) and then he shall have rejoicing in himself, and not in another.
And so in this regard, we may further understand the Circumstances, in which
the foolish Virgins arise: They cannot have the least advantage, or the least
good, by all the Saints that they have known, and have kept company with, or
heard, or Received the Lords Supper with: Nay, though they had Eat and Drunk in
Christ's Presence; and if they had heard Christ himself, it would have done
them no good, without the Power wherewith Christ taught them in. I speak not
this, that we should slight the Society of Saints, but that we should love them
entirely, and our delight should be in them, as in the Excellent of the Earth.
But still, we must have the same spirit of Faith with them, or else it will do
us no good: No, say they, not so, lest we have not enough for our selves and
you.

Which shows indeed, the Vanity and Folly of Popery, in carrying Men upon the
hopes of other Men; the Merits of such a Saint, and such a Saint: It is a thing
so silly, and so foolish and beggarly in Religion, that I don't think it worth
the speaking of; but there have been times, when such Foppery and Foolery has
taken place upon Multitudes of this Nation; but blessed be God it is not so
now: Though there be multitudes of Persons that would have gone upon the Faith
and Holiness, and the Charity, even by way of Judgment and Opinion, of such a
Saint heretofore: But I think it not worth the spending much time on the
Opinion, but on the mistake of Professors now. I go on to the next Particular:
And that is, They went to buy.

What is the meaning of this but only this; their vehemence, if it were
possible for them to mend their Faith, to mend their Repentance at that time:
It is a shadow of this, O that it were possible now, That instead of the false
Faith I have, I might have a true Faith; I would have a true Repentance upon
any Terms whatsoever. O the Cry that Foolish Virgins will make, when they have
had Opportunity, and lost their Opportunity! While they went to buy, the
Bridegroom came; and they that were ready, went in with him to the Wedding:
They that were ready, that had true Faith and Repentance, just at the time that
the others went to buy: And the Door was shut, and they came and said, Lord,
Lord, Open to us; But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you
not. Wherein

First of all, We may observe, as I said, They would have it at any rate, if it
were possible to be had, the Truth of Faith, and the Truth of Repentance, and
the Truth of Holiness, and of the Spirit of God dwelling in them; But while
they were endeavoring to amend, and to repair what they had so miserably been
mistaken in while they were here; They find, There Is no Amendment in that
State, They find, that there is no going over the thing again. Work therefore
(says Christ) while it is day; for the Night comes when no Man can work. And
therefore, let us look to it, while we are here in the World.

I shall therefore close the Discourse, in the brief Application of it.

1. In the First Place, it teaches us very seriously to consider, and so far as
any of us have Opportunity, to Propogate the koowledge of this thing, among all
the Profane and Wicked of the World; so far as (I say) they will bear it; or
that we can have place to speak so much to them; To consider, if foolish
Virgins will not be accepted in that Day; O! What will be the End of those that
are so boldly and insolently profane and wicked?

It were a happy thing indeed, in regard of the present state of things, and of
the hopes of something better; That we could prevail upon Persons that we know,
are prodigiously Contemners of God, and bold in Sin, and Railers at, and
Scoffers of every thing that is good, and that wallow like Swine in the Mire,
and that are drinking up the Vomit of their Sins perpetually, and doing the
same things over and over again. O that Persons would be prevailed with to read
the First of the Proverbs! And to draw the Land-scaph of their Case, by looking
upon Belshazzar, and reading his Story: I say, That they would be prevailed
with: Men that are Carousing and showing their Contempt of God, and of every
thing sacred, Oh that they might be prevailed with. For (as the Apostle says)
If the righteous be scarcely saved, and foolish Virgins perish, where shall the
Wicked and Ungodly appear? And

2. In the Second Place; Then let every one of us, as I hope, upon the
generality, there may be drawn this Title of a Virgin, without any injury done
to Christ; I hope, we do make a Profession of God and Christ, seriously; We do
Pray and Hear, and wait upon God in his Word, and read the Scripture, and we
are serious in drawing nigh to Christ at his Table; I say, I hope the Title of
the Virgin may be put upon many of us, in these regards.

But, Let it not be grievous to any of us (either Hearer or Speakers) to
consider this, That there are Foolish Virgins, as well as Wise: You may have a
very desirable and commendable Profession of Christianity upon you: We may have
this, and yet be foolish Virgins.

Consider seriously, If there be folly in our Virginity, it will utterly spoil
it, it will be such a Dead Fly in the Ointment of Virginity, that it will
certainly spoil and poison all: As our Lord speaks, If the Salt have lost its
savor: The Word in the Greek is, if it be foolish Salt, it goes to the
Dunghill: There may be Virginity, but if it be foolish Virginity, it will come
to be said, Our Lamps are gone out: We have heard and professed Christianity with
you, but lo! now Our Lamps are gone out! We cannot hold out; Immediately the
Fire of that Day (as we say, the Sun will put out those little Fires) So the
Fire of that Day, the Glory of that Day, will put out our Lamps.

But this is that Point, That I shall especially Discourse to you, next, To
show you, Wherein is the difference between a Lamp that goes out, and a Lamp
that is furnished with the Treasure of Oil still within it self; That has
still new supply, that has a Fountain to supply it; That does not go out, upon
the very spot, as we say: And, if the Lord enable me to clear so great a Point,
(to the Conviction of every one, that both hears and speaks) How great might
the advantage be? For, I would not discourage any from his Profession; God
forbid, that any one should be stopped or hindered in the way of Christianity,
so far as they have proceeded; but yet you see, this is a necessary
faithfulness, to be told of our danger, and persuaded and convinced of it, if
by any means we might escape out of the Snare, that the Snare might be broken,
and we escape.

The Third Application I make is this:

3. That according to the assurance I have given you, and that I profess in the
Presence of God, with greatest sincerity, upon duest Consideration, to be more
and more assured, That the Kingdom of Jesus Christ draws very near, and very
hard, and very fast upon us; That therefore you would have another
Consideration of these things, than those that lived a great way of of the
Time. For, though it is true, if any of us come to die, it will be the same
case, as if the Day of Judgment were just now upon him; but yet still, the
Scripture makes use of this, as a further and higher Argument, It is high time
now to awake, the Night passes, the Day is at hand, your Salvation is nearer;
And therefore, I beseech you, That you would seriously take it into
Consideration, and to Heart, That the ends of the World must needs be upon us;
For, if the Apostle said, that the Ends of the World came upon them, so many
Hundred Years since, how can it be, but that the Ends of the World must be upon
us? We are on the very last Sands of the Glass of the World: And therefore, Let
this Preaching of John the Baptist, and Christ be in all your Ears and Hearts,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Look to be wise Virgins, for the
Bridegroom will not long delay his coming: He has delayed it so long, but will
not delay it long now: And then,

4. In the last Place, I beseech you, be not so afraid of the Coming of the
Kingdom of Christ: This will be your great advantage; If any would choose, they
would choose to see the Kingdom of Christ in its succession: For, I have always
taken care to distinguish to you these two.

There is a great Difference betwixt the Kingdom of Christ coming in its Glory,
as it shall be at the Time* designed by this Text and Parable; and another
thing intended by its Succession, Rev. 11. 15. As a King Entering upon his
Reign; which you know, is immediately, and as soon as the former King went off,
and (as they speak) Demised, It is another thing, his Inauguration: You know
there is a distance of Time, between the Entering in of the Reign, and
Succession; and the Coronation, the great Time of Glory: And so there is a
difference betwixt Christ's coming, when the Midnight-Cry shall be, and his
coming into the Succession of his Kingdom: For, there shall be a wonderful
pouring out of the Spirit of God, as soon as ever the Kingdom of Christ shall
come into its Succession: There shall be a mighty Preaching of the Everlasting
Gospel; Christianity shall grow much higher, much more pure, much more
efficacious; there shall be bringing in multitudes of Gentiles, that are now
Unbelievers in Christ, Mohammedan or Pagan; Antichristians, and the Ancient
Israel coming in, as I have often said: Who then can be persuaded, that it
shall be possible to see the Jews and Gentiles flocking in to Christ, and that
there should be any, that should not believe in Christ, and receive his Gospel?
And therefore, I say, know assuredly, That it will be a great advantage to you.

And, for my part, There Is nothing that I more earnestly defire, or have a
greater value for, than to see the Dawns of the Kingdom of Christ; Oh! That God
would give any of us leave to see this, We should have great advantage of
making our Calling and Election sure, of working out our salvation with fear
and trembling, of being persuaded of the things that pertain to the Kingdom of
God; we should have great opportunities every way; And therefore, as Christ
speaks, when he propounded the Parable to them, Matthew. 13. 17. I say unto you,
That many Prophets and Righteous Men have desired to see those things which ye
see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have
not heard them: So if God shall continue any of our lives, but a few years, to
see the Kingdom of Christ appearing in this First Glory; O happy and blessed
shall we be! For, from the very beginning and foundation of the World to this
day, Many Prophets and Righteous Men have desired to see those things which we
shall see then, and have not seen them; and to hear those things that we shall
hear, and have not heard them.

In the mean time, Let none of us be discouraged, if God call us sooner out of
the World; For, as the Apostle says, All those that are Christ's, he will
certainly bring with him: And, it will certainly be a happier and securer
state, to be sleeping in Jesus, and dying in Jesus; For though we do not see
these things here, our Spirits shall see them above; and our Bodies shall be
raised in Glory for us to come with Christ in: And as to those who are not as
they desire to be, for my part, I know not any thing can be spoken for better
Tidings, or any thing that should more earnestly engage our Faith, and Prayer,
than to have that great opportunity, to wind up our Faith and Love, and
Repentance, to their own height; even that of the Coming of the Kingdom of
Christ into its Succession, and to see those blessed things, and to hear them,
that many excellent persons have desired to see, and hear, and have not: And
therefore, let none be offended, that the Kingdom of Christ is near at hand;
for, we shall have greater, and more blessed advantages and opportunities, to
make our Calling and Election sure, when that time comes.

Let us therefore desire, to hear those loud Voices from Heaven Proclaim, That
the Kingdoms of this World, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ: On which will soon follow that pouring out of the Spirit, and the
Preaching the Everlasting Gospel.

SERMON VIII. On Matthew 25. v. 6, etc. And at Midnight there was a Cry made,
Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him.

Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps.

And the Foolish said unto the Wise, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are
gone out, etc.


I Have led you through several parts of this great and admirable Parable: The
last thing I Discoursed to you, was concerning the Midnight-Cry, and
endeavored to show you:

That though there might be some use made of it, as a Description of any
Judgment, that should come upon the Churches of Christ, before his Coming; Yet,
That the Principal Intention is, That Cry, That Voice of the Son of God, That
Shout that the Lord will descend in, That Voice of the Archangel, That Trump of
God, that shall raise all that are asleep in their Graves, and shall bring them
forth.

I Endeavored to open to you, That every one shall rise in the very same
Circumstances wherein they lay down in Death, and in the Grave.

And therefore, That the Day of Judgment coming upon Profane and Insolent
Persons, upon the Fools that say in their hearts, There is no God, will be like
the Writing of the Fingers on the Wall before Belshazzar, that we read of Dan.
5. And as it comes upon ignorant Persons in Christianity, and upon the
Worldlings, those Fools that say, We have much Goods laid up for many Years;
and therefore, Soul, Take thy ease, Eat, Drink and be Merry. O! what an
Earthquake will it be upon them, to see the Kingdom of Christ! Now, They shall
be raised, both the Fools that say, That there is no God, and the Worldlings,
etc. They shall be raised just in the same Terror, in the same Consternation,
as if the Earthquake was now upon them, or in the Time of Life, now on Earth.

But I proposed to show you also, Wherein the state of the foolish, and the
wise Virgins differ; wherein this great difference lies, That one enter into
the Wedding, and the other are shut out.

And that is it, which now, by the assistance of God, I would undertake, and go
forward, to give you a clear Representation of this great Matter: For (as I
told you) Virgins, bespeaks a being of the Pure and True Religion; the true
Religion of the Gospel, the Doctrine of God in the Gospel: For all, whatsoever
false Doctrine, or false Worship does adulterate this, it is called in
Scripture, not by the Name of Virginity, but by the Name of Whoredom, by the
Name of Adultery and Fornication.*

Whatever defiles the Religion of Jesus Christ, is not styled Virginity, but by
other Names; And therefore it is certain, That these Virgins must be of the
truest and of the purest Religion of Jesus Christ.

In the second Place I told you, That they must needs be of a tolerable, sober
Conversation: They are not of the Profane, the Drunkards or the Swearers, or
the Sensualists of the World; but they are those, that walk in such unblameable
life, that they are worthy to be counted, and to be styled Virgins.

What a critical Case therefore, What a very nice and curious Point is this,
that distinguishes between the wise and the foolish Virgins?

If therefore God shall be pleased, in any measure, to enable me to open this
to you, and that you may aright conceive, and understand so great a Point; I
hope, That by his Blessing, our coming together may be for the better, and not
for the worse.

I shall therefore apply my self to it,

First, By considering the scope of the Parable in this Matter: And, I find,
That it lies here:

The one had Oil in their Lamps, but they had not Oil in their Vessels.

The other had Oil in their Vessels as well as in their Lamps.

So, that it comes to this; One has a Treasure, a Store of Grace, beyond the
Profession, the other has not.

I shall Answer very plainly, and downright Discourse in this thing; by
leading you to some great Expressions of Scripture, which do to me assure, what
our Lord intends. In the Third Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, v. 16,
etc. The Apostle, in that Great and Excellent Prayer, begs of the Father of
Glory; the Father of Glory! An Expression most suitable and agreeable to the
Kingdom of Christ, appearing in its Glory, to which this Parable refers: That
he would grant you, according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened
with might, by his Spirit in the inner man: That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by Faith: I look upon this to be Oil in the Vessel. It is Christ abiding
in the heart: For tho indeed the Vessel is not the Fountain; yet it speaks the
Vessel closely conjoined with the Fountain; and the Fountain continually
springing into it.

Another place of Scripture that I would give you: You know Faith and Love,
they are much required and insisted on in the Gospel, now observe what the
Apostle says, in the 1 Timothy 1. 14. And the Grace of our Lord was exceeding
abundant, with Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus: Where is the Treasure
of Faith and Love? It is in Christ Jesus, it is never out of him; the Spring of
it is never out of him; Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus; The Spring
overflows to the Vessel, with Faith and Love, but the Spring and the Fountain
is Christ himself.

And so, 2 Timothy 2, 1. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace that is in
Christ Jesus: Be strong in the Grace that is in him. It is never out of him,
though it flows to the Souls and Spirits of Believers, yet it is never out of
Christ.

So that here is the Oil in the Treasure of it; it is when the Soul is united
to Christ, the Fountain of it; here is the Oil that is able to bear up.

For, in two things, I think, the comparison lies, that our Lord intended in
this Parable, between Grace and Oil.

First, It must needs be of such an excellent quality, that it can bear up with
the Glory of that Day; And then,

In the Second place, It must be so abundant, that it can last with the Glory
of that Day.

For, if the Oil be not of the high and excellent kind, it will presently go
out.

As you know, the higher Light of the Sun, it puts out the lower Light of Fire
or Tapers, that we have below; so the Glory of that Day will put out any Light,
but only the Light of the Righteousness and Grace that is in Jesus Christ, and
none else will last; There Is no Spring of Light, but only that which comes from
him, Heb. 7. 16. who is after the power of an endless life. It is only Christ
that is Oil in the Treasure; Therefore, take the most Excellent Grace; That Is
the Point that I would endeavor to carry out to you: Take the most Excellent
Grace; if it be out of Christ, if it be only in the Person himself, it is a
Lamp that will go out; but if the Vessel be at the Fountain Head, and is joined
to the Fountain; then it is able to supply to the Glory of that Day.

And I shall represent it to you therefore, by a History of Scripture, that may
serve as an excellent Parallel, to Expound the Parable that I am now upon; In 2
Kings 4. 1. There cried a certain Woman of the Wives of the Sons of the
Prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy Servant my Husband is dead, and thou know
that thy Servant did fear the Lord; and the Creditor is come to take unto him
my two Sons to be Bondmen. And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee?
Tell me, What have thou in the House? And she said, Thine Handmaid has not
any thing in the House, save a Pot of Oil. Then he said, Go, Borrow thee
Vessels abroad of all thy Neighbors, even empty Vessels, borrow not a few. And
when thou art come in, thou shall shut* the Door upon thee, and upon thy Sons,
and shall pour out into all those Vessels, and thou shall set aside that which
is full. So she went from him, and shut the Door upon her, and upon her Sons,
who brought the Vessels to her, and she poured out. And it came to pass, when
the Vessels were full, that she said unto her Son, bring me yet a Vessel. And
he said unto her, There is not a Vessel more. And the Oil stayed.

Now this is the thing only, That I would represent to you; That to us, that
are in a miserable and needy, and wanting condition, and in danger to be
Bondmen and Bond-Women to the Wrath and Justice of God for ever, Here is the
Oil multiplied; The Oil multiplies from the Fountain, from the Infinite Grace
that is in Jesus Christ, that we may stand at that Day.

And therefore, That which I would advise, and press upon every one of us, from
this very Point is, That above all things we would mind our being in Christ. I
shall endeavor to free it from all Objections that you may be ready to make,
before I close the Point.

But, to give you a Parable, or a Representation that is nearer, and does
indeed intend this very thing; If you look into the Prophet Zachary, you shall
see what it is to have Oil, not only in the Lamp, but in the Vessel; that is,
to have a continual supply.

For, though indeed, this Parable seems to go no further, than Oil in the
Vessel; yet when we come to enter into it, we must needs find, that it must be
Oil from the Fountain alone, that can do us good, Zach. 4. 1, 2. And the Angel
that talked with me, came again, and waked me, as a Man that is wakened out of
his sleep; And said unto me, what See thou? and I said, I looked, and behold,
a Candlestick all of Gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his Seven Lamps
thereon, and Seven Pipes to the Seven Lamps, which were upon the top thereof:
And two Olive Trees by it, one upon the Right side of the Bowl, and the other
upon the Left side thereof. And it came to that; The Sons of oil (as they are
called, v. 12.) through the Golden Pipes empty the Golden Oil out of themselves
into the Golden Bowl.

Now, What Is the Meaning of all this? Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord; that is the Meaning of all: They Empty the Golden Oil
out of themselves.

That Golden Oil, by which our Lamps will bear up and shine at that Day, it
must come from those Sons of Oil; That is, From those Olive-branches, Both
which are only a Representation of Christ's Fullness in his Righteousness, and
in his Spirit.

So that here is that, that alone can bear us up, and bear up the Shining of
our Lamps in that Day of the Glorious Solemnity of the Marriage of the Lamb:
That which alone can bear us up, is the Righteousness and Spirit of Jesus
Christ; Which are always Connected and Joined one with another.

And, Proportionable hereunto are other Similitudes; The Wedding Garment, that
we read of, Matt. 22. which, a Man not having on, when he came to the Wedding,
he was sound Speechless; That is Nothing, but the Garment of the Righteousness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Graces of his Spirit. The King came in to
see the Guests, he saw there a Man which had not on a Wedding Garment; (The
same with Oil in the Vessel:) And he says unto him, Friend, How came thou in
hither, not having a Wedding Garment? And he was Speechless; Bind him Hand and
Foot, and take him away, says Christ, and cast him into outer Darkness,
because he had not the Linen White and Clean, the Righteousness of Saints,
Robes washed in the Blood of the Lamb; for that is the Wedding Garment. He had
not put on the Wedding Garment of Christ; he had not on the White Raiment. Buy
of me Gold tried in the Fire, and White Raiment (suitable to that Time) and buy
of me Eye Salve, that thou may see, etc. Rev. 3. All is from Christ. So that
the Whole Matter is This; Whether we are in Christ, or whether we are not in
Christ?

So the Apostle John says, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, (here is the
plain Proposition, the Case of every Man) He that has the Son, has Life; And
he that has not the Son of God, has not Life: And this is ihe Record, that
God has given to us Eternal Life, (the Place is as full to the Purpose, as
possibly can be) God has given to us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his
Son, in the Fountain. The Sun of Righteousness arises with healing in his
Wings. He that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not the Son of God,
has not Life: And hereby, we may understand that great Place of Scripture,
which else may be more hard to be understood, Romans 9. 28. says the Apostle
there, out of the Prophet Isaiah. A short work (says he) will the Lord make
upon the Earth: What is the meaning of that, That he will make such a short
Work upon the Earth? The Meaning is this, That it shall come to this speedy
Question: Are you in Christ? Or are you not in Christ? For he will finish the
Work, and cut it short in Righteousness; because a short Work will the Lord
make upon the Earth. A short Work.

Many are ready to think, That the Judiciary part of the Day of Judgment will
be a mighty long time; Because every Case of a Man must be examined, and his
Works; It is a Mistake, when we think so.

For though it will be, as exact to every Man, as if every Man's Case were laid
down in his particular Works, viz. of those who are not pardoned; But yet it
will be a time of the blotting out of Iniquity; I say, a Time of the full
blotting out of Sin, in all the Servants of God; Though Sins are sought for,
they shall not be found, There shall be none, but upon the Wicked.

A short Work will the Lord make upon the Wicked, when they are found not to be
in Christ; They have not a biding Light; They are presently found by the
Company they are in, and by the Habit of the Body; For the Saints are in the
Habit of Bodies of Glory; And the other, in the Habit of Bodies of Contempt:
So, a short Work will the Lord make: It will be presently seen by our
Appearance, whether we are Christ's, or no.

Now this I shall endeavor to Argue to you a little from Scripture-Reason, And
then it shall be the Principal Part of this Discourse to clear to you the
Doubts and Scruples, and Objections, that may arise in your Minds; That this
cannot be so.

First, In regard of other Scriptures, that insist so much upon what is in us;
And then to Answer these Questions.

In the Second Place, you may say,

How shall we come to have an Interest in Christ? And

In the Third Place; How shall we know, That we have an Interest in Christ?

And so I shall conclude with the Application of All.

The Great Scripture-Argument I would give you, is this:

If we could seriously consider the Infinite Holiness, and Purity of God; If we
could but (I say) seriously lay this to Heart; That God cannot see Things, any
other ways than they are, How would it clear this? A great many Good Men are
ready to say,

The Evangelical Righteousness that we have, shall stand before God, in
Justification; for Christ's sake.

I say, If we seriously consider, That God is Infinitely Holy; That the Angels
he charges with Folly; That the Heavens are not clean in his Sight; That he
cannot see any otherwise, than Things are: I do beseech you to consider,
Whether you would venture into the Presence of such a Holiness, with the Best
Graces, that you know in any Person in the World? For my part, I do not know
how Men can Answer it in their own Judgments: But I think, it is as impossible
for any Man to appear with the Holiness of the best Saint, that ever was in the
World, (except the Righteousness of Christ) as I think it impossible for a Man
to stand in the Greatest Presence, without Confusion, having nothing but the
Squallidness, and Filthiness of Impure Garments, and Putrefaction all over him.
For, surely, the Saints of God speak in the Name of all Saints; All our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags; and our Iniquities, like the Wind, hurry us
away: And there is no standing, but by that stable Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, Jehovah our Righteousness, and by the Holiness that flows from his
Death, and from his Resurrection, and that is under the Cover of his Blood, and
under the Answer, that his Righteousness makes for the Imperfection of it.

I am sure, this Reason is so solid, so substantial, and so weighty; That
whoever Considers it, must needs yield, and submit to it, if they do not go off
from it, but strictly and precisely consider it; That no other Righteousness
can be accepted, but only the Righteousness of Christ, and the Holiness that
flows from it, that needs the Cover of his Righteousness, and is made up in its
own Imperfection, by the Perfection of his Righteousness.

Surely, it must be a great Hazard, for such a Person as Paul, to go before the
Judgment Seat, with his own Righteousness, when he said, (even in a State of
Grace, and in Jesus Christ) 1 Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I
not hereby justified; For he that judges me, is the Lord: If we have not now
the Righteousness of Christ, How then can we stand before God!

I Argue this, not so much, to make you of an Opinion, or a Judgment; (for that
I ought not to aim at) but with the utmost Sincerity, as God inables me, that
you may know, your Peace, and Safety, and Security lies only in the
Righteousness of Christ.

That Lamp will certainly be put out in obscure Darkness, that has not the
Golden Oil: And therefore I speak, that you may have your Hearts full of this;
Christ, and Christ only. I am so far from being moved by any Objection, that I
am assured, That this is the True Grace of God that I now Preach to you,
wherein we are all to stand: We read, Heb. 24. Christ is not entered into the
Holy Places made with Hands, which are Figures of the true, but into Heaven it
self, now to appear in the Presence of God for us: We Translate it, In the
Presence of God; but the Greek is much more Emphatical: He Appears, or is made
apparent to the Face of God for us: Now, Christ is present with, and makes
himself appear to the very Face of God; That Face, that is Ten Thousand times
Brighter than the Sun, and that Dazles all Created Righteousness; Christ
appears to that very Face, and he appears now, in his own Blood, to that very
Face, for us. Herein is our great Comfort, when we come before the Face of God;
Christ appears to that very Face, in our Behalf: It is further said, Nor yet
that he should offer himself often; as the High Priest Offered other
Sacrifices: For then must he often have Suffered, since the Foundation of the
World.

It may be, you only read this, with a General Thought of it; and may not have
considered the deep Sense, and the Importance of it.

For, I ask, Why Christ must have Suffered often, from the Foundation of the
World, if he had not been a Lamb slain, once for All?

The Answer is, If his Offering had not been an Offering once for All, It must
have arisen from the Insufficiency of it, the Weakness, and Imperfection of it,
to have done All at once; and then he must, (as the Apostle says) Have Suffered
often, since the Foundation of the World; and not have Died only 1700 Years
ago, when the World was about 4000 Years old; but he must have Suffered from
the very Foundation of the World: He must have begun there, where the Sin of
Man, the Apostasy of Adam entered, and he must still have been Suffering; For
the World could not have been born up, but by the Efficacy of his Sacrifice,
and therefore it must still have been renewed. The World has been variously
divided, the Old World before the Flood, and then before the Law, and since the
Law till Christ; It is capable of more Divisions; but divide it as we can, I do
not see how any Division of it could have been without the Sacrifice of Christ,
nor how often each Division would have required the Benefit of it, if once
Offering had not been for All; but because once Offering of a Lamb without
Spot, by the Eternal Spirit, does Perfect and Consecrate for ever to the
Enjoyment of God, and Freedom from Wrath Them who are Sanctified from the Guilt
and the Power of Sin; And so it looks backward to all such before it, as a Lamb
slain, from the Foundation of the World, and forward to all, who shall be to
the Delivery up of the Kingdom to God All in All, and even throughout Eternity,
supporting Saints in their Union to the Father and his Love by Himself: Hence
this Great High Priest chose his Time in the End of the World, showing the
Right of Christ, to have put an end upon this Sunk, Fallen, Defiled World; but
that for Wisest and Holiest Purposes, Vision and Prophecy, in the Great
Efficacy of his Redemption were Sealed, and now of necessity are near to be
opened: This was the Fullness of Time, not far from the Fullness of Times, or of
all Time; That is, from the Kingdom of Christ.

Now on this Foundation of his Sacrifice for ever perfecting Them who are
Sanctified, we learn, That as All is Derived from Christ, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption; So it is Conserved in him, he has
for ever perfected, as in himself; For all still rests in him, and depends upon
Fresh Receivings from him, as is most evident in this; He went immediately into
the Holy Places made without Hands, there to appear in the Presence of God; or
according to the Force of the Greek, there to be made Illustrious to the very
Face of God for us: So that notwithstanding what he has done, we could not
dare to appear to the Face of God, if he were not there for us, appearing to
that very Face, receiving the Grace, and Favor of it, and Reflecting it on us:
And so in Sanctification, in the strictest, and most proper Sense of it, It is
continually Issuing from his Blood; The Blood of the Everlasting Covenant sends
forth the Efficacy of making perfect in every good Work, working in us, that
which is well pleasing in his Sight.

Now then from hence arises a Necessity of continual Looking to Jesus, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, in both Justification and Sanctification.

Take then, as in relation to the Point of Justification, our Faith, our Love,
our Repentance, our Charity, our Holiness, our Obedience, and separate these
from the Satisfaction, Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and how can they stand
before God on any account whatever, even in the Sense of All that do at all
acknowledge Christ! But beyond this, How pitiful are they, compared with
Everlasting Righteousness, with Infinite Righteousness! Nay, so Imperfect, and
so Polluted are they, that they cannot so much as enter into any the least
Consideration in the Point of Righteousness, or Justification, but they must
needs before a Righteous, and Holy God, Themselves, and the Persons, in whom
they are, fall under Condemnation: And in point of Holiness, if you divide them
from Christ, They are like a Beam, or a Ray cut off from the Sun, it
immediately vanishes, and comes to nothing; As therefore, The Conscience truly
enlightened, will say; Alas, I cannot come before God with this, and that, which
looks like Godliness, Holiness, or what we call Religion, as in Prayer, or
other Duties; I must have the Infinite Righteousness of Jesus Christ, else I
know my Lamp will immediately go out: So in point of Sanctification, even that
Holiness we receive from Christ, all its Excellency and Life is in Union to
Christ, If it be separate from him, it is like a Drop out of the Fountain; A
Drop in the Fountain is considerable, while it is in it; If you separate it
from it, it presently is lost, and comes to nothing: My Son (says he unto
Timothy) be strong in the Grace, that is in Jesus Christ; it must be in him,
Conserved in him; Else, it is as a Ray wandering from the Sun, or a Drop from
the Fountain, or to speak in the Language of the Parable, as a Lamp from the
Vessel, or even the Vessel from the Son of Oil: The Sum of all is, our
dependence is on Christ alone, our Union, and Communion with him; He is the
Fountain, he is the Great Son of Oil; All Lamps go out, not so united; In
Jehovah, shall one say, Have I Righteousness, and Strength, strength of
Holiness also; In him shall all his Seed be Justified and Glory.

Thus far I have endeavored to fix and establish this Point to you; And from
which, I hope, and am assured, I shall never find Reason to depart; That the
Oil in the Vessel, is the Heart united to Jesus Christ by Faith; The Having the
Son, and so having Life; For he is the Great Son of Oil, the Branch made
strong, even the Fountain, the Root, the Spring to Eternity.

I shall now endeavor to answer, and to clear up, what may rise, by way of
Objection, in any of our Thoughts to this Truth.

Object. 1. It may be said, All the Graces and Duties of Christianity, of
Holiness, are they not spoken of, as received from, and done by the Power of
Christ, and yet as if they were ours, and we stood by them before God, as in
our selves? Is it not said of such a Saint, as of Enoch, That he walked with
God? Of Noah, That he wis Just, and Perfect, and Upright in his Generations,
and that he Walked with God? Of Abraham, That he Believed in God, and it was
imputed to him for Righteousness? Of David, and other Good Kings, That they
Served God with an Upright Heart? Of Job, That he was an Upright, Perfect Man,
That he Feared God, and Eschewed Evil? These Things seem to be spoken
absolutely, and as if the Persons of whom they are spoken in these High
Characters, Subsisted by themselves; Christ may indeed lie at the Bottom, and
be the Foundation, why all is accepted, and all is upon his Account
principally, but yet under him, these Qualifications may be considered as our
Righteousness.

Answ. Now to this I shall answer very plainly; That Scripture has indeed laid
this Foundation; Jesus Christ; and Other no Man can lay, that acknowledges the
Gospel of Christ: And this being firmly settled, and the Consequences of it
looked every way into, the Key of All is given into our Hands: For though
Scripture speaks freely, and at large, and as may most serve in the Hand of the
Spirit, as an Instrument to work upon the Hearts of those, who are in Christ;
As, Blessed are the Undefiled in the Way; Blessed are they that keep his
Testimonies; Blessed is he that Considers the Poor; And Innumerable the like
Scriptures; Which look, as if we had a Righteousness in our selves; Yet how
exact, how positive is it in leading us to the Spring, to the Fountain, to the
Sun of Righteousness, Christ; and thereby giving us (as I said) a Key into All!
That All is, not only from him, but All is in him, (as the Sun holding all
Light in it self,) while it shines from him; The Head holding all Influences
within himself, the Root, Fountain, All in him, while from him: Noah was
Righteous, because Heir of the Righteousness of Faith uniting to Christ: David
describes, in relation to Abraham and all Saints, the Blessedness of the Man,
to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without Works; It consists in Free
Pardon, and not imputing Sin; Blessed is the Man (says he) whose Iniquities
are Forgiven, and whose Sins are covered; Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord
imputes not Sin: The Apostle Paul has many high Expressions showing the
Necessity of Holiness; and yet he says, I desire to be found in Christ, not
having my own Righteousness, but that, which is by the Faith of the Son of God;
as David says, We will make mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only.
Thus, notwithstanding all the Holiness, and Graces of Believers, the
Righteousness of Christ is their Righteousness alone, in the Point of
Justification; And this Righteousness never goes out of himself, for then it
would soon fail; But it is always Conserved in himself, he is Jehovah, our
Righteousness: And so our Holiness, the inward Holiness of Saints dwells in
him, and from him is continually communicated, even while the Gracious Frame is
fixed in them; Yet the Frame is in Union to him, we are in Christ Jesus, or in
Union to him, Created to Good Works; In Christ Jesus is the New Creature, or
New Creation; We know him first, and then the Power of his Resurrection; He is
our Sanctification, and our very Wisdom for Faith and Repentance; We are
Married unto him, that is Risen from the Dead, that we may bring forth Fruits
unto God; So that All is not only from him, but in him: All therefore that is
spoken of, as in us, or by us, is no other, but like the Attributing such and
such Things to the Eyes, or to the Hands, and Feet. There is a Preparation of
each Member to the Uses, and Offices proper to it, but the very Active Part is
proper to the Head alone and to that Spirit dwelling in it, without which they
are but Lumps of Clay; So that Graces, and Gracious Actions are attributed to
Believers who are the Curious Workmanship of God to such Good Works; but it is,
as they are in Christ, in whom their Spiritual Life always resides, in and from
whom it flows to them; So that the Oil in the Vessel shining through the Lamp
is still in Union to him, the Great Messiah, or Anointed of God.

Object. 2. A Second Objection, may be taken from that, in this Matthew. 25, 34.
You know, it is there said, When Christ had set the Goats on the Left Hand, and
the Sheep on the Right; He speaks in this manner; Then shall the King say unto
them Come ye Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for ^^u: For I
was an hungry, and ye gave me Meat; I was Thirsty, and ye gave me Drink; A
Stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed me; Sick and in Prison, and
ye Visited me: And so on the other side, he said to the Wicked, Ye did not so
and so; And ye did nothing to my Succor and Relief: Is it not plain therefore,
may Men say, That it is not according to the Righteousness of Christ, or a
Being in Christ, but according as we have done?

Now I Will give you a clear Answer agreeable to what I said before: It is true,
Where Christ has laid the Foundation, and has opened the Spring of his
Righteousness, he takes any Grace he pleases, and Insists upon it; Because it
is all of the Contexture, and Frame, and whole Webb (as I may say) of his
Righteousness; It is Weaved out of his Righteousness, and Redemption: And
therefore, he will take what Grace soever he pleases, because it is in the
Fountain still; It is all in the Sun, and in the Fountain: As if the Sun should
say, Here Is such or such a Particle of Light, and it shall do any thing
proportionable to the Nature of such a Beam of Light; But, consider, such a
Beam is in me; But if it go out of me, it will presently be as a Lamp gone out.

So, our Faith, our Love, or our Repentance, or our Holiness, take them in the
Fountain, and in the Spring, they are of great Moment: If you take them out,
they are nothing at all: So here is the Case.

Because the Robes of the Saints are Washed all over in the Blood of Christ;
And because all our Graces are in him, as in the Fountain, they are of great
Value, not any to be taken in the single Grace, by it self, (though Christ is
pleased to instance in this, or that, as he sees meet) but whether one or more
are spoken of, they are all spoken of, as they are in the whole Orb, and the
whole Body and Sphere of Light, his own Righteousness and Perfection; And they
all are Communicated from him: And therefore it is, that these Graces are
spoken so Graciously of, because they are in him.

In the Third Place, you may say, But suppose I am satisfied and convinced,
That it is not what is in my Self, but what is in Christ, where all my
Imperfections are made up, and where every thing is in Purity and Perfection;
This is the Great Thing lies upon me, That I don't know how to come to Christ,
that I may be his, and that he may be mine.

And therefore, this is that I shall Answer to you; There are under the
Profession of Christianity two Sorts of Men.

First, Those that never care for these Things, that never mind them, that
never consider them, that never ask the Question, Whether Christ is theirs, or
not? Nor have any Thought, or any Trouble about it: Now, to such Persons,
there is no great need of answering; It is a vain Thing to Resolve Cases of
Conscience to an Atheist, to him that says, There Is no God, There Is no
Religion: So it is in vain to answer such Scruples to the Man that never minds
Christ, or considers himself, Whether in Christ, or not?

But, if there are any of us, that are really under the Sense of the Want of
Christ, and of the Greatness of that Want, If there be any such; Why then there
is not at any time such a Thought in our Hearts as this, Whether we are
Christ's, or not, but it is a Hopeful Argument, That Jesus Christ does Call us,
and does Invite us: He does Call and Invite us, or else, Why should it so be,
That we are concerned and troubled about our having, or not having of him? Our
Case is just like the Case of that Blind Man in the Gospel, that we read of,
Mark 10. 46. When they were come to Jericho, there was a great Number of
People: And Blind Bartimeus, the Son of Timeus, sat by the Way-side, Begging:
And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say,
Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy on me: And many charged him that he should
hold his Peace: They would not have him make such ado after Christ; But he
cried the more a great deal, Thou Son of David, have Mercy on me. And Jesus
stood still, and commanded him to be called; And they call the Blind-Man,
saying unto him, Be of good Comfort, rise, he calls thee. I would only make
an Allusion, and so an Application of this: Christ coming near him, Invited his
Desires, and when he Desired, Christ further Invited him.

When we find our Souls moved with any thing of the Sense of the Want of
Christ, or Desire after him; It is a sign Christ is coming near to us, and when
we find that, let us cry out more earnestly after him, and though our own
Corruptions, our own Unbelief, our own Fears, our own Lusts say, Don't make
such a stir after Christ; They charge us to hold our Peace, and Satan charges
us, and many Doctrines in the World, (yea, of some very good Men) they charge
us to hold our Peace, and say,

First of all, Get more Humiliation and Sense of Sin; Get Holiness; Get
Resolutions of being better, and don't expect and ask for Salvation, till you
come so and so qualified.

Now, I say, in this Case, Let us cry so much the more; For if we want
Humiliation, where should we have it, but only from Christ? If we want
Resolutions to Holiness, where should we have them, but from Christ? It is not
intended, that you should be negligent of Humiliation, or Sense of Sin, or
Sorrow for it, or Resolutions for Holiness; But the Question is, Where shall we
have these?

Now, I say, We can have them no where, but from Christ; From the First Item of
coming to God, even from first to last, to an Everlasting Happiness, it is from
God, it is from Christ; He calls all those whose Souls are moved, and those
that have had no more Sense of these things heretofore, than the very Stones
and Stocks, than the very Heathen and Pagans; To all these, I say, If Christ do
but move and stir you, fly ye to him, and say, If I perish, I Will perish here: I
know nothing in my want of Everlasting Life, but only coming to Christ to help
me, may every Soul say.

Objection. But then you will say, There Is a Danger, that Men should Sleep, and
do nothing, but put off all with coming to Christ.

Don't fear this; If we are indeed in Motion to Christ, be assured of this;
He Will come to you, and make himself further known to you; And, in that very
Moment, that you think to be doing something, look upon Christ as the very
Author and Finisher of our Faith, and in his Strength go and do it; For,
surely, we may stand long enough fetching Water out of a Flint, till Jesus
Christ, be pleased to turn the Flint into a standing Water: Such an Expression
is in the Psalms.

So I say, The Flint in the Heart, the Heart of Flint, Christ will turn into a
Standing-Water; And it can never be done, till Christ do it.

And therefore, I know not how to advise such otherwise; Many complain of the
Want of this and that Grace, What Advice would you give us? Alas! Many would
say, Be Industrious and Earnest; I do not deny, but there is a Place for it,
But, I say, It is for a Man to begin at the Wrong End of the Thing, to begin
there without looking first to Christ: Let us therefore go to Christ; For Faith
and Love are in him abundant; And he will draw Souls to himself; When I am lifted
up (says he) I will Draw all Men to me; The Death of Christ upon the Cross was
a Spiritual Emblem of this Drawing: And the Father Draws, and the Spirit
Convinces, That Persons may by it be Drawn to Christ: It is therefore in the
High and Supreme Hand; And when we have any Intimations and Motives upon us, to
move, and to stir, still go to the Fountain; Go to him that is the Son of Oil:
These Rays and Beams lead to him that is the Spring of all Grace, from the very
first to the last.

It is worthy our Consideration, that Place of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 22.
last Verses, And I will fasten him as a Nail in a sure Place, and he shall be
for a Glorious Throne to his Father's House: And they shall hang upon him all
the Glory of his Father's House, the Offspring and the Issue; (The very
Beginning and the End) Vessels of all Quantities; from the Vessels of Cups,
even to all the Vessels of Flagons; They hang all upon him.

Now therefore, If you would hang your Humiliation, or Preparation, that is a
Vessel of the Offspring, and it is a small Vessel, a Vessel of small Quantity;
if you hang this any where, but upon the Nail in the sure Place, nothing of
Good can be expected; But if you would hang, even the least Vessel, the Vessel
of least Quantity any where, hang it upon Christ, Hang it upon the Nail in the
sure Place.

And, if any of you have any Troubled Thoughts, or Contest of Mind about these
Things, I beseech you, That you would go up to this Nail that is fastened in a
sure Place; For that Vessel, that we hang any where else, it shall certainly be
cut down, and the Nail we hang it upon will certainly be cut down, or removed,
for the Lord has spoken it; All our Lamps that shine in their own Light, they
will go out in that Day, at the Appearance of Christ, like Sparks, that we
compass our selves with, of our own kindling; All that do so, shall lie down in
Sorrow.

The Last Objection is, But, how shall we know that we are in Christ? Can we
discern it any otherwise, than by the Marks and Signs of Grace, that we find in
our Selves? If therefore we find not Faith, if we find not Repentance, and all
the Fruits of Holiness, How can we think, or dare we think that we are in
Christ?

Now therefore, To this I would give you this Twofold Answer.

First, It is certain, That the Supreme Witness to any of our Souls, it must be
from the Spirit of Christ, it must be from the Spirit of Adoption, crying Abba,
Father.

He is called the Spirit of the Son; I beseech you seriously consider it, Gal.
4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father: Why does he call it the Spirit of the Son? But to
show, that it is the Witness coming from Christ: If therefore it comes from
him, The Great Witness of the Spirit is, That we are in Christ: It does not
come to us in our own Righteousness; For then, Why should it be called, The
Spirit of the Son? No, not in our own Sanctification, does it come to us; But
it is, The Spirit of the Son; And, It Is a sure Testimony of its Glorifying
Christ, in taking the Things that are Christ's, and Giving to us even in its
Testimony.

You may say, This may Deceive us; And we don't know, Whether it is the Spirit,
or not?

Observe what the Apostle says, in 1 John 5. speaking of the Witness of the
Spirit; (latter part of the 6th Verse) And the Witness of the Spirit is Truth:
Why does he say, The Witness of the Spirit is Truth, but to meet with the
Things that are in our Hearts, that we are ready to say: There are other Good
Witnesses, we dare not Believe the Spirit alone; But we have other Good
Witnesses, and we must bring them in; And if they say so too, then we may
Believe the Spirit, or else not.

Now the Apostle says, The Witness of the Spirit is Truth; To let us know,
there is a separate single Witness of the Spirit of God, that is true.

I know no Reason at all, That we should be afraid to Affirm this; For, If the
Spirit of God dwells (as Generally the Best and most Judicious Discoursers of
these Things, allow) if the Spirit of God dwell in us, Why should it be
strange, that the Spirit of God should whisper its Witness in this way? And the
Apostle speaks of this very Witness, when he says, The Witness of the Spirit
is True: But then,

In the Second Place, I do acknowledge this freely and abundantly, That the
Spirit of God does make use of this, or that particular Grace, or Holiness in
general, in a Saint of Christ: As he pleases, sometimes he Witnesses only by
himself, sometimes by such and such Graces: And why? Not because the Graces
themselves are alone able to bear up the Witness; That I plainly deny. But then,

The Spirit Witnesses not only of Grace, of Faith, of Repen^ance, and
Holiness, etc. but as they are in Christ; Faith and Love in Christ Jesus; And
as they are made up of his Righteousness; and flow from his Death, Resurrection
and Intercession.

And here is that, that I said to you, Christ takes any Grace of his Servants,
and shows it at the Day of Judgment; Not as it is out of himself, but as it is
in himself, and in his own Righteousness, and by his Spirit; He now shows to
any of his Servants, any of their Graces, but not as out of Christ, but as in
Christ, surrounded, made up, filled up with his Righteousness: As I remember
the Expression in the Book of Exodus, where the Jewels that were in the Vrim
and Thummim, in the Breast Plate of the High Priest; Their setting is called,
Filling up.

They were filled up in the Gold, the Receptacles and Lodgings of them were
filled up, Exodus 28. So I say, In every Grace, there is the filling up of the
Righteousness of Christ.

Take all the Graces of Paul, and of Peter, or any of the Servants of Christ;
And if they had not been Set in the Righteousness of Christ, if there were not
a Filling up by the Righteousness of Christ, they would all come to naught; And
therefore they are filled up with his Righteousness.

And so I do acknowledge, That it may be; That the Spirit of God may give his
Servants a Witness, and a Testimony from their own Graces: And so, in 1 John 4.
17. Herein (says he) is our Love made perfect, That we may have Boldness in
the Day of Judgment; Because as he is, so are we in this World: There is no
Fear in Love, but perfect Love casts out Fear; He that fears, is not made
perfect in Love. Here the Apostle speaks of a Tormenting, a Disturbing, and
Perplexing Fear: The Power of Love to Christ drives it out; Because as he was,
so are we in this World; That is, The more Christ is pleased to Sanctify his
People, (taking it still for a Sanctification in himself) as he is made to us
Wisdom in our Calling, Righteousness in our Justification, Holiness in our
Sanctification, and Eternal Glory, styled Redemption, all in him, and from him.

I shall therefore wind up This, in these two Brief Applications.

The First is, You see here, as Solomon speaks in another Case, When all is
spoken, that can be spoken, We know (says he) it is but Man; It is nothing but
Man; That is, speaking of the Weakness of Man; All that can be said (says he)
you have nothing but Weak, Frail Man: And, on the other side, (speaking of
Christ) There Is nothing to be said, but this; He is All, All in All, we are
nothing: Here Is the Sum of the Matter; We are Nothing; all that is in us is
Nothing; All that God, or his Spirit has wrought in us, it is nothing, (if you
could take it out of Christ) it will be a Lamp put out in obscure Darkness.

Carry this constantly upon your Thoughts; He that has the Son, has Life; And
he that has not the Son of God, has not Life. We rest upon nothing, when we
rest upon our selves: Let us take him in, who is the Great Melchisedeck, that
King of Righteousness, that King of Peace; Let us never go without him, let us
never say, Here Is such and such a Grace, and such and such a good Action, but
let it lead us to the Spring and to the Fountain; If we can but Chatter, as
Hezekiah, the Name of Christ; It is the Blessed Name that is poured forth; It
is the Savor of the Knowledge of Christ, that makes acceptable to God.

If we can but only lie down at the Foot of God and Christ, and earnestly beg
for his Sake, according to the Great Expressions of Scripture in Prayer; If we
want Quickening, if we want Comfort, if we want Humiliation, if we want the
Sense of Sin, Sorrow for it; I have no Intention in these Discourses, that you
should throw these Things away, or think lightly of them; But that you should
have them all from the Fountain, and in the Fountain, by a continual Union with
him, and Communication from him.

Therefore, if any of us want any of these, the more we should cry to him; If
such a Sin grow too hard, and such a Lust and Corruption will take hold upon us
and Domineer in our Souls, whether should we go, but to the Great Redeemer? And
when we come to have a continual Converse with him, and to have all our Graces
from him, and in him, consisting wholly in him, this will bring us to such a
Love, such an Acquaintance with him, that it will cast out fear; As those that
we continually Converse with, our Love arises far above our Fear, and so, when
we Converse thus with Jesus Christ: I beseech you, that you would take the Name
of Christ; And if you cannot get your Hearts so affected as you desire, yet let
not that Name go, but press it upon your Hearts, in Prayer to God through
Christ; I am surely persuaded, the Flinty Rock will be turned into a
Standing-Water: If you say, How? There Is no need to give a Man Satisfaction, if
a Man slights it, and has no care about this; But if our Souls are indeed and
in earnest Affected, as Bartimeus, cry more earnestly; And if any thing bids
you hold your Peace, yet you will find that it will be said to you, He calls
thee; And so stand up, and lay the Weight and Burden of all upon him, as I said
before; From the Offspring to the Issue, from Flagons of great Quantity, even
to little Cups, the least Thing in Religion, let all be hung upon this Nail in
the sure Place: And then,

The Second Thing; Because I desire still to make mention to you, of the Great
and Gladsome Expectation of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, to come into its
Succession; Let us all earnestly beg, That it may be so; And then I am sure,
these Things will be cleared, there will be no clashing then: For the Name of
Christ will swallow up every thing; The Glory of the Doctrine of Christ, when a
Few years are but over, I make no Question, the Name of Christ will sound so
loud, that all Things will be drawn up to him, and be united into that Blessed,
and Excellent Name of Christ.

And therefore, we will say (with which, I Will conclude this Discourse) Thy Name
is as Ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love Thee, etc.

SERMON IX. On Matthew 25. Beginning at the First Verse, but more particularly
at the Tenth Verse. 10. And while they (that is the Foolish Virgins) went to
Buy, the Bridegroom came; And they that were Ready, went in with him to the
Marriage, and the Door was shut.

11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

12. But he answered and said; Verily, I say unto you, I know you not.


I Have past through this Parable; And there remain only Two Points, that I
proposed further to Discuss.

And that is,

First, Concerning the Peremptory and Positive Answer, that our Lord gives the
Foolish Virgins; They cry, Lord, Lord, open to us; The Door was shut, while
they went to Buy, of which, I have spoken to you before; And when they came,
and knocked, to have the Door opened, the Positive and Peremptory Answer, that
they received, was this; Verily, I say unto you, I know you not. And then,

The Last Point is the Application of all; Watch therefore, for ye know neither
the Day, nor the Hour, when the Son of Man comes.

I intend, by the Assistance of God, to speak to you of the First of these two
Latter Propositions at this time; That is, Concerning the Positive Answer, I
know you not.

Both the Shortness, and the Irrevocableness, and Irreversableness of it is
dreadful; It is in vain any further to make Application; For, I know you not.
And then,

The Phrase, or the Term in which it is conveyed; It is not in any thing but
this; I know you not.

So then, the Proposition, or Doctrine, that I shall lay down to you, is this:

That it must be sadly acknowledged (and every one is to take it to himself,)
That a Virgin, if a Foolish Virgin, shall not be admitted, nor suffered to
enter into the Glory of that Marriage Feast, that Marriage-Supper of the Lamb.

For that is the Meaning of the Door being shut, where a Great Festival-Room is,
and where those that are Ushered in as Guests, are Received, and Entertained;
The Door is shut; And they that have not a Right to Enter, are for ever
Debarred; They cannot Enter; The Door is shut, and no Entreaty will prevail;
Christ Answers them plainly, That he knows them not.

Now therefore, I would propose these several Things, to Discourse to you at
this Time.

First, I would take notice of our Lord's Language, I know you not: And then,

In the Second Place, I would open to you, who these are (by way of Earnest
pressing the Consideration upon you) who these are, to whom Christ says, I
know you not; Which may very well Startle and Amaze.

In the Third Place, I would Discourse to you, the Reasons, Why Foolish Virgins
(though Virgins) cannot have the Door opened to them: And then,

In the Fourth Place, I Will Answer the Scruples, and Objections, that may arise
in your Thoughts, against the Great Doctrine of the Gospel, upon this Account:
And then,

In the Last Place, I would conclude with the Application of it.

First, Concerning the Phrase that is here used by Christ; And, it is very
Remarkable; That whenever Persons that seem to have a Claim, and a Challenge,
and a Right to Christ, upon the Account of Profession, and upon the best
Profession, as I shall show you; Whenever they make Approach to Christ, as if
he were mistaken, he does not consider who they are that knock at the Door, and
desire him to open, yet still, he Represents himself, and Remonstrates to them,
in this very Phrase, I know you not; And so I shall enter into a Brief
Consideration of the Meaning and Importance of it.

First, That it is the Ordinary, or Stated Phrase and Manner of Speaking, that
Christ uses: Matt. 7. in that Great Sermon of Christ upon the Mount, beginning
at the 21st. Verse; Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall Enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; But he that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven: Many will say to me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in
thy Name? And in thy Name have cast out Devils, And in thy Name done many
Wonderful Works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; Depart
from me, ye that work Iniquity: Here Is the Language Christ uses.

You pretend (says he) to know me, to be of my Acquaintance, to have a
Familiarity with me, and to have many Pledges of my Presence with you, and of
being known to you; But, I know you not; I never knew you.

It is a very Dreadful, and Severe Expression, to those that would claim upon
Christ by former Acquaintance; All of you know, it is the Manner among Men,
when any one, that we would have nothing to do with; And (as we speak in our
Ordinary Language) that we would shake off, when they would desire to lay a
fair Challenge, or a Claim to our Acquaintance, or Friendship; We tell them, We
don't know them: A Person comes, and would fain Interest himself in us; You
know, it is an ordinary thing to say, I don't know you, or I have had very
little knowledge of you.

So, to those that say, Lord, Will thou Deny us? Have we not Heard? Have we
not Preached? Have we not Eat and Drunk in thy Presence? Have we not Cast out
Devils in thy Name? What! Will thou shake us off? Will thou deny that ever thou
knew'st us? Here Is the force of the Expression: So, Luke 13. 25. When once the
Master of the House is risen up, and has shut to the Door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock, at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; And
he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not, whence you are: What! Would
you that are Strangers, and that I never had any particular Intimacy with,
would you have the Door opened for you?

Then shall ye begin to say, (Ver. 26.) We have Eaten and Drunk in thy
Presence, and thou have taught in our Streets; But he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not, whence you are; Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity; There
shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth; when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your Selves
thrust out: So you see, it is the Language of Scripture, the very Language of
Scripture, I know you not.

That we may therefore understand the Sense and the Meaning of it; I shall open
it in Three Particulars, very briefly:

The First is this; There is a Knowledge of God from Eternity; A Knowledge of
Eternal Grace, of Eternal Love; A Foreknowledge, as the Scripture speaks, whom
God has foreknown, Romans 8. A full, and an Excellent Place, to this very
Purpose; Whom he did foreknow, (ver. 29.) he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, etc. So there is a Knowledge of God from
Eternity, of every Person.

I know, this is a very hard thing to Flesh and Blood to believe; That God
should Foreknow some, and not Foreknow others; And especially, except they
can hang it upon the Condition, That God should foresee, who should Believe,
and who should Repent: But as I have formerly endeavored to clear to you, That
there is nothing hard, when it comes to be considered; And that there are more
Saints, upon the Account of this Foreknowledge of God, than if he had never
Fore-known at all: For, there might not have been one Saint, according to
Adam's Behavior in Paradise, who had far greater Advantages, and yet you know,
he was lost himself, and all his Posterity in him, if a Mediator had not come,
and interposed.

Let a Man therefore be set in the best or worst circumstances you can suppose;
And, I am sure, there is more particular Hopes from God's Foreknowledge and
Purpose, than if there had been no Purpose, or no Foreknowledge of God, 2 Timothy
1. 9. So, Chap. 2, 19. The Foundation of God stands sure: Why does it stand
sure? Because (says he) it has this very Seal, The Lord knows them that are
his: So says Christ, I know my Sheep. And if we should say, Ay, he knew them,
because they were already come into him: Says he, I have other Sheep, that I
have not yet brought in, and that I must bring in, and them I know too: So that
there is a Knowledge before the Foundation of the World, or coming in.

And, undoubtedly, though, as you shall see, I shall endeavor to make the
Thing as plain, and as free to your Thoughts, as I can, in the Progress of this
Discourse; Yet I desire to give Glory to the Foreknowledge of God, and tell
you, That it is not your Disadvantage, but its your great Advantage. I durst
boldly take any Person in this Assembly, at this Time, and say to him, That
there is a great deal more Hopes, that God has foreknown you, than that by your
own Strength, you should prevail, for your own Eternal Happiness. There Is a
Notable Expression in 1 Cor. 8. The Apostle begins thus; Says he, We all have
Knowledge; Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth: And if any Man think
(says he) that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to
know: But if any Man love God, the same is known of him. If any Man comes truly
to understand God, then he is known of God first; and if any Man Love God, the
same is known and Loved of him first.

I do not deny, but these Expressions may be taken in the Second and Practical
Sense, I shall next give you; But I look upon it, That the Apostle first goes
up to the Fountain of Knowledge, to that Spring of All-saving Knowledge, God's
Knowing Men, in his Eternal Love, in and through Jesus Christ.

The Second Knowing of Men therefore is that, which Men will more easily assent
to, and take down; And that is, When we are in the Ways of Love, and Service,
and Obedience to God, then he knows with Approbation, he knows with Delight;
God knows every one of us now, we are all well known to him, and all our Ways,
and our Thoughts and Actions are all known to him; He knows us a great deal
better than we know our selves: As he speaks, Amos 4. last, He declares unto
Man what is his Thought: As if he should say, Would you have me Ignorant of
your Thoughts, and that you must tell them me, or else I cannot know them? No,
He declares unto Man what is his Thought: He unriddles all our Thoughts, and
Purposes, and Intentions in us; And so he knows us, every one very well: As it
is said, John 2. 25. He needed not that any should testify of Man; For he knew
what was in Man; He knows our Thoughts afar off.

But now, this is a Knowing (as Scripture speaks) afar off, in another Sense:
He knows our Thoughts, long before we conceive them; He tells to Man his
Thoughts, that hereafter will arise up, and how they will rise up: As it is
said in the Prophet Ezekiel, concerning Gog and Magog; Thoughts shall come up
in thee. I tell thee, long before thou came into Being; God knows our
Thoughts, at the uttermost Distance: But he knows with Approbation, all those
that are his; And, therefore that may be the Sense of the Form and Expression,
of being known of God: If any Man Love God, he is known of him: If any Man be
in the Way of Holiness, and Righteousness, God knows him; He knows him with
great Approbation; For so Knowledge, in Scripture does several times speak,
Psalm. 1. 6. For the Lord knows the Way of the Righteous; But the Way of the
Ungodly shall Perish.

The Lord knows; That is, He takes delight to Contemplate, as Men desire to
know a Thing, they like, and Love, they search into it, by Study, Meditation,
and Contemplation; The Lord knows the Way of the Righteous; He knows it so,
as to delight in it: Thou most upright, do weigh the Path of the Just; As it
is said, Isa. 26.

A Third Way of Knowing is, The acknowledging of Persons, at the Day of the
Marriage Feast; He knows them, that is, he will confess them: As Christ says,
Whosoever denies me before Men, him will I deny; I will not know him: And I
will confess his Name: If any Man takes care to watch, and to keep his
Garments, and not to defile them, says Christ, I will know that Person; I will
Confess him, I will not Disown him; I will not say, I do not know him, but I
will acknowledge him at that time, Rev. 3. 5. He that overcomes, the same
shall be clothed in White Raiment; And, I will not blot out his Name out of the
Book of Life, but I will confess his Name before my Father, and before his
Angels.

And therefore here we may find, why Christ uses this Expression, I know you
not; Because the Persons that were lost, they were not known to God, in his
Eternal Love, and Grace, from Everlasting; And They were never approved by
Christ, even in their very professing him.

And Lastly, Christ is ashamed to own such Acquaintance, when they say to him,
Lord, Have we not been often with Thee, in thy House, in thy Ordinances, in
Prayer, and Preaching, and Hearing, and in the Lord's Supper, and in all the
Duties of thy Worship? Lord, Do thou not know us? Can thou not Remember
we were at such and such a Time Hearing, and Receiving the Lord's Supper, and
Praying unto Thee? Can thou not Remember this? And Christ is ashamed, that
ever it was so, That we not having departed from Iniquity, that we could ever
make a Pretense to him; That we could ever say, That he had any thing to do
with us, or we with him: And so I have dispatched the First Particular, to open
to you the Sense of these Words, I know you not.

I come to the Second, And that is, of the Persons, of whom it is said, I never
knew you, I know you not; They are Virgins, tho foolish, And certainly, it
speaks the highest Reach that any one can make without True Grace, that is
spoken of here: This must be said, and acknowledged, though I confess, it is
one of the Dreadfullest Things that I know in Scripture, and the most
Discouraging, as it may seem, in the Ways of Religion; That Christ should say
of Persons that have been Virgins, That he does not know that there has been
such a particular Acquaintance, and (as it were) Endearment between Christ and
them; They owned themselves to him, and to be his; And yet for all that, he
should say, I know you not.

They are the highest Attainers in Christianity, and in the Profession of God,
in Natural, or in Revealed Religion, and yet Christ says, I know you not: I Will
give you a little clearing of this to you, a Luster of this Truth upon your
Minds, in very great briefness.

First therefore, I would consider Persons that are Profane and Wicked, and
that live loosly, under the whole Heavens, Let their Religion be what it will,
They that are Cruel and Unjust, and Unmerciful; They that are Intemperate and
Sensual, and Debauched; They that are Profane, and Contemners of God, according
to the Light, that they have, let it be what it will, it is no wonder, that
Christ should say to them, I know you not, I never knew any of you; You by your
Profession of the Name, (called Mahometanism, or by the Name of this or that
Paganism) What have I to do with you? As God says to his People, You have I
known above all the Families of the Earth, etc. As if God should say, I do not
know the Heathen, or Pagan, or obstinate Jew; Because he never came into the
Profession of my Name: But now, one would think the Name of Christian should
Envelop, should gather all within Salvation and Happiness, that they that Name
the Name of Jesus Christ, as a Savior and Redeemer, and Call upon it, should
be Saved.

But yet even among Christians there are such kind of Persons as are
Blasphemers, Common Swearers, Common Drunkards, Common Impure Persons,
Covetous, Extortioners, Unmerciful, Unjust, Idolaters; And of these it is no
wonder Christ should say to such, I know you not: Even Natural Conscience will
Justify Christ in that, in saying, I know you not.

But it seems hard, when Persons professing the Name of Christ, Sober, that had
lived better than others. when they have not an Acknowledgment and owning from
Jesus Christ: And therefore it is worthy our Consideration, that we read of,
Matthew. 19. of the young Man that had done every thing; when the Commandments
were reckoned up and repeated to him, says he, All these have I kept from my
youth. He was so sober a man, so just a liver, what lack I yet? says he: Here
was a plain, good Liver, a man of a good Life: You know it is very much spoken
of, a Good Life, a Good Life. And, it is true, it ought to be required, and
every one ought to mind this of himself; nothing can be spoken in derogation or
diminution to it, in it self; And yet, this young man, that had kept all this,
and was so good, that Christ looked upon him, and loved him; He saw a great
amiableness and loveliness in his Person and Deportment; And yet for all this,
Christ intimates very severely; he animadverts, and makes very harsh notes upon
this Person; when Christ proposes to sell all, he went away sorrowful. And
Christ makes this sharp Remark upon him; With great difficulty such men shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Verily, I say unto you, it is hardly
possible, that a rich man should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Nay, though
he be such a good Liver. If a man that is looked upon as a Religious Man, and
that makes a great Figure in the World, and that God has blessed; Now this Man
living so sober, in regard of all the Commandments in outward acts ( all these
commandments have I kept from my youth up.) One would think, it were not
possible, that such a Man should not go to Heaven: And yet, says Christ,
Verily, I say unto you, with relation to this lovely young man, it is a hard
thing for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Certainly he did not
come up to that, was properly the Virgin-state in the acknowledgment of Christ,
however he was of unspotted, unblameable external conversation; he had too, an
acknowledgment of Christ as a very Excelling man and a Great Master of Divine
Knowledge; but He had not a Sense of his Divine Glory, nor the very power of
Christianity so as to Grasp the Inside of it, to Lay Hold upon the very Spirit
and Life of it, as in Christ, and so to divest Himself of every thing for
Chrst, if Called to it; Nay he was unwilling to Own, and Follow Christ, in the
very Outward Profession and herein he came short of the Foolish Virgins, who
yet Fall short of Heaven; and therefore Christ preaches upon him this General
Doctrine; How Hard is it for a Rich man to Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven!

In the Third place, I might Name to you the men of Tradition, the men of
Superstition; that look upon it as their Glory, and Security for Heaven, to add
many things to the Commands of God, and of Christ, as if they either exceeded,
or made more perfect, or more beautiful, decent and honorable, the Religion of
Divine Institution, by their own super-added observations; but this needs not
to be much insisted upon; because Christ has declared from the Word of God in
the Old Testament by the Prophet Esaias, This People draw nigh to me with their
Lips, but their hearts are far from me; But in vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the commandmens of men, Matthew. 15, etc. But now, these
Virgins, as they hold the Truth, so the purity of the Worship of the Gospel;
and were also of an unblameable outward Conversation, as was before opened
concerning the Virgin State: From all this, we may plainly perceive, it is a
very nice Case, to distinguish either in Doctrine or in Practice, between
Virginity enlivened, with Wisdom; and Virginity, that has the dead Fly of
Folly in it.

I come therefore to the Third Head of Discourse, to give you the Reasons of
this, even Tremendous Dispensation of God; That there should be Virgins, and
yet Foolish Virgins: For to speak the very bottom and foundation of the matter:
This Resemblance of our Lords, of the Case of Souls or Spirits not accepted by
Christ, compared with the Apostles Expression, of presenting them as chaste
Virgins to Christ; and yet that some Virgins presented to him, he charges,
according to those expressions in Job, with folly; It seems to carry an
Allusion in a spiritual sense, to that Case, Deuteronomy. 24. 1, etc. Those that are
espoused as Virgins to Christ, and yet they are not clean in his sight, they
are for ever, eternally separated from him, even divorced from him; He sends
them a Renunciation, a Bill of Divorcement from himself; This is dreadfully
stupendous.

These Two Accounts I would give hereof according to Scripture, why there is
such a severity of the Gospel toward those, who are Virgins, and are found
foolish Virgins.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ would hereby Remonstrate to us the great Corruption
and Depravation of Human Nature; we do not enough apprehend, what a Nature, and
what Hearts thereupon we carry about us; Hearts deceitful above all things; and
desperately wicked, who can know them! It is strange, so excellent, so pure a
thing as a Virgin State should be defiled, and made wholly unacceptable to
Christ by Folly; our Lord therefore, hereby calls upon us, to be aware what
Natures and Hearts we bear about with us; since that very time, that God made
Man Upright in Knowledge, Wisdom, Righteousness and true Holiness, and he
defiled his Nature with the folly of many inventions; The Nature of Man Taints,
and defiles every thing, even Virginity it self; though not by a false
Religion; a false Worship, or grossly polluted Conversation, yet by the folly of
insincerity, and want of the Treasure of Grace standing in Union to Christ:
This should carry us to fear our own Hearts, Blessed is the Man that fears
always, but he that trusts in his own heart is a Fool; he deceives himself,
as the Apostle James says; Many ways seem right enough in our own Eyes, but
the issue and end thereof is death. Let us therefore, as the Apostle Peter
warns, Pass the time of our sojourning here in fear; and as the Apostle Paul
says, be jealous over our selves, least while we think, we present our selves
as chaste Virgins to Christ, that we are Espoused to him, there should be any
corruption from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus. Christ is one most
single, simple Jesus, without Multiplicity; as in Doctrine and Worship, so in
our Union to him, whoever misses him in that uncompounded Faith, and undivided
Affection, defiles the Virgin-State, and looses the Glory and Purity of it: You
may be Virgins as to the Chastity of Profession, and outward Conversation; and
yet you may loose the Wisdom of Virginity; if there be not a singleness of Eye
and Heart to Christ, which cannot be but in Union to himself; from thence
arises the simplicity that is in Christ, and our conformity to it.

A Second Reason, why so severe and dreadful a Dispensation is offered to you
in this Parable, that I shall now give you is, That we might learn Three great
Lessons from it; it is not to discourage, or beat you off from your Profession,
but that you may bow down your Ears and Hearts to these three things.

1. That you may depend upon the Free Grace of Electing Love; every one ought
to humble himself, and to lie in the Dust before God in the sense of this, It
is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows
Mercy: And who art thou, Oh Man! that reply against God: All this speaks the
necessity of lying low before God, in the sense of this supreme Grace. And what
can tend more thus to humble us, that to consider, Virgins may be Virgins, and
yet Foolish Virgins! This should make us look to a Love and Grace above and
beyond any thing in our selves, or that is wrought in our selves; we should
keep our Eye on this: The Apostle after the Description of the Antichristian
Apostasy, retires to Election; God has chosen us to Salvation: This is not to
draw off our minds from any of those Graces, that are the fruits of Election,
but to carry up our Minds above them, to the Fountain of them: And there is no
greater assurance of the Truth of Grace, than to look up to Electing Grace;
Knowing Brethren, your Election of God, and giving diligence in every Grace, to
make our Calling and Election sure: The Apostle has given us a great
Admonition for Adoring Supreme Grace, Romans 11. 32, etc. God has concluded them
all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: (That is, upon all that he
will have mercy upon: He has shut them up in such a way, that they could not
stir, if his Grace did not open the way.) O the depth of the Riches, both of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! For who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has
been his Counselor? Who could direct God what he should do in the eternal
concernments of Souls? Or, Who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed unto him again? Can any say to God, Thou have done unjustly or
unrighteously, that thou have not chosen me? Why, what have thou done, or any
Creature done to oblige him? If he has, I dare assure him, it shall be
recompensed to him to the uttermost. But I assure him, he that replies thus, he
is a Bold Man: and Proud and Haughty, is his Name. And, as Christ says, Thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
Babes. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to whom be Glory
for ever. And therefore I desire to be among the number of those, that do not
quarrel with God; That dare not enter a contest, and a contention with him,
concerning his Eternal Choice; Let us humble our selves, every one at his foot,
and say, Of thee, and through thee, and to thee are all things, and I desire to
be to thy Glory. Thus let us make our selves nothing before God, nothing at
all, but make him all. We never did any thing for him, we could never lay an
Obligation, and therefore, we have nothing to say, but Free Grace, Free Grace;
Free Love, and Free foreknowledge of God.

2. In the Second Place, This Parable in this dreadful part teaches, That we
should all be beholding to Christ, and to the Free Grace that is in him, the
Pardon of Sin, the Righteousness of Christ, his Blood, and his Redemption:
Here Is our all, I say, here is our all. For, as I opened to you, the Great
Point is, Whether in Christ or not? Whether Christ be in us, and whether we are
in him? Whether we are found in him, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 7, etc.
Here Is the Point, That every one may depend upon the Righteousness of God in
Christ. It is not the works that we have done; but according to his own mercy
he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit.
And here the wise Virgins reached out themselves to be found in Christ, and
only in him; but the Foolish Virgins fell short here.

3. Thirdly, We can do nothing but by the Spirit of Christ. Our only hope is in
the Spirit of the Lord our God; And therefore the foolish Virgins were
mistaken, That they did all in their own strength and power: They trusted in
their own Beauty; they trusted in their own Virginity, and did not mind the
Righteousness of Christ, the Free Grace of God, and the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

I come to the Fourth thing I proposed, and that is, To answer the Objections
that may be made against this state of this Case I have given you; And, I
desire to speak plainly, yet in very short to you, in this matter: You may say
then, What can any one do? What hope can there be? Though I am in the True
Religion, and in the True Worship of God; and though I am in an unblameable
Conversation, and yet I may be lost and undone, because I have not Wisdom,
because I have not something that I am not able to apprehend, or to be sensible
of.

Now therefore, I Will satisfy you in this; because you may think, In all
Religion, there lies a discouragement upon us, If things be thus; Therefore
I Will Answer you in Two things, very briefly.

First, Let no man mistake, for I am sure, Let any thing be preached that can
be preached, yet there shall not so much as be one Moral Person fewer in the
World: I am sure, that the measure of Restraining Grace, of Preventing Grace,
of Morallizing Grace, that God will give to the World, nothing of Discourse, or
Opinion shall be able to straiten it, or to lessen it. I say, I am sure of
this; There shall not be one Honest Man in the World less, because Christ
preached to that young Man that had kept all the Commandments from his youth;
Thou art yet under a great difficulty, as to the Kingdom of Heaven. A man might
have taken the Advantage of that discourse of Christ with this young man, and
have made a Clamor, and noise of it, and said, here is one that despises, and
discourages a good young man: for he says, How hardly shall such a young man,
that has kept all the Commands from his youth, enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven? but Christ knew very well, that he should not hinder, or lessen, or
straiten Moral Honesty, or Goodness in the World by what he said; for he knew
all these things are in God, and from God; and there shall not one hair from
the head of Morality (as I may so speak) Fall to the Ground, because of any
thing that can be said; for, There is a Common Grace of Morality and Honesty
given out from God, and Christ, and whomsoever he thinks fit to Receive it,
They shall receive it, and must receive it, and they shall be under the power
of it, and live suitably to it: And so for the Grace of God, There shall no one
be hindered of his Graee; Let men have as many Conceptions, as they can have of
things, and however Discouraging; if his Truth be duly spoken and in the
season; Therefore don't think, that the preaching of the Truth of Scripture can
do any hurt: for, God is always present, breathing in the Word, both with a
Spirit of Morality, and common Gifts of Righteousness, and also with a Spirit
of Grace; and none shall be ever able to straighten his Spirit, in any of the
Effects of it: And the Truths of God spoken according to his Word shall be
subordinated to it.

In the Second Place; I do always acknowledge and Declare, with Greatest
Freedom, and Sincerity, That this is the only way of Preaching the Gospel; To
preach it so, that Every one should be Sensible of True Holiness and True
Grace; And yet withal, They must be Sensible of Free Grace, the free Grace of
God, the free Choice of God: Free Grace in the Righteousness of Christ, of the
Spirit Blowing where it lists, and where it pleases, as our Lord tells us.
These things are not to be Divided nor Justled out one by another; for they
both stand fair in the Wisdom of God; and they are both to be offered to the
Minds and Consciences of men; and they shall both work Effectually for the
great ends and purposes, that God has appointed: And, as (as Christ says) If
any one be offended, let them be offended; Why? Because, every Plant which my
Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. That is, there shall be
no Plant lost, but what God leaves to it self, in his just and righteous
Judgment; That is, A Moral Man, and an Honest Man, and a Sober Man, so by the
Grace of God, he shall be so still; God has chosen and marked him out, to be
such a one. And he that is truly good, he shall be so. And yet, all this shall
be conveyed in the power of Preaching, and in such kind of Threatenings and
Promises, such kind of Expostulations, as Scriptures speak; and therefore, I
would not have you think, that these things should be put to a Jarre by any
Men's Preaching; for every one is under the righteous Government of God: Now
therefore, let Truths run ever, according to the Word of God, let them run
freely, as a stream from Free Grace; Let them then, be with all the Freeness
and Publickness spoken of, that can be.

And, as it is said in Exodus 14. There was a Pillar of Cloud, and a Pillar of
Fire, in one; And the Pillar of Cloud was turned, that is, the dark side was
turned upon the Egyptians, and the light side upon the Israelites; So I say,
when the Word of God is preached, the Light side shall be upon the person that
God will have a sober, honest, righteous, good man; and the dark side shall be
upon the dissolute, and upon the profane, and upon the intemperate; And so the
dark side shall be upon them, that God leaves to themselves, and the Light side
shall be upon those, that God will bring under his Grace, and under his Spirit,
and under the Power of Holiness.

And so I have Discoursed the Doctrinal part of this great Point to you; and I
hope, so, That none of you should have any just cause of being offended, at
what I have spoken; but that it should engage every one of us to run up to
Grace, and to Christ; for the hopes are greater that I have laid down to you
out of the Scriptures, wherein our Springs lie then when they call upon us for
our own Action and Duty; And when they do so, they show us the great necessity
of Christ, of the Spirit of Christ, of Free Grace. For, don't we see, Men are
Preaching up Free Will and Works as much as they can? And yet for all that, was
there ever so much profaneness and wickedness, was there ever any less Power
and Life of the Gospel, since the Reformation than now there is? And therefore,
though the Pulpits be full of this, yet we don't see the powerful Grace of God
go along so, that we have reason to rejoice at such Preaching; but those that
Preach the Righteousness of Christ without Works, and set forth the fullness of
Free Grace, and of the Supreme Dominion of God, and yet in a way of Holiness, I
can remember and trace back, That there were great effects of this; Men's Lives
were mightily Changed and Reformed; They were mightily changed, notwithstanding
that this Preaching was endeavored to be stifled and stopped; There were many
effects, both in City and Country, in bringing Men to God and to Christ, by
that Preaching, and so there are still; and therefore to close all in the
Application.

1. In the First Place; I would earnestly beseech you, That you would prize
this Grace: And Oh! that God would be pleased to turn the Bright-side of what I
have now spoken on, and that you would go into your secret Closets and
Meditations, and lay your selves low before God, and acknowledge the freeness
of God's Grace; One have I chosen, and another have I left: Be not afraid of
this, I say, it shall do you no hurt at all; God may make it a time of Love;
And the more you depend upon Grace, upon the Righteousness of Christ, the more
holiness; and the more you shall find the Power and Breathing of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ upon you. And therefore, Remember the Three things whereupon we
stand, viz.

The Free Grace of God, before the Foundation of the World.

The Righteousness of Jesus Christ, our whole Trust, as to our acceptance wit^
God.

The Spirit of Grace in building up in the ways of Holiness: And

2. In the Second Place, Let not (from all that I have spoken) any think That
any thing will be accepted, without sincerity of Grace. For, wherever there
has been the Love of God, or the Righteousness of Christ, that has taken hold
of any ones State and Condition; and where the Spirit of God has taken hold
upon any ones heart, there shall be sure to be the mighty Effect of Grace, and
Holiness and Spirituality; and, that in a Man's own action, he shall not lie
still, and say, I Will see what God will work upon me, but he shall be up and be
up and be doing, because the Lord is with him: He shall be active and full of
motion, striving, and full of industry; because the Light-Side of the Scripture
is upon him, and he is kept from every thing that offends; His foot shall not
be taken (as Scripture says) while he holds himself close, in dependence upon
Free Grace, upon the free Choice and Election of Grace: I am sure, you shall
not be ashamed, if God move your hearts, and if the Light-Side of Scripture be
upon you in these things; you shall find God will be your Confidence, and your
sure and strong hold; his Name in these things shall be your strong Tower, to
which ye shall run and be safe.

In the Third Place, I desire you would give me but one Moments time, to move
you to beg for the Coming of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and for the Time, it
shall first be preparing for its Glory; and which I have declared to be so
near, upon so great Ground of Scripture.

Now, I would give you Ground of earnestly begging for this Kingdom of Christ,
and the succession of it; And why? Because there shall be great Converting
Grace, bringing in Strangers to God and to Christ; There shall be a greater
Power in bringing men to the Purity and Simplicity that is in Christ: Then many
foolish Virgins yet, shall be made wise; many not Virgins yet, shall be
Espoused to Christ: And, if you say, Why was not this always? The Answer that I
shall give you is this:

It is in the power of God to dispense Grace as he pleases: You may as well
say, Why had not our Forefathers the Gospel, as pure as we have? Why had they
not the Scripture so clear? And why had they it not in their own Language, Two
or Three, or Four or Five Hundred Years ago? It was a dangerous thing within
these Two Hundred Years, to have the Bible in English, or the New Testament in
their Houses: Then it was a certain sign, That that Man was in danger of his
Life, to have it so. Why did not God give it with that freedom, as we have it?
And then, if you look back to Sixteen Hundred Years ago, there was nothing in
the World at large, but Idols, and serving of Devils: And the Gospel was not
Preached: Till after the Apostles Times, it did not come into these Islands of
Britain. It is not for us to know how to Rule and to Govern Times and Seasons;
But God has disposed of every thing; Blessed are your Eyes, for you see, and
your Ears, for they hear. But I would but only give you one or two Scriptures,
of the great advantage, if we should but live to see the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ: And therefore, I beseech you all, That you would earnestly pray, That
that Kingdom may be coming forth. In the 29th of Isaiah, if you observe the
reading at the 15th Verse, you shall find, that there was a Book offered, and
the Learned said, it was sealed; and therefore, say they, How can we read it?
And the unlearned said, we cannot read it, for we are not learned: If learned
Men cannot read it, how should we read it? But says God, in the following part
of the Chapter, This very Book shall be opened, it shall come to pass in that
day (that is, when the Kingdom of Christ shall come) The deaf shall hear the
words of the Book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and
out of darkness; that is, There shall be so mighty a change of things, that
that Book that the learned, and the unlearned could not meddle with, the very
deaf shall hear the Words of this Book: It is a very wonderful Scripture to
this purpose, it shows us plainly the great things, that shall be done by God
at that Day: And I make no doubt, but that these Scriptures, that Men are
afraid that any should meddle with, and they think it Presumption; And how
should we meddle with such hard Scriptures? I make no doubt, but the Eyes of
the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness. And so Isa. 35. 8.
And an high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of
holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those. The
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err in that way; So great a Light of
the Gospel shall shine out. Pray, therefore, don't be so against the Preaching
of the Kingdom of Christ, in your Judgments, or in your Discourses; but rather
bow your Knees, and buckle your hearts, and your thoughts down to the very
lowest at the Throne of Grace, to desire, that this Kingdom may come. Why do
you envy one another the great Happiness that shall be in the Kingdom of
Christ? For, a great Offspring, like the Drops of Dew from the Womb of the
Morning, must at that time be brought home to Christ: And many of those that
are Virgins but in Form must come to have it in the Truth and Reality, and
Sincerity of it. And therefore, let us earnestly pray, according to that
Prayer, styled the Lords Prayer; Let us with earnestness and understanding,
pray, Thy Kingdom, O Lord, let it come, etc.

SERMON X. On Matthew. 25. 13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day, nor
the Hour wherein the Son of Man comes.
I Come now to the Use, or (as we speak) Application, which our Lord makes of
this Great and Excellent Parable, Watch, for you know neither the day nor the
hour, in which the Son of Man comes: And it may be, upon the hearing of the
Words, you may be ready to say, That I am upon a Scripture that overthrows the
Attempts of drawing such a Scripture Line of Time, as I have endeavored to
hold out, and to persuade the Truth of, as should lead to the very Coming of
the Bridegroom, the great Son of Man. But indeed, the intention of it, as I
shall show you, is quite another thing, and does not concern it self in that
matter, either one way or other: The main Point in it is that great practical
one, That every one of us ought to be upon our Guard, upon our Watch, while we
are here in the World, in relation to that great Appearance of our Lord Jesus
Christ: We are to wait all our days according to our opportunity of enjoying
the Gospel, in the compass of Time God gives us, which may, as you know, be
longer, or shorter, as our Lives are in the dispose of God; he may take us away
this very Night, if he pleases; and yet for all this, we must have made such a
provision, and preparation for the Coming of the Bridegroom; which will else be
with a dreadful and ruinous surprise upon us whenever it be: We are
infinitely obliged (give me leave to use so great a Word, in so great a Point)
we are, I say, infinitely obliged therefore, to take heed in so great a matter;
If it was as many Years to the Coming of Christ, as it has been since he spoke
these Words, and though we were sure it would be so: That therefore, which I
will propose to open to you, shall be summed in this main Doctrine:

Doct. Every one that hears the Word of the Gospel, concerning the Coming and
Kingdom of Christ ( take it in your own sense as much as you please) is bound
to watch, as if it might be the very next Day and Hour; yea though he had lived
in the days of Christ, and had then known certainly, that that Coming and
Kingdom, should not have been in so many Ages as have run out since.

For the knowing what Day, or Hour, is not a knowing, or not knowing by
Computation, or Account of Time; but by an effectual providing a Treasure of
Oil, that we may not be found foolish Virgins at that day. Our watchful knowing
is knowing by Union to the great Son of Oil, Christ himself: And if any Man did
know never so certainly, the precise time of the Coming of the Bridegroom, yet
he would not know, in our Lord's sense, at what hour he will come, but would be
in the same surprise, as if he knew nothing at all: That Day most certainly
comes unawares, upon all overcharged with furfeiting and drunkenness, and Cares
of this Life; upon all that sleep, and are not watchful by Faith and Holiness;
It comes at a day when it is not looked for, and at an hour the evil servant is
not aware, who eats and drinks with the drunken; They only know that day, whose
Loins are girded, and whose Lights are burning, who, when their Lord comes,
upon account of the Wedding, open to him immediately; Blessed are those
servants, whom their Lord when he comes, shall find so doing; Verily, says
Christ, he will gird himself, and will make them sit down to Meat, and will
serve them; be ye therefore ready; for the Son of Man comes at an hour ye
think not; that is, if you are not ready; For the very sense of knowing, or not
knowing the time, is being ready or not ready; if not ready, we are not aware.
The knowing of time, or not knowing, is but the cover and outside of this true,
effective knowing, or not so knowing.

I will therefore, first endeavor to open to you the true state of this thing,
and then lay down to you several particular Directions for the right Exercise
of this Watch: And in a Second Head, give you the Arguments of Persuasion to
this Watch, and so close the whole with Application.

1. To show you then in the First Place, the true sense of this great
Proposition, from this our Lord's Application of the Parable: And in the
general, You know the Conclusion of a Discourse is the Practical Application;
and that you know, is regularly drawn out of the main substance of it: This
Application is then drawn out of the substance of the Parable; and that most
evidently, is the having Oil in our Vessels, as has been explained: The
watching is therefore, our looking well to that, having Oil in our Vessels; for
they watched, who were so ready, though the Bridegroom delaying his coming,
they slumbred, and lay down in Death; they did not watch, who so slumbred, and
went out of the World by Death, that they had not a provision ready for the
Bridegrooms Coming; so that the knowing or not knowing the Time, is not at all
touched upon; But more particularly, to attain our Lord's sense in the most
plain and practical instances of a Spiritual Life, according to the Gospel, as
Directions to watching.

1. Look diligently, that we are taken out of the Gall of Bitterness, and from
under the Bond of Iniquity, That we are taken out of the state of Children of
Wrath, by being implanted into Christ, and translated into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, in whom is Redemption in his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his Grace; that we awake from that sleep, and stand
up from the dead, that Christ may give us life: Let us look well, that we are
brought into the State of Grace; for that is the principal and fundamental
Point of Watching, and the Essential Difference between a wise and a foolish
Virgin; to be brought into Christ; and to have his Spirit.

2. Let us be continually carnest, and fervent in Prayer; watch unto Prayer, as
the Apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 4. 7. And as our Lord commands, Watch and
pray, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to stand
before the Son of Man at his Coming, Luke 21. 36. Pray earnestly with
importunate Cries, that you may not be given over, and found in a state of Ruin
and Condemnation at that Great Day. Christ was whole Nights in Prayer; with
strong Cries and Tears, he offered up Supplications unto him that was able to
save him from death, and was heard in that he feared; And how then should we
think to meet him without that exercise; let us therefore be instant in Prayer.

3. Let us be very diligent in meditating on the Word of God, Blessed is the
Man that meditates in his Law day and night; that is watching, to meditate day
and night; and whereas Christ says, I know you not, it is said, The Lord knows
the way of such holy, righteous servants of his, through his Grace in Christ:
And it is an evidence of being in him, Psalm. 1. 6.

4. Let us show our watching, by keeping our selves from our iniquity, and from
all the Temptations to it; Watch and pray, (says our Lord) that ye enter not
into Temptation, Luke 22. 43. Be sober (says the Apostle Peter) and watch unto
Prayer; Gird up the loins of your mind, and hope perfectly, for the glory that
shall be brought to you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. with
c. 4. 7. And be sober, be vigilant, or watchful, for your Adversary the Devil,
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, c. 5, 2. All this
shows the great Watchfulness our Souls should maintain against our own
Iniquity, that we may be upright before him, and not be as foolish Virgins. And
it is the more admonishing, that in like Discourses of our Lords with this
Parable, when he discovers such foolish Virgins, he says, Depart from me, ye
that work iniquity.

5. Our Watchfulness must be exercised in adding Grace to Grace; for otherwise,
as the Apostle says, we shall be blind, and not see so afar off, as to behold
the King in his beauty, and the Land that is very far off, 2 Pet. 1. 9, etc.
with Isa. 33. 17. Thus an abundant and rich Entrance shall be ministered unto
us, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; We shall be ready,
and not go to buy, and find the Door shut.

6. We Watch by continual Meditation upon being dissolved, and being with
Christ, and upon the Glory of his Coming; We need not be written to of the
Times and Seasons, for we our selves shall know, that the Day of God so comes
as a Thief in the night; and as sudden destruction comes on them, that say
Peace, Peace; but they that watch thus, and are sober, are not in darkness, and
in the night; but are of the Day, and not asleep, 1 These. 5. 5. etc.

7. We must Watch against the Sin of the very Age and Day wherein we live; when
we live in a profane Age, take heed of that; when you live in a formal,
hypocritical time, take heed of having a Name to live, and being dead; for
Christ comes on such as a Thief, at unawares. They shall not know, at what time
he will come upon them, Rev. 3. 3. If a Sensual, Luxurious, Worldly Age; Take
heed of being overcharged with those evils, and the Cares of this Life.

8. Let us possess our selves with the most clear and distinct Apprehensions of
the Appearances of the Kingdom of Christ, as the Kingdom of the Resurrection,
and of the Appearances of Saints in Bodies of Light and Glory, Rev. 16. 15.
Behold I come as a Thief, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
Garments, that is, that looks to the presenting his Body now, as a sacrifice,
a living and acceptable sacrifice well pleasing to God in Christ, Romans 12. Thus
we shall appear in Bodies of Glory, and not of Contempt; in the Redemption of
our Bodies, and Men cannot see our shame when Christ comes, and all his Saints
with him.

Head 2. I come therefore to the Second Head, to lay down the Arguments of
Persuasion, that we may be moved to this watch.

Argument 1. The Time of Watch is only the Time of the present Life: Whatever
we would do for the After State, it is to be done in the Present State, in the
Time of the present Life; There is no Counsel nor Device in the Grave whither
we are going; and therefore, whatever Our Hands find to do, for that
After-State, let us do it now; For in dying, Spirits going out of Bodies enter
into their Determinative State; They enter in the State they were in here; They
carry out the Oil, they have, whether only in the Lamp of their Profession, or
in the Vessel, the Heart united to Christ the Fountain; And so they must abide,
so they must appear, when the Bridegroom comes; This is the holy and wise
Decree of God, concerning the Human Spirit, and who dare control it.

From hence then it necessarily follows, That this Watch is to be maintained in
this Present State; and that, it can be only here; and that therefore, it is
only in order to and with relation to the Coming of the Bridegroom, but not
with relation to the Time of his Coming; for then the Doctrine of Watching had
not been proper to Persons living so many Ages before it; but because every
person successively living since the Time our Lord spoke these words, is in the
Time of his Life to exercise this Watch; that is, to see he has the Oil in his
Vessel, and not in his Lamp only, that he may stand before the Son of Man at
his Coming; Therefore it is a Doctrine necessary to every Age, as well those
furthest off, as those nearest to his Coming; because every one has but a
Lifetime to Watch in; and he is much more to be wrought upon by the sense of
the shortness and incertainty of his own Life, than by the nearness of the
Bridegrooms Coming, and the incertainty of the time of that, as we plainly see
by every Days Experience: And this is much the more uncontestable, by observing
the Apostle Paul's earnestness, against the Christians of those Times, thinking
the Day of Christ was then at hand, which he solemnly affirms, could not be,
till an Apostasy of 1260 Days of Years should have come in (and that not
immediately neither) and have run out; Yea, our very Lord himself, when They
thought the Kingdom of God should immediately have appeared, Luke 19. 11, etc.
gives the Parable of a Nobleman going into a far Country, and returning;
importing a distance of Time; all which had been a contradiction to watching,
because we know not the day nor hour; if the meaning had not been a making
provision in the present Life for the Bridegrooms Coming, how many Ages after
soever it should be; and that else, it would come upon us at unawares, and on
the sudden, and find us unready, unprovided for it.

Argument 2. It further appears, That Watching is the making such provision in
this present Time for the Bridegrooms Coming, as will bear up to the Glory of
that Time; because in the same State wherein we lie down, we shall rise at that
day, whenever it be, and openly appear therein in the face of Heaven and Earth.

The Judgment of Spirits, though it be before God and Christ, and Aangels, and
Saints; yet Scripture speaks of it as of a private Judgment; for the Day of the
Appearance of Christ is spoken of, Romans 2. 5. as the Revelation or uncovering
that righteous Judgment of God; which as passed upon Spirits returning to God
that gave them, is as covered and secret; There is greatest reason to be
assured, That when Spirits of Saints come into the hand of Christ, there is joy
in Heaven; for if there be joy at their Conversion in the presence of the
Angels of God, and so of Saints, there is much more so in the coming of Spirits
to Glory; but this Joy, and the Shouts of it are not heard down on Earth; But
at that Appearance of Christ, they are presented with exceeding joy before
Heaven and Earth; And so are All, not in Christ, with contempt and dishonor:
And this is the great Mystery and Wonder of the Economy, the Order of that
Day; That persons rise in the very same State, wherein they lie down; God will
have it so, for the clearness of his Judgment; though persons die in the corner
of a Bed, as the Prophets expression is, yet they shall openly appear in the
same circumstances they died; God will have every ones Judgment, as in all
orderly Governments, to be sub Dio,, openly in the Face of Heaven and Earth;
they shall all appear as in the Fact (...); Thus he will be glorified in his
Saints, and admired in all them that believe, in that day; and justified in the
Condemnation of all, whom he condemns. If God should dispose of some to Hell,
and some to Heaven; and that there were no public account of the matter, we
might think, they were so disposed of by God, as by an Arbitrary Power, and in
secret, and so his Justice called in Question: But when Spirits, that have been
so disposed of in private, both Spirits so publicly, and Bodies are called for
together, and the Judgment affirmed; This is clear and open proceeding; and
therefore a Day of Judgment, and of Resurrection is so often spoken of: All
shall be brought Face to Face; and we shall not only know one another, who have
conversed together, but even of all Ages; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; Cain and
Esau, Saul, Achitophel and Judas; All shall be known, and we shall know what
becomes of every one to Eternity; Death here, and Spirits entering into their
everlasting state is not All; of which we may say, Who knows the Spirit of a
Saint, of a wise Virgin, that goes upward; of a wicked man, of a foolish Virgin
that goes downward: But at that Day shall be known; All the Good Men, we have
read of in Scripture, or in true Accounts of History; And the Evil Men, and
Hypocrites; Each Company, and Person, apart, and apart; God and Christ will
pass upon all openly, and in Public.

And that which I would further urge, every one shall Rise in the very Fact,
the (...), in which they lay down, Belshazzars in their way, Diveses in their
way, the Worldlings in their way; and the Foolish Virgins in their way, Crying,
Lord, Lord, without Truth, and Power, as here; The great Tyrants, Enemies of
the Kingdom of Christ, in their way: To that purpose, they are described, as
having laid their Weapons of War under their Heads, with their Iniquities upon
their Bones, Ezekiel. 32. 17. and so they will come to the Battle of Armageddon; The
Iniquity, and the Bones, the Persons, and Weapons of War will appear together,
in that Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; as even then in
actual War against the Lamb and his Saints. This is the Great, and stupendous
management of the Day of Judgment, of that Day, and Hour, of which in this
Sense especially; and not as relating to Time; no one knows, no Angels, no not
the Son, as Man; The Father only, the Eternal Being alone had Wisdom to find
out, Authority, Dominion, and Power, thus to execute.

It is therefore the great Point of watchfulness, to Live so, and so to Dye, as
we would desire to Rise, and to Appear; we are not therefore on this Account so
sensible, as we ought to be, how great a thing it is to Dye: We know, it is a
common Thing appointed to all, once to Dye, and it is no disgrace to dye the
common Death of Men; because all Dye; and some Sense Men have of a Private
Judgment, at that Time; but to consider; thus we must Rise, and Appear, as we
Dye, Oh how should it oblige us to Watch, to get into Jesus Christ, to be found
in him; justified by his Blood, sanctified by his Spirit, full of Faith,
Repentance, every Grace; to Dye, and Sleep in, and by Jesus, that we may so
Rise, and Appear, Come with him: This is indeed the knowing so, as that, that
Day should not take us at unawares, and unready, as having not Oil in the
Vessel: For if you get it not now, you can never get it afterward. Let none of
us therefore Dye with such vain Hopes.

Arg. 4. All things at the Coming of the Bridegroom shall be carried by such a
Rapid Motion, That no Tongue can express the swiftness of it; That Saints and
wicked men are immediately, Body and Spirit, in that condition, as to Essential
Happiness, or Misery, wherein they shall be for ever; and with all the
circumstances, in which they lived and died; it is incredible upon any account,
but of Divine Power.

There are many Motions so swift, that a Man cannot know them, The greatest
Naturalist cannot give an exact account of: The great speed of a Bullet in the
Air is wonderfully swift; the motion of the Sun, measured either by Hours,
Quarters, Minutes or Seconds; No one can conceive, what way the Sun makes in
the Heavens in each of them, when he comes as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber,
and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a Race; and yet, it is nothing in compare
with this illustrious Bridegroom, of which that is but a dark shadow; I would
mention some Scriptures giving account of this swiftness, Prove. 1. 27. The
Destruction of Wicked Men is compared to a Whirlwind, a Motion so sudden, none
can express: Malach. 3. 5. I will be a swift Witness, A Witness ought to be
considerate, and a Judge patient in hearing; and it is their commendation; But
it is the Glory of God, who is both Witness and Judge, all in one, that he is
both most just, and yet most swift; I Will do all (says God) in a very little
moment of time; again, you know of what a swift Motion, the Lightning is, from
one End of Heaven to the other end of Heaven in a Moment. The Motion of the Sun
is exceeding swift, and yet the Motion of Lightning, even as of Light from the
Sun, is much swifter; now of such a swift Motion shall all the Carriage of the
Day of the Son of Man be; or the Son of Man in his day, shall move as
Lightning, Luke 17. 24. What a little time is an Atom of Time; it is the
smallest, most undividible for littleness, we can conceive; Now, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. In an Atom or Moment of Time, in the Twinkling of an
Eye, the Dead shall be raised incorruptible; and we the living Saints shall be
changed: None can express or think this swiftness.

Now from all this, it follows beyond all denial; That if a man could give all
the World, he cannot change himself on such a sudden; How can a Man change
himself in the Twinkling of an Eye? and that therefore there is no possibility,
that any should make a Change then: If we have run therefore with the Footmen,
and they have wearied us, how shall we run with the Horsemen? and if while we
were in a Land of Peace, we could not draw nigh, what shall we do in the
swelling of Jordan? surely in the Floods of these great Waters, we cannot draw
nigh to God; and therefore, our watch, is to be with relation to the Coming of
the Bridegroom; perfected while we are here, before we are gone out of the
Body; for in our Rising again, all will be so sudden, there will be nothing to
be done.

And this is a plain and downright sense of not knowing at what hour our Lord
comes, and does no ways concern a Scripture Line of Time to his Coming; For
thus understanding, the Day of the Son of Man, the Bridegrooms Coming, will not
be more sudden, on those who shall be alive at it, than on those who lived an
Hundred Years ago, or any time since, or at this very Preaching of Christ, or
indeed never so long before it; for all shall be raised to feel the suddenness
of it, as David says, Psalm. 58. 9. Before your Pots can feel the Thorns, he
shall take them away living, and in his Wrath; All shall be done so suddenly
and in a moment: And on the other side, take any of the Saints of God, at what
time soever they lived, nearer or further off from that Day; that Day or Coming
of the Bridegroom is no more sudden to those that live nearest, than to those
who live furthest off; because they are ready with Oil in their Vessels; if
this were not so, there had been no force of our Lord's commanding those, to
whom he spoke, to Watch: For in his Discourses, he tells them of Judea and
Jerusalems being led Captive of all Nations, till the Time of the Gentiles
should be fulfilled; and that very Captivation was Forty Years about, from the
Preaching of Christ; and before that came, the Apostle Paul assures, That Day
could not come, except the Apostasy came first, as was before said; The sum
therefore is, The truth of Grace standing in Union to Christ by his Spirit, and
Holiness flowing from thence, is the true watching, and such a knowing, as to
be ready, and that Day not to come as a snare, and at unawares; Thus Christ
keeps his from the hour of Temptation that shall come upon all the Word, to try
them that dwell upon the Earsh, Rev. 3. 10.

Application. The General Application of so great a Point, that I shall
conclude the Discourse of it with is, That we would search the Scriptures, as
those noble Bereans did, whether those things are so or not? I would desire no
other Judge but the Scripture, that excellent Book, that I hope, we have all in
so great esteem; now by this it will appear, That I have not spoken these
things of my self, and that I have not spoken the half of the Wisdom of that
blessed Word therein.

And seeing we have so great reason to hope, the Kingdom of Christ is so near,
how earnest should we be for the advantage of the Time; How should we desire to
see one, that is in Scripture way of speaking, the first of the Days of the Son
of Man: Oh! What a change would such a one Day make in the World, If we say,
Why has not God vouchsafed the World so great an Advantage sooner? The Answer
is, Times, in this regard, The Father has set or constituted in his own power;
He distributes them as he pleases, Why did not our Lord Jesus appear sooner in
the World? He came in the End of the World, and in these last days God has
spoken to us by his Son. And says our Lord to his Disciples, Many Prophets and
Righteous Men have desired to see the things you see, and have not seen them,
and to hear the things you hear, and have not heard them. But when that Time
comes, how will the Bridegrooms near approach change the World; Converts will
come in as the Drops of Dew from the Womb of the Morning, which is styled, The
Dew of Christ's youth; Then shall the eyes of the blind see out of obscurity;
the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped, and the Tongue of the stammerers shall speak plainly, Isa. 29. 18.
and 32. 3, 4. The Lame shall leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of the dumb shall
sing; and there shall be a way, it shall be called the way of holiness, the
unclean shall not pass over it: It shall be so plain and easy, that wayfaring
Men though fools, shall not err therein: it shall be so secure, That no Lion,
nor ravenous Beast shall be there, it shall be for those, viz. the servants of
Christ. Oh! how shall all this flowing from the pouring out of the Spirit from
on high, awaken to make provision of Oil in the Vessel, to look to the truth of
union to Christ, and secure against Foolish Virginity, For the Wilderness shall
become a fruitful field. But the more particular Application, I reserve for the
following Discourse, as conclusive of the whole.

SERMON. XI. On Matthew. 25. 13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day, nor
the Hour wherein the Son of Man comes.
I Shall at this Time, by the assistance of God, fully conclude the long
Discourse that I have had upon this Great Parable, by recollecting all that
has been spoken in practical Applications of it; wherein I cannot but remember
what I have so often mentioned, of our Lord's saying, I will open my mouth in
Parables, and utter things that have been kept secret from the foundation of
the World. By Jesus Christ himself, it is applied to himself.

And surely, this is an exceeding great Parable, and it is especially fitted to
every one that draws near to God, and to Christ, in the profession of the
Gospel. For so (as I have told you) it is very evident, That this Name of
Virgins, necessarily implies, the most Excellent State of Profession of
Christianity, that is not truly and thoroughly, and universally sound; for were
it not, that the word Foolish, comes in, and like a dead Fly (as I told you)
makes the whole Box of ointment, to send forth a stinking savor; the very name
of Virginity, every where in Scripture, is on purpose to set forth the reality
of Grace, and of a State in Christ. It is said therefore, The Virgins shall be
brought unto thee in Raiment of Needlework, Psalm. 45. It is a Great State: So I
have espoused you, as a chaste Virgin to Christ. It is said of the 144000 on
Mount Sion with the Lamb; They have not defiled themselves with Women, for they
are Virgins, Rev. 14. 4. So that, if Christ did not diminish and abate this of
Virgins with Folly, it could not but import the perfect and best state of
Christianity. And therefore, the more we look upon our selves as Christians,
and Christians of the right stamp; the more we must look, that we be not
Foolish Virgins; that our Virginity be not turned into folly. As it is said of
Achitophel, God turned the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, the very
Virginity of his Counsel and Wisdom, that was esteemed as an Oracle, and never
disgraced till that time. So when the Virginity of the Soul is turned into
foolishness; It is a very great Judgment, and the very expression of it, ought
to awaken and rouse all our Spirits; Not to discourage the thoughts of the
sincere servants of Christ, and to make them sorrowful, whom God would have to
be made glad, and to rejoice; But that there may be a holy Jealousy in every
one over our selves, and that we may not take Counterfeit for Gold indeed, and
for Pearl indeed. I have therefore closed with this Application our Savior
has made of his whole Discourse: Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day,
nor the hour wherein the Son of Man comes. That is, as if Christ should say,
as I told you there will be nothing done at that time; you can make no
advantage, you cannot command that day and that hour; there is nothing at all to
be done; All shall be in so speedy a Motion, that there will be nothing to be
done, by way of Amendment, or Reparation of the Errors, that we have committed.
Now therefore, as I proposed to you the last day several great particulars; so
I shall pursue them at this time in a way of fuller and more close Application.

First, Take notice of that which is especially meant by watching: It must be
that very thing, wherein the foolish Virgins fell short; for though the wise,
as well as the foolish (in the sense I have given to you) slumbred and slept;
yet for all that, the foolish Virgins only did not watch. They are they, that
our Savior grounds the Application upon, Watch therefore, for ye know neither
the day nor the hour, wherein the Son of Man comes. The wise Virgins did watch
in the main Point, because they looked to it, that all was done, that was
necessary to be done, to meet Jesus Christ at his coming, and to go in with him
to the Wedding. And therefore, The First particular, wherein we are to exercise
this Watch, is to look, That we have the Divine and Spiritual Life in us. For
no Man has watched, that has not looked well to this: That he is (as our
Savior expresses it) passed from death to life.

If any of us go out of the World (as I told you) In this very life, every
thing is to be looked unto: For, though the Day of Judgment, and the Coming of
Christ, be a different thing, in many reguards from dying; yet notwithstanding,
whatever we would do, for that Day of the Coming of Christ, we must do it now,
while we are here in the World; All is sealed for Judgment and Eternity at
Death: There Is no purpose nor counsel in the Grave (concerning this point)
whither we are going. When any rise from the dead, our Savior makes it very
apparent; John 5. They rise, either to Life, or Condemnation; There Is no
arising so, as with any possibility of passing from death to life at that time,
v. 28. Marvel not at this, (At what? it is plain what, viz. at the mighty
quickening Voice of Christ now, for of that Christ had spoken just before:) for
the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. You see
here, all the whole World of Mankind, at that day of the Coming of Christ, they
either rise to the Resurrection of Life, or to the Resurrection of Damnation,
nothing is then to be done more. This is a most evident and apparent Truth:
And, as I have made out to you; Spirits coming in to Bodies, come either full
of the notices of Eternal life, or full of the Notices of Eternal Death; They
carry all the Characters upon them: They rise, either to Honor, or to
Everlasting shame and contempt. And therefore, as the Apostle speaks, Ephe. 5.
Awake, thou that Sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee life, ver. 14. We must look well to this, That we hear the Voice of the
Son of God now, and live: The time is coming, and now is, the Dead shall hear
the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: Now is the
quickening time, according to it Men come forth. The time is begun now, (says
he) and it shall go on to the very coming of the Bridegroom, that they that
hear the Voice of the Son of God shall live, ver. 25. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life. We must look whether we have shot that great Gulf, of passing
from death to life; for, this is a Gulf to be passed now, which in that future
state cannot be passed: As you know in that 16th of Luke 24. There Is a great
Gulf fixed between us and you; so that they which would pass from you to us
cannot, neither does any pass from us to you, that are in those Regions of
darkness: So I say, the Gulf is now to be passed; There is a Pass now, but
there shall be none in that State; they are past from death to life. It is as
if our Savior should say, They have shot the Gulf: And therefore let us
consider, whether God has changed us (as it were) from West to East? Whether
he has turned us to the Rising of the Sun of Righteousness with Healing in his
Wings? Whether he has turned our thoughts to Eternity, and from the present
World, and all the Impurities of it? Whether the Face of our Spirits are to the
Kingdom of God, or not? Let us look seriously to all those Scriptures, that
teach us concerning the truth of Conversion; concerning the truth of Faith;
concerning the truth of Repentance: It is our duty, undoubtedly, to trim our
Lamps, in this reguard, now; and to search and ransack every thing in our own
souls; that we may be assured of the truth of Conversion, and that our hearts
are so turned to God, that they can never be turned back again: That we turn
our hearts back so to Christ, That we say, Whither should we go, thou have the
words of eternal life. To find, that God has so engaged our hearts and
thoughts to himself, that we can never more revolt from him: And though we
fall, and there are many things that we complain of, and bewail, and have
reason to humble our selves; yet notwithstanding this, our souls have that
Union to Christ, we are so knit to him, That the Golden Oil still runs out upon
us, from that great Son of Oil, that he empties out of himself, to us: That
Holy, anointed one, that stands before the Lord of the whole Earth is
continually supplying, and giving out to us, from himself.

2. The Second thing that I proposed to you, by way of direction to this
watching, is, That you would look to this, to be earnest, instant in fervent
Prayer, and to pray especially, to this very Point; That you may be counted
worthy to stand before Jesus Christ at his coming. Our Prayers ought to be for
the present state of Grace, indeed, and for all the signs of it; but we are to
have a continual ardency in Prayer, to stand before Christ: For, if you
consider, if the very Coming of Christ should be now, if he should now be
coming and appearing, every one would be ready to run to their Prayers, to
those Prayers they have accustomed themselves to; nay, those that have used
themselves to a common and formal way of Prayer, would be ready to stretch out
themselves to a higher way; Wherefore, let us endeavor after this, to pray
continually, (as if Christ were coming) That we may be delivered from the Guilt
of Sin; That we may be delivered from all our corruptions; That we may be in
Robes washed white in his blood; That we may be in the Wedding Garment: That we
may have every thing suited to the Glory of his Coming and Appearance: So you
shall find our Savior directs his Disciples, upon this very account, Luke 21.
Watch ye therefore (says he) and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things, that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
Son of Man, at his coming. Take heed that our hearts be not overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the cares of this life: But that we are in
a continual posture of expecting the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in
the 12th Chapter of Luke 36, And ye your selves like unto Men that wait for
their Lord, when he will come, because of the Wedding, that when he comes and
knocks, they may open unto him immediately. We should take great care of the
state of our hearts now, that we may at that very time, be found not so as
Gluttons, Drunkards are, but Watching, Praying. But you know, There Is no such
thing, as Gluttony and Drunkenness, in the Future State of Spirits; there is
nothing of the cares of this life, in that future state; but, they are the
things that now oppress, and that now take away the hearts of Men. And this
know says he ( ver. 39.) That if the good man of the house had known what hour
the Thief would come; he would have watched, and not have Suffered his house to
be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also; for the Son of Man comes in an
hour when ye think not. The Argument therefore Lies that we should do now what
we would do; For just so we shall Rise and Appear: as has been made out: There
ought therefore to be a holy violence upon every ones preparation, by Earnest
Prayer and Supplication for that Day; we ought every one to pray, as if just,
that very day was upon him; We should pray with the same Earnestness, as if
that Day, were even now upon us. This therefore is that Great Rule that our
Savior gives us, in Relation to that Time, that we should so pray now, That we
should not at that Day, be in the Confusion, and in the Horror of those
Things. Luke 21. 35. Watch ye and pray, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape those things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of
Man; You see here, that ye may stand before the Son of Man, there must be a
watching to prayer; and a watching upon this very account. O! that we could be
sensible of that Day, and stir up our supplications in that very point! So the
Apostle Peter, For I would endeavor to argue the Scripture upon you, that the
great Intention and Earnestness of our Prayer, should run to that very Point,
of the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is
at hand, and therefore watch unto Prayer. Let us be continually watching unto
Prayer, upon this very account, because the end of all things is at hand: If we
considered that, it would engage and stir up our Prayers, Be sober and watch
unto Prayer, for our Prayers will meet us then, we shall rise in them at that
Day.

3. In the Third Place, Our Watchfulness should stand in this, in a constant,
living sense of the Word of God (especially in this great point) upon us: That
we should have a Meditation upon the Word of God. It is a very hard thing for
us to entertain our thoughts in the Night, when we are awake; or when we are
alone; it is a hard thing to know how to employ our Thoughts, and to engage
them: And therefore, if we could take the Word of God, That would keep us in an
awful sense of God, and of eternal things. David often speaks of his Meditation
in the Word of God, Psalm. 119. I meditate in thy Word; I meditate in thy
Statutes; it is my meditation all the day: And Psalm. 1. 1. Blessed is the man
that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc. but his delight is in the
Law of the Lord; and in that Law does he meditate Day and Night. Says David, I
stir up my self, I awake in the night, that I might meditate in thy statutes.
If we could seriously bring into our thoughts the Meditations of the end of all
things; but we are so concerned for this little spot of Time; even for that
next Moment that is before us, what we shall eat, and what we shall drink, and
what we shall put on, and how this and that shall be maintained: If our hearts
were but suitably and proportionably fixed upon that, What shall we do for our
Eternal Condition? How shall we bear that Day? Would not any one set that Day
before him, if he were really possessed of it? If a Man were to Plead his Cause,
and whole condition in this World: who of us could keep his Heart and Thoughts
from often running into it? Now, if we could keep our Meditations upon those
Scriptures that speak of this Eternal Condition; I beseech you, endeavor to
get up your selves, and to aspire to it, by the Grace of God; and that you
would meditate on these things, as the Apostle Paul teaches Timothy, Meditate
on these things, that thy profiting may appear to all men; He speaks indeed
there, of the preparation for the work of Preaching of the Gospel; But let us
apply it, for we are every one concerned in this Great Point, to be Preachers
to our selves: Certainly, if every one be not a Preacher to himself, all other
Preachers can do him no good at all: And the Excellent Truths that lie in the
Word of God, can do no good, till a Man comes to Preach them to himself: The
Book of Ecclesiastes, is in the English of it, the Book of the Preaching soul:
that Book of Solomon, which we call the Book of the Preacher, it was the Book
of the Preacher, first to himself, Eccl. 1. 1. It is observed by Learned Men,
the Word signifies, The Preaching Soul; Every one should be a Preaching Soul to
himself, and Preaching this Great Point, Of the Coming and Kingdom of Christ.
And this would engage our Watch, this would be like the snuffing the Lamps of
our dark Apprehensions, and blowing up the Flame of our cold and benumbed
affections: It would make the Light more clear, and it would be like the
blowing up the fire; it would inflame and warm us with the strength and vigor
of those great apprehensions, that pertain to the Coming of Christ. Indeed, it
is very sad, That the present state of the World is so covered, and so darkened,
and so eclipsed, and so chilled, and even frozen, in these things; We can go
into no Company, nay, we our selves, though we are sensible of these Truths, we
speak them, and hear of them; yet we don't know how to converse like the
Servants of God, That we might be all Preachers to our selves, and one to
another in them; It is earnestly to be hoped, and prayed for, That a
betterstate of things may come on; and that the Spirit may be poured out
abundantly; And, Would (as Moses said) all the Lords People were Prophets; I
cannot reasonably think, that Moses spoke of a thing that was impossible; But
surely, there shall be a time, that every one of the Servants of God shall have
something to say, as Prophets of the Lord, one to another. And this is the time
that is earnestly to be expected, and to be Prayed for: I make no doubt, but
the World shall have such a Time of preparation in order to the Great and
Glorious Coming of Christ, Acts 2. 17. Pray observe, God will pour out his
Spirit, to this very end, to this very purpose, says the Apostle, I will pour
out my Syirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and you Daughters shall Prophecy,
and your young men shall see Visions, and your old men shall dream Dreams.
Every one shall have something to offer to another, concerning God. And on my
servants, and on my hand-maidens, I will pour out in those days of my Spirit,
and they shall Prophecy, And I will show Wonders in Heaven above, and Signs in
the Earth beneath, etc. And the Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon
into Blood, before that Great (pray, observe that) before that Great and
illustrious Day of the Lord come. He will come in the still Voice of his Spirit
poured out; and of every one being enabled, as Moses says, as a Prophet. For,
would Moses (do you think) have said, Would every Atome of Dust upon the Earth
could be a Star! (he would not have wished such a thing) or, That all the Drops
of Water in the Sea might be turned into Gold and Pearls! These things would
have been strange in Moses; because they are things that never shall be: But
now, That all the Lord's People shall be Prophets; That Is a thing God will
certainly do, and awaken the World with, before that Great and Illustrious Day
of the Lord come. In the mean time, Let us endeavor to be Preaching-Souls unto
our selves: This is a thing, I am sure, that no one can have reason to be
offended at; Let Men be never so severe, that none must Preach, but such and
such, so Educated, and Prepared; yet, to be a Preaching-Soul to our selves,
none can be scandalized, or offended at that.

4. In the Fourth Place; Let us take heed and keep our selves from our
Iniquity; that there may be no Sin that we shall be found in at the coming of
Christ, that we give Indulgence to now, no course of known sin, or of the
neglect of any known Duty. Let us take care of this, that we do not allow our
selves in any way of sin, that we search and try our ways continually, that we
may turn unto God. Il'l give you two notable Scriptures to this very purpose;
(though a great many more might be given) I was also upright before him, and
kept my self from mine iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23. That Is a very great Scripture,
though I have already spoke of it; that especially, that I would direct you to
now, is in the 139th Psalm 23. 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me,
and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in
the way Everlasting. You see here, It is a very Difficult, point. For, If a
Virgin may be shut out for ever; what Reason have we to lay: our thoughts open
before God? and to say unto him, Search me, O God; I know not how to Search my
Self; I am so Dark, and Blind to my self, in my own peculiar Iniquity, That I
know it not. But do thou Search me, and know my heart, Try me, and know my
thoughts, And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting; Any wicked way in me, That is, The way of living in any Sin, or
giving up my self to any Lust. Let us be mighty Cautious, very careful in This,
to lay our selves before God; for, Indeed, If any one would say to me, Which
way shall I help my self? You say, That a Virgin may be a Foolish Virgin; You
say, That Virginity is the Best State in the profession of Christianity; And
yet There may be such a Worm at the Root of it, as may wither it all; What then
shall I do? Does not this Discourage in the way of Religion, If I may be so
Mistaken, and Deceived in it? Were not the Foolish Virgins as likely in their
own Eyes, as the Wise? Therefore I say; No other way, but to lie at the Foot of
Christ, and of the Spirit of Christ, and Earnestly to pray, Search me O God,
and know my heart, Try me, and know my thoughts, and my Secret Retirements; and
see if there be any any Secret wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
Everlasting.

If we did continually This, and if our hearts were fully Set upon it,
certainly, God would bring forth our Righteousness as the Light, and our
Judgment as the Noonday; Surely, God will Discover This, if we are Sincere. It
is the best counsel, that can be given, and the best Example, that can be laid
before us. And so, That of our Savior I look upon as the peculiar duty in
order to our waiting for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; I say, I look upon it to
be the very peculiar Duty; Our Lord says, concerning this, Let your Loins be
girded about, and your Lights burning, Luke 12. 35. And so the Apostle Peter
expounds this Scripture more fully to us; and he directs it to this very Point,
of Looking to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Wherefore
gird up the Loins of your Mind, be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace
that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. Besides all
the Grace of the Gospel at the present; there is the Crowning-Grace, There is
the Triumphing-Grace that is to be brought to us at the appearing of Christ.
Gird up the loins of your mind; be sober and hope to the end, for that
salvation. You know, the loins, they are taken for those parts of Human Nature,
wherein is the Seat of Sensuality and Corruption most of all; the Bodily-Lust
that men are affected with; And as the loins are girded, a Man is the more
expedite, and ready for Motion; So, when all that superfluity of the Flesh, and
impure, sensual affection is girt up, and we hope perfectly for the Grace that
is to be brought to us at the Revelation of Jesus Christ: Let us earnestly
therefore pray, Keep back thy Servant from presumptuous sins, that they may not
have dominion over me. Then shall we lift up our face, clear as the Morning,
and we shall lift up our head without spot, as Job. If Pride, if Lust, if any
inclination to the love of this World, to sensual Pleasures and Delight, if any
of this we find to be our sin, any immoderate Lust; or Sin, whatever it is, Let
us gird up the loins of our minds, wherein we find any extravagant and
impetuous Motion to evil prevail upon us.

5. In the Fifth Place, Let this be our great care, to meditate much upon
Death, Judgment and Eternity: Let those common and general Notions prevail upon
us: For my part, I have always, and desire always to Declare, That I do not
bind up any one to any particular apprehensions of my own, in these things,
although I do fully believe such an appearance of the Glory and Kingdom of
Christ: Yet I say to every one, Let those general and agreed Notions and
Principles, be strong upon your hearts: And the less you can intend, and
incline to believe such an Appearance and Kingdom of Christ, be the more Intent
upon those Four Last Things, as they are generally called: that is, Death,
Judgment, Heaven and Hell. Let those General and acknowledged, and impressed
Points, be always upon your Minds. O! What kind of persons should we be, if we
did but grow up to the acknowledged Points of Christianity, Death, Judgment,
Heaven and Hell. Let us always take these into consideration, and there is no
Christian but owns them: even Papists themselves, those of them that have been
more Devout than others, have written very excellently and very notably upon
these things; these Principles that run so mightily into all the sense of
Christianity: God forbid, that any thing should be said to take off the plain
Consideration, and the strong Apprehension, and the close Meditation, and the
mighty influence of those Four Things from us. For who can enough speak of
them, or consider them? Take them in the plainest sense that you can; And Oh
that God would give you to feel, even every one of us, to feel the full work of
them upon our hearts; that they may have, every one their perfect work upon our
hearts: That (as I may allude) the Chariots of our Souls may be always moving
upon these Four Wheels, and that our Chariots may never stand still, but lift
us up continually above the Earth. It is my earnest Prayer for every one of us
(speaking and hearing) That our Souls may be as the Chariots of Aminadab;
carried upon these Four Wheels of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell. And
indeed, though I look upon it as a great Scripture-Truth, and which has so
great Evidence, as cannot be contradicted; yet I am far from pressing any one
to take into Consideration; I mean, those Apprehensions concerning such a
Kingdom of Christ; So that they should take off any thing from the serious
Meditation of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell. And I would desire only
those persons to take them into Consideration, that find they are more
enlivened, and more enlarged, and more enflamed by the strong Consideration of
the Great Things, Scripture has spoken, and that are in a visible and apparent
way, to bring forth the Glory of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. And therefore, I
hope, there is nothing that can be justly Taxed, in endeavoring to seek
further into the Doctrines of Christianity, beyond those that are but the
Beginning Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: I would exhort every serious
Christian, to make these it his continual Meditation, and that nothing may take
off the edge of his Spirit in these things. Say now, Am I not to die? And must
I not come to Judgment? Is it not said, It is appointed to all men once to die,
and after this the Judgment? Am I not immediately to come into a Judgment, and
determination of my Eternal Condition? And am I not to stand before Christ in
Judgment? Don't we all own that? And is there not a Heaven, and an Eternity of
Happiness? And is there not on the other hand, a black and dark Eternity, even
utter darkness, and for ever? O that God would enable us to carry this all in
our Minds! the Eternity of Happiness, and the Eternity of Misery. You know,
great Princes are Pictured with great Globes in their hands, but Jesus Christ
has those Two great Globes, the Keys of Death, and Hell; and Eternal Life to
give. Let these things be our plain and constant Meditation; Let us cut off
every thing that we think is singularity; I am still of the same Apprehension,
that the Scripture has declared, a visible Kingdom and Glory that is near; Yet
I beseech you, that you would get these into your constant Apprehension. And, O
that they might fall upon every one; Let nothing of Notion or Opinion take off
from these Great Things; Let us continually take our Walk and Meditation into
those Regions beyond this World: Let us say, I am to go out of this World, and
this State; and O, how Great must the Change be! That I must immediately enter
into an Eternity of Happiness, or an Eternity of Misery. Nothing will make the
Doctrine of Christ so powerful, as to have a strong Meditation of these Things:
And then

In the Seventh Place, Let us take heed of the sins of the Time wherein we live
(though, by all means, we are to take heed of the open Prophanenesses that are
in the Wortd) but, I beseech you, That we may all look to this, There are the
peculiar Sins of those that are called Virgins; There Is something peculiar to
every Time; And therefore, as I have intimated to you, in that Rev. 3. 1. That
Church of Sardis, I have for some time, looked upon it to be the Pourtraiture
of these very Times, and this very State we are upon: It is a Picture of the
Church of Christ in that State we call Protestant, and in that State we call,
The Reformation: And therefore, observe how that is described, and let us look
very diligently, that we don't fall into those very sins: And unto the Angel of
the Church in Sardis, Write, These things, says he, that has the Seven
Spirits of God, and the Seven Stars: I know thy works, That thou have a Name
that thou live and art dead. O, Let us take heed of having a Name. To be a
Protestant is a Name to live: To be of the Reformed Churches, is a Name to
live: Take heed, Is it not the General State of this very Age, of this very
Time? We have a Name to live, and yet are dead: Among all the several
Professions and Churches of Christianity, in the Reformed way, at this Day,
surely it is a Sin that lies upon every one, They have a Name to live, and yet
are dead: We find it one in another, but every one may find too much, that he
has a Name to live, but is dead. We may say to our selves, Is this like one
that is come out of Popery, upon the account of Conscience, and upon the
account of Truth and the Word of God? This is a Name to live; because, say we,
the things that Papists profess, and that they do, are not according to the
Word of God: Why now, if it be a Name to live, to come out from among them,
Take heed that we are not dead; If we have not the Power of Godliness, in the
Profession of the Reformed and Protestant Religion, It is but a Name to live;
be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain, and are ready to die. O!
how truly may we say, That the Things in order to the Kingdom of Christ, they
are ready to die; every where, among all sorts of Professors! How ready is the
Public Way of Worship to die, for want of the Power of what they Profess? And,
if you look upon the Congregated Professors, with what reason do they complain,
They are grown very Proud, very Worldly, very Vain, notwithstanding all their
Profession. So here is a Name to live, in order to the Kingdom of Christ, but
they are ready to die. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain,
that are ready to die; Here Is that Watch that Christ speaks of: We should take
heed, and watch, that the things which remain, and are ready to die, might be
quickened and have a new life: For (says he) I have not found thy Works perfect
before God: I have not found them filled out, and filled up: They are just like
a Stalk of Wheat, that looks as if it were something, and yet, like one of
Pharaoh's lean Ears, if we come to search, and enquire into it, and to Rub it
(as we speak) in our hands, we find it to be nothing; so indeed, we may sadly
complain, when we come to Rub Profession, either in others, or in our selves;
it is very thin, and lean, and lank: And therefore our works are not filled up
before God. Now, what says Christ? I will come upon thee as a Thief, and thou
shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. Let us therefore be very
diligent in this thing, to look to have the Power of our Profession, to have
the Power of the Protestant Religion, to have the Power of the Reformation. For
indeed, It is a very sad thing, that so many of us, as have a Zeal against
Popery; a Zeal against the Corruption of that State; That yet we should sink so
much below some of the Devotionists among them: For undoubtedly, There are some
among them, that seem to be under a greater Profession than many Protestants
are. To hear a Man swear against their Religion profanely, and to see a Man
Drinking, and Carousing, and saying, according to the very usual ways of Men's
Discourse: To drink (as it were) Healths to Protestants: Is not this an
abominable Shame, and that speaks our great dishonor? And that may make even
Papists scandalized at the loose, and licentious way of those that call
themselves Protestants; To hear Men Swear and Damn, and blaspheme, and yet at
the very same time, to profess a Zeal against Popery. Certainly, this we ought
to take care of, That we are not carried away by the Name of a Wicked,
Licentious, Blasphemous and Profane Protestantism. And beyond this, we should
look; That that Pride, Vanity, Cruelty, Earthliness and Oppression, and
whatever the Sins are, that are among us, that we do not cover them, and
disguise them, under the Name of this; Why yet, for all this, I am not a
Papist, I am a Protestant; surely, God will Tear that Name out of the Mouths of
such Protestants: As he says in Ezekiel, You sow Pillows and Kerchiefs; that
is, some Disguising things upon their heads: And (says he) I Will tear these
Kierchiefs, Ezekiel. 13. So God will tear off from those that have the Profession
of Protestantism, but have nothing of the Power, Life and Zeal of the
Reformation, and their Open Testimony for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that
very Profession from them.

In the last Place (that I may draw to a Conclusion.) Notwithstanding all that
I have said to you, concerning the Thoughts of Death and of Judgment, and of
Heaven and Hell; yet I would desire, that we may have a sense of the Glory, and
of the Kingdom of Christ, that is to appear; and that you would look to have it
in your hearts, to have the Kingdom of God in your hearts.

Let me propose a great Scripture to you upon this account: And after a short
Explanation of it, I Will conclude in a few Words, Luke 17. 20. There was a great
Question put to Christ in this case; He was demanded of the Pharisees, when the
Kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The Kingdom of God
comes not with Observation: Neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there: for
behold the Kingdom of God is within you. That Is the Kingdom of God; For in some
way, certainly, there is none of us but Profess it, else, why do we pray it
should come; When that, which is the Great Petition, the very Central-Petition
of the Lord's Prayer, surely that is the very Key that turns all about? Now I
say, if you would believe a Kingdom of God in any sense: And that you will be
ready to say, When shall that Kingdom come? Remember what Christ says, it does
not come by Observation; for Men shall not say, Lo, here, or lo, there; Though
indeed, it shall be a Glorious Sight, a Glorious Show, as the Apostle says,
which in his Time he will show. Yet for all that, you shall not say, Lo, here
comes Christ, and here come such and such Saints: And here comes such a Glory,
and Heaven and Earth glowing in a flame. You shall not say, here or there, thus
and thus it is, though you shall have reason to say so: yet (says Christ) the
main thing is, The Kingdom of God is within you. What will you be the better
for that Kingdom of God, if it be not within you? You must bring it to that
Day, The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation; it does not come with a
show without us, but our God will come, and all his Saints shall come with him.
They shall come with Bodies of Glory, and Bodies of Light, Bodies full of
Glory: it does not come with an outward show, but within us: Every one that
has not the Kingdom of God within him, at that Day, they will appear by that
very thing, to be foolish Virgins; for, they must bring that Kingdom in the
Righteousness of Christ, with peace of Conscience, through his Blood, by Grace,
and by Virtue of his Holy Spirit.

And now, I beseech you, That you would balance these two things continually
one with another. You pray that the Kingdom of Christ may come: The Kingdom of
Christ comes, when his Day comes; when the Day and Appearance of Christ comes,
2 Timothy 4. 1. Now, Amos. 5. 18. Says God, Woe unto you that desire the Day of
the Lord, to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not
light; As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him; or went into the
house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him. It is just such
a thing (says the Prophet) as if a man in a storm, should go into a house, and
take shelter there; and when he found the storm ready to carry him away, he
goes, and leans upon a Wall, and there a Serpent comes out of a Hole, and bites
him to Death; Even so shall the Kingdom and Day of Christ be, It is in vain to
say, Thy Kingdom come, If that Kingdom be not within us: for, It comes not with
Observation, but it is within us.

O Therefore! That we could be persuaded to get out of the formality of that
Petition, and to look for that Kingdom within; Thy Kingdom come by my Enjoyment
of such a presence of thy Kingdom within my own heart; That when it comes, I
may come with it, and it may come along with me: for else, I say, it will be
darkness, and not light. I make no doubt, there was a great many, that the
Prophet spoke usually to them, of the Day of the Lord. You know, it is an usual
expression in Scripture, The Day of the Lord: And, upon the often hearing of
it, Men come to say, We would fain see it: And so, many are ready to say
concerning that Kingdom; if it be such a Glorious State and Thing, we would
fain see it. Now remember, it comes not with observation, but you must have it
within you; for, if you have it not within you, it is in vain for you; for, for
what end do you desire the day of the Lord?

To shut up this in a brief Recollection of all, In the First Place, I desire
you seriously often to meditate upon this Parable, as I have in some weak
manner, endeavored to open it to you. And to remember also, That even my
Christianity (say to your selves) will not do me any service; I had as good
have been a Heathen, as to the main purpose of my Eternal Condition, if I have
not Oil in my Vessel; if I have not truly a great replenishing of my Soul from
the Great Son of Oil: And so, if you speak of Protestantism; If you have not
Oil in your Vessel, it will be but a very empty thing, and do you no good,
except you have Oil in your Vessels; except you are united to Jesus Christ;
except you have the Kingdom of God within you: And then

In the Second Place: Another great Use (for I only draw out the main scope of
the Parable, by way of Recollection, unto you, and so conclude) I say,
seriously consider, What ever you think to do for your souls, do it now,
because there is no Time after, Work while it is day, the night comes when
none can work. All the time that persons have lain in the Grave (as we speak)
or that their Spirits have been in Happiness, or in Misery, they have not done
the least thing for their souls; they have not added one Cubit, nay, not one
Hairs breadth to their Stature, they have not made one Hair (as our Lord speaks
Proverbially) either white or black, as to the State of their Spirits; And when
Spirits come to meet their Bodies, in the Day of the Resurrection, every thing
will be in such a speed, such a World in highest motion, That you cannot stay
to change one ill Posture, or Appearance, ot Representation of your souls. You
must not stay, I would speak according to the Language of the Parable, Can the
Bride forget her Attire? If any of us have forgot our Attire, we cannot mind
any thing that is amiss; We cannot fasten one Pin in that distress of our
souls: We must be in the Wedding Garment perfectly attired, and arrayed: For
what is done then (as I have often said) is done in an Atome of Time, The dead
shall be raised incorruptible, Wicked Men, and Foolish Virgins, shall be raised
just as they die. And therefore, mind seriously to do for your souls, what
you would do, in this present state. And then,

Lastly, As I have said, I say again, That you would earnestly pray for the
Preparation of that Time, Pray earnestly for the pouring out of the Spirit; Do
you think it will not be better for you, when God shall pour out his Spirit
upon all flesh, when your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy; when your
old men shall dream Dreams, and your young men shall see Visions? When there
shall be an universal Prophecy upon the People of God; as I have greatest
reason to hope, that the time is very near: Why should we not earnestly pray
for it, and desire it?

You think, there will be too much Clutter, and ado about Religion then; don't
mistake, Whatsoever is done, shall run so easy, and quiet then, with such
advantage, and the Great Cares and Disadvantages of the World shall be taken
off, and every thing shall be in a merciful order, that we may be prepared for
that Great and Notable Day of the Lord.

And therefore, Let us earnestly pray and wait, That a better state, both of
Christianity in General, and the Reformation in particular, may come forth,
That those Thunders that have been Sealed since the Reformation, for almost an
Hundred and Eighty Years, That their Mouths may be open, and their Voices may
utter themselves. That every thing may be that tends to increase and promote
Holiness, Purity and Spirituality, and Heavenliness; for I am not speaking, nor
never did speak to you of a Kingdom of Eating and Drinking, and putting on
Glorious Apparel; but that there shall be an universal knowledge of God and
Jesus Christ. And that none but those that are resolved to be filthy should
remain filthy; and those who give up themselves in Holy ways, should be
Encouraged, and should mount up with Eagles Wings, and Grow stronger and
stronger. And therefore, that there is but the Hopes of these things, Let us
Bless God Exceedingly. For many Prophets and Wisemen, and Kings, and Righteous
Men have desired to see those things, which you see and have not seen them, and
to hear those things, which you hear, and have not heard them.

And yet for all that; If any of us are called to Die, who are Sincere, and
faithful; God will give us so much certainly of that Spirit of Prophecy, of
Illumination; of Revelation, That shall carry us safe to Heaven; and shall
Search and Try us so, That we shall be led out of any wicked way into the way
that is Everlasting.

And therefore, Let not these things Discourage you, But let them Inflame our
Care, Zeal, Endeavors and Desires; That we may Watch, Because Nothing con be
done, when our Lord comes, but only, They that are Ready, Go in with Him to the
Wedding.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY For the Hope of the Kingdom of Christ, Appearing Within This
Approaching Year, 1697.

Wherein some of the Principal Arguments for such an Expectation are briefly
Couched, and the Greater Objections Answered.

Presented to the Notice and Examination of the Archbishops and Bishops Now in
PARLIAMENT Assembled.

By T. BEVERLEY.

Ezekiel. 10. 13. As concerning the Wheels, It was cried to them, in my Hearing,
Oh! Revolution!

LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by Will. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-Street,
and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street, 1697.

An APOLOGY for the Hope of the Kingdom of Christ, Entering Its Succession
within this Now Beginning 1697. And an Answer of Principal Objections presented
with It.
To the Archbishops and Bishops, as in Parliament at This Time Assembled.
Most Reverend, Right Reverend,
I Have now, by the Space of Fourteen, or Two Weeks of Years, been Serving for
that Beautiful- Rachel-State of the Church of Christ, in the place of that
Rachel in the Wilderness, weeping for her Children in Sackcloth, and under
Death; and would not be comforted, Because They were not. I have set my self
all along, by Meditation, and Supplication to the Father of Lights, to search
out, and by the Assistance of the Spirit of Prophecy, to Find, What, or What
Manner of Time the Spirit of Christ did signify, for the Fullfilling that Grand
Petition of his Servants; Thy Kingdom come, That thy Name may be Sanctified,
and Thy Will done, as in Heaven, and upon Earth; and I am now Wrestling to the
Break of Day, and I Hope, the Dawn of the Morning, and Resolved, not to Let Go,
Till I obtain the Blessing of it.

The Time, that from the First, and throughout, it pleased the Lord of Time to
fix upon my Mind, as the Time of That Kingdom Entering into its Succession, and
Preparation for its Glory, was, and is, This Approaching 1697. A Year, to which
I could have no Temptation, either in Regard of Nearness, or Distance, or on
any Account whatever, but as a Scripture-Line of Time, and Concurrent Reasons
of Prophecy, and History, very many, and in a Series, and Continuation have Led
me.

On this Foundation, having Settled, I have by Gracious Vouchsafements of Help
from God, Turned my Self to All the Grand Prophetic Points of Scripture; and
Found New Confirmations, and have Given as Public Accounts of them, as I could
attain, and presented some of Them to Your Selves, and to the Great Council of
the Nation: And in as much as Supreme Goodness has Granted me to Set up an
Eben Ezer, now at the Portal of 97. I have Thought it my Duty to offer this
Apology for the Kingdom of Christ so near Approaching; And that The Great
Isaac, The Son of Promise, of Universal Laughter and Rejoicing, The Desire of
all Nations will Appear at a Set Time this Next Year, the very Last of those
Three Set Seasons, Time, Times, Half Time; Eleven Times expressly, or Vertually
Recorded in Scripture Prophecy; and therefore I can have no Doubt; But in the
observing These so often Repetitions, Remarking close upon Them, and on what
Accounts They are Recalled, and to what Applied; and Ballancing These, One with
Another, I have Arrived to Full Assurance, They are Assigned to the Papal Last
State of the Roman Monarchy, the Last of the Four Kingdoms, or Monarchies (and
the Four) now Expiring in the Expiration of These Times and Half.

Indeed I look upon no Truth of Scripture to be more Plain and Certain, except
the Articles of Faith, and Rules of Holy Practice necessary to Salvation, Then
that Those Four Monarchies are given as a Calendar of Time for the
Embarrassment of the Kingdom of Christ, or that Glorious State of Christianity,
which even the Prayers, styled, Established by Law, oblige the Belief, Desire,
and Expectation of: Scripture takes therefore so particular Notice of the Four,
viz. the Babylonian, and Perfian; as is well known; and Takes Account of Their
Time; of the Grecian more obscurely; Yet the very New Testament, in that
Language, and the so often Division of the People of that Time, into Jews and
Greeks, is a very undoubted Owning Them, as one of the Monarchies; Out of
which, through a Great Part of the 70 Weeks, the State of the World had been
sliding into the Fourth, the Roman Monarchy, which Surrounds the whole New
Testament History, and Prophecy, as is undeniable.

But as soon as ever the Time allowed to the last of these is at an End, The
Kingdom of Christ will immediately succeed, and there can be no Inter-Reign;
Nor can any other Kingdom Interpose: The Vision is so sure, and its
Interpretation so certain; And such a kind of Kingdom it must be, as was
Congenially to have its succession so Connexed to those before it, that tho it
is a Holy, a Heavenly, a Spiritual, yet it must be also a Visible, Sensible
Kingdom, as to the Dominion, and Glory of it, and no Metaphor, or Allegorical
sense can satisfy without it: And we know the Nations, to which we belong, are
a part of the Ancient Roman Empire, and Remain still of the Ten, into which it
was cantoned; Which Division has been to me an Infallible Reason of
Confidence, France should no more prevail to an Universal Monarchy, then the
House of Austria has done. And herein for the keeping it within the Figure,
allowed its King by Prophecy; I know God has made our K. an Instrument. All
the Iron of it, could never break the Northern Iron and Steel of the sure Word
of Prophecy. But seeing we, I say, are such a part of the Ancient Roman Empire,
we are the more concerned, and ought to be the more Awake on the Fullfilling of
Prophecy, as of the first of the Kingdoms of the World, which is to become the
Kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ.

I have the same assurance, that this Time, Times, and Half Time, must be just
on the Expiration; By Prophecy, we might rather have expected their End sooner;
The Wisdom of the Divine Spirit draws them so very near to the Time of the
Roman Empire Becoming Christian in all its Portraitures of the Antichristian
State (As I know my self able, by Divine Assistance to make out to the
satisfaction of Any, that will allow themselves the thought, they know, and
yield necessary in any more retired Parts of Science) That had I not the
Faithful Evidence of the Scripture Line of Time, (I have already mentioned)
together with uncontestable Events; I should Fourteen Years ago have pitched
upon some nearer Time; For (to mention one of the most obvious) the very
Casting the 1260, and Additional 75 so manifestly into Indictions, or Fifteens
of Years, a Character of Time, not Regulated and known till soon after
Constantine, would have Inclined to have commenced them sooner.

I know, the Hope, for which I Apologize cannot, but Encounter Great
Objections, but I am assured, God has set it, and myself as a Minister of it,
as a Brazen Wall, that tho it be Fought against, It shall not be prevailed over.

The Objections, and Solutions, I shall very much in short thus Account for:
First, It will be pretended against it; It is a Presumptuous Curiosity to
undertake to Pry into Prophetic Times, and that it ought to be immediately
checked with that of our Lord; It is not for you to know the Times, and Seasons
which the Father has Set in his own Power.

But as to that Particular Scripture, it is evident, it was an Importune
Enquiry of the Apostles, not in the order of Scripture Researches, nor in the
due waiting for of the promise of the Spirit, which was the Duty of that very
Juncture; And therefore tho our Lord is quick upon their disorderly question,
yet he implies, there would be a Gracious method for their Resolution in it,
and commands them to Jerusalem, to wait for The promise of the Spirit from the
Father, which says He, you have heard of me, One Branch of which was, The
showing them things to come, Joh. 16. 14. And in general, we find the search of
Prophetic Times, is much more under the Favor, then the Displeasure of
Scripture; It is recorded with Honor to the Children of Issachar, that they
had understanding of Times, and knew what Israel was to do; Particularly 1 Chronicles. 2. 32.
concerning David's Kingdom, which was the concernment of that Time; And in
which I doubt not, they laid together the Prediction of Jacob, and other
Revelations of God peculiar to that People, and those Times, by which they were
able to give a Judgment: And it is observed, Their Brethren were at their
Command; This swayed no doubt in the Union of Israel in David: The Prophet
Daniel was not satisfied with what he found by Immediate C. 9. 1.
Revelation, but understood by Books of Scripture, and civil Records (It is a
Recommendation of that method) the Number of Years God had Determined for the
Desolations of the Sanctuary; The Prophets in the same manner searched, What
and what manner of Time, the Spirit which was in them did signify; The Apostle
by 1 Pet. 1. 11.
the Spirit Praises the Giving heed to the sure Word of Prophecy, as doing
well. Seeing then the Account of Time is one eminent Branch of that sure Word,
It is Praiseworthy to give heed to that, and no Presumption to do so: Our Lord
charges it as Hypocrisy, not to discern the Signs of the Times, those
Characters and Notes of Impression God has set upon them by Prophecy: How
often is there Encouragement given in that Great Prophecy of the New Testament,
Blessed is he that Reads, and they that hear the Words of the Prophecy of
this Book. Let Him that has Wisdom Count. Here Rev. c. 1. 3
is the Mind that has Wisdom; Let any one now Impartially lay these things
together, and it will plainly appear, There is waranty for searching Times
revealed in Scripture; And They are still in the Fathers Power, when the
Knowledge of them is waited for by the assistance of his Spirit, in the
understanding of his Word.

It may be further Argued against the Defining of Time from Scripture-Prophecy;
That the Scripture-Prophecies are so Dark, and Enigmatical, that it appears
most probable; The Spirit of God did not intend, They should be understood, or
Laid Open, till the very End of All Things, at the Day of Judgment, or in the
Kingdom of Heaven in Eternity; And therefore, The Soberest, Gravest Men, though
very Learned, and of Great Sagaciousness, do not engage themselves therein, and
Least of All in the Accounts of Time.

To This I would, by way of Defense, Rejoyn in the First Place; That it is most
True, That in the Darkness of the Present State, while the Apostasy of the
Papal State so much Eclipses the Glory of Christianity, There is a Great
Indisposition, and a Great Inability to Interpret Scripture-Prophecies; The
Unlearned say, They are not Learned; and the Learned say, The Book Esa. 29. 12.
it Sealed; And This Begets a Prejudice against Any Undertakers herein; and
they are Charged with Boldness, and Presumption, or with Madness or Enthusiasm;
It is said to Them, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from us to you? How
come you to be wiser than others? And this will in a very Great Measure
continue, till the Kingdom of Christ come into it is Succession, that the Ears of
the Deaf shall hear the Words of this Book, and the Eyes of the Blind see out
of obscurity.

But yet, in the second place, it is undeniable, That which is most
Enigmatical, and under what we call Riddle, if it be wisely contrived, and
designed, must have sense under it, tho not so open, but that it shall require
close Attendance, the most Exercised Thought; And on those Terms it is so
prepared, that it may be understood, and excellent Sense found under it, tho a
Riddle. Samsons Riddle had a very certain Determinate sense, and if we knew
fully the meaning of it, advances beyond the First Unriddling, very admirable
Instructions; All retired Parts of Knowledge in Anatomy, Astronomy,
Mathematics, Algebra, Call for Understandings peculiarly fitted to them, and
most attent Application, and Curious Instruments, Microscopes, Telescopes; and
yet the Knowledge, and Assurance, that rises from them, when understood is the
most Refined and Satisfactory: And so it is in Prophecy of Scripture, although it
does not offer it self at so easy a Rate, as some other Points of
Scripture-Knowledge; Yet by deep and fixed Meditation, by comparing of its
parts, one with another, and especially waiting upon the Spirit of Prophecy for
its Illumination, we shall find, it is prepared, and weighed out with the
greatest Severity of Truth, Divine Sense, and leads into very sublime
Discoveries of Divine Wisdom in the Government of the World, in Relation to his
Church, the Times and Seasons of it; And tends to the Greatest Aws of God, and
obedience to the Supreme Majesty of Heaven, and Earth, and to know, That he is
God.

In the Third Place, It is affirmed by the Spirit of God, that it is intended,
it should be understood; For it affirms, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. It is a Light that
shines in a Dark Place, Now if it be darker, than the Dark Place, How can it be
called a Light? Or how can it enlighten such a Dark place? And it is not of
Private Interpretation, as I have heretofore given an Account publicly; The
very meaning is, It is not of a Reserved, or Apart-Interpretation; As it is
said, Christ privately, or apart Interpreted his Parables to his Disciples. God
says of Himself, Esa. 45. 19. I have not spoken in secret, or in a Dark Place
of the Earth, like the Dark dubious* Oracles of Devils: I Jehovah speak
Righteousness; I declare the things that are Right, of Greatest Sincerity,
Vprightness and Truth, not perplexed, but plain to them that understand most
Right, Straight, and direct, to Him that understands; Right to them, that
find knowledge; And I have not said, says our God, to any of the Seed of
Jacob, Seek ye my Face in Vain, Even for the understanding of the Prophecies of
my Word; And in the very same Chapter, God Encourages to Ask of Him Things to
Come; Even, as his Spirit is said to show to his Servants Things to Come: All
which I hope, will appear a sufficient Answer to the Suspicion; That God gave
the Prophesies of his Word, and so Eminent a Part of them; Numbers of Time; and
did not intend, they should be understood.

If it be taken as in this very Joinct, and Objected, How comes it to pass?
That All, who hitherto have Writ on Prophetical Scripture, have much differed
one from another, and they who Fixed Time, have either lived to see themselves
mistaken, or it has appeared after their Death, They have been so: I desire,
it should be considered; Those, who as the Holy Servants of Christ, and
Ministers of his Word, have Set Themselves to Understand, have Given Great
Light, and Broken the Way for Those who have Followed; and Their Memory and
Services are precious to All Wife, and Good Men, notwithstanding some Mistakes,
and thereupon Differences; which are yet not more, or Greater, than Those we
Find in most Points not Fundamental, and in All Interpretation of Scripture^
And as to their Mistakes, in Point of Time, It is to be Allowed, Their
Distances, some of Them, from the Time of Completion, might be their
Disadvantage; God not vouchsafing such Light concerning that Time, till nearer
upon it; as not to Daniel, but upon the very Year of the 70 Years Ending.

It is further to be considered; That there are some Eminent and Learned
Persons, who have, though upon somewhat Different Grounds, yet concentred upon
this very 97. and some so near it, as upon 98, 99, and especially 1700. That
their Expectations are yet (as I may say) in Abeyance; and Things most probably
will be so Conducted, as easily to Reconcile so small Disagreements, by the
First Breakings out of Light, and further Illustrations.

But Herein I Humbly Magnify, and Adore the Freeness of Grace, and Divine
Assistance to his Unworthiest Servant; That He has Granted to me, to Lay
before me, the Whole and Entire Prophetical Table of his Word, which is the
Greatest Security against Mistake, that can be vouchsafed: Because by the View
and Survey of things together, They are seen in their Just Scituations, and
Allowances of Room, and placed Equally, one in proportion to another; That
there may be no Crowd, Confusion, Justle upon, or Interfere one with another:
Whereas, if this be not, a plausible Semblance, or Sound of Agreement may
mislead.

If such a Scheme be Reflected upon, as Imaginary, and the Work of Fancy, I
make an Humble Challenge to all the Wit, the Fancy, the Learning that is in the
World, to Give a Parallel Scheme in such an Agreement with the Word of God, and
the Providential Events in Concert with it; By which I am assured, It is not,
nor cannot be my own, but as Found in Sacred Writings; seeing Fancy and
Imagination cannot create into Self-subsistent Things; or Erect into undoubted
matter of Fact; As it is; That there are such and* such Prophetical* Emblems,
and Representations; Such Examples of the Way and Manner of Interpretation, as
that Nebuchadnezzar was the Head of Gold; the King of Persia the Ram; the King
of Grecia the He Goat; The Babylonish Woman, the City on Seven Mountains, that
at the Time of the Revelation Given, was then Reigning over the Kings of the
Earth: All These Give such a Pattern of the Manner of Interpreting Prophetic
Images, and what way the Spirit of God means, They should be Expounded, and
Discypher'd; that They are Equal to Matter of Fact; That there are such
Numbers, as 2300 Eves, Morns; 70 Weeks; Time, Times, Half a Time; Three Days
and an Half; 1260, 1290, 1335 Days, 42 Moons; And all these to be multiplied by
the Prophetical Standard of Time, or Days for Years. And that These, are some
of Them Repeated, variously placed, is plain Matter of Fact. To find therefore
the Concert of these, and to place Them in their Just-Order one toward
another, and in the Greatest Friendliness, Peace, Harmony, and Beautiful
Symmetry; and with the (...), the Admirable Air, and Mien of the Divine Wisdom,
finding out the Knowledge of All Witty Inventions herein; and then Supervening,
or Coming upon All These, Substantial; Undoubted Matters of Fact; the Greatest
Events, that have been in the World; Adjustable to these Numbers of Time,
Comprobated and Assured by the most Valuable History and Chronology, that are
in the World; All Make up such a Plerophory, a Fullness of Assurance, that must
needs deliver from the Scruple, that Fancy, and Imagination have had the
Architecture of such a Triangular, as I may call it, Compage of Things, in such
a Justice of Respect one to another, such a Trine, or Threefold strongest
Combination one with another.

For to give a Summary Delineation, on what Grand Pillars of Event the Emblems
of Prophecy are Planted, or drawn; and what Proportions of Time are adjusted to
them, and then how well it is known, That such Events and within some General
Ken of such Allowances of Time are owned by History and Chronology to those
Events, is the Greatest satisfaction, that can be given: For either small
Petite, or Obscure Events will Disgrace any Prophetic Scheme, And to be out of
all Boundaries of Time, is as Dishonorable.

The Root therefore of Prophetic Time, I make that Stupendous Failure of the
so Illustrious Types of the Kingdom of Christ, the Reigns of David, and Solomon
at the Death of Solomon; and the Incredible Depression of Them, had not Sacred
Writ assured it, in the Division of the Tribes into the Two Houses of Israel,
and Judah; Till Both Involved, each in a dreadful Captivation, distinct to
Each: The Rescue, and Deliverance of the Two Tribes from their Captivity in
Babylon, was by the Destruction of that Monarchy, the First of the Four, and
the Decree of Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Monarchy, at the End of the
390, and 40 Years of the Visional Bearing of Iniquity for them, and settling
the Prophetical Standard of a Day for a Year by Ezekiel.

In Cyrus his Universal Monarchy, so Favorable to the people of God, and so
Great a Type of Christ, as to be called Messiah, or God's Anointed Begin the
2300 Eves, and Morns; That staple Line of Time, that Reaches to the very
Glorious Kingdom of Christ; In the First Hundred Twenty Four Years of them,
there is, though with Interruptions, a Gradual Restoration of Judah, and
Jerusalem, Entering within the First Seven Weeks, or Forty Nine Years of that so
Famous, and by Christians, Universally Agreed Character of Time, confirming the
Prophetic Standard of a Day for a Year to 490 Years, Viz. The 70 Weeks

Through these runs the very Dwars-like and Tributary Condition of the Jews,
besides some horrible Inroads upon them, under the latter part of the Persian,
the whole of the Grecian Monarchy, and the beginning of the Fourth, or Roman.

At the last of these Weeks there is that so Glorious Exaltation of Time to its
Fullness in the Appearance of our true Messiah, and in the midst of it, His
Death and Resurrection; Greater things then which till his Glorious Appearance,
the Fullness of Times, or of all Time, Time cannot contain; In the other Half,
the Loud Publication of the Gospel of these Things, as by the Heraldry of
Thunder, began in the First Seal Opened by the Apostles.

In the Next Four Hundred, the First Seal is continued, and the next Three
Seals are Opened, in very Great and New Productions in the Roman Empire; till
in that Conclusive Persecution of the Christians, within the Fifth Seal, under
Dioclesian, and the Con-Temporary Pagan Emperors; In the Sixth Seal, That so
indeed August Revolution of the Roman Empire from Pagan to Christian, begun by
Constantine in the Sixth Seal, continued ( Julian's short Reign Excepted) till
Vindicated, and Sta^^minated by Theodosius the Great, in the Seventh Seal, a
Great Precursory Emblem of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

But Early under Constantine, and so Going on, That Appearance of the Kingdom
of Christ, began to be Eclipsed; And the Barbarous Nations Rushed in on the
Empire, in the Just Revenges of Christ upon Antichristian Supplantation (who
yet after United as his People, and as Ten Kingdoms under his Ecclesiastic
Empire) and Undermine by the Interposal of the Antichristian Moon; so soon that
Prophecy gives the Notice of it, as Immediate; in the Sealing the Servants of
God, against both the Antichristianism, and the Vengeance in those Trumpets of
Vengeance Given into the Hands of the Angelick Ministers of it, the Witnesses
Entering into Sackcloth, and the Churches Flight into the Wilderness, or being
so Hidden; that it was hard to be Discovered before the Reformation. These
Early Notices do beyond All Reasonable Contradiction, Assure the Times and Half
Sworn to Antichrist, must needs be now upon the Expiration, which, as before
Noted, are cast into Fifteens, in the 1260 Days, into which they are Expounded,
to show their Nearness to Constantine's Time; and because so Determinate a
Time, and Short, Compared with the Glory to follow, is styled, a Short Time, in
God's Answer to the Souls under the Altar; And the Devil considering it,
Reflected on it as a Short Time, not as the Father of Lies, but as it was
Extorted from him by God; show it near Ending.

At the End of 400 Years from the Weeks, of 404. from the Resurrection, and
437. from the Incarnation, Begin the Time, Times and Half with the High Sounds
of the Four First Trumpets; Of which That Year was not without its
Answerableness to this Prophetic Character, by reason of the Incursions of the
Barbarous Nations, as a Storm of Hail and Fire mingled with Blood, who because
They were to Become the Subjects of the Antichristian Papacy, are called, The
Gentiles Entering into the Outward Court; And their 42 Moons Commence, being
Solemnly, as it were, Inaugurated into Them by Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria that
very Year so Earnest in Adjusting Lunar Time to Solar; At the same Time began
that Apostasy the Apostle Paul speaks of in Delay of the Kingdom of Christ; And
in such Corruptions of the Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation of Christianity,
the True Church was Hidden under the Public Profession so Corrupted, as to be
the Church as in a Wilderness; and on which the Witnesses Prophecy, That is,
Declare Christ's Kingdom in Delay; as in Sackcloth; of which That Year there was
a Sample in a Persecution Raised by Gensericus, a Vandal Prince, against the
Servants of God Holding the Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God;
and It was continued against Those, who Kept the Commandments of God, and Held
the Testimony of Jesus Christ, by the Papal Tyranny: Within the Four First
Trumpets, Fall the so often Burning, and Sacking Rome, the utter Cessation of
the Name of Emperor of Rome in the West, and even of Consular Dignity.

At that very Time of the Cessation of Empire begin the Moons of the Papal
Antichristian Power, which Prophecy styles, The Beast; as a Preparation to
which the Hierarchy (as the Historian Sozomen Relates) had been Rising stilly,
as Feet of Clay from the Earth, and crept silently Forward into a Dynasty;
styled therefore, The Other Beast, which procurated for the Grand Beast; thus
Came in the Succession of the Beast, Dated to this very Year 476; and so its
Succession is Given as the 7th Head, and Eighth King, Rev. 17. For it is in
Immediate Succession to the Seventh King, no Head, which was the Christian
Emperor in the West.

Then the Bestian Antichristian Power grew up to its height, or Supremacy at
606, as the Star Fallen to the Earth, within his First Time, and pursued by God
with the First Woe, or the Mohammedan Imposture, at 622, and so to 797, Armed in
the Saracenick, Inrodes upon the Western Parts of the Empire: This continued
along the Second Time, or First of the Two Times of his settled, or, consistent
Power, till the Second Turkish Woe starts out in the Third Time, or Second of
the Two Times, where His stint, or the Bounds of his Power were set: Till it
came down to the Reformation at the Beginning of his Half Time, at the Year
1517. Where it has continued an 180 Years, down to the present. 1697, a
declined and decayed, but not a Fallen Power, according to the very Importance
of Two Times degraded to a Half Time.

Now I would Appeal to all the Reason, and Understanding of Man, whether, when
all the Prophetical Images are so expressive of these Events; And that, the
Line of Time, that Prophecy has proportioned to them, when laid to them, is so
fairly every way Adjustable, Viz. From Cyrus before the Weeks; Since the Weeks,
to the Death and Resurrection of Christ, After the Death, and Resurrection of
Christ, and the Preaching of the Apostles at the End of the Weeks, in 400 Years
of the Seals; and the Greater Cantons of Time, Times Half Time dividing, and
distributing 1260 Years into 360, 720, 180, and All so according with the very
Years, we Vulgarly Account to 1697. I would, I say, appeal to all Sense and
Understanding, whether this Account can be the Creature of Fancy, and
Imagination, or so much, as of Accident; Except they think, such a Conspiration
of so many things, of so great Concernment to the World, and to the Churches of
Christ, be below the Notice of the Divine Spirit, or its Care to make them
known; For that the very things themselves cannot be contrived into such
Representations, cannot be once said; when it is so Experimental, that the
things, if not so Designed by the All-seeing Spirit, must by Accident be so
subject to the Elaboration of Fancy, and Imagination, or rather of Judgment,
and Understanding; Seeing this Threefold Respect is found in Reality, and
Substance of Scripture-Emblems, of Scripture-Numbers, of Correspondent Events,
in History, and Chronology; To say which Undermines All Rationality of
Inference from the Greatest Correspondency of Effects in Creation, and
Providence, with the Wisdom, and Power of the Supreme Creator, and Governor of
All, Viz. If we may not Reason from these, to the Intention of Divine Spirit.

Now from hence, reach the Additional 75, to the Thousand Years of the Blessed
State, Viz. From the Kingdom of Christ in Succession, in Thirty years of the
Sealed Thunders, opened in Rev. c. 14. Making the 1260, 1290. Wherein First
there is a Glorious shining out of the Gospel, and the Glory of Christianity
for the Conversion, and bringing Multitudes to Christ, and for a Testimony
against those who remain obstinate, the Filthy being Filthy still; And then the
Vials poured out, that Time of Trouble, such as never was, since Man was upon
Earth, Through the Forty Five Additional to the 1290, and making them 1335, to
the Glorious and Blessed State, and the Lots of the New Jerusalem, in the End
of these Days, Dan. 12. 11, 12, 13.

And in the same way of Evidence, and Assurance, I find my self through the
Gracious Assistance of God, able to go backward in the Analytical, or
Retrograde method to the very Death of Solomon, where I began, and find the
Connection of one thing to another, so Just, so True, so Steadfast, and so
Unmovable, that they cannot be dislocated, nor Disjoynted; And the Numbers of
Scripture Time so Locked, one within another, That they cannot be Wrench'd, or
Forced asunder; All which I have in Readiness to offer to every Judicious
Considerer, and of which I would give the Briefest Specimen in this following
Scheme, that I can Contrive.

The Thousand Years, are by all the Wonders of it the most undoubted End, or
Finishing of Wonders; And the very same with the Mystery of God to be Finished,
by the Seventh Angel sounding, according as he has spoken in Gospel to, and by
his Servants the Prophets.

This being the Fullness of Times, all Times Center, or flow down, and rest in
it. Here rest the 45 Last of the 2300 Eves, Morns, as is expressed in Daniel; The
45 take such hold of the 30, that all the force in the World cannot divide them;
As is Apparent by 1290 made 1335, the Thirty take the same hold of the 1260;
Which are the Times, and Half; That they can no more be separated, then the
others; The 1260 in the Three Divisions, Viz. The Half Time takes hold of the
720, or the two Times; And the two Times of the First Time, or 360, And they
can endure no distance; Because they are together one 1260. The 1260
necessarily take hold of whatever Time went before, and lay between the 490 of
the Weeks, and the 1260; This can be no way contested; Because the Weeks by
Express Scripture End Three Years, and Half, or Half a Week from the Death of
Christ; And then, we know a Time there must be, from the Beginning of the 1260,
of some distance of Space from the End of the Weeks; Because from the Three
Years and Half after the Death of Christ, so many more Years, then 1260 are now
passed, and yet the Great Events at the End of the 1260, not yet come to pass,
and therefore not the 1260 themselves. And yet that space must take hold of the
End of the Weeks, Because the Half Week Ends a Three Years, and a Half; Half a
Week; from the Death of Christ; The Seventy Weeks Notwithstanding, They are
divided into Joints, yet are as close, as the Joynted parts of any the same
Member of the Body, being together the Seventy Weeks; The Seventy Weeks lay an
Indisputed Claim to whatever Time went before to Cyrus; And every part must be
Joined Each to other, Because all the several Portions of Time stand United in
the 2300; And seeing so much Time has already passed since the End of the
Weeks, as leaves no more then 75 before the Weeks of the 2300 to Cyrus, we are
sure, there can be no more; I confess, there may be Fewer, and so more of the
1260 to Run out then to 97; But so far, as we can be sure, there can be no more
than 400 before the 1335. We may be sure, there can be no Fewer, than 75 before
the Weeks.

From Cyrus backward, must be the 40 of Judah's Sin Born, Lying Close to the
End of the 390 Days of Israel's Sin Born, which Bring back to the Division of
the Tribes into the Two Houses of Israel, and Judah; All which Things have
been, and are Ready to be Fully made out to any, who Desire it in particular.

The Undoubted Emblems of Scripture Answering to these Numbers of Time, may be
Accounted for with the same Evidence, in this Retrospective Motion, as in the
Progression; For the very End of the Wonders is placed in the Beast and the
False Prophet cast alive into the Lake; And the Glory of Christ's Appearance,
and the Armies of Heaven, for whom Thrones were Set, and They Sat upon Them,
and They Lived and Reigned with Christ a Thousand Years were such, as did not
Worship the Beast, nor Receive his Mark, etc. The Vials, that Brought in the
Thousand Years, are Noted to Fall on the Beast, and them that Worshipped the
Beast, and had Received his Mark. The Voices, that prepared for the Vials, and
at the End of which, the Vials Began, were also upon the Beast; and the
Witnesses coming out of the Death, the Beast had laid them under, plainly
Entwist the Vials and the Voices with the Beast, and the Witnesses; and so
their Times one with another; viz. with the 1260 Days, the 42 Moons, the Times,
and Days, and Half. And in this same manner the Dragon, and they that were
Beheaded for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Dragon
cast down, and the Martyrs of Christ Overcoming, by the Blood of the Lamb, and
the Word of his Testimony, and not Loving their Lives unto Death; Seeing the
Dragon Gave his Power, and his Seat unto the Beast, show, very Evidently, that
the Moons of the Gentiles, and of the Beast, Began at the End of the Seals.
Even as it is most clear in a Progressive Motion, the Seals Issue into the
Trumpets, by the Seventh Seal conveying to them; The Trumpets into the Voices
by the Seventh Trumpet; the Voices by the Seventh Voice into ^he Vials, the
Vials by the Seventh Vial into the Thousand Years.

The Seals Run plainly Back into the Weeks, Beginning in the Confirmation of
the Covenant, by that Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, Emblem'd by
Christ Riding out on his White Horse, conquering, and to conquer, at the Ending
of the Weeks; The Weeks Run back into the Time of the Word Going forth for the
Restoring Judah, and Jerusalem, from whence they are Dated; The Going forth of
the Word into the Babylonish Captivity, which gave Occasion to the going forth
of that Word; and the Last Forty Years of the Babylonish Captivity, which was
the Ground of Bearing the Iniquity, or Punishment of the House of Judah, clasps
Fast with the 390 of Bearing Israel's Sin; because God commanded Ezekiel, when
He bad Born the sin of Israel on the Left side, without any Intermission, to
Turn on the Other side, and to Bear the sin of the House of Judah on the Right
side, and the Bearing the Sin of the House of Israel goes back to the Division
of the Tribes into Two Houses, at Solomon's Death.

In the Last Place, I dare Appeal to the Greatest Chronologers, or Historians,
whether our General Accounts do not, within some Fair Proportion, Allow the
Years of the Papacy, of the Pagan Power, of the Roman Empire, of the Grecian,
Persian, Babylonish Kingdoms, to serve these Prophetical Accounts; and so
backward by the Kings of Israel and Judah, to the Death of Solomon. Now all
these Things, were there Room to Represent Them clearly, particularly, and in
Full, would Give such certainty in these Points, according to the Exactness of
Scripture-Time, as would amount to the Justification of the Great Hope, I so
publicly make Offer of; and against which, in every minute Particular, I
Humbly Pledge my self to be Ready to Receive Exceptions, and to Return Due
Satisfaction; and therefore shall now Return to the more General Objections.

This way of Endeavor to Justify every Thing, by Plain Accounts, and Arguments
of Reason. Approachable by every Ones Reason, and Subject to the Examination of
every Man, whoever will take so much Thought, and Care of Trial, and Just
Judgment upon Himself; may take off much of that Exception; Why should All This
be Revealed to you more than to Any Other?

For The Answer I would give, is, Because God has engaged my Heart and
Thoughts to this Inquiry; And it has been the Principal Subject of my
Intellectual Inquiries, though I hope not in a Neglect of other Points of
Theology, and Scripture-Knowledge; But by this means I have been looking every
way into All the Advertisements of Scripture-Prophecy, comparing Prophetical
Things with Prophetical, and any of the most Accurate Memoirs of History and
Chronology, I could Arrain; And This is no other, than what Any Other Studious
in these Things, might have Attained* and much Higher, according to the
Advantages of Learning, more enlarged Capacities of Mind, Clearness of
Expression; as is most experimental in that Excellent Person, The Annotator on
the Revelation, and his Annotations, Published about Four Years ago; The Only
Thing that I pretend to, of Peculiar Favor herein from the Most High, is, That
he has thus engaged my Heart, and Thoughts to separate my self, and to
Intermeddle with this Wisdom, and Assisted me so far therein.

When any one vouches any Immediate Revelation, that cannot be disproved by its
plain Disagreeableness to other Sealed Parts of Divine Revelation, though
indeed from God; He, and his Revelation are Inaccessible, but by the same
Spirit of Revelation, in some suitable Efficacy of the same Spirit, enabling to
discern, or to feel the Virtue of it; As in the Apostles Days. When the
Prophets spoke one by one, 1 Cor. 14. 29. Then the Rest Judged; that is,
Discerned the Divineness of the Revelation; by the Participations of the same
Spirit in themselves: But when Any offer the Interpretation of written
Prophecies, or Prophecies of Scripture, by the Assistance of the same Spirit
that gave them; this Interpretation, if Just, and True, and according to the
Sense of the Divine Spirit, is the Spirit of Prophecy; Because it is the
Testimony of Jesus, which is the very Essence of the Spirit of Prophecy: Now
this is plainly Approvable by All, who wait upon the same Word of God by the
Assistance of the same Spirit: I do not therefore in Any of these Prophetical
Discourses, offer at any such thing, as in which the Spirit of the Lord passing
by others, should have spoken to me, but what every one has the same Riht, and
Open Door to, and Freedom of; and what every one has a Riight to Examine and
Accept, or Reject, according to the Evidence he finds of an Agreeableness with
the Sure Word of Prophecy or not: That only I stand up for, is, That He Judges
as a Prophet, according to the measure of that Dispensation of the Blessed
Spirit, now vouchsefed to his Servants; That is, that he Judge by the Due
Compare of Prophecy with Prophecy, by Attendance to every Hint, and Indication
of the Prophetical Mind Flowing from that Spirit, and that he lay this First,
as a Foundation, that the Prophecies of Scripture ought to be Given Heed to;
and that they may be understood, as a Light shining in a dark place: And
whoever does not thus address himself, can no more Judge, then any one could of
the Revelations then made by the Spirit to the Prophets of these First Times,
when they met in th^se Prophetical Exercises, without the Communication of the
same Spirit to themselves; or then an Illitterate, or unknowing Person in any
Science or Art, Can Judge of the Exercitations of the most knowing Persons, or
Artists, when they meet together for the Communication of their most Elaborate
Exercitations therein: And so I do indeed Claim, and Insist on this Privilege;
That none undertake to Judge, of what I have offered in these things, but by
such Prophetical Preparations, and Attendances upon Scripture Prophesies, that
are indeed open to every one that Desires to enter by the Key of Scripture-
Prophetical Knowledge, and shutt to others. And this is no more Presumption,
then what every one thinks his Privilege, that no one Judge of his Art, but He
that Understands it first Himself: And this I hope Vindicates from any undue
Assumption of any more, then the Gracious Direction of my Heart, and Thoughts,
to that Book of Scripture Prophecy, that Lies open to every one, that draws
nigh with due Preparation; And that every one may Judge of by the same
Preparation.

It may be further Objected, that yet it is very hard, if not Impossible to
attain the Sense of the Divine Spirit to a Year, or any such Precise,
Definitive Account of Time.

To this I Answer, It will easily be allowed that the Divine Spirit has
Determined, and knows according to that its Expression of it self, to the very
Self same Day; And therefore, seeing it has given Numbers of Time, it must be
to the very Self same Day, For the end of every Number is so Precise, and
Definite; That It must needs be to the very Self same Year, and even Day, if we
could have, as Punctual Account of Days, as of Years; But I find not the Holy
Spirit ordinarily, is more particular then Days of Years: By therefore a due
Poize of that Trine Aspect, of Prophetic Emblems, Prophetic Numbers, and
Providential Effects in Event, and Matters of Fact; of the Records of which, It
has taken Care by General History, and Chronology, we may come to know to a
Year; And of this, Besides several other Assurances that Require more
Discourse, There is that Time of the Reformation more Easy, and Immediate to
every Observation; wherein Divine Super-Intendencies upon all Historians
concerning it, to Fix the Beginnings of it in 1517. does so assure the
Beginning of: Half Time, as to assure also the End of Half Time, as of an 180
Years, and so of Time, and Times at 1697. and therefore the Beginning of Times,
or the Two Times at 797. and of the First Time at 437. The Times, and Half, are
contrived therefore into such Large Cantons of Time, as One Time, Two Times and
Half a Time, that They may be seen in so Large Spaces, and so much together;
and yet in such Minute, Exact Divisions, as Days of Years, especially and on
purpose, that they might be fully known, and exactly understood all along, and
at the End. which with so many Concurrences before-nam'd, (and of which I
should be most Ready to Give the particular State, more at large, to a Free and
Desirous, and a Judicious Recipient) does not make it strange to determine so
particularly upon 97. and may free from that Objection.

But what is there of Preparation to so great a Change? or what Instruments in
view for such Effects? may it be said. To which, this Answer is to be given:
That when we have to do with Him, who Planted the Heavens, and Laid the
Foundations of the Earth: who tells the Number of the Stars, and calls them
All by their Names; and appoints them every one their Course, to Fight in;
Nothing is Hard. Or how wonderful soever it be in our Eyes, can it be so in
His? Who works his signs, and his wonders in Heaven, and on Earth; and none can
stay his Hand, or say unto him, what do thou? who works, and none can let
it: Has he spoken, and shall he not do it? Is Any Thing too hard for me, sath
our Jehovah?

And as to Means and Instruments, although he could raise them, if he pleased; Yet
His Word of Propheby so expresses the doing of it, as if he would make use of
No Hand but his own; The Stone cut out of the Mountain is not in Hands; That
Power that stands up against the Prince of Princes, shall be broken without
Hand. Now this without Hand, is a manner of speaking, the Spirit of God is
pleased, as by the Translation of it from Daniel, into the New Testament, to
Apply a Tabernacle made without Hands, the Circumcision without Hands; the
House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens, appears to be an Expression
of God working by an Immediate Power of his own, and by Himself. It is by a
Spirit of Life from God, and by a Voice from Heaven. The Four Wheels of the
Four Monarchies are brought into the Temple, under the Cherubims; and without
any more ado, It was cried concerning them in my Hearing (the Hearing of the
Servants of God) Oh Revolution! It immediately passed upon them All, and there
were Loud Voices in Heaven upon it, proclaiming that Revolution: The Kingdoms
of this World are bocome the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. And this
is done at Half Time Ending, which signifies Suddenness, and Surprise: When
this is done, He, who does it, Comes with strong Hand; His Arm Rules for Him.
He understands his own Work; In the midst of All the Perplexities of it, His
work is before him; He understands it perfectly and throughout, Every Spring,
every Wheel to be moved, Every Pin of Connection.

But that which may much indeed Terrify, and Discourage, is the Great
Unworthiness of All Sorts and Degrees of Men, of Nations, and even of Churches;
so that some very Sweeping Judgment, and Desolation rather, or, at least, is
first to be expected.

The Hope yet is, That when God works for his Kingdom, and seems to be Lifting
up his Hand to Destroy, He will work for his own Names sake, in a Deliverance.
He will consider, He, to whom the Kingdom is to be Given, is worthy: And when
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Angel of the Covenant, comes into his Temple, He
does not expect to find Refinement ready to his Hand, but He comes to Refine:
He has given an Example in the Apostle Paul of All Long-suffering and
Patience, especially prepared for that very Time; Those, who shall Hereafter,
in a great distance of Time, Believe on Him; His Reward is with Him. He expects
it only from Himself, when his work ie so before him. And even to Impenitents
there is first a time of Warning and Testimony, and then the Day that will Burn
as an Oven, and the wicked are as Ashes under the Soles of the Feet. After this
warning is the perdition of ungodly Men reserved for punishment.

I know very well, Notwithstanding, all this Assurance, and the Reason of it* I
have given; It will be said yet to me; Seeing this Year 97 is in so near on
Approach, and there are no Appearances of such a Succession, or opening of the
Kingdom of Christ, ought it not therefore to shake your Confidence, and put a
diffidence upon such a continued Affirmation of such a Kingdom to make any
Entrance at this Time?

In Answer to this, I would make this Humble Profession, or Confession in these
Three things.

First, I cannot be shaken in my assurance; Because I find my Grounds in the
Word of God unshakable, and unmovable; A False Witness, that has no
Foundation, Perishes in this Sense; He cannot Bear up to, nor continue in his
Testimony; But, He that Hears, and knows, on what Grounds He speaks,
Affirms constantly: He that has seen nothing, as the Ground of his Prophecy
is like a Reed shaken with the Wind; But they, that have the Word of the Lord,
Continue to speak it: While I am so certain, The Kingdom of Christ Enters its
Succession without any delay, whenever the Last of the Four Kingdoms Ends; That
the Third Woe of the Seventh Angel, that Sounds the Kingdom of Christ, Comes
quickly; I look to see therefore, what assurances there are, this Last Kingdom,
even its Last State is upon giving up. I find then, the Times and Half, Which
are the Term of the Last State, of the Last Kingdom; By the Time since
Constantine; By the Time, since the Christian Empire Demised; By the Time since
Mahometanism, and more Particularly the Ottoman Empire has entered the World;
By the Time, since the Reformation first entered by Luther, just ending. All
these have such Lively Sculptures and Engravings, in the Sure word of Prophecy,
and their Times so Delineated; I do not better know the Course of the Months in
the Year; the Days in the Month, or the Hours in the Day, then I know the very
Last Year of the 1260 Days of Years, is now entering, and to Run its Circle; and
that within its Circle, the Kingdom of Christ will come into its Succession.

The Second thing, that I most Humbly desire to be Steadfast, Unmovable,
Unshaken in, and upon, is the Exceeding Riches of the Grace, and Loving
Kindness of God in Jesus Christ, the Great High Priest, and Apostle of my
Profession; That Shepherd of the Sheep, that is to Shine forth as the Great
Prince, to have That great (...), that Fold, that is a Court, One Shepherd, and
One Fold: the Goodness and Faithfulness of the Spirit of Truth, Guiding into
all Truth: Glorifying the Lord Jesus Christ, by taking of the Things, That are
His, and so of his Kingdom, and showing them to his Servants, and showing them
Things that are to Come; I have Great Assurance in his Tenderest Mercies,
having Led, and Guided, and Supported me thus far, in the Search after his
Kingdom, and Manifested so much to me; He will not Leave me to be ashamed of my
Hope; I can Humbly say before Him, as his Servant Jeremy; Oh Lord; thy Words
have been Found, and I have Eaten them, and they have been the Joy and the
Rejoicing of my Heart, I Humbly therefore Expostulate with Him, Will Thou? Will Thou be to me as a Liar; I know it is Impossible, He should Lie, He is God,
that cannot Lie; And therefore herein His Servants may plead with Him; The
Vision shall not Lie, He will not be, as Waters, that are not sure, of which he
has given so Lively a Description, in comparing the Unfaithfulness of Friends
to Them; My Friends have dealt Deceitfully with me, as a Brook, and as the
Streams of Waters, that pass away; Which are Blackish by Reason of Ice, etc.
But what Time they are warm, They Vanish, when it is Hot, They are Consumed out
of their Place; the Paths of their way are turned aside, They go to nothing,
and Perish; The Troops of Tema, Looked, and VVaited; The Companies of Seba were
Confounded, Because they had Hoped, they came thither, and were Ashamed, Jer.
15. 15. etc. Job. 15. 15. etc. How fully does this Express, what Jeremy
understood by Waters not sure! And how Applicable to My Case, if the Hopes I
have of the Kingdom of Christ, should prove mistaken.

It may be said, Indeed if I were sure, I had the Right Sense of
Scripture-Prophecy, the Argument were enough sure; I therefore herein Rely on
his Grace, that he has Guided me into the Truth of his Word; that as I am
sure, His Word cannot Fail; He cannot Lie; so neither can any Iron, any Created
Power break the Northern Iron, or prepared Steel of his Wisdom, Truth and Power.

But lest any should say, If you have such a Fasth, have it to your self before
God, and Happy are you, if you do not find Reason to Condemn your self in what
you so much approve: This therefore is my Third Profession, The things that I
have so heard and seen by continual search into, Meditation upon, and seeking
Divine Direction in* I cannot but speak; I look upon the Kingdom, as of those
Things wherein we should confess Christ, and not be ashamed of him before Men,
whosoever despise his Kingdom; and of those, of which Confession is to be made with
the Mouth uneo Salvation. And therefore, as I have Humble Hopes, That Jesus
Christ has been Graciously pleased to draw out my Heart, Thoughts,
Meditations, to search Every Retirement of his Word therein above All, that
have been before me; And to give me Greater Confidence and Assurance; and a
more open Profession and Publication of what I have Found; So that he will
graciously Accept, Remember, Pardon, spare me through the Multitude of his
Mercies, and not deliver up to shame, and Confusion of Face before Men, and
confess me before his Father, and before his Holy Angels.

That such a State of his Kingdom, and such a Revolution with it, and by it,
shall this very Year Appear to All the World, as has never been since the
Apostasy of Humane Nature; and that therefore All Mighty Works shall show forth
Themselves in it: The Spirit shall be poured out from on High; The Wilderness
shall Become a Fruitful Field; viz. in the highest Purity, and Prosperity of
his Churches; and that, which looked like a Fruitful Field, become Desert, even
the Antichristian State, and whatever partakes of it, the Glory of All this
World, and the Grandeur of it; and so the Everlasting Gospel shall be preached
to every Nation, Tongue and People, and every Thing move to the Glory of that
Kingdom.

To whom then (Most Reverend, and Right Reverend) could I present equally, as
to you, the consideration of these things, who, I am assured are so Richly
Furnished with all Advantages of Learning, both in that Sure word of Prophecy,
and in History, and Chronology, Correspondent therewith; And whose very Title
Imports the Office of Those, who are on the VVatch Tower, waiting for the
Speaking of the Vision, which will not Tarry beyond its Time; And therefore
should be able to Answer the Question, Watchman, Watchman, what of the Night?
Or how Near is the Morning? and who, as Persons of an Elevated Station, ought
to Vindicate your selves by a Higher Zeal for the Kingdom of Christ, and even
by a Holy Haste to bring Him to his Throne above others; That you may not Fall
under any Ombrage of the Antichristian Hierarchy, who as Feet of Clay, are
found in the Undermine of the Kingdom of Christ; and are Broken by the very
First Openings of it, as upon which that Image Rests, that Stands in delay of
that Kingdom.

How therefore should you be able to answer that Question, What do you more
than others for the Kingdom of the Chief Shepherd, who has it on his Vesture,
and on his Thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? and who Profess to Attend
upon him more Near and in Ordinary.

I most Humbly therefore submit this Apology to your Severest Examination, and
that as Prophets, that is, Persons above Ordinary, Instructed in the (...) Word
of Prophecy, (for no otherwise can it be done) you would Judge; The Grounds
Themselves I freely tender to so Sage and Learned a Christian, a Protestant
Presidency. There is a kind of Intuitive Knowledge and Plerophory of
Satisfaction, I must (with all Reverence yet, and Humble Fear) Hope I have a
Right unto, as proper to the having seen together the Curious Lines of
Prophecy, equal to the Curious Lines and Symmetry in the Works of God, which
the most Exact Astronomer, Anatomist, Naturalist, (...) has, or can Observe. I
desire the Things I offer might be brought into Seriousest Consultation, and
Debate, as in the Days of Herod concerning the place where Christ should be
born, so now concerning, the Time of his Kingdom Appearing. It cannot be but
most Great, to be near the (...) of the Kingdoms of this world to be the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. How would it relieve in All the most
Inextricable Labyrinths of the present Difficulties of Nations, to our Nation
particularly, to our King, to the Council of the Nation in Parliament: That He,
whose Right it is, is now about to take to Himself his Great Power, and to
Reign, and to destroy them, who have been so long destroying the Earth.

I know, the Paganizing Nations, and Spirits will be very Angry, even at the
Mention of these Things, as Vtopian, Imaginary, Fanatical; and think to Scoff
it off; But as an Hidden and Concealed Train, that Gives Fire, and has its
Effect in a Moment; so the Chain of Divine Councels, the Predictions of
Omnisciency in All Times take Full Effect in their own Just Moments, how
Unawares soever the World be concerning them: For He who is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in working, can neither be outwitted, nor over ruled.

What I offer can be only from Sense of Duty to declare, what I have so Full
Assurance of: Duty as to the Great Revealer of Prophetical Secrets, the
wonderful Numberer of the Times of Prophecy; so Duty to the Public, in the so
Generally Acknowledged Distress of Affairs; For which my Constant Supplications
Ascend, as also for You whose Most Christian Assistance, and Administration,
according to Your Higher Sphere, I Beseech, and who, I Hope, Count it Your
Greatest Honor to Serve Him, who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth (...)
and therefore will not with a Ga^^i^ like Spirit, not Care for any of these
Things.

This First Month of the Year 1697. Most Reverend, Right Reverend, Your Most
Humble Servant, In That Kingdom of our Lord, T. BEVERLEY.

FINIS.

