THE LATE Great Revolution IN THIS NATION;

Argued according to Rev. 17. 16. 17.

To be duly Ascribed to the Supreme Spirit now about to move in the Fulfilling
All Prophecy; The earnest of which is vouchsafed to us in this so wonderful
Change.

In pursuance of a Discourse Published Twelve Months past, viz,

The Command of God to come out of Babylon:

Wherein is more fully proved the [NOW] Roman Communion is Intended, and that
the Words of God will be fulfilled concerning the Present State of the Papacy
in its Expiration, and the Hatred of the Whore, 1697.

By T Beverley.

For the Testimony of JESUS is the Spirit of Prophecy, Revel. 19. 10. Printed
for John Salusbury in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1689.

A PREFACE TO THE READER, Upon the following DISCOURSE, suited to the present
Juncture of Affairs in the World, and to the particular Signs of the Times now
Emerging.
THat which bore up the great Princes, and Leaders among the Servants of God in
Elder times, to such a Transcendency of Action, was immediate Revelation from
God; The Word of God came to them, as Christ speaks, and ennobled them, as Gods
upon Earth.

Immediate Revelation in the same manner bore up so High the Spirits of the
Prophets, that they feared none of the Powers upon Earth, how great, and
formidable soever, in delivering the Divine Messages, even when they threatened
them with that Ruin, which they knew would most enrage them to Hear of.

The very same immediate Revelation, stirred up the Spirits of the Universality
of the Servants of God in Prayer, and suitable Action, so that they offered
themselves willingly to the Services of their Generation, even in the
Loughtiest Achievements, when they knew themselves Armed with the Assurances
of the Purposes of God to be fulfilled in those Seasons, wherein they were
summoned to such Actions.

That which next to such immediate Revelation would now Inspire the Servants of
God in each Station, to the highest Elevation, in Divine Manifestations to the
World, in Prayer, and Action, must be a Discovery of the Signs of the present
Time according to sacred Prophecy, and especially that great Prophecy of the
New Testament, which is peculiarly entitled The Revelation; Because it is and
ought to be in the place of immediate Revelation to All, who Read, and Hear it,
and all the Servants of Christ ought to Read and Hear it. For it is the
Revelation, that God gave to Jesus Christ to show to his Servants, things that
are shortly to come to pass. And that showing is plainly declared to be by
their Reading, and Hearing: For it immediately follows Christ's showing, and
signification of it by the Testimony, and Writing of his Servant John. For he
is commanded to write for after Ages; And to encourage in such Reading, and
Hearing, There is a Promise of Blessedness adjoined to the Reading and Hearing.

I do not at all doubt, there is a mystical Reading, and Hearing by the Spirit,
and Power of Christ instructing and actuating his Servants, according to the
Principles, and Services of this very Prophecy. And that, what is now doing,
and operating, in the World, and in our Nation, is according to it, without
explicit understanding, or attending to the Explanation of it.

But yet undoubtedly, a more open, and bold Explanation is due; especially to
this Age of the Churches of Christ, and approach of his Kingdom. We ought now
to be more skilled in the Signs of the Times, than by a mere kind of Implicit
Faith. And that must be by the Calculation of them according to this Prophecy;
for the Signs of the Times are compounded especially of the Definition of times
by Prophesy, and the events determined to come to pass in those Times, and our
discerning the Signs of the Times, is to be by a compare of Prophecy, and the
product of Times, agreeable to the Prophecy, together; even as the Time of
Messiahs coming was designed by the sure Word of Daniels Prophesy, and Jesus
Christ, mighty in Word and Deed, came at the same Time. Now our Lord condemns
the Ignorance of the Scribes, and Pharisees, and People, who did not discern
the Signs of that Time, not as simple Ignorance, or Nescience, but as gross
Hypocrisy, that they would not know what they might have known; and
proportionably in all times, but especially in these Times, wherein mighty
Works are to show forth themselves, and begin to show forth themselves in the
downfall of the Turkish Tyranny, with which the Papal is to meet in such degrees
of Ruin, as are determined to be parallel in each, and in parallel Times.

I most humbly, and earnestly threfore Beseech the Angels of the Reformed
Churches, That they would search this so great Prophecy of the New Testament,
as commensurate, as has been said to Immediate Revelation, and that they would
Minister out of it to the Princes and Powers of the Ten Kingdoms, that have so
long given their Power, and Kingdom to the Beast, especially to those, which
are already of the Reformation; For the Words of God are near to be fulfilled,
for God had said, The Beast shall have Power to continue Forty two Months, and
to receive great Power, and Authority from those Kings, giving their Power, and
their Kingdom to Him. And the Word of God was fulfilled, so that their Kingdoms
were entirely so given till the Reformation, when the Morning of the last half
Day, or half Time of the forty two Months, gave Liberty to some of those Ten
Kings to reverse, and recall the giving of their Kingdom: As Christ arose early
in the Morning of his last third Day, and appeared to some of the Apostles, and
Disciples; But it was Evening, e're he met them in a Body; and those, who saw
him first, were Instrumental to prepare those, who did not see him till the
Evening: so those Princes already of the Reformation shall be Instrumental to
oblige the rest, who have not yet renunciated to the Beast and the false
Church, to do the same, now near the End of the last of the forty two Months.

Let them therefore have those grand excitements, and encouragements of
Prophecy; undoubtedly Cyrus though a Gentile Prince was highly animated by the
Prophesies of Isaiah and Jeremiah for the Destruction of Literal Babylon, which
Prophesies we may be assured were expounded to Him by Daniel, so great a
Prophet in his own Times; how much more will Christian, and Protestant Princes,
exalted in their Spirits, summon their Prowess, and puissance for the service
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to be within these Eight next Years proclaimed
by loud Voices from Heaven: For when the Words of God are to be fulfilled, that
the Ten Kings and their Nations, do give their Power no longer to the Beast;
Then the Kingdom of Christ is proclaimed, although his Inauguration, as we
speak, shall not be till seventy five Years after.

If any should say, the Prophecy is dark and not to be understood, and Men
very disenclin'd to believe the Explications given of it; let them consider, it
is very dangerous to say of any Book of Scripture, with the unlearned, we
cannot read it, because we are not learned, and with the learned, we cannot
read it because it is sealed. If there were by the pouring out of the Spirit
upon the Reformed an united endeavor to search by the Books of Scripture, and
other Ecclesiastical Records with Prayer, what, and what manner of Time, the
Holy Spirit in it did signify, as they have searched for the Sense of
Antiquity in some things of far less moment, or concern to the Kingdom of
Christ, what doubt can there be but that the two leaved Gates of Truth in it
had opened to them; and by their concerted Light, and Authority, Princes would
be awakened, and persuaded, so that the great City, and its Decimal power would
soon feel the Earthquake, and fall.

I am not at all in doubt, but that to me, less than the least of all Saints,
and the chiefest of Sinners, as upon the Banks of Chebar, Ulai, and Hiddekel,
and as in the Isle of Patmos, that Grace has been vouchsafed upon my most
Attentive Thought and Contemplation of this and other Prophesies of Scripture;
and upon the whole Scheme of Scripture Time, that I have certainly found, That
at the year sixteen hundred ninety seven, These great Things shall come to
their Complement, that are to be at even Dates with the Proclamation of the
Kingdom of Christ; That the Pollution of the Sanctuary shall be so far
finished, that the measured Temple, and it is worshippers sealed up [within
eight,] the last twelve hundred sixty years shall be opened, and a far more
excellent Church State Appear. The Ministrations of Truth, and Divine Worship
much purer, as the Ark of Testament seen; and the Witnesses Shall have come out
of their Sackcloth, wherewith the so long Apostasy, together with the Turkish
Woe, a Judgment upon that Apostasy, has covered them.

I have published several Discourses to this purpose, viz. A Scripture line of
Time and Solomon's Song adjusted to it, and have found none, who has thought
fit to remonstrate to them, or resist the Evidence with which I have written;
not because I have written, but because of what I have written, I may say, It
is written. It is written in the Scripture of Truth.

Particularly the annexed Discourse, I published a year ago, and I cannot but
look upon the present appearance of things in the World a Justification of it:
I have observed hitherto a very wonderful progress of Divine Government in the
World, according to the Calculation of Prophecy I have made. I observe a great
Preparation for the Cessation of the Turkish Woe, upon the Imperial
Constantinople and the Greek Cities, that those Candlesticks may be Re-placed:
I observe yet, This seems to wait for the Fall of the Tenth of the great City,
which motion it is to attend: I have been always of the Judgment, the Reformed
Churches, that lie in the Bowels of Nations, whose Princes, and Staple Laws had
not established the Reformation, were in Danger of fresh Martyrdoms by the
cruel Policies of the Jesuits Order, whose Arcana Imperii, or Politics, may
well be styled the depths of Satan. I have understood those Churches symbol'd
by the Church of Thyatira, in regard of whom the Feet of Christ burn as in a
Furnace to this day.

The Nations, whose Princes and Laws have established the Reformation, I have
had firm Assurance, could not be re-enslav'd, under the enchantment of
Restoring that Power to the Beast, which they had repealed from him, nor should
the Churches in them, except by a short Hurricane, be in any danger of force. I
have had the same Confidence with particular Relation to this Nation, and the
Churches in it, and that the Sovereign Power of it shall be of the principal,
that shall perfect that Revolution of the Reformation into it is Complement, and
on that account have prayed for the good understanding of our Supreams to that
very end.

I have compared such Reformed Churches, and particularly this, to that of
Sardis, esteeming our greatest danger to be a Security, a slumber in a State
though splendid as to this World, yet short of the Glory intended by Christ in
the Advances of his Kingdom; and that thereupon, he would come upon us, and we
should not know at what hour he himself would come upon us. I find no Reason to
change, or so much as to suspect, but to be more and more confirmed in these
Sentiments.

I make no more doubt, the present Conjuncture, is a dawn of that great
Revolution, awaiting the Year ninety seven, next ensuing, than I doubt, whether
the dawn of the day be in advance to the perfect Light; because I am not upon
any single Conjecture, but upon the whole Conspiration of Apocalyptical Times,
compared with the Registries of History in the course of Time since our Lords
Resurrection, as famous, and as well known, as the Reformation from Luthers
Time is known. I am not on any single Line of Time, but upon the Concatenation
of Times throughout Scripture, not as it is perplexed with the Irreconcilable
Chronological Controversies, but assured by Massy, Sterlyn Scripture, both by
compare of the Texts themselves, and Scripture Reason, argued from them.

I have only three parts of that Line to publish, viz. from Abraham to the
going out of Egypt, from the going out of Egypt to Solomon's beginning the
Temple, and from the Temple begun to Cyrus his Decree for restoring it, after
the Babylonish Devastation. I have also prepared so great a Probation, that the
day of Judgment, and the Resurrection so generally acknowledged in Christian
Doctrine, are at the full dimensions of Exposition the very Milennial, or
thousand years, Kingdom of Christ, that I think upon the comparing of
Scriptures, I have vouched and argued, it cannot be denied; and as a Complement
of all, I have adjusted to those Illustrious Scriptures the Prayer, we so
generally acknowledge by the Name of the Lords prayer in the Explanation of it,
and proved it to be the Prayer of, and prepared for that Glorious Kingdom of
Christ, as also by eminent Scriptures the Lords Supper to be the Sacrament of
the Kingdom.

I hope by the good Hand of God toward me to be so assisted, as to make
Publication of these with the great, and confiding Expectation; that since I
have had so great cause to believe, no one sees Reason to chastise the
Discourses I have published, and that the Divine Administrations of these
latter Times, are going on to justify them, they will be serviceable as Go^ds
to the enquiries of greater Masters of Assemblies, and their every way ^ore
acceptable Researches into these things, to the greater hastening of the Glory,
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the fall of his Enemies to be his
Footstool, by the earnest Prayers of his Churches, and Saints, and that in the
mean time, they will be as Nails fastening those Tents, and Pavilions of
Princes, who are to serve the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords in their
Station. For I am sure, they are given from one, even the chief Shepherd, and
Bishop of his Church, Jesus Christ.

I am not inclined, nor have ever had a Temptation to represent the Prophesies
of Scripture as a Doctrine of Blood. I am sensible, what Spirit Christianity is
of to its greatest Enemies. Christ came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them; I expect a Battle of Christ, that shall not be as of the Warriors with
confused noise, and Garments rolled in Blood, but with fuel of Fire, pure and
clean Holiness, a pure Either of Justice, and Righteousness; for in
Righteousness he Judges and makes War, and that in the mean time, there shall
be no more use of Instruments, to destroy, than the most Righteous, and just
Constitutions and Governments of Nations allow: For the Angels of the Vials
upon the Antichristian State are clothed with Linen pure, and white, and
their Breasts girded with golden Girdles, their Vials full with no other wrath
than of God Almighty, Rev. 15.

Yet not offering to be particularly definitive; I Avow in the general, Yet
Eight years, and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ, and Papacy and Mahometanism shall sink down before Him,
his Monarchy shall then begin its Succession, although his glorious Investiture
shall not be till seventy five years after; In which time, The everlasting
Gospel shall be preached by a new Mission equal in speed, and effect to that of
the Apostles, and more universal; symboll'd therefore by an Angel flying
through the midst of Heaven, bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles, and
effectual to the Conversion of the Jews; upon which Saviors shall come upon
Mount Sion, and destroy the whole race of Pagan, Mohammedan, Antichristian
Edomites, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any please to assist in the Publication of the whole Designation, they
shall receive Proportionably.

It consists of the Scripture Line of the Kingdom drawn from the first Sabbath
to the thousand Years Sabbatism.

The Song of the Kingdom, or Solomon's Prophetic Song adjusted to it.

The Doctrine of the Kingdom, or Demonstrative proof by Scripture, the Kingdom
of the thousand Years is the Resurrection, or Day of Judgment.

The Prayer of the Kingdom, or the Lords Prayer, proved principally to look at
that Kingdom.

The Sacrament of the Kingdom, or the Supreme aim of the Lords Supper, argued
to be at that Kingdom.

T. Beverley.

Revel. XVII. 16, 17. And the Ten Horns thou saw upon the Beast, these shall
hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her
Flesh, and burn her with Fire;

For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his Will, and to agree, and to
give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.


I Have in a Discourse Published Twelve Months past, explained, Gods Command to
come out of Babylon.
and proved the explanation of this, and the neighboring Prophecy, as having
it is direct Aspect on the prostitute Roman Communion by such Arguments as have
never been so much as attacked, in a time when there was both all advantage and
keenness against what ever was offered contrary to that Interest, how weak, or
trifling soever it might seem, and it is probable, They would have that
Discourse go for such.

It is wonder therefore, if the Arguments would have born it, they were not at
least exposed to scorn and laughter; but Prophetic Truth in this matter is too
solid to be so fastened on.

This Prophecy Imports the great Revolution of those Ten Kings and their
Kingdoms, our own and those, which lie all about us, that were known for
several Hundreds of Years, to have been devotely united to the Roman Catholic
Church, as they delighted to Style it, and to the Papal Supremacy, as Head of
it; these very Kings and Kingdoms shall hate that Adulterous Church, made
Infamous in this Prophecy by the Name of the Whore, and shall Treat her with
the greatest Hatred, Indignity, and Aversation; and God will set Judgment
before them as in the Case of the Jewish Ezekiel. 23.
Aholibah, and they shall execute greatest severity upon it, as eating her
Flesh by Slaughter, and Burning her with Fire.

And all this they shall do, as is Employed, when the words of God are
fulfilled. That is, when the time determined by God for the giving their
Kingdom to the Beast is expired; till then they agree in one, being under an
Enchantment to the Whore to give their Kingdoms to the Beast, that bears her,
that he might bear her with the greatest Granduer, and State, his Head rising
up with these Ten Horns; These Symbolical Names are given to the Papacy, and
the Ten Kings for the stupidness of their Idolatry, and the Cruelty of their
Persecution.

The time God had allotted to the Beast was Forty two Jewish Months, making
1222 Years, as another Prophecy assures us; so long the Papacy was to continue
from the time of this Authority, to be accounted from 475 and at the same hour
the Ten Kings receiv*d their Kingdoms in Sacred Register, or Prophecy, at the
Cessation of the Roman Western Empire.

This time is also called, as given to the whole Antichristian Revel. 12.
Apostasy, Time, Times, and half a Time; At the Morning of the half Time, as
Christ arose on the Morning of his Third Day, Some Beginning ^3^.
of those Ten Kings began to hate the Whore, and Revoked their Kingdoms from
the Beast; This was when Luther first rose up. Ann. 1517. Yet so great
Kingdoms, as we know, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Poland and Portugal
continue their Subjection to him. In them also the Prophecy shall be
accomplished, when the words of God shall have their last fulfilling, that will
be at the Year 1697. For as each Time is Three Hundred Sixty Years; so
proportionably the half Time is one Hundred Eighty Years; Take them to begin at
Luthers appearance, 1517. they necessarily end at 1697. the very observation of
which gives the expectation of that Year Credence. For none can deny if Time,
Times, half a Time, are equal to 1260. Years; The half Time numbers 180. None
can deny the Reformation dawned 1517. which things joined together make,
whether we will, or no, a great Climateric of 1697. a Year of great Remarque,
as the Hundred Eightieth or half Time from the Reformation, for if a part of
the Ten Kings Revoked then as in the Morning, All must at the Evening; For when
the words of God are entirely fulfilled, this hating the Whore must be
fulfilled also, and that is at the full end of the half Time 1697.

These things I have more fully opened and proved in that Command out of
Babylon, as also in the Scripture Line of Time. I only prepare for the present
Discourse by a Summary Repetition of them.

My Intention now is, to Remarque upon the present wonderful Doing of God in
this Nation, and to examine, whether it be not a loud Alarm, not only to this
Nation, but to the Christian World throughout. That God has to admiration
opened to the accomplishment of this great Prophecy. And that it is so, I
shall affirm by Ten solemn Arguments.

But first by way of premisal. I say, if this be indeed a Proph^s^e, a Divine
Prophecy so soon to be accomplished, and that the accomplishment be indeed set
out in this wonderful change of affairs in our Nation; it is then certain, the
consideration of the Proph^sie is more to the great purpose, what we are to
expect, then the fairest Train of second Causes, the Eyes, and the Spirit of
the Living Creatures in the Wheels in Ezekiels Vision c. 1. are much more to
every end and purpose, then the Rings of the Wheels, how High, Dreadful, and
August soever; they are indeed more in view, make more noise, raise a greater
dust, but the Spirit does all.

All Princes, States, Councils, Forces are to be valued, and Honored in their
Places; but Prophecy, or the God of Prophecy raises them, gives them each
their Line of Action; raises others, when they are at the end of their Line;
takes hold, and grasps it is end, and is most assured of it. All second Causes
may fail, your Fathers are dead, and the Prophets, where are they? But did not
my words by the Prophets take hold. So it was in all Ages, so it will be now:
The words of this Prophecy seem to lie still in the Sacred Book; but God
remembers them, as his word, and sends out his Spirit, and stirs up the Spirits
of Men according to them: We ought not therefore to despise the searches of
Prophecy. For whoever can find the True Canale of them, gives greater
assurance of the Port, and Haven of all motions, then the wisest Conventions,
or most Potent Armies, or fairest set of subordinate Instruments can do; From
this very Prophecy sprung out the great Action of this Year now in our Eves.

I shall therefore pursue this Argument, keeping wholly within the P^ophetical
Sphere, touching no Civil concerns, but as naked matter of Fact for the service
of Prophecy.

Prophecy from Christ's Condemning both Teachers, and People, when they knew
not the Signs of the Time. The Signs of the Times are not only Religious, or
Moral Characters, as the Holiness of Christ's Doctrine, Life, great Zeal in
doing good was such a sort of Signs of the M^ssiah that could not be absent;
and Christ says in Relation to them. And why of yo^^selves judge you not, what
is Right? viz. from the Laws of Reason, of Natural and Religious Conscience,
instead of a S^gn from Heaven; but besides these, there are the Signs of the
Times, the sure word of Prophecy gives, as Daniels Seventy Weeks gave of
Messi^h; With these His Miraculous Birth early Wisdom at Twelve Years old,
great works concerted, and these compared could not deceive concerning
Messiahs's times then on Earth.

I presume to say, I have found a Line of Time in Prophecy reaching to near as
within about Eight Years of this great Prophecy fulfilled, I gave it out a
Year ago. Here comes out a Providence before us so great, so stupendous, to
the very purpose of this Prophecy, the equal of which is hardly to be found in
Story, that was yet but an Embryo in the Womb of this Prophecy at that time, I
made the Line Public; far off from all prospect, no Cloud as Big as a Man's Hand
to Divine by.

If now one may not, if one cannot discern the Signs of the Times by such a
Conjuncture of Prophecy, and Providence, I may humbly say, why should any one
be condemned of Hypocrisy for not discerning those Signs, when on so great a
Configuration one may be mistaken. Then may it be said, all Signs of the Times
are Fugitive, Fallacious, and Uncertain, but they are not so; therefore I am
not mistaken; event will justify it at 97. as it has so, beyond conjecture,
already begun.

Phenomenon, one great appearance in Prophecy, that seems to forbid this
Interpretation of the present glor^ous Providence; that is, that just before,
viz. Three Years, and a half before the fall of the great City, Babylon in a
Mystery, this Roman Infamous Woman; the Witnesses must be killed* and by the
Beast on which she Sits.

I have Anticipated this Objection by showing, it is impossible the Beast
should have Forty Two Moons of Years, and have that work to do at his Three
last Years and a half, nor does the Analogy of so great an event agree with so
Pusil, so small a time. But the Three Days and a half are equal to the Three
Times and a half, and both to Twelve Hundred Sixty Days; They are in the Habit
of Three Days, etc. only to show a deep time of the Sackcloth Proph^sie in
being killed, as there was a deep time of our Lords Death, in his not whole,
but part of Three Days as I am conscious I have abundantly made out.

But further, I argue from this Providence. This Church of England,
Comprehending, as God does, all his Servants; holding the Testimony of Jesus,
whether, what we style Established by Law or Protestant D^ss^nters, is a Land
of Gods Witnesses, if there be any such under Heaven; if God has then so
rescued them from being in any sense killed by the Beast any more, as he has;
it is certain, that Prophecy of the Witnesses cannot be in the way of this
Prophecy of the Ten Kings hating this Whore, that it should not come to pass
in it is just season of 1697.

For God has so Consolidated the Nation in this rescue, that this Kingdom of
the First Three among the Ten Kingdoms must be destroyed in all Human speaking,
e're it can be so subdued, as to bear a killing of the Witnesses in it, such
as the Prophecy imports.

Indeed some resemblance there has been of it in those severe Prosecutions of
the Protestant Dissenters, the guilt of which the Church of England has, (I
pray) truly unloaded from it self upon Popish Cabals. Besides Antichrist has
poised the weight of his Hand very notoriously upon the Church of England it
self, to try what it could do upon it. But I doubt not at all; the Bitterness
of that Death of the Witnesses is past; the differences being always great in
my esteem betwixt the Church of Thyatyra Protestants, lying in the midst of
Popish Laws, and Powers, and betwixt those Churches whose Laws, and Princes
have given not only a Legality, but Sardian splendour and security to the
Reformation, whose only danger is too Deep a repose therein, and slumber upon
it.

Indeed I have been always much assured, and God has verified it, Each
Kingdom, that repriz'd it self from the Power of the Beast shall be a
Protestant Kingdom to the very last; and that it could not have any Established
Prince, that was not Protestant also; for God will not give back what he has
rescued; so that among them the killing of the Witnesses can have no proper
place any more, I am assured according to Prophecy.

The Protestant Churches in Hungary, Savoy, France have too much made good some
senses of killing the Witnesses but under another Symbol in Prophecy, then of
the Witnesses slain, viz. the Thyatyrian Churches.

Infatuation of Jesuitic Councils, which are the depths of Satan, and as the
last sinking Pillar of a decaying Kingdom, argue it so near the end, as
Prophecy has made it; when Achitophels Wisdom is turned into foolishness, it
argues a fatal ruin near. Their seeking to hide their Counsels deep from the
Lord by the golden pretense of Liberty of Cons^ience, as if they would Cajole
the Reformation; and Gods so great Abomination of it, and ensnating them in it
shows, the last remedies, or healing Medicines of Babylon have proved vain. God
has made their turning things upside down to be as the Potters Clay, that
immediately received another shape, and mould, then they designed it.

Now as when Haman began to fall before Mordecai, he fell apace; so this great
defeat God has begun to give them declares their final zuin approaching.

And indeed the Kingdom of the Beast has more Years upon it. then most
Kingdoms or Monarchies in the World have had, except the Ancient Babylon, as
deriving it from Nimrod, the beginning of whose Kingdom was Babel. Had not God
decreed so long a Genesis 10. 10.
State; In the course of Human Powers, it had fallen long ago, but Rome Eternal
is one of it is Blasphemies, and though it says, it shall Sit a Lady for ever,
yet it is Idols have deceived it; For it is Menet^kel is even at the Doors. The
dephth of it is so old Kingdom shall now become Dotage, therefore God has begun
the Pattern among us, and it shall go through the whole breadth of the gre^^
City.

coming down, he appears to have Bowed the Heavens, and to have come down; so,
though mountains of contrary appearances, have flowed down at his presence, he
has answered us by amazing things in righteousness; he has done things, that
we looked not for, that Eye has very scarcely seen, or ear heard, or the heart
of Man conceived of. All has been, as when a Melting Fire Burns, and things
of themselves have run into the Form, God would have them, as the Clay or Wax
turns to the Scale.

Certainly, when God does such things in so great a manner, it Portends more,
than the late terrible Earthquakes in Popish Territories; God is more in this
still voice: Every Battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and Garments
rolled in Blood; this has been as with Fewe^, and burning of Fire; and it is a
Presage, that to us a Child is born, a Son is given, who shall within few
spaces, take the Government Es^y. 9.
on his Shoulders, and appear the Father of the World to come, his Kingdom of
Righteousness and Peace is near.

It is not to be presumed, that all shall go on just thus, God has done this,
that he might give notice what he is about to do; and this concerted with the
Prophetical Line is a great Sign of the T^me, and declares his Kingdom is near
to be Proclaimed; for when Papacy falls, as the last part of the last, viz. the
Roman Monarchy, to which Christ's Succeeds, his Kingdom shall be Proclaimed; and
he invites all to take notice of it, his Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace, I
say is near. For the Feet of Clay Crumble, and the Iron parts from them.

Romans, and the Protestant Christianity were to be tried, and very natural
Reason, if it were to be Umpire, would easily tell us, what the determination
from Heaven would be.

In the beginning of the Reformation, there was a Dispute, whether Protestancy
should have any place or Being in the World, in that which is called the
Smalcaldic War. And God determined in favor of Protestancy; it has not been
possible yet to make it lose one Nation, or Kingdom Established on Protestant
Laws.

The time is near, when the Question shall be put, whether Anti-christianism
shall have a longer State in this World, and it is very dangerous, a Critical
Time for such a Question to be put so near the end of the Beasts Moons. Every
public Watch man then should be skilled in the Time of Babylons falling, in
the burden of that Dumah, that Edomitish Christianity, or Anti christianism; we
should know what of the Night, what of the Night, what the Age of Isa. 21. 9.
10. 11.
the Roman Moon, of that Governess of the Night is; what the hour of it is Night
is; for the Morning comes to the True Churches of Christ, and the Night the
blackness of the Night on that Lady of the Night.

God has stirred up the Spirit of Protestant Princes; and it is most likely he
will so Embroyl things, betwixt them and the Princes, who are yet with the
Beast, as shall be serviceable to make an universal change, and all contrary
Ass^ciations shall be broken in pieces.

God has given therefore, as in the beginning, a Sentence from Heaven in this
Nation, and out of his great goodness has herein exalted it above the other
Protestant Nations to give a Pattern here first. And it cannot but be
remarkable, that a Descendent of that great Prince of Orange, whose
Assassination at his Death, gave him the Name of Martyr, as his great Conduct
in his Life, the Honor of one of the great Captains, who were at that time
with the Lamb, and with his Called and Chosen and Faithful.

Providence has sent that Fire upon Earth; concerning which it says, what will
I, if it be already kindled? That is, it insists no longer upon a seeming
velleity, or as we speak a willing, and woulding to have the Fire kindled, It
is already kindled; It is in Act, and in Motion. It has shed or Insensibly
distributed it self into all the veins of our Nation, and will do so through
all the Christian World, till as a Refiners Fire, it Purify it from that
Ant-ichristian Apostasy, that shall not be able to abide the Day of Christ's
coming; for which this Fire is to prepare: By this I understand the great Zeal
against that Impure Anti-christianism. And there is to be found upon this Zeal
as it were the very Image, Seal and Impress of this Prophecy. It here spread
it self upon all sorts, and degrees of this Nation from the highest to the
lowest; what is it then but to say? This is one of the Ten Kingdoms, that
should hate the Whore, and Execute the Judgment of God upon it, that is
Written, in it is due Times.

And that the Sovereign of the Nation, because he cannot at the present
understand the Reason of complying with so great a Prophecy, should
voluntarily retire from the Government; till he shall see, and consider what he
has not yet duly seen, and considered. It being indeed Impossible according
to this Prophecy, but this Protestant Nation must have a Protestant Head, no
other can rest upon it.

Certainly this is a very Memorable fulfilling of this Prophecy, and I am most
assured, it is for a Sign to the Lord, that shall not be Cut off, till the
whole be fulfilled, and it ought to be set up for a Memorial before the Lord,
as in the Temple of the Protestant Churches.

I know, something like it fell out in our Neighbor Kingdom, concerning Henry
the Fourth, and the Great of France, Grandfather of our King, and Great
Grandfather of our Prince of Orange, There was at that time in that Nation an
universal Zeal against the Reformation, which they called Heresy, so that they
would by no means receive a Prince, how great soever his Character was, as it
was indeed, as great as any Princes of his time, though there was at that time
a Complex of great Princes in the World; they could not receive him how
undoubted soever his Right according to their Salique Law: But he was under a
necessity to forfeit his Right, to live in a perpetual War, or to change his
Communion, upon what he did, Draw a Curtain in Honor to the Memory of so
Heroic a Name.

But was not this also a great fulfilling of this very Prophecy according to
that season? For at that time, when several Princes had withdrawn themselves
and their Kingdoms from the Antichristian Usurpation, if all had done so, how
had the words of God been fulfilled, giving the Beast Forty Two Months of such
a Decem-Principality or Ten Horned Power when above an Hundred Years at that
time were unexpir'd? It pleased God to take the advantage to Revulse some of
them from him, to give public notice thereby, It was the Morning of the half
Time, and we are even now to be admonished by it; on the other side some great
Kings were to continue united to him, to show the half Time was not run out,
but the end of it to be expected for the making Desolate, and Naked, and
Judging her, that has so violated the Wedlock of True Christianity.

In another regard also Prophecy was hereby fulfilled; for by that Great Henry
the Fourth of France, that Famous Edict of Nants was Granted, and Confirmed in
favor of the Reformation, of which he had been so great a Confessor and
Champion; that thereby, in France, as in Germany, and Poland and some other
Countries, Churches of Thyatyra might be settled, lying among the Nations,
where the Counsels of the Ignatian, or Jesuits Order, superadded to other
Orders, justly esteemed, and called by Protestants (or as They, viz.
Protestants speak) the depths of Satan would yet take place, according to
which, springing up in a just Season for it, viz. 1528. advantages have been
taken to Persecute Christ in his Servants of those Churches, and to cause his
Feet to Burn, as in a Furnace, as they have done most dreadfully some time past
in that Nation, in violation of that Edict; and as more constantly, where the
Hellish Inquisition has been always, as an Oven, or Furnace kept hot, and
burning, in Countries wholly given up to the Beast still.

And thus wonderfully has God Counterpoiz'd the State of the Beasts Kingdom,
and the Reformation, during this half Time acccording to Prophecy, giving yet
the inclining, and heavyer Scale to the Beast, that his words may be fulfilled,
until the Beasts Measure be heaped up, and running over.

Providence over these Nations shall be in order to the fulfilling of
Prophecy, is, that it so wonderfully Synchronizes, or keeps time with the
State of the Turk^sh Empire.

I have given Eighteen Months ago public Testimony from Prophecy, that the
Tenth part of this great City shall fall before the Mohammedan Sultany is
Dis-mounted from the Constantine-politan Heighths, and De-ported from the
Confluence of People, as of Rivers; since that, two Champagnes have passed full
of such Action, as has exceedingly humbled the O^toman Mountain; and yet it
stands, though shaking, and as in a trembling expectation of the fall of that
Anti-christianism, that gave the demeritorious provocation to the Wrath, and
Justice of God, that swelled it to such a loftiness.

As Rome, and Constantinople were such Sisters in the Apostasy, as Aholah, and
Aholibah in an Idolatrous defection from God, so God prepared for them so sore
a scourge as the Mohammedan Imposture, that should both deride their
Superstition, and miserably Affl^ct them together; It came abroad soon after
the contest of those Two Bishops, both fallen Stars, for Supremacy, and
Universality; wherein Rome had the fatal pre-eminence to obtain the Key of the
bottomless Pit. Immediately broke out those Judgments of that Mohammedan
Imposture, which this Sacred Prophecy calls Two woes, which have layn upon
them Both, from that very time, more, or less: Judgments prepared on purpose
for the Anti christian Apostasy, in which the Eastern Churches shared deep, and
which is to this day too closely Incorporated with the remains of the
Christianity, that is found among them, that are indeed rather dark Mentions
of, than that Excellent Doctrine it self and Holy Religion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

As therefore this Armed and violent Imposture seized above Two Hundred Years
ago on that Imperial City, Constantinople, that so unhappily affected to be
called New Rome, and therefore has Dru^k so deep of it is Cup, both of Sin, and
Judgment, so it shall continue under that Tyranny, as a Witness of the more
dreadful vengeance, that is to fall upon that fouler Prostitute, Old Rome, and
stands as a Pillar of Salt to warn it hereof.

Yet, so that, that Grecian Acropolis is subjected in Hope, and waits, as the
groaning Creation for the Liberty of the Sons of God, so for that happy Day of
the fall of the Tenth of that great City, the coming of the Witnesses out of
their Sach-cloth, and their Ascent to Glory, as it were to Heaven in a Bright
Cloud: For then that Second w^e of the Turkish Usurpation upon that City, and
those Churches shall pass off from them, and so must be near.

And now that God has so suddenly shaken the Foundations of that Ott^man
Empire and made it to Totter, gave me expectations; the Anti ^hrist^an should
observe Time, that the Provocation, and the scourge might pass off together,
and it is to me most undoubted, this R^v^lution is in Motion thereunto; nor can
I slight the notices from Nature, as in Convulsive Fits, in the last Summers
Earthq^akes, giving the Alarm to both these Tyrannies, as together, and at
Times near one to another to be overturned by other kind of Earthquakes.

I add, the speediness of the Motion in the two wonderful changes in our
Nation, and in Turkey show; Providence is moving on those Wheels, and on those
Wings, that it uses in the fulfilling Proph^sie, Ezekiel. 1.
as was in Ezekiels Vision drawn to the Life; so that upon th^se two
Revolutions may be Written that Prophetic Motto; I the E^y. ^1. (...).
Lord have hastened them in their own Time.

Persecution in France* of so black, and Inhuman a Barbarity, and even Hellish
Cruelty, speaks some great Judgment near upon that Beastianism, that has the
Horns of a Lamb, but the Mouth of a Dragon, viz. under the Name of a Christian
Hierarchy, the likeness of a Lion, a Bear, and a Leopard, and on that Imperious
Whorish Woman, that is, under the Mystery on it is Fore head of Mother Church,
the Mother of the Abominations of the Earth, and in whom the Blood of the
Saints, Martyrs, and Prophets is to be found, whose Adulterous Religion is
Armed with a Salvageness most contrary to the Natural tenderness of Manly
Nature, and most especially to the Laws of Christianity, and yet whatever is
done for the propagating it is Golden Cup of Fornication, though by the most
Feral force, is called doing God Service. Now before the Judgment Executed upon
Babylon, she is to fill her Ephah, that she may be Rewarded double for all,
that she is to do; who then can but think, that her Day is near, and that God
will be a swift Witness against her, not for Three Transgressions or Four, but
for her Seventy Times Seven Abominations?

God does not use to bear long with Atrocious wickednesses, nor give up to such
un-naturalness, but when he is ready to take vengance, He allows not the wonted
Truce of patience in such outrages of Blood, but rises, now, to the Prey.

I confess, this Persecution would incline one to think, were there not deep
Reasons in Proph^sie to the contrary, with that so Zealous Confess^ur, and in
great degrees Martyr Mounsieur Jurien, that the Witnesses are Slaying, as in a
Three last Days and half, of the 1260. and lying dead in France, as in that
Street of the great City, and that when this Last is Scene perfectly
Represented, the Witnesses shall rise, and that great City, viz. it is Tenth, or
Hierarchy shall fall from it is Tenfolded Dominion fully, and finally, and
undoubtedly All this is an Epitome, or short review of that Slaughter of the
Witness^s, and the happy Resurrection shall be in fewer Years, then that
Excellent Person has warily taken in, as the largest compass of time for the
doing it.

And I am very desirous to believe, this French Persecution is that last effort
of Anti-christianism, revealed to our great and Holy Arch bishop Usher, the
forest, but shortest Ravage of the Beast upon the Protest^nt World, wherein by
Sympathy every Nation should bear a deep share, and we particularly, seeing it
has pleased our Good and Gracious God to pull us as Brands out of the burning,
and who knows but we are Delivered for such a time as this? Even for their
Deliverance also; and that if we altogether h^ld our peace, and think to be
quiet in our own Nation, Light and Deliverance shall arise to those Slain
Witnesses of France from some other place; But our S^n will find us out, If we
forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto Death, and those that are ready to
be Slain; If we say, behold we know it not, we are not concerned, does not he
that pondereth the heart consider it? He that keeps our Nation does not he
know it? And w^ll he not remember it in the Day, when he makes Inquisition for
Blood?

Revolution will be the Buoying up substantial Christianity, and Protestancy,
(which is Christianity returned to it is own Dignity, and Excellency) and that
Form and Ceremony are dropping off from us, at least so far, as it has been
matter of distinction, and most of all of difference, and division, or breach
of Love, and Charity.

Now such a S^ate Borders near upon the State of the Philadelphian Church, the
Church Tempered, Cemented, United by Brotherly Love, when the Envy and Vexation
one of another, on such accounts shall depart, and we shall exercise them no
more; when this shall indeed be, the time of the Philadelphian Church shall be;
Every glimps of one is the glimps of the other, and when the Time of that
Church is, the Time of the Apostasy is expired: Hence therefore I hope the Time
of all is near.

Two things most express that State; Essence of Christianity, and Universality.

The Principles, and Constitutions of some Protestant Churches are too full of
Ceremony, Ritu^lism, and Formality, these especially, when rigorously pressed
to an Uniformity are nearer to Anti-christianism then to true Christianity,
Protestantism, or to the Kingdom of Christ.

These when Luxuriant, and over spreading, when Zealously insisted upon, when
Persecutorily urged are then called the Synagogue of Satan; viz. in the Church
of Smyrna at the Entrance of the Ap^stacy, and in the Church of Pbiladelphia,
when the Apostasy shall expire; The first Entrances, the Avenues of
Anti-christianism were un-written observances; over affection to Places, Days,
Forms, Rites, Titles, swelling beyond the Apostolic Simplicity, hence it came
to Superstition, Idolatry, Supremacy, this State the Holy Spirit Brands, first
the Synagogue of Satan, because some were Authoritative, Jurisdictive,
Excommunicative upon them; although not to be vouched from the word of Christ;
and though they were before the very Apostasy, or Church it self in the
Wilderness, before the Throne of Satan: Again, such a State of things falls
under the same Brand toward the end of the Apostasy, near and at the very
Philidelphian State, when some are sticking in these, as if the Reformation
were not to move them, but that they ought to continue for the sake of
Reverence to Antiquity, this seems to me a mistake like that, but in a much
greater concern, with which some Learned Mathematicians charge Pope Gregory the
Thirteenth, his Reformation of the Calendar, He Reformed down to the Nicene
Council, but not to the Days of Julius Caesar, by whom the Calendar was first
Formed, on which Account even new Style is, not perfect, as to Time; so some
Protestants would Reform down to the Four first General Councils; but they
ought to Reform down to Christ, and his Apostles, by whom as the Author and
Infallible Ministers Christianity was Originally Planted; they forget the
Mystery of Iniquity Began to work even in the Apostles Days, and was Counter
wrought by their Infallible Writings, in which all things are to be tried, to
Insist upon any thing not Written there, is a Redivival of that Synagogue, when
over Zealously affected, much more, Imposed under the Awe of Penalties, and
Excommunications, which is the Form of a Synagogue of Satan. But with this
difference; the Apostasy was in the Church of Smyrna in the Ascendency, so it
went on to a Throne of Satan. It is now toward it is lowest Declination, so
the last Synagogue shall come to Worship at Philadelphiaes Feet, and to
acknowledge, Christ Loves that Church. And I hope that Day is now Springing;
and no sure^ Sign of the Apostasy expiring. This very Synagogue Sealed the
Thunders, that had uttered their voices at the first Reformation; It has near
this Hundred and Eighty Years retarded the Ki^gdom of Christ, and Shut up the
Book as hid in the Bowels of Prophecy then opened, and ready to have come into
Act, but when that Synagogue begins to acknowledge it is Error, that Kingdom is
near: But on the other side Universality is another principle of the
Philadelphian Church; some Protestant Churches are too narrow, and
Circumscribed within their own Congr^gations; and will not own, nor receive
those as the Church of Christ, whom Christ has received, although they even as
themselves, are among the undefiled Names of Sardis how few soever: They should
go and Learn what that means, Christ pleased not himself: For it is Written,
the reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon me, that is, our very
Sins, not by way of compliance, but by way of Compassion, union to the persons
notwithstanding their Sins, or Infirmities; Christ is the Head of a Church
under many remaining evils, we should own our selves the Members of such a
Church; An Universal Spirit is most of the Spirit of Christ's Kingdom opening to
receive the fullness of the Gentiles, and Jews, how much more real Christians
and Protestants; Not enclosing Austerely our selves in pend up Congregations;
so as not to unite in Spirit with all true Christianity and Protestancy though
not of our Model.

Revolution as we are Discoursing of near us, is removed by this present
Revolution, that our Eyes have seen, our Ears heard, and our Hands handled;
that is, that all our Senses are fully assured of; the sins, the unworthiness,
the unpreparedness of the Age for so happy a Revolution is the great Argument
against it.

But it that could have interposed, we of this Nation had not received so great
a wonder of Providence in favor of us; I delight not to insist on so
ungrateful a part, but leave it to every one in their own serious Reflections to
Calculate the greatness of this work in mercy to us, by Ballancing all the
unworthiness, that might have opposed it; but when God is pleased thus to work;
As his work is before him in his own determination to do it; so his reward is
with him, he expects it only from himself; He secures all, that his own Wisdom
and Holiness requires, and prevails over the remainder of unworthiness by his
own Names sake.

And of this I take the more earnest notice, that we may know Pr^phetical
events are like the Rain, that waits not for the Sons of Men, but having such a
Generation of the Just, of the Children of God in the World, whom Fatherly
Providence has a peculiar Eye upon, it falls on the unjust also.

Yet this is to be understood with three Limitations.

1. There are yet Eight Years for a variety of disposes to show themselves in,
either of Mercy, or Judgment; In this Time the Carcases of many of the mixed
Multitude may fall, as in a Wilder^^ss: There may be Wars, noises of War,
Commotions, distress of Nations, and great p^^plexity with many evils, that may
consume profane, and un ref^rm'd Persons, we ought not therefore to be s^cure,
or presuming because of so great a Mercy, nor on the other side be discouraged
at contrary appearances; For whatever waving of things may be in this Interval,
the end shall yet be certain, as Prophecy has declared.

2. There will be nothing, there can be nothing more dreadful to the un-holy,
to the sleepy, and secure, to the Ignorant, and Abominable, then that approach,
then those loud voices from Heaven of the Kingdom of Christ, when these things
come to pass; Christ expresses it in brief to all those in defiled Garments in
Sard^* except thou watch, I will come upon thee as a Thief, and thou shall not
know, at what hour I will come upon thee, blessed are they then, or even at
this Time, (though it shall have a greater fulfilling just at the Seventh Vial)
who watch, and keep their Garments, viz. from defilements, because Christ comes
now also as a Thief, and on such a surprizal, the unprepared, ^hrowing off
their defiled Garments in haste walk naked, and Men see their shame. The
greatest Zeal of Protestancy, if un-reform'd in heart and Life will be
affrighted even to endless distraction, and confusion, at this approach of
Christ, if Men do not before watch, that is, resolve what manner of Persons
they ought to be in all Holiness and Godliness of Conversation not sur-charg'd
with Drunkenness, Gluttony, the cares of this Life, etc.

3. With Relation to the Grand Appearance of Christ, there are between the Loud
Voices in Heaven, that the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of
the Lord, and of his Christ, between the end of Time, Times, and half a Time,
which are the 1260. D. and the Kingdom it self, Thirty Days for Years, making
1290. wherein the Seven Thunders so long sealed shall be opened in Seven
Successive Voices for the Reforming, the purifying, the Converting the World,
the World of all sorts of Men, that whatever remains filthy may be filthy
still, even forever; because it would not be cleans'd, when God would have
cleans'd it, which Voices we may find in their due order Revel. 14. compare the
Time of Thirty Years, Dan. 12. And these shall be, before Christ comes to Smite
the Earth with a Curse; For immediately upon those Voices come Forty Five Years
of the V^als, making up 1335. in Daniel* these are the Execution of the Holy
and pure Wrath of Almighty God without mixture of any Human Passions, or Ends.
Then at the end of them is the Glorious Kingdom of Christ, the New Jerusalem,
wherein all his Saints, and Servants from first to last stand in their Lots,
and whereinto nothing, that is defiled shall Enter: Thus God has secured his
Mercies, though vouchsaf*d to an Impure World now.

All which considerations exceedingly strengthen the Arguments, and remove the
Objections arising from so Impure, and indisposed a State of the World in
General, and of this Nation in particular, for so Gracious Manifestations of
God, as this Prophecy Predicts.

Prophecy, that gives a further glance upon the near approach of the Time, and
that this Revolution looks to the very just Complement of the words of God to
be fulfilled; And that is, that whereas the Prophecy had said; The Ten Kings
should agree to give their Kingdom to the Beast, till the Words of God should
be fulfilled; It without any notice of their withdrawing their Kingdom from the
Beast tells us, they shall hate the Wh^re.

Now it is True, Their being Drunk with the Wine of the Whores Fornication is
the Reason of their gi^ing their Kingdom to the Beast that carries her, as has
been before observed, and therefore when e're they hate the Whore, they will
certainly withdraw their Power from the Beast; But because it is said, they
shall hate the Whore without any mention, how they shall behave themselves to
the Beast, and that it seems to be the peculiar note of the Prophecy
fulfi^led, that they hate the Whore, it moved my enquiry, whether either in the
first Reformation, or at the Time of this Revolution, there be any shade of any
King, dividing the Beast, and the Whore, that is, of a Retrenchment of their
Power from the Beast, and yet continuing their kindness to the Whore, that the
distinct particular Hatred might, as I may say, Perpendicularly fall on the
Whore, the minds of any Princes Jealous of their Power, and the Honor of their
Kingdom having any ways been moved with an Indignation at the Curtalling their
Power, and Kingdom by giving it to the Beast, and so have re-call'd it: For if
such can be found, it seemed to me a great note of the fulfilling this
Prophecy, viz. If the Whore was first so distinctly loved, that then by her
self she might be exposed to Universal hatred afterward.

And I find, that there have been some Specimens of it all along, and in the
beginning of the Reformation by out King Henry the Eighth, who retained his
kindness to the Roman Catholic Church in it is Doctrine* and Worship* and
veneration of it, and Monstrous Zeal for it in all these, and yet removed the
Power of the Beast from his Regalia in all Points; But never was there so
Ample, and Illustrious a Representation of it, as in the present French King,
who has so with his Clergy Lowered, and even Annul'd the Power of the Beast,
or the Pope in their Gallicane Church, and yet so closely espoused the Apostasy
of the Whore, and under the very Name of the Roman Catholic Church, and so
In-humanly Persecuted the Reformed, as H^retics, as if that King would himself
take upon him to be the Beast bearing that Church, and to Relieve the Pope from
so ungentile, as well as A^ti christian Office: By which he, and his Clergy
have offered these great Instructions to the World.

1. That the Roman Catholic Church, as called, whatever hands the
Administration of it be in, will show it self to be the Whore, the Mother of
the Abominations of the Earth, of Superstitions and Idolatries, and that drinks
it self drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus; and
that whoever serves it shall be intoxicated with the (...), the Sting, the High
Rage, and Fury of its Fornication, and shall enforce the same Cup with utmost
Barbarity into the Hands, and Mouths of those, who refuse it.

2. That the distinction betwixt the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome is a
vain and frivolous shift, an Apron of Fig*leaves to hide the impurity and
filthiness of the Whore; for at this day in France are found, however
palliated, the Sorceries, Idolatries, and Murders of the Church of Rome, where
the Court of Rome is so much defied. This is, as it were, on purpose ordered by
Providence to expose the Whore, by her self alone.

3. That there shall be as great an Instance, as can be, of Hating the Whore,
or Church of Rome by it self; and as distinct, as can be supposed in that close
Conjunction it has with the Beast, and the Beast with it: The very abstracted
Religion of the Roman Communion shall be detested for its own sake, without
Relation to Politics, or to the Usurpation of the Beast or Papacy over National
Rights. And whenever this is, It is the watch word of this Prophecy, that It is
near fulfilling. And because things are so much prepared in France hereunto, It
is a very great ground of Expectation, that there this great Prophecy shall
begin to be fulfilled, above any of the Kingdoms devoted to the Beast and Whore
as united; and that the Time is as near, as I have from this Prophecy declared,
and that by some wonderful Hand of God, parallel to what has been in our
Nation, the Action shall go on there, to which there are many other Prognostics
leading, not fit to be here recounted, where we insist wholly on Prophecy and
Providence compared.

I now conclude this Argumentative part with these brief Inferences.

Prophecy designing so great Ends, show the Vanity of such Reasonings; What is
Prophecy to us, or the Ten Kings hating the Whore? If we have the Laws, and
Liberties of our own Government, of which Protestant Religion is become so
Essential a part, that we cannot have the one without the other; we have what
we desire, we meddle not with dark Prophesies beyond our Line; we consider the
Natural and Political Causes of these Things, which lie so plain before us, and
meddle not beyond them.

But, be not deceived, God is not mocked, nor can be justled out of his
Purposes by such low Designments of ours; He has a Wheel within every Wheel of
ours, which being acted by his Supreme Spirit, shall move on to its Ends, and
carry all our Wheels thither with it self; His Pleasure must go on, however
our private Interests are disordered by it: In a common Flame particular Houses
must suffer blowing up, and lesser Buildings give way, and make room for public
princely Structures: sometimes our Desires, and Conveniences are taken in, as
of late; sometimes left out; but the Mystery of God in the Kingdom of Christ by
the Oath of the Angel, must be finished; there is but a short Time, in
comparison now, till the Seventh Trumpet begin to finish it, and Time of the
present date, of the present Style shall be no more; as He has spoken by his
Servants the Prophets. That Kingdom of Christ is, and shall suddenly appear to
be the Grand Public, not only of our Nation but of the World.

And the Destruction of the Papacy, and the Hatred of the Whore by the Ten
Kings must be to us, even to us, whoever we are, whether we will or no; both as
to our National Interests, and as to our Eternal Concernments. Our National
Interests shall be carried that way, if we are moved with that Spirit of God
now about to show it self in the World, according to our desires; if not beyond
all our Desires and Intendments. And as to Our Everlasting Concernments, It is
much to us, for It brings on that Day, that shall be either the day of our
Redemption, or that shall burn as an Oven, and All the Wicked shall be consumed
in it.

Philadelphian State of the Church, that is so near us, and that shall far
exceed all our present Church states, how excellent soever they may be; Then
shall the Great Truths of Gospel-Redemption, and particularly the Prophesies be
Sung, as a New Song, as by a Choir of Angels, the Music of the Spheres, and
all the Servants of Christ under the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, with his
Fathers Name on their Foreheads, shall learn it. And then, as by a new
Mission, speedy, and Universal, like the First Apostolical Preaching, and as
from the Mid-heaven shall the Everlasting Gospel be preached to All; The
disbelieved Hour of Christ's Judgment. viz. Of his Kingdom or Government, that
begins with a Judiciary Process, shall be Thundered out, as nigh, to All
Nations.

The Fall of Babylon, and the Judgment on the Beasts Worshippers shall be
declared with a New Majesty and Power. The First Resurrection (Blessed are the
Dead, etc.) shall be promulg'd; Prayers for the Conversion of the Fullness of
the Gentiles, and so of the Jews shall be answered by Christ with the Crown on
his Head, and the sharp Sickle in his Hand, reaping the Harvest of the Earth,
as Ripe for the Salvation of all Israel; and then is the Vine of the Earth
gathered, especially the Clusters of Spiritual Sodom, and thrown into the
Wine Press of the Wrath of God, and from ^hence the Vials are filled and poured
out in Judgment.

Then the Opened Temple shall show the Tabernacle of Testimony, and the Ark of
the Testament, and be filled with Smoke, because the Divine Glory is coming to
dwell there; that is, Ezekiels Temple, and City, and the New Jerusalem of the
Apostle John shall be spiritual^z'd into one Divine Presence of God, and of the
Lamb, which is the Sanctuary cleans'd at the End of Daniels 2300 Ev. Morn.

These Things God will be Inquired of for, by the Prayers of his Servants
awakned thereunto. But they are by the demand of the Watchers, and by the Word
of the Holy, however light they are made of; and therefore shall certainly be
in their Season.

Powers, that are set over us by God, as in Relation to the most Supreme part
of their Administration. As now for the King, the only Prayer, that can be made
for him in Faith, with respect to the Regal Power, is, that He may be one of
those, that may hate the Whore; else in a Protestant Nation, rescued from the
Beast, and the Whore, Prophecy will not allow him at this Time, I do not say,
of the Day, but of the Beasts last Moon, though it be indeed also the Half day,
since the Reformation; had it not been for this Prophecy, there had not been
such an easy Retirement of Him from Government. An Atheist may see, and the
greatest Infidel in Sacred Prophecy be convinced.

The Great Prayer for the Protestant Prince, whom God has stirred up to be a
Deliverer, is, That He may be a polished Shaft in Gods Quiver, and that God
would fill his Bow with Him, and make Him as the Sword of a mighty man, that he
may ride out prosperously and atchieve High in this Great work, that is to be
done, that after the overthrow of the Throne of Kingdoms, and of the Rider,
etc. He would make him a Signet, as having chosen Him; And for the assembled
Councels of the Nation, that they may be with the Lamb, who is appearing King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as His Called, Faithful, and chosen, now his
Victory over the Ten Kings, who have, and who yet make War with Him, is so near.

For the Witnesses of Christ in this Nation of all Kinds, our Prayer should be,
that they may so finish their Sack cloth Prophecy, that they may hear that
Voice, Come up hither.

wonderful doing of God in this Nation, with a Wisdom and Consideration guided
and conducted by Prophecy; let us behold it in All the Circumstances of it,
especially in this, that God has frustrated the Tokens of the Babilonian
Liars, and made the Divinors at Loretto, and the Infallible Chair, Mad; but
has begun to perform the Counsel of his Messengers, saying to Babylon, It
shall Fall, and to his New Jerusalem, It shall be built; and to those of the
Ten Kings, who are now of the Reformation, You are my Shepherds, and shall
perform my Pleasure, till All the other of the Ten Kings also unite in Hating
the Whore, when the words of God are fulfilled to the utmost.

As a Pattern hereof, He has bowed the Hearts of the People of the Nation, as
one Man; He has brought the Notions of Loyalty, Non-Resistance, and Passive
Obedience, into Subjection to Prophecy.

All who love the Kingdom of Christ, and sincerely pray, Thy Kingdom Come,
according to the Prayer of the Kingdom, whether we would choose, and desire,
that this late Revolution should be (though set at the highest Elevation) a
Mercy to the Nation, and to his Servants in it upon their very Prayers, but not
in order to any further great End according to that admirable Prophecy of the
New Testament, the Revelation; or whether we would choose and desire; It should
be for the removal of that Great Remo^a and Estopple of the Kingdom of Christ,
the Papacy, a Beginning of the Train of Things, that shall pass according to
Prophecy in this order. viz. Begin at this Prophecy of the Text, Chap. 17. v.
16, 17. and set it before c. 11. 11. to the End, and so pass to c: 14. and
carry a line through it, to c. 15. c. 16. c. 18. c. 19. c. 20. c. 21. c. 22. to
v. For so I am assured, God has begun in our Nation, so, as He will extend
this Prophetical Line through the World, reaching to that Glorious Jerusalem.

According to our desire herein, let us search that Prophecy, and set our Faces
to the Lord our God by Prayer and Supplication, with Fasting, Sack cloth, and
Ashes:

Philadelphian State of the Church, that shall be at the End of the Apostasy,
is the Exemplar or Pattern, at which All the Protestant Churches should aim, as
being indeed the Rest, or Rev. 3. 2. (...)
Remainders that are to fill up the Reformation, upon which the New Jerusalem
shall come down, in which the Sanctuary cleansed appears. This we should aim at
in Brotherly Love, imported in its very Name, which is the Bands and the Beauty
of that Church; In Holding fast the Name of Christ in his Supreme Pastoral and
Episcopal Office, receiving nothing, but from his Voice, entering by the Door of
his sole Authority, and flying from the Voice of Strangers; in keeping the Word
of his Patience, or staying for the Vnfading Crown until his Glorious Kingdom;
in looking for, and hasting to it. For in too great an Ignorance, and unbelief
of it, the very wise Virgins of the Protestant Churches are slumbring and
sleeping at this Day.

In laying aside all Austere Ceremonialness out of over-Reverence to Antiquity;
and rather humbling our selves and acknowledging an Error in too near
Approaches to that Synagogue of Satan, that showed it self before the last of
those Four first General Councels: Lastly, in a Great Moderation of Censure
toward those Churches, and Protestants, who were so greatly mistaken in that
last point; not Reproaching them as Antichristian, or having so much as the
number of that unhappy Name; however too near approaching the Ritual and High
Jurisdictive Synagogue, that led to it at first. But now such shall see their
Fault by the Instruction of Christ Himself, who Receives, and owns them: and
thus should we All join in seeking the Beloved of the Church together, till He
appear on the Mountain of Spices. Cantic. 6. 1. c. 8. last.

THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
JEremiah, when He had Writ All the Words concerning Babylon in a Book, gave it
to Serajah a Quiet Prince to Read, when He Jerem. 51. 59.
Came to Babylon, and to pray according to it; and then to bind it to a Stone,
and to sink it to the bottom of Euphrates, as a Symbol of the then Babylon
sinking, and to Rise no more: yet Jeremiahs Prophecy Rose again when Babylon
Fell, as is particularly Remarked, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22.

Now I offer these Words of Mystical Babylon Sinking, to every Quiet, Calm,
Sedate Mind; I only request such to observe, how Providence moves, and goes on
according to the Prophecy expounded in them, while It is yet standing.

Let the Discourses, and the Instrument, used by God, (however unworthy) sink
to the Lowest; It may very well be so; yet let none be Scandalized; even that
shall be only a Symbol of the Babylon, that now is, sinking; These very
Discourses shall Rise into particular Remembrance, when Babylon Falls.

I do not pretend to particular Inspiration; but the Observation of the close
Chain, and curious Links of Prophetical Scripture, since the World began,
requires so intent, and nice a Speculation, that the Discovery is almost as
particular, as Inspiration; and when they are found, they are so even, just,
solid, substantial, that I doubt not to say, They are certain, as Inspiration,
For V^sion or Prophecy cannot Lie: And there may be such a Manifestation of the
Comm^ssures and admirable Connexions of one part with another, that sooner may
the most exact Anatomists be deceived in their Eyesight, though assisted with
Microscopes, and utmost Art, and in their Reason and Admiration of the Works of
God in Nature, upon their Eyesight, then those Nerves and Fibers of
Prophetical Scripture deceive: They are such and so laid, that no Fancy could
create them; This is my Assurance.

Yet even a Prophet must not look for Honor, or Acceptance more in his own
Time, then in his own Country; His Words coming to pass are the Credential,
Most require, that God has sent him. The Jews built not the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, whom their Fathers killed, till they knew their Words had come to
pass. It must much more fare so with the Expositors of Prophecy, but concerning
that, The Will of the Lord be done.

I only beg the Favor of such Assistance, as that the whole Work may be
perfected, and laid up for the Time to come; and propose Thirty Sheets yet to
be printed, and desire Two Shillings six pence of each Assistant, to carry on
the Impression.

[Parts Printed.] The Scripture Line of Time, from the first Sabbath to
Abraham; from Cyrus to the Milennial Sabbatism. The Song of Solomon adjusted
from David's Kingdom to the Kingdom of the Root and Offspring of David, Jesus
Christ. The Command to Come out of Babylon, with this Treatise in Appendage.

[To be Printed.] The Scripture Line from Abraham to Cyrus. The Gospel Doctrine
of the Kingdom. The Prayer of the Kingdom, or the Lords Prayer; The Sacrament
of the Kingdom, or the Lords Supper; Adjusted to that Kingdom.


