THE PATTERN OF THE Divine Temple. Sanstuary, and City of the New Jerusalem:
Measured according to Ezekiels Last and Greatest Vision, Chap. 40. to the End.
Each Temple shall be seen opened (...) the Days of the Seventh Trumpet; at the
End of the 1260 Days of the Apostasy 1697. That there may be a Daily
Preparation in Conformity to it, until It Comes down from Heaven at the End of
the 2300 (...). Dan. 8. 4. and (...) the 1335 Days, ^^n. 12. 12. at 1772.
Assigned as a Preface to Two late Treatises, viz. The PROPHETIC HISTORY of the
Reformation till the Great Re-Reformation; And the Grand Apocalyptick Vision of
the Witnesses, (...) and Ascending: which shall Contemporate with this Temple
open (...) Heaven at the ^men 1697. Ezekiel. 40. 4. and c. 43. 10. (...) of Man
see with Thy Eyes, Hear with thy Ears, (...) Thy Heart on all that I shall show
Thee. (...) of Man (...) the House to the (...) of Israel, (...) be (...) of
their (...), and let them measure the Pattern.

By Tho. Beuerley, a most Humble Reader in the Prophesies of Jesus Christ.

Printed, and are to be Sold by John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun in Cornhill.

To the Archbishop of Canterbury. To the Bishops of London. Asaph. Salisbury.
Worcester. Chichester.
To Dr. Tillotson. Dr. Sharp. Dr. Tennison. Dr. Kidder. Dr. Goodman. Dr.
Fowler. Dr. Burnet, Master of the Charter House. Dr. Woodroff. Dr. Cressener.
Mr. Baxter. Dr. Bates. Mr. How. Mr. Cole. Mr. Mede.

My much Revered.
I Most Humbly, and in a deep sense of my own Vnwort^iness, yet Take upon my
self to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, to Recommend to you the most Prof^und,
and Serious Setting your Hearts to Measure, to the utmost we can Attain, this
Pattern of Ezekiels Temple, and Throne; And that You would to that End beg of
God the Use of the Reed (of much more value then Pastoral Staves, Crosiers, or
the much disputed Power of the Keys,) till He comes, whose Right indeed the
Keys are, with the Golden Reed; which is the Measure of the Full Stature of the
Mystical Man Jesus Christ, that is, the Angel of the Covenant; even Jehovah in
our Nature; whom we seek coming by Himself into Himself the Temple, and Throne.

In this Pattern undoubtedly lie Hid the Treasures of the many ways Variated
wisdom of God, till It be shown by the Church to Principalities, and Powers:
All Dates therefore of Time are Given, as I show, by this Temple in its various
States, till at the Ascension of Christ It was Reared, and Anointed; as Appears
in that Vision, Rev. c. 4. c. 5. But as the Apostle speaks in a like case; It
is in Heaven, and there Reserved; But a Counter part is Given on Earth in such
proportions, as Infinite Wisdom has Thought fit, In as much as He permitted,
and Swore to permit an Apostasy, or Mystery of Iniquity to have Time, Times,
and Half a Time, and to Work Early in order to it.

There are therefore Four Living Creatures, Revel. 6. sent as it were out of
this Temple, with their Voices, Come and see this Temple, and Throne in the
Gospel Frame; The First had only the High Great Note of Thunder in the First
Preaching of the Apostles; While in that Time, the Mighty Man of War, the Lord
is his Name, went forth Conquering, and to Conquer: Then Things Flatted; Yet
while the Living Creatures were in Motion, the Apostolic Ministry was yet
Continuing; Till at the Beginning of the Fourth Seal, the Last Voice was Given
out; And They ceased just at the Death of Alexander Severus. Who as a
Renownedly Just Prince, was ordained by God, to be in his Just Balances, a
Symbol of the Half Time of the Church Pure, or at the Equipoiz of it Purity,
according to Ezekiel. 46. v. 9. etc. From that Time It Declined, yet so that there
were Emissions from the Temple in Heaven not yet shut, and Appearances from it,
the Apostasy not being entered.

But at the First Trumpet, the Apostasy of 1260 Days or Years entered; Then
that Temple was Measured, and shut, c. 11. 1. and the Court without cast to the
Gentiles to be Trodden under Foot. This lasts till the Seventh Trumpet, and is
not expired by Seven Times, or Years, viz. till 97.

From that Time, All Church States shall Return more and more to the
Apostolical First State; The Temple in Heaven being Opened, and the Ark of
Testament, and Tabernacle of Testimony more and more also seen; Till the Voice
comes out of this Temple in the Seventh Vial; IT IS DONE, or All Prophecy is
Fulfilled in Vengeance on the Defilers, and Desolators of the Sanctuary;
especially That Last, and Great one, the Antichristian Papacy; And then a Voice
from the Throne, It is done in this Temple, Throne, and City coming down from
Heaven in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 27. 6.

Our duty is therefore in the mean Time, to come as near as we can to the
Pattern; as it were in our Inward, Secret Temple worship, viz. of every ones
Private Judgment; For a High open One of Uniformity, we cannot yet Attain,
whatever we may Think; And to See, that we do All according to it, by keeping
Close to all that is Written without Least Additionals, seeing All Shades are
Taken from Heavenly Things Themselves; Who then can Appoint them, but He who
Alone has the Proto-Type?

We ought also with all the Love, Condescension, Forbearance of one Another in
our Dissents, to be Assistant one to Another; While the Temple is yet shut, and
we in a Dark Place as to a Public, though not a Private Glory; And not to fall
out, and wrong one Another, because we see not yet as in that Opened Temple we
shall, and are All Brethren now moving to it.

To you therefore, who seem to me to be Pillars, and of whom I have Great
Confidence, You shall be Pillars in that Temple, and shall go out no more;
Having in some Measure observed your Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith,
Long-Suffering, Charity, Patience, by your Sermons or Writings, or more
particular Knowledge of some of You; To You I first present This, as it were,
Affixing Prophecy, as of old to the Pillars of the Temple, to make it most
notable; And have made bold to Represent as in a Figure in you thus Joined,
however seemingly distant, the High union that ought to be now, and shall be of
All such e're long, in the Churches of Christ.

And I Hope You will not, and I Beseech You do not Slight these Toings, as
Fancies, For I Rest upon the very Testimony of Jesus Christ, (which you know is
the Spirit of Prophecy) and I Trust, that God has enabled me (my only
Province,) to Transferr from Scripture to Scripture, and to Lay All, together
by Words and Symbols of the Holy Spirit, which in such a Chain did never yield
to a Phantasm, especially Agreeing so with All History.

Now that God would make to You, and to all His Churches this discourse, a
Showing of the Pattern, Blessed by Himself; That we may be Ashamed of our
present, even our Best, as a Low, and Defiled State; is the Humble, and Earnest
Prayer of

My most Revered, Your most Unworthy, but Faithful Servant in the Prophesies of
Jesus Christ: T. Beverley.

THE PREFACE.
FOR as much, as I have Labored to the utmost; Yet not I, but the Grace of God
with me; in the search, what, and what manner of Time The Holy Spirit, that was
in the Prophets of old did signify; in Setting out the Excellent Majesty, and
Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ in his Kingdom; This Great Vision of Ezekiel,
did in my own Thoughts Vpbraid me, that I had made no Attempt of Enquiry at the
Divine Oracle Concerning it; I Resolved by the same Grace therefore to Consider
so Stupendous a Model of Divine Truth; And I Can in some Humble degree Speak
it, That I have Found in it like the waters of the Sanctuary, the Accesses of
Divine Illumination, Rising Higher, and Higher; and Becoming a River
Overflowing my Thoughts with Inexpressible Sweetness, and Satisfaction; And
though I very Freely Acknowledge; There is in it an Infinite and unsearchable
wisdom, as a Boundless River that Cannot be passed by any Humane understanding;
Or as the Hiding of the Divine Power in a Light that no Man Can Approach, Yet
Beams of Light Coming out of his Hand, I have Found to Instruct and direct.

Let no Man therefore, I Humbly Beseech, Blame this Freedom of my Ministration
in this Dark Scripture; Seeing This Vision of Ezekiel, as All other Prophetical
Scriptures, are Scripture in the Reverentiallest Confession of All, and
therefore are Commanded to be Searched; And These are They, which Testify of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; These are as other Scripture, if duly opened and
Applied, Profitable for Correction, Reproof, Instruction in the ways of
Righteousness; It is Witnessed particularly of this Vision; That It is to be
Shown; and is herein Profitable to Excite a Shame of our Iniquities; That it is
our Duty to Measure this Pattern; And as the Apostle Peter Assures us; No
Prophecy of Scripture is of any Private but Public Interpretation; That All
the Servants of God do well in giving Heed to it, as the only Light in such a
Midnight Confusion as we are yet in under the Apostasy; till that Morning Star
of the Rising Witnesses and this Opened Temple dawn in upon us; For as All such
Prophecy was Given by the Universal Public Holy Spirit; So It leads to the
Public Universal Glory of God, and of the Lamb, in the Salvation of his Church.

Further, I am very well Assured; As the Revelation is Taken out of the Prophet
Daniel so far as Concerns the Sufferings of the Church of Christ under the
Pagan Emperors, and then under the Ten Kings, Popes, and other the
Antichristian Hierarchy; So unto the very Temple and Throne State in Ezekiel,
is Daniels Prophecy Adjusted in the Four Monarchies, as to the Throne; And in
the Evens. Morns. and other Notes of Time as to the Accomplishing the
Desolations of, and Cleansing the Temple, or Sanctuary, and Final Judgment on
the Last Desolator Antichrist; and showing how Long; And so the Temple
Representation, Rev. c. 4. c. 5. The Throne of God and of the Lamb, the Seven
Lamps, the Rainbow, the Holy Angels, the Elders, the Living Creatures, and
Every Creature in Heaven and Earth Applauding and making Acclamation to God and
to the Lamb, It is Taken out of this Vision of Ezekiel; And all Times Dated
accordingly by what Befell this Temple. And whereas It should have Immediately
Appeared in Glory at the Lords Resurrection, and God and the Lamb have Come
down to be the Temple of Saints; There was only an Anointing of it in Heaven;
As The Sanctuary was Anointed by Moses when prepared to be set up; of which
Anointing of the Holy of Holies Daniel Prophesied c. 9. 24. together with
Vision Sealed or Staid; There was yet all along Some Proportion of a Counter
point on Earth in Giving the Spirit The Symbols of which are as if Taken out
Ezekiel. c. 47. 9. etc.
to the Apostles; in an Apostolical Ministry Appearing, During the Service of
the Four Living Creatures, which Reached Just to the Death of Alexander
Severus, at the Third Seal.

And so Long the Balances, and Weights of the Sanctuary were Just, and Bore up
against the Apostasy, or Mystery of Iniquity then working; From that Time there
was a Declination; Yet after Constantine the Elders and Living Creatures Appear
under the Sixth Seal, but as it were indirectly, and with a Glance only on the
present State of the Church; viz. Only in a Prophecy of the New Jerusalem or
Describing it; So that in the Seventh Seal, There was a Retyring to the Altar
of Incense, and the Daily Sacrifice was Taking away; And then the Temple was
shut up, and the Court without Trodden under Foot of the Gentiles, viz. Just at
the First Trumpet; And so It Continues a Shut Temple; and no Appearance of the
Elders or Living Creatures, nor the Temple Opened till the Days of the Seventh
Trumpet; But then It shall be seen more and more, and so onward to the Coming
down of God and the Lamb to be the Temple of the New Jerusalem. Rev. c. 8. c.
9. c. 10. c. 11. till v. 15.

It is therefore no Wonder, that there are not more Universal, and Close
Researches of Holy and Learned Men; and by a Concert of Endeavors; to Spring
the Mines, and Break up the Depths of Prophecy, to Cultivate, Till, and Plough
up the Fallow Ground of Prophetical Scripture; that Conventions and
Convocations are more yet Taken up about the Fescues of Ceremonies, then about
Eekiels and John's Reeds to measure the Temple of God in the New Jerusalem.
Touching which if Any Sober Heathen, on Moral Philosophers Judgment might be
Taken; whether it were not Even Ridiculous, when such Great Scripture
Prophesies are before us, that there are such Disputes about Rituals; I am
sure, They must Give it very Dishonourably to the present Christian, Even
Reformed Churches; Whosoever of Them areso Meanly Engaged, when so much Greater
Things Stand by Them under the Disregard of not being with utmost Diligence
Inquired into.

But certainly As The Jews Although at Herod's Summons, They Determined aright
the Place, but never took Care to Inquire Diligently and Accurately the Time of
Messiahs being Born, Fell into the Great and Ruinous mistake of Rejecting Him;
Even so The not Stating the Kingdom of Christ and the Time of it may be the
Cause of a Grevious Slumber upon the Churches of Christ, as Matt. 25. 1. The
Jews Great Scandal against Jesus Christ Lay here; They Expected a Pompous
Messiah and an External Glory, without Regard in the First place to the
Spirituality of his Kingdom; We pretend on the other side, to be altogether for
the Spirituality of his Kingdom, and to have no Regard to the Visible Glory of
it; But we Glory in Transferring all such Expectations to the Eternal State in
Heaven.

But indeed Both Mistakes spring from the same Root; We are Afraid of a Kingdom
of Christ, that should make an Impression on the present State of our Carnal
Grandieur, and Enjoyment of this World; and therefore desire All Things should
Run in that Channel, till Death, and Final Judgment, and the State of Eternity;
Temporal Princes, and Statesmen would not have any change in their Power* and
Politics, and are Angry, Christ should (...) told to Take to Him His Great
Power, and to Reign; Ecclesiastical Grandees would have their Jurisdiction,
their Regiment, their Canons, their Dignities, and Revenues Remain in the
order, wherein They now Stand; And so the same Temper Runs down to the lowest
of Both of each sort.

And thus we, even as They, Tread such Paths, as that not Knowing the Voices of
the Prophets, Acts 13. 27. though we Read them (as They did) often; Fulfill
them in Condemning Him, or His Kingdom; For the Glory of this Kingdom and World
to come, whereof we now speak, is so plainly declared, and yet we are so Averse
to it, that It is Hard to know, whether Theirs, or Ours is the Greater
Blindness; Only Blessed be God, the Error is not so damnable in our Case, as in
Theirs.

In the mean time We Pray for, and Profess to desire better Things; Even such
as the Prophets have Foretold; But what Hopes can there be of such a
Betterness, without a Higher Economy or Administration from Heaven, when the
fairest Appearances that ever have yet been upon Earth, have been Blasted,
Faded and Withered, as a Flower in the Field, when It has most spread its
Glory?

Even This is a Demonstration beyond denial, that either there is a Despair of
any better State, or else some Great Prophesies must be Fulfill*d according to
the High Eloquence of Scripture, concerning a Restitution of All Things by the
Second Adam, from the Time of the Fall of the First Adam, and a Spirit poured
out from on High, Suitable to it.

Oh that therefore by this, and other Concurrent Discourses, I might, however
unworthy, be Instrumental to persuade; That we might with One Consent, Give our
selves by Books to Understand, when the 1260 Years, which God will have
Accomplished for the Desolations of his Sanctury, shall come to an End; And
that we would Set our our Faces to the Lord, to Seek by Supplication, Fasting,
and Ashes, as the True Witnesses of Christ, that They may come to an End; Even
if it may be sooner, then 1697. And I am most assured, that at that Time at
least, we shall prevail, and the Tabernacle of Testimony, and the Ark of the
Testament shall Begin to be seen by us in the Temple opened in Heaven; and It
will be Filling with the Smoke of Divine Purification by the Spirit of
Jugdment, and of Burning, just before the Glory of the Lord Returning to it;
For the Time given for the Bringing Ezekiel's Vision into Effect must be at
Hand, and the New Jerusalem shall come down as the Lord has spoken, Amen.

(...) A^justment of the Lords Prayer to the Vision.
O^R Father which art in Heaven, whom yet the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain;
Hallowed be thy N^^e, Bow thy 1 Kings 8. 27.
Heavens, come down, and place the Glory of thy Name in thy self, and the Lamb,
the Temple of thy Holy City, the New Jerusalem; Filling Heaven, and Earth with
it; Thy Kingdom Rev. 21. 22.
come, Thy Will be done as in Heaven, and on Earth: Let thy Throne be
Established in the New Heaven above; Reaching Ezekiel. 43. 7.
down to the New Earth, the place of the Soles of thy Zach. 14. 20.
Feet; So that an entire Obedience may be Rendered to Thee, even Holiness to
JEHOVAH throughout: Give us this day our Ezekiel. 41. 22.
daily Bread; and Forgive us our Trespasses, as we Forgive them that Trespass
against us. Fix then the Table before the Lord of John 6. 33.
the Super-substantial Bread, the Lamb, united with the Rich Ezekiel. 44. 25.
Perfumes of his Intercession, Arising from the Seven Times Purified Altar of
his whole Burnt Offering of Himself, once Heb. 13. 10.
for All; By which is made an Universal Reconciliation of All Things in Heaven,
and Earth, in Him, even in Him: Colos. 1. 20.
Lead us not into Temptation, But Deliver us from Evil; And this Thy dwelling
place we shall no more defile by our Whoredoms, Ezekiel. 43. 7. 8.
and Abominations, by the Carcasses of our Kings, by our Posts, Thresholds; Or
the Uncircumcision of our Heart, c. 44. 7. c. 45. 9.
and Flesh; Nor any more Violence, Curse, or Death Heard of in the Holy City of
our Melchizedec; the Serpent, and his Rev. 20. 1. Ezekiel. 41. 18. etc. Rev 19. 6.
1 Cor. 15. 28. Rev. 21. 6.
Seed being Sealed up in the Abyss: For Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and
the Glory, The Cherubims, and Palm-Bearing Company shall sing Everlasting
Hallelujahs, The Lord God Omnipotent Reigns: For Ever and Ever, In a Kingdom
delivered up to God and the Father throughout Eternity of Ages, Amen. So be it,
and So it shall be; So It shall be done.

The Humble Proposal to the Reader.
I Have already published, (however at several Times, as I could) a Scheme of
the whole Scripture Line of Time, and Prophecy, as a Preface to the Work; and
with it a Compare of the First State of Things, (that may be called the Stasis
at the First Sabbath,) with the Restitution, which the Apostle calls
A^^*Catastasis, or Re-Enstating Them at the Grand Sabbatism; and so proceeded
by the Patriarchal Line, down to Abraham; and from Him to the Going out of
Egypt: And then beginning at Cyrus, have drawn the Line to the Thousand Years
Kingdom of Christ. I have also strengthened the Fixing the Line of Time, from
Cyrus to that Kingdom by Full discourse on the Visions of the Four Monarchies
in Nebuchadnezzars Image, c. 2. and the Four Beasts, c. 7. and shown; How the
Revelation Falls in with, and more Fully ^narchy, in a Tre^^^se called; The
Kingdom of (...) Time accordin^ (...) those Four Monarchies: I have also proved
(...) ^narchy to be the Roman Pagan Empire, and then the Papacy with a short
^^^^^thesis of the (...) Empire, in both That, and Another discourse called;
Gods Command to come out of Babylon: I have now published Ezekiels Vision of
the Temple, and City in the ^^and design of it, the New Jerusalem; and shown
the several States of the Churches of God, and of Jesus Christ, till this
Temple and City come down in the New Jerusalem, are Commensurate to the whole
Time of the Four Monarchies; and give Dates to the Line of Time, ever since;
first in that entire Line of 2300 Evens. Morns. (after Forty Years from this
Vision given) to the New Jerusalem; and in several Parcel Collatteral Lines,
and by Name of Daniel's 70 Week and 1335 Days; And also herein Joined a
discourse on the Reformation, the Rising of the Witnesses at 97, when shall be
the Great Re-Reformation: I have Lastly published the Prophetical Song of
Solomon from the Kingdom of David the Type, to the Kingdom of the Great David,
the Antitipe; Showing its Stupendous Configurations with all Prophecy.

There now Remains to fill up the Line of Time from the Going out of Egypt to
the Building the Temple, and so to Solomon's Death; and from thence to the
Restoring that Temple by Cyrus; and therein to Solve the Difficulties of the
480 Years in the History, 1 Kings 6. 1. and the 450, Acts 13. 20. and to Clear
that the 390 Days, and 40 Days of Ezekiel's lying on his side, continue the
Line from Solomon's Death, and the One Kingdom of Israel Becoming Two to the
Restoration by Cyrus; And upon all this, I Find it necessary in an entire
Discourse, to clear by plain Positive Doctrinal Scripture in compare with
Prophetical; that There is such a Kingdom of Christ, as of the 1090 Years New
Heaven above, and the New Earth below, that Begins with a Judgment by the
Vials, and ends in the Casting the Last Enemies, the Devil, Hell, and Death
into the Lake; and between Those is a Thousand Years Kingdom of Visible Glory
of Christ and his Saints, after the manner of his Transfiguration above, and
after the manner of Adam in Paradise below, and Full of Holy Spirituality, and
Enjoyment of the Redemption of Christ; Free from all Cerinthian, or Millenarian
Heresy, and shining in that Divine Economy, or Preparational Glory until the
Kingdom is delivered up to God, and the Father All in All. And Lastly, To show
that the Lords Prayer, the Sacraments of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper; even
as I have shown; the Sabbaths of the Old and New Testament have their
Continuance, and their Great use, as the only Ceremonials of the New Testament
in Typing out that Great Kingdom.

Upon all this I Humbly Propose to every Reader, that is Favorable hereunto,
and of Ability, to Assist me by Contributions for Thirty Sheets more to
complete the Work at a Penny a sheet, and a Seventh Book to Six Subscribers, or
as they please in further Assistances, to be Given either to my self, or to Mr.
Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhill; And the Press shall be daily going on
to Finish the Work; And with Faith, Hope, and Prayer, Let us, if we Love the
Kingdom, and Appearance of Christ, Humbly, and Earnestly wait for the Great
Revolution, I Affirm of the Kingdom of Christ at 1697, to enter into its
Succession, and 75 Years after, viz. 1772 to begin in the 1000 Years Appearance
in Glory.

Month 11. Day 29. 1689/90.
The Pattern of the Divine Temple, Sanctuary, and City of the New Jerusalem,
Measured according to Ezekiels Last, and Greatest Vision, c. 40. c. 41. etc. to
the End.
AT a day of a most Certain, and exact Date, when Jerusalem and its Temple lay
in Ruins; God shows in Vision to Ezekiel, not a Model, nor a Direction to any
persons, to Build according to it; but a Building in Actual Being, and
therefore a Building, made without Hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1 Revel. 21 10. Heb. 10.
11. 16.
whose Builder and Maker God is, Eternal in the Heavens; from whence It is to
come down in the New Heaven, and the New Earth; viz. a Temple, a City, that
has Foundations, and a Country Lying about it, the principal State of which,
is Heavenly, but to shine down to the New Earth, from the New Heaven. Rev. 21.
24.

The Preparation to the Vision.
1. The Date is above the Exactness of any Record, viz. By the Year of
Captivity, It is first dated; and thereby it is Joined with the Thirtieth Year,
in the Beginning of Ezekiel's c. 1. 1.
Prophecy; which being set alone without any other note of Time, can in no fair
Construction, be any other Thirtieth Year, but from the Last Jubilee, according
to General Jewish Style of Time; and that being the Fifth year of Jehoiachins
Captivity; and the present year of the Vision being the Twenty Fifth year of
that Captivity; It shows it to be the Fiftieth c. 40. 1.
year, and so the year of Jubilee; Fitly to Represent the Great Jubilee of the
World, that shall be in this Vision Accomplished.

It was on the Tenth day of the Month, Answering the day of the first
Institution of the Passover, when also will be the Exodus 12. 1. Dan. 12. 1.
Matt. 24. 21. Rev. 3. 10.
Greatest Passover of Deliverance from the Great Trouble, Tribulation, and
Temptation, which shall come on all the Reprobate Earth, but the Saints shall
be privilegd'd from it.

It was in the Beginning of the Year, or Spring, on which the Greatest Acts of
God are Recorded; and which God E^od. 12. 1.
made the Head of the Sacred Year.

It was in the Fourteenth year, after the City was (...)* To show it was in the
deep Desolation, of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, and Land of Israel, as
the Season of Mercy; For when his Servants are the lowest, Then in the Mount,
the Lord will be seen. Genesis 22. 14. with Ez. 40. 2.

Lastly, It was the Self Same Day; and thereby the Time is Genesis 2. 1. c. 7. 11.
13. 2 Pet. 3. 7. 8.
Knit to the self same day of the Creation, and First Sabbath; To the self same
day of the Flood, when the World, that then was, Perished by Water; Answerably,
the Heavens and Earth that now are, are Treasured up for Fire; Even for the
day, when this very Vision shall come into high effect: All Great Epochs.

2. The Theater of the Vision is the City Jerusalem that then lay in Ruin, and
the Land of Israel under Desolation; whether the Prophet Ezekiel was carried by
a Divine Hand in the Visions of God; Agreeable to so Great Visions of God, as
will be, when this Jerusalem comes down from Heaven.

3. This wonderful Measurer, whose Appearance was as Brass, (as the Feet of
Jesus Christ are Represented in the Prophecy of Daniel and in the Revelation.)
This Measurer is parallel to the wonderful Numberer, called Palmoni, in the
Margin of the Bible. Dan. 8. 13. Knitting both Visions.

4. There is a Charge upon Ezekiel, obliging all his Powers of Attention, and
Observation; Son of Man, see with thy Eyes, Hear with thy Ears, and set thy
Heart upon All, that I show thee, c. 40. v. 4. which Charge is renewed, c. 44.
5. showing how weighty, and how sublime a State, this Temple-Communion with God
shall be.

5. There is a Charge upon Ezekiel to show to the House of Israel, All that He
saw, c. 40. v. 40. and then c. 43. 10. to show them the House, that They may be
Ashamed of their Iniquities, and let Them, says the Lord, Measure the Pattern:
And if They are Ashamed, show them All the Forms, Laws, and Ordinances, etc. of
the House. Now this I look upon as chiefly Prophetical of the Time, when the
Temple shall be Opened in Heaven; And it shall Tend to the Great Purification
of the Churches of Christ, and to the Conversion of the Jews; and that in the
mean Time, the very Apprehension, and Consideration of so stupendous, and
wonderful Regularity and Exactness in the Temple State, as is here given,
should exceeding persuade to Model our Religion, and Worship of God, and of
Jesus Christ, by the Clearest, Closest, and Exact-est Conformity to the Pattern
of the Word of God.

The Vision it self follows, which may be Comprehended in these following Great
Particulars.

1. There is the Frame of a Temple, with its Holy of Holies, outward Temple,
Altars, Chambers, Galleries, Courts, Places of Reception; Strengthened and
Adorned with its many Pillars, Surrounded with its Strong and High Gates, and
Walls; All upon Stable Foundations, as is to be seen throughout the Vision,
with undeniable Allusions to the Temple at Jerusalem.

2. Throughout this Frame, there is an Admirable Exactness in measure, by a
Reed, and a Line of Flax, in the Hand of the Brazen Measurer and Numberer; of
number, in so many Cubits, Reeds, Pillars, etc. as is to be seen throughout;
and of Weights particularly, as to both Sacrifice, and Administration of
Justice, c. 45. 10. And in the measure there is a Magnificence of a Cubit, and
an Hand Breadth, of Great Cubits, c. 40. 5. c. 41. 8. and a particular Regard
to Four square, c. 40. 47. etc.

3. There are Sacrifices, Solemn Feasts, a Priesthood, a Law about their
Garments, keeping their Heads, Marriage, etc. and with a special preference to
the Sons of Zadock, as having preserved the Sacerdotal Integrity: All these
clearly relating to the Laws of the Levitical Priesthood, c. 44. etc.

4. In All Things, the Law of the House, and the Limit of the House is Round
about most Holy; Separating betwixt God's and Man's Posts, and Wall;
Abominating the Whoredoms of Worship, excluding the Vncircumcis'd in Heart and
in Flesh. c. 44. 6. c. 43. 8. 9. 10. etc.

5. There is a single Prince mentioned, who shall not, who will not oppress;
with his peculiar Sacrifices, and Worship, his place and Avenue of worship, his
peculiar Portion of Land; and whose part it shall be to Furnish the most Solemn
Sacrifices. c. 45. v. 7. 9. etc. and there is also mention of Princes under
Him, who shall also be Just. c. 45. v. 7. 9.

6. The Reed by the Hand Breadth of Cubits added to each Cubit, becomes a Reed
of Seven Ordinary Cubits, and all being measured by it, It Imprints a
Sabbaticness on the whole Frame, into which All is drawn up. c. 40. 5.

7. There is in the Altar a plain Signature of the Israelitish Twelve, c. 43.
16. and another Altar that is called the Table before the Lord, c. 41. 22.

8. The Jews have an undoubted Priority, and the Gentiles an Engrafting. c. 47.
22.

9. There is a New division of the Land by Lot, to both Jews and (...) ^7. 22.

10* ^^ere is besides the several Ascents to the Temple, the place of Gods
Throne, and the Place of the Soles of his Feet. c. 43. 7.

11. There are Stupendous Waters of Life, Trees for Medicine, and even a
Catholic State of Life therein. c. 47. 9. 10.

12. The Glory of God comes in, and All Results into a Jehovah Shammah. The
Lord is there, and dwells there for ever. c. 43. 7. c. 48. ult.

And now upon this general Survey of the Vision, we may very well Humbly say to
God as They to Ezekiel, c. 24. 19. Will Thou not be pleased to Tell us, what
These Things are to us? Seeing These Things are written for our Instruction, on
whom the Ends of the World are come, 1 Cor: 10. 11. Two Great Questions arise
hence, 1. What Temple and City and Country these are, that are here described?
2. If we can find These, How can we adjust such descriptions to them?

There are Two Great Pretensions of Opinion concerning this Temple, City, and
Country.

1. That it should be the Description of the Temple, and City Jerusalem, and
Country of Judah, that were Restored by Cyrus.

Now whatever service, that Restoration, as a Type might perform to this
Vision; yet that It cannot be the Grand Scope of it, may be thus Argued.

1. There is no Reference to this Vision, to the Measures of the Pattern, to
any of the Rules, and Laws of it; no particular Account of the Sons of Zadok
among the Priests, no Glory of God Returning to it; no mention of the Vision by
the Prophets, Haggai, Zechar, Malach, or by Ezra, or Nehemiah, in that
Restoration; as there is of the Prophet Jeremys; of the seventy years
Captivity, by Dan. c. 9. 1. and by Ezra, c. 1. 1.

2. Whereas this Temple was to be the Place of the Throne of God, and of the
Soles of his Feet for ever, and to be polluted no more; That Temple has been
long since defiled, * (...) Antio^has.
and destroyed by the Abomination of Desolation by the Romans.

3. There was no Ombrage of the Healing waters, as flowing from the Sanctuary,
or Medicinal Trees.

2. There is therefore much more Reason to suppose the coming of Christ into
this Temple, and drawing it up into the Spirituality of the Christian Temple,
Church and worship is designed by it, till All the Received up into G^^ry.

Now however it is to be Acknowledged, that the Christian Church was the
Beginning of the Fulfilling of this Vision, and the State of Eternal Glory be
the Complement of it; yet that there is a Glorious visible Appearance between
those, to be expected which has not yet been, I thus argue.

1. Because at the Death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; before the Holy of
Holies, (as it is styled, Dan. 9. 24.) was Anointed by the Giving the Spirit
to the Christian Church; Vision and Prophecy, concerning the Glory of the
Church, and Kingdom of Christ was Sealed; So the Throne was seen only in
Heaven, Rev. c. 4. c. 5. The Temple in Heaven, afterward was Sealed, and the
Worshippers shut up for 1260 years; and then the Temple opened in the days of
the Seventh Trumpet, and more fully before the Vials, Rev. c. 11. c. 15. But it
was in Heaven still till the New Jerusalem came down; And not only in Heaven,
for It must come down.

Argum. 2. Because after that opening the Temple in Heaven, and the Divine
Glory coming into it immediately, as into the Tabernacle, and Temple of old,
signified by the Smoke; The New Jerusalem came down from God out of Heaven in a
Glorious visible Appearance, with many of the Signatures of this Vision upon
it, Rev. c. 1. 21. c. 22.

Argum. 3. Because the self same day so exactly Dated and Recorded, makes a
Remarkable Epoch to some Great Time; And that Time is the Time of Gods Throne,
so unmovably placed in his Temple; and of the Sanctuary cleans'd, Reconcil*d,
and Justified; and of his Servants being placed, each in their Lots,
accordingly to Daniel. as c. 12. 13. This Time of the Throne is assured to be
not till after Four Monarchies had run out themselves; Dan. c. 2. c. 7. The
Sanctuary cleans'd or Justified not till at the same Time, viz. at the end of
2300 Evenings Mornings, c. 8. 14. Nor Daniel, and so all the Saints standing *
At the first 75 of which It was Restored by Cyrus, at 490. after Anointed,
Revel. 4. at 400. after Sealed, and shut up c. 11. 1. at 1260. after Opened in
Heaven; c. 11. at 30. after more fully opened, c. 15. 5. at 45, after comes
down out of Heaven from God, into the New Heaven and the New Earth; the New
Heaven as the Throne of God, especially described Rev. 21. the New Earth as the
place of the Soles of his Feet in this Vision of Ezekiel.
in their Lots of this Great Blessedness till the end of 1335 Days, which are
also the End of the 2300 Evenings Morning. c. 12. 12. 13.

Argum. 4. Because there are such Extraordinaries in this Vision as can fit no
State, that has ever yet been in the World, and therefore must have an
exceeding High, and Heavenly State; as the Princes Inheritance, sufficient to
give to his Sons for ever, c. 46. 16. 17. with John 8. 35. 36. And so the
Princes omnipresent Conduct, though Himself in the East, yet in the midst of
those, who went Southward and Northward; c. 46. 8. etc. the miraculous Waters
and Trees, and the universal Life, the City 18000 Measures, each Measure of
18000 Cubits at least, too big for this State of the World; and an Inheritance
great enough for all Israelites, and Strangers, when such Great Sholes of
People, and all in a State of Life, Represented by Fishes, shall be in such an
Abundance and Perpetuity of Life, c. 47. 9. And yet a Lake of Miry Places not
Healed, as the Dead and the Lake. Rev. 20. 5. 10.

Argum. 5. Because this Throne, and Sanctuary being for ever, can never have
any other end, but that of the Kingdom delivered up to God, and to the Father
at the Time of the White Throne; which is not an end, but a perfection into an
Absolute Etern^ty; and all Defilement for ever separated into the Lake. 1 Cor.
15. 24. with Revel. 20. 11. etc. to the End.

I Have then Fixed upon the General shades, and Lines of this Vision, and found
by very Great Assurances; that it presents a Supernatural State of Purity and
Glory, Reaching down from the Throne of God, or the New Heaven to the New
Earth, the Place of the Soles of his Feet; and in both a Temple State of the
Highest Enjoyment of God.

I have also found by the Exquisiteness of the Date, It is the Epoch or Head of
Time from the Typical Jubilee at that Time, to the Great Jubilee of the World,
the Kingdom of Christ; and that within Two years of it, God began the Calendar
of Time from this Vision, to that Kingdom at the end in Nebuchadnezzar's Image,
as I have elsewhere made out; and Forty years after or at the end of the Forty
Days for Years after this Vision, wherein Ezekiel bare the Sin of Judah to the
end of the Captivity; God super-added a second Vision of the same Four
Monarchies, under the Emblem of Four Beasts, Dan. 8. and that the space of
those Monarchies might be more distinctly, and certainly known, He gave also
within Two yerrs after, 2300 Evens. Morns. Days also for Years to the
Cleansing; or as the Original is, the Justifying this very Sa^ctuary, and to
the great Sabbatism of the New Creation; and to the Kingdom of the Prince of
Princes; the Antichristian Desolator of the Sanctuary being Broken first
without Hand; Dan. 8. 25. which 2300 Evens. Morns. ending with the 1335 Days.
This Heavenly State is divided also by Lot, Dan. 12. 12. 13.

And now we are upon the 2200th and 18th of these Evenings, Mornings, There
remain then but Seven to the Opening this Temple, to be seen first in Heaven;
and but 75 beyond that to the coming down of the New Jerusalem: All this being
thus settled, I come to Adjust the Substantial Spiritual meaning to the
External Types of the Vision, and to show the High Rationality of the
Correspondencies between the one and the other, in answer to the second
Question.

Correspondency 1. This Vision most Evidently and Illustriously presents the
Highest Temple State, or of the Tabernacle of God with Men; A Temple and all
the Forms, Laws, Ordinances, and Measures of it runs through the Vision; Now a
Temple is a Place, or Building, wherein there is an Expectation of a divine
presence, or Gods coming down in a Communication of Himself to his Rational
Creatures, as at a distance from his Highest Glory, and Presence; and his being
also pleased, Graciously there to Receive their Tenders of Homage, and service
in Adorations and Praises; This is the True notion of a Temple. The very
Highest Heaven is a Temple to the Angels, and Glorified Spirits; He Humbles
Himself, Psalm. 113. 6.
wherein God coming out of the Infinity of his own Glory, and Being, is pleased
to hold Communion with them; The whole lower World, and Paradise especially was
a Temple to Adam before his Fall; And in Regard of the divine omnipresence;
Every place is a Temple, and so He dwells not in Temples made with Hands, but
is Worshipped every where by Acts 17. 24. John 4. 21. 1 Kings 8. 27.
them, who Worship Him in Spirit, and Truth. For seeing the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain Him, how much less a Temple, as Solomon the Builder of his
Temple tells us.

God therefore very Tender of this Glory, and the Fallen nature of Man most
prone to violate it, by Idolatry and Superstition; There was no Temple or other
place, or indeed Form of Worship to be devoted to Him, but by his own
Appointment: The first Appointment of place by God, was the Tabernacle Exodus
25. 40.
in the Wilderness, the exact Measures and Pattern, of which Gad gave to Moses;
and He was with Greatest Caution to observe it; Solomon by the same Divine
Pattern, and Inspiration, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11.
Built the Temple. It was after the Babylonish Desolation restored under Cyrus,
etc. as near as might be to the old form, etc. All this was too Low, and served
only as a Shadow for the Time Being. For it was too Low, too often defiled,
and violated by Corruption within, and Pagan Fury without; It was Finally
destroyed by the Romans, yet it always remained a Type of the True Temple that
is to be. This Vision of Ezekiel joined with that of John, Revel. 21. Give that
True Temple, wherein God and the Lamb will be the Temple, and that Temple gives
to the City the name Jehovah Shammah. The Lord is there.

Here now is the Reason, why there is in this Vision so much of a Temple Frame,
and Appearance; To show forth and foretell the State of the New Jerusalem,
wherein the Presence of God in Christ shall be most Free, and Illustrious;
showing his Love and Favor to his Servants, and Receiving their Service,
Praises, and Obebience. His name shall be in their Foreheads, and his Servants
shall serve Him, without any Violation or defilement shall this Temple be; All
hitherto has been too Low, too Dark, too much polluted, even when Purest since
the Anointing the Christian Church in the days of the Apostles; and will be,
till this Temple not far hence, shall be seen in Heaven; Then it will be daily
Cleansing: A Worldly Sanctuary has been the Great opposite to this, especially
when not appointed by God. Paganism and Antichristianism are the Abomination of
Desolation to it; The remains of the Synagogue of Satan ever since the
Reformation, still keep it out of sight; The most refined Churches are both too
narrow, and too obscure yet. The many Contents and Paper Combats about
Hierarchy, Liturgies, Ceremonies, viz. what should be abated or altered, are
even Ridiculous Things before it.

But all such will Vanish like Smoke before that presence of God, that will
within short Time, fill all Temple-State with another Smoke; Even with the
Glory of his presence, ready to enter, and with the Vengeance of his Temple
upon all that have defiled it: And then the Man whose Name is the Branch, shall
Build the Temple of the Lord, and Bear forth the Glory of it: Let us therefore
be Ashamed of whatever Temple State seems now most desirable; and Earnestly set
our Hearts, Prayers, and Expectations, to what is so much above it, even to
that which the Lord will pitch, and not Man; and that God would cause his Face
to shine on his Sanctuary, which is yet Desolate for his own Name sake.

Correspond. 2. As the Beauty, and Grandieur of any Building, and also its
Security, and Stability consists in the Justice, Equality, and Symmetry of all
its Parts; So to set out in this Frame a Divine, both Stateliness, Glory, and
that Firmness of a Kingdom that cannot be Shaken; there is a Construction of
all those Admirable Measures we find in this Vision; And though They can no
more be Found out to Perfection, then the Almighty in his Works, Job 11. 7.
then the Laws and Measures of Creation in the Hanging the Earth by Poize upon
Nothing; then the Bounds of the House Job 26. 28. 37. 38. etc. Psalm. 147. 4.
of Light, the Weights for the Winds, the Balance of the Clouds, without which
they Rage, into Storms, and Tempests, as we see; then the Measure of the Dust
of the Earth, the Decree of the Rain, Thunder, Sea, and Waters; then the Number
and Names of the Stars, the Conduct of Arcturus, and Orion; The Infinite
Understanding can alone do the One, and the Other; Yet still They are all
Admirable; and when the Reason of them is exposed in Glory to Angels, and
Saints in this Temple-State of the New Jerusalem; in the Stupendous Holiness,
Purity of Spiritual Worship, and Enjoyment of God; Then the Morning Stars shall
Sing together, and the Sons of God shall shout for Joy, Job 38. 7.

And as Number, Weight, and Measure are so Essentially necessary to All the
Great Things, that are performed in the World, as to Astronomy, Observation of
the Heavens, and their Course, Geometry, Architecture, Statics, Navigation,
Survey, Experimental Philosophy, and to all Commerce, and Traffic, and even
mutual Cohabitation of Mankind; So under these Measures in this Vision are
shaded the Sublimity of the Divine Communion with his Saints, and Servants; and
of Angels, and Saints one with Another; and those Lines of Communication
signified by Jacobs Ladder, Genesis 28. 12. between the New Heaven, and the New
Earth; and all that Abundance of Peace, Joy, Riches, Even Happiness,
Blessedness in the most Just Order, and Equality to Full Satisfaction, and
Enjoyment, and yet so, that there are Archangels, Ephesians. 1. last. Col. 1. 16. 1
Cor. 15. 41. Rev. 22. 3.
and Angels, Thrones, Principalities and Powers, and one Star Excelling Another
in Glory, and the Lord God and the Lamb on the Throne.

And as All the Wisdom of Creation, in Number, Weight and Measure are
Transferred into the Fear of God and Departure from Evil; into the Righteous,
and wise Government of the World; Jobs Description of, and search after Wisdom,
c. 28. Issues at the last into that Divine Decree upon Man; The Fear of the
Lord, That is Wisdom; and to Depart from Evil, That is Understanding; And as
Solomon's Practical Wisdom, Justice, Judgment, and every Good Path, is the same,
by which Kings Prove. 8. 5. c. 3. 19. with c. 8. 23.
Reign, and Princes Decree Justice, By which Judges Rule, and all the Nobles of
the Earth are led; the same also by which the Lord Founded the Heavens, and
Established the Earth, Flowing from even the Eternal Wisdom, Jesus Christ, who
sets up this Infinite Frame. And as this Wisdom since the Fall of Man is as it
were new Founded, a New Creation in that Height, Depth, Breadth, Length of the
Love of God in Jesus Christ, which passes Knowledge, and being Filled or
Completed into all the Fullness of God, (according to the Fullest Dimensions,
created Nature is capable of) which Dimensions every Saint is to comprehend or
Take with all Ephesians. 3. 18. Rev. 21. 16.
Saints. So this City, and Temple Result into that City, and Temple-State,
measured with the Apostles John's Golden Reed, wherein the Height, and Depth,
the Breadth, and Length are equal, as the Moralists (...), All is Four Square,
and every Saint in the perfect Cubical, Four square State of Holiness.

And as All those Foundations, Walls, Gates, Courts, Buildings by their exact
measure in this Vision must needs have an unexceptionable Firmitude and
Stability; So they Represent ^eb. 12. 27. 28.
that Kingdom, that shall never be shaken, the City, that has Foundations,
whose Builder and Maker God is; and every Saint is a Pillar in this
Temple-State; that shall Go out c. 13. 14. ^ Cor. 15. 24. etc.
no more, Rev. 3. 1^. All this State, City, Temple therefore is 24. etc.
continuing, and never Ends, Till It is Delivered up, whole and Entire, to God,
All in All.

Correspond. 3. A Third Correspondency between the Types of this Vision, and
the New Jerusalem State is; That all the Types of this Vision, and the New
Jerusalem State, That all the Types, Laws, and Ordinances of the Mosaic Law,
Tabernacle, Temple, and Priesthood, and also of the Land of Canan, called the
Holy Land; and all the Predictions, Figures and Promises in all the Prophets,
since the World Began are herein to have their Complement, and Perfection. For
seeing the Truth of God Requires, that every such Foretelling Type, as well, as
Express Oracle, or Pronunciation, should be justly Fulfilled, when once Given;
and that this New Jerusalem-State is the last [IT IS DONE] of all These; It is
most Just and Agreeable that this Vision, which is an Old Testament
Representation of that New Jerusalem-State should be Clothed, and Attyr'd in
so many of the Types, Laws, Measures, of the Levitical Temple, and Priesthood,
that It may be known; They shall all come forth in Spirit, Life, and Substance
in that Last, and most perfect State; Else They must never be Fulfilled.

For after all the Rationalia; or Reasonable Accounts, that Learned men have
Endeavored upon the Levitical Laws, and Types; The Apostle to the Hebrews, c.
8. 5. c. 9. 9, 10. c. 10. 1. as was most due, when He writ to them, Gives us
the True one; That they are Shaddows, and Samples of Heavenly Things, Images,
(and not the very Presential Image) of Good Things to Come till the Great (...)
or Adjustment of All Things. In that Heavenly City, and Country therefore,
when It Comes down from Heaven All These Things are to be Entirely, Absolutely,
and Ultimately Fulfilled and presented by Themselves; It was therefore
Necessary, even Those very Types, and Manners of speaking, Taken from All those
Forementioned Things, so well known to the Jews, should be made use of in the
Description of such a State, as by so many Irrefragable Arguments must be the
New Jerusalem-State being too High for the present World; and yet not
Abstracted, Spiritual, and High, as the State of God All in All: And thus our
Savior has Declared; He Came not to Dissolve the Law, and the Prophets, Mat.
5. 18. but to Fulfill Them; and as it were Pointing to the Time, by comparing
this with Mat. 24. 3. 35. when They should be so Fulfilled, viz. at the New
Heavens and the New Earth, He says Till Heaven, and Earth shall pass away,
meaning those which now are; One Jot shall in no wise pass from the Law till
All be Fulfill*d; Then Christ will to the utmost Fulfill All, even to one Jota.

And Thus must that so Solemn Divine Asseveration, Jer. 33. 29. etc. be made
Good, concerning the Levitical Priesthood, to wit, in that Spiritual Priesthood
of the whole Israel of God, Jews, and Gentiles, serving God and the Lamb Day
and Night, that is, always, in his Temple in the perpetual Priesthood; Clothed
in Fine Linen, White, and Clean, or in Robes made White in the Blood of the
Lamb, which is the Righteousness of the Saints in that State, seeing his Face
and having his Name in their Foreheads; Rev. c. 7. c. 19. Otherwise The Apostle
is Irreconcilable with the Prophet, when He Declares, Heb. 7. 11, 12. a change
of the Levitical Priesthood into that Melchizedeckian Priesthood, Begun at the
Resurrection of Christ, but not Appearing till the Kingdom of Christ, in its
Glory.

For though I freely Acknowledge, All These Things had their Beginning
Spirituality of Fulfilling them at our Lords Resurrection; Yet as I have said,
the Holy of Holies that was then Anointed, has been yet Reserved in Heaven,
and was by Reason of the Apostasy, Measured, and shut up, and not seen, till
the Seventh Trumpet; nor shall It Come down from and with God, and the Lamb,
till It shall be pronounced of the City, the New Jerusalem, Jehovah Shammah,
The Lord is There, or the Lord God, and the Lamb are the Temple of that City.

And This is the State of the perfect Redemption, Expiation, and Atonement of
Jesus Christ as the End or Consummation of all the Levitical Law, or Frame, and
the Righteousness of it, Romans 10. 4. Appearing in Glory; when All Sin is
Blotted out to Perfection, and when is the Great Reconciliation of All to God,
and to One Another in Heaven and Earth; In Him, even in Him; And All shall
according to that Petition in the Prayer of the Kingdom be both Fully Forgiven,
and also Plenarily Forgive, which now is Done in Great Infirmity only, Colos.
1. 20. Mat. 6. 12. 14. 15. In all which lies the Spirituality and Truth of all
the Levitical Priesthood, Sacrifices, Temple, etc. which are therefore so Fitly
made use of here to Represent that State; and therefore All Saints are the
Spiritual Levitical Priesthood Worshipping God, and Christ, as his Priests in
his Redemption.

4. These Types are Fitted to express the Highest Holiness, and Separation to
God from all Impurity, or Semblance of Alienation from Him; This shall be in
that New Jerusalem State; and therefore It is expressed in the Language, proper
to the Holiness, and Purification of the Sanctuary: As these, This is the Law
of the House: The Limit thereof upon the Top of the Mountain, shall be round
about the most Holy; Behold this is the Law of the House: The Holiness is as it
were, Guarded round about with a Law; It is therefore said at the Beginning,
and end of the verse, c. 43. v. 12. This is the Law of the House; Behold, This
is the Law of the House to be Most Holy.

All the Whoredoms of Impure Worship, and of the Carcasses of the Kings in
their Idolatrous Impositions are utterly Removed; The House is to be Cleans'd,
and Reconciled, and the Altar purified Seven days; The Priests to Consecrate
themselves; and their Persons, and Garments are by no means to be defiled; None
but the Inviolate Sons of Zadok are accepted to draw nigh; The Worshippers are
to go straight forward in their Worship and Service, and not to Return, even as
the Angels in their Service. c. 45. throughout; c. 46. 9. with c. 1. 12.

The Glory of God comes therefore into the Temple, and takes it up for the
Residence of his Throne, and of the Soles of his Feet for ever; and promises,
and even undertakes It shall be no more defiled. c. 43. 2. 7.

Now seeing, There never has been any Temple State on Earth, that has not
been defiled; as we must needs be convinced, if we look back on all History of
Scripture, or its Pro^^etic History; It must needs be, that this Temple is that
New Jerusalem State, wherein God and the Lamb are the Temple, coming down from
Heaven, into a State, as in Heaven, and upon Earth: Now as God, and the Lamb
cannot be Tempted of Evil, So they are a Temple not possible to be Defiled; so
that it is Security unspeakably High, that this Temple cannot be Defiled, that
God and the Lamb are the Temple; And therefore in that Prayer of the Kingdom,
we pray; Thy Name be Sanctified, as in Heaven, and upon Earth, even by such a
presence, as to be the Temple of his Servants; even as his Kingdom comes, so as
in Heaven, and upon Earth, and His Will is so Done.

5. The Types of this Vision present after the manner of David, and the Princes
of His House, a Single Prince; And as Zadok was firm to David, and Solomon in
the Priestly Office, so the Sons of Zadok are here preferred in the Priesthood;
The Worship of the Prince is Appointed; His Place of worship, His going to it,
and Returning, and all in the East, where the Glory of the Lord, had made its
Entrance. His Portion of the Holy Land is Assigned Him, which cannot be
Alienated, but only to his Sons. All these Types Answering the Sollemn Oath of
God, so often Repeated to David, and particularly. Jerem. 33. 20. 21. and Psalm.
132. prepared as it were for this ver^ Time; This Prince therefore can be no
other, than of the House of David; And seeing this State is Divine, Heavenly,
and never to End, It must be the Great Prince of the New Jerusalem, Jesus
Christ. For It is He, that sits on the Throne of his Father David for Ever, and
Ever, and whose Kingdom shall have no End; Luke 1. 32. 33. It is He therefore,
that must needs be this Prince, in such a measured, and unchangeable State; The
Oath of God could not stand to David, if it were not his Son; The Application
of that Oath to Jesus Christ the Son of David, by the Spirit of God in Luke
could not stand, if it were any other S^n of David but Jesus Christ; Nor can we
find any Appearance of this Prophecy fulfilled to any other Prince before
Christ; Nor can there be any said Supposition since His Resurrection, except of
some deputed Prince under Him in the New Jerusalem State.

But there are some, (although Private, and Hidden) Indications in the Vision,
that however the Representations of this Prince, are no other in open view, but
as of a Humane Prince only; yet that He can be no other, upon these
Indications, then Emmanuel, which being Interpreted, is God with us, shall
appear in these Two Remarks.

Remark 1. That the Prince has Power to estate his Sons in his own Inheritance
for ever; Now if this Prince continue one single Prince, during the whole Time
of this Happy State; His Sons might be so numerous, as to Eat out the
Inheritance of the Prince it self, if it were not a Divine Inheritance; Besides
this so long duration of any single Prince, as this Blessed State shall endure,
is sufficient Assurance of Him, who is the Great Melchisedec, a Priest upon the
Throne, Abiding so continually, and made after the Power of an Endless Life.
And if we Heb. 7. 16.
would suppose the Prince to Intend a Succession of Princes; This is a Great
Argument, It cannot be so, because the many Sons of many Princes, Receiving by
his Gift, Inheritances for ever, must needs consume the proportion of the Holy
Land Allowed the Prince.

I therefore Expound this Gift of Inheritance by the Prince to his Sons, and
not to his Servants by that Forementioned place, John 8. 35. 36. The Servant
Abides not in the House for ever, but the Son Abides for ever; If the Son
make you Free, then are you Free indeed; Words so Agreeable, as if taken out of
Ezek^el. To which I add Revel. 21. 7. He that Overcomes, shall Inherit All
Things; I will be his God, and He shall be my Son: Spoken by the Father of the
World to come, Isai. 9. 9.

Under this Great Prince, whatever Princes are for order, and Glory, must,
shall by the Eye of the Supreme Prince be all Just, and Holy Ruling in the Fear
of God, in this Morning without Clouds. 2 Samuel 23. 3. 4. c. 46. 1. to v. 8.

Remark 2. The Prince is made known to be omni-present; For His place is the
East, His coming in, and Returning is by the East, but the coming and going out
of the People was only North, and South. Now the Prince was to go out in the
Midst of them, and although a motion in the East be in the midst to North or
South, and to all that move to either; Yet such a Midst, as the Prophecy
Represents the Prince in, is much nearer; then that every step should remove
the Prince further, and the People further off from that Midst; I Expound it
therefore by the Lamb in the midst of the Throne, Rev. c. 5. 6. and c. 7. 17.
Yea much Higher by that Union of Him, who as the Head of this Body the Church,
makes it his own Fullness, Filling All in All; By the Rainbow springing from
the Glory of the Holy of Holies in the West, and obverted to it in the East,
and being Round about the Throne in the Humane Nature; For this is that Time,
when we All come in the Unity of the Faith, and Knowledge of the Son of God to
a Perfect Man, to the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ. Ephesians.
1. ult. with c. 4. 14. From whence as the Learned observe, this whole Temple
Frame Receives, as it were its Laws, and Measures from the Symmetry, and
measures of the Humane Body, which (as David says) is Fearfully and
wonderfully made, and in God's Book were All the Members of it written; As some
Learned Men Interpret, chiefly meant of Christ, and Christ Mystical also, Psalm.
139. 14. etc. Thus the Cubit and Hand breadth Run through All; And when this
Admirable Pattern shall be fully Anatomized, and Measured; It will draw freely
much higher Hallelujahs, then the Beholding the wonders of the Humane Frame,
extorted from the so deep Galen.
Naturalist, as to be almost Atheist, in his Hymn to the Creator.

Correspon. 6. This State of the New Jerusalem consists not of Revolutionary
Sabbaths, but is it self one perfect, even always continuing Sabbatism to the
People of God, and even to the whole Creation; All Productions being Free,
Spontaneous, and full of Blessing: This Sabbaticness is fitly signified by the
Reed, c. 40. 5. of Six Cubits, and a Hand Breadth; For the Six Hand Breadths
allowed to every Cubit above the ordinary Standard, make up a Seventh Cubit;
and so the Reed becomes a Reed of Seven ordinary Cubits, thus contrived by
Infinite wisdom. For that cach Cubit had a Hand Breadth above the ordinary
Cubit; and not that the whole Reed had only one Hand Breadth to all the other
Six Cubits, together, is evident c. 43. 13. the Cubit of this Vision was by the
Cubit, and an Hand Breadth.

This Reed therefore becoming a Seven Cubited Reed, by the Six and 6 Hand
Breadths united, and running through the measure of this whole Frame, turns all
into Sabbatism; For so as the First Sabbath united with Recollecting the
Foregoing Six Days, and the Works of them into it self, and Blessed Them; So
the Seventh Millenary shall, as a Grand Sabbatism Recollect, Restore, and Bless
with Peace, Rest and Comfort, all the Six preceding Millenaries of Toil and
Labor to the Servants of God; All drawn up into its self, and its own Rest,
according to Moses's excellent Sabbatical Prayer to this purpose, Psalm. 90. v.
13. to the End. It shall therefore be to all the Saints, and to the whole
Creation of God, a Day of Restitution; But with the Vials of his wrath, as with
a Flood He will Consume the wicked out of the Earth, and so as to be no more,
and destroy them that before destroyed the Earth, Psalm. 104. 35. Rev. 11. 18.

Correspon. 7. There is in the Great Altar of Sacrifice, c. 43. 16. a very
Illustrious Signature of the Israelitish Twelve, which was exalted by Jesus
Christ into the Apostolical Twelve: For the measures of this Altar, vary from
the measures of Moses his Altar, which was but Five Cubits square, as too
little, Exodus 27. 1. and from Solomon's, which was Twenty Cubits square, as too
much, 2 Chronicles. 4. 1. And why was this? but to show the True Atonement for the
whole Israel of God, Jews and Gentiles in its Symbolical Twelve Tribes, is
Jesus Christ, declared to be so in the Doctrine of the New Testament,
established by the Apostolical Twelve; And the Spiritual Levitical Priesthood,
concerning which, God Lift up his Hand, Jerem. 33. 19. etc. is diffused through
all Saints, who shall be Priests of God, and Christ, in Robes washed in his
Blood, and daily Rejoicing in his Sacrifice and Altar most Holy; And Other
Tribe of Levi scattered through this whole Israel, as that of old in Type, Genesis
49. 7. and so Blessed by Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 17. The New Testament Acknowledges
none; So Great is that mistake of calling the Elders, Pastors, and Doctors of
the Gospel so, of which the Gospel says nothing but the Contrary, nor has It
come into its Mind.

And of the other Altar, c. 41. 22. It is expressly said, This is the Table
before the Lord; Leading us to that Great Supper of the Kingdom, called the
Lords Table; wherein we show forth the Lords 1 Cor. 11. 26.
death, till He come; when we shall Eat and Drink at his Table, in his Kingdom,
in that Passover Fulfill*d, and that Fruit of the Vine New in the Kingdom, the
Father, as the Ancient of Days has given to the Son; and to the Saints of the
most High. Dan. 7. v. 9. 13. 27. Matt. 26. 29. Luke 22. 16.

And to show the Spirituality of this State, The Altar of Incense, and the
Table, viz. of the Show Bread Become One; For I see no Reason to think, (as
some Interpreters do) that that v. 22. c. 41. consists of Two Things, viz. The
Declaration of the Altars Measures; and then a Declaration to Ezekiel, as by
the by; That near the Altar is the Table before the Lord; But rather, herein is
this Great Mystery; The Melchizedekian Priesthood brings forth the
Super-substantial Bread of the Kingdom, and with it the Power of the Endless
Lived Intercession; signified by Incense, and Interpreted to be the
Melchizedekian Priesthood of Christ, Heb. 7. throughout, with Revel. 8. 2. So
that They Became both one.

Correspon. 8. The Jews have an undoubted Priority, and the Gentiles an
Engrafting, and are even (...), a Body together, a whole Israel, one Temple,
Ephesians. 2. 21. c. 3. 6. Romans 11. 17. 26.

The first is so plain, that the Vision is made up wholly of it; So that I am
fully convinced, No Spiritual, Mystical, Evangelical sense can Satisfy it:
There must be therefore a Reception, a Reduction of the Twelve Tribes; which He
Knows how to Gather, and sift for, who can Summon Them from, A^^s 9. 9.
and, as it were, by the Four Winds; So that as their Reduction shall be like
the Sifting of the Resurrection for Every man's Own Body; and Life from the Dead
to Themselves; Of which we have that Illustrous Vision, Ezekiel. c. 37. 1. etc. So
It shall be to the Gentile Churches Engrafted into that Olive, [that is the
Jews Own,] the Time of the First Resurrection; Even to All the Dead in Christ,
whom God will bring with Him; And to the Saints, who shall be (...). The Living
The Remaining 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. 17. There shall be such Issues of Living waters,
as are after to be declared.

Now as to the Latter part, viz. the Gentiles Engrafting; though indeed there
are only Silent mentions of the Gentiles, by the Strangers Sojourning among
Them, having the same Interest by Lot, that They Had; Yet It is because, the
Vision is Given in Jewish Types, and Language; But the Gospel declaring; Jews,
and Gentiles, are All One Body, One Temple, One New Man in the Stature of the
Fullness of Christ, One Olive Tree with its Natural, and Engrafted Branches, It
is made Certain, The Twelve Tribes with the Sojourners, are the whole Israel of
God. c. 47. 22.

In as much then, as the Apostle Romans 11. v. 12. has declared a (...) an
Ecclips under which the Jews lie to this day; and that there is also a (...) or
a Full ORB'D LIGHT, to which They are to Arise; And that by Esa. 60 1* (...) v.
25.
Speaking of the same (...), or Full Orb'd Light of the Gentile Church, The
Apostle did privately Foretell an Eclipse by the Apostasy, under which That
Gentile Church was to Fall; and then Balanced the order of Each Churches Time;
We may thus understand it: First the Gentile Church is to Come out of its
Eclipse, and Apostasy to its Full Orb'd Light, when, (as our Savior says) The
Gentiles Times shall be Fullfil'd; Luc. 21. 24. Then Judah first of the Two,
and Israel of the Ten Tribes shall be Received both; When This is perfected,
Then shall be the First Resurrection, or as the Apostle Calls it, Life from the
Dead: v. 15.
For as the Jews could not be made perfest according to this Vision, without
the Gentiles; which They not enduring, became Enemies for their sakes; So that
their Casting away was the Riches v. 25. with ^2.
of the World; Even so the Gentiles becoming the prime Church of Christ, could
not be made perfect without them; God therefore cast the Gentile Church into
Martyrdoms, under the Pagan Empire for 400 Years of the Seals; then under an
Apostasy of 1260 Years under the Antichrist not yet expired. And when the
Gentile Church is so far prepared by Sufferings, It must come to that Full Orb;
But because it cannot be Fully perfect without the Twelve Tribes; They must be
Received, that Both may be together perfected according to this Vision; and as
the Apostle v. 15.
says, by the Gentile Churches Mercy or Glory, that must by promise be after
the 1260 Days, [Joyn'd with the 400 Years of the Seals,] so long the Souls
under the Alone slain by Paganism, must Rest, till the Rest slain by
Antichristianism, should be Fulfilled according to Revel. 6. 11. Then the Jews
obtain Mercy, v. 31. and must be Received, that All may be Glorified together;
On which Mysterious Ordination, the Apostle cries out, Oh the Depth, v. 33. So
we see this Vision cannot be Accomplished till the Full Orb'd Light of the
Twelve Tribes, together with the Gentile Church; Both which are yet under
Eclipse, till the 1260 End; And then Preparation shall be daily made for the
after Glory at the 1335 Days ending by the Everlasting Gospel, Freach'd to all
Tongues, etc. or to all the Gentiles; And the Twelve Tribes shall then be also
Received, and the Veil or Eclispe Removed.

It is very Remarkable therefore, though at the Resurrection of Christ, Revel.
c. 4. c. 5. there was a Representation of the Apostol^ Church of both Jews and
Gentiles in the Living Creatures; It was as in Heaven, and after shut up there
during the Apostasy, and not so much as seen; Nor any Appearance of those
Elders, and Living Creatures from c. 8. when the Apostasy was entering, till
the Seventh Trumpet, c. 11. And when it is seen more and more, c. 15. Yet it
does not come down, till c. 19. c. 21. And of this there is also this
observable in the First Appearance of the Church in Heaven, c. 4. The Gentile
Apostolic Church in the Living Creatures is First; and so when the Gentile
Apostolic Church is restored under the Great Voices, viz. of the Four Living
Creatures, c. 11. 15. 9. and c. 14. 1. is Returning to its Full Orb. But in
every Vision of the New Jerusalem, as c. 7. 11. c. 19. 4. The Elders are First;
signifying the Priority of the Israelitish Apostolic Church Received; Till in
that order, the Priority is continued to Israel, in the name of the New
Jerusalem for ever; So that must be first in the Elders; But the Gentile Church
is also Included in the Living Creatures, looking universally to East, West,
North, South, and Both are one Israel, one New Jerusalem.

Correspond. 9. The State of Blessedness, and Happiness being Typ'd out by the
Land of Canan, divided by Lot, is in this Vision also Represented, as divided
or distributed by Lot; though, (as Interpreters Agree,) after a Divine,
Heavenly, Spiritual, and not an Earthly manner; Thus it is promised to Daniel
in Admirable Agreement with this Type, That He shall stand in his Lot in the
End of the 1335 Days, plainly showing, when this Vision shall be Accomplished;
viz at the end of the 1335 Years, the Last of the 2300 Evens. Morns. which 1335
began in just Succession, upon the 965th, which, as is elsewhere shown, ended
in 437 of our Christian Account of Them* and the 1335 at 1772. when Daniel
shall Appear in Body with All the Dead Saints; And as Inheritance, and
Priesthood fell under Lots; so the Royal Inheritance, and Priesthood of the New
Jerusalem is fitly Typ'd out by Lots, the Heavenly Inheritance being called
(...), a distribution by Lot. And so Rev* 21. 7. He that Overcomes, as the
Israelites the Cananites, shall Inherit all Things by Lot, but the Fearful,
etc. Even as those Fearful Spies, Number. 13. 32. 33. were cut off; shall be cast
out into the Lake.

Correspond. 10. The State of the New Heaven in the New Jerusalem, is fitly
given in Symbol, or Type by the very Top of the ^zek. 43. 12.
Mountain, the Limit of which Round about shall be a Holy of Holies; and by the
place of Gods Throne; and the New Earth in all the various degrees of Approach
to God, by the Lower Gradual descents from that Holy of Holies, and by the
Place of the Soles of Gods Feet; as if a Throne reached from Heaven, down to
Earth by its Footstool, as was said before in Jacob's Ladder, and as in the
Prayer of the Kingdom, as in Heaven, and upon Earth. So the Throne lifted up,
the Tram filld All, E^ai. 6.
.

Correspond. 11. As the first Paradise had its noted Rivers, as of Living
Waters, and a Tree of Life; And as the New Jerusalem has a River, clear as
Crystal, proceeding from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb; and a Tree of
Life, whose Leaves were for the Healing of the Nations, c. 22. 1. etc. And as
in that Happy State, the Lamb Feeds his delivered Servants, and Leads Them to
the Fountains of Living Waters; So in this Vision, there are Rev. 7. 17.
Waters issuing from the Temple, and the Altar, Running into the Desert; and
into the Sea, and Healing it, so that It becomes an Ocean of Life; And the
Trees that grow by this River of these Waters are both for Food, and Medicine,
and their Fruit New every Month, as Rev. 22. 2. with Ezekiel. 47. 12. From whence
issue an Universality, and Perpetuity of Life; For whatever Lives, shall Live;
Even as in the First Resurrection of the New Jerusalem; Blessed, and Holy is
He, that has his part in that First Resurrection, either as in the New Heaven
above, or in the New Earth below; For It is All one Life to Eternity; The
Living, the Remaining dye not, but are Changed, and Caught up, even as the
Children of the Resurrection in the New Heaven cannot dye, Rev. 20. 6. with 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 51. and Luke 20. 36.

But as in the New Jerusalem of the Revelation, There is a Lake, and the Dead
slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, Live not again, till the 1000 Years are
Ended, that is, Never. For then the Dead are cast together with the Devil, Hell
and Death into the Lake, which is the Second Death opposed to the First
Resurrection; with which it begins, and continues to Everlasting, All one
Death; Whatever is Dead, and not in the Book of Life, dies for ever without a
First Death; even as the First Resurrection is All one Life without a Second
Resurrection. Rev. 20. 5.


So in this Vision there are Marshes, and Miry places, that are not Healed,
but Given to Salt even the Salt of Fire and Brimstone, and make the same Lake;
showing both Prophecies of Ezekiel, and John describe one State, so parallel in
so many Great Things. Ezekiel. 47. 11.

And now it is well known, such a State has never yet been so much as
Spiritually, much less Literally Fulfilled on Earth; Nor can it be a Heavenly
Paradise here intended; For what Nations, Desert, or Sea, will be then to be
Healed? What Fish to be propagated in such Abundance, or to be Taken; Which
according to our Saviors Great Gospel-Parable of Fishers of Men signify the
very same Thing, with the Dew of Christ's Youth, numerous as the drops of Dew
from the Womb of the Psalm. 110. 3.
Morning; It must needs be therefore the New Jerusalem State on Earth, when
Christ shall have an Offspring so numerous, as to make Recompense for the
over-number of the Lost now; And in All that State, There shall be to the
Second Adam, (Then to come in this New Jerusalem State, when the Apostle wrote)
more of the Reign of Righteousness and Life, then to the First Adam of Sin, and
Death, Romans 5. 12. to the End. And this shall be, when that False Fisherman
Antichrist, with all his Nets, is cast into the Lake of these Marshes, and
Miry Places never to be Healed.

Now These Waters were Four Times Measured by a Line, viz. the Line of Flax
Recorded, c. 40. 10. and mentioned on this occasion only; Each Measure was a
1000 Cubits; But in Regard of the Great Dryness, and Barenness of the Earth
before, though the Divine Manifestation was so GRAND; Yet It Reached only to
the Ancles, having small success; This may very well Resemble the Few, to whom
the Arm of the Lord was Revealed by the divine Preaching of Christ Himself, and
his Apostles before the Resurrection. The Second 1000 Reached to the Knees, in
the Preaching of the Apostles, and their Immediate Successors after the
Resurrection. The Third 1000 will Rise to the Loins, in the First Days of the
Seventh Trumpet, when this Temple shall be Opened in Heaven; But the Fourth
Thousand in the Milennial State, or in this Vision, Accomplished in the Kingdom
of Christ; There will be a River Running down from Above, throughout the New
Earth beneath, a River of Life, to Bathe and Swim in, and that cannot be passed
over, nor Transcended in any Temple State; For It is an Ocean.

Correspond. 12. The Spring of All this State is the Glory of God, coming into
his Temple, c. 43. 1. And the perfection of it is, JEHOVAH is THERE, as in
perpetual Residence of his Throne, c. 48. last.
and of the Soles of his Feet; Yea, so that He becomes Himself with the Lamb,
the Temple of this City, as has been said.

Well therefore might All parts of the Temple be Embellished with Cherubims,
attending the Divine Presence; And as attending the Lamb, They had the Face of
a Man on one side, Worshipping Emmanuel, God in our Nature; and of a Young Lion
on the other, in Homage to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; The Temple was also
Adorned with Palm Trees, Representing the Innumerable Palm Bearing Company of
Saints, c. 41. 19. etc. Revel. 7. 9.

I have now presented the General Table of this Vision, in Agreement in the
Chief and Main Importances of it, with the New Jerusalem; It now Remains, that
I draw up some Conclusions, giving the Scripture Rationality of the whole.

Conclusion 1. Although this State be so Great, and Excellent a State, that It
can never have an End Imposed upon it, or that it can expire of it self; Yet it
is by the Apostles express Doctrine 1 Cor. 15. 24.
to be Delivered up; Even this Temple, and this Kingdom of Christ; As the
Father is in it, It shall be Resumed; And as the Son is in it, It shall be
Resigned, or Deliverd up by the Son with his Saints; For as from Heaven, It
comes down for the Glory of God and Christ, so thither It shall be drawn and
Resigned up.

Now All this speaks it to be in order to a Higher End; There must be therefore
some Ultimate State, and Perfection, to which even this Temple, and Throne are,
as the Apostle styles it, an Economy or Dispensation of the Fullness of all
Former Times; In order to this, All former Dispensations were, and are as to
their next, even Supreme end, and the very Complement of Them; So This is in
order to a further ^xaltation of it self, that does not indeed give it End, but
comprehend it, and into which It is delivered up. And this is, that God may be
All in All, and that the Son and his Saints may be Subject; Or as our Great
Mediator expresses it, John 17. 21. 22. 23. That They, viz. All the Saints of
Christ may be One, as Thou Father art in me, and I in Thee; That They also may
be One in us; And the Glory which Thou ga^est Me, I have Given Them, That They
may be in one, Even as we are One; I in Them, and Thou i^ me; that They may be
made Perfect in One; This being the Supreme End, It gives Law to the Noblest
means, and even to That, which is to All others an End. viz. to this Grand
Economy and wherein All Oeconomies are Sum'd up.

Conclus. 2. There never was Any Temple-state. Either High Enough, or Secure
Enough for this Union of the Saints with God, All in All; till this
Temple-State wherein God, and the Lamb are the Temple, be Brought down.

Herein therefore the Highest Perfection of the Redemption of Christ is
Enjoyed. There are therefore Robes washed in ^is Blood; There is a Continual
Participation of the Altar of his Sacrifice; His Intercession, and Himself, as
the SHOW BREAD of Life is as an Altar of Incense, and the Table before the
Lord: There is the Annoynting of All Things by the pouring out of his Spirit,
making his Servants Kings, as well as Priests; And All the Heavenly Things of
this State are Purified, that is, Purchased, and Consecrated by that Better
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ in his Blood. Heb. 9. 23. Even Angels and Glorified
Spirits of Just Men wait for their being made perfect in this State, and Learn
from Time to Time till then; Then All the Treasures of wisdom, and Gace shall
^e Opened to the Rev. 20. 6. Priests of God and Christ a 1000 Years, And They
shall be therein Completed for the unspeakable, and Eternal Union with God,
All in All.

This State is Begun here on Earth; on which Account The Servants of Christ are
now in Common; And not the Elders, Pastors, and Doctors of the Gospel only;
Called the Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 53. to which Dr. Hammonds Notion of (...)
will Excellently Agree.
and the (...), the Portion, and Lots of God; according to the words, the Holy
Spirits wisdom Teaches; However we from the Ancients Humane Wisdom have
Learned to speak Otherwise, In them all alike is the Spiritual Tribe of Levi
Perpetuated according to Jerem. 33. 21. 22.

From this State Spirits Going to God are before the Thro^e in white Robes of
this same Priesthood, Clothed and so prepared to be Invested with Glorious
Bodies in this High Temple State; and therein Consecrated for an Eternal Union
with God All in All; So the Sublime Purification of this State is according to
the Divine Economy absolutely necessary to that Eternal Union.

Conclus. 3. This Temple ^tate is the Complement of all Proph^^y; For as All
Things, Times, and Pr^phecy have been some ways Prophetic of it; Even Adam in
Paradise was, the Type (...) who is Yet to come in it, And the Two Last Voices
of Pro^^ Fullfil'd, It is done, It is done, come out of this Temple, R^^ 16.
17. and from the Throne of this Temple, Revel. 21. 6. as R^membring Ezekiel's
Temple, and Throne; Even so All dates ^^ Time from the Beginning, more
especially from Daniel's 2^0^ Evenings, Mornings, have been kept by it, and
determine in th^^ as the Apostle calls it, the Fullness, not of Time only, as
th^^ Time of Christ's Incarnation and Death, are call*d Gal. 4. 4. b^^ the
Fullness of Times, that is, All Times, Ephesians. 1. 10. An^ further to show in
this of the New Jerusalem, or Ezekiels V^sion Fulfilled, All the Law and the
Prophets are Fulfilld; we may observe in that Grand Vision of the Gospel, the
Trans^^guration in the Mount; which by the Apostle Peter's express Exposition,
Ep. 2. c. 1. v. 16. etc. was a Vision of the Power, ^^ Coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and wherein God the Father ga^^ Him Honor, and Glory; and by a Voice
from that Excellent Glo^^ that shall come down into his Kingdom; Established
Him ^^preme, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased* Hear ye
Him. At the same Time Moses, as Supreme Med^^to^ on Earth of the Jewish Law,
and all its Tabernacle of Testi^^^^ and its Types; And Elias, as that Prophet,
who was the Type ^^ that Vndying State, Carried up immediately into Heaven ^^
Chariots of Fire, and so the Chief of the Prophets, Appeared ^^ Him; to show
this State was indeed the Full Complement of th^^ Prophetical Law, and of all
the Prophets. Luke 9. 30. 35.

Conclus. 4. We should consider, that this Temple is yet shut u^ and not seen
till the Days of the Seventh Trumpet; because ^^ Days of the Apostasy are not
yet expired; Nothing therefore ^^ yet be, as it ought according to the Pattern.
In the m^^ Time This is our duty to come as near to it, as we can by o^^ing
nothing, but according to the very Word of God; For see^^* All Things commanded
by God, are Patterns of Heavenly th^^^^ and the Temple in Heaven is not yet
seen, none can transgress ^^ much as by a Ceremony, and be Innocent; So nice
and seve^^ is that Admonition for this very Reason; See thou do All Things
according to the Pattern showed thee in the Mount, Heb. 8. 5.

But within Seven Times or Years, The 1260 shall end, an^ we shall see it, that
we may be Ashamed of our Corrupt ^^ present Low State; And when we are Ashamed;
As Certain^^ then shall be, the discoveries shall be clearer and clearer; till
^^ and the Lamb be both our Temple, and our Light.

FINIS.

