THE PRINCIPLES OF PROTESTANT Truth and Peace.

IN FOUR TREATISES.

VIZ. The TRUE STATE of LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, In Freedom from Penal Laws and
Church Censures.

The OBLIGATIONS to NATIONAL TRUE RELIGION.

THE NATURE of SCANDAL, Particularly as it relates to Indifferent Things.

A CATHOLIC CATECHISM, Showing the True Grounds upon which the Catholic
Religion is ascertained.

Zech. 8. 19. Love the Truth and Peace. By THO. BEVERLEY Rector of Lilley in
Hertfordshire.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst and Will. Miller at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, and the Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

To the Reader.
I Have very sadly observed the great distress of Humane Affairs, through
miscarriages every way in point of Religion.

For while the Powers of this world and Ecclesiastic Jurisdictions take it for
their Right, to impose by severe Penalties, and dreadful Censures, what they
think fit under so great a name; they yet neither can assure any one, they are
not, or do not use to be mistaken in their recommendations; or that all their
Authority or Power shall excuse and acquit those that obey them, when they
appear before Gods Tribunal; so that it is impossible the Judgment or
Conscience should have any repose here.

On the other side, some not only out of Recoyl for self-preservation, or out
of design, but from Furious Wild Principles, have broken out into public
disturbance, to make room for what they have proclaimed, as the Kingdom of God
and Christ, to the great scandal of True Religion, the imbrewing their hands
very horridly in Blood, and the seeming Justification of utmost Rigors, against
any pretenses of Religion, except according to Law.

Besides all this, private Feuds and Animosities, vehement and angry disputes,
are every where clamorous, and people hereupon in great Amuse, what they should
believe or do.

Now since there is no doubt, all these evils are foreseen by God; there is as
little doubt, that there are sure Remedies provided against them.

I have then upon the whole this account to give the Reader.

That the observation of so many Counter-Cries of Opinion, such great
Exasperations in men's Affections, such Complaints of oppression of Conscience
by undue Laws, such Recriminations of Faction, Sedition, Fanaticism, not only
among Christians, but among Protestant Christians, and of the same Common
National Interest, moved me to seek Retirement to some Rock of Certainty, that
I might be at perfect Peace upon, in full satisfaction of Judgment and
composure of Affection: and having found Natural Religion as certain as our
Faculties, and Fundamental Christianity, in most things of the same immediate
certainty as Natural; in all things after due exploration, of the same final
certainty, I am so far at Peace in my Judgment, as to have no doubt WHAT IS
TRVTH in relation to Eternal Happiness, if ten thousand more of Opinions
encompassed me round about; so far at Peace in my Affections, as not to be in
Commotion with any man that gives Testimony to Christian Charity, that he is a
strict observer of Natural Religion, and Fundamental Christianity; one
Essential Rule of both which is, Love, Peace and Mercy to all that are centred
in this Natural Christian Religion, though they may adjoyn or refuse some
Eccentrick Placits that do not harm the Foundation.

Lastly, I am assured this very Natural Religion espoused by Christianity, well
considered and observed, would disarm the world of those Instruments of Cruelty
in the Cause of Religion, so extremely abhored by it; whether used by angry
supreme Powers, or unjustly taken up by Seditious, Ambitious or Fanatic
Subjects. Which Cruelty men are sain to borrow from wild Beasts, no such being
given by the Gracious Author of all things to so excellent a Nature as he made
the Humane, and therefore most certainly not by the Redeemer, nor his Religion,
who came to fill the world with Innocence, Goodness and Peace, after so great
an Invasion of Barbarity and Cruelty.

Now having found this satisfaction my self, I make offer of it, if it may be
the same to others, asking only Candid Interpretation in particular management,
the main Principle being above the need of pardon or the Fear of Indignation.

Although the Discourse (being intended much shorter) is not distinguished in
the Body of it into Chapters or otherwise; yet that the Reader may have a
guidance into the main Designs of it, I have prefixed this Summary of Heads of
Discourse following each other.

The Contents.
THE Introduction, Explaining the Text, and showing the merciful Design of
Christianity against contrary appearances. The always present way of
determining Doubts in Religion, 1. to 8. Of Natural Religion, as sure, as our
Faculties, and the Examination of Things by it, 10. to 26. Of Natural-Religion,
united by Christian Religion to, and with it self, as the only Assurance and
Test of Revealed Religion, and of the little value of Ceremonies in Religion
either Natural or Christian, 27. to 45. Of Natural Religion, the only standard
of Humane Paenal Laws in Religion, 45. to 79. Of the great use of Natural
Religion, in composing, and deciding Differences in Christian Religion, applied
to some of the greatest Controversies in it, 80, 82. Of the first Principle of
Peace in Christianity it self; The important Honorable Business, given as one
Rule to walk by, wherein it engages all its Disciples; several ways producing
peace, 88, to 94. Of the grand Principles of the Union of Christians into one
Body, on which love and peace are infallibly to ensue, 95, to 99. Of Heresy,
and the nature of it, cutting off from that Union, exemplified in Popery, and
whether the Roman Society be a True Church. Of Schism, and its nature, as it
cuts off from the Body of Christ, 99, to 110. Of the Laws for Christians, being
imbodied in a Catholic Church; in particular Congregations or Churches; and
the Order of Both to National Christian Constitutions. Of the great value the
word of God gives to Public National Religion, requiring our utmost
attemperation of our selves to it consistently with conscience. Of the Peace of
Christianity in relation to the Ministerial presidency of it; in relation to
Magistracy, to Universal Goodness, 121, to 127. A Lamentation over the World's
unhappiness in relation to so excellent a thing as Religion, and Christian
Religion, 127. An Offerture for the Amicable Return of all Protestants one to
another within our English Nation, and the Methods of it, 136.
ERRATA.
PAGE 2, l. 28. r. action. p. 7. l. 25. for thus, r. that. p. 17, l. 17. blot
them. p. 23, l. 1, for them r. that. l. 5. for it self, r. themselves. p. 27.
l. 32. r. appellation, p. 91. l. 37. for they r. that. p. 109. l. 7. blot why.
l. 10. blot who being, p. 1220 Marg. r. (...). p. 141. l. 7. r. done.

ISA. XI. 6, 7, 8, 9. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
shall lie down with the kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall
feed, their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw
like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt, nor
destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.
THIS Context is a high and eloquent Declaration of the excellent, peaceable,
and benign Temper that Christianity introduces into the world, under the emblem
of a general pacification between the mighty and the weak, the armed and
unarmed, the noxious and innocent, the oppressive and oppressed parts of the
Creation.

And whether we look upon it as a description rising out of the Rules and
Principles, whose natural and genuine effect where ever they take, will be such
as is here drawn out; or whether it be also a Prophecy of what shall in some
time at least come universally to pass, that there shall be such a noble
experiment of true Christianity in the world, as we have great reason to
believe there shall: And so whether the effect shall be throughout to
conversion, and the truly Christian change; or whether it shall only smooth and
polish many men who have not the true Grace of God within, but shall be ashamed
in such a land of light to deal Isa. 26. 10.
perversely, and not to behold the majesty of the Lord, in that transcendent
Goodness and Grace he appears in, both in the Commands and great Exemplar of;
yet so that there shall be a multitude of sincere Converts to that state.

However we expound either of these, they are both alike to the discourse
intended; it being undoubted that Christanity always lays the grounds and
reasons, gives the commands, and urges the precepts, inspires the temper here
described, and does most effectively in all times upon many, (though few
comparatively) and in all reasonable hope shall upon the generality in some
time so prevail in the world, that all that Belluine, Ferocious, and Salvage
Temper of men shall be put off, and proscribed the world; the hearts of men
being either truly changed by the Grace of God, or universally so far convinced
by high considerations and over coming light (for the knowledge of the Lord
shall cover the earth, as waters do the sea); that at least they will not
discover that Leonine, and Wolvish Temper; that cruelty and venom so natural
to men's hearts in this sinful and degenerate state.

And this extends not only to the superseding the cruelty of action,
oppression, spoiling of goods, imprisonment, Massacres, martyrdoms, and all
sort of Tortures; but to the taking away that poison of Asps that is in men's
lips, the Lyon-like teeth of slanders, and invective, the swords and knives of
cruel mockings and Revilings men offer one to another in the management of
Religious Controversies.

For these things the Prophet speaks of, are especially to be understood with
respect to Religion, as men are upon their hatred to true Religion, or the
mutual differences in it, become Lions, Leopards, and Tigers in their
executions; Cockatrices, Aspes, and Scorpions in their bitter words and
Anathema's. All which according to the influences of Christianity upon men's
minds declared in this Prophecy, shall be taken out of the world; except upon
the account of those things alone, which will be causes of men's eternal
damnation at the Tribunal of God and Christ, if the infliction be Spiritual; or
such iniquities as God has indeed commanded to be punished by a Judge in this
world, if the sentence be temporal. Of such a change as is here set out, the
Apostle Paul was a great and remarkable instance, whose conversion as it has
been thought a prophetic Pattern of the calling of the Jews, so (it may be as
well thought) of this happy transmutation of the world, most probably
concurrent with it, if either be universal, as we have reason to hope; for he
was taken in the very manner of a fierce and wild beast breathing out
threatenings, and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, and immediately
Acts 9. 1.
turned into a meek, merciful, tender, and compassionate Lamb, over whom at his
conversion there shone a light round about him, in resemblance of this knowledge
of the Lord that shall cover the earth; at the brightness of which they that
journeyed with him, stood speechless, which might allegorize the making tame
even those in such a day of Divine Appearance that are no true Converts.

Now this Apostle (as we know) ever after breathed nothing but the Love,
Meekness, and gentleness of Christ, in himself; and offers in all his writings
to inspire it into others, as we shall have abundant occasion in the progress
of this discourse to observe; severe in nothing, but what was irreconcilable
with this excellent Christian spirit.

Object. Before I pass on, I shall only remove one Objection which may seem a
very great one, viz. That our Savior says by way of surprise upon any such
expectations, Suppose ye that I am come to send or give peace on the earth?
Think not so, I came not to send peace on the earth; I Mat, 10. 3, 4. etc. Luke
12. 51. etc.
tell you, nay; but rather division, and a sword and a fire; For I am come to
set a man at variance, etc. and from henceforth there shall be five in one
house, divided three against two, and two against three, etc.
Answ. In answer to this, we may easily perceive our Savior in this place
speaks neither his own intention and design, nor the proper tendency and
rational effect of his Doctrine; for in that sense he says to his Disciples,
attempting to imitate the fiery zealot spirit, Ye know not what spirit ye are
of: for the Son of man comes not in a Chariot of fire to destroy all that will
not be of his Religion; for he came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them, Luke 9. 55, 56.

In this place therefore, he only signifies what would arise through the great
Corruption of man, whose lusts and passions would be apt to swell and rage at
so excellent a Doctrine, so destructive to sin, and to all false Religion,
defended by long possession, and ancient Tradition, and composed for the
Patronage of men's lusts. Hence men would be implacably set against the Religion
of Christ, and would be divided with extreme hate from those that espoused it
as their chief interest and happiness, and not be drawn to Apostatize from it,
though it gathered upon them the spite and rabid Inclinations of the world in
general, and of their nearest Relations in particular. Indeed the profane, and
enemies of Christianity, are wont to cry out against Religion on such
occasions, as if it wrought all the mischief in such cases, when it is their
own wickedness that troubles things; as Solomon says, The foolishness of man
perverteth his way, and then his heart fretteth against the Lord.

This then abates nothing from the grand Importance of these words, which I
shall endeavor so to discourse, as to show that Christianity lays down those
Foundations of Unity, Peace and Kindness upon Religious Accounts, as are
sufficient in the Nature and Reason of them to take off all manner of
Barbarity, Fierceness and Malignity in actions and words concerning Differences
in Religion; so that there should be no hurting and destroying, but what is
just, and deserved punishment of evil; Evil truly and really so, and not
different Religions only, without that natural real evil, much less different
apprehensions in the same Religion, almost, if not altogether unavoidable; nor
should the names of Contumacy, Faction, Sedition, be a salvo, or shelter
sufficient for men to cover their Cruelties under, directed indeed against
different sense in Religion, whatever else they pretend.

And if the true measures given us by the Gospel were observed and pursued,
they would certainly and effectively reconcile mankind in general, and
Christians among themselves in particular, removing all Animosities, and making
them most tender, compassionate and benign one toward another, even toward
them that are not yet come to the knowledge of the Christian Truth, much more to
them that profess that Truth with themselves, though they dissent in some
things, wherein they are taught by their profession to do it with modesty,
esteeming and preferring one another in honor each above themselves, even then
when they cannot in their particular distant sentiments part with that they are
persuaded is Truth. For if obstinacy, contumacy, pride or singularity shall be
charged upon one another by each d^ffering party, and pursued with penalties by
the stronger, and these faultinesses pretended to be the things only against
which the Austerities are levelled, and not the difference in judgment; yet if
there be no other standard to judge of these truly culpable things, and that
indeed deserve the humane severity due to them in all other cases, as well as
differences in Religion, if any other but God, who knows men's hearts could judge
of them; but if there be, I say no other detection of them but this, That the
one Dissenter cannot come over in judgment to the other; that i^, the Inferior
to the Superior in power especially; the case is still the same, that all must
come to one opinion, or maligning one another still continue, not professedly
for the dissent, but for those other evils, of which yet that dissent shall be
the only proof, and accounted sufficient proof too.

I would therefore by divine Assistance endeavor so to manage this Discourse,
as to secure it from such elusion. I confess the undertaking, as it is of great
moment, so is very difficult; and whoever considers what has continually been
done in the world, and how things of this nature have been entangled and
perplexed, would not believe there should be any such Rules of prevention in
nature, or that God has designed any such for the good of mankind, and by
measuring from what is past to future expectation, may look upon any Discourse
to such a purpose as Vtopian and Imaginary. Seeing the Christian Religion so
humble, peaceable, modest and amicable, and that has the only true Rules of
this Peace, has yet been so unsuccessful herein, that as at the first it was
the Butt against which all sorts of Cruelty and Barbarity discharged themselves
in the Confessors and Martyrs of it; so since, it has been made the seat of
those unholy holy Wars, perpetual Controversies and Disputes carried on with
great wrath and clamor; and worse than that, a kind of Aceldama, or Field of
blood, by the horrid and unnatural furies of Christians one against another.

But to conclude from hence, True Religion and Christianity has not a fitness,
or less of fitness, than false Religion to beget in men's minds that Amity,
Union, and Peace spoken of, by fixing such principles and fundamentals, as
Christians might concenter upon, notwithstanding their various senses in many
things; and by induing them with such a spirit of wisdom as is pure, peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, is to take
off the load from the Degeneracy and Corruption of humane nature, and to charge
it upon the most excellent thing in the world, Religion, and Christian
Religion, whose very Excellency is the true and only reason why Corruption, and
all the malice of Hell planted themselves against it with all the force they
could to have barred it out of the world; and when it prevailed against those
Gates of Hell, and settled it self, then to adulterate, debauch and divide it;
which attempts, and the resistance to them, has made it fuller of commotion
and noise, than false Religion; which being held in peace by Sin and Satan, as
their entire and undivided Territory (no sound of true Religion coming in),
there is not that reason for a disturbance.

There is therefore no Argument of moment to be drawn from hence against the
Christian or Reformed Protestant Religion from the divisions of the Teachers
and Professors of it; for it being demonstrated (as it may very plainly be)
that it is not from the nature of Religion it self; it then remains, it is only
from the pravity of men, and design of Satan, who are not so concerned against
any other Religion, not feeling that destruction from any but it. Thus
therefore the waves and storms beat more vehemently against the Rock of Truth;
that there is more rage, and foam, and froth about it is not from the
unquietness of the Rock, which is always firm and still, but from the
unruliness of the waves.

Nor is the dead Sea of a false Religion, or a total Ignorance in Religion,
because it has a dead calm upon it, like the blood of a dead man, more safe
than these Religious Rev. 16. 3*
Commotions; for every living soul dies in that: There is certain Death there;
but motion argues Life, and tends to it; though there are other hazards
appertaining to motion, yet still there are possibilities of life. A Fever is a
degree of Cure, compared with a Lethargy; and dissents, if well and Christianly
moderated by the running to and fro of men's understandings, increase Dan. 12. 4.
Knowledge, maintain Action and concern in Divine Things, resine Doctrines and
Professions (which else like stagnated waters are apt to corrupt) make more
evidently appear, that which cannot be shaken: This indeed is not to be applied
to absolutely necessary and fundamental points of Faith, Worship, or Practice;
for though by opposition they also are much fortified and confirmed, yet that
is by Supreme Power, bringing good out of evil, but none may do evil that good
may come; nor does it introduce Skepticism in any thing we ought to know, but
every man ab^unding in the sense of his own mind, offers his own, and receives
the Reason of others, proving all things, and 1 These. 5 21.
holding fast what he finds best; with all toleration and condescension to
those that think disseringly from him.

I come therefore now to the main of the Discourse; and to make good, that the
Nature, Constitution, and Rules of Christian Religion are most exactly prepared
to ingenerate, promote, and establish love, peace and quietness among men, even
Universal and Ecumenical peace, but especially among Christians, and that by
the most compendious Authority, viz. the word that is nigh to us in Scripture,
and true and undoubted reason, without going up into Heaven, or down into the
deep, or sending beyond the Sea, or turning over voluminous Writings of
Ancients, Church History, Tradition, which perplex things with endless
intricacies; for before any one can with due rational satisfaction receive
them, he must for himself search them; and when he has done, compare, and be
able by sagacity to find out the true Genius of the Writer, and distinguish
what is sincere, from things spurious and counterfeit.

But suppose a man well satisfied herein; yet still how various are
interpretations? and what contrary senses do the same periods yield to several
Readers? and when all is agreed that can be agreed, it is uncertain, except
things are brought to a higher test, wherein the peccancy and lubricity, the
oversight and weakness of humane nature have had place, or what has been
conducted by the Word and Spirit of God by true Wisdom, according to the pure
and chaste Laws of Christianity.

So that though all knowledge, and learning, reading, and acquaintance with the
records of elder times, be most valuable, and to be desired in its due place;
yet as to the ascertaining our minds in what concerns us, not only to
everlasting Happiness, but to present Peace; God has provided better for us,
and within a nearer compass, wherein our search cannot be too curious or
industrious, but within lesser room, for such a kind of acurate se^rch as is
due to the Scripture, which in short gives us the conclusion of all matters
necessary to life and godliness in present, would be more than the most of
mankind have either leisure, patience, or skill for; if extended upon the
monuments of antiquity, so variously insisted upon for the finding out what men
very often have a mind to find out in them, rather than fairly to take what is
offered by them.

But the things I shall present as Christian foundations of universal Peace and
Benignity, and most especially among the Disciples of Christianity, are such as
are plainly found in the Word of God, and attested by sound reason.

1. The first Foundation of universal Peace, and Love, and Benificence in
Religion given us by Christianity, is, The Universal Consent, Unity, and even
Uniformity in Natural Religion throughout the souls of men, if they would show
themselves men, and act as men, every where presumed upon, and appealed to in
the Gospel.

Under this Head I will endeavor these Three things.

1. To take a brief view of Natural Religion, observing the intimate union of
Christian Religion with it, as Scripture brings it to light at its full luster,
and presents it at its full Dimensions.

2. To show the great agreeableness of Christian Religion with Natural, and the
testimony Christianity receives from it, in what it reveals above and beyond
natural Religion, and the Reasons we have for our acceptance of it thereupon.

3. To observe the grounds of Universal Peace and quietness in the world upon
its consent in Natural Religion offered to us by Scripture and Reason.

For that there are such grounds herein, I shall show Christianity supposes,
and that it strongly intimates they are the measure and standard of such a
Peace and quietness to mankind in general.

Before I enter upon these, I must premise,

1. That Natural Religion in many things does not at first and immediately
appear to us, but upon strong and sedate motions, thinking, reasoning,
meditating; as we recover natural science by study and labor in many points of
knowledge, which yet being found, are most plain and evident.

2. There may be strong prejudice against some Principles of Natural Religion,
and yet no more argument against the truth of them, than that in former times
there was a general confident disbelief of the Antipodes, was a disproof of
them, in which cases yet Truth will by degrees prevail to victory.

3. It is certain the true and lively characters of this Religion are so
defaced and blotted by the fall, that they cannot be perfectly recovered but by
Revelation.

Many Truths clear enough in themselves concerning God, his Worship, the
intercourse of the souls of men with him, and in relation to their eternal
condition, yea and in plainer things than these, viz. concerning true
Righteousness, Mercy, Humility, Soberness, Patience, are not seen but in their
darker rudiments, till they are revealed by God; but when they are so revealed,
they so notably fall in, and unite with the remains of Natural Religion
preserved in us, that they assure the same original writing of all, both what
we find more immediately in our hearts by their own light, and what we receive
from the Word of God. Yet so, that Natural Religion is no where found in that
brightness as in the Word of God, though revelation being supernatural, is an
orb above natural, yet so large that it comprehends this lower and less.

The notice^ of Natural Religion by man's apostasy, retired as plants into the
earth in Winter; Divine Revelation, as the Sun returning at the Spring,
encourages them, so that they sprout up afresh, and grow, being cherished by
its warmer beams; and so, that we know these newer notices are of the primitive
implantation, by their being drawn out in a continuation from the elder roots.

Yea, those things that in the state of innocence had no place, viz. Faith in
the pardoning-Mercy of God, and repentance, (for there being no sin, there was
no need of these) by way of supposition of man's sin, and so great a goodness of
God any way discovered to man, flow as freely from the same fountain of Natural
Religion, as any other duties of it, as is after to be shown.

4. Notwithstanding all these former premisals that seem to abate from it, I
affirm Natural Religion is a Basis for the common peace and quietness of
Mankind, upon which they might easily so concenter as to preserve the world
from blood and cruelty on religious accounts, if they would (as I have said)
show themselves men.

I come therefore to take briefly the intended view of Natural Religion, and to
observe the intimate union of Christian Religion with it.

I. And first the acknowledgment of a supreme Being, the Lord and Giver of all,
with all the Reverence, Love, Obedience, Service due to him as the great
Author, Benefactor, Lord and Judge of the whole world, is the first most
fundamental Principle of Natural Religion; and so plain and evident, that
whoever denies it, may without any brand of cruelty be dealt with as a Traitor
to the Universe.

1. For first he has unhindg'd the order, subordination, and dependence of
things, and laid the foundation of a perfect anarchy and confusion He has out
assunder the sinews of Government, and laid all open to spoil and waste.

2. He has undermined all gratitude, and dissolved the Laws of it, seeing
receipt of being and preservation is the foundation of all gratitude; and he
that denies this, unties the obligation of Parental Love and affection in
children, of duty and subjection in inferiors, and so offers to deprive them of
superiors care and protection.

And there is no subterfuge allowable in this case; for every man knowing he is
neither the Author of his own being, nor the things that support it; must
therefore know he is indebted for his being and preservation somewhere; and
where can he so return it with reason, as to that Almighty Jehovah, whom reason
it self always presents, and universal nature and consent of mankind
acknowledges.

3. Hereby all the most substantial reasons of doing well and avoiding evils,
are turned into vanity; for inward conscience of, conformity to, awe of a
supreme righteousness; guilt upon transgressions, fear of a supreme Judgment,
are cut off at one blow; and the best that can be said for Virtue, is but
convenience; and when that alters, a man may do any thing; every one therefore
may justly demand security of him that denies a God, as of a suspicious person,
of whom he is always as in danger.

4. Such a one can have no conscience to suffer for, he has no eternal
condition to take care for, no higher Majesty to please, than on earth; and so
may well be forced by any severities to pay obedience in Religion to the Powers
over him, which only he acknowledges.

5. Nor can he complain of injustice, who has removed all measures of it out
of the world, and consigned all over to fate or chance.

6. He that will make himself Heterodox to all mankind, and differs from the
universality of humane nature, may well be turned out of that Community as a
Monster.

II. That God can be but one, to him that acknowledges a God, is Mathematick
demonstration; seeing Infinite can be but one; and to whom the whole love,
service, and obedience of all creatures is due, He can be but one; for if there
were more, they must be Gods without love and service: he therefore that brings
in more Gods than one, is a Traitor to the one true God, seeing more easily may
the Firmament support two Suns, one Kingdom two supreme Princes; than the
nature of things more than one God; Polytheism, or the owning more Gods than
the one true God, is an iniquity justly to be punished by the Judge, being the
first and prime Idolatry.

3. There being an acknowledgment of a divine Being, there must be immediately
necessary a worship and service of him; since there cannot be such a Being, so
relating himself to mankind, but there is an immediate obligation arising
hereunto: and to own God yet without such a relation to mankind (as I united
with the mention of God) in the first particular, is but another sort of
Atheism, full of all the mischiefs of that, which seems more perfect Atheism;
and so is not another, but to all the intents and purposes of it the same, and
therefore deserves the same condemnation.

And if there be a worship, it must be public and not private only, seeing the
Glory of God is the universal interest and concernment of mankind, and
therefore his honor in the worship of him is most justly under the inspection
of Magistrates with whom common interests are entrusted.

Besides, there lies an obligation upon Communities as Communities, as well as
upon single persons in their private capacity to worship God; and indeed the
greater the Community, the more solemn the service, the greater glory rises up
to the Divine Majesty; and the zeal of men's Devotion mutually more excited and
inkindled: This therefore is most deservedly under the public eye of Authority.

But this being agreed, it still remains what this service, this worship is?
And this is evident, there can be no worship of God acceptable to him, but what
is agreeable to his Divine and Excellent Nature, so far as created Nature can
comprehend it, can reach up to it.

For as the services of Princes are adjusted to their wisdom, Awe and Grandeur;
Antiques, Phantastique Gestures, and Mimick motions, become not the dignity of
a grave and sage Court, nor sordid things its splendour.

God therefore being Infinite Spirit, Understanding, Reason and Goodness, his
service must comport therewith to rationality, spirituality, and Conformity
with his Goodness.

The First most excellent and absolutely necessary service and worship of God,
is the presenting him a holy, pure, and intelligent Spirit, in a most lowly
adoration of, and astonishment at his incomprehensible Perfections; in a
reverence, fear, and most intent love of him, in a ready obedientialness to all
his commands and counsels, in a steadfast trust and reliance upon his Divine
assistances, infinite Goodness, Bounty, and expectation of his gracious
Recompenses, in humblest aspirings to his likeness, and the fruition of him for
ever: and all this with a continual eye at his Glory, and not to any lower end,
but in subordination to this highest; for seeing there is such an infinitely
glorious Being as God, this is an undoubted Law of Rational Religion, In every
thing to aim at his Glory; and this is one essential difference betwixt the
Graces of Holy men in Scripture, and the Morality of the virtuous Heathen, that
God was always in the eye of the one, but the natural Beauty of virtue at the
highest; and their own Honor mostly, if not altogether in the view of the
other; which was undoubtedly a high offense, and under the Condemnation of
Natures Law, if duly applied to it, and examined by it.

Next to this fundamental and most real worship of God, is that external
worship, which from the same Reasons of Gods being infinite Understanding,
Spirit and Truth, must be also most Intellectual, and spiritual in the Soul,
guiding those Organs of the Body most prepared to rational use, but with the
most plain, simple and unaffected attendance and compliance of gestures,
according to the custom of Countries, as standing, kneeling, bowing, uncovering
the head, and suchlike decencies of habit and behavior; and these only as
following and waiting upon Rational Service, which is all that Natural Religion
requires of outward Ceremony.

This worship of God then in the Discourses of Wisdom, and Holy Reason
concerning him, arising from deep Meditation, and Contemplation of him,
Discourses of Obedience to him, and Conformity with his Excellent Attributes
and Perfections, of eternal enjoyment of him; Declaration of his Works of
Creation and Providence; of his final judgments; of that chief of his sublunary
Works, Humane Nature; Observation of the Degeneracy of man by sin, the
Discourses of the possible Recovery and Restoration of man by Repentance, of
the infinite patience of God, and his readiness to pardon, as a strong
Incentive to Repentance.

For that that Doctrine is made known to men by the light of nature,
consequentially, and by way of deduction, though not originally ingrafted, I
make no doubt, and that these two ways:

1. By that obligation to forgive, planted in humane nature, and the
inclinableness of generous minds to it, as an Excellency and Glory of Humane
Nature; and therefore it is most attributable to God, seeing all perfection
derives from God, and is most attributable to him: To the Lord Dan. 9. 9.
our God belong mercies and forgivenesses: He has declared to man it does so,
by inserting it as a Nobleness in his heart. They therefore that do not esteem
it a virtue, and of most desirable practice in themselves, may upon that very
reason despair of it from God, seeing they count it wiser and better not to
forgive; and whatever is best and wisest, is most attributable to God.

2. By the patience of God toward sinners, which in its most natural
Inferences leads to repentance, and is salvation; Romans 2. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Infinite goodness not being willing that any should perish, but all come to
repentance; and therefore that penitential frame discoverable in humane nature,
upon ingenuous sense of sin, answers this patience of God; as the Eye and
light, as the Ear and sound do one another, and both together are a connate
Gospel in man's soul.

If any should think this a derogation from the Mediator, he will be satisfied,
I intend no such, when I tell him, I esteem; all those notions of Natural
Religion and Morality, as continued to be planted in man, are from Jesus
Christ, the Creator-Redeemer, by whom every thing was made that is made, who is
that true light, that is the light of men; the true light that lights every
man that comes into the world. Natural Religion therefore may well be inlaid
John 1. 4, 9.
with Evangelical Lines, since it is all from Christ. The Apostles therefore,
both St. Paul and Peter, discourse it as the great sin of men against natural
Knowledge and Conscience, not to know that the goodness of God leads to
repentance, to despise the riches of his long-suffering, and forbearance, to
account it slackness, and not salvation, which could not be without the grace
of God in a pardon made known by natural light; nay indeed all impressions of
Natural Religion continuing and moving to good actions after sin, are built
upon Gods pardoning Mercy, because God allows, receives no worship from Devils,
who find no place for repentance; David therefore celebrates God thus, There is
forgiveness Psalm. 103. 4.
with thee that thou may be feared; that is, honored, reverenced, worshipped
and served, which could not be since man's sin, if thou did not forgive.

Thus evident is the Doctrine of Pardon and Repentance, that if there be any
such thing as Natural Religion since the fall, that must be a noble branch of
it. The King of Nineveh had a confidence in this Mercy, that so peremptory
decree of destruction notwithstanding, for the allowance Jonah 3. ult.
of them a quarentine or forty days patience carried a solemn promise of Pardon
upon Repentance in the very nature of it, else why was not the destruction
immediate? so he understood, and so it proved, and therefore it is a worthy
part of religious public discourse in the worship of God.

2. The second duty of Natural Religion is prayer to God, which our dependence
upon God, our expectation from him, both for the holy and happy state of our
minds in virtue and godliness challenges from us, the recommendation of our
state beyond death into the hand of God as a faithful Creator requires it of
us, the peaceable and prosperous order and government of the world, and of our
nearer concerns in it, National, Domestic, Personal, provoke us to it; Prayer
for pardon and reconciliation to God, Vows of obedience to him, of returns to
him by repentance, how necessary are they? for upon supposition of sin and
hopes of pardon, the same considerations enter into prayer that do into
discourses of God.

Now this is a duty so natural, that not to pray is to restrain John 15. 4.
prayer, to shut up and imprison a most natural motion and vent of the soul
that is ready forcibly to burst out as water consigned within bounds too close
for it. David makes addresses to God as by one of his Attributes, Oh thou Psalm.
65. 2.
that hear prayers, and therefore have an universal congregation of
suppliants about thee, to thee shall all flesh come.

3. Praises of God in the divine excellencies of his Nature and Being, in the
glories of Creation and Providence, in his Mercies and continual Beneficencies
to our selves and all his creatures, in his righteousness, judgments and
severities upon the wickedness that is in the world, are a tribute to God so
natural, that God as our Maker gives all men songs in the night, that is
continual matter of praise even in the ordinary and extraordinary seasons: the
whole Creation is one Mouth opened in his glory. This is so due and even
necessary to be paid, that some Naturalists of no great reputation for
Devotion, have upon the survey of the admirable works of God found his praises
even bubbling up from them in Hymns of Praise.

4. The holy and reverend mentions of God upon all just and valuable Reasons,
as in swearing by his Name, in Covenants and Pacts, in decision of
controversies by testimony, in asseverations of truth, in promises, are among
the Decrees of this Natural Religion.

Lastly, The universal Sanctification of the Divine Majesty in all our
thoughts, words and actions, that in nothing we may reverse that acknowledgment
we make in solemn duties; who that calls God the b^st and greatest Names of
Love and Awe in the highest d^grees, (as Heathens did by the force of Natural
Religion) can deny or keep back any part of these from God? or if any denies
them, or does contrary to them by impious swearing, blaspheming the Name of
God, or undervalues the awful and tremendous attributes, or what evidently and
undoubtedly pertains to the Divine Honor and Glory; who can say severity upon
him is cruelty, but a due sacrifice to justice, as punishments for blood,
rapine, unnatural lusts are?

All these then are so plain and evident Duties, that they need nothing of
further discourse, but only a sober reflection upon their own evidence in order
to their prevalency in the understanding of men.

And for the manner of performance, besides the very gravity required in such
awful actions, the prudence of rational nature in its solemn deportments, the
greatest condecency required to divine things that can arise from nature and
not from artifice, I know nothing to be added except a caution to rest here,
and not to suffer the transports and enchantments of a fleshly imagination that
is endlesly spinning out it self in forms and modes of divine worship, till
that worship become not a piece of pageantry only, for that were harmless in
comparison; but the abomination of idolatry and superstition, most loathsome to
that infinitely pure and spiritual Nature.

I come in the next place to consider how far time, place, distinction of
persons in religious worship, are within the cognizance of the law and light of
Nature. For I omit out of choice any discourse of sacrifices, which some have
contended came in by natural instinct, as too copious for the present
intendment, concluding they were ordained by God chiefly to typifie the true,
ever breathing sacrifice of Christ, which service having performed, they
expired in it, not only repealed by the Evangelick Law, but (no doubt) through
the superintendency of Providence grown into disuse throughout the world, which
together with those strong solid Reasons against their valuableness in
themselves given by God, Psalm. 50. 9, 10, 11, 12. Mic. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 9.
10, etc. sufficiently argue they were not of natural notion, nor of the
everlasting Righteousness of that Law.

Let us therefore, waving them, go on to debate the dictates of Primitive rules
concerning time; and I find but two things I can suppose injunctions of so
ancient a date pertaining to it.

1. That the time be sufficient, capacious enough for the receipt of Religious
duty and action, sufficient for the making ample inquiries and searches into
Divine things; for the souls commoration, and rest upon them for the discharge
of Religious business and duty; and so suitable and agreeable to the
testification of our honor to the supreme Majesty, by offering such a
proportion of our time together, such frequency of returns, with the favor of
season, and redeeming season, when it seems to fly from us; that in all we may
have a liberal space for so grand a business in our more stated and occasional
performances.

2. That in what concerns public worship, the time be commensurate, as in the
former particular, to all the ends and purposes of public worship, the
occasions and advantages of it, and particularly that it be known, agreed, and
indicted for that service.

But for the seventh part of time, though undoubtedly pitched upon with infinite
wisdom, justice and ^quity in the fourth command, respecting Divine honor and
business on one side, and humane occasion and diversion on the other; yet it
must certainly be said, the original ^allowedness of it is founded in Divine
command, and must b^ conveyed by undoubted tradition of that command, having no
more natural in it, than the general compromise of the world in the
distribution of Time into Sevens, or weeks, seldomer than which no reasonable
sense of Religion could allow for the recurrency of solemn public worship,
mixed with continued private devotions, as in extraordinary to every days
service. Else I cannot perceive it could be defined by the laws of natural
understanding. For place, these two things are also necessary.

1. That places be as agreeable as may be to the end; secret and retired places
for retired and secret worship; places of domestic coveniency for Families;
and public, known, and agreed, for public worship.

2. That places for Divine Worship have the decency, gravity and solemnity that
is suitable to such a degree and quality of business as is there to be
negotiated; not as any part of Divine Worship, or so much as having any
influential conduciveness upon the mind in such action, but solely as the
result of humane prudence adjusting every thing to its proper use and service,
and with the decorum most natural to it.

For time and place having no influence upon Religious actions, more than upon
all common humane actions by any peculiar virtue of their own, they cannot
without a peculiar Sanctification from God, with which he by his revealed will
acquaints those upon whom he is pleased to enjoin the observation, rise any
higher than themselves. Nor can humane appointment extend them beyond
expediency and decency; the ordinary rules by which all things civil and humane
are squared.

Devotion can mount nothing higher than its own true elevation as to the nature
of the thing. Devotion (I say) and zeal ascend up to God, yet they leave the
things they use behind to rest in their own station. It being a Divine power
that makes any thing Divine or Sacred, or efficacious to any such productions.
Without this, every thing rests upon its own basis of natural aptitude,
observed and employed by reason to those ends and purposes whereunto that
aptitude serves.

Time and place rated beyond themselves, become injurious to religious
services, receiving more of the minds attendance and respect than is due to
them; which being wholly obliged to a total, sole, and single determination
upon the Divine Majesty it self, must not look off from it, but under the peril
of moving that jealousy God expresses in the Scriptures; and if not thus, yet
they beget in men injurious thoughts of God, as if he dwelt in Temples made
with hands, and the presence of the Lord of Heaven and Earth confined there;
whereas except by his own choice upon certain reasons, as among the Jews, all
places are alike, and He equally accepts those that worship him in spirit and
truth. He that inhabits Ubiquity, is no more offended, Joh. 4. 21, 23, 24.
or disdains mean and unadorned places for his service, than stately
Structures. To misdeem so of God, has a degree of that folly that would
restrain his Omnipresence lest it should be defiled with the sordidness of some
receptions nauseous to us; not knowing that Infinite Spirit feels not the
passions of body: our Savior made use of any place for Heavenly Discourses and
Prayers: to observe days or times, carries a suspicion, that he who inhabits
eternity, and is Lord of time, is not all times the same; and therefore the
Heathen that had corrupted natural Religion, watched for some days as more
lucky, and avoided others as unluckly in their attendances on their
mock-deities. Yet does God allow to men the wise and prudent choice of their
own conveniences in his worship, both for time or place, not presuming to
sanctify any thing to him, that he has not first sanctified to himself; for
who knows how to choose for him? or who is able to give to him first? This must
needs be the determination of natural reason, if it use its own light, and
discharge its own trust.

Having spoken thus briefly of time and place, I come to the third thing,
Distinction or separation of persons for Divine offices; how far it is directed
by natural Religion, under these three Heads.

1. In the first Ages of the world, Patriarchal Eldership, nearness to the
Creation, and continual acquaintance with the History of Gods Treaties and
dealings with men, together with the Power, Gravity, Authority resident in it,
carried the most fit administration of Divine Things along with it, so that the
Pontifical, Prophetic, and Royal Authority accumulated upon them: this seems
unquestionable in Reason, Scripture, History, and universal tradition.

2. After the multiplication of Families into Nations, and greater Communities,
and that Patriarchate and Primogeniture lost it self in the numerousness of
Mankind; Reason advised to the orderly separating, and dedicating some persons
to the continual attendance upon Sacred Offices.

3. That they might be the more Authoritative herein, as persons of greatest
sanctity, wisdom, seize in knowledge, were most recommended to such a
choice; so Education, separation to Reading, Meditation, Study, for attainment
of knowledge, must be the means under the eye of Natural Religion, for enabling
persons for the discharge of such Functions.

For there are but three ways whereby persons can be supposed authorized to
presidency in Divine Things.

1. By Parental Authority, the same with Patriarchal. 2. By Eminency of Parts
and Gifts joined with dedication of themselves, and orderly approbation to
public office. 3. By special and immediate appointment of God, either by a
standing Law, as in the Levitical Priesthood; or by Inspiration, as in the
Prophets.
The first two are of Natural Sanction, the last of Supernatural Ordination.

And so far as appears by Sacred Records, no one of them excludes from
Discourses and Instructions of even a public character, those that have
eminent gifts and inablements, though not by immediate inspiration; as Elihu
having an excellent spirit, equaled himself with men of days, and years, as he
himself speaks, Job 32. 7, 8.

But Jeroboams making Priests of the meanest of the people, 1 King. 12. 3^, ^
was a transgression against the very Laws of Nature.

And it seems to me an error of too much a like enormity against innate reason,
to bring down Divine Offices to such prepared prescription, as the most
uneducated, undevoted, undedicated persons to knowledge, study, meditation might
perform, so that they have nothing to trust to, but (as it is called) the
indelible character of Ordination, which will hardly bear them out in the Court
of natural Conscience, and therefore cannot easily atone them to the rules of
Revealed Religion, which never contradicts, or so much as dispenses with
natural.

On the other side, to clog the higher dignified persons in this Ministry with
so much of rule and business, as hinders the performance of these Divine
Offices with the utmost effects of that study and meditation before spoken of,
runs into the same ill consequence, and exchanges a Religious service into a
secular Grandeur. Else no one has reason to envy, that they who are Princes in
Righteousness, Truth, and Peace, and Priests indeed of the most High God, Genesis
14. 18.
mediating continually betwixt God and men, in Doctrine, Prayer, Blessing and
Praises, should be placed among the Princes of the people.

And so I have run through those things that more immediately concern the first
and greatest commandment, but like unto Mat. 22. 37, 38.
these are Righteousness, Justice, Mercy, Truth, Sobriety, Temperance, Charity,
Humility, Modesty, Patience, general love, peaceableness, containing our selves
within our own bounds, order, submission to Government, with perfect subjection
in all things that do not contradict obedience to God, together with all those
things that speak virtue, goodness, loveliness, good report, honor, esteem in
human conversation, Phil. 4. 8.
which so far as they can come under the observation of man, and can be
regulated by laws, so far as they can come into palpable instances, are worthy
of rewards, and encouragements, and the contrary of punishments. This is
natural Religion, and it stands upon this unmovable foundation; Nothing is more
truly Religion, or reverence of the Divine Majesty, than those things which do
most perfect humane nature into a conformity with God.

And therefore the first and chiefest in the order or scale of Religious
excellencies, are the things that are most really good: the more substantial,
rational, solidly good any thing is, the more it pleases God, and must be
approved of Romans 14. 18.
men if they show themselves men.

Thus all the massy acts of Love to God and men, Godliness, Righteousness,
Soberness, excel all the Honor pretended to be done to God by prayer, praises,
discourses of him, o^ whatever of that sort seems most worthy to be preferred,
which without the other become a flattery of God only.

Next discourses of his word and will in order to learn obedience, are of
higher account than prayer, for He that Prove. 28. 9.
turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be an abomination;
yet Prayer and Praises are much more acceptable than sacrifices.

There may be now a solemn appeal made to all the world, whether Christian
Religion is defective in one single point of this true Natural Religion at the
highest and fullest dimensions of it possible to be conceived: here is the
height and depth, the breadth and length of Natural Knowledge, concerning God,
concerning good and evil, concerning rewards and punishments, according to the
most sober sedate judgment of Mankind, the universal consent of the world, the
most ready accusations and defenses all men make in points of good and evil, in
their treaties and debates one with another, according to the discourses of the
most Wise, Learned, and Virtuous of the Philosophers, the best of Lawgivers. If
then there be the most Wise, the most Good, the most Virtuous that ever was in
nature found in Christian Religion, abating nothing but positive Laws, topical
Religion, Rites and Customs; what a foundation of peace, quietness and happy
state might a consent but in this Natural Religion (as it is fairly extant in
the Christian Religion) be! and what a conviction of the Christian verity would
such an acceptance of Natural Undeniable Religion from it be! when just as in
the day of Pentecost, those Acts 2. 8.
several sorts of people heard the wonderful Works of God, each in their own
language; so in Christianity, every one finds what ever they can think
(excepting their own particular Rites) most generally, truly, and valuably
good, and that upon deepest considerations, strictest examination, and even
uncontroversable certainty.

And how benign and compassionate might mankind be to it self, if summoning
together these truly excellent notions, and framing its Religious Laws
according to them, they exacted a severe conformity in all, that is thus
virtuous and good, and allowed a benign freedom of offering and receiving the
best accounts that can be given of further revelations from God, forbearing
injury, violence, and blood; and then also it would soon appear what an
indisputable title, that only excellent Religion of our Savior has to be the
truly Catholic Religion of the whole world; and so far to set it at peace.

Now though there is little reason to expect this will come to pass, till a
spirit be poured out from on high, and these rivers of truth break out in the
wilderness, till the great Prophecies of Scripture looking to a better state of
the world come to be fulfilled: Yet still according to the rule of right
Reason, it should be so; nor does it diminish the reasonableness, or silence
the offers of the Reasons, that they are not likely to have their effect, there
being many other (in the event) incurable evils upon men, in despite of right
Reason, the cure of which yet any one may freely offer and discouse.

2. Having thus far insisted upon the first Particular under this Head of
Natural Religion, I come to show the agreeableness of Christian Religion with
Natural; in what it reveals above, and beyond Natural Religion, and the great
Reasons of our Acceptance of Christian Religion thereupon, which was the second
Head proposed.

And that I may make this the clearer, let it be distributed into these three
Branches.

1. That it is hereby necessarily supposed, Natural Religion is given to be a
Test and Touchstone of Truth in Religion. 2. That Christian Religion has such
an evident agreement with Natural Religion, as to be approved and recommended
by it. 3. That it being so excellent, and so recommended, it lays the true
grounds of peace throughout the world in Religion.
1. As to the first I thus argue: If a man have no notes of distinction within,
if there be not a Religious, Rational Understanding planted by God as a nature
in man; if there be not Principles ingrafted into that Understanding, how shall
a man know the goodness of anything proposed to him, the conformity of it with
what it is pretended to be?

When our Savior challenged the Phraisees requiring a sign from Heaven for the
truth of his Doctrine thus: Why even of (or from within) your selves judge ye
not what is Luke 12. 5, 7.
right? He implied, The very essence of a man as an Intellectual Rational
Spirit, must be also full of Religious and Moral Principles, and so must have
innate judgment of Religious Truth, as many other Scriptures assure us. Without
this a man can have nothing but an Implicit faith for his Religion, a strong
belief, it is true. Now seeing Turks, Jews, Papists, every one that is thoroughly
possessed with his Religion has the same; this kind of Faith is no other than
these several Religionists laying a wager one with another, which is the true
Religion; and it greatly derogates from the Christian Religion, to suppose
there is no more but this confident adventure for it, rather than for any
other, and no grand assurance within in Natural Religion. Even matters of
Divine Revelation, however immediately from God, must be hence known and
discovered, else every thing that calls it self Revelation must be taken for
Divine.

Although the Prophets might be at some times under a strong supernatural hand,
that transported their minds, as it did also in extraordinary cases their
bodies; yet they were generally under the still-voice, speaking to their
faculties, enlightening their reason, sanctifying their affections, by which
they had even at the time of their greatest raptures a sense of the excellency
of Divine Truth, an habitual acquaintance with the ways of Divine approach and
presence; a search into the things they had spoken, even after they had spoken
them. So the Apostle Peter tells us, They searched what or what manner of time
the Spirit that was in them, did signify. 1 Pet. 1. 11.
They had a holy gust of Divine things, a judgment discerning between any sort
of private spirit, and the universal Spirit of Grace and Truth: else how did
they differ from Balaam? 2 Pet. 1. ult.


Abraham no doubt had a free debate with himself of the certainty that the
voice was Divine that commanded him to Genesis 22.
sacrifice his Son; and argued within himself the reasonableness of returning
his Son, and especially his Son Isaac, to the Author of all life and being, and
of Isaac's most particularly, and so he resigned him. But Infinite Truth and
Goodness always jealous over the sacredness of Nature's Laws, would not permit
the execution.

The great power of Miracles is not their astonishment of sense, but summoning
men's minds with great authority to Rational and Religious Considerations, laid
up in store within them.

The sum then of this Point is this: Natural Religion always with us, as
intimate as our faculties, as certain and true as they are, in their frame and
creation, must be our Ordeal, if I may so call it, our Fiery, our surest way of
trial, of all Proposals made to us in Religion; that is after due awakening our
minds, and examination of things by them; and the blessed assistances, or
highest infusions of the Divine Spirit are breathed into our natural sentiments
in things pertaining to God, enlightened, purified, and guided into all truth.

2. The second Branch follows, viz. Christian Religion has such an evident
agreement with Natural Religion, as to be approved, and recommended by it, even
in what it reveals above, and beyond Natural Religion. Now if it be first
evident, there is not one good thing in that whole Religion, (as every thing in
it is holy, just, and good) but Christianity has united it self with it self,
it has so carefully gathered up all the fragments of it, that no one thing is
or can be lost. And if it be made good in the second place, that whatever
Christian Religion reveals beyond natural Religion, endures the touch of
Natural Religion, and is (besides its own proper credentials) recommended by
it, there cannot be any thing added to evince that Christian Religion is a
foundation of Ecumenical peace in Religion, seeing Natural Religion is the
Oecumenick Religion, the Religion of all mankind. It must be so, for every man
has it written in his heart, and Christian Religion is in much of it, one and
the same Religion, is all of it most agreeable with Natural Religion, and
recommended by it. It then necessarily follows, no man can be wisely,
Rationally Religious, but he must be so far Christianly Religious; and what
Christian Religion offers beyond the wisdom and rationality of a man, beyond
the Law of the first creation, is yet as agreeable with it, as light with
light, greater light with lesser light, how then can he that shows himself man,
be cruel, outrageous against, or out of peace with it? He that falls out with
it, falls out with Godliness, Righteousness, Soberness, Humility, Truth, peace
with God, atonement to him, with laying hold upon Eternal Life, and flying
from the wrath to come, with Patience, Meekness, Mercy, Compassion from God to
men, from men to one another.

He that persecutes Christianity, must persecute righteousness, peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost, in which whosoever Romans 14 17, 18.
serves Christ (as every one must do that serves him) is accepted of God and
approved of men; and therefore to despite Christianity, is not only Belluine
but Devilish. So that the third Branch plainly results from the two former,
viz. if Natural Religion be the standard and touchstone given us to try all
things in Religion by, and that Christian Religion comes off from the trial
more precious than Gold: It follows then of what value it ought to be to all
the world.

To demonstrate then the second Branch, that Christian Religion so agrees with
Natural, as to be recommended by it, in what it reveals beyond it.

1. The first thing I shall insist upon, is this,

That even as Natural Religion conduces very much to the worlds Peace, that it
is Natural, Substantial, and not Ceremonial; so does it also recommend
Christian Religion, that it is so far from consisting in Ceremony that it has
no more in number than there were found in innocence.

There was the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, the not eating of which
was a symbol of universal obedience. There was the tree of Life, a Sacrament
sealing the Reward of obedience. Gen 2. 9.
There was the seventh day Sabbath, a day of solemn converse with God and
meditation of his Works, founded upon his rest from Creation, and a pledge of
everlasting Rest with God. Genesis 2. 2, 3.


In Christianity there is Baptism, the seal of the Covenant of Grace entered
into on Gods part, and ours. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper the seal of the
full Communication of all the blessings of the Covenant. The Christian Sabbath,
a day dedicated to the service and enjoyment of the Creator-Redeemer, giving
natural Rest to bodies, Religious Festivals to souls in holy employment and
action, grounded on his Resurrection, and sitting down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high; called by express title the Lords Day, (as the Eucharist the
Lords Supper:) and a pawn of the Eternal Sabbatism with our Lord in Glory.

Now these are so few, so easy, so familiar, so near natural, so intelligible,
that it is plain the Institutor and Founder of them had no pleasure in
Ceremonies; or that his servants should waste their time or spirits in
observing them, or employ their understandings in finding out a Rationale for
them, although in condescension to men sojourning in flesh and blood, he gave
such Symbols of his Grace and Presence.

And so in the fewness, the easiness, the intelligibleness there is a testimony
to them from Natural Religion, which else is unconcerned in all the Religious
Rites and Ceremonies that are in the world, and leaves them to be judged by
that proof they can make of themselves, either as enjoined by God, or as the
results of humane Prudence, or National Decency. Further it can give no account
of them, for Natural and Ceremonial, Substantial and Ceremonial are opposed one
to another.

This then is the Glory of Natural and Christian Religion, which indeed are not
two but one, that they have least of shade.

The darker any Religion is, the more are the Ceremonies like the shadows of
the evening stretched out; the clearer the Religion; the nearer the perfection
of Heaven, (where there is no shadow at all) the less are the Ceremonies, like
the shades of a high noon in the Summer solstice.

The depraved heart of man is so easily bewitched with Forms and Fopperies,
calling them significant Ceremonies, (like saying to the dumb stone awake,
arise and teach, or to their staff declare to us) that it is by no means to be
trusted, lest seeking Hab. 2. 19. Hosea 4. 12.
a shady devotion of Ceremonies under the disguise of a solemn one, as the
Pagans chose Woods and Groves for their sacred performances.) it lose it self
in the thicket not knowing where it is, and in the end, the true Religion also.

I cannot see what Religion or Devotion (except that which ignorance is the
mother of, and which cannot be good, no more than the heart that uses it) can
suffer by being easy of access, familiar, unencumbred; the most plain, free,
intelligible institution of the Lords Supper was at length corrupted into the
idolatrous Mass, by being made horrid, as the (...). Religion by being solid
and substantial is best secured from the stroke of the Atheist, who accuses it
of trick and design; for when there are found Ceremonial covers, like pious
frauds over it, and they easily yield to Attack as of no value, the Atheist
presently challenges all the rest by proportion, and renders it suspicious.

It is best secured against the schismatic and unquiet spirit, that is truly
so, for he has something in unnecessary Ceremony to fasten on, and move
trouble by. It is kindest to the more modest scrupulous person, who is upon
great Reasons afraid of humane additions to divine worship.

Ceremony can add nothing to the truly wise and generously Religious person,
who loves Religion for it self, and needs not the childish and Fantastic
Gaudery or Gayety of Ceremonies to inamor him of Religion; he loves it for its
true worth, for its native Beauty, and substantial excellency.

It is therefore only fitted to the Hypochondriack Devotionist, who loves
Religion in such a kind of set solemn dress, or to the empty Formalist that
must have it so adorned, or recommended; or to vulgar, unlearned, and
irrational minds, who must be caught with shows and pompous appearances, and
kept in amuse, that they may be somewhat intent in Religious exercise; but
with this disadvantage, that they seldom pierce further than this surface, or
take notice of the Religion it self; and when at any time these things happen
to be exposed, they become the scorn and hate of such persons, so that they
deal rudely with them.

But now substantial, massive Religion yields not to such sort of Attacks, but
like Rock resists, supported with its own substance, born upon its own truth.

And therefore were it not for the excellency of Christian Religion, of Divine
Revelation in the Scriptures, I should rather choose (as he said) to have my
soul among the Wise, Rationally Religious Philosophers, (if such can be found)
then with any Religion that this day appears in the world, not excepting the
Romish that has deturpated, and dishonored the only excellent Religion; and
as it is Romish is the worse, because it is Christian.

Next to those ponderous self-great, and infinitely Rational principles of our
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, I should choose to rest only in the undoubted
principles, and maxims of Natural Religion, so excellent, that Christianity
has not lost one of them: but so gathered up the Fragments, that no one thing
could be lost, as I have already said.

Besides this Natural, this Christian Religion, I know nothing; but all
subjection to principalities and powers, according to the Laws of Nations in
civil things, the gravity and decency of Religious actions, according to all
Laws of humane Prudence, and the custom of Countries. If any one should object
to the advantage of Ceremonies, the state of Religion among the Jews involved
and wrapped up in so much Ceremony: It may be answered to him:

1. There was so great, and presential an evidence of Divine Authority
concerning them among the Jews, who were only bound to them under that
immediate Theocraty exercised over them, that as it was absolutely necessary,
so it was sufficient to bear them up. God as the Author, continually and
frequently appeared to give value to them by his own particular command; He was
able to bless and empower the meanest Rite to the greatest ends; and therefore
might command what he pleased: He therefore added often to such precepts, I am
the Lord, whose Authority could not be disputed, whose Benediction could not be
deni^d or suspected. Thus the waters of Jordan were better than 2 Kings 5. 12.
Joh. 9. 11.
all the Syrian Rivers. The clay and spittle, and washing in Siloam beyond the
most excellent natural Application.

2. And yet as if Omnipotency it self could not make them, or did not care to
make them of any great value; they are often exceedingly despised and set at
naught of God himself, when considered as separated from Divine Blessing Isa.
1. 10. and 66. 3.
and Grace, and from moral Obedience, and subjection to God.

3. They are argued to be childish and low things, yea Gal. 4. 3, 9. Heb, 9.
poor and beggarly; that there was a necessity they should vanish at a time of
Reformation; that the servants of God were under them, as being under Age: that
a more manly and excellent state of Religion was to be brought in, and did
actually come in with the great Doctrine of the Son of God, and the
superintendency of the Holy Spirit.

So that it is admirable whence it should proceed, that the Christian Church
should dote so much, and be so languishingly sick after Ceremonies.

And whereas it is pretended, Religious Action looks bare and naked, and
unadorned, when not shaded, and graced, and covered with Rituals.

They are only weak and feminine minds that think so. The natural Decency,
Humanity necessarily chooses; the National Decency proper to particular Regions
and Climates with the weightiness of Religious Actions themselves are
sufficient grace and solemnity to them: more either obscures or disfigures them
into Antickness, Phantastry, Art, or Superstitiousness.

And therefore indeed much of this sort has proceeded from the wanton and
lascivious imagination of men, not loving the chaste and pure Worship of God,
and with holy minds embracing Truth, and the Divine excellency of it.

From whence has always proceeded much of Division and Feud; every one
endeavoring to obtrude the Creature of his own fancy in Religion, which having
nothing of reason to bear it self upon, displeases others as much as it pleases
himself; and must therefore be imperiously enforced; and if power go along with
the Imposition, obedience to it is extorted by mulcts, and imprisonment, and
often with cruelty and blood. And so much the more, that the minds of men
impaled in the love and do^age on Ceremonies, grow narrow, slavish, void of the
love of God, and the generosity of true Religion; and from thence easily fall
into a self-willed, rigid, austere, revengeful spirit; but the sincere Religion
is noble, free, large, merciful, and most compassionate. So that besides the
intrinsic worth, the purity and spirituality of a Religion free from
Ceremonies, it is a great security to peace and quiet. True Natural Religion
being tyded along by Reason into men's minds, enters with much more insinuation,
and persuasiveness, having an interest beforehand; renders men's temper more
sweet and benign. Or if not received, being truly and substantially good,
deserves punishment proportionable to the offense, without any just imputation
of unmercifulness; For the offense against Natural Religion must be perfect
Immorality.

2. I come therefore to consummate all in the full agreement of Christian
Religion in the revealed parts of it with Natural; and I confess it is hard to
receive some parts of Christianity naked and unguarded, torn off from the rest:
As a limb by it self cut off from the body, is another thing than as it is in
the body; so is it to run away with this, That the Christians worship a God
crucified, that died as a malefactor, that was a Carpenter, that lived poor in
the world, and despised; without observing the whole train and connection of
things, the several great instances of Divinely Rational Account for it, as it
stands in the whole body of Christianity. But when we consider in it the most
indisputable rules of all Goodness, (as I have before at large set down) the
presence of Divine Power in Miracles, that we have an inward sense of, as
Divine; both which stand as it were at the gates of wisdom, drawing and
inviting in minds, to behold the inward frame and contrivance; and when the
correspondency, symmetry, substance, solidity, beauty, purity of all within is
seen, then is there sufficient satisfaction against, and resolution of former
doubts.

To him that patiently considers the great reasons of things as they stand in
Gods Justice, it will appear why Humane nature so lapsed, so peccant and guilty
should be at on'd by a sacrifice offered up in that Humane nature, wherein
obedience to the Divine Holiness should be exemplified in the profoundest
submission to increated will and pleasure, and in the greatest experiment of
it; Self-evacuation, and even annihilation, and beyond this, unexpressible
sufferings, that there might be a compensation to that Justice of God as the
great Governor and Legislator offended by sin, seeing suffering and punishment
follow upon sin and guilt: and that this should be performed (tho in Humane
nature) yet by a person who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, even
the Son of God: and that hereby all sensual Phil. 2. 6.
worldly glory (the great temptation to sin) should be slighted, turned out of
its Grandeur, and high pretensions in the world; and Intellectual, Spiritual,
Heavenly, Eternal Glory, advanced and preferred to its own excellency and esteem
by the Savior of the world: who has therefore brought in all that lively
Doctrine of patience under sufferings, mortification, self-denial, contempt of
this life, so feebly managed by Morality in comparison of this, as at the same
time to show it not unknown to nature, and yet much eclip^'d: He that seriously
looks upon things thus, and beholds them with the severest eye of Reason, will
find that which will indeed perfect and accomplish his Reason, and engage it to
worship, and throw its Crown at the foot of Infinite Wisdom and Grace, but
nothing to despise, nothing to disdain, only to be astonished with the Infinite
love and condescension of Divine Goodness, which yet is like Infinity, so to
show it self.

But that this Particular may be better understood, let the Excellency of
Christian Religion in its Revelations be discoursed upon these avowed,
declared, and most undoubted Principles, in respect to Natural Religion, in
these three Points.

1. That the raising up Natural Religion to its true primitive excellency, is
one great part of Christian Revelation, viz. to settle the true Notions of God
and his Attributes, the true love, fear of, delight in, desire after God,
resignation and obedience to him; the truly generous kinds of Righteousness,
love, mercy, compassion to men; the unspotted temperance, sobriety, purity in a
man's self, the right Principles, Motives, Rules, and Ends of all these; the
full-spread Doctrine of Immortality, and Eternal Life, of pardon of Sin, and
mercy to Repentants, of Repentance it self, and Faith in Divine mercy; and
lastly of future rewards and punishments. Now in all these (as I premised)
Natural Religion is not to be measured by what is found in the dark and sullied
state of the generality of Mankind at such vast distances from the days of
Innocence, or so much as in the colder, liveless Climate of Philosophic
Morality; but by what discovers it self, when these frozen benumbed Principles
relent, and are thaughn by the warmer beams of revealed truth, by what men do,
and must acknowledge when they come to themselves; then the Ministers of Natural
Righteousness out of (and according to) Divine Revelation are 2 Cor. 5. 11.
made manifest in men's consciences, and they speak and write no other things
than they do acknowledge, and shall acknowledge to the utmost, to the very end:
Even as the illiterate 2 Cor. 1. 13.
mind does not at first perceive the wisdom of such a writer as Socrates,
Plato, Plutarch, of such Historians as Livy, Taritus; but when it comes to be
cultivated, it knows by a Test within it self, the gravity and dignity of their
sense and style. Thus at the first, unexercised souls taste not the gratefulness
of the Word of God to natural conscience, which is afterward most agreeable,
the senses being exercised to discern g^od and evil. Heb. 5. 14.


2. In what of Christianity pure and perfect revelation alone must be
acknowledged: There is yet such a close affinity betwixt the holiness, purity,
wisdom of the one thus revealed, and the other implanted, that they must be
owned all from the same fountain, and accepted alike by every serious
considerer; that as it is observed of the Old and New Testament, and the
several Writers of each, through all the variety of Times, Manners and Customs
of the world in the s^veral ages of it, throughout the several periods of the
Churches state and progression, and throughout the different extractions,
educations, employments, temperatures of the Sacred Writers, there is yet one
Wisdom, one Reverence of God, one Holiness, one Majesty of Discourse running
through the whole, arguing the supreme Author one and the same.

Even so in Natural and Revealed Christian Religion, the Divine Commandment is
perfectly one and the same, nothing trivial, nothing Romantic, nothing
Speculative only; all is for greatest use of the glory of God, and the
salvation of men's souls, so as not to be refused.

3. The Revelations of Christianity are the highest Amplifications of natural
light, even to the utmost possibilities of conception, but in nothing
contradictious.

The Doctrine of the only true God is kept most pure, even as silver tried in a
furnace of earth purified seven times. But this Divine Nature is explained to
us in the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit; and in the infinite Graces and
Bounties proceeding from the Deity so explained to us; and this is so to the
utmost, that as we certainly know in Heaven it self, it is impossible to know
any more Gods than the one true God we have known here in the world; so it is
as impossible we should know any more in that Essence than the Father, the Son,
and the Spirit, in Eternity it self.

It is of everlasting inviolable Truth, There is one God, and it is revealed to
us in Christianity, There is one Mediator 1 Timothy 2. 5. 1 Cor. 8 6.
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. There is one God the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. And this is life eternal to know thee the only true God,
Joh. 17. 3.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Thus the Divine Unity is preserved. And
lest the obligation to a Mediator, to a Redeemer, should abate or interfere
with the obligation to the one God and Father; the Mediator is always made
known to us, as the Son of the Father, the brightness of his Heb. 1. 3.
Glory, tho express image of his person, the heir of all things. So that the
Glory of the one Mediator infinitely and incomprehensibly unites, and
circulates in one, with the Glory of God the Father. So far is the Revelation
of Jesus Christ Phil. 2. 2^.
from any the least contradictoriness to that fundamental natural principle of
one God.

And as evident it is, that it is to the utmost, and above all we can think:
for in the highest Glory of Knowledge, it is (we know certainly) impossible to
know any higher Mediator, any other Mediator than our one Mediator; for as a
man can rise no higher than God, there can be no higher Being than God; so
there cannot be a greater Redeemer and Mediator than the Son of God.

There cannot be a greater acceptance of a sinner than upon the account of the
most perfect obedience, and the deepest sufferings of the only begotten of the
Father, the beloved Joh. 1. 14. ^at. 3. ult.
Son, in whom he is well pleased.

There cannot be a nearer union to the whole nature of of man, than by this
divine Person assuming, not any humane Person, which had been limited, narrow
and confined, but humanity it self into one person with himself.

There cannot be a greater inspiration and internal operation than of which the
Spirit of God is the Author and Fountain; nor a closer uniting of Believers to
Christ, than by this Spirit to be so joined to the Lord as to be one 1 Cor. 6.
17.
Spirit.

Thus to the great Justification of Christianity before Natural Religion, all
is from God, and absorpt into him, yet in such a distinction from him, that
every glorified Spirit enjoys its Happiness, Glory, Purity, Perfection,
Acceptance with the Divine Majesty distinctly and in it self; and yet so in
God, that the whole Glory is refunded into him, which is the perfect Glory of
the Divinity.

From the whole then, though it is most true that these great points surmount
Reason in the discovery and explication, yet when it beholds these things in
that full portraicture divine Revelation presents them, it cannot but adore,
and admire, and confess the manifold wisdom and knowledge of God, the riches of
his grace, the praise of his Ephesians. 3. 10. and 1. 6, 11.
glory, working all things after the counsel of his own will.

As to the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection and eternal Judgment, they
are but what is very agreeable to the very Principles of Natural Religion, all
men having an ingrafted sense both of it, and a future state; and as to the
Resurriction it self, I think it most manageable upon grounds of Reason, That
the Creator can as easily command the Principles of a dissolved body into one,
as at first create those very Principles out of nothing; nor can I think those
niceties of dispute brought into this Article of Faith, of any moment, it being
enough there shall be a future state of Spirits in bodies, as in sensible
appearances of Glory or Misery, and those bodies as much men's own, as the
nature of matter or body in a perpetual transmutation can bear.

And that this Doctrine also of a future state is to the utmost, cannot be
denied, since nothing can more complete happiness or misery than the Scripture
expressions reach to. But I insist no further upon this, being in the main
substance of it, in my account of it, a fundamental point of Natural Religion;
but that God will transact this Judgment by Jesus Christ, is indeed perfect
Revelation, and falls in with the former account given of his Mediatorship, and
enhanses still this principle, as to its greatest certainty, so to all its
possible height, since God in humane nature, God in the Mediator Judging the
world, turns about with great^st consolation to good men and terror to evil
men, that can be comprehended by humane understanding.

And so I have endeavored to make good the second Head of discourse under this
first foundation of universal peace, Consent in Natural Religion, viz. that
Christian Religion in what it reveals beyond Natural Religion, agrees yet with
Natural Religion, and is recommended by it: and herein I have insisted upon
those points of Christian Religion that are truly Christian, for those private
disputes among Christians were much better silenced within the Gates of
Christianity it self (in that way wherein they are managed,) and therefore much
more ought not to be declared in Gath, nor published in the streets of
Ashkelon: neither indeed need the points themselves upon which the disputes
are. For if together with those undoubted Principles of Natural Religion in
Doctrine, Worship and Practice, (as they are revealed by Christian Religion)
wherefrom none can make defection but under the most righteous severity of the
Magistrate, who in those cases bears not the sword in vain: I say, if together
with these, the substantial truths and institutions of Christian revealed
Religion (wherein we are all agreed) were presented as the general confession
or prof^ssion of Christians, before we come to lanch out into par^icular
opinions or modes of worship, our excellent Religion would stand much more like
a City set on an hill, Mat. 5. 14.
whose Magnificence and Beauty could not be hid for the benefit both of
strangers and its own Citizens, since things so great, so excellent, so
agreeable with all the inward sense of men's minds, could not be rejected by
those that would be accounted men of Mind, Soul and Reason; and especially
there could upon these terms Christianity offers, be no possible place for
hurting or destroying Christians by any party, except men are resolved to lay
aside the Man, and put on the Lion and Wolf.

Now by all that has been spoken upon this point, it appears three sorts of
Opinions, whatever of Christianity they assume to themselves, are indeed the
injury and horrible scandal of it, because they contradict Natural Religion,
which is an abomination to Christianity.

1. That Opinion which adoring our Mediator as having all power in Heaven and
Earth, allows him an ubiquitary presence, and addresses prayers to him, allots
him all Divine Honors, and yet denies him Coeternal God with the Father, for
this brings in supreme worship, love, confidence in more than the One God, it
clothes Finite with Infinite, which is a contradiction to the Law of Natural
Religion, every where illustrated and confirmed by the Word of God: Of this
great evil, Socinianism, Arrianism, and the several names of Heresy of that
Alliance are guilty.

2. That which brings in Image Worship, prayers to Saints and Angels, which
supposes Invisible Beeings, though creatures, Omniscient and Omnipresent as
God, that in all places men may lift up hands to them in prayer, without
doubting of their being lost in their direction to those, that are not that
they know able to take any notice of them; and further, which is not the least
of the Idolatry, it gives them the honor of being absolutely knowable by
natural light in the Divine Attribute of hearing prayers, that all flesh may
come to them, viz. in their Knowledge, in their Mercy, in their Power, all which
must be absolute as Gods, and as evident to reason as in God, seeing men have
no justifiable revelation to any such purpose: the Arto latria or adoration of
the bread in the Sacrament is of the same family: now however these things are
intricated by various pretexts, yet as the spectacle in the last especially is
horrid to sense, so the things to Reason and Natural Conscience, and can never
be reconciled; we have otherwise learnt Christ, who in the days of his flesh
neither required nor received worship directed to his body upon any such
pretensions, Mark 10. 17. Luke 11. 27. 28. John 6. 36. John 20. 17. but refused
it, except when at sometimes the mighty Emanations of his Divinity prostrated
men into the Adorations of him.

3. Whatever Dogme or Sect of men subvert the very nature of Religion as a
Proteus-Thing that sneaks into all shapes and professions according to the
earthly powers it appears before, fearing men rather than God: All things that
overturn morality and distinction betwixt good and evil; the denial of Spirits,
a future State, as undermining the very Life and Being of the Almighty Spirit;
all Phanatick Principles turning Religion into Raunterism, or moving the
pillars of humane societies, as consisting in submission to principalities and
powers, in subjection to Laws, civil customs and decencies: all such things as
these and the whole lineage of them, however they may presume to Christianize
themselves, are a just abhorrence to the true Christian Spirit, as most
contrary to the Law of nature.

These opinions therefore now named are excluded, and shut out of that
universal Peace and Quietness, I am to speak of under this last Head of the
survey of Natural Religion, which I now come to, viz.

The third thing proposed under this first head of Natural Religion, and upon
which the whole weight of it rests, and turns, as to the intention of this
Discourse is this: That Christianity supposes it a firm ground of enjoying the
Common Peace and Tranquillity in Religion, that a man receives, and owns all the
grand points of Natural Religion, Godliness, Righteousness, Soberness, and
acknowledges it his duty, and makes it his profession to live according to
them, that he avows no Principles contrary hereunto, though he believes and
professes to be assured of some other Divine Revelations, in order to his
Eternal Happiness.

It supposes, a man that in all his discourse and action, gives abundant
security of his fidelity to Natural Religion. A man that is no Idolater,
Atheist, Blasphemer of Religion, Impugner of Morality, that observes the
Worship of God, in Prayers, Praises, and Religious Discourses should be free to
commend himself to God, in what he thinks most agreeable to his will, though in
distinction from others; whom he no way disturbs against rules of Reason,
Modesty, Peaceableness, and Humility, but only offers the Apology of his own
faith, yet with meekness and fear, and the perswasives ^ Pet. 3. 15.
of belief, and practice agreeable thereunto.

Such a one, I say, Christianity supposes to have a right to common protection
of Magistrates, and the Laws of Humani^y, while he endeavors to approve
himself to God, at whose Tribunal he must appear, to whom as his own Master he
must stand or fall, no man having power to judge another servant in this case.
Romans 14. 4, 10, 12.


Now I shall endeavor (with submission to better instructions) to give great
reasons, that this is the ground Christian Religion bottoms upon, and presumes
to it self, That perfect conformity in a Man's Principles to Natural Religion,
(so far as Principles or Being, as we speak, of a Religion are in debate) ought
to be a sufficient guard according to the present state of Humane Nature, and
the Divine Ordination upon it, against the Enmity, Despite and Injury of
private persons; and against the (...) the punitive justice of Magistrates.
However a man in other particulars disting^ishes himself for conscience sake
toward God.

For the proof of this, I shall first insist upon those places of the New
Testament, that I suppose fixed upon this foundation, and then argue it by
reason with respect to all ^ncountring Objections.

The first is that of the Apostle to Timothy, I exhort first of all, that
prayers, supplications, and giving of thanks ^e 1 Timothy 2. 1, etc.
made for Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may live peaceable and
quiet lives in all godliness and honesty.

This Exhortation of the Apostle contains two things.

1. The Duty the Apostle enjoins, viz. the making of prayers, supplications,
intercessions, and not them only, but giving of thanks, and for all men, and
not only but eminently for Kings and all that are in authority. Now in that the
Apostle injoins giving of thanks, it argues, though he did not exclude, yet he
did not intend the only matter of the prayers should be the conversion of those
prayed for. For there being then no conversion of Princes, nor so general
conversion of private persons as should be expressed by all men, there could be
no matter for Thanksgiving. But that which was mainly in the Apostles eye, was,
that Christians should concern themselves in all the happiness and welfare of
mankind, both by Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions; that is, with all
the earnestness, and heartiness signified in that accumulation of expressions,
and also by Thanksgivings for the mercies they enjoyed; and in eminent manner
for Kings and those in eminency, who are the Trustees and Depositaries of the
Peace and Prosperity of the world; and by this means Christian Religion should
be known to be most agreeable with the true natural and excellent Religion of
mankind, and a fair Rational Inducement offered to embrace it.

2. The advantage the Apostle expresses as arising from the due performance of
this duty; That men in general and Princes in special, being convinced of their
rights by the evidence of those two main parts of Natural Religion, Piety
toward God, Love of Humane nature, and the Universal good might afford to
Christians the rights and dues of Godliness; and Grave, Honorable, Sober
Deportment among men; that is, Peaceable and Quiet lives, not breaking out into
injury, and violation of common Protection and Humanity, because they were
Christians.

From hence then I observe, the main foundation of right to Peace and
Quietness, is Godliness and Honourableness of manners, in opposition to all
Immorality: And Prayers and Thanksgivings for all men and Princes are most
naturally to be understood for the Tranquibity, and flourishing state of
Communities, in the ways of Piety, Justice, and Soberness; though I doubt not
they added, that they might by Conversion be not only almost, but altogether
Christians; and not only not far from the Kingdom of God, but that they might
come from the East and the West, from the North and the South, and sit down in
the Kingdom of God, to which the freedom of prophecy under the Caution of
Godliness and Honesty, might exceedingly conduce, on which account the Apostle
goes on; This, that is, All this intercourse, of Christians prayers, Godliness
and Honesty: and All Men's, Magistrates especially procuring their peaceable and
quiet lives, is acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who would have all
men to be saved, and by this means to come to the knowledge of the Truth, seeing
the One God, the One Mediator, Author of the One natural, and the One true
revealed Religion, is equally concerned in all.

A second place is that of the Apostle Peter, in relation to mankind in
general, complicated with all those expressions of both the Apostles, Peter and
Paul, concerning Magistra^y, and the Ordination of it by God.

In relation to mankind in general, the Apostle makes this challenge, 1 Pet. 3.
13. And who is he that will harm you, if you be followers of that which is
good? Plainly implying, to follow that which is good, ought in all Reason and
^quity to secure men from Harm, and that Good which the Apostle intends must be
Good, defined by the Laws of Natural Religion to be good; for else
Christianity, as it stood distinct from that (for contrary to it, it is
impossible to be) was not then understood to be Good. All judgment of that
therefore being suspended, whether Good, or not Good, as it stood distinct from
Natural Religion; The undeniable presence of all Natural Religion and Power of
it over the Lives and Actions of Christians, was to be their defense on the
right hand, and the left, from injury. Concerning Magistracy, that Duumvirate
of Apostles concur, that Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Wilt then thou not be afraid of the power? (says the Apostle Paul) do
Romans 13. 3, 4, 5.
that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same; for he is the
Minister of God to thee for good: But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid,
for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a
Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil; wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Thus far the great
Apostle of the Gentiles. The Apostle of the Circumcision speaks thus: Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as those that are sent by him for 1 Pet.
2. 13, 14*
the punishment of evildoers, and the praise of them that do well.

Let the way of arguing used by these two Apostles be well weighed, the
circumstances of the times wherein they writ; the sense of Magistrates
concerning Christianity, the obligation upon Christians to obey God rather than
Magistrates: and yet both these Apostles write as if the nature of good and
evil were out of dispute between Magistrates and Christians, as if all were
clear and fair between them, and no controversy whether Christianity was True
or False, a Good or a Bad Religion; when yet Christians were under the fiery
Trial, when they were continually under persecution for their Religion, which
the Apostle calls Righteousness, because able to justify it self to be so by
the Laws of Natural Religion; when they were bound to deny so great a part of
their subjection to the higher powers as not to cease to be Christians at their
command: what then does this largeness, frankness and freedom of expression
mean? On the part of Christians to be subject, and that not for wrath but for
^ons^ience sake and to submit themselves, when yet they were presently upon the
account of their holy profession of Christianity to deny subjection and
submission to the great command of Magistracy in Religion.

On the part of Magistrates; that they were only a Terror to evil works, and a
praise to them that do well, that he that does well should not be afraid, when
upon the true estimate of Christianity they were persecuting for righteousness
sake.

How can all this be reconciled? but by reducing all to the just bounds and
limits of divine Ordination, fixing the Magistrates Power and the Peoples
Obedience in things pertaining to Religion thus, so far as Natural Religion
extends, so far the Magistrates power extends; here he is the Minister of God
and bears not the sword in vain: hither is the peoples obedience to come; in
all things pertaining to that they must needs be subject, not only for wrath
but conscience sake. These are the ancient Landmarks thar ought not to be
removed: I speak not at all of civil obedience now, but of obedience in things
pertaining to the conscience. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, as a thief,
as an evildoer, 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16.
as a busie-body in other men's matters, So the same Apostle speaks, Offenses
against Natural Religion, or for violation of Godliness, commanded by the Law
of Nature; then quietness and peace of life is justly denied you.

But if you suffer as Christians, rejoice and be exceeding glad when you come
to suffer upon the account of that excellent Religion revealed from Heaven, and
assured to you; here there is no suffering justly due to you, therefore your
sufferings shall be recompensed to you with Divine Glory from Heaven, from
whence Christianity is revealed.

Let us lay the whole together: At that very time when Magistrates were
Heathens, and enemies to Christian Religion, and Christians could pay them no
obedience in receding from Christianity; so that upon the point of
Christianity, there was not the mutual obligation of obedience and protection;
yet there was still a common center wherein even in Religious Considerations,
the Protection of Magistrates, and the Obedience of Christians was to meet, and
that uncontroversably on both sides good: and what could that be, but as one
place calls it godliness and honesty, another good works, another doing well?

This then is the standard of the worlds peace and tranquillity; Universal
Religion, Absolute Religion, Natural Religion; even as Natural Justice,
Universal Justice is the measure of all Transactions between man and man.

Yet if Magistrates will inflict sufferings upon Christians, 1 Pet. 2. 2^.
holding fast their profession, they are taught by Christianity to suffer
patiently; not as if sufferings were due to them, but that Justice may be done;
Natural Religion may be maintained, one great branch of which is upholding
Government in all its Honors and Plenipotence: but therefore in testimony to
them, that sufferings are not due to them, the Spirit of God, and of Glory
shall rest upon them.

Even as in all undue Administrations of the Magistrates power, where Humane
Laws, the Laws of this or that Government have taken no care; suffering is the
duty of the innocent, but their appeal lies above.

The Conclusion then is this, according to the sense of the New Testament,
where ever there is no impeachment lies against men from the violation of
Natural Religion, their peaceable and quiet lives are the just right of their
godliness and honesty; Praise, security, a state out of fear is due to them as
well-doers, as to those that do that which is good.

Many other are the expressions we meet with in the Apostolic Writings looking
this Way, that the great Letters of commendation to mankind in general,
concerning persons and their ways in Religion, so far as the thing comes under
their judicature, is the intrinsic and real goodness of their Profession and
Lives at the beam of Natural Conscience. This is the Royal Law every one is to
fulfill: in these things Jam. 2. 8. Romans 14. 18.
we must serve Christ, that we may be accepted of God, and approved of men:
Thus they must adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior; thus they must take care
against the Name 1 Timothy 6. 1.
of God being blasphemed; thus they must put to silence the ignorance ^ Pet. 2.
15. and 3. 16.
of foolish men, and make them ashamed. Now it is true, all the severity of
Profession and Life, according to Natural Religion, will not justify the truth
or goodness of an assumed Religion as revealed from God, as of the sober Moral
Heathen, Jew, Turk, Papist, or any Master of Sect of most unblameable life
among Protestants; that is, to be tried in a Consistory proper to it: the
Arguments and Evidences of it being revealed, are to be weighed; the nature,
scope and tendency of it, and all its Principles are to be examined; and at
last it stands at Gods Judgment Seat, where it ought to be judged. But thus the
Argument is the more enforced, that where there are the Testimonials of Natural
Religion fairly written in the behalf of any Religion, and the Professors of
it, though we are not, nor may have reason to be induced by the Motives of
Credibility it gives, to approve our selves to God, or seek everlasting
happiness in it; yet the right hand of Humanity in allowing Peaceable Lives, is
to be given them.

Having thus far insisted upon Scripture, in the proof of this Assertion, I
come now to argue it by Reason, and under every Argument to observe the
Objections that may be made against it.

Argum. 1. And in the first place I argue from the great Excellency of Natural
Religion, and the Acceptableness of it to God; that therefore, since it is also
general Religion, it ought to be the Center of common peace in Religion; we
ought to allow the Hospitableness of Humanity to all that profess it, and
Dogmatize nothing, but what upon due hearing and discourse they offer to make
out consistent, and fairly agreeing with it: For it is but reasonable, even
upon a violent suspicion of the contrary, to inquire, hear and receive Reason,
if it can be given; as in the case of the Altar of Testimony, we read of Joshua
22. 10. God made the World, and all the Magnificencies of it, at the first, to
entertain men of this general and excellent Religion. And the Apostle Peter
says, as in Revival of what had been long mistaken; I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons; but Acts 10. 34.
in every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness (the two
Comprehensive parts of this Religion) is accepted of him.

Why then should mankind imbrue their hands, and that upon the Account of
Religion, in the blood of those that are of the same Religion they themselves
are, or ought to be, and hold to contradiction to it?

What excellent persons were Job, his three Friends, and Elihu, though out of
the Family of Abraham; I mean out of that part of it, where God had more
eminently fixed his Church; and out of that line, wherein all the Families of
the Earth were to be blessed? How excellent the Books of their Religion, and
Ratiocinations upon it? though the Friends were mistaken in urging too far, as
if present Afflictions were a detection from Heaven of Insincerity, and
applying it to Job: That most desirable Book of Holy Scripture was undoubtedly,
by the special Wisdom of God, prepared as a Treatise of Natural Theology,
raised to its own height, through the Assistances and Inspirations of the Holy
Spirit, and wherein most probably the sense of all the Pious Patriarchs kept
fresh and pure from Corruption, was maintained, and improved upon the proper
Reasons of Natural Religion; for we meet with no intermixture of positive
Precepts, or Rites, except the Historical Relation of Sacrifices, in the
beginning, and end of the Book; An Institution of God, by which men were taught
in the beginning of the World, as soon as sin had entered it, to look for
Atonement wit^ God, through that great Sacrifice of Christ, to be offered in
the end of the world; to whom it is most probable Job makes some very
significant References, though according to the Covertness of so great a
mystery at that time.

But what point of Natural Religion, even sense of Natural Corruption, and the
^vil of sin, of Faith in Divine Mercy, and Repentance, of Godliness,
Righteousness, Soberness, Fidelity, Chastity, Temp^rance, Charity and Mercy to
the poor is left untouched? What point relating to the Worship of God, against
Atheism, Idolatry, an Iniquity owned to deserve punishment from a Judge, is not
h^re stated? Job 31. 28.
Prayers, Praises, Holy Meditations, Discourses, and Attendances on the Word of
God, for the knowledge of his ways, have here their frequent mentions: What
severe Reproofs, Censures, and Condemnations of all wickedness do we meet with?
And which is most remarkable, through the whole, All is Substantial, nothing
Ceremonial. How lovely is such a Religion? Our Savior observing but some of
the lines of it in the young man in the Gospel; it is said, He looked upon him,
and loved him. Mat. 10. 21.


And the Scribe, that had so much of the notion of it, he commended, as not far
from the Kingdom of Heaven, viz. from True Christianity here, and Eternal
Salvation hereafter.

In this Book of Job we have also the true natural way of propagating Religion,
and reconciling differences in it, viz. by Discourse and Argument, only heinous
offenses, and plain violations of Duty in Natural Religion, are cited to the
Magistrates Tribunal.

I have insisted so long upon this, because we have not such another Hypothesis
in Scripture; such a Body of Natural Religion; such a form of sound words
concerning it, given out by such Masters of Assembly, and yet not of that (we
may call the visible Church) at that time; else indeed the whole Scripture is
full of Natural Religion from one end of it to the other; and that which is
least in the Kingdom of Christ concerning it, is greater than all besides.

But, no doubt, there might be many others at that time, and all along, who
were not of the Jewish Proselytism, and yet great Instances of this same
Natural Piety; For if Elijah, 1 King. 19. 18.
who had a less compass to observe in, and more probable opportunities of
Inquiry, and even Inspection, yet was ignorant of seven thousand in Israel that
had not bowed their knees to Baal, but thought himself left alone: how much
more may lie hid from our almost suspicion, True worshippers of God according
to Natural Religion, all along elder times, inspired and conducted to it by
Divine Illumination? Nay, who dares be so bold to define, there are no such now?

For though it is most true, There is no other name under the whole Heaven
given to men, whereby they can be saved, but Acts 4. 12.
the name of Christ; yet we are not sure that Name must be expressly known, but
that the God of pardoning-mercies giving and accepting repentance unto life,
may by Divine Equity and Favor be interpreted God in Christ, in the behalf of
men so addressing God, as he is truly so in himself.

Yet ah lass we cannot stretch our charitable hopes so, as to think this the
case of the generality of the Nations, that know not Christ, who lie in the
valley of the shadow of death; not only as ignorant of Christ, but as without
God, the true God in the world; Horrible Corrupters of what they naturally
know, that is, of Natural Religion. But as there were many Lepers and Widows in
the days of those two Prophets, Luke 4. 25.
but to one of each were they sent; so we may hope there are some Instances of
this Divine Bounty and Grace, if we can hope so but of few; but these secret
things belong to the Lord our God; and it is safest not to presume too far on
either Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
side: yet by the same Charity we allow Papists, that the prevalency of truly
Christian principles may Antidote the poison of Popery; so the pregnancy of
some natural principles rise up above all the refuse in such Souls; but, oh
Lord! thou only know! Yet some things I dare be bold to affirm,

1. That if any man live uprightly, as Job, according to the Laws of Natural
Religion, at its full extent, and has the knowledge of Christ offered him; he
will receive it upon the advantageous Recommendations of it in Gods own time
and way.

2. That if any man so obeys the Precepts of Natural Religion, and has not the
Revelation of Christ, the want of that Revelation shall not be charged upon
him, so much as in the consequences of it.

3. That whoever understands Natural Religion, must needs understand that sin
is in the world; that man is born like the wild Asses Colt, and drinks iniquity
like water; and Job* (...) 16. 13* 14.
yet that God is patient, speaks once and twice, in order to men's Conversion
and Repentance. That therefore there is place for it in pardoning-mercy, of
which in God, even Humane Nature it self has a sense; Natural Religion cannot
be ignorant of this; for without it, all service of God, or Application to him
would be in vain, and but like the service of Devils.

Yet I cannot but here take notice, There is not such a learned World in
Morals, as was heretofore among the Graecians and Romans, such as Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, Epic^etus, Cicero, Seneca; nor as those of later date,
Plutarch, Porphyry, Hierocles, Jamblicus. But as that one sacrifice abolished
the Typical, yet divinely instituted Sacrifices, (much more those
mock-sacrifices, that there are no such now in the more famous Religions in the
world, as divine Oracles, and Prophecies, absolved and finished in Christ and
the Apostles) silenced all those fallacious ones from below; so the resplendent
light of Natural Religion in the Gospel-revelation, since its prevalency in the
world, and that it is become the Religion of Nations, seems to have dazzled
natural reason, that there is not the appearance of it as in former ages; but a
kind of barbarity has invaded, as a thick darkness, the world out of the
Goshen of Christianity; while the Jews trust to the letter of the Old
Testament, not 2 Cor. 3. 15.
yet unvailed to them in its glory, and further obscured by Rabbinick Dotages;
and Mahometans to the Spite-prophet, and his senseless Alchoran, set up by
Satan, and permitted by Divine Justice in opposition to the only true Prophet,
the Lord of life and glory, and his everlasting Gospel. All besides these lie
obscure, and at a distance from us, in a manner like a Terra Incognita in
Reason and Religion, having only some relational glimpses, no bodies of their
discourse in either. A great argument of the Truth of Christian Religion, that
has drawn up all Rational Religion, Reason, and Learning within it self, and
under its own Horizon.

For though for a time it pleased God to allow the notable efforts of that sort
of learning, and in opposition to Christianity, one of his unsearchable
Judgments, as in Porphyry and Hierocles; yet being vanquished by the greater
light of the Gospel, since the days of Constantine, it has never risen in any
other parts of the world unchristianiz'd, to appear with any remarkable
strength.

But all this does not diminish so much from Natural Religion, as it brings it
into question, Whether there is now such a thing in the world as Natural
Religion, without Christianity? nay indeed, it may be doubted whether
notwithstanding, or even for the sake of those great Names I just now recorded,
(who were but a sort of Parelian lights to the true light of Natural Religion)
whether there was ever such a true copy of it, as that of the Book of Job, in
any man's heart, life, or writings, that was without the help of divine
Illumination; and yet Natural Religion is never the less natural, nor the less
felt and acknowledged to be so: When besides such a proportion, as is always
ready to men, not degenerate into beasts, being so preserved by God, that he
may not leave himself without witness, nor men without Luke 15. 17.
means, in order to their conversion and recovery; when (I say) besides this,
God restores to any man, or number of men the perfection of it by his Word, or
by particular illumination of his mind; it is not the less natural; even as the
prodigals Self he came to, was not the less natural Self, because he had been
so long a fugitive from it, and it became necessary to him to be so restored;
so no less is Natural religion, natural, because it is returned by revelation
after being lost. And this carries the great uses indeed of Natural religion,
that whether it be that part of it by general providence preserved to the
generality of men, or by ordinary means improved; or whether by divine
Illumination and Revelation, it is given as it were anew, yet we still find it
natural, and as it were our own, properly belonging to our natures; and it
comes to us as by way of Reminiscency of what we had once, but had lost. Thus
all the ends of the earth Psalm. 22. 27.
shall remember, and turn to the Lord.

And as I have now stated things, that which may seem a great objection against
what I have discoursed of Natural Religion, will be more easily reconciled.

And it is taken out of those places of the Apostle John, first what he records
in his Gospel, that our Savior said, He that honors not the Son, honors
not the Father that Joh. 5. 23. 1 John 2. 23. 2 John 9. 10.
sent him. And in his Epistles, Whoever denies the Son, has not the Father.
And in his second Epistle, Whoever transgresses, and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God; and if any man come and brings not this
Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for he
that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

By all these sayings laid together, it seems undeniable, that even the
acknowledgment of that first and great principle of Natural Religion, The
believing in, and adoring the one God, is made of no value, by not
acknowledging, honoring, and believing in Christ the Son, which is the
principal point of Divine Revelation.

For the settling therefore this doubt, these three Things are to be considered:

1. That after due Instruction and Explanation of the Doctrine of Christ, it
is, as I have said, so united with Natural Religion, that who ever has that in
sincerity, is (...), set in a posture ready to receive and believe
Christianity. So that if any one upon Instruction commensurate to the
Understanding Christian Religion, does not receive it, he has not God, he has
not true Natural Religion in that Fundamental point, especially if he have had
the Preparations of Divine Revelation in the Old Testament, as the Jews, to
whom these words were especially directed, had. Yet still, I suppose this case
reserved to Divine judgment, and not to Humane; nor that such an unbeliever may
be dealt with by men, or by Magistratical Authority, as an Athiest; man can
only deal with him by Remonstrances out of Scripture, and reasons flowing from
it.

2. The severity of the Apostle has greater force upon those who having
received Christianity, apostatize from it; transgressing and not abiding in the
Doctrine of Christ; for it is most certain in the thing it self, they have not,
nor can have Natural Religion, that prove Ap^states from Christianity
understood, so intimate to it.

3. This has yet much greater force upon those whom the Apostle seems
especially in his Epistles to intend; those who come with a high pretension of
an extraordinary spirit, of an immediate Doctrine from Heaven, and yet bring
not the Doctrine of Christ. For there being at that time such infallible proofs
and assurances of all sorts, to the Apostles, and that have descended down from
them to us in Sacred History; we must needs conclude, they might justly
Anathematize in the highest degree, an Angel from heaven that preached any other
Gospel; they were most certain, who ever Gal. 1. 8.
called or proclaimed Christ, Lord, were authorized to do so by the Spirit of
God, and therefore that no man could by the 1 Cor. 12. 3.
same spirit declare him accursed, seeing that Spirit could not contradict it
self.

No dream, wonder, or praediction however fulfilled, was Authentic enough to
draw the Jews from the true God, that Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
had so supremely demonstrated himself to them; nor might any Angel or Spirit,
that is, Immediate Inspiration, or Doctrine given by it, seduce them from
Christ, so evidently sealed to them in the New, by God the Father; and
therefore Gal. 6. 27.
all pretensions to the contrary, how high soever, are to be rejected with
detestation.

They knew, All that endeavored it, must know themselves deceivers, the
greatest crime against Natural Religion; and indeed none so subject to Humane
Inquiry, to their detection, or severity when detected, as Impostors pretending
Divine Revelation. Nor to their most Authoritative restraints and repressions,
as the wild Enthusiast, though with more mercy, because he is himself so
greatly deceived and deluded.

And next to these, an Apostate from Christianity can hardly, if at all, give
such an account of himself to Christian Powers, as should clear him from being
a most heinous offender against Natural Religion.

The sum then is this: He to whom Christianity is proposed as faithful and
worthy of all acceptance, with such assurances of it from Natural Religion,
and its own evidences, as are sufficient to draw any man intelligent and
conscientious, to it, and yet rejects and refuses him that speaks from Heaven
to him; is to be delivered over to the Judgment of God, who will judge the
secrets of all hearts by that very Gospel of Truth, Romans 2. 16.

He that apostatizes from it, when he has once received it, may be justly
called to the most strict account by Christian Magistrates; and as they find
reason, further censured or punished, it being ordinarily impossible there
should be such an Apostate from so excellent a Religion once tasted, but with
greatest violation of Natural Religion and Conscience; he that pretends Divine
Revelation against that which has so ample a pattent from Heaven, may most
righteously be first discovered, exposed, and after dealt with as the most
flagitious self-guilty Deceiver, by Christian Rulers, who are the Ministers of
divine veng^^^^e in such cases; and Romans 13. 4.
by private Christians, for his natural evil works, cast out of their whole
Society, Religious or Civil; except he appear an Enthusiastic Phrenetick, who
in pity to him is to be shut up in a Bethlehem, from doing so great injury to
himself and others.

And thus I have finished the first Argument, concerning the acceptableness of
Natural Religion to God our Savior, guiding my self in it by this Rule: Viz.

The most comprehensive Religion in charity to others, while we keep to main
foundations in our charity, and to the purest strictest Rules in our selves, we
can attain to, is certainly the best, and most like that one God, and one
Mediator, the common bosom of love, peace, hope, rest.

The 2. Arg. Proving Natural Religion is fit to be the center of common peace,
and agreement in Religion, is this: There is an Universal Code of Natural
Religion, of which every man has a part for himself, so that we may all appeal
one to another, as it were to page and line, whether it be not so written in
that book of the Law within us? Whether such a thing be not our duty, and
whether we have not sinned in doing contrary? And indeed thus to do is the
universal usage of men in all their debates one with another. As face answers
to face in water, so the heart of man to man in this Natural Religion; as the
parts of Humane body agree in all men, so do these proportions and lineaments
of souls.

We may with greater certainty solicit men upon these Principles, than evil
men tempt one another upon common depravation: For corruption, though all one
in the fountain, yet lies in more several veins than these laws of natural
Conscience; so that men may be missed by those that tempt them out of their
proper inclinations to evils, as hitt in the wrong vein.

But there are none of these lines of natural Conscience wanting in any man,
nor an aptness to be moved in them; if searched to the quick, they will feel it
to conviction, though too often not to conversion.

The Apostle in preaching to Faelix, struck him in the Sentiments of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, as in master-veins, and knew
he must take place, as it proved in his trembling.

So in his Discourse, Act. 17. he fell upon that universal sense of a Divine
Being, and his excellent Nature, of which he was sure there was a counter-part
within them.

He did not first preach Christ to them, a point without them; but getting
within them in natural Principles, he assayed by the continuity and similarness
of the one with the other, to intwine (as with admirable artifice he does)
those Natural Principles with Christianity.

Our Savior indeed dealt with the Jews in more absolute and positive terms,
because natural conscience lay higher and nearer to supernatural instructions,
by their acquaintance and familiarity with the Oracles of God committed to
them. But in dealing with those that had not those Revelations, the Prophets
and Apostles center their Applications to them in this Universal Religion, and
with great reason and expectation of success. As Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, I
counsel thee to break off thy sins by righteousness, and by showing mercy to
the Dan. 4. 27,
poor, if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity: This was Natural
Doctrine, and fit to be addressed to a Prince never so much a stranger to
Divine Revelation. For this is a Religion known to all the world, and therefore
that in which all may most reasonably unite.

This is that a Magistrate may with greatest Authority demand conformity to of
his subjects, and they obliged to obey; as the King of Niniveh most justly
enjoined public Jo^. 3. 7.
Humiliation and repentance in the case of so great and iminent Judgment.

For every Magistrate is supposed as a Magistrate to have good knowledge of this
Law, of which he as a man has a copy, as the Kings of Israel had of the
revealed Law; and in which (as they in that) he ought to be conversant, that he
may be just that rules over men, ruling in the fear of 2 Samuel 23. 3.
God.

Of this also, every subject has a copy, that he may know his duty, and
observe it. Hence therefore Universal conformity is an unquestionable
obligation, when he that commands, and they who are to obey, have both the same
just weights and measures committed to them; one in order to Rule and
Government, the other in order to Obedience and Subjection; such as cannot
disagree, no more than sealed weights and measures in general Traffic, and
which each have a standard of, and may (except inexcusable ignorance,
negligence, or injustice be in the fault) have an immediate recourse to.

But beyond this, what of Compulsion there can be, I do not understand: Every
Revelation is received by Faith; and Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. It is the sword of the Spirit that is to make the way, and not the
sword of the Magistrate that is to cut it.

Christianity, substantial, fundamental Christianity, has the best claim to
the Edicts of Principalities and Powers for it, there being no other Revelation
except that in the world, but what is counterfeit and spurious; no other
Religion so inducible upon truly Natural Principles: and in Christianity, it is
the substantial Christianity, not every nice Dispute or Definition, much less
additional Mode or Ceremony that has this claim.

And yet notwithstanding such a claim, I make doubt whether ever any sober
Christian would wish Christianity propagated with Force, much less with Blood
and Cruelty; like the Popish Conversion of the Indians. I believe no true
Christian, no truly Protestant Christian, ever did desire it, or think it
agreeing with Christianity.

And let not the Compulsory Laws of Jewish Religion plead a coerciveness for
the Christian upon the Reason that a better Religion more deserves it: for
First, The better the Religion, the better Methods of introducing and
recommending it, are desirable; as much therefore as Instruction excels Brutish
Force, as much as sincere Compliance of Judgment, Reason and Understanding
excel Hypocrisy and feigned Conformities, as much as Divine Impulses and
Suasions of the Holy Spirit excel the Power of Laws enforced with Penalties, or
being of the Religion of the Prince for Mode, Compliment or Preferment; so much
ought the way of introducing men into the most excellent Religion of
Christianity, exceed and surpass all other ways that can be devised to draw men
to any meaner Religion than it; and as much easier may be the effect. In
Natural Religion men are not to be drawn into it, they are created with it,
they are and must be of it, and are only punished for not acting suitable to it.

In Revealed Religion their own judgment and choice moved by suitable
Arguments, both enters and retains them in it; though, as I have before
observed, the case of the Apostate from main Christianity, arguing an offense
against Natural Religion, may be of a different consideration.

Further, In the Jewish Religion the immediate government of God, that lived as
a Prince in the midst of them, made their case different from any other that
ever was in the world; their Messages from Heaven being so immediate and
distinct, their consultations in cases of doubt with the Divine Will being so
near at hand, and the Evidences of all being so clear and undoubted, that the
sensibleness of them equalled the very assurance of the Laws of Nature.

The Objections that I can foresee against this Argument, lie these two ways.

If the Laws of Nature are so clear and evident, how comes it to pass there is
so great a darkness and ignorance in multitudes of persons, yea in Nations,
concerning these Laws? And yet how much less is the Obedience paid to them? And
lastly, how comes it to pass there never was such a Concord and Agreement in
them?

In Answer to this I should only briefly rejoin these two things.

1. That notwithstanding this, there always has been, and will be such
Evidences of the Truth, Righteousness, Reasonableness, and Naturalness of these
Religious Principles, that no more can they be banished out of Humane nature,
than the Notions of Health, Beauty, Happiness can be extinguished in the world,
notwithstanding all the disease, variation from the exact model of Beauty, and
lastly, the Unhappiness, Misery and Complaint so universal in the world; so
that though there is not any Example of the perfection of any of these in this
world, and very great and general Deficiencies from them: yet the Notions of
every one are whole and entire, and such representations and approaches to what
we mean in them are so visible, as to take away all doubt of the things
themselves, and of the desirableness of them; even so it is in this Natural
Religion.

2. The whole disadvantage then of Natural Religion objected, must be imputed
to the miserable depravation of mankind, to that degree, that the most
excellent things so lose their effect, as even to seem to lose themselves; yet
still they remain, and so remain, as to require and even exact their
acknowledgment, and so demand that due effect, and that so powerfully, that the
justice of the demand pressed home, cannot be denied; and thus it is in Natural
Religion.

2. Object. It may be objected f^r the enforcement of Revealed Religion by
severities, That when the Reasons of it are laid before men (as of the true
Christian Religion) lying in a straight and even line from Natural Religion to
it, it can only be the Brutishness and Obstinacy of men that they do not
receive it, which may be justly punished as against the Laws of Nature; and the
interpretation of Punishment shall be, not as intended to compel them into the
Christian Religion, but to chastise their Beast-like Senslesness or Obstinacy.

In Answer to this I would re-enforce these three things.

1. As to the main of the Objection, there is so great a difference between
Naturals that will certainly rise up at earnest and vehement summons, being
within already, though they may lie hid and deep; and what is purely from
without and must enter through those multiform, Meander'd, twisted and twined
passages of men's Understandings and intellectual Belief, through varieties of
Tempers, Educations, Principles, men have most conversed with, and rivetted
their whole souls into; that it is impossible for any but God alone, who
searches the heart, to know, where the guilty obstruction lies, when the screws
of truth, and the receptacles of men's minds do not reciprocate and answer one
another; where the key of Truth and the wards of men's thoughts so dissent, as
not to be reconciled; so that this must be left for ever as to Divine
Omnipotency in the efficacy, so to the Divine Judgment where the fault is, of
men's not receiving what is so graciously offered from Heaven.

2. Therefore to pretend to judge obstinacy, or insensibleness, or whatever
other faulty Reason we have prepared of men's not receiving the Religion we
would impose, is to assume Divine prerogative to our selves, and to become
Judges in His peculiar Court, or to contrive an Artifice to cheat an
acknowledged Principle, (viz. not compelling Revealed Religion) of its due
Obedience; and lastly, to cloth innocent persons, for any thing we know, with
the Sambenito, painted with Devils or Beasts skins, wherein they may appear
guilty with the disguise we have put upon them, though out of that they cannot
with Charity be concluded nocent, or guilty of those particulars, we charge
them with.

All this is to be understood, when the offense, and the particular offense (it
being not enough in this case to say there is some offense without special
matter charged against Natural Laws) is not as evident, as in any other case of
humane judicature; and where the only proof that men are otherwise guilty in
not receiving the Faith we offer them, is only this, that they do not receive
it.

3. If this punishing men for not receiving a Revealed Religion, were only for
not receiving substantial Christian Religion, it were the more tolerable;
though as I have said, not desirable to any true Christian Protestant; but when
it is stretched out to False Religion, to every nice Opinion, Ceremony or Mode
of worship, it is a burden mankind could never bear, being most intolerable:
And so I have done with this second Argument.

Argum. 3. I proceed to a third Argument, Justifying Natural Religion to be the
term of universal peace and concord; so far that if that be secured, men should
acquiesce in peace one with another, in things that concern Religion;
Magistrates allowing common protection, and people the common benevolence of
Humanity; as upon a ruled and determined case, that Reason and Truth ought to
have, according to the Divine Will, and the very Laws of Nature, a Through fare
in the world, free as the Air and Light, and that by an Ordinance as early as
of the day.

Before I argue this, I premise, That all Religious Freedoms are under the
entire acknowledgment of Princes within their own Dominions in all causes, and
over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil (in the very sense of the
Church of England) supreme Moderators, and Governors.

As also, that it is more desirable all things of a Religious concern should
have the countenance, encouragement, and example of Authority, and the Symphony
of Communities.

Yet still with this condition, it is the Birthright of every man to be
avowedly and publicly Religious, according to those Rules he believers,
agreeable to the Divine Will, Natural Religion being Judge. And that this is
according to the very institution of God himself, and no way inconsistent with
the Laws of subjection to Magistracy, or being a commodious and agreeable
member of a Community.

For if there be not such a Natural Freedom, there is no way left, since that
general corruption of Religion in the world, for a man ordinarily to reduce
himself, and induce others to reform themselves and their open profession of
God, to true and regular thoughts and acknowledgments of God, his worship and
service, and the ways of pleasing him in order to the eternal enjoyment of him.

For it often falls out in the world, that Magistrates and People sit in their
Idol-Temple of a false Religion, guarded with their Laws for Uniformity,
environed with their own Canons and Constitutions, and threatening severest
penalties to any disturber. Though we have reason to bless God our lines are
fallen in pleasant places; yea we have a goodly inheritance of Religion by our
Laws; which very much bribes our judgment of the Duresse of Impositions in
Religion, because we only consider it in ceremonies imposed, and do not turn
our selves to behold the abominations in other Nations, not only committed but
framed by a Law. But Imposition is imposition in the least things in Religion,
not natural; and opens the way to it in the greatest.

If it be not therefore before hand taken care of by such an Immunity, reserved
to Humane nature, notwithstanding Government and Subjection to Rulers, that
most fundamental principle of Natural Religion, in Piety toward God, issuing
it self in declarations of his Name, Truth, and Glory; in charity and
compassion to the souls of men, (whose case, though not themselves, cry out, as
the man of Macedonia in Paul 's vision, Come and help us) must lie still as a
Talent Act. 16. 9.
hid in a Napkin, and buried in the earth; or must encounter and fall foul with
another Law of nature viz. of Subjection and Obedience to Magistrates in their
Religious Laws.

But if their right to command only in and according to Natural Religion, the
best, most honorable, and safe command that God thought fit to deposite with
men, that they should hold the Golden Reigns of Godliness, Righteousness,
Soberness, far greater than of ceremonies, and safer than of Revealed Religion,
a chariot too divine for man to govern: If this, I say, be the case, men need
not cloister Religion in their breast for fear of violating so awful a
Sanction, as that of Magistracy. Nor while they confess it (neither afraid, nor
ashamed of the public discountenance), do any thing injurious to Divine
Disposition of power to Rulers.

If this were not the true, natural, legal state of things in relation to
Religion and Magistrates, and the very Ordination of God in Creation concerning
them, this further grand inconvenience would follow, That the most excellent
Religion of our Lord and Savior, so careful of all just rights and duty,
Dividing to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and reserving to God the things
that are Gods; yet that Luke 20. 25.
this Religion came in as it were treading upon the necks of Princes, and their
Laws, and disacknowledging that power entrusted with them by God, the power of
first Decreeing Religion, though it were allowed, He intended only the true
Religion.

For it is most evident, Christian Religion came into the world against the
will of all Humane Powers.

I know it will be said, Our Savior and his Apostles in regard of their
immediate commission from Heaven, of which Miracles were their Credentials,
could not in the least violate Humane Power, which falls before the Divine, as
the lowest Magistrate among us before the Supreme. I confess this is most true;
yet still it is to be considered, what great care God has of his Moral,
Natural, Fundamental constitutions; and it is not at all to be believed, he
would in so weighty a concern as Christianity, have so far neglected his
Ordinance of Magistracy, as not at first to have presented that Doctrine, and
the miraculous evidences of it to the Vicegerents of his power here upon earth;
that at least they should have been guilty of a peremptory refusal, before
their deputation in the propagation of Christian Religion had been waved by
God. I cannot therefore account the Supremacy of Divine Power above Humane, the
chief reason, that God took no more notice (not of Magistrates only, but) of
Magistracy it self, when he brought in the first begotten, and his Religion
into the world; and that he did not say, Let all these Angels of God on earth
worship him, in the first place.

We see in all things that could but have the appearance of being under their
proper jurisdiction, how cautious our Savior was not to offend; as in the case
of Tribute, though he as a Son over the Temple, or supreme Prince, was free;
yet Mat. 17. 24.
he wrought a miracle on purpose to defray it.

Besides the propagation of Christianity was to out-last the immediate
commission of the Apostleship, and Miracles; and to survive in ordinary
preaching and discourse, while the Princes of the world were yet enemies to it.

What then does this argue? but that the enforcing of true pure Natural
Religion only, is the right of Earthly Powers. Not the retrenching any of the
Freedoms of Natural Religion, not the imposing any thing besides and beyond it,
by power or penalties; not the forbidding of Reformation of any corruptions
invading it; not the embargoing any Revelation from Heaven, consisting with, or
perfecting Natural Religion, (as all truly such do) only the power of requiring
all to live in obedience to, the punishment of those that disobey Natural Laws.

But it may be further said, God intended Christianity should be brought in,
not by might, not by power, but by the Spirit of the Lord. That Believers in it
should seal it not with Pleasures, Honors, and outward Advantages accruing to
them by it, but with their blood and sufferings.

This is also most true, it appears God did so intend. But still if Magistrates
were entrusted by God with making Religion Legal, or not Legal by their seal;
it is plain, that Divine Ordination of Magistracy was dishonored and debased
by him that appointed it, in that it was not at all taken notice of in so great
an affair of the Divine Kingdom. And so far as they could judge, who did not
believe, there was a real injury done to Powers, and the sufferings of
Christians were on that account, just. For who could know that for so long a
time God had suspended that supposed Ordination of his, viz. That no Religion
should be brought into any State, or Kingdom, that had not first the favor and
license of the Laws and Magistrates of that State and Kingdom.

But now suppose it is a stated Rule, that beyond Natural Religion the
Magistrates Power extends not; but (that being secured) there is a freedom to
Subjects of taking care of their Souls, and wherein they have to do with God,
as of their bodies, lives, or estates in private concerns; or as a Philosopher
has of choosing what he thinks the best system and from the best Authors; and
that men may freely reason herein, still within the confinement of Natural
Religion, Rever^nce of God, and all just deferences to men; and then Christian
Religion had a Legal entrance, offering no disregard to Magistracy, but taking
natural freedom to offer it self, wherein its way being so prepared, it then
opens it self with all that Divine Power and Authority, that cannot be refused,
but under the great peril of Eternal damnation.

Thus proportionably the case is the same concerning the Reformation of
Christianity from Popery.

We then that are Christians and Protestant Christians, have great reason to
keep that door of the just and lawful propagation of Religion, not contrariant
to Natural Religion, as open as we can; and to grant a quiet, comprehensive of
all offers that can be made, keeping within Rules of Natural Religion, Reason
and Prudence; it seeming less hazard to admit those inconveniences attendant
upon this liberty, that through humane corruption run round with every thing,
than those greater mischiefs of having Christian or Protestant Religion
violently kept out.

Thus I have endeavored to clear, that there are obligations lying upon men
precedent to any right of Humane Authority: viz. of duty to God, in obeying God
rather than men; of the Profession, Confession, and publication of true
Religion, however men forbid or scorn it; of rational communication of truth,
as the Apostles said, We Act. 4. 12.
cannot but speak the things we have seen and heard; of charity to men's souls
in not concealing the tidings of Salvation, the Righteousness and Truth of God.
For certainly David expresses himself according to the Laws of Natural
Religion, when he says, I have preached righteousness in the great
congregation. I have not refrained my lips, Oh Lord, thou Psalm. 40. 9, 10
know. I have not hid thy righteousness in my heart. I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation. I have not concealed thy loving kindness and
thy truth from the great congregation. And Moses when he says, Give ear, Oh ye
Heavens, and Deuteronomy. 32. 1, 2, 3
I will speak: and hear Oh earth, the words of my mouth: my doctrine shall drop
as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, because I will publish the
name of the Lord: Ascribe ye greatness to our God.

Yet from hence I do not suppose any man bound to go and preach to the Great
Turk, either the Laws of Natural Religion against any of the iniquities of that
tyranny, or follies of that superstition; or the just and holy Laws and Truths
of Christianity instead of his worse than A^ile Alcoran.

Every man is to measure his commission, and the enablements he has received
from God for his work, and not to venture upon things beyond his line. For even
the Apostles knew their measures, the measure of the rule distributed them by
God; a measure reaching so far, beyond which they did not stretch themselves,
in that famous place, 2 Cor. 10. 13. Every man may compute the probable account
his service will turn to in the Glory of God, and the Salvation of men's souls.
Christ teaches him to forbear, when it is certain before hand, His pearls will
be trodden under foot, and himself Mat. 7. 6.
rent.

And so I have finished what I think necessary to be spoken upon this Third
Argument, and pass on to the fourth.

Argum. 4. Natural Religion may well be the Cement of Universal Peace, since
whatever can comport with the good of the Universe or Community, is secured by
it.

The Glory of God, so far as Community is charged with it.

The Peace and Welfare of particular persons.

The orderly Posture of every man in his Station and Rank.

The just deference to Magistracy and public Authority.

The security of public Peace and Quiet.

The Advancement of True Religion in Divine Revelation.

Now in every one of these I will consider what Objections may be made against
allowing freedom in Religion; upon Natural Religion secured, and the Answers to
them.

Object. 1. Every False Religion, or refusal of the True Religion in a Nation,
not vindicated by due severity upon Offenders, is an offense against the Divine
Majesty, of a National Guilt, and brings down National Judgments.
Answer. The government of Conscience being Gods peculiar, no earthly Power
shall be charged with the obliquities and errors of it, any more than with the
secret sins of men that are not known, or those Distempers of Mind and Spirit,
which coming into no palpable Instances can neither be convicted nor sentenced
by man.

Now mistakes of men in Religion not cognisable by the light of Nature, are to
be reckoned among the Errors of Conscience, and so are properly left to Gods
Judgment Seat, and the Magistrate stands free.

It is therefore very observable, Princes are called nursing-Fathers, and
Queens nursing-Mothers; signifying not a Isa. 49. 23.
Commanding-Power, but a tender, insinuating, cherishing, the Encouragements
from them, that such an Appellative carries with it, in those that declare it,
in those that are to receive it.

The Magistrate discharging this Honorable Trust, may acquit himself and the
Community before God from the guilt and destruction of those that may be yet
heinously guilty before God, as Jonah's Mariners did from the Blood of that
Prophet consigned over to the Sea by his own Sentence, Oh Lord! lay not this
man's blood to our charge, who have Jon. 1. 14
done all it pleased thee to command us.

When Sovereigns and Nations have considered the Wisdom, Rationality and
Heavenliness of Proposals in Religion, and settled upon what they find of the
highest Character, as the Religion of their Nation by Law to be established; to
which they allow the encouragement of their public Honors and Maintanance,
and taken care for the propagation of it by Instructions, Arguments, Reasons,
and good Examples, they have done all that God expects from them to do, and so
have delivered their own souls.

That which was of their free judgment and arbitrament, (as proper to them, as
to families and persons, to dispose of their own) they have placed as they
thought upon due consideration, most to the glory of God, and the good of the
people; but to deprive men of their native rights, or to punish them in their
Persons or Estates (who are not Offenders against Natural Religion) for the
sentiments of their minds, of which they have only a humane judgment, is not a
Power wherewith they think themselves invested of God, and so forbear it.

This is indeed the Religion of a Nation of Men, a Nation of Christians, a
Virtuous, an Honorable Government, and more hopeful to propagate true
Christianity, than that which writes its Laws in Blood. And this is to Rule
over men and not over Beasts; bound up (as men should be) with the cords of a
man in Natural Religion; in what is beyond that, as revealed from God, with
Bands of Love, to serve the Public; Blessed are the people who are in such a
case; blessed is that people whose God is thus the Lord Jehovah.

Object. 2. What Peace can there be in the world amongst private and particular
persons, while there are several opinions in Religion? how many Disputes, and
Calumnies, and Invectives are continually flying up and down by reason of
differences in Religion? and how much better are all compelled into Union?
Answer. All these evils are but so many Arguments of depraved Nature, which
creates its own occasions out of every thing; and if the mischiefs of
Compulsion, or the ill state even of those parts of the world, where the voice
of Religion is all one la^^^^ge, were cast up, I doubt they would be found to
balance the worst that can be charged on differences in Religion. But yet
Natural Religion, and most evidently Christian Religion, is most severe and
positive against all Strife, Envy, Railings, evil Surmisings, and bends men
upon Peace, Love, Me^kness, Quietness, Charity toward all men, and especially
Christians, as is after to be sh^wn; and therefore undoubtedly those evil
effects where they grow to excess, may be restrained by Civil Magistracy, as in
any other case; and the rather, that True Religion so much disowning them, they
are more inexcusable in that cause, than any other; for though we find
Scripture severe in its language in great cases, as St. Paul against the Bigots
of the Law; yet we must also consider the Infallible Spirit that guided Sacred
Writers, who alone knows how to direct those sharp arrows, and what effect they
shall take.

Object. 3. This clips off the Royalty and Prerogative of Princes, if they have
not the command of men's Sentiments, or at least of their outward Actions and
Practices in Religion.
Ans. The unjust Enlargements of Earthly Power into the Divine Sanctuary, has
been always fatal to Princes. Vzziah's rude entrances into it, were punished by
God with infamous Leprosy: Herod's Letting that sacrilegious acclamation, It is
1 Chronicles. 28. 18, 19. Act. 12. 22, 23,
the voice of a God, not of a man, sink into him, was presently revenged with a
dreadful hand of Judgment. Humane Power is safest, keeping it self within the
verge of Divine Institution; beyond that, though it may seem greater, yet it
becomes only like a swelling wall, the bigger it is, the more ready to fall; or
a tottering Fence expatiating to ruin.

Their Honor is great in being nursing-Fathers; if God had intended Civil
Magistracy to govern in any Religion but Natural, they should have had as
certain Rules to act by, as they have in Natural Religion.

Besides what is the good of being great Masters in Religion, except in that
wherein God has showed every man what is good, seeing the greater Judgment
waits for such. Thus the Apostle James, James 3. 1. My brethren, be not many
masters, imposers or prescribers in Religion; that is, do not affect it,
knowing we shall receive a greater Judgment.

Object. 4. But it is impossible to govern with any security, if Governors
hold not the Reins of men's Consciences, if they have not the Rule of that Helm,
that turns about so great Bodies of people, which way soever they that have
that Pylotry please, with what vigor and courage are men animated while the
Principles and Rewards of Religion are in their hearts and eyes? If therefore
the Prince rules not in these, his Command is but Cipher.
Answer 1. Religion is too great and noble a thing to be but an Expedient of
Government.

2. The History of Christianity assures us no Princes have had more obedient
Subjects, a more valiant Soldiery, than Heathen Princes of Christians. True
Religion knows its obligation to Government, and pursues the Laws of it, though
that Government has stood distinct from that True Religion. And this is the
standing-Rule of Christians.

Object. 5. But what Tumults, Factions, Seditions, have been raised under
Religious pretenses, when Subjects have not yielded themselves to the Empire of
Princes in Religion?
Answ. These evils, as they are falsely pretended by men of turbulency to be
for the service of Religion; so they are unjustly charged upon it. There can be
therefore no severity too great upon those that so abuse so excellent a thing.
But the s^m^ care that secures against ambition, sedition, rebellion, in one
shape, will do it in another, without taking away lawful liberties. Nor is
there any remedy so specific against the great Hypocrisy of covering
Rebellion with Religion, Faction with Faith, as the severest Regiment of men
according to the indisputable Laws of Natural Religion, and allowance of the
greatest Tolleration in what no way contradicts that: For then is the artifice
strongest, when it is planted in the oppression of men's consciences, so great
an illegality against Natural Principles. Take away severe Impositions, and
what have such Politicians to work upon?

Object. 6. But what a Hydra, a many-headed Monster of Opinions, will Religion
become by such a Toleration?
Answ. 1. Severe Natural Religion enforced, and strictly pursued, will so
rebate men's corruptions, (besides the hopes and expectations of Divine Bl^ssing
accompanying so virtuous a Government), that there will be a much greater
retrenchment of Opinions, than can be understood. The excellent Wisdom, Gravity
of Natural Religion in the lives and actions of men, especially enobled with
Christianity, would bring most of men, except extremely bad or wild, into an
admiration of its excellency, that even ingenuous shame, together with general
prudence, would compose them against fugitive, inconstant, changeable, giddy
opinion. Men are not so intractable as they are thought to these awful Laws, if
wisely proposed. The worst and wildest part would become in every man's sense
due subjects for rigor, whom so much reason and fair inducement would not
prevail upon.

Steelly, unfruitful, unsatisfactory ceremonies, loose principles and
practices, the want of that great presence of true Religion, and an iron hand
instead of it, makes men Atheistick, Sceptick and Fanatic, ever teeming into
vain opinion, for want of solid goodness to rest upon.

But however sinful degenerate men will be bad every way: Uniformity begets
loathsome ignorance and formality. That which is best in it self is to be
chosen, viz. That free air and light, in which men may try all things, and hold
fast that which is good, though evil adheres to that, as to all good things.

Argum. 5. To conclude, True Natural Religion has a set of such self-evident
principles, that it will be enough to name them; and yet if they were observed
and obeyed, universal peace and quietness could not fail to result from them.

1. That every man has the due care of his soul committed to himself, so that
it shall be no Apology for him in the sight of God, that others, whether
Churches, Magistrates, or public Teachers misled him; it may be some abatement
of condemnation to him, and increase to them; but it shall not Ezekiel. 3. 18.
deliver him; he shall die in his sin, though his blood shall be required at
the watchmans hand.

What reason then can there be, or how can it be accounted for, to compel that
man with force to take that way he judges dangerous, or drive him from what he
thinks best for his soul? To advise, persuade, reason him, is commendable and
charitable. It is good for him to make the best inquiry, and take the best
advice. But that he should be forced against his own sense, is unnatural and
barbarous, seeing he must be wise for himself; or if he scorns, he Prove. 9. 12.
alone must bear it. This is to be understood in cases not evidently good or
evil by Natures Laws. In them there is no excuse against impressions of
absolute authority. Now how much would this tend to peace, if it had its due
observance?

2. That Humane Nature should do all the good, kindness, and ease it can to it
self in every particular member, and remove all the evil, discomfort, and
mischief it can in the same manner; and no severity, except in cases plainly
destructive to general Humanity, can be tolerable to true Humanity: If this
were men's Rule, who would hurt or destroy in the world?

3. That in all things, wherein a man can without infinite hazard do it, he
should unite himself with the greatest Communities, with lawful Governors,
with Nations, and most comprehensive Congregations of Christians; seeing that
is most acceptable to God, who would have all Nations to Romans 15. 9, 10, 11.
serve him, all people to praise him: It is most Humane and Christian; it is
also most a man's interest, most safe and secure to himself.

4. That wherein a man finds himself under a necessity of differing from any
man, much more from a Community, he should deport himself with all meekness,
humility, modesty, love and charity, that he may demonstrate, it is truly his
judgment and sense of conscience, and not perverse humor, that makes him
differ; that he is still a most lively feeling member in the body of mankind,
and Christians, that in all things excepting the glory of God, and the
salvation of his soul, interests too vast to be compounded for, he prefers the
public before himself; such a one can neither harm, nor deserve to be harmed.

I have now dispatched what I intend concerning this first foundation of even
Universal Peace recommended by Christian Religion: viz. The general unity and
uniformity there would be in Natural Religion, if men would show themselves
men. I will only by way of Conclusion reflect upon the usefulness of so great a
Point.

1. It justifies the great Creator of all, who has not left himself without
witness, amidst this great Deordination of his Rational creatures, that he is
yet a Faithful Creator: Seeing he has carved into their very Beings such a Law
of Truth and Goodness, that if they would but show themselves men, would have
preserved them from the great errors of Vnderderstanding and Practice; and as a
Compass would steer them in the wide and disorderly sea wherein they now sail.
By this inward infallible guide, if rightly excited to give its sense, and duly
applied, they might find true Religion in this Babel of Languages concerning
it. And though it is very difficult, and in the event, through man's great
corruption, but not in the reason of things, almost impossible without Divine
Illumination so to excite and apply it, yet there it is, even within men, so to
be excited and applied; and it is men's corruption only, and wickedness, that it
is not of more use.

2. To us Christians having the benefit of this Divine Illumination in the Word
of God, and in the hopeful assistances of the Holy Spirit, the use of this
Natural Law is much more visible; and indeed chiefly we have the benefit of it,
and of such discourse as this upon it; and our guilt more than twofold, if we
do not find it. To us it may appear how inflexible a Rule it is, how excellent
the Religion of our Savior is, we may in every thing see by it, what it is
that is indeed of value among all our divisions; What is that faith once
delivered to the Saints, we should be always in an agony for; and what we may
allow and condescend to those various Sentiments, that are and will be as
various, as aspect; the beauty and even harmony of Humanity and Christianity
being not made up of Uniformity in such things; but unity of love and charity
is the true beauty, the true melody here; all would be a dead calm without some
variety. Thus as Christian Religion revives and now impresses Natural Religion,
so does Natural Religion corrected, freed from its Interpolations, corrupt
Glosses, restored and filled up, where gaping chasmes had spoiled the sense and
contexture, and anew imprinted upon us by Christian Religion, give great light
to Christian Religion. For being thus restored, and a natural light within us,
it is redintegrated to us in its great Office, to be as the candle of the Lord
in our spirits, by which we behold the true and excelling Glories of
Christianity.

3. It therefore makes brief and compendious many great Controversies, as they
are made in Christian Religion: I shall summarily instance in these Four.

1. Those between Rome and the Reformed Churches. Although I have a just value
for all those renowned labors of the great lights God has raised up in the
Protestancy; a very rational and Christian entertainment of the Writer and
Reader: Yet I must profess the unshaken Assurance I center upon, in all those
Controversies, is a short Conclusion of the matter, That Romish Religion not
only is not, but cannot be true: it is impossible it should be of God, if
Scripture and our Faculties are true; if Natural Religion, or Christian
Religion that we have in the Scriptures be true: And this I take to be a ready
and sure Antidote against Popery to all that are equally concerned to know
which is the True Religion, Catholic Religion falsely so called, Popish
Religion, or Protestant Religion, though they have not opportunity to acquaint
themselves with all the Learning so plentiful, so valuable at this day in the
world for the decision between them.

2. That great Principle of Natural Religion, Hear Oh Israel, the Lord thy God
is one Jehovah; and Thou shall love Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5.
the Lord thy God with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy might and
strength. And that great Principle of Christian Religion, If any man love not
the Lord Jesus, let 1 Cor. 16. 22.
him be Anathema Maranatha; these two joined together assure me beyond doubt,
Our Mediator upon whom our Love, Trust, Service is to rest; and that at such a
distance as is Heaven from Earth, cannot be but the One God with the Father,
and so I am resolved in the Socinian Controversy. And further, if he be the
Eternal Son of God, and his offering up the Humanity united to him, a
sacrifice, I know it must be of infinite value, and not a martyrdom, not an
example only.

3. By Natural and Christian Principles united, I am convinced, the great
foundations on which the Controversies between the Arminian and Calvinist (as
we use to express them) rest, must have great truth on both sides; but they
being related to those judgments of God, that are as a great depth, it is
impossible to find them out to perfection; for how can Finite wade in Infinite,
without being swallowed by it! We need not therefore stay, till these two
things can be reconciled in our Judgments, the infinite sovereignty and
dominion of the Almighty over every particular immortal spirit that he has
made; so that it cannot be disposed of, or dispose it self without the counsel
and foreknowledg of God; and yet that no one is prejudged by any determination
of God in the true liberty of a rational creature, much less determined to sin
and misery upon it, by any overruling power. We may safely with respects to
both sides, be profoundly abased in the sense of Incomprehensible sovereignty
over us; in a self-condemnation, wherein soever we find our selves degenerate
and fallen into sin, as knowing our destruction of our selves. Nor need we stay
till supreme grace and our own freewill are reconciled in dispute; we may
safely on both sides make our humblest and most lowly appeals to him, that
works in us both to will and to do. We must do so, and are under the same
security, and obligation in stirring up our utmost Phil. 2. 13. Ezekiel. 18. 32.
powers in turning our selves that we may live; in working out our salvation
with fear and trembling. And all beyond Phil. 2. 12.
these two conclusions are but Speculation; in which we may employ and
entertain our selves in considering infinite wisdom, and glory, and searching
as near as we dare approve its holy and gracious ways; but need not be angry we
cannot agree in things out of our depth, so as to be certain.

4. In all the Disputes concerning Forms of Church Government, Modes of
Worship, we have thus much of resolution from the consent of Christian with
Natural Religion; Whatever is most substantially good, is fittest to be the
center of Agreement and Union; and other things doubtful allowed to particular
reason, and choice, with mutual tolleration and charity. As is further to be
shown us under the next Head of Discourse.

Having now spoken so much of Natural Religion, I think it necessary, before I
quite leave it, besides the survey I have taken of it, to add these Characters
concerning it, that it may not possibly be mistaken.

1. It is that which depends upon nothing particular, but must be the same to
all Nations, and times; it is all essence, and has no accidents, or
circumstances, as it is natural. To pray is Natural Religion, that is, to lift
up Desires to God with humility and hope; this is and must be the same without
any variation to every man in the world. Now whatever can be supposed to
pertain to it, if it be not the same every where, is not Natural Religion.

There can be but one nation of a God to all the world; there can be but one
Justice, Sobriety throughout; there can be but one notion of sin, or of the
pardon of it; of Judgment to come, as they are natural. Till you come to
Essence, you come not to Natural Religion.

2. It is that which cannot be demurred to, but with the failure of all sober
reason, nor indeed without a consciousness of it, while denied. I am fully
assured no man can deny a God, a distinction between good and evil, a future
state, without a strong recoil of the Natural Faculties, returning as by an
Intellectual, Moral, Elastick force.

3. It is that whereof, if any of the Principles be taken away, grand
inconveniences and absurdities will follow, like taking away light, air, or
water, out of the natural world.

What an infinite necessity is there of God? of Prayer to him? of Praises of
him? of his pardoning-mercy since sin? of Judgment to come? Take away these,
and universal nature flys in pieces, runs every way upon so great a vacuum, as
the want of any these Principles immediately makes.

This is Natural Religion; and nothing else is Natural Religion but this.

Having discoursed what a foundation of Universal Peace Christian Religion has
laid, in not only assuming to, but uniting with it self Natural Religion; I
shall come now to present as in perspective, Christian Religion it self, and
show the admirable contrivances for unity, peace, and love, it has found out;
and most earnestly pressed on all its Disciples, so infinitely wise, reasonable
and good, so efficaciously insinuated, so strongly argued and enforced, so
awfully commanded, so to the life, the very Divine life of it, even
Hypostatiz'd in our Lord; that it is indeed the inexpiable shame and guilt of
the Christian world, that it is so unlike the Divine Philosophy, the Laws, the
grand Exemplar of it.

That I may pursue this Intention with greatest advantage, I shall propose
under several Heads, how this design is laid by the infinite wisdom of our
Savior; much different from what is ready on all occasions to offer it self to
Humane Imagination, that is Unity in Uniformity; without which, as this
confident boast of Imaginary Reason pretends, there can be no peace, and that
this is the groundwork of all; but the more Heavenly Understanding of the Holy
Spirit lays its foundations quite otherwise, as shall be made manifest in these
following accounts.

1. The first foundation Christianity lays, is this, It proposes to the minds
and consciences of all its servants, Concerns of that vast moment and Rules of
Action according to them; that whoever does sincerely observe, and walk by
them, shall be unavoidably carried upon love, and peace, and off from division.
It does not propose a set of opinions, that every one must come up to, though
at a distance from these main concern; or a machine of bodily worship, that
every one must learn the motions of; but it sets down interests of such
indisputable, worth and goodness to be pursued, that do upon very great reasons
concenter Christians in unity, love and peace.

1. In that the spirits of men possessed with them, are wise, weighty,
generous, and manly: In malice, children; in understanding 1 Cor. 14. 20.
men; that they can neither grow fierce, churlish, and rigid, nor weakly,
peevish, and querulous. Nay very much above this, their souls are holy,
heavenly, aspiring to God and Christ, that they are above small things.

It is of great consequence, what notions in Religion and Divine Things the
mind feeds upon; for accordingly their temper will be. They that have with
devotion fallen upon old Jejune observances, (which they call Reverence of
Antiquity) spinose Controversies, opinions of zeal without knowledge, Phil. 1.
9, 10.
a passionate affectionate Religion, not abounding in all judgment, and knowing
the things that differ: Their temper is apt to be morose and angry, or
vexatious and full of complaint, if all be not of their measure; but they that
have their thoughts fixed on righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost,
they are furnished with what is of value, they partake of the marrow, and
fatness of Gods house, they drink of the river of his pleasures; and are
lightsome, Psalm. 36. 8.
benign, altogether for compassion, beneficence, and rejoicing in universal
good.

2. The pursuit of those Interests gives them such true employment, that they
are not at leisure to press trifles upon others, or be over attendant to them
themselves. They that are running this race, run so, that they may obtain; they
1 Cor. 9. 24.
that are fighting for this Crown do not love to beat the air; Phil. 3. 14.
they that are pressing on for the price of the high calling of God in Christ,
are so taken up, all their sinews are so strained another way, that they cannot
trifle themselves, put others upon it, nor assume any thing in comparison of
what they are so intended upon.

3. That high value they have for the one thing necessary, gives such an
honorable character to all that are in the same manner affected, and employed,
that they cannot differ one with another in affection upon minute things. The
regard, and reverence they have for that Divine Image upon them, preserves them
from lightly speaking or thinking ill one of another.

Now in these three things, to have Spirits of an Excellent, Solid, Benign
Temper, attending great and worthy Objects; in having a full, generous and
noble Employment, in a great and honorable Esteem of Christians, for true
Christianities sake, lie the true seeds of Christian Peace.

I shall therefore bring these things to to their just Gosple-Rule, as in
innumerable expressions of Scripture it is silently pointed at; but in two more
expressly, and in both, as the very standard of Peace.

The First is that which has fallen lately under so much debate: let us walk
by the same rule, let us mind the same Phil. 3. 15, 16.
thing.

Now that we may understand this rule, let me propose this very plain and easy
Method into the Apostles sense.

The Apostle beginning this Chapter with an exhortation Ver. 1, etc.
to rejoice in God, and in that excellent state of Christianity into which they
were brought, immediately had his eye upon the Legalists, that troubled those
clear waters, and damped the joy of Christians; a point he was much upon, and
very safe for them often to hear. Having, as I said, his eye upon those
Legalists, who indeed perverted the Gospel, and encountered the main design of
it, (as he by the Apostolic Spirit discerningly knew) He cautio^s Christians
against them, under very black Characters; dogs, of rabid and rending spirits;
evil workers, designing Ver. 2.
against the good the Gospel introduced, disguising themselves under the
venerable name of the circumcision, when they were quite another thing, viz.
the concision, a Sect in whom the dignity either of true Israelitism, or
Christianity was praescinded from themselves, as infamously as the Garments and
Beards of David's Messengers were by Hanuns Villainy.

Therefore says the Apostle, you need not fear they are Ver. 3.
gone away with the birthright and blessing of Circumcision: We are the true
Cir^umcision, the Israel of God, who having forsaken the flesh, the outward
Ordinances of Jewism, out of which the sprightly inhabitant is departed, and
left it as a body dead; we, says he, worship God in the spirit; that Spirit is
with us, we Glory in Christ; we have the true Joy not allayed, chastised or
adulterate; we have no confidence Ver. 4.
in the flesh.

From hence the Apostle passes on, and in a Figure proposes in himself the best
and fairest side of the legal state, as it then stoodout of Christ, that he
might at that very best, trample upon it, and debase it to the very lowest in
compare with Christ; circumcised the eight day, of the stock Ver. 7.
of Israel, an Hebrew of Hebrews, etc. touching the righteousness of the law
blameless: but what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ;
yea doubtless I count All things, etc.

Wherein he appears (as in a most lively scheme), First, A Jew of the greatest
advantages without Christ, and yet worth nothing. Then a Christian enriched as
a Merchant Ver. 8, 9.
with the Pearl of great price: in himself, I say, appears a Jew of the highest
alloy; in himself a Christian of the first three; in both he shows the
worthlesness of all out of Christ, the infinite Riches to be found in Christ.
And after this Ver. 10.
he exemplifies still in himself the high and most important business of a
Christian in all those most Eloquent, Significant and Ponderous Expressions,
that I cannot so much as glance upon, being too mighty for a long and set
discourse, much more for a short one, and in passage.

Having done all this, he now applies it to the present Ver. 15, 16.
case of Christians, whom he ranks into two degrees.

1. The (...), the perfect, those of full age, as they are called, Heb. 5. ult.
or (...), as Ephesians. 4. 13. the perfect full aged man, grown wholly out of the
childishness of Ceremonies, or Opinions.

2. The weaker Christians, whom the Apostle very gently and tacitly signifies,
by those that do (...), those that are under some abatement from this
perfection of judgment, they have somewhat of reverence for those Rites
formerly of Divine Appointment, though they sincerely too value Christ above
all, even as the perfect.

To the First the Apostle advises, Let us wholly and entirely mind the same
thing; so many of us as are perfect, we have nothing else to do, we have
nothing in the least to take us off.

To the Second he allows, First, All the Tolleration of Charity, till, and
confidently foretells, God will reveal even this to them, viz. not only the
supreme excellency of Christianity, but the total uselesness, and utter
abolition of those Ceremonies.

But in the Second place he presses them on so far as they had attained, viz.
to a sense of the incomparable excellency of the knowledge of Christ, to a
conformity in his Death and Resurrection; and that they would walk by that one
Rule, that they would adjust all their Actions and Motions with the perfect
Christian, and mind that same thing, though they cannot lay aside all regard to
other things immediately of that lower Rate.

Here then is the Christians Rule of governing himself as a Christian, and it
brings forth certain Peace.

1. The absolute and inexceptionable Rule to every one; that is a True
Christian, to have a supreme value for the eminency of the knowledge of Christ,
to know him and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, to be made conformable to his Death, to forget things behind, and
to press forward for the prize.

If any man has not attained this Rule, he is either no Christian, or under
the disguise of one, (if he be an Undertaker, an Imposer, a Master in
Christianity,) such as the Apostle here so dreadfully brands; an evil worker, a
designer against Christ.

Here is the one same Rule by which all Christians are to walk: here is the one
thing they are all to mind. Here is no allowance, no tolleration, here it is
they are all to be so serious, of such excellent Spirits, to have such a value
one of another, as to be able to center in Universal Love and Peace upon this
point.

2. Every perfect man is not to take in any thing of a lower kind, of a
foreign extract, into so Divine and Heavenly a Religion, that he may wholly
and without any allocation to any thing else, mind this same thing: This makes
him a more wise, a more perfect, manly and full aged Christian; more Spiritual
and Divine, and more fitted to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace.

The overowning any way, party, or person, takes off so from the Excellency of
a Christian, as to render him Carnal and Childish: I could not (says the
Apostle) speak to you, but as unto carnal, as unto babes in Christ; you are so
1 Cor. 1. 12.
over-zealous for men, and make Christ himself as if he were but the Head of a
Party.

And this brings forth Strife, Envy, and Division, as he tells those Corinths,
1 Cor. 3. 1.

3. If any man be under such disadvantage as to have taken such assumenta, such
additionals to his Christianity, he being right in the main Rule of the supreme
value of Christ in his Death, and Resurrection: he is to be supported in his
infirmity by all the kindness, and condescension of stronger Christians, in
expectation of Gods timely Revelation; Romans 15. 1.
but so as to be pressed on to walk up, and bear aloft to that Rule whereunto
he has attained, to mind that one thing; and so to wear out that mistaken
esteem for any thing not deserving it.

And this is most necessary in order to Peace, seeing such infirmities are
natural to this low state, even of Christians in this world.

Wherein they that are scrupulous, must take heed of judging the wiser, as
disorderly, irregular, and almost profane, if they do not observe their Rites;
and the stronger ought as carefully to preserve themselves from despising the
scrupulous, as fond superstitionists, because they cannot neglect them. So the
Apostle discourses, Romans 14.

Yet so, that these somewhat otherwise minded, be of the same mind, and rule in
the main; else they can neither have peace in themselves, nor yield it to the
higher Christians, nor grow up to the stature of full aged men in Christ.

This also is to be added as observable, that the case of the weakness of the
first Chr^^tians can never recur exactly; for those Ceremonies being of Divine
Institution, had just claim to an awe upon Consciences, not as yet clear in
their repeal; whereas all later Rites can pretend no higher than humane
institution, custom, or venerable antiquity; for the suspicion of Apostolic
Institution in their behalf, and so adding Religion to them, I look upon as
much weaker and worse, seeing we have no Authentic Records of such
Institutions; and in things of so dilute a goodness, as Ceremonies must be,
there will not be a balance to the opposite danger of leaning a Religious
weight upon a broken Reed, that both pierces, and deceives.

But it may be said, Is not the scrupulous forbearing, the being scared and
terrified at Ceremonies, as great a weakness, as being over anxious in their
observation?

Does not the placing a point of Religion in an abhorrence of them, and
thinking ones self the better for not using them, detract as much from minding
this same thing, and walking by the same Rule, as the other side solicitude?

No doubt it does, if we justly explain and limit in the case; and therefore
for the resolving this question, I will observe the importance of this same
Rule, given us by the Apostle in another of his Epistles, a place very parallel
to the sense, and much of the same expression with this to the Philippians, the
right explication of which will also much confirm the exposition given of this
Rule, seeing as I said, they are both one and the same Rule: and it is that we
find, Gal. 6. 14, 15, 16.

God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature: And as many as walk according to this rule,
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

Here is the Joy and Glory of Christianity in the Doctrine of Christ dying for
sinners, and bringing in that Divinest Religion upon it: ^ere is a conformity
to his Death by which all worldly, sensual, and fleshly Glory, whether in
fleshly Religion, or fleshly Life (which minister one to another) is crucified
to a Christian, and he to it.

But most especially the Apostle levels here against a fleshly Religion,
observing the enemies of Christianity so active instead of a new creature, to
delight to glory in the flesh, in the outward conformity of their Proselytes.
He observed the great Bait of Ceremonial Religion, was (...) to set a good face
on things how mean sovever; as idolaters carve and guild a Post: Glory in
appearance, though without true satisaction to the heart or conscience, makes
Spiritual Religion look like nothing; but to the true Christian who knows the
Gospel so Divine and Spiritual a thing, a fleshly Religion is out of date.

A new Creation in the soul of a Christian, and that exemplified in a life of
excellent Holiness, substantial Goodness and Purity, planted in the Faith of
Christ Jesus, is of the only avail in this Profession; and he that makes
Circumcision any thing separated from this; or if he shall fly over to the
other extreme, to make any thing of Uncircumcision, as if they might atone for
the want of a new creature, as a more perfect remove from Judaism, and
consigning a man's self over to Christianity; both are alike mistaken in the
Doctrine of Christ, who values only this new creature.

And as many as walk by this rule; viz. a making the new creature in Christ,
All; and every thing else Nothing: and who act according to it, the peace and
mercy of God, and Christ, and all true Christians, be upon them; for they are
the true Israel of God.

And so it is plain, If any man makes the other side of a Ceremony, the not
observing it, a point of Real, Substantial Religion to him, is afraid of it,
and values that fear as a fear of God, without the more intrinsic parts and
effects of that Fear, he errs from Christianity, as the Bigot for Ceremonies
does.

But this does not imply, every one that preserves, and will not recede from
his liberty, though he knows the true use and disuse of all things indifferent,
yet will not be ceremonially bound by any on earth, is presently afraid of a
Ceremony, or that he is so, because he will not set it too near Divine
Institutions in his practice, or incumber his worship of God with it, though it
be told him never so often; There is no Religion in the Imposition, but Order,
Decency, or Submission to Government.

All this does not argue, he makes it a point of Substantial Religion not to
endure Ceremonies, which he esteems himself neither the better, nor the worse;
but places all in Christ, and the New Creature, to commend him to God.

Thus we have the First, and very Deepest Foundation for True Christian Peace,
lying in the absolute substantialness of the Religion of Jesus Christ;
substantially good, even as the Eternal Laws of Goodness, and perfecting the
soul of man into them, and the enjoyment of God in them; and the Heart, and
Life stretched out in the utmost pursuit, with the same intensness, that men
strive for masteries, and taking nothing ceremonial into any degree of this
value, if into any at all, as the full-grown Christian does not. This is the
True Rule of Christianity.

And this Rule, even as to that to the Galatians and to the Philippians, is one
and the same Rule, and given into every Christians hand to judge and walk by,
with this Inscription upon it, Whoever lives and acts by this same Rule, though
he may require toleration in some things that God may in time reveal to him;
yet he is, together with all Christians, the Israel of God; built as a City
compact together, at unity and at peace with it self.

And who that looks upon Christianity, and this Rule of it, can but be amazed,
Essential Christianity should not draw up the entire Love and Zeal of
Christians to it, so that they should only provoke one another to love and good
works, and so value one another in it, as to be united and reconciled above and
beyond all other Bitterness.

Now this first Head I have been insisting upon, is that in which Christians
have all one judgment, and speaks one and the same thing, and so admits not the
least variation. Here all the lines of Christian Revealed Religion meet, no
Fundamental point that is not included in this Rule.

For He to whose Image there must be such a conformity, must be the Son of God;
He that was crucified must be man. All purity from sin, and vigor of the Divine
Life, must be found where there is the power of his death and resurrection. The
whole glory of self-confidence, self-righteousness, worldly pomp and vanity,
must be crucified, where there is the fellowship of his sufferings; where the
glory is only in his cross; where the world is crucified to a man, and a man to
the world; where there is a reaching forth to the utmost, to attain the
resurrection of the dead, and a pressing forward for the price of the high
calling of God in Jesus Christ, there must be the Doctrine of Eternal life; in
his resurrection lie treasured all the glories of the future state; and where
these things are urged as under so great necessity, there must be an extremity
of evils on the other side, signifying the wrath to come. They then that are
agreed here, may well tolerate one another in lesser differences, while these
things are not subverted, over-pressed, or defeated by other additions. This
then may well be accounted the first ground of peace, so great a Doctrine, that
is according to Tit. 1. 1.
Godliness.

2. The second Head under which may be discoursed the Efficacy of True
Christian Religion to Peace, is, That in Christianity there is an uniting
spirit of Love, flowing from those several points of Union, wherein Christians
are closely one with another conjoined, and compacted, and so acquiesce in a
truly Divine Peace.

For the principal, internal tie of Union is, that one spirit: this one spirit
conveys it self, and runs through the whole body of all Christians, in Love,
and so in Peace.

For Love is the Bond of Perfectness, that is, of the integrity of this whole
body: for so I should choose to expound Col. 3. 14.
that Perfectness, because the Apostle had been exhorting to all those Graces
that do most conserve the Union of the body; bowels of Mercy, Goodness,
Humbleness, Meekness, Patience, forbearance one of another, forgiveness v. 13.
one of another; if any one have a quarrel against another, even as Christ
forgave: but above all (says the Apostle) put on Love which is the bond of
perfectness; and let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, unto which ye are
called in one body: So here is the Love that is the Bond of the Integrity of
the body; and the Peace consequent upon it, unto which Christians are called in
one body; and both of them guarded with all those uniting, healing Virtues of
Christianity, wherein that Love and Peace are most cherished, conserved and
secured. Peace it self is the Bond of that Unity of the Spirit, that is, of
that real effective Union the Spirit accomplishes, by virtue of which the parts
all rest in strict combination one with another: this Peace is the close rest of
the parts, by which every one adheres with greatest kindness to each other, and
desire of self-preservation in the preservation of the whole; and so all the
parts seek the commodious situation each of other, and abhor the disturbance,
the disease of any.

And because this Peace cannot procure or conserve it self, seeing it is not a
dull sluggish Rest, but in the midst of Motion and Action, Love is (as I may
call it) the Divine Archeus, that Divine Spirit of Nature, the great Instrument
of the Holy Spirit, the supreme Author of this Love and Peace.

And Love runs every way, pries into all the causes of Division, and removes
them, sees into all the ways of conciliating, and effectually pursues them.

This is that Love, that edifies the body, it takes off all the asperities and
roughness of the parts, those particular sharp angularities of Opinion, reduces
them to a square, to a Figure fitted one to another, and then cements, and ties
them one to another, till they grow into a spiritual Temple. What incomparable
Virtues to this purpose, does the Apostle at large, and with greatest
speciality, express in that Divine Treatise of Love, 1 Cor. 13. All knowledge
without 1 Cor. 8. 1.
this is nothing, of what sort soever it be: That only puffs up and swells men,
as if they themselves were All, as if they could themselves be an Entire
Temple, a Spiritual Building alone; the understanding all Mysteries, it makes a
man look to himself like the whole Body of Christ, or at least, as if he were
to determine the posture, and figure of the whole, and all the other parts to
obey, and be contented with the room he leaves. We know this is the general
temper of Opinion, the product of Knowledge without Love. Knowledge therefore
alone cannot build. Airy Knowledge is big, boisterous, angry, if it be not
admired, if it be not venerated so, as to take up what space it pleases, to
order as it pleases.

Even the following of the Truth, the earnest search after, and Ephesians. 4. 15.
pursuit of what is True, a much more excellent thing than mere Knowledge; yet
if this be not in love, there cannot be a growing up into the Head in all
things, even Christ.

Love then, is that which takes care of all the members, of all the lively
stones, how they may all most comply with, and advance each other, and rest in
their peaceable conformity one with another, and sweetest application one to
another, even while they are in a most intense, Christian motion, like the
Heavenly bodies, so harmonious, so at peace in all their activity, that there
is in this true sense, The sweet music of the spheres: so it should be, so it
is in true Christianity, in all its motions governed by love, how various
soever in other respects, yet they are all melodious, because they are all in
peace, how different in lesser things soever.

Now this Love and Peace are spiritual, and intellectual, and they therefore
are fixed upon a complication of spiritual intellectual Centers (if I may so
express them) all the Right True Lines from which, and returns to which, are in
Love and Peace. And these are those several points of union the Apostle has
laid together, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as ye
are called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God, and Father of All, who is above All, and through All, and in you All.

1. One Body] Even the whole Society of Christians, dispersed throughout all
the world, and united so, as to make up this one Body, and that by virtue of
the second point of union, that follows.

2. One Spirit] One Divine Spirit, Author of the same Spirit of Holiness and
Grace within Christians, informing every Christian, and making them All of the
same Christianity, as the soul in men makes them All of the same Rationality.

This is the one Spirit into which All are made to drink, and so are this one
body; for without this they would be indeed but as so many single stones, or
scattered parts; else too their union were no other than dull, and stupid; but
now all the parts feel throughout in this Center of one Spirit.

3. One Hope of our Calling] The same Heaven and Eternal Happiness (Mansions of
this same House of our Father) is the one hope of Christians, unto which the
Gospel alike calls them. They then who are to meet together in the same Eternal
Blessedness, and to be one general Assembly, and Church of the first born for
ever, with what unconcernedness in little trifles should they aspire to that
Glory together, with unexpressible indearedness of Love and Peace?

4. One Lord], even Jesus Christ, instead of the Lords many, is the One Lord to
Christians, by whom are all things, Romans 11. 18.
and they by him: they therefore who subsist, and are borne upon the Root, as
branches of the one Vine, must not boast 1 Cor. 8. 6.
against the Branches, for they bear not the Root, but the Root them: the
worshipping of one True Supreme Lord, how 1 Cor. 8. 6.
much a stronger tie of Union than a precarious visible, but visible Apostate
head? If one Earthly Prince be such a band of Union, how much more one King of
kings and Lord of lords? they are to be forgiven every thing, conceded every
thing, who sincerely worship this one Lord: every thing that can possibly
consist with their sincere acknowledgment of him.

5. One Faith], the Principles of Revealed Religion, which they believe, even
the substantial Principles, (as I named them in the last Head) are one and the
same; and therefore a solid band of Agreement: and it is the same Living, and
like Precious, Saving Act of their Souls, wherewith 2 Pet. 1. 1.
they believe these alike Precious Principles; Faith that works by Love, Love
to God, and Love to all Christians: Gal. 5. 6.
Love is the very natural Breath of that life of Faith.

6. One Baptism], One open Profession and Confession of Faith Christians make
to Salvation, with one Mind and one Mouth, from under one end of Heaven to the
other, generally sealed with the same Sacramental Rites, Baptism comprehending
all the instituted Rites of Christianity: a voice of Confession as the voice of
Thunder, so high as to still and quiet all the small murmurs and jars of
Division: Rites so solemn and great, as to make void and vain all other
Ceremonies, as notes of Distinction.

7. One God and Father of All, who is above All, through 1 Cor. 8. 6.
All, in you All]. To us Christians there is one God the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in him.

This grand Uniting Principle of Natural Religion is more nearly condescended
to us in Christianity; and the Bounties of the Creator, in and through the
Redeemer, flow with an Infinite Redundancy in, and through, and over All, with
one Universal Influence comprehending, and folding all that are in the Faith,
and Acknowledgment of the One Author, so close by the sameness of the
influence, and as it were by the strength of the stream, and this on every side
circumfluence of it, in, and through, and over All, that they cannot disuni^e.

Now from all these springs, this Love, this Peace, a Love that is an
infallible character, that we are the sons of God, that we have passed from
Death to Life, because the Principle 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
is so Divine, the Temper so Heavenly, and the last perfe^tion of it, Eternal
Glory; for Love never fails, but is swallowed up in that, and abides for ever.
A Peace that Phil. 4. 7.
so garrisons the mind in the Knowledge and Love of God in Christ, from which it
cannot so divert and wander, being kept as within Fortifications, as to fall
into ill tempered, unpeaceable Division; a Peace so passing Vnderderstanding,
that it drinks up, and loses all small dividing Opinions.

Here then is the Bond of Integrity, or perfectness of the Body of Christians.
Hereby they are all at Peace, not staying till they are all of one sentiment in
all things, that concern them toward God; but in those Fundamental points, in
those grand points of union, they are fully satisfied, and at peace, and
entirely love and unite; strongly cemented and edified in love, as the number
of the parts increase, as the largeness of each part is dilated; so they grow
up into the Head, and the whole increase is made in love.

It is not in pomp of Speculation and opinion always disputations, and
quarrelsome if without love, but a worthy abounding of love in all knowledge and
judgment, so as not to be a Blind, Ignorant, Dull Affection.

Not in Models, or Forms, Rites or Ceremonies, of no value in this spiritual
frame, when once they get past natural Order and Decency; but like nice
Curiosities of Art, very often is all broken in pieces, in the twisting things
to comply with it; and when it is brought to pass, rather Fine than Solid, and
of no Duration.

Without forced Subscriptions (prudential enough upon voluntary Agreements),
but when imposed with Rigor, they either receive into the Fold (besides the
Politic, Imperious Contrivers only) the Ignorant Herd, or the Hypocritical
Complier with All things for his own Interest, and put out too often the most
Intelligent, and Conscientious.

Here then is the Just Estimate of Heresy and Schism, in their True and
Highest sense; there may be a laxer and more general use of them to a lower
sense, but as to what we are now speaking of.

Heresy is the rending a man's self off from the body of Christians, by denying
some of those points of Consent, in which the union of Christians is founded;
so that such a Denial continued in after a first and second Admonition, in so
plain and evident points of Christian union, argue a man subverted from the
foundation, sinning with a high hand, condemned Titus. 3. 10. 11.
by himself out of this one Body, or by the Thing it self; and therefore is
justly rejected from the Communion of Christians.

Or if by coining and forming such Additional points of Union, of such an
aliene and strange Extract and Importance, compared with the True ones, as
though they take in them too, yet do virtually destroy some or more of them,
This also subverts the Heretic from the Foundation.

Or if a Community of Christians in Name, because they retain the
Acknowledgment of Jesus Christ the Lord, shall frame to themselves a distinct
Body, united and compacted of such Principles, as they have made essential to
themselves, that do either deny or defeat those with which Christ has united
his Body, and so must needs also be animated with another spirit; This is, and
must be a distinct Body from this Body of Christ, of which we now speak.

But S^hism is, when upon some points true or mistaken, of Doctrine, or
Worship, or External practice therein, that we would engage upon others, or
others would oblige us upon, that do yet on neither side so entrench or regrate
upon those points of Union now mentioned, we notwithstanding not only avowedly
refuse compliance with things required, or abate not from our demands of
compliance with our selves, neither of which do necessarily infer Schism; but
also withdraw that Love and Sympathy, that fellow-feeling, and adherence to the
body of Christ in general, or to any part of it, for causes not deserving. This
is Schism.

Heresy then does indeed make and constitute another, a distinct body from the
body of Christ, by the principles united in, very different from, and
destructive of the points of Christian Union; and so separates from, and gives
also the True body of Christ a just reason to separate it self from those, that
by their Fundamental Errors do really become another Body from the Body of
Christ, and so that compassion as being in the same body, is not due to them;
only that of common Humanity is due to them.

Schism is a withdrawing that love, care, and concern for the Body of Christ,
due to it, upon unjust Motives and Reasons, because of which we think it not
the Body of Christ, when indeed it is.

Heresy does not only, not love the True Body of Christ, but makes another
Body, or at least cuts off it self from that True Body.

Schism does not indeed make another Body, but seems to it self to do so; and
by contumacious persisting therein, and withdrawing the love due to the Body of
Christ, into a Society of its own, falls in the end into the condemnation of
Heresy, to be cut off from the Body of Christ, not for the different
apprehensions one Party has from another, but for the extinguishing that love,
and destroying that peace which are the bonds of Christian Union.

And that is the true notion of Schism, I take from the use of the word Schism
in the natural body, to which the Society of Christians is made analogous, 1
Cor. 12. 25. That there should be no Schism in the body, but that the members
should have the same care one for another; and whether one member suffer, all
the members should suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members
should rejoice with it: Now you are the Body of Christ, and members in
particular.

That I may endeavor the clear understanding of this, I shall give very freely
and modestly my sense of this whole matter.

Every Christian by believing one Hope of his calling, having One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of All, as was now explained: If he be
truly thus principled and persuaded, and accordingly profess and act, he is as
much a member of the body of Christ, as any member in a natural body, is of
that natural body; and it is not at his own or any man's pleasure, whether he
shall be of that Body or not. For as there is a Law of the natural Body, by
which a member having such ties with, such supplies of nourishment from a Body,
vigor from such a soul inhabiting that Body, it must be a member of that Body.

Even so there is a Law of this Mystical Body, and a man so united, so
spirited, is by the Laws the Head has made for his own Body, who only has the
power to do it; he is, I say, a member of the Body of Christ.

Now as the Apostle says, intending this Mystical Body especially, If the Foot
shall say, Because I am not the Head, I 1 Cor. 12. 15.
am not of the Body, is it therefore not of the Body? And if the Ear shall say,
Because I am not the Eye, I am not of the Body, is it therefore not of the
Body? And, God has tempered the Ver. 24, 25.
Body as it has pleased him, giving more abundant honor to that part which
lacked, that there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the members should
have the same care one for another.

The Apostle, I confess, is speaking of the order of Higher and Lower,
Honorable and less Honorable members of the Church, under the resemblance of
the natural graduations in the members of the Body.

But the reason being taken from the Laws of each Body, argues, It is no case
at the arbitrament of any who shall be of this Body, but as that Law of Christ
has defined, and so far as that Law has extended that Body, so far the love
and care of it, and for it, must go, else there will be Schism. Seeing there is
not else that proper care of the members, who must according to the Laws of the
Body, be members, whether one or other please to have it so.

Thus then I suppose, there is a Society, or Societies of Christians, in this
or any part of the world; they hold Christ the Head; they hold those great
points of union I have been Col. 2. 19.
speaking of; they are not chargeable with opinions or practices plainly
contrary, or undermining those acknowledgments therein, though they may be
guilry of errors in Doctrine, Worship, or Practice; yet not so Fundamental, as
to tear them off from the Body, or make them another Body; or they are
misunderstood to hold such errors, though indeed they do not, or they are not
errors: or they refuse to join in such opinions, or practices, as they conceive
not allowable by the word of God, though not destructive errors; nor can they
that require their compliance, pretend on their part, that the things are
absolutely necessary to make a member of the Body of Christ.

In this case, I say, he is the only Schismatic that has not a love, that
has not a sympathy with the Body; and therefore if neither party has, they
must be both Schismatics.

There may be Modest, Peaceable Dissents, and different practices upon them:
There were such notorious enough among the First Christians, as the Apostle
plainly discourses, Romans 14. for he says, They that eat, eat to the Lord, and
give God thanks: they that eat not, yet still to the Lord they eat Ver. 6.
not, and give God thanks: One for his Religious eating, the other for his
Christian Liberty. Here are acts of Worship in which there could be no
Uniformity, they could not join one with another.

So, He that regards the day, to the Lord he regards it: he that regards
not the day, to the Lord he regards it not. Here again are acts of Reverence
of God, but there is no Uniformity; yet still the Apostle (Romans 15. 5.) supposes
and exhorts, that in the midst of these differences in which he had positively
made an allowance to each part, they would yet be like-minded one to another,
according to Christ Jesus, after his Exemplar, or having their eye upon the
same Image of Christ instamped on both.

Yea, and notwithstanding these Discords, he supposes they might with one mind
and one mouth glorify God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, both in
those common Ver. 6.
things wherein both agreed, and were perfectly one; and also in those things
wherein they had one common Intention, and Design, centered in the one point of
doing all to the Lord; whether they eat, or eat not; whether they regarded a
day, or regarded it not. And therefore the Apostle further exhorts them to
receive one another, as Christ has received v. 7.
us, to the glory of God, notwithstanding our many faults. So Christians,
notwithstanding the faults they truly, or mistakingly esteem so in one another;
yet still they should own one another as Christians; they should mutually
partake the benefits of one another Christianity, and the public
administrations of it as to the things wherein they are as one, and even in the
things they dissent, in this conspire; in the direction of all to the glory of
God. All this plainly shows, that Unity consists not in Uniformity; Unity of
Worship, not in Uniformity of Worship; nor does Schism necessarily follow upon
such different apprehensions or practices: And thus, so far as we can perceive,
the Apostle ordained in all Churches there should still be communion in the
midst of differences.

And indeed, he that being a Christian, deprives himself of the abundance of
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel, running every way among Christians,
or of the mutual impartment they make of spiritual gifts and graces one to
another, upon the account of small differences only, is unthrifty of the
advantages offered to him by God, and straitens to himself, the Divine Spirit
in its free emanations every way, and throughout all the members of Christ,
without attending our sinful differences, which are no rule at all of its
effusions or restraints, when it flows among all that are true Christians: it
does not consider in its gifts, that one party is by it self, another by it
self, but gives to all that are truly of Christ's Body; yet the sinful severity
of one party, and too often of both, may displease, grieve, and in great
Degrees quench the Holy Spirit in its donations, as 1 These. 5. 19.
to one, or both guilty parties.

And indeed this is another of those things that does more truly import Schism,
than external differences do; when those that are truly Members of the same
Body, do deny to yield, to convey, or to receive, and give Circulation to the
Communications of the Divine Spirit through the whole Body.

For thus men may become putrid, gangrened, or mortified Members, and so
deserve to be cut off; not for their different sentiments, which ought to be
tolerated, but for that they will not Communicate, or will not be Communicated
with; they will not give or receive the Gifts Christ has given Ephesians. 4. 8.
to men, as they flow among all, because of some things wherein they differ: It
is even a Schism from mankind, a division from that, not to receive those
common Benefits of Reason from any that have had them, and been willing to
Communicate them; the Scripture it self Communicates with the Reason of
Philosophers, and wiser Poets, in what they said well and wisely, as that we
are Gods offspring. Acts 17. 28.


A wise Christian does not deprive himself in his private Freedoms of true
Reason, or Christian sense, though he culls it out of much dross; nor of the
benefits of Christian worship, where he may find Good, if the worship be not so
corrupted, that one cannot be separate from the other. There Is a general
Charity and Tolleration must be of humane infirmity in the best administration
of it by men, for there is a charge of our Folly upon all our appearances
before God, visible not only to God, who charges his Angels with it, but to our
selves; so that if Angels hide their faces, much more those whose houses are of
clay, and their foundation in the dust. Yet there are advantages of Edification
that are indeed to be had, for which we are accountable to God, and so our
withdrawing our selves, (without just Cause) and the degrees of our withdrawing
shall be accounted Schism. But of this, and what may be objected in these
cases, more may be spoken under the next Head.

If any man indeed from want of Love, and with a design to divide, scatters,
and sows Opinions, or causes Divisions, is an Enginere of Division: Such a man
has the true Spirit of Schism, and is to be marked and avoided, Romans 16. 17.

But there may be dissents, there may be dislikes in many cases, and yet no
Schism, no cutting off, no more than of a Member in the Body that is weak, or
deformed, or wounded, or it may be none of these, but for ease, or convenience
would posture it self somewhat differently from the rest. But still in all
cases there must be a care for the body, and he that withdraws is in danger,
and that for the withdrawing, not for the different apprehensions.

Men may withdraw in some points of outward Communion, we see they may locally
separate on occasion; they may deny to conform to what they think amiss, as one
Member is not bound to deform or wound it self, that it may be Uniform with
another, that is so wounded, or deformed.

There may be very different Motions, and ordering the several Members on
sundry accounts, yet no Schism.

No man can say then, I will not be of such a Body of Christians, for such an
Opinion, for such a form of worship, or because they will not so conform, when
All are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular.

It may be said, Are these not of the Body therefore? or those not of the Body
therefore, because in some thing they differ, when both parts hold the Head,
and are Members according to the Laws of the Head?

What can be said against it? but that the Laws of men interposing, or the Laws
of particular Churches interceeding, make a difference betwixt the case of
Christians now, and in the times in which the Apostles writ: and that now such
variations from the Obedience and Conformity required by those Laws, become
Schismatical, merely for the Disobedience sake, which shall be presumed proof
sufficient of the want of love and care for the Body, and not the want of Love
constitute the Schism; so that wherever the disagreement in Judgment is, there
shall be the Schism sure enough; whatever the Love, and the Indications of it
are in all other signs, tokens, and effects of it.

But if there be the desired Conformity, all the Hatred, Emulation, Strife, and
Envy against the contrary side, shall be canonized, and not reputed Schism; and
the senslesness, or even disaffection to the general Interests of Christianity
shall never be considered.

But shall the Laws of men thus make obsolete the Laws of Christ?

It is not any Law, nor an Offense against any Law, but the Law of Christ, nor
against every Law of Christ, but the Laws concerning the Unity of his Body,
that can make a Schism; nor does a Congregation, or a Multitude determine where
the Schism lies, when there is a difference, or a Division among Christians.

For as one man holding the substantials of Christianity, is more a Church than
a Community, erring in those Fundamentals; so is one Christian full of the Love
of the Body of Christ, most willing to do, and receive good, more truly of the
Body, than Associations filled with Anger, Wrath, Clamor, and the Spirit of
Indignation, without Mercy, without Compassion, who are indeed in their Union
more Schismatical than the humble solitary Christian that cannot run with this
stream.

For these things are not carried, nor determined by number, but by true weight
and worth; as one wise man is more a Senate than a Convention of foolish, and
unknowing men.

By all this that has been spoken, it may be determined, what Answer is to be
given to that Question, whether the Church of Rome (as it is called) be a true
Church: to which the Answer I should give, would be plainly this.

It is no otherwise so, than a married woman that is an Adulteress, is a true
Wife.

I say, not a true Woman; for the importance of Woman is more Physical, and so
in this case more ambiguous; the sense of wife, more befitting the moral and
mystical sense of Church; and the one not made use of by the Scripture in these
cases, the other constantly called for to represent the true or false Church.

But to keep more close to what we have been upon, let me put the question
thus: Whether the Church of Rome be a part of this one Body of Christ?

And it is most evident, if we look upon it as such an Incorporation, such a
Body as it is in, and by it self, it is not, it cannot be other than a
Synagogue of Satan.

For so it is a Body consolidated upon other points of Union, than the Body of
Christ is; for though it takes in them, yet it adds foreign, and aliene of its
own, and those very many, and such as destroy, if not all, yet some of the
principal, by such a deep corruption of them changes them so, that they cannot
be known to be the true ones, or alike precious Fundamentals laid by Christ
Jesus and his Apostles.

It is a Body animated with another spirit, the very spirit of Antichrist; a
spirit of blood and cruelty, against all that keep to the true measures of the
Temple and Altar of Revel. 11. 1.
God, and his true worship therein.

The Body of that false Church has its fabric put together and united, not by
that faith at once, and once for all, given to the Saints, but by successive,
and growing Tradidition. Jud. 3.


And then the spirit of it persecutes out of all the common privileges of
Humanity, so far as it can, not to buy nor Rev. 13. 17, 18.
sell; those that will not receive that mark of it self, its name, and the
number of it, viz. that false Christianity, that forsaking the stable
apiece of the true body of Christ, the Revel. 21. 14, 16, 17.
square-roots of Truth, out of which Christianity rises; the Twelve Apostolic
Foundations upon which the Church of Christ ascends, sets up its Odd, uneven,
unequal Antichristianism, part Christian, part Pagan, part true, part false.
And this is all the care we need take for the Body of the Roman Church, it is
not the Body of Christ, it is not of the Heb. 12. 23.
general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn written in Heaven. It deserves
not that love and care due to ^he Body. As it is so incorporated, it is irreco
cilable with the Body of Christ, and ought to be so declared.

But there may lie hid numbers among them, who like the seven thousand in the
Israelitish Baalism, who being ignorant of the depths of Satan in that false
Religion, to whom the Christianity that remains, though blended with that
corruption, separates it self, and as oil rises uppermost to them. To these we
may allow the charitable hopes of Salvation, not for their Popish tincture, but
for their Christianity. For all that is Popish is their danger, and their
extreme danger. It is the Christianity, pure separated Christianity, that is
their only hope, and it is only like the hope of an Antidote working in the
midst of a great deal of Poison. Or like true Principles of Natural Religion in
the midst of Paganism, the event of either of which operations must (as I have
said before) be left only to God.

In the mean time, their damning all to Hell for Heretics, that are not of
their Communion, is but one of the Blasphemies, of the Names of which they are
full, and makes no man among them the safer, but his case becomes the more
desperate, that Protestancy argued from the very charity, and compassion, of it
to be more infallibly the Religion of Christ, allows all the compassionate
hopes that can be to some who are in the midst of that contagion, and yet may
be preserved from the deadliness of it; but cruel Popery, as much as it is
able, prepares flames in this world, and that which is to come, for all that
have not the faith of removing mountains, not only of Improbability but even
Imp^ssibility, that their monstrous Principles have raised, and set in the way
of Christian Communion with them.

And thus I have settled the second Head of Discourse concerning the efficacy of
Christian Religion to peace; That Divine Balsom of love running throughout the
Body, and particularly to the agrieved parts, where there is an union upon the
Fundamental Unities of Christianity, and so certainly preserves, and secures
Peace.

I come now to the Third Head of Christian Peace.

3. The Rules Christianity gives the true Professors of it, for the imbodying
themselves one with another, will show how sincerely it designs peace.

For some may think if there be no obligation of mutual Conformity in
particular societies of Christians, how can there be any such Societies? if
there may be such Separations among Christians, as that there be not required a
concurrence in all points of Doctrine, Worship, and Practice, under peril of
the dreadful sin of Schism, Christianity will be like a general notion,
subsisting in no distinct particular bodies; or like an universe of Atoms
without any connection; and then how can they that have nothing to do one with
another, be at peace one with another. If there be no associations of
Christians, no Churches particularly united and constituted, there is no
opportunity to practice that peace and submission to order, which such
Societies oblige to, and which the Apostle rejoiced to behold in the Church of
the Colossians. If all the love and peace of Christians be only that which is
extended to the Universal Col. 2. 5.
Church, or to Christians occasionally in particular, every one having his own
private apprehensions to himself, then is there no room for this more distinct
exercise of Love and Peace.

I shall therefore now address my self to consider the Laws of Christianity,
for Christians so imbodying themselves, that they may display all the general
virtues of Christianity in their particular stations in the Churches of Christ;
and so I shall lay down these three Rules concerning this very weighty Point.

1. That the first Congregating of Christians is to Christ himself, as to the
Head, in whom the whole Body is principally united, and the Union with him is
the Measure, and true Law of their Union one with another, as the Apostle joins
their Order and Faith in Christ together: they give themselves, first to the
Lord, and then to one another: Col. 2. 5.
This was the Apostles method to preach, first Christ Jesus to be the Lord, and
themselves Servants for Christ's sake. All 2 Cor. 4. 5.
Christians are first Converted to the Faith of Christ, and so added to the
Church. Acts 2. 44, 47.


And this is most necessary to be considered, because if the first gathering of
Christians were to the Church, the Order and Peace of that Church would be the
Rule of all their after-Action, and Regulation of themselves, and they must
take every thing on trust from that; but if the first Point of Union be Christ,
and Faith in him, that shall overruled, wherein soever a Church may deviate
from the Laws of Christ,

2. From hence also it follows, that the Union of Christians is, first with the
(...), the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, whose Constitution
is fixed upon the Essential, unalterable, and ever the same Points of
Christianity; and the worship agreeable to them, and in which all true
Christians must concenter, that they may be the Body of Christ. This is that
Church against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail, it shall never dye,
it shall never fail, which yet we know may befall all particular Churches; they
have, and perpetually may fail, Mat. 16. 18.

Now thus far I have already shown, There is as firm a Foundation of Peace
laid, as the Understanding of man can conceive in this state of things here
below in a degenerate world of humane nature.

3. But besides this, there are particular Assemblies that are nearer to
Christians in particular, and to which they ought to Unite, as either having
received the Profession of Christianity by their Ministry, and so having been
to them one of those Pillars to which the Christian Doctrine being affixed, it
has offered it to all Comers, and to them in particular. Such Assemblies being
a rest, or repose ^. Tim 3. 15.
of Truth, the Communication of it has been made to all that have been near
it, and particularly to them whom we suppose ought to unite with them; or it is
the same thing, if their Parents incorporated in such Churches, and professing
Christianity in Communion with them, have directed their Education into the
acknowledgment of Christ, and the Profession of him, together with the
Christians of such or such a Congregation; or that they themselves having
considered the whole circumstances of their state in relation to Christianity,
have found it most to their advantage of Edification to unite with such a
Congregation of Christians. All these, or any of these, may create an
obligation to such conjunctions.

But because the hottest disputes in relation to Christian Practice, so as to
conserve Peace, and Order, have risen in this very juncture of particular
Societies of Christians: I will endeavor to settle upon an indisputable state
of things, and leave out what is more intricate, and controversal, that we may
see how far the Laws of Christ extend here to Love, and Peace, in these
following Assertions.

1. That Our Lord has given Rules for such Holy, Grave, and Honorable
Societies, under the name of Churches, as must needs invite all of the same
excellent Christian Temper, into their Communion, according to the
opportunities they have to join with them, their Doctrine, Worship, and
Practice, so Pure, and Heavenly, so evidently for the good of men's souls, so
composed to all true Decency, Prudence, and a Discipline so Humble, Natural,
Strict only to the truest benefit of those that are under it, that it cannot
look like a secular Dominion, but for the service of Faith, the help of Joy,
the safety of Souls, and their eternal Interest. This I am sure every one will
yield is the Frame and Constitution of a Christian Church, let it be found
wherever it can be found: Let every Church see to it self, whether it be so
Tempered and Constituted or not. How then does it seem possible, that when
there are such Societies, Christians should not fly to them, as the Doves to
the windows; seeing Christianity improves the sociableness of Humanity into the
truest publickness of Spirit, and desire to enjoy Good with more than in
solitude.

2. It is the express Command of Christ, and his design in all his
institutions, that there should be such Assemblies of his people, and servants,
for the Glory of his Father, for his own Glory, for the Salvation of his
People, for Divine worship, for the discharge of the several Duties of
Christians, for the Communications of their Gifts and Graces: so that the
forsaking of the Assemblies of our selves together, as Heb. 10. 25.
the manner of some was, is very little distant from Apostasy it self: How can
there then be but Churches, where there are Christians, seeing so much of the
concerns of Christianity lie therein? and who indeed possessed with those
concerns does not rejoice in them, and bless God for his unspeakable Gift, in
the Constitution of them?

3. Yet is there no Law of Christ, that main force should be used upon men, to
bring them into any Assembly of Christians at all, much less into one rather
than another, especially when the main Reasons or Motives of uniting with
Assemblies, according to the Laws of Christ, present themselves to men's
Apprehensions, and Consciences more in some, than others. Indeed men's
over-zealous Affectation of some, and unworthy neglect of others, as one for
Paul, another for Apollos, another for Cephas, another for 1 Cor. 1. 12.
Christ, as if these Ministers by whom they believed, were to set up for
themselves, as Heads of Christianinty, and to rival Christ himself, as if but
upon the same level with them, was very justly and severely chastised by the
Apostle; but a true value for all the Stewards of Divine Mysteries, and 1 Cor.
4. 1.
Churches; and a particular value for those Pastors and Congregations wherein
God has vouchsafed especial Blessings for men's Souls, or gives opportunity to
receive such, is very agreeable to the Gospel; as the Apostle, though he
refused undue measures of Honor, yet assumes that of being 1 Cor. 4. 15. 1
Cor. 9. 2.
a Father, as above thousands of Instructors: Christianity and the Ministry of
it, being so Holy, and Humble a state, that no one acting according to it,
either Arrogates, or Envies; so he that has much of the Honor of it, has
nothing over or above the measure of a Steward: and he that has least should
have nothing under that measure, if he be found Faithful: So the Congregations
have the equal Glory of being of the Body of Christ; and Churches to be little
Representations of, and imbodyed with his own Catholic Church, in the grand
Union of all Christians with the Head. Here then is the ground of Christian
Peace and Union in Churches.

4. It is a Principle in Nature, and much Confirmed and Exalted by
Christianity, that the Worship of God, and the Salvation of men's Souls, should
be made as Public and Universal as may be: Go Preach the Gospel to every
creature, and Baptize all Nations, was the very Commission Christ gave to his
Apostles, and first Ambassadors, and is continued to all his Ministers to the
end of the world; not of Mat. 26. 19.
the world of that Age only, but to that end of the world which is till his
second coming, until which he has promised his presence. The Great
Congregation is the most natural Receptacle of Divine Truth: the state of
Religion under the Gospel, is rarely spoken of, especially when declared Psalm,
100. 1. 117. 16. 1, etc.
in its Magnificence, with a less Public Character than All People, All
Nations, All Lands; the Round World in its whole Circle, from the rising of the
Sun, to the going down of the same, All the Earth. True Religion aspired to it,
even under the narrow Dispensation of the Law: and in this very sense, it is
most true, that the Apostle said in his time, The whole Creation groaneth, and
travelleth in pain until Romans 8. 19, etc.
now; and the earnest expectation of it waits for the Adoption, the
Manifestation of the Sons of God to be gathered together under the whole Heaven.

Nor will some of every Nation satisfy the full intention of this
Magnificence; but that Nations as Nations imbodyed, and Kingdoms as Kingdoms
shall become the Lords, and his Christ's, is the plenary sense of the Divine
Spirit, when even as of Israel, an indisputably National Church, God shall say
of Heathen Nations, as of Egypt and Assyria, known to Israel so well, and known
so well as Rankly Heathen, and therefore chosen as Representatives of the whole
Heathen world. Yet of these God shall say, Blessed be Egypt my people, and
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel Isa. 19. ult.
my inheritance; for in that day, Israel shall be but a third with Egypt and
Assyria, and there shall be a Highway through them All, and they shall serve
together; there shall be a free passage of Truth through All. A High way of the
Gospel throughout, and an Union of Worship.

So then, if we find so much for a National Religion in the Prophecies of the
times of the Gospel in the Old Testament, which grasp more than those passages
in the New Testament, which relate to the then matter of fact only; if our
Saviors Commission for making disciples, and preaching the Gospel, extend to
all Nations; if the Prophetic book of the New Testament, the Apocalypse,
foretell the kingdoms of the world in the very state of Kingdoms, becoming the
Lords and his Christ's; All these things argue a great encouragement of Nations
receiving and making a public profession of the Gospel, as Nations; even as
Families may and ought as Families. And though it be undoubtedly the great
Honor and Glory of Nations to come as near and as exact and close, as may be,
to the Laws and Order of Christ, in the Government, as in the Constitution of
their National Christianity; yet because there will, and generally falls out to
be a mixture of National Customs in such public Administrations, a Comprimise
of them to the Laws and Government of Nations, hence it also comes to pass,
there may be a dissatisfaction in many of the subjects of such Nations, to
comply with their National Constitutions of Religion; Hence there is apt to
arise Discomposure and Disquiet, if Princes or Powers exceed that exercise of
Power allotted to them by God (as we have before discoursed); and also by the
very essential constitution of Christianity; seeing Christ has made none Lords
of his peoples Faith or Divine Worship, and Princes are no more than
Nursing-fathers. The quiet therefore, and peace of Nations is most advanced by
setting up nothing in Christianity but what is absolutely necessary according
to the Laws of Christ, and yiedling the tenderest, and opening the most
bountiful hand to the professors and Ministers of essential Christianity,
Covering all the faulty divisions of Christians with their Royal and
compassionate PVRPLE. This is most Princely, Generous, and Great; this is most
exalting of Christianity it self.

But if this cannot be obtained, the next Best, and that which is indeed, as I
have already made out, but Just, is, That no native Rights and Liberties be
defaulked, nor punitive oppressions inflicted, but that the Honorary Rewards of
Nations and Princes be adjudged to men who are of the Public Sentiment in
their Administrations in Christian Religion. And this indeed cannot be excepted
to, it being the Right of National Powers to dispose of their own according to
their own Reason and Judgment.

Yet is there still an obligation upon Christian subjects, beyond these
Considerations to examine all things with the greatest prejudice for, and on
the side of the National sense, especially when they find the substantials of
Religion secure, and in safety; and besides their private adjustments of
Christian performances in particular Societies, according to the exacter Rules
of Christianity, as they are Judges for themselves, to encourage, also promote,
and as far as possibly they can, communicate with National Religion, putting
the fairest and kindest interpretation, and Hope upon all things, tolerating
all that can without disobedience to God be tolerated; observing Rites and
Customs of Nations, as far as they can with security, from vain worshipping of
God by the commandments of men, both because of the Honor Christianity gives
to Magistracy according to Natural sanctions; and also, and more especially
because of the esteem Christianity has of a Public and National Religion.

Let me then resume upon the whole matter; And it plainly appears,
Christianity, notwithstanding the Freedom it allows to every man's
conscientious sentiments, is no Enemy, but a Friend,

1. To Society. 2. To the Order and Peace that bind Society. Yea, and strictly
commands them, and has given positive Institutions for them.
1. For first, It unites all its true disciples in that common, ample,
universal center of Love, Peace, and Order, God and Christ, to whom the first
dedication of a Christian is made, and in whom it always rests.

2. It unites them with that most public, wise, rational, and most holy
Assembly under Heaven, the Catholic Church, even all that are that one Body,
acted by that one Spirit, united in one Hope, one Faith, one Baptism.

In all which, every Christian being one with the whole, desires and rejoices
in the increase of that one Body, the advancement of that one Faith,
communicates in the prayers and praises of that one Body, sorrows in its
Afflictions, ministers to its necessities; and if opportunity be offered,
communicates in Spiritual Gifts and Services, with any member of it, and values
not their particular Rites as any obstruction, while they agree in Essentials.
And indeed, every Christian should be suffered to drop that Mantle of
Ceremonies as he pleases, when he ascends in holy offerings of himself ^o God.

3. (...) to particular Societies or Churches of Christians, in whi^^ the
Essentials of Doctrine and Worship are preserved uncorrupted (and so they must
be, or else such Societies deserve not the name of Churches) and when they are
in such a neighborhood to the true Christian, that he may freely enjoy his
choice, he considers these two, both recommended by the Word of God.

1. Private, particular Congregations that cannot conform to public
settlement, such must needs be the first Churches, when Christianity had no
public allowance; such may be still.

2. The most public Settlement of Christian Religion; and wherein he may do
it, he uses both promiscuously; wherein he must divide, he considers upon the
Balance of his most humble and impartial judgment, which tends most to the
glory of God, to public edification, as well as his own, and so as not to do
evil that good may come.

If he chooses that which is more particular, as best according to his
Sentiment, he is yet careful to do all he does with the greatest vigor of
Charity, Inoffensiveness, and desire of promoting of that public worship, as
it contains the Essentials of Christianity.

If according to the sincere sense of his mind he prefer the public
Appointment either as public, and in that regard overweighing smaller doubts,
and so taking the best advantages afforded therein, as to all the Duties,
particular Congregations seem most adapted to; or that the whole composure of
the public is most agreeable to his Sentiment; he considers the more private,
as being of the same body, and cannot be severe to the Retirers thereto;
knowing, every man has the proper sense of his own mind, and what Essentials
Christianity consists in, and therefore would not forcibly hale any into the
public, but remonstrate to them, as he sees reason, with mild and Christian
arguments, the disadvantage of separating from it, beyond plain necessity.

4. In the differences of judgment of public Societies, and private, in
relation to one another, or the differences of private among themselves, the
true Christian still keeps himself upon that Love, Mercy, and Peace,
Christianity teaches him; and in the midst of those diversities, considers the
higher ties, worth, and value of those Unities, wherein they all meet.

5. If a Christian fall into such places where the Essentials are corrupted, he
esteems Religious solitude the best Communion; yet refuses not to improve any
thing of Truth he can extract from such Corruption; or if there be any parts of
public worship not so adulterated, but to admit a possible separation in the
exigence of present service to God, yea if it were but pure true natural
worship, he would not deny to join in it, when no better can be had, and
therein is ready to take any advantage to improve that little to such great
purposes, as St. Paul did the Altar to the unknown God at Athens.

Lastly, In every one of these Associations He considers some universal and
undeniable practices of all Christian Churches that are yet not pertaining to
the Essentials of Christian Worship in themselves, but either to natural Order
and Decency, or at least to the decency observed in such parts of the world
wherein Christians so meet, and most freely complies with them; some of which I
shall observe ordained as such by the Apostle, such as he ordained in all
Churches.

1. That of every man's walking as God has called him, in Circumcision, or
Uncircumcision, Bond or Free, and esteem neither state any prejudice upon his
Christianity, 1 Cor. 7. 17, 18.

2. That of women keeping silence in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 34.

3. That of Prophets speaking one by one, and not in Confusion, and a Medley of
voices: IN A KNOWN TONGVE, with Interpretation, v. 5. These pertain to natural
Decency and Order in all the Churches of the Saints, of which God is the
Author, and so are to be observed, 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40.

2. Decency proper to such Ages of the world, or to such Parts of the world: So
I esteem those Rules of the Apostle, concerning men and women Praying covered
or uncovered, wearing their Hair shorn or unshorn: And in such cases the Custom
of Churches determines them, or the Churches of God have no Custom to be
Contentious concerning them, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

Such Rules of uncontestable Order and Decency as these, a Christian Wise, and
Sober, always, and most ncessarily acknowledges; Ceremonials and Rituals beyond
these, he suffers to have no Ascendent over him, if for other Reasons he uses
them, as if he used them not.

Now such a person as this, (and such a one Christianity teaches every man to
be) I boldly affirm concerning him, he is a Christian, he is no Schismatic, he
is no Boute-Fen in society; nor is he, (as some may mistake him), any
Ambidexter in Religion, no more than the Apostle, who became to the Jews, to
them under the Law, to them without Law, to the weak, such as themselves, that
he might by all means save some. To allow no latitude in these things, that are
to vere to opportunity of doing good, is starchedness, and not constancy, even
in the judgment of a St. Austyn, who avowed the greatest Indifferency, and
freedom from Rites, having any power over him.

And so I have passed through the third Head concerning the Peace Christianity
designs, viz. Christians imbodying themselves into Societies.

I come now to a fourth Head, showing how Christianity has provided for Peace
and Quiet within its own Gates and Walls: And that is this,

4. The Ministerial Presidency our Savior has ordained in and for the conduct
of Christian Religion, is such as plainly demonstrates, he did not intend there
should be a striving, or a cry, or a clamorous lifting up the voice in the Mat.
12. 19, 20. These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 1.
streets for his Kingdom; that the bruised Reed should be broken, or the
smoking Flax quenched for his sake. For though this Ministry is frequently
styled a Being over Christians, a Rule over them, an Eldership, an Eminency;
and such like ways of speaking, as carry Superiority, and Submission;
Obedience, Honor, and High esteem are required of Christians as of an under
Degree to that higher Order in the Church: Yet the Designation of the whole
Office is wholly for the service of Christ and his Church, for the
Administration of the word of God, to watch for souls, that they may Heb. 13.
17.
give an account of them with Joy, for the good success of having guided them
to Salvation: the Honor and Esteem is for their works sake: it is a labor in
the Word and Doctrine, it is no Dominion or Lordship over men's Persons or 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Estates, nor over their Faith or Consciences; but as they offer Divine
Commands, all their Superiority is in the Lord.

It is not Grandeur, or Imperiousness, but Use, Service, Ministry, and Work,
that expresses this Precedence: not as having Dominion over your Faith, but
helpers of your Joy, says the Apostle Paul: Not as Lords over Gods Heritage,
but as ensamples of the Flock, says the Apostle Peter. But above all, ought
that of our Lord and Master, the chief Shepherd, and Bishop to be remarked to
this purpose. Mat. 20. 25. etc. Mark 10. 42, etc. Luke 22, 25.


Having described the great Assumptions of the Princes and Chiefs of this
world, he expressly warns, and declares to his Disciples, it is not in the
nature of Christian Greatness so to assume: But if any one would be accounted
Great or Chief among the Dis^iples of Christianity, it must be his Service, his
pl^in Service, his Ministry, that must (...)
so advance him.

Indeed it were enough to the purpose, if our Savior intended no more than
this; Let such a man that loves Preeminency under the Profession of
Christianity, let him be turned down into the lowest Class, among the
Disciples of lowest and meanest Account, as a just Recompense of his Ambition.

But it is altogether most probable, our Savior intends a more kind sense, to
represent the great serviceableness of all those of more Eminent Character in
his Kingdom; it is their public Use that recommends them to Grandieur in it.
For this he exemplifies in himself, The Son of man came not to be minisired to,
to be attended upon, and served in state, but to minister, to give his life a
Ransom for many.

They who witness a good Confession, who can be instant in season, out of
season, who can instruct publicly, and Act. 20. 19, 31.
from house to house, who are apt to teach, who can serve the Lord in the
salvation of Souls, with many Tears and Prayers, Day and Night, and seal their
Ministry with their blood, They are the Great ones in the Account of
Christianity.

I speak not this to detract any thing from the Figure, Bishops, or any in
Ecclesiastical Dignities, make by the Fav^ur of Princes, who (as I have often
said) may dispose what is their own; as they measure themselves from the
Donation of m^n, to their Superiority over men, from the favor of Princes and
Laws, to the Government they place them in over others of their Subjects, so
they are Great and Honorable, and may exercise Authority, (secular Authority,
standing indeed upon that Foot, though called Spiritual) and very reasonably
and justly, so far as I know. But this is not the Greatness proper to Christ's
Kingdom, that lies wholly in service, in condescension, in application to men's
Souls. As they measure from Christ to Christians, this is the true Account of
Christian Greatness: And I am sure this in all Justice, Humanity and Reason,
tends to Peace: for what can move to it more than a sole design of doing Good
in them that are at the top, and an evident Assurance to them that are below,
that, that Good is offered to them, and continually ^laborated for them? what
can more quiet and addulce men's Spirits, than to see an in^ire Contrivance and
Composure of all things to their Eter^^l Salvation; as the Apostle did all for
the Elects sake, that they might be saved? 2 Timothy 2. 10.

Such Ministerial Rulers are therefore the peculiar gift of Ephesians. 4. 11.
Christ, and speak the Magnificence of his Ascension. They are given for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the
body of Christ; all great ends in a Christian computation; and as there were
then extraordinary qualifications immediately given by Christ, so now there
ought to be such in the ordinary methods of Divine blessing upon Reading,
Study, Meditation; to which they that desire to serve Christ in the Ministry,
are wholly to give themselves, that their profiting may appear to all.

Church-preferments, as we call them, and Ecclesiastic Dignities, are often
otherwise bestowed, and serve other ends; and yet too, very often the Donors
design these excellent ends; and when they are otherwise intended, yet are in
many instances overruled by God into great subserviency to these ends, by the
excellent Abilities and Labors of Holy and Learned Ministers of Christianity.

But be those things (as they are under human Dispose,) as they fall out, the
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his
Great ones, even his true Ministers. And let him that calls himself by great
names in Christ's Kingdom, see that he make them good by his Service and
Ministry; Not by serving tables, (I understand) any meaner service than feeding
the sheep of Christ. A prudent Governor for Church-Orders, Rites and
Ceremonies, a great Improver of Church-Revenues, however good they may be in
their kind, will not rise high enough, nor answer the account. Not a cunning
Disputer, a witty Haranguer, but a Workman that need not be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of Truth, is Christ's Minister.

5. In appendage to this Head, follows the Fifth account of the Peaceable
Intendment of Christianity to the world; and that is, The Method of Chastising,
Correcting, and Reforming the known transgressions against the Laws of Christ;
and they so far (as they are stated to the use of after-ages) are according to
the nature of the offense, Admonitions, Warnings, Reproofs, Rebukes, Avoiding,
Rejecting from Communion, esteeming as Heathens and Publicans, casting out of
the Church, consignation over to Divine Judgment: All these of a spiritual
nature, fitted to edification, and not to destruction; 2 Cor. 13. 10.
to touch the Conscience, to affect the Mind, to work self*reflection, shame,
self-condemnation, repentance, and amendment, or else Divine Judgment must be
awaited. It is the Rational as well as Christian Expedient, of purging a
Society from the scandal of offenders, from Infection and Contagion, of keeping
it pure and honorable, viz. to disavow them when gentler means are
ineffectual. It is a most natural Instrument for Reformation and Amendment; and
if it do not work so, when upon just causes, and by an unerring key, is not
only an appeal to Divine Judgment, but a Predamnation.

I know it is debated by Learned men, Whether the Apostolic 1 Cor. 4. 2, 1.
Rod, and delivery to Satan, did not operate by corporeal infliction, as in
Ananias and Sapphira, and possibly in the Incestuous person in a lower degree.
I will however allow, It did or might; yet since it was extraordinary, it was
immediately from heaven, much more convictive of conscience than human
processes, wherein are often found much of mistake and injustice: It was
without noise or violence, nor did it allow recrimination and complaint; and
therefore much more fit to go along with so spiritual Doctrine, than Worldly
Judicature, and possibly necessary for primitive times, to give authority to
the Doctrine of Christ newly set out in the world: So that still here is none of
that barbarous hurting or destroying in all Gods Holy Mountain; and most
probably the infliction fell upon those that were guilty of great offenses
against Natural Religion, Acts 5. 1. Acts 13. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 21.
Chap. 13. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 20.
as Ananias's falsehood of the deepest dye, Elymas his Sorcery, the Incestuous
Corinthian, those that had not repented of their Fornication, Lasciviousness,
and Uncleanness; Hymeneus and Alexander, who had put away a good conscience,
and then broke out into Blasphemy.

6. The peacefulness of Christianity is most evidently seen in its deportment
of it self toward Magistracy, of which having spoken much in that which
concerned Natural Religion, taken into union with Christian, I shall only
present these following short mentions of particulars, wherein Christianity
manifestly designs Universal Peace under this Head.

1. It every where confirms and assures the Divine ordination of it.

2. It states its Power in enforcing all Natural Religion, and Goodness: In
restraining all that is impious and evil.

3. It craves nothing of it, but to have Justice done it according to those
sanctions; nor prophecies any thing in the greatest outward happiness of
Christianity, but that Princes and Nations shall be sprinkled by it, and
Supreme Princes Isa. 52. 15.
become its Nursing-fathers.

4. It enjoins upon all its servants and professors upon unjust sufferings to
return nothing of violence, but blessings and prayers for injuries, and with
patience to resign life it self.

5. It interposes not in deciding the bounds between Princes and people; but
leaves that to Laws of Nature, and particular Laws of Nations, Compacts between
one and the other; neither straitning nor enlarging Prerogative; neither
swelling nor abating Power; nor on the peoples side curtailing or stretching
Liberty. It leaves these things to be disputed in their own Forum, to be
debated in their own proper Senate. For its own sake, it moves no Landmarks
either way. It tears up no senses. As it therefore is horrible injury to
Christianity to proclaim (as some speak) King Jesus to the disturbing Earthly
Kingdoms, when his Kingdom is not of this world. So is it a huge (...), a grand
extreme on the other side, and inconsequence, to argue from the Commands of
Christians sufferings, when Human Laws, and Regular State-Constitutions
adjudged them to such, how unjustly soever; then indeed no resistance is to be
made for the sake of Christian Religion: But it is vastly inconsequent to infer
hence, any man is bound by the Law of Christianity tamely to resign those
Rights, even those Religious Rights that are established to him by the
Fundamental Laws and Statutes of a Nation, wherein the whole Power of Kingdoms
and States, Princes and People have concurred. For Christian Religion as
Christian Religion, undermines no Laws, whether for Princes prerogative, or
peoples Liberties; but leaves every thing as it finds them, to their own just
rights according to Law; and if it self come to be one of those Rights, It does
not repeal from any the Legal Right of it self, which is the greatest and
surest Rule that a Religion can guide it self by, not to disturb, but to extend
peace to the world: The Prince, the People (being for it, or any thing it
teaches or does) most secure of their own interest, though it fall out
oftentimes to the greatest sufferings of its servants in all worldly Interest,
even loss of life it self, and that with all circumstances of painful dying,
which yet it is able to r^^^mpence in the resurrection of the just, that better
resurrection.

There remains nothing to complete this whole Discourse of the excellency of
Christian Religion, in the Foundatio^^ of Peace it lays, but the Universal
Goodness, Holiness, ^urity, Mercy, and all the most generous fruits of th^se,
it is so concerned in, and enjoins with so much absoluteness; the heavenly and
eternal glory it directs the earnestness, zeal, and highest ardor of all
Christians upon; so that while they are in the way of well-doing, seeking
honor, glory, and immortality, they have all the arguments of love and peace
working within them, and governing all their outward Actions. But I have so
every way prevented my self in this part, that I shall not at all further
pursue it, but recollect this whole Discourst into the Conclusion of it.

And in the first place, it carries upon this very sad and melancholy
Contemplation, The so great and nice preparation of Natural Religion, of
Christian Religion, for the peace and quietness of the world, How monstrously
unsuccesful has it been among men!

What great Heats and Disquiets have Differences in Religion been still both
the true and unpretended Occasions, and the pretended only, and counterfeit
Causes of in the world?

What Blood and Cruelty, what Slaughters and Massacres, what Exquisite
Torments, and Artifices of Barbarity have been called for, Contrived and
Executed in this Q^arrel?

On one side men have made Religion a cover and shelter for Sedition,
Rebellion, Commotion and Change of Government, perfectly against the whole
design of it.

On the other side, Wordly Powers have charged all offers of a Religion never
so true, never so peaceable, as if it was bringing out the Engines of
Destruction, for the blowing up States, and therefore judged most reasonable,
the Authors and Proselytes of it should be pursued with severest punishments.

And without any Relation to these Concernments, the very different
apprehensions in Religion have been thought worthy of the extremest Hate, and
most barbarous Persecutions, of Racks, Wheels, and Tortures, as if men having
destined one another to Hell in another world on these accounts, thought it but
fit the Hell should be begun here; or else (which has been sometimes a
pretense for this savage method,) they would pull them with violence (indeed)
out of that fire, or save them from those flames, yet so as by fire; cruelly
forcing them thereby into the Religion of their Judges.

Now how contrary this is to the nature of True, Rational or Christian
Religion, I have all along shown.

But however multitudes of the Votaries of Religion, whether true or false,
have with incredible patience, and oftentimes with joy and triumph embraced
their sufferings, and gloried in their death and torments; esteeming their
pains, Martyrdom, a name of honor in this world, and of great expectations in
the world future.

So that a very considerable part of Story is filled up with great undertakings
upon account of Religion, with the severity of Laws against any thing strange,
or innovated in the profession of Nations, and the Martyrologies of those that
have suffered for being otherwise persuaded.

Now if a man values and estimates things by this worlds peace, happiness, and
quiet, he would be ready to praise and applaud Atheism and Irreligion, and wish
there never had been the name or notion of any other in the world, to give
origin to so much mischief and injumanity.

Especially considering the Christian Religion, the most excellent tender
Religion, most compassionate of Humane Nature; most Clear, Intelligible,
Rational, Virtuous, freest from Ceremony, most aliene from Superstition, most
modest and humble, most submissive to Government, at its first entrances into
the world endured the whole weight and body of malice and cruelty against it;
was sown in the Blood, and grew up as from the Graves of the Confessors and
Martyrs of it, being first founded in the death of the Author, though he indeed
gave proof of the Truth and last issue of it in a Glorious Resurrection.

And since it has possessed it self of the acknowledgment and Authority of
Thrones, Princes, Laws and Governments, Baptized whole Nations into its
profession, it has been most strangely perverted from its whole design and
intention, into the same instrument of Ambition and Cruelty upon the various
accounts and occasions, that Church History and other Chronologies swell, and
labor in the Relation of.

Yea, even small and valueless things, if weighed upon its own just Balance,
have yet given fury to the greatest Animosities, and Dissentions, which have
not been washed off, but in an Ocean of Blood.

In sum, this of all Religions has been first most persecuted, hated, and
opposed by Grandees and Chiefs of the world in its first approaches to the
world, and since by the several Dissentions within it self, been the Field of
Blood, made use of sometimes by design, sometimes by angry power; but so, as
that the purest and most sincere Professors have been mostly dyed in their own
gore; so that by the same standard of worldly interest, next to Atheism and
Irreligion, Antichristianism, or denial of Christian Religion would seem next
to be chosen.

But when we more wisely and justly apprize the mighty and unconquerable
Reasons for Religion in general, and the particular, vast, and momentous
Arguments for the reception of True Christian Religion; it must needs lead us
to other much more serious and reconciling Considerations.

And who that is a Grave Thinker, having been first put into an amaze, then
into the most melting and relenting Commiserations, that the world should be so
unhappy in that wherein its greatest happiness consists, that there should be
such deplorable instances of rage, and even Hellish cruelty that cannot be
drawn out, or expressed in any suitable and condecent language, upon the account
of that Religion, that professes every where of it self, it came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them; even then when the mistaken Zealots of it would
have had Fire from Heaven, in a present revenge upon those that would not
receive the most compassionate founder of it, the greatest lover of Humane
Nature that ever was in the world.

Who, I say, that ponders these things would not set himself to find out the
causes of these evils, and sadly bethink himself how they should so generally
fall out among Christians themselves.

And indeed he that does but a little consider, will find first, It is a very
good answer to endless cavil, and querulousness against the best of things,
that can be obtained here, that every thing in this world is injured,
disordered, and defiled by the pravity of Humane Nature, there being nothing in
the whole Universe of Good and Excellent, that is not debaucht by the lusts of
men; or where shall he fix himself, that would upon earth remove himself from
all things that have been by sin (if but possible to be) depraved by ill use to
ill ends?

But yet this is not answer enough for the defiling the very light, and the
Sun; even Religion it self; and that in so great degrees, and to so heinously
contrary ends; for whereas the very height and transcendency of Divine Things
might in all reason plead an exemption from such debasements, yet coming so
near to our corrupted Atmosphaere, it is even as the very light, though in it
self remaining always pure and clear as it self, notwithstanding prostituted by
men to their own abominable impieties.

This then alone answers so great a Doubt, That God is exceedingly offended and
displeased with Humane Nature, that so excellent an instrument of the Divine
Glory, the Happiness of the world in present, and the eternal life and
happiness of it hereafter, should be depraved into an instrument of greatest
unhappiness and mischief to mankind, both in this world, and that which is to
come.

For so far as we can see, much of that Blood and Devastation, Tumult and
Convulsion, much of the Cruelty and Inhumanity that has fallen out, had been
saved and prevented, had it not been that Religion had a place in the world.

Much of that deep and almost inexpiable guilt that has been contracted
through the persecution of the True Religion, and opposition to it from the
false, had never come into account now, or at the day of Judgment.

It is therefore evident upon the whole state of Humane Nature, that though
there is a main difference in regard of the goodness of God in the Mediator,
between it and the Angelick Nature fallen, that one is universally in chains of
darkness to the Judgment of the great Day; and without hopes of remedy; the
other not universally, nor without hope: Yet those chains are due to the one,
even as to the other, and in what degrees to the Divine Justice in its wisdom
it seems meet, it casts men into them; even as it distributes as it pleases,
measures of the punishment of sin, in taking the forfeitures of the Blessings
of Earth of some, and not of others, when it was given to the children of men
alike as to their substantial enjoyment, however one might have differed from
another in glory; and laying great calamities upon some, and not on others, as
greatly deserving of them; and that in this time of general patience. If it
were not thus, no reason could be given why so great Tracts of Humane Nature
lie in the valley of the shadow of death, having no light of the True Religion
to shine upon them; And why without the great discomposure and disturbance of
the world, and without the ruin and destruction of those that make the offers,
there can be no offers of better made to them.

If it were not thus, no reason could be given why there is so great a
corruption, even of Christianity it self, where it is generally professed; and
the attempts of Reformation in Christianity, are every whit as dangerous, or
more than the persuasions to it addressed to Turks or Pagans; the lingering Acts
of Cruelty in the Inquisition and horrible bloodiness of Massacres, exceeding
any thing of any other kind.

Lastly, If it were not thus, those smaller Differences among Protestants
themselves, who have had opportunity to look over the unreasonableness and
prodigious Inhumanities of Pagans, Turks, Jews, and Papists, in their
persecutions, could never have brought forth so much of spleen, hate, and
sufficient proportions of the same cruelty among themselves, when they have had
before their eyes, not only those pregnant motives to detestation of such
Barbarity, in those forenamed examples, but that mirror of patience, meekness,
forbearance, The Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Nor is it unworthy of good observation to this purpose, that the proceedings
against offenders in the Laws of Natural Religion, or Morality, are generally
with leisure, moderation, proportion between the offense and the punishment, a
compassion of Humane Nature, even where severity is of greatest necessity.

But in what men levy against different Religions, all is carried in storms and
whirlwind, in fury and rage, in blood, smoke and fire; arguing to us, That the
Cause not fairly lying before Humane Justice, there being an error in the very
foundation of the procedure, the evil increases, and grows upon men's hands,
till it becomes too mighty for any Government, and so carries all before it
into prodigious violence of Ferity and salvageness. And also, that Divine
Justice therein showing to man his great degeneracy, and liableness to Divine
severity, as God himself pleases, suffers the power of that Degraded Spirit,
the God of this World, to triumph in nothing more than the abusing Religion,
and especially Christian Religion, that great Contrivance of Heaven, for man's
recovery out of the state of Devils; and to make it like an Engine of
destruction to recoil upon man himself, and fly every way with terrible death
and ruin, as if Hell rather than Heaven came along with it.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it is most certain this whole misery is
conceived and brought forth by the sin and unworthiness of man to himself, by
his own stupidity and folly, or by his wisdom, that is worse than folly,
earthly, sensual, and Devilish; for the interposal of the Mediator runs so
through the whole state of Humane Nature, that there are sure ground-works laid
how men might in every case recover happiness, even out of misery and
degeneracy; and principally in this very Cardinal Point of that Happiness, True
Religion, and the Peace and Mercy of it, care is taken how the World might be
secured if it would, both from the Ambitious and unquiet man in his designs;
how Government, Anthority, Sovereignty, might be kept safe; and yet unbesmear'd
too with Martyrs Blood; yea, even the blood of those, who, though they are
mistaken, yet are willing to profuse it for their Religion: For whom it should
move pity, the nearness of their case to the Honor and Honesty of dying for
True Religion. I mean when plain Foundations of Natural Religion are not
destroyed, for that case deserves no more mercy than poisoning Fountains, or
setting on fire, if men could, the whole course of Nature.

Now to discover this path or way to universal peace in Religion, (which is
like Wisdoms), The Vulturs eye has not Job 28. 7.
seen it, nor the Lions whelp trod it; Death and destruction say, It is not
with them; and well they may, For it is the way of peace, which they have not
known, though they may have heard the fame of it with their ears. It is the way
found out and declared by him that made weights for the winds, and balance for
the clouds. It is the way of the fear of the Lord, the beginning of Wisdom, and
departing from evil, the true understanding: There lies the peace of Natural
Religion.

It is the way of Christianity, seen and published by Christ Jesus, the Way, the
Truth, and the Life: That Is the peace of Christian Religion.

And it is certainly the proper excellency of Christian Religion, and its very
intention to bring this way both as Natural and Christian, to light; to lay the
grounds of it, to give the Rules and Measures of it, to sweeten men's tempers to
the good nature of it. That every one in a clear and still air, not darkened
with Clouds full of Thunder, and terrible with the Lightning of dreadful Laws,
and Bloody Executions, may see, may be wary in the choice of his conduct of
himself, to his unchangeable state; and may therefore have light, have room,
have still and silence, in which he may weigh every thing, prove every thing.

Now that which I have now declared, is a way most agreeable to the Word of
God, and that Reason which respects either all mankind, or all Christians. This
is the Contrivance of Christianity's providing, That the Wolf and the Lamb may
dwell together, that the Lion may lie down with the Kid, that the child may
play on the hole of the Asp; that there may be no hurting, or destroying in all
Gods Holy Mountain. That Knowledge of God and True Religion may have the same
scope and freedom that the waves have in the Sea. Christianity has always the
Grounds ready by it, and with it.

And to present them in their Rational Possibility is a Vindication of Divine
Justice, Righteousness, and Goodness, an Offerture to man to be happy: Nor will
the Platform be always Vtopian, the days will come when it shall pass into
life, power, and effect.

Now whenever this shall be in its Glory, that Degeneracy of mankind, that
curse that lies upon the earth, that vail of the covering spread upon the face
of all Nations, that severe indignation of God against Humane Nature shall be
removed.

The Spirit shall be poured out upon all flesh, the light of one day shall be
as the light of seven. All flesh shall see the Glory of the Lord together. So
come, come thus Lord Jesus: Even so, Amen.

I have thus far made a Lamentation upon the General State of the World, in
relation to Religion; which till some such mighty Influence come down from
Heaven (as I have intimated) upon it, is like to be for a Lamentation: For the
dark places of the Earth will be full of the Habitations of Cruelty; and it is
certain, the Habitations of Cruelty will be furnished with the Instruments of
Cruelty. And therefore, Oh my Soul, come not into their secret, unto their
Assembly my Honor be not thou united; for in their anger they slay and
destroy; and in their self-will they dig down walls. Cursed be their anger, for
it is fierce, and their wrath, for it is cruel. Their drink offerings of Blood
will I not offer, nor take their name of Religion into my mouth. I shall
therefore leave them, and address the close of this Discourse to the Saints
that are in the earth, and to the Excellent in whom is all my Delight.

And in the first place, it calls us to the Review of the Excellent Christian
Religion; even as Natural Religion, all essence, all substance, trace it
throughout all its Doctrine, Worship, Rules of Life, they are all by their very
Goodness, plain to him that understands, and right to them that find
knowledge; there is nothing froward nor perverse in them; its bands of peace are
not politic, or worldly Intrigues; no Ceremonial Symbolism, or Ritual
Shibboleth, but ponderous Verities, and Divine Love.

All the show or appearance any Religion can make, is but a ray borrowed from
its Divine perfection; a derivation from its light, or from Natural Religion
which is it self; for pure Natural Religion is Christian Religion; if you
suppose a soul without sin mounting from its Creature-proba^ionership to its
highest perfection as Adam, if not having (...) from Paradise to Heaven. And
Christian Religion is Natural Religion, suppose the soul fallen, and rising
back from its Apostasy to that perfection by the Redeemer.

2. Let me apply this Discourse to the Comprimise of all Differences betwixt
Protestants, and particularly in our English Christian Nation; not defining any
Controversal Point, but urging to that end such undoubted Principles, as I have
insisted upon in this Discourse.

1. That supposing a National Church cannot be made out to satisfaction, yet
Christian Kingdoms are so considerable a point of Scripture-Prophecy, that it
cannot be denied. So far therefore as National Worship can be agreeable to a
man's Conscience, making inquiry and most curious search into the Word of God,
both as to his Duty, and to his Liberty also, and possible Freedom from
Scruple; every Christian is obliged to Glorify God in the public services of
him, and Confession of the Faith of Jesus Christ with his native Country.
Suppose a man should retire to particular private Congregations, to supply what
he may find wanting in the National Constitution, to complete all the Duties of
Christian Communion, and the advantages of it; yet still he is bound to promote
and encourage National Religion, so far as it extends, to avoid as much as is
possible, all Divisions, and professed separation from it, by putting the fairest
Construction, and the kindest hopes upon those things that seem doubtful; and
as little infringing the Authority of Laws, as may be consistent with
sentiments of Conscience, and a due enjoyment of that liberty God has given
men of judging for their own souls, as in his sight; viz. in those things that
are not Laws of Natural Religion, and so indisputable; or those Grand Points of
Christianity, in which a Christian can have no allowance: in all things else a
Christian has a liberty, but so, that he must not use that his liberty as a
cloak of maliciousness, but as the Servant of God, give due Honor to 1 Pet.
2. 16.
all.

I would therefore propose these three Considerations, to draw men to the
greatest Conjunction with National Religian, that can by any means be
reconciled with good Conscience toward God.

Considerat. 1. That if we examine things by Scripture, there are many
abatements from the supposeable evil of external Observances, of which we may
lawfully make our utmost Advantages to so great a Good, as our Professed
Conjunction with National Religion, while substantially good, though the High
Places, I 1 Kings 15. 14.
mean things equivalent in our opinion be not taken away, as in the times of
the Excellent Kings of Judah.

First then, as fundamental to this case, I suppose these two things
Equiponderating one another.

1. The high Character of National, Christian Religion in the Word of God, as I
have proved.

2. The Errors supposed in such a National Constitution. Now Reformation of
National Constitutions in Religion, are uncontestably in the Supreme Power of a
Nation: what then shall we do till these supposed Errors of such an account as
the High Places, are removed? we must either not worship in consent with our
Nation, which seems as natural as with our Families, and much countenanced by
the Scripture; or we must wait the seasons of public Reformation; in the mean
time attending public Worship, and avoiding with all the Wisdom and Prudence
we can, the Dint of Errors in such a Constitution, as we suppose.

The seven thousand in Israel did not in far greater Corruptions omit certainly
all sorts of public Worship (besides the Temple-Worship at Jerusalem) and yet
bowed not their knee to Baal, nor kissed him.

Gross Corruptions are indeed positively to be refused and abhorred, such as
those of that time, such as those of Popery, such as are (all, though not
complete Popery) yet too near it; lesser Dissatisfactions may be waryly
avoided, and yet National Religion, as far owned as we can without sharing even
in those smaller Errors.

And it is some relief to us herein, that allthough it is evident National Laws
cannot bind any man's Conscience in Religion, any further than they agree in the
sense of that man's Conscience with the Word of God; for they cannot save him
harmless at the last Tribunal, and therefore in no Reason can bind him; yet I
say it is a relief in that Obedience a sober Christian desires to pay to Humane
Laws, (so far as agrees with Scripture) and the regards he would yield to
National Religion, that he may well take the Benefit of any Connivence or
Relaxation of Humane Laws, in their prosecution; as all men how Conscientious
soever concerning Humane Laws, do (we see every day) where the Law is not
pressing, nor the injury any, although it be no other but ordinary common
liberty that is restrained; for if Authority be not despised, if public Good
be not incommoded, Humane Laws do not bind the Conscience as Divine Laws do,
and therefore much less in Religion, wherein (except Natural) their Power has
not a further obligation, than as the Conscience is sensible of Divine
Authority concurring: Thus then a man may without offense withdraw himself from
such observances, and yet join in public Worship.

2. There are the Customs and Vsages of a Nation entering into their public
Administrations of Religion, as into other National Solemnities; there are
their Laws and Appointments of what they think Grave, Decent, Orderly,
Rationally promoting the Knowledge of Christian Religion, with Condescension to
the meanest Understandings of their people, and security for some parts of
Divine Worship, to be certainly performed with that Advantage, as Liturgies and
reading Scripture; and it may be added, these things may be intended as
Cementations of men in civil Government, which is a lawful End, if it be a
Subordinate End, and regulated by the Highest. Now though there should be a
mistake in all this, yet upon the account of National Conjunction in Divine
Worship, we should Tol^rate them to the utmost we can, or they may be
interpreted into the nature of civil Appointments, civil Order and Decency or
National Custom.

For if nothing may be Tolerated, if nothing may be favorably Interpreted,
there is no use of Charity 1 Cor. 13. 7.
in those Excellent Acts of it the Apostle Records, viz. Charity believes and
hops all things, that can with any Symmetry to Truth and Discretion be hoped
or believed: It bears all things, it endures all things that can be endured,
without our own sin, though sinful in others, as commanding with Rigor, or
over-esteeming things not necessary.

3. It seems by our Saviors Command to his Disciples, to observe the Pharisees
Precepts, speaking out of Moses his chair; and yet at other times to beware of
the leaven of Pharisees, which is expressly expounded Mat 23. 1. Mat. 16, 12.
of the leaven of Doctrine, that a man may join in public Acts of Worship,
where the main part is of Divine Institution, and yet not be so immersed in the
whole, but that he may separate between the pure and corrupted parts in
relation to himself by his own private act. And indeed if a man could not do
this, I know not how he should join in any Humane peformance, as I have noted
before; or how he should allow his own worship of God, seeing he must needs
condemn himself in Particulars, wherein he allows himself in the general; every
thing Humane, being imperfect. I know it may be said, There is a difference
betwixt evils of unavoidable incursion, and those that are framed and
deliberated into a Constitution.

But even in this case it appears, a man is under no necessity, when he joins
with the solemn actions of others, to take all things in the sense they do when
there is a good and lawful account of such actions, besides their ill ones.

There is nothing more abhorred by Scripture, than eating things offered to
Idols, in the sense, and with the conscience of those that offer*d to the
Idols. And yet the Apostle allows the freedom of eating things so offered, and
even in an Idols Temple, where a Christian has the 1 Cor 8. 10.
knowledge that an Idol is nothing in the world, and there is not any other in
danger to be scandalized or drawn into sin, that has not that knowledge, and yet
is imbolden'd to eat with conscience of the Idol.

4. A very great good to be donce or received, will recommend to us the use of
things unnecessary, without an eye to that good, and in some cases unlawful and
forbidden, as appears by what the Apostle says, That to the Jew he became as a
Jew; to them under the Law, as under the Law, etc. that by all means he might
save some.

It appears too by what he did in the Circumcising Timothy, by his intending
and relaxing his Discourse Act. 16. 3. Act. 21. 26.
concerning Jewish Rites.

It appears by our Saviors commanding the Disciples hearing the Pharisees,
though they endangered themselves with the leaven, so that had it not been for
the regard and reverence due to Moses his Chair, in all proportion of reason
our Savior had not allowed it.

And whereas our Savior was at other times very severe, as in the Tradition of
washing hands, as in the young Mat. 15. 1, etc. Mat. 19. 17. Gal. 5 2. and 4.
9, 10.
man's calling him good; and the Apostle concerning Circumcision and Jewish
Rites; it was upon great accounts of preserving pure and safe the main points
and design of True Religion and Christianity, when they were in danger.

And this is the first Consideration I have proposed, with the several Branches
of it; not that I have any thing, as the Apostle said, to accuse my Nation of,
by all Act. 28. 19.
means to be shunned with abhorrence. But supposing what may be objected against
its constitution, relating to Divine Worship.

Nor on the other side, that I would so much as intimate any enforcement upon
Dissenters (against which I have argued so far) except that of
Scripture-argument, with satisfaction to doubts.

Consid. 2. But if a man cannot run the line of National Worship, it is good
yet to take the u^^ost advantage we can of the Gifts Christ has given to men
in the public National Ministry; who would at a cheap rate lose the benefit of
many great lights God has at this very day set up in the English Nation, men
who both by their Holy Lives, and great abilities, have adorned the Doctrine of
God our Savior, Bulwarks against Atheism and Antichristianism.

I profess for my self, though I most heartily pray to God for the removal of
all that offends either, of either name; and that there were a Highway out of
the Churches and Congregations of Conformists, into those of the Nonconformist,
and so back again; or rather that the Distinction were wholly removed; yet I
would not upon any of the rates (set as necessary at this time to enjoy their
excellent Labors) lose the benefit of either; seeing in both there resounds
that Glorious Gospel of God our Savior, in great excellency, according to the
Talents committed to each.

3. It is good to take off all suspicion and disgust of Magistracy from
Religion, occasioned by distance from him in public Administrations, that
there may be no appearance of Faction, Sedition, love of Difference,
Affectation of Singularity, so far as we can fly this Imputation with safe
conscience toward God, it is best to be done to the utmost; when it cannot, to
manage our Dissents with exceeding Modesty and Humility.

Besides, in relation to People in general, we are to consider how National
Usages prevail on them, transform men into all appearances of Habit, Gesture,
and such like Circumstances; National Decency is a great Circumstance in
Religious Service, as I observe from the Apostles Discourse, 1 Cor. 11. 16.
Every thing Vnnational is ready to be turned into Ridicule; when therefore we
can have the due License of Conscience, the Decency, Gravity, and order of our
Native Country, is of very great Reverence.

Lastly, Incompliance with our Nation, is very ready to render our spirits
morose, angry, vehement, zealous of small things in our own way; too severe and
rigid against small things in others; and in fine, to make us Bigots of another
kind, given to mode in another dress of things, and Ceremonialists of another
Order.

And so I pass to the other side of Things, and to make this modest
Recommendation of Three Considerations to those of National Conformity.

1. That they be not zealously intent, and overwarm about the things
themselves, wherein Protestants among us disagree. For it is evident, they are
not of worth to support any great esteem; nor can there be a greater Argument
against them, than are intemperate heat for them. This is to make them
something in Christian Religion, which is to turn them into a like thing with
the Jewish Concision; because it is with the great injury of Christianity when
such Things are over-rated, and the turning the things themselves out of that
middle place God has set them in, into a much worse.

And to transfer the whole load of our too great heat for them upon Subjection
to Magistrates, Order, Decency, is a plain confession, the things themselves
are of no worth, and to charge those other great Names with a weight too great
and unjust to lay upon them, viz. to make them serve under all the evils of
wrath, clamor, malignity, oppression of men in their Consciences an^ Estates.
It is to press them as a cart is pressed with sheaves, and yet no wheat is
brought into the Garner; there is no wealth increased to Magistracy, Order or
Decency, while all those valuable things, Love, Peace, Universal satisfaction
are sold for them.

2. Bigottry even in a National way, does as much unman men, abate from the
excellency of their minds, the goodness of their temper, the gravity and
becomingness of the Mean in Religion, and grows as contemptible and servile as
the same evil in any other way.

3. What great likelihood is there, a Nation may sometime without violence,
without any thing of Faction, Sedition, Tumult, or Fanaticism, consent to
change this outward face of Religious Administration? and then how many Zealots
for it will be posting to the newer Constitution? and how mean and pitiful will
it be (not to desert the things, for that is no more than changing, that which
is changeable but) to desert what they have been zealous of, which is apt to
look Irreligious, Hypocritick, even almost Atheistick? And suppose men continue
their zeal, it looks but like the second childishness of old age, that cannot
part with the trifles it has been so long used to. I do not speak this as if I
thought Religious Administrations, should vary Fashions as often as men do
Habits; but till we bring them up to that state which cannot be shaken, that
certainty of Divine Institution, Pure, Natural, Rational Decency, joined with
that of the very Country and Nation it self; we shall never be sure but that
which may be shaken, will be shaken, that the things only that cannot, may
remain. Antiquitas seculi juventus Mundi. The world grows, and will grow more
vigorous and manly by its age. We see a new mode of Discourse of Sermons grows
up every age; nay too, much a new fashion of Divinity, that can by no means
endure change, it being the Faith once for all given in Primitive Christianity,
at once for the main rescued from Popery, and restored in the Reformation.

Yet what offers of Alteration upon, at least, the form of the notions, the
manner of conveyance of them, are at this day endeavored, is very visible; as
if the form^r were unintelligible, of no good sense or consequence; not
suitable to the clearer and better modelled state of Theology; why then should
we be so hide-bound in a scheme of Ritual Administration in Christian Worship,
which in its own nature is much more made to pass away with the age? If we are
then more merciful to this Gourd of Ceremony, than to the more substantial
interests of Truth, Mercy, and Peace, let us fear l^st we provoke God to smite
our Gourd with an East Wind.

But I undertake to judge in these cases no further, but judge this rather, that
on all sides we value substantial Christianity, and the new Creature as the
Rule by which we are to walk in mutual love, peace, and forbearance one of
another in all lesser things, wherein we may be somewhat otherwise minded one
from another; and then in due time God will reveal even these things so to us,
that so far as is necessary, even in those we may be of one mind.

Seeing our Union is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; if
there be not a Schism in our Love, in our Sympathy, in our Bowels of Affection,
in our Care for the Body, though we are not all of an Aspect, of a Figure, of a
Size in our Membership, yet still are we the Body of Christ, and Members in
particular; and being so, we are the Israel of God, upon whom is Peace and
Mercy, both now and for ever: Amen.

And if we ought, as certainly we ought, so to pray; with what satisfaction of
mind, with what appearance of Christianity can we move against the Peace of our
Fellow Members, or not contribute to their Ease, to their self-Enjoyment, to
the Comfort of each others Condition; so that if one member be honored, all
the members may rejoice with it; if one member suffer, all the members may
suffer with it, and send in to its Relief and Support.

Our Defects herein, disturbing the Peace, not Ministering to the Merciful
support of one another, will be found another sort of Schism, but of far deeper
Guilt than that so much cried out of, not Conforming to one another
Indifferents.

But above all the Ravening of the Evening Wolf, the Roar of the Lion, the
Poison and Venom of the Asp and Cokatrice' should be far from our Mountain, if
we would have it accounted the Holy Mountain of the Lord.

And on all sides we should open the Doors and Sluices, that the streams of
Divine Knowledge might run every way, till it covers our Land, as the waters do
the Sea.

THE END
True Religion the Interest of Nations, or National Religion Demonstrated to be
the Duty of Nations, etc.
Psalm. 79. 6. and Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy Wrath Fury
upon the Heathen Nations that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms
Families
that have not called on thy Name.
THIS Prayer doubled by the Spirit of God, for the weight of it, the safety to
men, it should be well known, and the certainty of its effect contains a strong
assertion of the great benefit of, Phil. 3. 2. Genesis 41. 32.
and obligation lying upon Nations to National true Religion.

For seeing according to a grand Rule in Gods Administration of the World,
Nations that have no National Religion, and whose Nationalness therefore
becomes Heathenism, and is so branded by the Spirit of God, (for so Nations in
Scripture very often signifies Heathen, that is, Nations without true
Religion), are liable to the pouring out of the wrath and fury of God upon
them: It does not only follow by the rule of Contraries, that National true
Religion* or Worship of the true God, has a strong order to, and connection
with the favor of God; but as the positive Proposition is the prime and
original, and gives ground to, and contains within it self the privative; so
does this Proposition, That Gods Anger and Fury is at all times ready against
those that do not know him, that do not call upon him as joined in a National
Body, or Society, being the privative, owe it self to the other, being the
positive; as shall be more fully made out in the arguing this Point.

At the present, it will be enough to observe, that these two Holy men, the
Composer of this Psalm, and the Prophet Jeremy (except as some think they were
both one), desiring the destruction of those Heathen enemies under whose
oppression their own people (which at that time comprehended the Church of God)
then groaned, and praying in spirit for it, rely and rest the whole weight of
their prayer upon this principle of great truth and consequence in Gods
Government of the World, that as Families, as Nations, as Kingdoms, (for so all
Communities are comprehended) they did not know nor call upon God, that is,
they did not worship the true God; and therefore were most justly subject to
his fiercest displeasure.

And on the other side, it is couched under this, though indeed before it, That
the people that do know and call upon the true God, have a title to his savor,
and vindication of them in all their distress, while they are considered as so
knowing, and calling upon him, and not contradicting it by their actions. The
Context therefore goes on arguing with God on this point, They have devoured
Jacob, in whose quarrel and rescue God is so much concerned.

And seeing the favor of God is Eternal Life, and his wrath burns to the
lowest Hell; both his wrath and his favor are to be understood in their extent
even to everlasting ages.

All which will ground the Proposition, which I mainly intend in this Discourse.

That National true Religion is the greatest security, strength and defense of
a Nation against the Divine wrath and displeasure, and gives the surest claim
to his favor, blessing and protection, both in this world, and in that which
is to come. Because it is an observation of the greatest duty; and therefore to
be most closely united in, and pursued to the utmost by all wise Nations, and
by all the several parts, and members of a Nation; for it is their first and
highest Psalm. 33. i2 and 144. 15.
Interest: Blessed is the N^tion that is in such a case, yea happy is the
people whose God is the Lord, who have Jehovah thus for their God,

And this very consideration should reconcile all differences in National
Religion, that can be composed without loss of that Truth, and corruption of
those parts of the Worship of God, which give denomination to true National
Religion.

This should incline those that are above, to the greatest condescensions, and
those that are beneath to the most free compliances possible, if they value
Religion, and love their Nation, that at least there may be union in National
Religion, if there cannot be perfect Uniformity. For I am fully persuaded, that
upon a strict examination of this Point, it will be found that National
Religion (supposing it always the true) is the happiest model of union in
Religion of any upon earth, and most pleasing to God, except that of the
Catholic Church, whose union is in the Substantials of Truth, worship and
practice, but comes under no other form or model properly taken: but except
this, there is none so perfect to the ends and glory of Religion, so adaequate
to the expressions of Scripture concerning the publickness of Religion, so
encouraging and advantageous to the practice, so reconcilable with the peace
of Religion and Nations, so preventive of the endless divisions, and
subdivisions Humane Nature is apt to fall into, when it yields up it self to a
scrupulosity, and Disputatiousness about Externals and Forms in Religion.

I say again, I am persuaded no man can serve God with greater acceptableness,
nor be Religious to greater ends and purposes of Religion, than by joining with
the Nation, or Supreme Civil Incorporation, whereof he is a member, so far as
he can be permitted to do it, consistent with the Truth of Religion, and Divine
Worship. I say, as far as he can upon these accounts, if not throughout.

And of this I shall endeavor to give great and valuable proofs from
Scripture, and Reason agreeable to it, and deduced from it; and herein being a
Minister of God according to the National Religion, Romans 11. 13.
I magnify my Office.

To this purpose I will first consider of the Radical obligation we have to
join our selves with others in the profession of Religion, and Worship of God,
and how it rises from Personal Religion, the Substratum or foundation of all;
and by what degrees it must and ought to rise, and how it most rationally
determines it self in National Religion. It ought to attempt thus high, and
cannot successfully attempt higher in the way of Association; to spread thus
far, and cannot expatiate to any purpose beyond it: I shall therefore here give
such Arguments for National Religion out of Scripture, as it does not afford to
any other figure of union in it.

In the first place therefore it necessarily must be supposed and granted, That
Personal Religion is the Fundamental Religion; even as a Nation, or even
Universality of Humane Nature must become a notion without particular persons,
in whom all Communities subsist; even so must National, or Catholic Religion
vanish into imagination, if it were not sustained by particular and Personal
piety; Nations and Families calling upon God, most necessarily imply and
include the particular persons of each doing so.

And herein it is further considerable, that every man is a complete Being
within himself; that as it is said of him, He is in his Soul and Body a little
World within himself, so he is a Kingdom, a Society within himself; and we may
say in this sense, He is a Church within himself also, as Solomon calling
himself Coheleth, the Congregating Ecclesiastes.
or the Preaching soul, in that great Treaty with himself, supposed his soul a
Congregation, and a Preacher within and to it self first, and then to the
public; so ought every man to be to himself.

Here therefore is the first inviolable duty and obligation to Religion,
because a man can never be absent from himself; and it is impossible for any
force to surprise the passages of a soul to Heaven, or to hinder the souls
Congregating in Holy Meditations, and Discourses within it self.

And as a man is thus considered, he cannot nor ought to suffer himself to be
imposed upon, or commanded without Divine Authority; for as thus considered, he
cannot be forced by any, and he is accountable Romans 14. 4, 12.
countable only to God: He stands or falls to his own Master: Every one shall
give account of himself to God; which is one of the greatest Arguments the
Apostle insists upon for mutual forbearance in disputable things in Religion;
every man on this account ought to be 1 Pet. 3. 15
able to render a reason of the hope that is in him, to himself and others; and
not to rest in an implicit faith. It will be no man's excuse he was led or
commanded into a false Faith, or Idolatrous worship.

Every man also upon this same account is bound to make confession Romans 10. 10.
with his mouth to salvation in his proper place and station; and in a narrower
sense, yet a sense as large as his capacity and rank, every true Christian is a
Pillar, and Ground of Truth; that is, Truth must 1 Timothy 3. 15.
be settled, and strongly seated in his soul, and he must expose Truth, and bear
it out in Confession and holy practice, and is himself a Temple or House of the
living God, where God will please to walk and dwell; and therefore can be no
way obliged to join with a Family, or any sort of larger Community in a false
Religion, though he should stand alone in the true, or should, as Abraham,
forsake his People, or his Fathers House to do it.

Yet notwithstanding this, It is not good for a man to be alone, Genesis 12. 1.
Genesis 2. 18.
though in true Religion, if it can be otherwise; he is made for Society and
is, as it were, imperfect without it: Herein he resembles God in some low
degree, in whose Image and likeness he is made. God is an infinitely perfect
Being in himself, yet he has pleased himself in communicativeness to all his
Creatures, and in the attraction of all in their several kinds, especially
Angels and Men to himself; as if he was not satisfied in being holy, in being
happy alone.

Thus man, though if he could not have society in True Religion, he would be
yet a complete and absolute Figure alone; yet where, and so far as he can have
society in it, he is so far from being complete alone, that he must needs prove
a Cipher, a Nothing, if he affected and coveted to be alone: Whatever he has,
if he has not Love, he is nothing; God is Love, and therefore rejoices in
communication from himself and with himself, and so must, so does every good
man, every holy man also.

If there be True Personal Religion, there must be Religious Society, for Man
is made for Society; and if he meets, he must meet with that Religjous Sense he
has upon himself, with that I say he must meet with others, which seems the
absolute necessity of Religious Society. For if a man meets with his own
Religion others that have the same sense of Religion, there arises a necessity
of the Religion of all to meet together.

But further, Man was made for Society, and the first and supreme end of
society, as of all things, is the glory of God; and therefore society is in the
first place bound to be Religious society. Marriage the Root and beginning of
society, was, that there might be a godly seed, Mal. 2. 15. to sustain a
Succession of Religion: So society spreads on still, that there might be
Religious Societies.

As soon therefore as Seth, the first Descendent from Adam in the holy Line,
had a Son born in the same Line, it is recorded, that Then Men began to call
upon the Name of Jehovah, that is most probably, Adam and Seth took it as a
just and necessary occasion, not Genesis 4. ult.
only to set up a pillar of Thankfulness in seeing themselves the Progenitors
of the blessed Seed, but in the foresight of a holy society, just ready to
spring from their loins, they thought fit to promote Divine Worship into a
public State and certain Order; and this I think the most agreeable
Interpretation of that controverted place: so that from the beginning of the
world, all along the History of True Religion in the Old and New Testament, we
shall find Religion contended into publickness, and all the advantages of
Humane Society.

Yea Humane Nature has taken this so for granted, that it is doubtful whether
there ever was a society in the world, politically united or not wholly
barbarous, but it was cemented in Religion, though being so generally but false
Religion, it proved no better than Heathenism.

There may have been private Cabals of Atheism, but there never was a public
Association against A God known and believed, except in Hell. If we could
suppose a Society designedly united without Religion, it would be like the Plot
for building of Babel, an endeavor of such a part of mankind to set up for its
self and its own security, as it were in defyance of Heaven.

A Society united in Civils, and crumbled into Sects and Divisions in Religion,
that is, in the main substantials of Doctrine, Worship, and Practice, is a
Babel, as it was under the curse of Confusion, of divided Language; A
disparagement of Religion, which can be as it is indeed Religion, but one; as
if its Name were Legion, or as if in fundamental points it could not
sufficiently evidence it self, so as to be known to be the true: Lastly a
disanulling the ancient Law of Society, which is principally for the Union of
Religion; so that if men could agree in all things else, and were yet divided
here, it were not true humane society, but would want the very noblest part or
Principle of it, Religion, which is as a soul or spirit to it.

Yet too rigorous and severe a constraint of Uniformity, is both to forget
humane infirmity, that does not allow so perfect an union in this world, (if a
rigid Uniformity be indeed perfection) and to forget also that every man is a
complete Being within himself, and makes a perfect Figure as he is alone; and
therefore to grant nothing to this consideration, is rather to crowd men into a
Little ease in Religion, than to unite them; and so pressing them too strait,
makes them fly out of that uneasy state for more room, and dissolves the union
that might else have been.

But in all the principal points of True Religion, Union is so necessary, that
it stands good; Humane society is for the sake of Religion; yet in this state
of Gods patience to the world, Commerce, and civil Conversation are no more
than Property founded in Grace, for then we must go out of the world, yet still
the supreme and prime end of Society is Religion.

Society in Divine Adorations is the state of Angels and Saints in Heaven: It
was designed to be the State of Innocence in this world. It is a Law that
cannot be repealed; It is the perpetual Duty of Man: Fallen Nature has a
violent inclination to it, so that all societyes consent to walk in the name of
some God, though mistaken in the right object. But the word of God and
Christianity, as they most clearly reveal the True Religion so the necessity of
Union in it.

The publickness of Religion therefore, that it is most choosable for the glory
of it to God, for the good it does to the souls of men, for the blessing and
acceptance it receives from God; I shall plainly make evident from the reason
of Scripture.

1. For the Glory public Religion presents to God, it is evident, although God
in his Son and Spirit is a sufficient Spectator and Witness of, and infinitely
rich in his own Glory, in the understanding of, and his own eternal praises of
himself, so that nothing can be added to him; yet it is most evident, God is
pleased to delight in the publickness of his service, and the nearest approach
of all his Creatures to him, and that not in solitary service, but the most
conjoined, as if infinity received Additions of Glory from the openness and
publickness of his Worship, which yet we know is impossible. But it is the
abyss of his goodness, that he delights in loving all his creatures, and being
universally known, loved, and served by them, and that in the greatest Union
herein, that as he himself is the prime Unity and Universality, and this is the
perfection of his Being; so his Creatures sprung from him may return to him in
the same Universality and Unity, in resemblance of himself, which is the
highest and truest worship of him.

In Heaven there is an Innumerable company of Angels, and blessed Spirits, in
one general Assembly, to praise and worship God. The Scripture excites the
praise of all the Earth, of all the world, of all Lands, of all People,
Tongues, Languages, Nations, Kindred and Families; even the Heaven, and Earth,
and things under the Earth, and the whole host of them, are called in to
concert the Glory of God, and nothing left out but Death and Destruction, which
cannot praise him, because never made by him: And when the Glory of God, as it
rises from his Creatures, is represented at its highest pitch, it is thus set
out: And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne,
and the Beasts, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is
the Lamb, etc. And every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and
under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them I heard,
saying, as it were in one Quire: Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and power be
unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

Thus David also musters up the whole Creation to join in the praises of God,
not to fill up and adorn the Divine Poesy, but to show the indisputable right
God has to the services of all his Creatures, and that in those which are not
able to pay it immediately by themselves, every wise and prudent holy man is to
observe that tribute of praise that is as it were marked upon them by the
wisdom that made them, and to offer it up for them, when the service of God is
represented, as most glorious in its being most public.

Every thing therefore in Gods Ordination of Religion, tends to publickness;
Our Savior will not appear but in the fullness of his Body, the Church, which
does as it were complete him: For it is in this sense his Complement or
Fullness, though he fills all in all. The knowledge of God would cover the earth
even as water does the Sea, and is restless, till it does; so the Preaching of
the Gospel is to be extended to all Nations, to every creature.

In Prayer there is to be a coming of all flesh to God. Praise is to rise up as
one pillar of Incense from the whole world. The Church especially is to publish
the name of the Lord, and to ascribe greatness to our God.

Now the sense of this is, that since God has been pleased to place his Glory
in the publickness of Religion, in this Universality of it, all good men are
zealous and earnest to draw in the public Societies of the world, as much as
they can, to love, fear, serve, pray to God, and praise him together.

God does not allow his servants that out of choice they should retire to the
Religion of a Cloister, or a Wilderness, or a private separated Assembly, as
the greatest honor to him, but delights in the most public Assemblies of his
Saints, servants, and creatures; for though the reasons here of lie deep in the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, yet it is spoken to us in the plainest Language, as
if God carried it, as Princes do in their magnificence, whose Glory is in their
great Courts, in the multitude of their Attendants, and People, Spectators,
Admirers, and Tributaries to their luster.

2. I argue to the publickness of Religion from the good it does to the souls
of men. It is from hence the greatest wisdom to win souls; and they that turn
many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars. Now the offer of true Religion
to them that had it not before, the persuasion of it upon those that have not
yet obeyed it, tends to their Conversion, Repentance, to their love and fear of
God. They therefore that have the true sense of these things in their own souls
use all means out of love to the Glory of God, and to the souls of men to
propagate them to others, which is best done by all public acts of Religion:
This is the original Law, from the very beginning it was so: Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied publicly, The Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness. This was the great zeal of
Christians in the first times.

Further, It strengthens, confirms, and inflames Religion among those that are
the joint Professors: Public Religion is the great glory and security of
Religion it self, mutually warming and assisting it self in all its several
parts, and the Professors of it. As Iron sharpens Iron, so is the countenance
of a man to his Friend herein. How much more lively is Religion probable to be
in a Religious, than an Atheistick and Barbarous Country? nor does God afford
those divine heats to those that withdraw from Assemblies in Religion, except
in cases of necessity, however he may supply in extraordinary exigences,
without which, Woe to him that is alone in Religion, if he fall he has not any
to help him up: and how can one be warm alone? If one prevails against him, he
wants a Second to withstand together with him, and the benefit of the threefold
cord, that is not easily broken.

Every thing in nature endeavors toward Community or universal Unity, as its
own strength and security. Even the Devils retain so much of first Nature, as
to knit in a community; and false Christianity imitates the true in a pretense
to Universality, though a most destructive one, like that of the God of this
World, who aspires to Universal Monarchy, but it is in sin and death.

But this does not disparage True Religion, moving to an Universality of Truth,
Peace, and Life for evermore.

3. The blessing and acceptance that Religion receives from the Divine Majesty,
is much greater for the publickness of it; even in this sense, Two are better
than one, for they have a good reward for their labor. In thss sense their
complicated services are more forcible, their threefold Cord is not easily
broken. Not that God is prevailed upon to any change in himself or his
Government by the services of his Creatures, though in a multitude; but he is
pleased to found the occasions and opportunities of his own most bountiful
Recompenses, in the drawing near of their greater numbers: For as when God was
pleased to communicate himself more freely, he did it to a multitude of
Creatures; so he delights in receiving back the glory of having thus
communicated himself from a multitude also; and as there is more of himself in
more of his Creatures, whether of several sorts or of the same, so there is
more of his blessing in their approaches to him.

He that does not only weigh the Mountains in scales, but comprehends the dust
of the earth in a measure, takes notice of those prayers and desires of the
poor of the people, that make the crowd and throng in his worship and service:
He accepts the pair of Turtle Doves, the two Mites, when it is the All, and is
ready to reward it.

This was the policy of Nineveh's Natural Religion, to unite their Force in
Humiliation, Fasting, and Prayer, and to take advantage of joining the mute
desires of the Beasts, that have a voice in the ears of God: Abraham's Servant
made the Camels kneel down while he prayed to God.

Thus in Thanksgivings, It was David's art to gather up all the praises, even
of the lowest of the Creatures, that could so meanly give them, and inspiring
them with his own reason, made them, as it were, to follow his Harp, and unite
in his own Hallelujahs. Thus he served himself of them, that making by them a
greater present of glory to God, he might receive the greater blessing from
him. The Apostle speaks of the good effect of Christian Charity, in causing an
abundance of thanksgivings to God. David saying, The congregation of the people
would compass God about, adds this prayer; therefore for their sakes return
thou on high.

Now all these expressions, reporting to us a great force in the publickness of
Religious Duties, we know it is only from the agreeableness of this publickness
with the Divine Will and Nature, and his holy Ordination, who loves his Saints,
and knows their approach to him is an approach to their life and happiness: And
because he loves all his Saints and Creatures the more of them in conjunction
draw near to him, the more of his tender mercies have the occasion to spread
themselves; for else all the Nations are to God, but as the drop of the Bucket,
and the dust of the Balance; all their services are not sufficient to him for
a sacrifice to burn before him: He humbles himself to behold the things that
are in Heaven, as well as those on Earth. He with great delight yet looks to
one that is of a broken and contrite spirit, and that trembles at his word. As
one day and a thousand years are both alike to the Infinity of God, so are a
thousand persons and but one; as it is all one to him to save with many or few,
so it is to be entreated by them in prayer, or accept their praise; but
according to the wisdom and holiness of the Divine Manifestation in his Love
and Bounty, so he is pleased to see his Servants draw near to him in an union
of Love among themselves, and every one having a claim to his favor, who is
all Goodness, the united claim is stronger. He hears even the Ravens that cry,
for they are his Creatures; if any man therefore could intwist their cry with
his own in a general scarcity, he makes his own so much the stronger. He then
that joins the prayers and desires of many with his own, doubles still the
strength, as is manifest by the Apostles so often and earnestly desiring the
help of prayers.

And this may answer what may seem to be an objection against good men joining
with public and promiscuous Assemblies, wherein are so many ignorant and bad
men, that by their sins, ignorance, and folly, rather obstruct the effect and
acceptance of good men joining with them; so that it may seem better if holy
and good men separated themselves, and left the generality of a Nation out of
their Religious Services.

But from what has been said it is very plain, that as the Ninevites and
Abraham'^ Steward served themselves of the Beasts in their prayers, and David
served himself of the very lowest of the Creatures in his praises, so good men
consecrating the public Religion, though resulting from a medley of worse men,
turn it to greater glory to God, advantage to themselves, and the advantages of
those worser men also, in sundry respects, when it does not prevail to their
conversion and eternal salvation; as figures of value subordinating to
themselves Ciphers, increase Sums to very vast.

The services of men not truly Religious, are not so acceptable to God alone,
but are ennobled by the union of truly good men; for that they have such a
virtue is plain; even Job's Friends, though good men themselves, received good
by his offering their sacrifices; and that good men may subject the services of
evil men to their own, is as plain by the Apostles rejoicing, that Christ was
preached by those that preached him out of envy and contention, for while his
preaching Christ out of love, over ruled theirs, who preached the same Christ
from worser respects; all their preaching of Christ was so forcibly united with
the Apostles, that it became as if it was wholly his own, and turned to his
Salvation; the greater and truer Light drinking up the less, and the less noble
which followed in attendance upon it; and so much more the prayers of less
worthy men are snatched up to Heaven with the prayers of Holy men, and prevail
for a full acceptance of them with God, leaving only some lesser portions of
Blessing to those whose Hearts do not ascend with their prayers: Yet we must be
careful of saying to any, Stand off, I am holier than thou. Many a man being
rejected under the Appearance of a Publican, whose heart's breaking within it
self to God has greater acceptance from him, than what seems rather to be
preferred among men.

For the Honor therefore of the most public Conjunction in Holy Services, we
may observe, those men who are of the most Happy memory in Scripture, Men of
Renown for the Efficacy of their prayers, as Noah, Moses, Samuel Job, Daniel,
the Apostle Paul, and many others, were no Monkish sort of men; No men of
Separation from the public upon choice, but Personages, as of the most Divine
spreading Reason, so of a public Wisdom, Grace, and Spirit, containing a
public Interest, and Piety within their own Breasts; yet joining with as many
as they could, to better their services mutually, and not scrupling union with
them, lest they should be made worse, or their services less acceptable; Men of
no narrow and contracted Spirits, Principles or Devotion, but like our Saviors
converse with Publicans and Sinners, they were as Physicians to the sick, Helps
to the weak, as well as the Comparions of all that fear God, pulling sinners
with violence out of the Fire, converting them from the error of their way,
saving souls from Death, and endeavoring to hide the multitude of sins; and
therefore were so prevalent in prayers for others, though at sometimes God was
so incensed, as to deny Audience even to such, except for their own souls.

Thus clear it is on the side of Public Religion in these great Examples;
they separated from the sins, the superstitions, that were at any time become
public, but joined with the Public Religion, and thereby raised it to much
higher Excellency: It is impossible to make bad Things good, as False Worship,
or Corruptions of Practice, if never so many Good men fell into them; It would
endanger them, but cannot better that, which is of it self bad: But that which
is in it self Good, which would be much dispirited through Evil handling it, by
Bad men, may be made better by Holy men's Predominancy, and Ascendency in it;
and so turn to general Good, in some Thirty, in some Sixty, in some an
Hundredfold; which shows the Nature of the both Communicativeness and
Singularity of these Holy men; Communicativeness in True Worship, though with
Bad men; Singularity from Sin and False Worship.

I have now dispatched this first Head I proposed concerning the publickness of
Religion in general: I come now to the second Head, That this publickness
determines it self in National Religion, neither staying short of it, nor
expatiating beyond it.

And to make good this, I first consider how humane Society rises, and what are
the first bands of Union. And it is very evident the first Associations of
mankind must grow out of Families, as I have observed the Law of Humane Society
was first declared and promulg'd upon the Institution of Marriage. This was the
beginning of Families, Families of all greater associations of men. Here also
must begin all Religious Society. These are the most near and combined; here
therefore are the most frequent seasons of worshipping God, of daily praises of
him, and prayers to him. The examples of it we find in Abraham's, Joshua's,
David's, Cornelius's Families, and the Churches in the Houses of some
Christians at the first. This Domestic Body is most close with it self, and
more easily called together, therefore the first seat of Religious Society.

Families therefore for the closeness, nearness, and naturalness of that
Government, as being the smallest of Communities, but the most primitive, are
particularly named in this Prayer against the Heathen, and made another
expression together with Kingdoms of Irreligious Communities.

For as Kingdoms are greater Families, united indeed as Families but greater.

So Families though lesser, were yet the first Kingdoms.

Religion therefore being a most uncontestable duty and obligation in those
less^r Kingdoms, Families, it argues to the same obligation and duty in those
greater Families, Kingdoms, and the Religion or Irreligion of the one and the
other run along one with the other.

Thus God first eminently himself founded Religion in Abraham's Family, and so
commenced both the Family and Religion into a Nation and Kingdom. Religion
therefore rises higher, and settles here as upon the most advantageous
Eminences, as in the most full and free spread Communities, called Nations for
their greatness and numerousness, Kingdoms for their Majestic government and
union in it.

For a Nation or Kingdom is a part of Mankind cantoned indeed from the whole
world, and the wideness of that, yet into a larger compass than Neighbourhoods,
Towns or Cities, and is generally enclosed within some more remarkable bounds
of place, as Seas, Rivers, Mountains; united by nearness of Manners, Customs,
and Disposition, arising from like Temperature of Air and Climate, freedom of
Conversation and Commerce, having one and the same Language, but especially as
under the same Civil Interests, Laws, Government, and Legislative Authority.

For these mutual Bonds are they which give Reason to National Religion, as the
most solemn instance of public Religion and Worship of God, because by virtue
of these it becomes one great Family.

I know there may be some exceptions from this description of a Nation, which
will have their force upon National Religion also as it results from it. For
sometimes one Monarchy does as it were stride over more Nations, sometimes one
City or Free Town is distinguished from the rest of the World by one Government,
one Civil Interest, independent in its Government in its proper Interest upon
any other.

Now in such a Monarchy as contains several People and Nations under it, it
does not properly give name to a National Religion, while their Interests,
Laws, Conversation, and Civil Commerce are preserved and kept distinct, as
these are often allowed to be under some conquering Potentacy.

On the other side if a narrower compass of people than we properly call a
Nation, viz. a Region, a Province, a City, has its Interests, its Laws, its
Government, Conversation and Commerce, entire to it self; it is as to the
purpose we are now upon, as it were a Nation.

The sum then is this: so far as Humane Society has drawn any People or
Families into a close and more compacted state of Civil Interests, necessitude
one to another, and Government running up to the highest point of Government in
that compact state, so far is the obligation of Union in public Religion drawn
upon them; where these are freer, that attendance to union in Religion is freer
also, any further than the common truth of Religion, and the obligations of
that, bind even those at greatest distance and union one with another.

For thus Religion may and ought to unite all the true Professors of it, at
what remove soever from one another. It may and ought also to pass upon
whatever bond of union there is in the world; but there is no such union as
Laws, Commerce, Conversation, common safety running all up to the supreme
Government over that conjunction to graft Religion upon. All else is but
consent in the same unity of one God, one Lord, one Spirit, one Faith, one
Baptism, which make the Catholic Church one Body, and joining with one
another, presentially in the same acknowledgments of God, when a concurrence of
all things necessary happens to fall out, as cannot be supposed frequent in
parts remote one from another, and of a diverse lip or language.

The Catholic Church is indeed united as Humane nature is, in one and the same
true Reason, and thereupon a readiness of wise and learned men to correspond
one with another at a distance, or confer one with another if at any time
suitable concurrences favor it, or as the world, much more the Catholic
Church is a Temple built to the Glory of the Creator and Redeemer, wherein all
good men meet from one end of the Heaven to the other, in the unity of the same
Spirit, and in the same kind of worship; and if opportunity allowed, in the
same actual worship.

The nearer therefore any parts of the Catholic Church are by the
Neighborhood of Nations, by the frequency of Traffic, the neare^; the more
frequent the correspondencies are, the mutual assistance, may and ought to be.

But now in the Dependencies and Interweavings of all Civil Interests in
Nations, there are not only those voluntary and contingent correspondencies,
but such as first grow out of the nature of Humane Society, and bind of
themselves to common true Religion; and then have the favor, encouragements,
directions, obligations of Laws and Authority running like the same spirit into
all the several parts of a Nation, and recommending that National true Religion
as it stands in this Union that is first commanded by God, besides much more
free, ordinary, Actual Meetings in one and the very same place, and Acts of
Worship. It is true indeed, the Worship of God allows our worldly callings, and
the provisions of the present life, and Relation, and therefore a
Neighborhood, whether it be the more populous of Cities, or Towns, or the more
infrequent of Villages, has the conveniences of more solemn and stated
Meetings, the ordinary fit seasons of the Lord's Day, and other solemn times of
worship: thereupon National Religion is generally exercised in these lesser
Societies, even as the Justice and Execution of Laws; and National Authority,
must be brought home to men in their particular Countries, and Towns, and not
rest in the Capital Cities at a distance from their daily Business and
Conversation; and yet the standard of all things National is generally
preserved there for the very sake of union. Even so of National Religion, not
as Religion; for the standard of that is Scripture only: but as National; so
the Agreement in it is deposited with all other National Acts. So that National
Religion has the advantage in these two things: First, The Naturalness and
Closeness of the Union of a Nation to all the Interests of Humane Society; and
therein it imitates the nearness and closeness of Families, or lesser
Incorporations, as much as can be consistent with the second thing, viz The
Illustriousness, Magnificence, Honourableness of Religion, as seated in larger
Bodies, but especially as upon the Soveraignties and Supremacies of the Great
Incorporations of Mankind.

I shall only observe further, That All this does most effectually exclude the
pretense of an Universal Church-Monarchy, as hateful in Religion, as an
Universal State-Monarchy in Politics, and Civil Liberty. Both of which are
indeed Tyranny.

The Imaginary Benefits of such sorts of Union are infinitely toilsome, and
tedious, while they are expected, and always in the issue found impossible to
be enjoyed in their Fruits; but in the mean time, while the pretenders are
laboring for, and grasping at so vast a power, they fill the world with the
lamentable effects of their Ambition, and do indeed destroy Humane Society,
because those Laws and Bands that tie it together, being so over-strain'd, fly
in pieces; and I am sure nothing is more contrary to Christianity, than an
Universal Head of Religion here upon Earth, except Christ himself with an
Ubiquity of Holiness, Power and Influence, came down to reign upon it. An
universal Union were indeed desirable, and glorious, if there were an
Omnipresence of Virtues answerable to the Administration; but that being too
great for any creature; too great in the present state of the World; Religion,
and Christian Religion glide along with the Civil Union they find prepared, as
I shall presently evince, beyond which is nothing but Usurpation.

I come now to the Arguments from Scripture and Reason for National Religion,
not afforded to any other Figure of Union in it.

The first Argument shall be, that I derive from this prayer, I Holy men spoke,
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, rest upon some great Pillars and
Principles of Divine Truth, and Argument: For particular cases, in which they
prayed, are brought to those general principles, by an understanding enlightened
to understand, in an humble sense, even as God understands, and inflamed with a
Holy Affection, in a lowly Imitation of the Divine Zeal, wherewith God performs
all his Holy Ordinations. Thus as Princes they have power with God, because
they offer him their Petitions according to his Established Rules of
Government, and his own Holy Will, concerning the things, wherein they pray to
him.

Now the understanding these Rules was extraordinary, and infallible to the
Prophets, and Servants of God inspired by him, but to us in ordinary by the
light of the Word of God, by the Laws of True and Right Reason in deductions
from that word: And in which word, and the deductions from it, if we are not
mistaken, the Efficacy will be certain, because if we ask according to his
will, we are sure he hears us, and that we have in some true sense the
Petitions we ask of him. This is so valuable a Rule of prayer, that Daniel,
though so great a Man of Vision, yet betook himself to this ordinary means of
Instruction in the mind of God, Dan. 9. By Books of Holy Records, and general
Chronology, he knew that the time of the Babylonish Captivity was near its
Expiration, and so set himself to prayer, and was crowned with this wonderful
success and acceptance.

Thus prayers prevail with God, and yet without any change in him, there being
a Configuration, or Concurrence of all things, according to his own unchangable
Will; His Counsels of old, that are Faithfulness and Truth, are remonstrated to
him by the humble, servent desires of his servants, that knew them to be his
Counsels, and who are ordered by the same counsels to enquire, or beseech him
by prayer according to them, and therefore by his spirit, the spirit of prayer,
He draws the parallel lines to his own Intentions upon their Hearts, Desires,
and Affections.

I have pursued this the further, because it gives a solution to that Doubt,
how God without any change in himself hears prayers; and also assures us, this
prayer being so remarkable, as to be twice used in the same words, most
certainly bears it self upon some certain principle, from which we may argue to
general practice. The principle it rests upon, must be this: There is an
Established order betwixt the wrath and displeasure of God; His Fury, and
Vengeance, and the Nations, or Families, not knowing, not calling on his Name:
and this is known by very light of Nature. His Wrath, according to unchangable
Laws, is always prepared against those that forsake him, and that Duty they owe
to him, as Nations: It had been else a great presumption upon God, and Breach
of Charity to the Nations so to pray against them; which may also give us
account of all those Dreadful Imprecations, and Curses, David, and other
Prophets and Holy men pour out against their own Enemies, and the Enemies of
their people; They are founded in their being Enemies to God, his True Worship,
Love, and Service, and as such their Final Destruction was decreed against them
by the most Righteous Laws of Divine Government, made known unto those Holy
men, and so they prayed for it as public persons, and not out of private
Wrath and Revenge: but this by the way. I proceed now in the main Argument.

And this principle I am upon, That the Wrath of God is against the Nations
that are without National Religion, lies deeper in a First, and more Original
principle, viz. There is an Obligation, a great Duty lying upon Nations, as
Nations to know, and worship the True God; For else why should God find fault?
why should he be angry, when none had resisted his Will?

From hence it is, That there is a Natural Order established by God, between
his Love, and Favor, and a People, and their public True Religion, because
it is the Observation of a Duty, and the Observation of Duty is the fitting us
for Blessing, and ^avour, as the neglect, and Transgression of Duty cannot be
without wrath and displeasure. For thus God has placed Life and Death one over
against another; yet so that Life and Blessing are always first, even as Duty
is always before sin: For God never made Death and Destruction, even as he
never could be the cause of sin, but they come in by the Failing of our Duty,
and so of that Life and Blessedness entailed on our Duty.

Yet the Obligation to National True Religion is much more evident from these
Holy men, praying down Wrath upon them that know not God, and that call not on
his Name; then it could have been from the praying for his Favor to them, that
did know him, and that did call on his Name; because his Favor might have been
vouchsafed upon Terms much below our substantial and inviolable Duty: As many
of the Jewish Rites might be Arguments for, and Pledges of Gods gracious Regard
to the people, he had so distinguished, when the want of those signs would not
have argued to the effusion of his Wrath and Vengeance, there being no natural,
or positive Duty lying upon any, but the Jews to such observances: There may be
many Arguments for the Bounty and Favor of God from External Rites appointed
by him, and observed by his people; though indeed these all refer to their
Essential Duty, and argue nothing without it: Yet the contrary will not enforce
to the opposite Degrees of Wrath and Indignation, because they are not
observed, when no substantial Duty is violated. Uncircumcision, that keeps the
Law, may have in the main the same security from wrath, with Circumcision that
keeps the Law also. Seeing then there is so great wrath against those that know
not God, that call not on his Name; It assures us, the Duty, the Obligation,
and the Reason of it lie deep, that the omission is so subjected to the Divine
Revenges: and it is in this; A society without Religion is a High contempt of
God, a making flesh our arm, and departing from the Lord, and so from his
Favor and Blessing. A principality without an Inscription, a Dedication to the
Glory of God, to which all things are to be devoted, is like the building a
Tower up to Heaven. A sin like the sin of Herod, when he let that Sacrilegious
Applause sink into him, and gave not the Glory to God, and therefore subjects
men to be at any time smitten and blasted by God; who has said, Those that
honor him, he will honor; but all else shall be lightly esteemed, whether
Nation or Person. It is not therefore only the Judgment upon the Irreligion of
particular persons, of particular Families, that is here intended, though this
is included and supposed, but especially upon the Irreligion of Societies,
knitting and strengthening themselves without the True God; upon Principalities
exalting themselves, and not by and with the Almighty, and Supreme Majesty.

On the other side, if there be a Duty, an Obligation of being publicly
Religious, there is a Blessing upon it, according to that Fundamental
Principle; He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him: that Godliness has the promises of
this life, and of that which is to come: And this must be first, because as
Righteousness and Duty are before sin, so Blessing and Favor are before Wrath
and Displeasure: Yet Wrath is a more certain Demonstration of absolute Duty
violated, than Favor is of absolute Duty observed, because the Favor of God
is more at liberty than his Wrath, which always depends on strict Justice. All
which amounts to the full proof of the great Duty of National Religion from
this prayer, seeing National Irreligion is so near the Curse of Divine Fury and
Revenge.

Having thus far considered National Religion, as it is founded among the Jews;
when by a Prerogative of Power, and Goodness, God would secure the True
Religion, after the Nations had so corrupted themselves, and that he had now
begun, as the Apostle speaks, to suffer them to walk after their own ways: He
founds his Worship, as it were anew, first in Abraham's Family, and from thence
commences it into a National State, even as he did the Family, wherein he had
placed it, and that for the very sake of his True Worship, which Family and
Nation had indeed many peculiars in its Religious Constitution, such as are not
to be found in any other, as I shall after account for them; yet in the
general, it is an Evidence of the Fitness and Agreeableness of that Model of
Humane Society, to the Ends of Religion, and the Acceptableness to God, it
should be so devoted.

But because we may think this choosing of Abraham's Family, and the Nation
rising from it, was an Interdict upon any other Family, or Nation, to institute
a public National Religion, any other ways, than as they Proselyted
themselves to that one Nation and Family: It is very observable, there are
elsewhere the footsteps of National, and Family Religion, though more rare in
that very time, as in Melchisedeck, who was King of Salem, of Peace and
Righteousness, and Priest of the most High God, so incorporating Religion with
his Government, the same is to be found in Job, and his Friends: so that the
Erecting a National Religion among the Jews, did not supersede the obligation
of any of the Nations to the National Worship of God, though in Judgment past
our finding out, He so overlooked them, as to leave them to themselves, for he
never left himself without witness He ought to be so worshipped, by giving them
fruitful times and seasons, and filling their hearts with food and gladness: He
was never far from them, in that he gave them life, and breath, and all things;
and in him they lived, moved, and had their Beings; so that they were without
excuse, when at any time his wrath was revealed from Heaven against them, for
not glorifying him as God, and being thankful Belshazzar, and his Nation, were
obnoxious to God, for not Glorifying that God, in whose hands was his life, and
breath, and all his ways. Besides those of the Nations that were near the Jews
were allowed to unite themselves to the Jewish National Religion, when the Laws
of Nature were grown so dark and obsolete among themselves; and though they
were the sons of strangers, yet God assured them a place in his sanctuary; but
because there was not provision enough for the multitude of the Nations within
the Bounds of that Religion; it was certainly at all times lawful and pleasing
to God, that they should have Nationally dedicated themselves to the true
Jekovah, though eminently known then to be the God of Israel: and that they did
not so, gave reason always to his Wrath against them, whenever he pleased to
execute it.

But I hasten to the third Argument of nearer concernment to us.

The third Argument I derive from the Favor of Christian Religion,

1. Christianity repeals none of the Laws of God that are founded in the very
Nature of Things: if therefore National Religion be according to the Rules of
Essential Duty toward God, if it be the Reasonable service of Nation; It is
certain Christianity does not remove it, but restores and exalts it to the
greatest perfection: Christ came not to dissolve any of those Laws, but to
fulfill them, that is, to restore the Doctrine to its just Integrity, where it
was falsely gloss'd upon; and if any thing was wanting in the former Revelation
of it, to superadd what might render it most complete.

2. Of the same Nature is the second proof, That if God not only for the sake
of type, and shadow, which was useful for that State of the Church, but for the
sake of the real Goodness and Usefulness of the Thing it self, pitched upon the
National Form of Religion, by his immediate Revelation to Abraham and Moses,
(as I have already argued), it cannot be supposed to be reversed by Christ: It
remains therefore among those things that are written for our Admonition, and
Learning, on whom the Ends of the world are come.

3. Christianity vouches it self a Religion of the most public spirit and
intention, and came into the world by the High Conduct of God to open all
passages for Truth and Divine Knowledge among men; as innumerable places in the
Old and New Testament assure us; so that the Gospel most evidently designs it
self to be free, and public, as the Heaven, as the lights of it, and the
words of the Psalmist may well be applied to it: The line of it is gone
throughout all the Earth, and its words to the ends of the world: so far
therefore as Naturalness, and Publiqueness agree, so far the thing is
undeniable.

4. Many expressions of the Prophets that went before, of our Savior, and his
Apostles that fol^owed after, have a particular Favor for National Religion.
To name some of a multitude: Christ shall sprinkle many Nations: He is the
Desire of all Nations: Go make Disciples of all Nations: All the Kingdoms of
the World shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. The Apostle
magnifies himself, as the Apostle of the Nations; He compares himself with the
Holy Priesthood, while by Preaching the Gospel, he was negotiating in the
offering up the Nations, a sacrifice consecrated, and sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, the greatest sacrifice that was ever offered to God, except that of the
Son of God, offering himself. And this is the only instance of the Ministry of
the New Testament, resembled with the Priesthood of the Law, or clothed with
that Denomination of Priestliness, use has appropriated to it, and that to no
other office but of Preaching to Conversion, Romans 15. 16.

But because I know the proofs from these Scriptures are liable to be
retrenched by expounding them of the Diffusion of Christianity into the
Catholic Church throughout the World, and then calling out of every Nation
Converts into particular Societies and Congregations; I shall make an Essay to
level the line of them to Nations and Kingdoms, as they are united into such
Conspicuous, and Illustrious Bodies of Mankind, with their Principalities so
formed, so compacted, and not only a Diffused Catholic Church, or small and
invisible Congregational Churches.

1. The Kingdom of Christ can no way attain that Greatness, which it is
prophesied and foretold it shall attain, if it does not allow Nations, as
Nations to associate themselves in the profession of it; if it only gives Right
to private and particular Churches, or Congregations; and a Diffusive Church,
that can no way congregate, which though great in its Spiritual Union, yet
arises to no visible Greatness; but as it moving into all parts of the world,
congregates it self according to any of the Laws, or Advantages of Humane
Society it falls into, and finds prepared for it: The Messiah then can never,
as is prophesied of him, have his portion divided him with the great* nor
divide the spoil with the strong, but must rest in a very low and
under-condition of small, private, and particular Assemblies of his servants,
professing him; but a National Christian Religion, a Religion, as Famous as the
name of the most populous Cities, and the greatest Princes and their
Territories, in honor to the Lords anointed, must not be allowed, no not
according to his own Designation. For though the Eminency of the Doctrine, and
the Appearance of God with it, does infinitely surmount all created Greatness;
yet many places of Scripture compare the Honor and Glory of Christ, as a
Prince over Nations, with other Soveraignties, and prefer his; not only in
regard of the Heavenliness, and Eternity of it, but as it obtains an Interest
and Command in the world. For it is a Government over Nations, as Nations; over
the Laws and Principalities of Nations; and not of one only, but many Nations;
not indeed in the way of Worldly power, but Divine persuasion: Evidences of
Truth, and Reason, Virtue of Holiness, and Goodness, are the Scepter of this
Kingdom, the weapons of this Power; and this Mountain shall grow greater, and
greater, till all the Prophecies are exactly fulfilled in the Sovereignty of
Christ, and the lowest subjection of all Kingdoms to him: the greatest
Mountains disappearing and becoming nothing before him, when the fullness of the
Jews, and Nations are come into him. Thus it is a Mountain set upon the top of
the Mountains; not only in the Eminency of its Doctrine, but the professed
subjection of the Governments of the world (that are in Scripture called
Mountains) to it, for his Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness sake: But if
Nations receiving and flowing into Christianity, sink it presently into
particular, private Assemblies, as it was while under persecution, and that it
should be of no more public Honor, than at such times; the Mountain of the
Lords house should not be above the Hills, but shaded by them, and that
according to the very Constitution of Christianity it self; for the Supremacies
stand aloft, but the profession of Christ retires into privacies; yea the
worship of the True God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, which after the
appearance of the Son of God in the world, is only in Christ, must be so far
from being exalted, as is everywhere signified, that it must be abated and
brought low by the Depression and falling down of the Mosaic Frame; for then
it was settled upon one of the Principalities of the world; and though it be now
more diffused, yet if it not only be not, but ought upon its own principles to
be Established in, and upon the public profession of a Nation; It has not, nor
can have such an Eminency as among the Jews, when it had the Awfulness and
Majestickness of a Kingdom devoted to that true Worship, making it thereby of
much greater notice in the World.

And if Religion may be National, even as Nations themselves are united in a
way of order, so must National Religion also be by order composed into its
Nationalness: and this by the Rules of Scripture and Right Reason.

But let this be no pretense to that Tyranny in Christian Religion, that great
Usurpation of Popery; for it is a Sacrilegious Displacing the Honor from
Christ upon oftentimes a most unworthy Mortal; those Princes then that are
Minores Coronae, that lessen themselves by giving their Kingdom and power to
the Beast, must needs diminish the Honor of their profession of Christianity,
seeing they have so far stripped themselves of their Principalities, that they
have them not to dedicate to Christ: The retaining their Honor unvouch'd,
unviolate by any creature, and presenting to the Honor of Christianity a
Supremacy unprostitute, is the true Glory done by Christian Princes to
Christianity.

2. If there were not the Liberty allowed to Nations to espouse Christianity to
their Government, and to receive the Honor to themselves of being Religious,
and Christian, as Nations; the Condition of Nations were worse than that of the
Jews under the Law. For now People, as in the Body of a Nation, may not be so
happy, as to have the Lord for their God. They may not crown themselves with
the chief Glory of Nations, viz. True Religion: Moses, we know, often magnifies
the State of the Jews to themselves, in this particular, viz. the Excellency of
their Religion: He uses it as a great Argument, that God loved the Nation; He
told them, it was their Wisdom and Honor, before the rest of the Nations round
about them, who had reason to defer to them, that they were a great, and a wise
Nation, an understanding people, that had such Deuteronomy. 4. 8, etc.
Statutes and Judgments.

Now seeing Christian Religion has the undoubted Evidences of Wisdom, Truth,
and Goodness; not only so superior to all the Religions in the world, as to be
the only true Religion; but much superior to that under Administration of the
True Religion it self among the Jews: It must needs be the happiness of Nations
to enfranchise it, as the public National Religion, by the same Authority
whereby they make valid any other Law, or Act, so as to become the act of the
Public.

And we have reason to believe those many expressions of Ephesians. Ephesians. 2. 14. c.
3. 6.
2. 14. c. 3. 6. Breaking down the Partition Wall, and admitting all Nations to
be the People of God, and (...), a Body together, are intended, not only to
signify that they may unite in lesser Congregations, but in the fullness of
National Associations, else they are not received into the same freedoms and
immunities that the Jews had; nor could Egypt and Assyria be so equal with
Israel, that Israel should be but a third with them, whom the Lord of Hosts
shall bless all alike with no more variation, than Egypt my People, Assyria
the work of my Hands, and Israel my Inheritance, Isa. 19. We may find
Christianity intended to embrace all Societies of Mankind, it declared it self
a Religion that loved them, and, as it were, on purpose to testify the Divine
Approbation of, and the near resemblance between those Civil and Political
Unions one with another, founded in the very nature of Humane Society; and that
Religious Union, which by the very same Law of Nature follows them as so
united, Christianity kept to the very same Tenor of Union it found any where,
and twined as close about the Cities, Neighbourhoods and Families, made ready
to its hand by civil Associations, as it could; not calling men out to
Wildernesses, Mountains, or Woods, to be the Churches of Christ; or that they
should abide in Deserts and Solitudes, when persecution did not drive and force
them out: But the Churches of Christ are denominated from those Cities and
Regions where they are planted, as the Churches of Ephe^^^^* 2 Cor 9 2.
Cori^th, Judaea, Galatia, Macedonia, etc. yea the Christi^^ of Achaia, are
called by the Apostle, Achaia, as if Christianity were there become the
Religion of the Country; and the seven Churches of Asia, are called those very
Cities where they were seated. Rev. 1. 1^.
Wherein it is observable, the Churches of Cities are called the Church of or
in each City, as one; though it is in a manner certain, they must be
distributed into more Congregations for their numerousness; yet they are still
called one, because the City was one. But the Regions not being so united in
Government, Neighborhood, or any kind of Civil Union, the distribution of
Churches easily follows the distinction easily supposable in their civil state:
In Regions therefore we suppose there was no Center of Union, not in the
Churches, which were at distances too great for Coagmentation into one; nor in
the Laws and Government, at least with any respect of order toward Religion;
they are therefore called Churches and not one Church, as they are without any
exception in Cities, even where the Apostle names particular Churches in the
Houses within those Cities; yet in regard of the Unity of the City it self,
they are comprehended under the one Church of that City.

Now all this speaks the care Christian Religion uses not to disturb, but to
conform to Civil Societies, and therefore especially to National the chief of
those Societies; and so I close this third Argument for National Religion,
derived from the consideration of Christian Religion.

National Religion is of great moment and consideration, in respect Day of
Judgment; for the wrath and fury of God upon those Nations that know him not,
that call not on his Name, is to be taken at the full extent and duration in
this world, in that which is to come; and so the happiness of Nations, who have
the Lord for their God, that have the everlasting Arms under and about them,
spreads it self not only upon Time, but upon Eternity.

It is indeed generally taken for granted, that Nations are only judged as
Nations in this world; yet if we closely examine, we shall find both in
Scripture and Reason, very valuable grounds to believe, the Day of Judgment
shall not only pass upon persons single, but in their Communities, as they are
locked in with their Associations, and with respect to those very periods of
Time, and the Generations into which the Communities and Associations have been
distributed; so that not only the people of every Nation come into Judgment
together, but the people of every Generation, of this or that Nation, come
distinctly into Judgment together.

Besides those peculiarities of Sin, or Grace, wherein every man is individual
to himself, and no Stranger intermeddles, but he proves and enjoys his own work
alone, or bears his own burden: There are also men's interwoven Actions, either
good or bad, wherein the Communities, knots of Society, Neighbourhoods,
Concurrences with the Nation, Conformities with the Age and Generation, shall
be exactly compared, and weighed in the Eternal Judgment.

For there is nothing more frequent in the Scripture, than thus to represent
the carriage of the day of Judgment: The Nations, whole as Nations, that forget
God, shall be turned into Hell, and Egypt and Ezekiel. 32. 18, etc. Rom 2 12.
all its company, all its Hosts lie together; the other Nations with their
multitude, every one in their proper sorts: The Uncircumcision and those
without Law, are judged by themselves; the Circumcision, and those under the
Law, by themselves, distinctly Our Savior speaks o^ Sodom and Gomorrah, the
men of Nineveh, Tire aend Sidon, Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, coming
into Judgment, in that Union, in that Community, wherein they were imbodyed
here in the world; and the men of that Generation, as they were that Generation.

I confess it is not so clear, that the happiness and salvation of mankind, is
with any respect to the distinction of Nations; because, besides what other
reasons may be given, the union of all blessed persons to God and Christ, and
of happy Spirits one to another, is so infinitely great, as to swallow up all
distinctions; so that there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Scythian nor Barbarian,
but God and Christ are all, and in all.

And so far as there is any such National distinction, Our Lord being of the
Seed of Abraham, in whom all the Families of the Earth are blessed, the bosom
of Abraham, the Table of Everlasting Life, at which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
sit down, the new Jerusalem, the Israel of God, are the Capital expressions of
happiness.

But still there is reason to think the distinction of Nations is not so lost,
but that the Holy Seed is as the substance of every Nation, in which it is for
ever (as it were by it self conserved:) A Seed serves God in every Age, which
is accounted to the Lord for a Generation at that time, and when God writes
down the people in the Book of Life, he writes them as under the head of such a
Nation; this or that man was born there, although they are all enrolled, as
Citizens of that common City of Zion, the City of David, from whom our Lord
sprang. And though all Christians are one holy Nation, yet it is said of some
very glorious, and happy State of the Church, (of which I will not undertake to
determine) that after the distinct Sealing of so many thousands of each Tribe,
there was yet an innumerable company, not in a confusion, but in a distinction;
so as to be known to be of all Nations, Kindreds, People, and Tongues. All the
Nations of them that are saved, are also mentioned in the same Mystical Book,
as kept under that distinction.

The Apostle speaks to his Corinthians and Thessalonians, as certain he should
meet them under those very names, at the appearance of Christ: He prays for
Israel, as a Nation, that they might be saved; he discourses their falling away
and recovery in a national way, for many particular Israelites were then called
and saved, but not in a national way, as he insists.

Besides all these fair Inducements from Scripture, there is the same urgency
of Reason, for the Day of Judgment passing upon men, as in Nations and lesser
Communities, as upon their single persons; for else their actions can never be
judged, the very compliance with the custom of Nations, with the sway of such
an Age and time, being the reason of many sins; and the sinful ways of men are
so locked into one another, that the Day of Judgment, that gives sentence upon
all things most righteously, comprehends them together, even as the Fallen
Angels, the old World were judged together, and in common.

In Sodom and Gomorrah, was given a pre-appeatance of the final Jude 7th.
Judgment upon the world, for the Apostle tell^ us they were set forth for an
ensample, and that they suffered the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; and we know
they suffered in their Community; Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all their
company, were involved, as in the sin, so in the punishment; and there is no
separation except where Repentance, and that with great difficulty, has made
it.

So on the happy side of things, Religious Nations and Communities encourage
and assist one another in acts of Love, Service and Duty to God, in Virtue and
all Goodness, and infold their piety mutually, so that on neither side the
recompenses of Mercy or Justice can be proportioned, but as in Community.

2. There is the same Reason for the last Judgment passing upon Nations as
Nations, as for its passing upon private persons, as private persons.

For let any one survey History, and he shall find Nations, as Nations, have
escaped the vengeance of God in this world, as much as single Persons; and the
same sort of Revolutions, Changes, and final Periods have befallen Nations
professing God and Christ, as those that have been enemies to such Profession;
as is most apparent in a compare of the Jews or Christian Nations: Yea
generally those that have been called by the Name of God and Christ, have been
most speedily punished, as those that God has most especially known of all the
Nations of the Earth. The Prophet Hab^kkuk's First Chapter is spent upon this
very Subject, of that wicked Nation of the Chaldaeans, so prosperous above the
Jews, described in many elegant similitudes, and vehemently expostulated from
the twelfth verse to the end.

Whoever shall consider the ancient Romans, or the Papacy, or the Turkish
Empire, since the rising of it, must needs conclude, that to judge Nations, as
Nati^^^ at last, appertains as much to the Paramount Sovereignty o^ ^^vine
Justice, and more than single Persons.

Nations that have been so great and formidable, and Princes swelling with the
height of Pride, and contempt of God and Religion, should in all reason stand
in those very Appearances at his Tribunal; with their wise Senates, mighty
Captains, Armies, and Multitude about them, and so be Sentenced and Condemned
by the Righteous Judge of all the World, the only Potentate, the King of Kings,
Lord of Lords, and Prince of Princes, even Christ the Son of God, in humane
Natue, else they would not be judged at all as Nations.

For here neither Love nor Hatred can be known any more to Nations than to
single Persons, by any thing that is before us. There is often one event to
all, to the Righteous and Merciful, and to the Unjust and Tyrannick Nations, to
the Good and to the unclean People, to them that sacrifice to the True God, and
to them that sacrifice to Idols.

There are as many Instances of the severity of God against private, particular
wicked persons, as against such Princes, Nations, or particular Ages; and of
his patience and forbearance to the one as to the other: There are as great
examples of the mercy, and favor of God to private, particular good men, as to
pious Nations and Governments; and of his severe corrections upon the one as
the other. The piety therefore and the wickedness of Nations according to their
particular Generations, equally waits for the last Day, even as of single
Persons.

For though there are Periods Judgment sets to it self; and when sin is come to
its height, Judgment stays no longer; yet this without a future Judgment will
not give satisfaction for the Ages of Prosperity and Greatness, the many signal
Victories, the stupendous Grandeur many very bad Nations and their Princes
have arrived at, and continued in before the final Calamity has overtaken
them; any more than dying at last with great circumstances of pain and horror,
answers for the worldly prosperity of many a wicked man, if after Death there
were no Judgment: So that especially as to particular Generations, there is the
same Reason for the Judgment of Nations, as of particular Persons.

3. If all things were not to be as publicly transacted at the Day of
Judgment, and to be set upon as open and universal a Theater, as they were
acted upon here, and that before the Congregation of Heaven and Earth at that
day; there were not so great reason for an Universal Judgment; The Privat^
^udgment of Souls might suffice: Nor could there be any reason (...) ^cripture
should lay so great weight upon the Resurrection, and (...) in the very same
Bodies, at least as to the principal parts, and so as that men should be known
to be the same persons?

Why thus, If men were not to be presented in the same Circumstances,
Relations, Communities, and the most notorious Appearances, wherein they
conversed, and whereby they were most known in the world?

Let this then be granted, and it will rise up to States, Governors, Senates,
Princes, their Laws and Transactions, with the temper of their Times.

And indeed this setting Persons, their places of Habitation, their Nation,
their Times, together; must needs break out with the greatest luster of
Justice, and the Supremacy of Divine Judgment, when every thing shall be called
to account, and represented over again, just as it was in this world: Things
high and low, public, and private, national, and personal; but without this
all would be dark, private, obscure, and imperfect; notwithstanding the
gathering all together to that Tribunal. For very momentous Causes,
Circumstances, Aggravations, or Extenuations of Good or Evil, could not be
understood: The Pride of Sin and Wickedness would not be sufficiently humbled
and abased, nor despised goodness enough raised and honored, and so would
amount to little more than a private Judgment as I said before; but Scripture
every where instructs us, it is the very design of the Day of Judgment, to show
and present the whole Scene of things, and to se^ the balance of them even in
all particulars: It is the Day, not only of the righteous Judgment of God, but
of the manifestation of it; every thing is then composed to show and
Manifestation; it is the appearance of Christ, whom God will then show in the
highest glory of the humane Nature, and so that his low, despised, humbled, and
crucified State, shall also be seen, and the glory triumph over it, to the
utter confusion and wailing of all that pierced him, whose very own eyes shall
see him, as so pierced by them. It is the appearance of men in their Bodies, of
Nations in their National Capacities, of all men and things in their
Restitution: For it is the (...), the Regeneration, (Mat. 19. 28.) to their
former state; that Relig^on and Piety may receive its recompenses of Glory,
that Irreligion and Wickedness may have its just rewards of Shame and
Punishment, and that in the very circumstances wherein each were seen and
known, and shall then be remembered to ^ave stood here in the world, though for
the generality, very different from the esteem and disesteem they then found.

Lastly, This Representation of the day of Judgment, is the most lively,
feeling, and sensible Engagement to speedy Repentance and Reformation, that our
sins may be blotted out, when the times (...), of Re-enlivening all things
shall come from the presence of the Lord: Who would not take greatest care,
that when they are Acts 3 19.
sought for, they may not be found? Who would not desire, and so use the most
effectual means to appear in Glory, and not under shame and contempt?

This is also among the strongest Arguments upon the most honorable Personages
and Governors of a Nation, yea upon all that love the honor of their Nation,
and desire the glory of it with the true public Spirit, to mind the promotion
of sincere Religion, Piety, and Goodness in themselves, together with the State
of the People, Times, and Governments to which they belong; since if they
desire their Nations Renown in this world, and that their management in it may
be transmitted fair in Chronicle, that they may live High in Story; how much
more must they, if at all serious desire to m^ke an Honorable Figure in that
most Illustrious Representation of the last Judgment, and the Eternal Records
of All Things? They and their Country together, according to the station and
Relation wherein they have stood to it, and the love they have born to it?

And certainly every good man desires by an immutable Instinct, by a Law of
Goodness within himself, to be good in a Community, and to be saved in their
Salvation, which he earnestly aspires to in and with his own, and his own in
and with that: Yea, though he be so low or mean in his Fortunes, Abilities, or
Discourse, as not to be in any Advantages for propagating True Religion, y^^ he
has an inward force to it; and as every good man rises in his Stature and
Condition, and influence in the Nation to which he belongs; so in his service
to the public Religion, but especially every eminent, great, truly Religious
Person, of a public Character and a Lover of his Nation, has a most vehement
and ardent desire, not only of his own Salvation, but of the Salvation of his
Nation, of as many and great numbers, of as universal a Body of it as may be.
Moses was so high in this, that he desired to be blotted out of Gods Book of
Exodus 32. 32.
Favor, that he, rather than his Nation should; and the Apostle Paul for
Israel, his National Kindred, wished to be Anathema from Christ: The scruples
of either of which I will not dispute, being satisfied Romans 9 3.
they express a high and mighty zeal for the National Salvation, and which in a
degree is to be imitated by the best men.

Therefore such Persons, as Moses, Paul, and other of the Worthies of Nations
and People, that have been successful in bringing many to Righteousness and
Happiness, shall have (as our Savior speaks) Rule over Cities proportionable
to their service; they shall for ever be exalted as Princes over their People
in Eternal Glory, even as the Apostles shall sit upon Thrones, judging, (that
is) shall be Rulers and Governors over the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Those that have not been successful, as Noah, Lot, Esaias, etc. that have yet
had the Zeal, the public Spirit, that was commensurable to the Piety,
Religion, and Salvation of their whole Community, shall not, though Israel be
not gathered, yet spend their strength for naught, their judgment is with the
Lord, and their work with their God. They shall be glorious in the eyes of the
Lord, they shall Isa. 49. 3, 4,
be a sweet savor to God of true Holiness, and Piety, in them that perish,
even as in them that are saved.

The glory and happiness shall accumulate upon themselves, though it redound
not on the Nation: God makes them of themselves, as it were, a great Nation in
the blessedness of Eternity; as he promised Moses, if he would have been
contented with the destruction of that present Nation of Israel. They are
reckoned as a Nation by themselves, and not of that Community that perishes:
For as the Apostle says, The Lord knows how to deliver the Righteous out of
Temptation, and so out of the Infamy of a common corruption, and especially
that everlasting contempt; and reserve the wicked to swallow it wholly in
themselves. Their Reproach their Lord will return upon them for ever, it being
turned off from himself and his Servants.

But though there is an infinite wisdom in the Divine Judgment, in rescuing
thus his own Glory, and the Glory of his Servants that have been unsuccessful
in turning men to righteousness, while they have been faithful with all their
Talents, and in all their House; yet the salvation of Men and Nations, is the
plain and manifest glory of God, and of his most Eminent Servants. Those that
are their Converts, are their Hope now, and their Joy, their Rejoicing, their
Crown of 1 These. 2. 19, 20.
Rejoicing in the presence of Jesus Christ, at his coming in that day; only
thus Men of eminency, in holiness, are secured against loss, if they save only
their own souls, while they endeavor the good of many, that they may be saved;
they are Crowned with those whom God has given them, as Children, by being
in^truments of their Conversion. On the other side, they are assured of their
reward with God in them that perish.

But further, Every man that is good in a Nation, though his Interest be
private, may like the one poor wise man, have done all he can to save a City,
and therefore shall not be forgotten here. If he be a holy, good man, he will
not be lost by being alone, nor overseen by being low in the world, though he
be but one of a Family, or even of a City, yet God will bring him to Zion, the
City of the living God. Every one shall with Daniel stand in his own lot;
proportionable to what it was here, it shall be in that future state. God will
seek his Sheep out of all places whither they have been driven in the dark and
cloudy day, though but the poor of the flock, and they shall stand at his right
hand at that great Division of the Sheep from the Goats.

To conclude this Particular, The honor of Nations themselves, as well as
persons, wherein Religion has prevailed to such degrees, as to be called
National, is conserved in those that are saved, even as the honor of the
Angelick nature is conserved in the holy and elect Angels, as the humane nature
in the seed of Abraham, the father of the faithful, of them that are saved in
all Nations; as in Isaac, the seed of Abraham is called, as in Isaac's
children, the children of promise are counted for the seed. Thus the honor of
particular Romans 9. 7, etc.
Nations is treasured up in the elect of it; so that if we suppose a Nation
without Converts, it is lost, as to happiness, or as if it had not been, as the
Tribe of Dan has no name among those Rev. 7. 5, etc.
sealed Tribes, to which we had relation before: And as the order of each Tribe
is disposed according to the happy memory of the worthies of every Tribe, and
their more noble Acts, in, or for the True Religion (as is observed by
Interpreters): and as there are degrees of Glory to every Christian, according
to the excellency of his Graces and services that abound to his account; So the
case is with Nations and Generations, the more, and more eminent men any has
brought forth, the more it shall be adorned at that day. It becomes a Diadem
and Crown in the hand of God, and is, as the Isa. 62. 3. 5.
Prophet expresses it, as a Bride married by the multitude of her sons: So
that the last Glory and happiness of Nations is very greatly concerned in their
common Faith and Religion, and the nearest participation they have been capable
of in one another holiness and piety; and therefore the more they can do to
enlarge and increase it, the more they add to the common glory and salvation,
and do most ensure their own.

On the other side, Although there be a lessening of honor to a Nation, by the
fewness of those that are saved, and in the many of those that perish; yet it
is not so, as that the Glory is counter-ballanc'd by the disadvantage; for
there is a much higher account of Glory to the Goodness, Grace and Mercy of
God, to the salvation of Christ, in that excellent state of Gods Creation, in
the elect Angels, and the recovered parts of mankind, in that new Heaven and
new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, than there is depression of that Glory
in those that perish, and their contrary state; so the the Glory of the
Angelick and humane nature it self, and so of Nations, is more conserved in
those that are saved of them, than in those of them that are lost; for there is
a much more, a much higher reign of righteousness and life asserted by the
Apostle, than of Romans 5. 17.
sin and death, although Scripture, and general observation give reason to fear
there are more that perish than that are saved; and however we cannot unfold
the mystery of it.

This then stands as an impregnable argument for National Religion: If it
conduces so much to the future happiness and salvation of N^tions, and so to
the more exalted Glory and salvation of all those that are z^alous herein* and
both these in a more National visible way than things are transacted before our
eyes in this world, but that there shall be some such future state, whether at
the the day of Judgment, or throughout Eternity, we cannot define; yet that it
shall be, cannot be denied, when so much of Scripture, so much of Reason concur
in it: and so on the contrary, that the irreligion of Nations toward the true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, shall be revenged by the most
sensible, apparent infamy, contempt and wrath from Heaven, in which, those that
have had the most malignant influence into such irreligion, shall have a double
measure: and all this in a National way. I know not what can persuade more to
National Religion than so great a consideration. And so I finish this fourth
Argument.

The Fifth Argument for National Religion, shall be only a complication

1. National Religion contributes to the most happy state, peace, and union of
Nations: J^rusalem by virtue of its National Religion, as the Psalmist says,
was as a City compact together; now that which has a fitness and aptitude, by
the very law of Nature and the reason of things, to strengthen and corroborate
a Nation, may very justly be chosen by it for its own conservation and
happiness, upon that very account; but especially when it is subordinated to
better reasons too, and of a much higher nature: Every one therefore should
give the advantage to National Peace by consenting in National Religion; so
that we lose not the truth of Religion, for the sake of National Peace, which
may be supposed too to rise from a National Religion, though false.

But National true Religion is a means fitted by God to the peace of Nations,
and such a means as is acceptable and well pleasing to him.

First, For the sake of Religion; for Unity in Religion gives excellency to
Religion, and makes all the services of it more acceptable, as I have already
shown: It is also well pleasing to God, as it cements the peace of Nations;
which is of high price with the God of peace, and Christ the Prince of peace,
who has commanded us to seek peace and pursue it: To study to be quiet, to
live in peace, as much 1 These. 4. 11. Romans 12. 18. Prove. 6. 19. Mat. 5. 1.
Psalm 133
as lies in us, and if it be possible with all men; who has branded the sowing
discord among Brethren, as one of the principal Abominations to him, but has
blessed the peacemakers, owning them as his children. He has made truth and
peace the stability of any time; these are the pillars that are the Lords, and
he has set the Nations he loves upon them. Behold how good and how pleasant it
is for Brethren to live thus together in Unity: It is like the precious
Ointment of the Sanctuary, and the Dew of Heaven, where it is found; the Lord
has commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

Thus Religion, by being National, is freed from the charge of being a design
and occasion of disturbance.

Thus the Hearts of Princes safely trust in it; thus it becomes the very
ligament and sinews of Government, a pia matter to the sacredness of Authority,
and makes Sovereignty easy and sweet both to Prince and people.

What but Truth can be weighed against this Peace?

And that not all Truth, but Truth dwelling so near the essence of Religion,
the very purity of Divine Worship, that as it cannot be sold nor parted with,
so it may not be concealed: A man may not have it to himself, but with his
Mouth must make confession of it to salvation.

2. True Religion becoming National, has the desence and security of National
Wisdom, Force, and Strength, against false Religion, and its force and
endeavors to expel the true, and become National it self. For a Nation divided
against it self in Religion, how can its Religious Interest stand? When though
the main be agreed, yet if differences of an under nature are managed with high
exasperations, it must needs endanger the staple Religion it self, by weakening,
dispiriting, and dividing the strength that should engage for it, while every
one takes care for his private sentiments, and is jealous of being undermined,
or oppressed in them, the public and common Religion cannot be environed and
defended with that vigor and union.

A Nation united in Protestancy, is the greatest Bulwark against Popery; what
can single Interests do in this case? Even Experience teaches those that
dissent from one another in many things, even in National Reformed Religion) to
acknowledge this Union the Fort-Royal against the hostile Invasions of Popery,
which should conciliate them as far as is possible among themselves.

3. True Religion, as it is National, secures best against those undermining
Enemies of Atheism, Heresies, Enthusiasm, wild and monstrous Opinions,
Profaneness, neglect of all Religion, Coldness, Lukewarmness, which take
shelter and manage their defense from the divisions in the Religion of a
Nation, settled and confirmed into avowed Sects and several parties; but
National Union in a true Religion, strikes them both with fear and shame.

4. The benefits and blessings of public Religion, as before declared, come
down upon a Religious Nationa, and all the truly Religious parts of it, both in
this world, and in that which is to come, according to the strength of the
Union in National Religion: And this is an interest far greater than that of
Trade, warlike Defense, or the policy of Cities or Kingdoms. Accursed therefore
be that Irreligion or Disunion that enfeebles it: He that lives without God in
the world, as to the worship of him, and he that prodigally commits waste upon
a Religious Principle, is worse than they that by riotous living or idleness,
do their part to impoverish a Nation. He that upon Division retires from the
public Religion without necessity, takes his Interest out of the National Bank
or bottom, or sullenly lets it lie dead: Such kind of partyings in Religion
without necessity, are like the Hetaeriae or Cabals in Civil Government,
Consultations without respect to the public, and so the great damage of it an
injury of great guilt, seeing we owe so much to the public.

And so I have done what I intended in the arguing this point: I shall now
consider what may be objected to it, as an occasion further to explain this
whole Doctrine; and the great Objections I can conceive in prejudice of what I
have asserted concerning National Religion, I reduce to these following.

Obj. 1. When God gave the great instance and pattern of National Religion,
especially as in a National Church; how much otherwise did he found it, than is
possible to be derived from our Saviors Institution. He begun it in a holy
Root, that sprouted out and grew, and flourished into a Nation holy to God. By
his appointment they met together at Jerusalem, in the solemn Feasts and
Sacrifices, as public Ordinances. The Priests, and more especially the
Highpriests, were in most Authorirative Deputation from God, between him, and
that peculiar people, that they might unite all as in One. The Temple, Altar
and Holy of Holies, were as the common Center of all the public worship; and
a great sin it was to have multiplied any of these, and so to have made a
Division.

They had Prophets, who were their extraordinary National Ministers, their
Office and Sermons closely relating to the general state. Lastly, their Civil
Magistrates were under the strictest obligation, to attemper their Government
and Administrations to the Religious Laws, given by God to that people.

Besides all this, they had the Levites dispersed through their Cities and
Villages, to teach, and instruct in the Synagogues, the places wherein they
assembled for constant exercises of Religion. But now what a silence is there
of all these things, or any thing like them, with relation to Nations in our
Lords appointment? His Apostles called men out of Judaism, or Heathenism, the
then Religion of Nations, into private and particular Assemblies, called
Churches, under Pastors particular to them, without any Rules for Christian
Magistrates, or expectation of service from them; which argues, he did not
intend National Churches; or if he did by the Prophets signify any such, it
was not intended they should be in this dark and cloudy state, wherein
Antichristianism has so prevailed; it is reserved for some more glorious State
of the Church, some more eminent appearance of Christ, wherein such Prophecies
are to be fulfilled.

2. Hence it came to pass, the only Instances we have in Scripture, of
Christian Societies, the discourses of them, the Rules in relation to them, are
all fitted to private and particular Congregations; and where there are any
such spoken of, they are called Churches or Congregations; so that there is no
Association in Christian Religion mentioned, but under the name of a Church, to
signify Christian Religious Societies, and Churches, are all one; so that
there can be no National Christian Religion, without a National Church: But
there is no rule either of a National Christian Religion in the New Testament,
or a National Church.

3. A National Church, or a National Religion, must depend upon a National
Magistracy; the Church must be gathered in them, the Religion established by
them subject to their Laws and penal Statutes; and beyond this, those that
cannot be every way compliant with the whole National Scheme, are looked upon
as enemies to, or disturbers of the peace and Government of the Nation, because
the Government and the Religion are incorporate together; whereas the Laws, and
Religion, and Churches of Christ, are all in him, and depend upon him only; how
far is this from a National Church?

To give first an answer to these Objections together: The Arguments already
mentioned do mightily prevail with me that it is impossible Christianity should
by any of its influences, so much as suspend so absolute a Natural Duty upon
mankind as this, viz. to consecrate National Associations to God in National
Religion, but that it is always the duty of Christian Magistrates and people to
unite in National Christian Religion; Or that the Redeemer of mankind should
cut off so great a privilege of Nations as that, to entitle themselves
Nationally to God, and his favor and blessing, and to make profession of the
wisest and only true Religion in the world; or that the very proper and natural
Glory of Christianity, to make disciples of all Nations, may not at all times
be endeavored by every particular Nation. However the Prophecies may be more
literally fulfilled hereafter in the purity and universality of Christian
Religion.

This being premised, I come more particularly to give answer.

1. Many of these things that are named, as found in the Church of the Jews, as
a National Church, were not yet the Essentials of a Church, as National in
general, but of that particular National Church, and typical of things under
the Gospel, as is plain in the exposition of them in the New Testament; and
more particularly that excellent Epistle to the Hebrews: the Temple, the High
Priest, the Holy of Holies, the Altar, the Sacrifices, the solemn Feasts, with
such like, served only as shadows of things to come; and the want of them
argues nothing against National Religion.

2. Those things that were not Typical, or whose main and sole intention was
not to adorn and complete that whole Frame, but rested upon Universal
Principles of Reason, Truth, and Duty, can never be abrogated, but are for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have
National hope in God, and be obliged in our duty, even as they were. Thus the
duty of Magistrates and people toward true Religion, of public instruction,
of public Ministers of Religion, of care for places of meeting for Divine
Worship throughout a Nation, continue still, and need no new commands in the
Gospel.

3. As to the first planting of Churches by drawing Christians into particular
private Societies, it amounts but to thus much, that Christ the Lord of the
Church did not found his Church universal as necessarily diffusing it self into
Nations; nor could it in reason be so.

For seeing it was in Divine Providence, for great and weighty Reasons, of
which it is not proper now to speak, intended and ordered, that hundreds of
years should pass over Christianity, ere it had the favor and protection of
Supreme Christian Magistrates, there must have been for that space no Religion
or Church, if there had been no other Form but National. The Church of Christ
therefore, though it was in those days within Nations, Cities, Towns, and
Villages, yet of low stature in comparison of National Religion, till the Reign
of Christian Emperors, considerable indeed in it self, and its diffusion
through so much of the world, but not acknowledged by Laws or Governments, till
long after its first entrance. And at all times upon the change of a Christian
Magistracy into a Pagan, an Apostate, an Heretical, or Idolatrous Succession,
or the complex of all, Antichristianism, which early invaded the Church, and
even covered and obscured it in succession of time; the Church of necessity
must fall back into such a low state, and subsist upon its obedience to the Law
of Christ, and its own prudential accommodations to the state of Times, without
the Magistrates care and protection.

Our Savior therefore took care of the Catholic Church, which is of absolute
Divine Institution, which is founded in that promise, The gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it: To which belong primarily all the great and glorious
expressions of Scripture; to which are given originally Pastors and Teachers,
to propagate, promote, build up, and strengthen it; and shall by virtue of
Christ's ascension far above all heavens, be certainly continued to it, till we
all come to the unity of the Faith of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the
full measure and stature of Christ in all his members. All other Societies of
Christians are but little images and representations of this, in these its
excellencies; and the more they participate of it, the more truly are they the
Churches of Christ; But because this is too diffused for one Model, for one
Frame to comprehend, there is therefore allowance given by Christ for lesser
Associations of this Catholic Church, from the nature of the thing; and
because of the discountenance of Nations and worldly powers at first, and since
upon true Christianity: Our Savior therefore, Matthew. 15. 18 etc. expressly
fixes the promise of his Divine Presence in the smallest parts of this Church,
where but two or three are gathered together in his Name, he has assured, he
will be in the midst of them; so that it is hence evident, the whole
neighboring discourse centers in the least Assemblies agreeing in Christian
Religion: For though it supposes first a greater number, (the Church, and two
or three Witnesses being contradistinguished) yet as it were in prospect of the
great fewness upon some exigencies of Christians practicing the duties of
Christianity together, it brings down the promises of Audience in their appeals
to heaven, and presence with their whole worship and services to the smallest
numbers, not by way of limitation to, but encouragement of so small a number.
And it is very observable, the very same declaration of Christ to the Apostles,
whose soever sins you remit, or bind, by the true Doctrine of the Gospel, shall
stand good in heaven; the very same is said here to the smallest Societies of
Christians as to their Judgment and determination upon their own members,
according to the Laws of Christ concerning the offenses that fall out among
themselves, having the same Doctrine to proceed he committed to them, even as
to the Apostles themselves: Churches are Pillars and Rocks of Truth, even as
the most Excellent Ministers, and either, or all being no more, but Praecones,
each in their kind, or Publishers of the Will of Christ, and his Truth declared
in his Word, in the virtue of their being parts of the Catholic Church.

Now the Reason why our Savior pitches upon so small a number of Christians,
agreeing, is certainly this, because he would appoint no other form to his
Church, than such as could live, as could subsist under any Civil Government
whatever, whether friendly or unfriendly to it. He gave it no other shape, but
what it might attain and keep under any state of Civil Laws, under any enmity
it met with in the world.

And this was most necessary, because the Church of Christ was not confined to
one Nation, as the Jewish was, whom God in a peculiar manner singled out, and
managed to the state of a Kingdom, and Nation, by a mighty power, and
outstretched arm, and conserved by the same, ruling it with an immediate
sensible presence, after he had formed it by precise Laws, and settled the just
bounds of all Officers in their Office, and appointed them the place of the
exercise of it; whereas the Christian Doctrine being indifferent to every
Nation under Heaven, it did, as it made its progress, convert certain numbers
to it self at first, which had no privilege of humane Laws or Powers, but the
edg of all turned against it; so that the Form of Churches was composed to all
the vicissitudes of Providence they were to undergo; and that in all reason,
must be in case of necessity, the very least of Societies of Christians, Two,
or Two or Three (as our Savior significantly points upon small Societies) for
such are most fitted to the worst of conditions that could befall; lesser, and
single bodies moving every way, and shifting for the gaining opportunities for
the assembling themselves, and preserving their relation one to another, in the
discharge of mutual duties, much more easily than any greater associations
could; for our Savior intended all for use, not for Form; he minded not
Nominal, Titular Bishops and Churches.

Thus far I have pleaded the appointment of Christ, that the smallest numbers
of Christians may agree and associate, and be assured of his presence.

But now, that this appointment is in bar of greater Societies of Christians,
is by no means to be granted; for it is most apparent, our Savior designed all
things under the Gosplel should be restored to the Law of Nature, and the true
Reason of Things.

Now according to that, the first End of all Society, is the enjoyment of True
Religion, in more than solitude.

This desire of enjoying true Religion in Society, extends it self from the
least of Societies, to the greatest, that are not too great for the Ends of
Society: Our Savior therefore, as he gave no Frame of positive Laws, or
Worship, no Pedagogy of Precepts, so no Institution of Bounding Churches, but
that in case of straits and exigencies his true Religion may be administered in
the very smallest of Societies with confidence of his Favor and Presence; when
it has freedom, it may enlarge it self further and further; and if it have
favor of Nations and Governments, ascend to the greatest; yet with this
reserve, That if in any time or place National Christianity varies from the
true Original Christianity, as often it has been sound to do; so that it
cannot, even in substantial things, be consented in with a pure Conscience,
privater Congregations, even to the most particular, are always ready for
Christians to retire into; for so the Laws of Nature allow, where the Public
is not safe; and yet when the whole is not corrupted, nor liberty of joining
without commixture with those Corruptions denied, there may yet be, there ought
to be no Separation.

Thus the greatest Societies are not in bar of the least, when True Religion
requires them.

Thus the least are not in bar of the greatest, when Christianity is at full
freedom; for it is closely allied with that Wisdom, whereby Kings ought to
Reign, and Princes to decree Justice; by which Princes Prove. 8. 15, 16.
ought to rule, and Nobles, yea all the Judges of the Earth, with that Wisdom,
which rejoices in the Habitable parts of the Earth, and has its delights with
the sons of men.

I have therefore before observed, That Christian Religion at the very first
joined it self, as near as it could, to all Humane Societies made ready to it,
as Families, Villages, Regions; and so far as the Rage of Persecution would
permit Christian Societies, united themselves unto Distant and National
Correspondencies among themselves.

Now it has been so unhappy indeed with the World, that in few Instances there
has been a Good State of National Religion to yield a full, conscientious
Compliance with. Yet this will no more argue against the Thing it self, than it
does against any other of the wise and good Ordinations of God, or against the
Jewish Church, so immediately governed by God, and yet so often, and so
notoriously corrupted in Judah, and more generally in the Ten Tribes; and yet
to show how, to the very utmost, without following a multitude to do evil, we
ought to join with any that are good in a Nation, and with any thing that is
good in National Religion, when Elijah had, as it were, deserted his place, and
the good influence his being in public might have had, and that God found him
alone; He did by way of Reproof ask him, What he did alone in 1 Kings 19. 9.
the Wilderness, and informed him of a greater number that had not bowed to
Baal, than he knew of, with whom he might join himself.

If Corruption would argue against any good Appointment, or Ordination of God,
it would argue against Churches of the very first Form, or Constitution; those
Churches in the Revelation, whose Corruption is severely taxed and threatened,
yet are without any Censure as to their Constitution; and while S^paration from
those Churches is not so much as intimated, yet a Separation from Impurities is
highly commended, and promised reward. Those Names Rev. 3. 4.
in Sardis, that had not defiled their garments, are assured they should walk
with Christ in white, for he judged them worthy.

From whence I conclude, no Form of Churches can recommend things disagreeing
from the word of God, how truly formed soever those Churches be; for Churches
are constituted for joining in those things that are agreeable to the Will of
Christ, not in those that are not; and yet Separation from Corruptions does not
necessitate Separation from Churches, while there are any Parts of Divine Truth
and Worship preserved pure to unite in; so great are the Obligations that lie
upon all sincerely Religious, to make true Religion as public as they can in
the several Societies that are found to ingraft it upon.

Now that every Society, that is the feat of True Christian Religion, is in the
language of the New Testament, A Church, I allow, and therefore will briefly
inquire into the Scripture-notion of a Church.

And I find the Original word taken out of the Septuagint of the Old Testament,
which translates the Hebrew Kahal by (...), which our Translators in the Old
Testament, as generally render Congregation; although in the New Testament,
what is in the quotations out of the Old Testament in the Greek (...), they
render Church: so that from the whole it is very plain, as the Universal, or
National Assembly of the people of Israel was called (...), or the Church, as
by St. Stephen, Acts 7. 38. where he speaks of the whole Body of the Israelites
in the Wilderness: so the Universal Assembly of Christians, considered as in
the Catholic Church, is called by our Savior and the Apostles (...), that is,
The Congregation, by way of Eminency, as Holy Records are The Scripture or
Writing, and the Volume of Scripture, The Bible or Book, as the glad tidings of
Christ, are the (...), the Evangil, or Gospel; so the Church is The
Congregation: And as lesser Congregations of that Church of the Jews, that did
not comprehend the whole Body, are called The Congregation, or Church; even so
lesser Societies of Christians are called the Congregation, or Church; in
allusion to which our Savior says, If two or three are (...), a word of like
Importance.
gathered together in my name, I will be in the midst of them.

So that the Universal (...) of Christians seen only together by God; and
particular Assemblies of Christians, that meet together under each others eye,
are in the phrase of the New Testament, Churches. Even as the whole Assembly of
the Israelites in the Wilderness, when they were all under one view is by St.
Stephen, as I observed, called the Church; and the Congregations, after they
were become a Nation, though they could not all then meet together, are called
the Church also, because they were all under one Law and Institution, all
partakers of the same Rights and Privileges, and so indeed all particular
Churches of Christians are but the Catholic Church in lesser Associations, as
the circumference of Heaven is the same, though in so many different Horizons;
As light is the same, though variously modeled by its several Receptions; as
the Ocean is one, by how many several Denominations soever it be distinguished
from the shores it washes, or the channels, or other scituations it rests in;
so this Church is often spoken of as one Church, and as several Churches, as
the Sea is one and several Seas, they being so much every way the same, as to
differ only in the Universality.

But whether a Nation united in Christianity may be called a National Church,
having many dissents of opinion appertaining to it, and not possible to be
decided by express Scripture, there being no Christian Nation under Heaven in
those days of the New Testament, wherein it was written; I shall leave wholly
in the middle, and only observe two Things concerning this Controversy.

1. That there can no great matter accrue to either side of it, by deciding
for, or against a National Church.

For allow a National Church, or if you will, a Congregational Church, agreeing
in any thing, not agreeing with the Laws of Christ, or if either of them wants
any thing necessary to our Obedience to all the Laws of Christ.

In the first of these Cases, Christians may and ought to retire from the
Irregularities of any such Church, either National, or Congregational, that
they may be pure from Corruption.

In the second Case, Christians must find out the ways and opportunities, so
far as is possible, whereby they may perform all the Duties commanded by
Christ, though they separate from either of those Churches, no further than to
those ends.

But if there be a Corruption in the Main, or a Defect in the Vitals of the
Doctrine, or Worship of Christ, in either Notion, or Churches that will not be
upon due Remonstrances reformed, then if according to the Institution of
Christ, Christians gather into Assemblies, though lesser, though but of Two, or
Three, they are assured of the Presence of Christ; and no inconvenience of
Rending the Body of Christ, or making Divisions in his Church, shall condemn
them; for the Society deserted is not his Church, but the Society that does
desert is his Church, supposing it retires sincerely in obedience to the Laws
of Christ.

On the other side, Suppose a National Church, not of the Ordination of Christ
in the Gospel, as under that Name or Notion; yet if that stand good, which I
have endeavored to demonstrate, that every Nation, to which the Gospel is
preached, is bound by the Laws of God established in Nature, and by the Laws of
God and Christ in his Word, to plant true Christian Religion upon its National
Union; It will be still every Christians duty to join in, unite himself with,
encourage and promote all that True National Christian Religion, and not to
separate from it, any further than the Laws of Christ oblige him, that he may
yield Obedience to all those Laws: For it is the absolute Duty of every member
of a Nation to seek the Eternal Salvation of his Nation in his sphere, as the
Apostle Paul did of the Jews in so high an Orb, when he professed his great
heaviness and sorrow of heart, even to the wishing himself accursed from
Christ, and prayed with his hearts desire, they might be saved. On account of
which, in so many things he became to the Jews as a Jew, and wrote that
Excellent Epistle to the Hebrews; It being for that very Reason to me most
probable, it was his, that he might make good all those great professions of
Love to them; for though it was peculiarly directed to the Christian Hebrews,
yet it had an aspect upon the whole Religion, and people of the Jews, as the
scope of Adjusting all the Mosaic and Jewish Law to the Gospel-Mediation,
makes plain, and so was in it self most proper for the Conversion of that
Nation, as a Nation, seeing their owned and gloried in National Religion truly
understood, led to the Christian Religion, justly now to have been their
National Religion, if they had yielded obedience to their own Laws rightly
interpreted.

Now if National Religion be an undoubted obligation upon Nations, and the
members of Nations, so far as it is true; Those Laws, those Officers that are,
though not ordained by Christ, yet not contradictory to his Ordination, but
necessary, according to Rules of Right Reason, to the Establishing True
Religion, as National, must be submitted to also, upon the account, and for the
sake of that True Religion, as National: But if National Religion wander from
Truth, that Fundamental Liberty established by Scripture, and Laws of Nature,
must be always preserved, that I before asserted, as giving Right to retire
from all Societies not united in Truth, according to the Degrees of their
defection from it.

But for the further justifying National True Religion, I will in the next
place observe from Scripture the Uses, and great Ends of Churches, and see how
far National Religion may be accommodated to them.

For Churches are not therefore appointed, that men may Arbitrarily, and
Fancifully choose, which, or what sort they will be of: but that the true
Reasons and Purposes of them may be observed and complied with; and they are
these Three.

1. That there may be a Generation of men in the world, in the same Faith and
Worship of God in Jesus Christ, according to the Scripture, however dispersed,
at whatever distance soever remote, yet united in the same Doctrine, Prayer,
Preaching, Praising God in the Sacraments, and if opportunity allows and
invites it, in the same actual Worship, and at all times closely compacted in a
virtual and mystical Communion with one another, the same spirit running
through all, uniting all to Christ, and God, and one with another, joined in
the same love, and sympathy of joy in the prosperity, and of sorrow in the
affl^ctions and sufferings one of another, and with all readiness in yielding
the fruits of mutual Charity, Mercy and Compassion from one end of the earth to
the other, every true Christian being the compassionate Samaritan to every
other Christian, and not Jewishly distinguishing his mercy to his own Sect,
Party, or Church; and in cases of corruption and defection from the Laws, and
Word of Christ, there is to Christians, a mutual power of remonstrating against
those corruptions, and that defection, by arguing, expostulating, censuring the
evil of them; yea, and Authoritative denouncing the Judgment of God and Christ
upon them; for that Charter of Christ's, to the true Preachers of the Gospel, to
the true Churches, stands good as to Ages, so to all parts of the true Church,
Whose sins ye remit, are remitted, etc. viz by solemn Declarations out of, and
according to the Laws of Christ, even to the utmost distance, wherein any
rational possibility of extending such Remonstrances and Declarations, with
success and effect, can be found: there is not only power, but an incumbent
duty to do it.

This Union now is of uncontrollable Divine Right. Thus much of National
Religion, a National Church can by no means be denied to a Christian Nation,
seeing to be thus of the Church, is absolutely necessary to salvation: Every
man that shall be saved, being certainly added to this Church, the entrances
into which, in deed, and in truth, are by the saving Graces of the Spirit of
God, and in the judgment of Charity, by a serious profession: And this is that
Catholic Church that comprehe^ds all lesser Unions, but excludes, or denies
none, much less can be excluded by any. As therefore every one must be of the
Church Catholic, and Nations ought to be Christian Nations, and protect that
profession: So this very Catholic Church in every Nation, where it is truly
found, carries with it the name of a Church; and as a Nation is by it self, and
its own Civil Union, denominated a Nation; so the union of Christians must be
the Church in that Nation; for it is the Catholic Church in its universal
diffusion, running through this, or that particular Nation, and all the virtues
and duties of the Catholic Church ought to be exercised in it; and if any one
denies this, he denies the Catholic Church of greater moment than any
particular Church can be.

2. All the closest and most constant exercises of Christian Religion, that
Christians are to exercise one with another, that cannot be exercised but in
Society; of this kind, are all parts of the public worship of God, Prayer,
Preaching, Sacraments, which are indeed, or ought to be the same for nature
throughout the whole Christian Church, but must be actually performed in
particular Societies: Now these Churches may be solemnly erected, and
constituted by agreement, but they are also founded, and even grow out of the
very nature of the thing: for the close Neighborhood of Christians one with
another, they having continual knowledge of, and acquaintance one with another,
and thereby daily opportunities of agreeing in that public worship of God, and
their common profession, all these engage, and also incline them to unite,
whether in greater Families, as the Apostle speaks of Churches in the Families
of Christians, or in Villages, or in greater Congregations of Cities, one or
more; still the obligation is unavoidable: The necessity of Duty that lies upon
Christians to perform these Acts of Worship in Society, and the Law that is
upon all Society (and Societies must needs grow out of this frequent
conversation) to dedicate it self to God, make it absolutely necessary, that
from the neighborhood of Christians should arise particular Churches.

And who then can deny, but that there may be an Union, and further, that there
ought to be an Union of a Nation, agreeing with it self, as in the same
Government, Laws, National Constitutions, and commerce in a more frequent and
free conversation one with another; so in Religion, when the parts of it
profess the same true Religion, and desire to worship God in the most public
way they can? or who can deny, that a Nation may give name to a Church, seeing
the very Cities give name to Churches, where there was a number of Christians,
acting together according to the Laws of Christ, given to his Church?

The obligation to true Religion, to public Religion, is undeniable. The
opportunity of agreement is the same, and may be transacted in the same mannner
all other National agreements are.

And what is a Church but a Society agreeing in all Acts of true Religion,
according to the Laws allowed by Christ, having no other Form but that of the
Catholic Church, distinguished by the particular Societies or places where
they reside.

I acknowledge Two things are necessary to particular, by the nature of
particular Societies, and the places where they resided Churches. 1.
Consciousness, or mutual knowledge of persons and their worship. 2. Consent.
This our Savior teaches in that expression, if Two of you shall agree, Mat.
18. and indeed not only in particular Churches, but even in the Catholic
Church it self these things have their resemblance, but with this difference:
In the Catholic Church the Divine Spirit running through all, knows them all
that truly belong to it, and every one of them, one for another; and by their
true Faith they all are united in closest consent, in all things necessary to
salvation, one with another, which Faith is kept from failing by the same
spirit in them all that are truly of it.

But because there must be yet a more particular understanding, that Christians
have one with another, that they may join in the same Religious Acts, and
mutually assist one another in them; therefore the union of the Catholic
Church upon Earth, though it be the greatest, the most Religious Society, the
most strongly banded and cemented; yet is not sufficient, because there is not
that consciousness, or mutual knowledge of, and consent in one another Faith
and Worship in distant parts of the World, that is necessary to the Glorifying
God and Christ in particular Churches: This is one great reason too why the
Church-Triumphant, though inseparably united with the Church-Militant, and
every part of it, though more acceptable and prevalent in all its Adorations;
yet cannot be communicated with actually, and explicitly; we may not solicit
such a communion with it here on Earth, because we are not conscious or knowing
of any such particularities in their State, or Action, as should ground it; nor
are we assured, that they are conscious of any of our particularities: Abraham,
the Prophets and Apostles are, for ought we know, wholly ignorant who we are,
when we pray, or are exercised Religiously: There is a thick and dark Vail
drawn betwixt the Church in Heaven and Earth, as to such particular Communion;
The Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit are only certainly and particularly known
to us in that Higher Region; of them we are only assured, They know us, and all
our actions.

To ascribe the Honor to any other of the Invisible Church, is to Idolize
them, as well as to thrust into things we have not seen or known.

Thus freely I acknowledge, the closeness and easiness of Society, of mutual
understanding, and consent with one another, is the Foundation of particular
Churches: Those Duties of mutual Exhortation, Assistances, Counsels, and when
it is necessary, Reproof one of another, besides the constant meeting in
public worship; That necessary severity of disowning in cases of great, or
incorrigible offense, such persons as walk in practices contrary to the Rules
of Christianity; not being possible, but in the nearest conjunction one with
another, that the State of mankind allows at the same time to be, as public
too as it may be: The duties of Pastors and Teachers toward the people, and of
them toward those that are so over them in the Lord, which consist in watchng
for their souls, as those that must give an account for them; and those souls
therefore yielding obedi^nce to those Rules of the Word of God, the
Administering of which is styled a Ruling.

All these require a particular presence one with another; and in such a
proportion of number one to another, that the principal Duties may not be
defeated by the over-number, but that the services of all, one to another, may
extend to all, may comprehend all, may continually pass, and re-pass between
all, and in which all may continually demonstrate their consent and agreement.

But yet all these things cannot be in bar of a National Religion, seeing that
a Nation, as I have already said, has, and undeniably must have a National
Union; and if True Religion be fixed there, and carried along with that Union,
it may well be called a National Religion at least, and without any injury a
National Church; the Agreement in the one carrying also an Agreement in the
other, makes it so. And as in such a National Union, though the standard of all
things, as of the whole state of Law, Judicature, Trade, Business,
Militarystrength of a Nation, be preserved in Capital Cities and Courts, yet by
the care of Government they are all in due proportions distributed, as the
Blood in the veins by fit Channels to every particular, as it were in circuit;
so the public agreement in Religion settles the Religious Interest of a Nation
more eminently in those things that do most represent the consent of the whole
in it; yet with due care of every part, and member of the Nation, to bring it
home particularly to them, and making the mutual intercourse in it free and
open to all persons, in all places where they have occasion to pass up and
down, and maintain an intercourse one with another, that wherever they are, or
have occasion to be, they may enjoy the Freedom of public Worship and National
Religion, to which at all times they give a knowing, and even conscious Vote
that agree in it, the Assemblies being as it were in view, under a sufficiency
of Masters of the Assemblies of the Nation together; and as National Union does
not swallow up lesser, or even Family Union; no more does a National any lesser
Church or Religious Society, except by men's own fault: And wherever men thus
united come in the Nation, they gladly lay hold of the opportunity of joining
with any other particular Assembly to which sameness of language and manners,
give them ready admission besides particular knowledge; and that National
Religion cannot be so very particular as congregational, is no more reason to
deny National, and rest wholly in Congregational, than it is to deny
Congregational and rest in Family Religion, or to deny Family and rest in
Personal Religion, because these are each closer than other.

3. A third end of Churches comes to be considered that more particularly
enforces National Religion, and justifies its Nationality, viz. That there may
be a more illustrious, famous, and remarkable offer of Religion to notice and
observation, for the drawing in, and congregating others to it. Thus a Church
is a Pillar and Ground, or Seat of Truth, and a magnificent House of the Living
God: And what more advantageous to this end, than a Nation united in the True
Religion, which we know has greatly the odds of particular Congregations, in
this Illustriousness and Magnificence? nor does this run out yet to the
building the Babel of Rome, that would mount up as a Tower to Heaven; or as too
ambitious Pyramids, that are often rebuked with Lightning from Heaven, for
coming too near it; seeing, as I have before shown, such an Universality
enforced is destructive to all the ends of public Religion, Humane Society
being so bounded by Nations, though all the Treaties of Nations of the same
True Religion, may be managed to give it the honor due to it, that can be
procurated in such Treaties.

So much then as National exceeds, and extends it self beyond any narrower
compass, and yet rejoyns it self to and with it self, after the manner of
particular Congregations; so much does it partake of the magnificencies of
Scripture concerning the publickness of Christian Religion and the Catholic
Church, and yet returns into the closeness of particular Churches with
themselves, and is the just point betwixt the Tyranny, Ambition, and endlesness
of Popish Universality, and putting Christianity under a Bed or Bushel.

National Religion, and National Union in it, is as a city set upon an Hill,
that cannot be hid; as a candle set upon so exalted a candlestick, that gives
light to all within it self, and about it, even as far as the Fame of that
Nation reaches.

The Churches, much more, as rising up into a National State, are the Glory of
Christ: As therefore, though we may be in some regard more exact in the most
private, we go out of our Personal Religion into Family Religion, out of our
Family Religion into Congregational, and as the Christians at first (most
probably) according to the Laws of Humane Society, went out of Congregations,
into Consociation of Churches in Religion; so we out of all these where
National Union in true Religion allows it go into that National State, that we
may build the honor of Religion to the highest, in so sensible and
understanding a Consent and Union in it, so public an acknowledgment of God;
and though hereby it be as a Net that draws in bad as well as good, even
visibly and apparently; yet when we consider the possible care against it in
particular Congregations, though still National, when we further consider the
state of the Jewish Church, of Corinth, the state of the Apocalyptick Churches,
the doubt will not be so cogent, as to move National Religion out of the Nature
of things.

The only remaining Doubt is, that thus National Magistracy becomes as the Head
of such a Religion, the National Religion is gathered and united in the
Magistrate and his Laws, and that which should only be united in, and depend
upon the Laws of Christ, becomes subject to another Head; on pretense of which
Magistrates have been attempted on too with force to bring their power to true
Religion.

The Answer I give to this shall be very brief, in three Heads.

1. I always own any pretense taken from exalting Christ and his Kingdom, to
enforce Civil Powers, to ratify truest Religion into National Consti^utions
and Laws, is most destructive of the Kingdom of Christ which is not of this
world, that is, to use force for its own promotion; and utterly subverts
Government, seeing private persons may under this shelter and disguise, rise
up, and invade, and disturb any Civil State or Government whatever: When
Religion is our Birthright by our Laws, it may be by the same Laws defended;
when it is not Prayers and Divine Reasons are the only way of introducing it
into Nations: Beyond this is nothing but Popish, Antichristian Ambition, or
wild and cursed Enthusiasm, with all their salvage effects.

2. Where there is National Religion, even the National Authority is first
Christianiz'd; so that there is no Headship, no Foundation, but Christ and his
Laws taking place upon a National State in profession of him. If the
Christianity then be removed by falsehood taking place instead of Truth, the
Nationalness stays; but the Religion, the Candlestick is removed, the Church is
departed from it, and retires where it may be enjoyed in its own Truth. The
form of the Church is the very same with that of the Catholic Church and
Congregations: As it is National, the Headship, Organization, is no other than
National, but no more than the City of Corinth, or other Cities or Regions,
made a Church of Corinth, or those other Churches; no more do National Laws or
Magistracy make the National Religion. Christianity, if received, settles
there; if not received, or afterward expulsed, leaves Laws, Magistracy,
Cities, to themselves, and so it deals with Churches, or Forms of them, of what
kind soever.

3. All Union in True Religion is free, rational, voluntary. It owns no
compulsion of Laws or Magistracy, except in things morally good or evil; so
that in this only is the difference from National Agreement in other things,
that of Religion is voluntary, and by consent. Princes and Governors may be
nursing Fathers and Mothers, by honorary Rewards and Encouragements; they may
give all freedom to the true Worship of God, and protect it by Laws; they may
f^nce it in with the strict observation of all moral observances; they may
offer, and take care for the persuasions of Religion to be addressed to all
their Subjects. Many such demonstrations of their Love to true Religion are
allowed by God, but despotically to command, or compel, is not of the nature of
True Christian, though National Religion. Christ's Kingdom not being of this
world, refuses even the Magistrates Sword, much more that of private force, for
the propagation of its most proper Interests. Our Saviors Religion hates all
things of violence and cruelty, it is not of its Spirit, he does all by
instruments of his own. And if Nations have made their Religion, yea the
Religion of Christ, an essential of their Government; yet if it be not
according to the rule of Christ, Obedience to, and the good opinioof that
Government, is a lower and lesser Interest than Truth and O bedience to Christ:
Christ never intended Christianity for a Politic Engine or Expedient; yet for
the conservation of Government, in its full Rights, there is not a more
concernful point of Christian Religion, than the whole Doctrine of Patient
Suffering with its reasonableness; though it is unhappy for those Rulers, that
put Christians upon the exercise of it, unhappy is that Power, that is sealed
to with Martyrs Sufferings: Yet every man owes to God a strict account, why he
is not of the National Religion; what reasons counterballance to him the great
reasons given for National Religion, and therein shall receive his Sentence
from Christ. If any, upon just reasons, desert a Congregation, though but of
two or three (as I have at large set out) is a little Sanctuary reserved to
them by Christ, with a faithful promise of his presence, where it cannot be
enjoyed in greater; which are else, though with some disadvantages in all other
regards, to be preferred for their publickness, and not without great reasons
to be refrained from, or deserted. If the Reasons are not of weight, they stand
at the Judgment Seat of Christ, who are guilty of a Schism against the Laws of
Christianity, the Laws of Natural Religion, the Laws of Humane Society, and
that according to the malignancy of it.

To draw this Discourse now to a Conclusion, let me subjoyn some Rules by way
of Inference, of certain good effect, to the management of so great an
Interest, as I have represented National Religion.

Rule 1. That the Religion offered for National, should in the substantials of
it be all of clear, and undoubted evidence from the Word of God, and sound
reason from it; and in indifferents, or necessarily adhering circumstances
prepared by so public a Spirit, as to project least of doubt and scruple; that
as Articles of Faith should be so framed, as to beget no dividing Controversy,
but leave room to the particular Judgments of Men, where points absolutely
necessary are secured; so all things of external mode or form, should be so
freely and generously designed, that every man's particular apprehension may be
most at liberty, without which the probabilities of the National Religion are
surprised.

Rule 2. That in Circumstantials of Religion, what is prepared and settled, so
that it cannot be altered by any private dispose, nor allowed to any private
choice, without scandal to the public; Every man should consider his Liberty
of Conscience on one side, as on the other, to preserve himself from scruple,
as in the Apostles instance of eating; There is liberty on one side to eat all
things, but this does not determine to a necessity of eating; that were not
liberty: If therefore there be a good reason, an expediency not to eat, the
liberty is more conserved in not eating than in eating: So it is in the use, or
not use of all indifferent things. Where then (as to the case we are now upon)
the advantages for public Religion incline this way, or that way, to the use,
or not use of Indifferent Things, It is our greatest liberty, to move our
selves that way, and not to be deterred with the suspicion of the loss of it by
so doing.

This seems to be the Prophet Zachariahs resolution, concerning the Fasts,
wherein those that would have them laid down, and others would keep them still
a foot differed. He first shows them of no value with God, then bids them love
the Truth and Peace, Zach. 8. 10. For though outward Forms, Uniformity, or
Variety in them, are of no account in themselves with God, but either way in
the Uniformity, or the Variety; They that serve God in spirit and truth, are
accepted of him; yet the angry dissents and disagreements that dis-joyn the
minds of men, and disable the Union of Divine Worship, is like the covering the
Altar with tears of complaint, and makes the offering unacceptable. That there
may be the Unity God is delighted in, without Uniformity, is plain by the
Harmony of the Evangelists, in their History of our Savior, where there is
perfect Unity, yet without Uniformity; it is plain too by a consideration of
Gods smelling a savor of rest in the services of the Church Universal, where
there is great Variety, yet Unity. But the contentions and quarrels that often
arise about these things, are the great causes of Gods displeasure; what may
most cure them, is then most to be desired and chosen; but what that is, I will
not be so bold as to prescribe, whether a strict Conformity, upon Reasons in
Government, best understood by Governors themselves, or a compassionate
Indulgence most acceptable to Christianity.

Rule 3. They that without the violation of the true and substantial Rules of
Religion, can most see, and use their liberty in these things, and thereby
become instruments of the greatest public good, are most acceptable to God:
They that do not Tithe the Mint, and Cummin of Indifferent Things in National
Religion, and Worship, with great noise and zeal (for that is the greatest
injury can be done to it), but take them so far as they are instruments of
Peace, and use them in their own Indifferency, for the greatest service to the
public; They that insisting with any stress upon main things only, are most
earnest in turning many to righteousness: These are they that shall shine as
Stars in the Nations Firmament, if not now, assuredly in Eternity.

They that take advantage of the National profession, to call sinners to
repentance, cause greater joy in Heaven than they that only think to secure
themselves with the purer Societies; Sure in this case God chooses mercy in
seeking and saving them that are lost, rather than sacrificing alone by our
selves, without regard to such: Christ chose rather to converse with Publicans
and Sinners, than what looked l^ke purer Society, because he came to call not
the righteous, but sinners to repentance. For the case was much different
between the scandalous of the Jewish National Church, with which our Savior
conversed, and so of every National Church from the Churches gathered newly
from among the Heathen, of whom the Apostle speaks, though even among them we
read of no Separation from Religious Duties, but only from private converse
among those that were scandalous, till they were as publicly disowned, as they
ought to be by Church Censures.

But on the other side, they are least in the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
National Religion, whether Rulers or People, that dispirit Religion by an
immoderate heat for mere Forms; that are so warmly concerned for
Indifferencies, to give reason to suspect they are a principal part in their
esteem of their own, or the National Religion: Whereas such things, so far as
they may be any way contributary to good, are best observed with greatest
silence and least cry; being rather to be first so far prepared to acceptance
and use, that there may be no noise of Axes, Hammers or Tools of force or
compulsion about them.

Rule 4. In all Religious Duties, and the management or administration of them,
there are different excellencies, like the Psalms of Degrees, or those parts of
a Psalm honored with the Notes of Elevation: There will, and may be different
Keys of Affection, according to the differing hands playing upon us. The People
hung upon Christ to hear the Word of God, for he tau^ht them with Authority,
and not as the Scribes; yet they were ^^^nd by Christ to hear the Scribes. Even
thus in the National (...) and Administrations, we may undoubtedly more warmly
adhere to, and pursue the things that are more excellent, and with a lighter
touch pass over things of less moment, though in all we mind the glory of God,
and the peace of National Religion: For Union in National Religion, must be
primarily and chiefly in things truly called Religion, and in lesser things
with a regard to peace only. David was otherwise affected in praise, than in
sacrificing a Bullock with Horns and Hoofs, seeing as he says, it pleased God
more; yet in the fear of God he did both. The Apostle was otherwise affected in
the Preaching of Christ, than when he became as a Jew to the Jews; yet he did
the latter Religiously too: The higher and closer the Ministry of Divine Truth
and Service is, the greater and closer the adherence of the Soul ought to be:
Some things we ought to do with our might, and only not to leave others undone.

Rule 5. We ought to have a steady, and certain Gage within our selves, of what
our Lord has provided for the preserving the truth of Religion to us, and what
care he has taken so far, as is possible, with the conservation of that Truth
to give us all advantage for publickness in Religion.

As to the truth of Religion, these three provisions will secure it.

1. That no man is so much bound to any Church, Communion, Nation, or
Government, as to the true Religion, which is the first, and absolute
necessary; nor shall his withdrawing from any of them in things impure and
offensive to God, be charged upon him as sin or Schism: All the putting out of
Synagogues, casting out Names, or Excommunications, signify not any thing
where God and Christ are in communion; and where those on whom they fall are of
the general Assembly, and Church of the First born, of that truly Catholic
Church which is the only necessary Church to be of, that we may be saved.

2. The privatest Assemblies, yea even single Souls, so retiring that they may
worship God according to his word, have the promise that God and Christ will
make their abode with them, come and sup with them and they with him, and they
shall be written in the writing of Gods people: The Catholic Church is always
provided for them, that they may not be out of the best Society under Heaven.
The Apostle encouraged the Hebrew Christians that might think them selves
divided from the Jews that had been the only Church of God, by assuring them
the Gospel brought them into a greater Church than that, viz. the General
Assembly and Church of the Firstborn written in Heaven. This honor have all
the Saints of Christ.

3. All the evils that can be endured upon account of Christ and obedience to
him, will be abundantly recompensed by the saving of the soul, and that better
and truer life. That Argument of our Savior, He that loses his life saves it,
and he that saves it loses it: And what shall it profit a man if he gain the
whole world and loses his own soul? or what shall he give in exchange for his
soul? stands always impregnable, that a man should buy the truth, and not sell
it at any rate whatever. Thus for the Truth of Religion.

2. As to the Publickness of Religion, there are these great advantages for it.

1. That Christian Religion professes Love, endeavor of Good, and Salvation to
all men, to every Creature, and has antiquated all that Judaism, that neglects
any for their profit to Salvation, though but Gentiles.

2. That a man may join his Religious Services to any thing truly good in
Natural or Revealed Religion, whether of Families, Neighbourhoods, Cities,
Nations, or of voluntary Societies, stopping there, and keeping himself free
from other men's sins, so that the evil that other men adjoin to any thing true
and good in Religion, being protested against, and divided from, does not
corrupt what is good or true, but it may be enjoyed in the most public way,
while we have nothing to do with the evil, nor find it so mixed with the good,
as to admit of no separation. And what is wanting in the public worship of
that which Christ has ordained and commanded, does not necessitate the total
departure from that public Worship, when the very Institution is not changed
by that want; for the true Christian may make up that want in privater Duties:
Thus they that feared the Lord, spoke often to Mal. 3. 16.
one another, without separation from the Church.

3. There is a free use granted by Christ of all things indifferent, or a
freedom on each sides to do, o^ not to do, where no moral evil adheres, or
disobedience to some express Command of Christ's attends either part. If then
Religion be not drawn out of those necessary things wherein Divine Wisdom,
Goodness and Truth have placed it, and Traditions thereupon become Doctrines,
which constantly carries al^ng a rejecting the Commands of God, or a lower
esteem of them for those Traditions sake; if there be no moral evil, or
indecency, nor that a too great cumber be drawn upon Religious Acts, every
thing is by the Laws of Christ left to its own indifferency, as Reason invites,
or persuades on either side to the doing, or not doing. All which sets men free
from a Jewish yoke in these cases, and is the true Christian Liberty. Eating or
not eating, keeping a day, or not keeping it, Buying in a market, and going to
a feast, without asking any question for Conscience sake, without fear of the
danger of moral defilement in those things that other men's sins defile only to
themselves, if we keep our selves pure, are plainly the Liberty Christ has
published to us; every Creature of God is pure, and not to be rejected, but
received with thanksgiving; no sin of man can pollute it to any, but himself.
And this consideration may state to us the whole matter, that relates to order
and decency.

That order which God has established in nature it self that (...) and (...),
which are written with a Sunbeam upon things themselves, are out of all
dispute. God is the Author of them, and not of the contrary, confusion or
indecency.

That order which is the prudential contrivance of men, though not the same in
all places, times, and to all persons (as the former) yet ought to be
cheerfully complied with, as what is necessary to a National union in, and
administration of public Religion, both as to Officers and Things, seeing
nothing can be settled without order.

Accordingly we find the wise and pious Governors among the Jews taking care
and the people submitting to such Ordinations, and all under Divine Approbation.

The Order that is merely of Humane position, and arbitration, moves the
greatest doubt, standing in things that have only the thin pretexts of
Antiquity to give them some venerableness, or that they are usages already in
being, or that they add the Imaginary decency, that Ceremonies set out Humane
actions with. Now as to this they that have the power of imposing, are equally
to weigh the value of Religion it self, and what that may suffer for the sake
of this order, and a great account lies upon them before God; but for those
that are under subjection, I add further,

As to this sort of order, I can only say this, that supposing it no way turned
into Doctrine (as the Pharisees not eating with unwashen hands) but declared
against as such, the consequences of observing, or not observing, are to be
balanced, and so the practice of every conscientious man to be determined.

On one side stands the freedom of using this order, as an advantage to do
good, the consideration of the peace of Nations, the National defense made more
unite against false Religion at the price of Conformity to those more Arbitrary
Impositions.

On the other side stands a just fear for the purity of Religion being either
obscured, or the freedom of it incumbered; or for the reputation of Religion,
which often suffers by those unnecessary adherencies, as if they entered into
the nature of Religion it self.

I must yet allow the preference, in my own judgment, to that side by which
National Religion is most served; but with the full persuasion, that God
receives both, if over-bitter zeal on either side be not offensive to him; and
with the concession, that National Religion were more happy, if more free; but
if love adjust to each their due allowance, the services of both will be found
with great acceptance in the common National Religion, as I doubt not their
hands would be in the defense of it against the Invasion of a National false
Religion.

But if any be over-rigid, or severe on either part, they may receive the full
rewards of their own society, or party, but they lessen the higher recompenses
of doing the most public good. The strictest Laws, either this way or that
way, in these things, are of men's own making, and exacting, so from them only
they have their reward, who are zealous beyond their own knowledge, and the
goodness of the matter.

From all that has now been said under this Rule, I collect,

1. That they that cannot agree to the publicly encouraged constitution of a
Nation, should yet point their worship, as much as they can toward it: They
should comply with all that is good in it, so far as they can be recieve^,
without launching beyond their judgments.

Thus Christianity was made as public in all places, by the Apostles, as they
could, by adjoining it to any principle of Truth, or to the natural sense of
Religion, they found any where; St. Paul gave solemn thanks to God in the midst
of all that sailed with him, though a bad sort of men. Thus he Preached the
true God and Christ at Atkens upon their Inscription, To the unknown God, upon
the Fundamentals of National Theology, upon the wise saying of a Poet of their
own. He thought it best to acknowledge all that was good in the most faulty
state of Religion, as an advantage to convince what was bad, and disagreeing to
that good, and gaining men to unite with that whole element of Truth and
Goodness, with which any sparks kindled in them already were so closely allied,
as to gain them to the whole.

How much nearer then, and closer may Christians, and of the Reformed
Christianity, fall in one with another, if we valued what we agree in at a
higher rate, as certainly we ought to do, then what we differ about?

2. The way to make National Religion most National, is by comprehending all
the differences, that can be reconciled with true Religion; while they that
dissent in some things receive one another with a good, peaceable, holy, and
public temper of mind; as the great Argument and Inducement of which, we
should all pray for the acceptance of the holy services of all, that call on
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, (as the Apostle distinguishes Christians,
but immediately unites them again) both theirs and ours: They and we whatever
smaller distinctions make the (they) and the (we) are both one in our Lord
Jesus Christ. We ought therefore to pray for the common benefit of all so
united, though not bound up in the same form with us, for a gracious audience,
and reception of their and our Worship of God, that so the Spirit of Love and
Union in the main, may convey all our services into one before God, where
indeed (if they are as he requires) they meet stripped of all their outward
Circumstances, Form, and Ceremony; Faith, and Obedience, being alone able to
mount thither with them: And services so raised can by no means be spared for
small differences in a National Religious Interest; for the Angels of all such,
behold the Face of our Father in Heaven.

If Darius, though a Heathen Prince, had such a sense of the virtue Ezr. 6. 10*
of that true Religion he was not of, as to engage those of so great difference
from him in their sense of God, to pray for the peace of the King, and his
Sons; how much more should we, who are all of the same true Faith and Worship,
and know the Force and Energy of it, by great acts of Favor to one another, in
those things wherein we cannot be wholly one, yet all join in praying for the
acceptance of one another services, and the services of the whole Nation,
whereof we are not only Civil, but Religious Members: And if we are truly
Religious, shall be so accounted with God, yet with the abatement of our sinful
differences and divisions? How should we therefore unite, that we may lose none
of the things that we have wrought, but may receive a full reward?

Rule 6. It is the happiness of our Nation, that if any man tru^y understands,
considers, and pronounces of our National Religion; It stands in the Scripture,
making us wise to Salvation: In Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance, Love of God,
Fear of the Divine Majesty, all Acts of Justice, Love, Mercy, Compassion, true
sincere Preaching the whole Word of God, Prayer, use of Sacraments, the
Lord's Day, Religious Discourses and Conferences, Catechetical Instructions, and
Education of Youth in the knowledge of Religion; Restraint of Atheism,
Irreligion, Intemperance, and Sensuality, generally and throughout the Nation:
Compulsion of the very worst of men, to acknowledge a Deity and his Worship;
for what is hypocrisy in them may turn to the salvation of good men.

These are the things I say again, that are truly our National Religion; all
things pertaining to Order, Decency, outward Form, or Mode, are but the
Vehicle, the conveyance of that True Religion, if the main Ends of which be
obtained, viz. That these Religious Acts are performed but with that peace, and
freedom from confusion: Confusion, destructive of all public Actions; and with
that Honourableness, that is agreeable to the state of every Nation, and this
Nation particularly in the simplicity of Religious Worship: It is enough; and
whatever on these accounts is commanded in our National Religion, I freely own
and acknowledge as reconcilable with these Characters, forbearing such, who
(though agreeing in all main things) upon sincere endeavors to understand them
so, cannot acquiesce in them as so, who deserve compassion. These things ought
to be no Partition Wall in our National Worshipping of God one with another,
nor can they without great rigor and censor ousness very evil in the sight of
God, be condemned in those, who for the sake of Substantial National Religion,
the publickness and more universal benefit of it, wherein they are most truly
zealous, pay obedience to the Rules of them.

Rule 7. Let us all strive, labor, preach, hear, and pray, and even suffer in
the Reformation of our selves, and endeavors to Reform all others, according
to the most excellent Rules of our most Holy Religion, professed in this
Kingdom as our National Religion; that it may be found to Praise, Honor, and
Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, and be thought worthy to stand before
the Son of Man, at his coming, before whom nothing but the Gold, and precious
Stones of Substantial Truth and Goodness can stand, all else will be burnt off,
as Hay and Chaff by the fire of that day, and they that have been hot and
contentious for them, be saved only as by Fire, with difficulty and loss.

And in the mean time, that our Union and Love in the True Religion, may be to
us an assurance of the Divine Favor, and presence; of his protection and
blessing; that neither our Candlestick may be removed, nor our Nation, the
present place of it, be taken away, for generally both are removed one with the
other, or soon after one another.

Rule. 8. Let no man be discouraged from the most zealous, Affectionate joining
himself to, and promoting National Religion, because o^ that veneration due to
the Name of The Church and Churches, according to the Scripture; For a Nation
united in True Christian Religion, differs no more in the strictest notion,
from a Church, than a Body of men united, and consecrated to God according to
the Law of Nature, differs from a Society united, and consecrated to God
according to an Institution; that is, no more than an Institution planted in
Nature, differs from an Institution given by Revelation.

For one is the Appointment of God, of old from the very Foundations of Humane
Society. The other after the Fall of Nature, and the Inability of it to its end.

An Institution therefore does not repeal a Natural Law, but takes care it
should be fulfilled, and completed in its chiefest End.

Israel was a Church to God, being so devoted to him by his own Institution;
and it was a Holy Nation, according to the Original Exodus 19. 6.
Law, being elevated by the Institution, to its true perfection, as a Nation.

The Christians, to whom the Apostle Peter wrote; As they were a Church
according to the Institution of Christ, so they were a Holy Nation, as he
styles them, succeeding into the place of that whole Jewish Nation Consecrated
to God by the Law of Nature upon Nations; though but strangers scattered
abroad, yet to show the 1 Pet. 1. 1^
great value God has of a Nation devoted to him, they are styled A Holy Nation:
The Institution of the Catholic Church, as the seat 1 Pet. 2. 9.
of the True Religion of Jesus Christ, makes a Nation united in that True
Religion, both a Church, as that Catholic Church has thereby a Residence in
it; and much more than those forementioned scattered Jews a Holy Nation, as it
is Nationally resigned up to God in the True Religion, according to the Law of
Nature made perfect by the Institution.

Where then a Nation is united in the Truth of Christian Doctrine; the Purity
of Divine Worship; the Holy Rules of Practice; the Catholic Love of all
Christians Baptized into the same Body; made to drink into that one Spirit; In
Pastors and Teachers Ministering the same Gospel, the Apostles infallibly
delivered and sealed with Miracles (All which are marks of Segregation from
false Churches or Members (of the True Church) falsely so called): Here is the
Catholic Church in a Nation, according to the Institution; and here is the
Holy Nation, according to both the Law of Nature, and the Institution.

So again, Where a Nation brings home Religion into the most particular
National Districts, or Divisions; as near as may be according to the
Institution of Christ for particular Churches: Here is a Nation of Churches,
which, in regard they all consent in one National Union, are without any
impropriety styled A National Church; and every such Society is both a Holy
Society, according to the Law of Nature devoted to God; and a Church-Society,
according to the Institution directing, and perfecting that Law of Nature.

Now the Institution of particular Churches by Christ, I understand to be that,
where he says, If Two or three agree, and are gathered, or enchurch'd in my
Name, I will be in the midst of them.

Wherein he does not only encourage the smallest number in case of Exigency, or
Necessity, but couches some Rules, whereby much greater numbers, whether of
Christians in Separation from Civil Societies, or united according to them, are
to be formed.

As first in all (excepting the Universality) that is Essential to the
Catholic Church, which is The Church; of the nature of which each particular
must therefore partake, that it may be a Church. 2. In a number proportionable
to Edification, in all the Duties and Ordinances of Christian Religion. 3. In
the Humility, Modesty, and unaspiringness of Christianity: For he that
instituted his Churches in such small numbers, and those not forced, but
agreeing, projected nothing by that Institution, for Domination, or Grandieur.
4. In the simplicity, and plainness Christian Religion professes; For Churches
instituted in such a paucity of Members were never designed to be Courts of
Forensick business, nor capable of Subordinating themselves so, as that their
Members should be Fatigued with long and tedious Suits and Appeals, removed
from one part to another (worse than going to Law before unbelievers), as the
Romish Tyranny has contrived. Whereas our Saviors methods for Complaint and
Admonition in case of Scandal; for Reconciliation, in case of Repentance; or
severer Discipline, in case of obstinacy; are natural, easy, and speedy, as is
plain to any observer. 5. Christian Churches allowed in Two or Three, shows the
care of Christ, that there should be a proportion betwixt the strength and
gifts of his ordinary Ministers, since the Cessation of the Apostolic
measures, and their charge and trust: For our Lord would not by his Institution
give any Reason to Moses his complaint, I am not able to bear this great people.

Thus was our Saviors Institution of particular Churches; and though it does
not lay any absolute Interdict upon the Truly prudential, though Additional
Constitutions, either of Nations, or other Humane Societies, proceeding
according to the general maxims, upon which Societies strengthen themselves:
yet with this Caution, that what is so done may not enact any thing by which
the main and great Ends of this Institution should be defeated. However that
the Institution should never be pleaded, but stand free from the Errors men
fall too often into, in pursuit of the Maxims forenamed; whereby they would
aggrandize Society in Religious Things, or make it comport with Civil State:
But that his Institution should be a standing Rule, first to avoid them, after
to discover, and reform them; or if they grew ext^eme, and not to be reduced,
as in Popery, to warrant a wit^drawing from them.

But to apply all this to our purpose, If the main Ends of the Catholic and
particular Churches, Instituted by our Lord and Savior, are obtained; There is
no Encounter, but a most happy Agreement between the Natural Law of National
Religion, and the Institution of Churches, which, as I before asserted, are not
to be drawn into a Desert, or Wilderness, or shut up in Cells and Cloisters, or
confined to one point of the World (as the Donatists would have had the True
Church), but are to be fixed in the midst of the Universe, of Nations and
Cities, as the very places of the Candlesticks, or Churches (from which in just
indignation to those places, when unworthy of them, they are removed) in the
midst of the Business, Trade, and Conversation of the World; as is apparent by
the Churches we read of in the Scriptures.

Let then True Religion (as Christianity contended, and will at last, in much
higher Degrees, overcome) be as wide as the Universe; Let the Kingdoms of the
World become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and his Christ; and the Universal Church
will be as wide; Bring it into particular Societies, and particular Churches
will be as many, as numerous as they.

A Church State is indeed a State of Separation: the Church-Catholick is a
Separation from the Universe, because there are Fallen Angels, unholy, and
unhappy; because there is a multitude of mankind in the same State.

But this is only for the sake of True Religion, and the Happiness consequent
upon it, that there is such a Separation; and this the very Law of Nature
agrees in.

Thus particular Churches, whenever they are a Separation from particular
Societies; It is for the sake of True Religion, and its due Administration:
Restore that, and the Law of Nature, and the Institution, become both one.

Then a Nation, and a National Church coalesce into one: then Civil Societies
in particular, and particular Churches grow into one; and God is pleased to
dwell in them, and with greater delight, because all his Institutions Natural
and Revealed unite in one.

I have only one Caution to add, That the state of Things hither to in the
world is far from perfection; that whethersoever we look, we cannot find it; so
that to be removing from one thing to another in hope of it, is perpetually to
give our selves to change, except Things are no way tolerable, but the very
Substance, Rules and Principles are corrupted, and that there are no Arts of
Retirement, and withdrawing from them left; we should consider how the pious
Jews and Israelites, how our Savior and the Apostles, how the undefiled names
in Sardis managed themselves in the midst of great Corruptions; what retreats
from the Evils, and yet joining in all that was good, was visible in their
practice, what kind of Division the good and approved Corinthians made from the
misdemeanors 1 Cor. 11. 19.
of the bad, without forsaking the Church, that we may imitate their Examples;
and continue to do the greatest service to the Churches, or Nations we are
members of; neither silencing our due Resentments of Evil in our place and
station, nor rending our selves from that Body we are of: But that All our
Things 1 Cor. 16. 14.
may be done in Charity.

Rule. 9. In the last place, let us not think, Nations and other Incorporations
of mankind slide away with this world, and are wholly lost in the future state
of Things; and that only every man shall appear, and be judged singly by
himself: Our Resurrection, which is the day of our Regeneration, of our new
life, and appearance in Bodies, will present us not only single, but in our
state of Community, wherein we were here in the world; even from Families to
Nations, that we may receive the things done in those Bodies, as well as in our
own Bodies; then the Good we have done, or omitted to do; and the Evil we have
withstood, or been the occasion of, or not prevented, when we might, shall be
severely accounted for by each in their station.

Each Magistrate shall be surrounded with his sphere of Authority, wherein he
was set here, and judged in that: And each Minister of Religion justified or
condemned in that very Orb, wherein he was fixed as a Star. And the several
Magnitudes of both Magistrates and Ministers will then be dreadful to them;
however they have coveted, and been Ambitious of them here, if they have not
enlightened their whole space, because their Judgment will be greater. Even
every man shall be judged by his Services to the Public in his place and
station, how private soever, if it has never so little exceeded his single
capacity. And who in his Reason can think? God will then account with men for
Mint and Cummin, small and disputable Things, howsoever zealous, or rather fond
of them they have been in themselves, and earnest with others concerning them:
Those things that have truly centered in the Glory of God, and the Salvation of
men's souls, in Faith, Repentance, and a Holy Life, in Love and Peace will be of
the only moment at that Tribunal.

This therefore should be the most powerful persuasive upon us, to do all the
good herein we can, in that Community wherein we are fixed, according to our
Talent, though but a single one (much more if our Talents have been Two or
Five), that we may in that Day of Recompenses enter into the joy of our Lord.

THE END.
THE Woe of Scandal: OR, SCANDAL In its General NATURE and EFFECTS;

DISCOURSED, As one strongest Argument against Impositions in Religious Things
acknowledged to be Indifferent.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside. 1682.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THAT which I will endeavor in preparation to the following Discourse, be to
present my Design and Method in stating the Nature of Scandal, that it may be
more intelligible by being seen first, as in a Landscape, in this Entry; and
then to add some Considerations of great strength to each part of that
Undertaking, that have since arrived to my Thoughts.

As to the Method, I must in my own defense say, that I have to do with a
Subject, in which so much of the deceitfulness of Sin is treasured up, of so
moveable a consideration, (as Scripture from its own various shapes offers it
to us) that it cannot easily be known, or traced: I hope therefore it will be
allowed as some part of an Apology, that the Thread of my Treating concerning
it, does not run so even, and straight along, as it ought.

Further, I must take Sanctuary at the Reader's Candor, for the acceptance of
my sincere intention, and any degree of performance in so difficult a task: I
confess the want of the most advantageous Arts of Method, and a clear
unperplexed Style: Yet that I might take the truest measure of so multiform and
vague a Notion;

1. I have taken hold of it in the most strict and precise Description I could
frame, as it is applicable to all cases of Sin, therein resting especially upon
those words Scripture uses to convey the sentiments of it to us. Thus Scandal
is that by which we are drawn into any sin, and off from the course of Duty,
and Religious Action, and so entangled in Guilt, disease of Conscience, and
endangered as to Eternal Happiness, under a pretext of Reason or Religion.

2. Because I find the Scripture applies the Notion of Scandal especially, when
some of the grand Principles and Laws of Religion are violated under such
pretext; I have considered it, as referred to those great Principles by such
sacred use.

3. Because there is a very peculiar, and most remarkable use of it, in the
case of indifferent Things, by the Apostle, when they are turned into sin, by
being determined upon in practice with a doubting Conscience (besides other
ways, wherein being used amiss, they may become Scandals, or occasions of it) I
have therefore allowed a very peculiar Head of Discourse to that Case.

4. Because by deeply considering Scandal, and that, as our Savior pronounces,
Scandals must needs come, I found there must be some Primitive, Fundamental,
and Universal Scandal, that covers the whole State of Sin in general; I
addressed the last part of my Meditation on the Nature of Scandal, to this
Primitive, Universal Scandal.

And lastly, I resume upon the whole, a representation of Scandal adjusted to
what I found upon each of those forementioned Inquiries after it.

And herein I hope I may have hung up Lights to discover in some degree, and to
avoid so dark and mysterious an Evil, as Scandal, though I have not been able
to do it to those degrees I desired, or to compose into so happy an Order, or
so perspicuous an Expression, what I had my self clearer apprehensions of. Thus
far as to the Method.

Now for the strengthening some parts of this discourse by Considerations that
have arrived to my Thoughts, since I had set an end to the Treatise it self;
they have arisen from the close observation of the Contexture of the Lord's
Sermon upon Scandal, as it is Recorded especially in this 18th of Matthew, and
Mark 9. and Luke 17. Compared with the Debates of the Apostle to the Romans,
and the Corinths, which are the most eminent Seats of the Doctrine of Scandal,
we have in all the Scripture.

Our Savior therefore, whose chief business into the World, was his recovery
of it from Scandal, the Deception, and the Ruin of it, by giving satisfaction
to the Divine Glory, for the dishonor done to it by Scandal, has blessed us
with as Sovereign Arguments and Instructions against either giving or receiving
it.

Our Lord has so embraced all sorts and degrees of Scandal within this Sermon,
that none can be exempted from the force and energy of thos^ his Arguments,
Instructions, or severe Denunciations. But yet, that they have a particular
poignancy against Scandals within his Church, and one more particular kind,
given by a particular sort of Men, and directed against another particular sort
of Men, will be most evident from the survey I am now to give of his
Heaven-born Discourse.

The occasion of it was the Disciples coming solemnly to him with a grand
Quere, in which no doubt their Ambition, a very ignorant Ambition, was deeply
concerned. Who, say they, is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? That is, as
was generally understood at that time, in the Kingdom of the Messiah.

The Lord, as he was wont on all such Questions, takes the occasion of most
Grave, Weighty, and Important Doctrine, and Admonition in return to it.

And that he might place in his Remonstrance a most lively Emblem; He calls a
little Child, and sets him in the midst of the Disciples: and upon him displays
these two great points of Truth.

1. That except a man be converted, and become as a little Child, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; either of Christ here in the Gospel, and his
True Church, or the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter.

Now though this being Converted, and becoming as little Children, be very
profitably, and pertinently applied to Regeneration; yet, considering it in the
Scope, and whole Context, it is very evidently designed to that Humility,
Unimperiousness, sense of the danger of perishing for ever; Innocence, and
Inoffensiveness from Scandal, by which others perish: The resemblances of which
are found no where in this World so agreeable and significant, as in some
Properties of little Children, and their Nature; the manly state of Humane
Nature, showing so little hereof in this great Degeneracy, as to require a
perfect Conversion, and Regeneration to such a state.

2. The second point of Truth is this, That whoever humbles himself, and
becomes as such a little Child, in those Christian Properties, is one of those
Great ones, those Magnates; or the more any one humbles himself so, the greater
he is; and he that humbles himself most, is the greatest in the Kingdom of
Heaven, in the Kingdom of the Messiah, and shall be in the Kingdom of Glory.

These two great Points of Instruction being now settled upon this living
Emblem, the Lord proposes the very same to other two as great purposes of
Admonition, although from another aspect or cast of this one Picture: Consider
Little Ones, as the Emblems of Weakness, Infirmity, liableness to Danger and
Injury, of little Defense and Resistance to any Assault; and so the Lord
declares:

1. Whoever receives such a little one in his name, that is, upon the account
of Profession of Jesus Christ, into a just esteem, value, and care, of
cherishing such a one in that Holy Profession, and securing him, as far as he
can, in the Blessedness of that state; receives, that is owns and acknowledges
with Honor, Christ himself, and the kindness is accepted, as if it were
immediately placed upon Christ.

2. But if any one Scandalises, sets a stone of Offense and Ruin, in the path
of such a Little One, by which he falls from, or in, his Profession of
Christianity to his Destruction, the Lord pronounces a Woe upon such a one, as
dreadful as the Proverb imports, It were better that a Millstone were hung about
his Neck, and he were cast into the depth of the Sea: Which as it peremptorily
dooms the Professed, obstinate Scandaliser, so it warns all of managing
themselves so in Christianity, as to cast off all Offense and Scandal from it,
and to encourage the tenderest in it, to strengthen, and promote them.

Hereby then, our Lord has designed the security of the whole state of
Christianity from the harm and danger of Scandal; for in these Little Ones he
comprehends,

1. Those, who in regard of their being newborn out of the State of Universal
Scandal, are in danger of being re-intangled in its Net, or in regard of any
other disadvantage, or liableness to Scandals mischief, are the lost, as our
Savior after styles them, and the weak, though not the young, (as the Apostle
names them.) Now if such are secured, all are secured: For if a Christians
carriage be so off from the danger of Scandalising, as not to Scandalize the
weak, the stronger will be much less in danger to be offended.

2. Those are the weak, and the Little Ones to us, who appear to us under any
such disadvantage, though indeed they are not; as he that doubts, and dares not
do what others profess to do on great assurances, seems weak to them that doubt
not, but are so assured; and then the Precept of Christ takes as great hold of
us, in all our Administrations toward them, as if they were really so. Now
what a Wall of defense were this to Christianity! what a happy state would the
state of it be! if we were all most tender toward those, with relation to
their safety for Eternal Happiness, who seem the lowest, weakest, least to us
in that Profession?

3. The Term, Little Ones, expresses a subordination under the Great Ones: Now
that they may not assume over the Little Ones, the Lord first affirms, with his
usual Asseveration, that none can be Great, or any thing at all in his Kingdom,
that is not humble and inoffensive, as a Little One. And that if any that takes
himself to be a Great One, thinks he has privilege to do as he pleases, either
by Imposition, or Imperiousness over the Little Ones, and does not in all
points of Christianity, demean himself as the least under one common Lord, the
Lords dreadful Commination hangs over him, he is in danger to be One of the
Grandees in Torments.

On those things therefore, that lie within the Compare betwixt the Great Ones
and the Little Ones, does the Finger of the Lords Discourse especially point.

But though our Lord was most feelingly concerned, and struck the most stinging
Woe into those that Scandalize them that believe in him; yet he did not
overlook the World in general, but bewailed it perishing under Scandals, the
multitude of Scandals, the inevitableness of Scandals, that they must needs
come, even impossible they should not come; and yet because he knew what Spirit
it is that acts Scandal, even from Satan the chief of Scandal, down through all
the Ministers of it, he heaps the Woe upon him by whom Scandal comes. Of which
I have endeavored a full account in the after management.

And because whoever Scandalises others, is first Scandalized himself, and they
also, that receive Scandal from others, have some great Scandal within, upon
which that from without catches; he therefore so severely cautions on all sides
against the Scandal of the Right Eye, the Right Hand, the Right Foot, and
prefers to every man's choice the dismembring any of them, rather than that the
whole Body joined to that Member, so fettered with Scandal, should be cast into
Hell, where their Worm dies not, and their Fire is never quenched, the dreadful
end of Scandal.

Next follow the Arguments with which our Lord presses the highest value, and
care over the least of them that believe in him, not to offend them.

1. He shows at the same time, how honorable the Employment in serving the
little ones is, and also of how dangerous a consequence it is to despise them
(which, both by the relation it has to the Context, and the Apostles use of
it, cannot be far from Scandalising.) The Angels suffer no disparagement, in
being called their Angels. And the very mention of Angels brings to mind, the
Charge they have over all such, to bear them up in their hands, to guard them
in all their ways, that they may not d^^h their foot aginst any of the stones
of Scandal. They are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them that
shall be Heirs of Salvation: Those greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven humble
themselves as Little Ones, to serve the Little Ones of God and Christ.

And, as their Angels, they always behold in Heaven the Father of our Lord, and
of all that believe in him, that whoever despises them, even to Scandal, must
be sure to have it remonstrated against them.

2. He exemplifies the care of them in himself: The Son of Man is come to seek
and save that which is lost; and the Argument is raised to the height, as it is
exemplified in the Father of the whole Family in Heaven and Earth, named after
Christ; whose will it is not, that so much as one (and yet when one only is in
the danger of Scandal, Who does not look upon him as a Singularist, especially
if one of the least too, and reject him?) should perish, but is pleased in the
preservation of one such; even as the joy of one Sheep, that is lost out of a
hundred, exceeds sensibly the joy of the ninety nine that were not in hazard.

But now lest the great charge against Scandalising and Despising should seem
to introduce a Lawless state in Christianity, and increase Petulancy, and
Licentiousness in those, who would be looked upon as, at least, Little Ones in
Christianity, or make the care of not Scandalising of endless scruple, or
burden; Our Lord prescribes a Method for preventing so ill Consequences; very
certain to its End, yet very far from Scandal or Despising.

A Method that allows no sin, and yet deserts none, till they deserve to be
accounted but as Heathens or Publicans, to whom yet a due measure of Christian
Charity is to be preserved.

Which Method it is not my business now to enter into the Controversal part of,
but to observe, as of great moment, that the Doubting of the lawful use of
Indifferent Things in Religion, falls not into the account of any of those
Trespasses the Lord speaks of; and that, as if it were on purpose lest the
thing should be mistaken, a most different Method is in that Case commanded by
the Apostle of the Lord.

Here therefore give me liberty to compare, in some things which I have omitted
in the body of the Discourse, the Sermon of our Lord and his Apostle.

First, He that doubts in Indifferent Things, and cannot conform to what others
do, and would be conformed to in, is not commanded by the Apostle to hear the
one, or the two, or three, nor the Church it self.

Nor is it said by the Apostle, they that will not hear on such accounts,
should be as Heathen-men, or Publicans, (or as we speak, Excommunicate) both
which are very notorious in the Evangelists Records, in the Case of the
Trespasses there spoken of, which assures us they are of another Nature.

Nor does the Apostle urge as from our Savior, that what is in these Cases
bound on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; or what is loosed on Earth, shall be
loosed in Heaven; that there shall be any obligation on the doubting Conscience
by the Churches Canons, or any such discharge of it before God or it self by
obeying them: But every Man in this Case is to hear his own Conscience, there
every thing of this nature is bound and loosed; there every word or matter is
heard and established.

On the other side, there is no Injunction of telling the fault of
Nonconformity, if any be aggrieved at it, in that gradation from one to more,
and so to the Church.

But the Apostle's command is, First, Not to Judge, or Despise, if that may
keep Indifferents to their Equipoise; if not, the Command is, not so much as by
Example to Scandalize, or draw any that Doubt to act against, or over their
Doubt in Indifferent Things, because they are but Indifferent; for that is to
sin against the Brethren, the weak Brethren; as at the least we esteem them:
Now in these Cases, to sin against the Brethren, is to sin against Christ in
his Law against Scandal.

Now in that all things are of so diverse a frame and aspect in the Lords
Prescriptions concerning Trespasses, and the Apostle's Directions in cases of
various apprehensions in things of Indifferency, wherein one great part may be
guilty yet of great weakness and mistake, and that none of the Methods ordered
in the one, is so much as mentioned in the other, or once intimated; it argues
very evidently, that variety, and as various practices in indifferent Things,
though joined with such mistake and weakness, are none of the Trespasses our
Savior had regard to. And since the Apostle puts all under the notion of
Scandal, wherein the weaker part is either drawn into sin, enfeebled in the
vigor, disquieted in the true peace of Conscience, or so much as despised, by
being incompassionately neglected in his Doubt; the whole Case is brought under
the force of our Savior's Sermon against Scandal, that none looking upon
themselves on any accounts, as Great in the Kingdom of God, in the Church, or
in the Christian Profession (let those Accounts be whatever they can be
presumed to be) should by any sort of Imperiousness, whether Command, rigorous
Treaty, or Example, that despises all that do not follow it, impose upon the
Little Ones.

To all which let me have the Readers patience to add this one Observation,
That the Evangelist Mark makes the occasion of this, or a like Discourse of the
Lords upon Scandal, That the Disciples were much displeased that one did cast
out Devils in Christ's name, that did not follow them, that did not seem, and
indeed was not of their way, in the appearance of Things. But our Lord, with
great Compassion, accepts him so far as he was come. For, says he, He that is
not against us, is on our part. He that, although in a different Company, or
Mode, does the same things we do, and does nothing in opposition to our Great
Design, is on our side. And so he proceeds into a similar Discourse of Kindness
to, or Scandal against his Disciples, though Little Ones. And if we suppose it
the same Discourse as in St. Matthew, and that this Evangelist had not an
accurate regard to the occasion; yet in that he connected it with such an
occasion, and that by the Divine Wisdom, it teaches us how much such a
Discourse is adjusted to such an occasion; for guided by the Holy Spirit, the
things are so laid together.

Now that the Apostle had his Eye upon these so famous Discourses, besides the
Reasons I have given on this Head in its due place, it is evident to me further
he had so, by his Representation of himself in a Figure, all along the ninth
Chap. of his First Epistle to the Corinths, in the very heart of a Discourse
concerning Scandal; as that Person that humbles himself, as a Little Child, in
so many Remarkable Instances: His Little-Child-like Inoffensiveness, his easy
Recession from his Just Rights for the Gospels sake, his Inoffensiveness and
Desire to please all, to win upon all, that they might be saved, ^is dread of
Danger, lest whilst he Preached to others, he himself should become a
Castaway. Nor ever was there a clearer Comment upon cutting off the Right
Hand, and Foot, and plucking out the Right Eye, than his weighty Admonition of
being Temperate in all things, and bringing the Body into subjection.

One thing more I cannot but yet adjoin, that the Apostle is so wary of
Imposing upon any one in Indifferent Things, appertaining to Religion, in a
positive, or affirmative kind of observance, that though for the avoiding
Scandal, he dehorts from Eating Meats, or drinking Wine, that may scandalize
any in the very Eye of their Doubting Conscience, and draw them into Sin: yet
he no where, to the same purpose of avoiding Scandal, persuades to the
esteeming, or observing a Day to the Lord; though another may be Scandalized if
he does not so. Such abstinence (yet in a full Freedom of Thoughts) being a
much easier performance of Charity, extending only to Meats in Doubt, under the
Eye of the Doubting mind; but observing a Day, requires direct acts of
Devotion; From laying the obligation of which upon any Man, the Apostle has
wholly withdrawn his Hand, even in case of Scandal, and only preserves from
Despisal such a doubting Christian, and then only, when the Out-date of the
Divine Command for such observance, was but just come, and not fully
understood, Page 38. l. 25. What therefore I have intimated contrary to this
Account, I retract as not fully considered.

And I now bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Glory, that he would inspire the Hearts of Civil, and Ecclesiastical
Governors, who are constituted as Guardian Angels of Conscience against
Scandal, and of all Christians in general, that out of his Kingdom, throughout
the World, and particularly in this Nation, may be gathered all such things
that offend, and all those that w^rk iniquity on account of Them.

THE Woe of Scandal.
Matthew. XVIII. 7. Woe unto the World, because of Offenses, (or Scandals) for it
must needs be that Offenses (or Scandals) come; but woe to that Man, by whom
the Offense (or Scandal) comes.
A Free use of the word, Scandal, and to Scandalize, for Offense or to Offend,
can need no Apology, the Original being so well known, and now, become English,
more significant of the thing intended, than the other.

Of which Scandal, our Savior was in a deep and intense Contemplation in this
Chapter, and of the state of things because of it, both in his Church and the
World; in the World especially, as it confines upon his Church, is in the
Neighborhood of it, and view of what is done in it; or indeed, as within the
Arms of it, by a Profession of Christianity, though an unsound and insincere
Profession; for so there is the World in the Church, as well as the Church in
the World.

The Lord turns himself to behold and observe this Scandal, how it discharges
it self on all sides with Woe, Mischief, and Ruin; and with Compassion
foretells and warns all of it, as of the most destructive way of sinning, the
most to be abhorred kind of Mischief and Ruin.

This must needs make every thinking Christian afraid of Scandal, of having any
thing to do with it, either in giving, or receiving it; and much more of being
a Projector, or Pusher of it on in the World, and most of all in the Church.
Now to this whole Discourse there will be a continual occasion to have recourse
in this Treatise: But the words themselves offer to Consideration these Three
Propositions.

1. That the present state of the World is such, that Scandals must needs come.
Scandal is very pressing, and crowding in upon the World; in regard of its
multitude, its Name is Legion; it throngs the World; our Savior expresses it
in its number, Scandals: In regard of its vehemence, or importunity, it must
needs be that Scandal comes. It thrusts in every where, it perverts the best
things, and twines about them; it plays in things Indifferent, how much more in
things purely Evil.

Scandal comes, it comes as an Eagle hastes to the Prey; it comes supping, and
blasting as an East Wind; it comes as an Invader with its Troops. And the
World, how willing is it to receive Scandal? It calls for, and invites it, it
opens all Gates and Doors to it; it even surrenders and betrays it self to it;
it is mad after Scandal, both to give, and receive it: It must needs be then
that Scandals come.

Yet the World lies under great Misery, because of the Propos. 2.
multitude of Scandals, the Efficacy of Scandal upon it: It is more miserable,
in regard of Scandal, than merely in regard of Sin. For when the Lord
Emphatically denounces a Woe upon the World, because of Scandal, he intends
something more, than the Scripture generally declares against Sin, and Sinners;
for that is a known Case, that there is a Woe upon Sin; Our Savior
remonstrates this case as more rarely, and yet of all most necessary to be
understood, observed, and profoundly considered. And though it will appear, it
is always in the Sense of Scripture joined with Sin; yet it has thus much more
of Danger in it, than that merely it is sinful: It is Sin some way guarded and
defended against Divine Truth, and so holds its Goods more in Peace.

Its wound is no less deadly, yet more secret and unexpected, and therefore the
worst sort of Death: It is an Ambush of Death.

In the Sin of Scandal most eminently it is, even as in that most Enchanting
Sin, That a Man goes after it, as an Ox to the Slaughter, and as a Fool to the
Correction of the Stocks; till a Dart strike through his Liver: As a Bird
hastes to the Snare, and knows not that it is for its Life: Scandal wipes
its Mouth, when it destroys, and says, It has done no wickedness; when it
speaks fair, there are seven Abominations under it.

As against those Men of Scandal, the Pharisees, so against Scandal it self,
has the most merciful Savior of the World made his keenest Remarks.

There is still, however guilty the World be, an Accumulative Propos. 3.
Woe and Misery upon that Man, by whom the Scandal comes; Woe to the World;
but Woe to him; by which our Savior does not yet intend every one that
Administers Scandal; for so good Men often do in the doing their Duties; even
himself, his Doctrine, was an occasion of stumbling, and a Rock of offense; nor
is every Man pointed at here, that through Error, or fall into Sin, offers
Scandal; though this Woe spreads far in some degrees of it, upon the Generality
of Mankind; yea, upon every Man without Repentance, seeing all Men, one way or
other, guiltily convey Scandal along.

But there are some Engineers, some Masters, some prime Ministers of Scandal,
that as the Sons of Perdition push on Scandal in the World, and are obstinately
bent to do so; and on such a sort of Men our Savior principally fixes this Woe.

Now for the discoursing this great point of Scandal, upon these three
Fundamental Propositions, I shall observe this Order:

1. I will endeavor to settle a just Notion of Scandal, and being Scandalized,
and so enlarge into the whole compass of Scandal, in the general knowledge of
it from Scripture. 2. I will set my self to a pure and distinct Consideration
of Scandal, as it has such a peculiar Interest, as it appears to have, in
those Debates of the Apostle, concerning Indifferent things in Religion, in his
Epistle to the Romans, Cap. 14. and to the Corinthians, 1 Ep. Cap. 8. and 10.
3. I Will discourse the Reasons why Scandals must needs come. 4. The Worlds
woeful state, because of Scandals, shall be demonstrated. 5. I will consider
the Principal Authors of Scandal, that are as the Angels of Satan in the World
to that purpose. 6. The whole shall be, in the last place, applied to Practice.
I begin with the Notion of Scandal, which is a Metaphorical expression, taken
from those Engines that are contrived and prepared on purpose for a surprizal
into Mischief and Destruction, and accordingly disposed covertly into a Man's
way and passage; or from what is naturally, usefully, or accidentally and
carelessly placed in such way or passage, so as that a Man unawares falls upon
it; as either Gin, Snare, or Trap; or sharp Stakes, or Stones, that gall and
cut Men's Feet, if not removed or avoided; Stones or Blocks that lie in the Path
they are to walk, and occasion their stumbling, and fall; oftentimes to their
Death and Ruin, and always to their inconvenience, hazard, and danger.

All which Importances of the Word, applied to the several purposes of the
Scripture-use in their Proprieties, may be seen more at large, in the most
Learned Dr. HAMMOND's Discourse, and Annotations upon Scandal.

I shall only observe out of the Old Testament, as one Instance of many that
might be made; That the same word that is used to express the (...)
stumbling Block, that God forbids to put before the Blind in Leviticus, passes
out of the Levit. 19. 14.
Litteral Sense there, into the Moral Sense in the Prophet Ezekiel, for the
stumbling Block of a Man's iniquity, Ezekiel. 14. 3. Zephan. 1. 3.
which he puts before his Face; and the stumbling Blocks with the Wicked, in
the Prophet Zephany.

Other the like Translations of the same, and other Words of like Importance,
from their Native to this Moral intendment, might be gathered together, but
that this one so plainly leads us into the main point, and is so pregnant for
the describing Scandal; which may be thus represented.

Scandal is a prevailing Temptation to some great Sin, or course of Sin,
causing the Soul to fall before it, or catching and inwrapping the Soul in it,
and all the dreadful Consequences of it, covered under the disguise and
plausible pretense of a Principle of Reason, or Doctrine of Religion, to its
greatest Mischief and Ruin, if not recovered from it, by the Grace of God, and
sincere Repentance.

1. Scandal is thus when it prevails, when it succeeds to its unhappy Effect of
Scandalising: For a Scandal may be offered, and not take. Our Savior had a
Scandal offered him by Peter his own Apostle: Thou art a Scandal to me, Matt.
16. 22, 23.
says our Lord, when he presented him a pretext, a fair show of Reason against
suffering, which was the very Law of his Mediation in the World, imposed upon
him by God. The Suffering yet of so Innocent, so Divine, and excellent a
Person, looked like a Prodigy, and monstrous portent to the Apostle; not once
to be spoken or thought of, Be it far from thee, Lord; but our Savior
immediately discharged himself of it, in that severe rebuke, Get thee behind me
Satan. Thou art in this to me an Angel of Satan, the first Inventer, the
supreme Creator of Scandal.

The Saints, and Servants of God, have Scandals continually contrived into
their Paths; but God witholds their Feet from being taken; He has charged
himself with them, to keep them in all their Ways: He bears them up in his
Hand, that they may not, to their Ruin, dash their Feet against any of these
Stones.

Scandals are so many, and so great, as to undo, if it were possible, the very
Elect; but for the Elects sake, the Effective Power of Scandal is shortened.

2. Scandal is a Temptation; what the Evangalist Matthew calls being
Scandalized, or Offended, the Evangelist Luke Matt. 13. 21.
expresses by falling away in a Time of Temptation. Luke 8. 13.


Scandal differs nothing from that Description of the Apostle James: Every man
is tempted, when he is drawn Jam. 1. 14.
away of his own Lust, and enticed. Then Lust, when it has conceived, brings
forth Sin, and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death. I say it differs
nothing, but that in Scandal the Temptation is covered: Lust, Inordinate
Affection, is always at the bottom of Scandal: All Scandals against Religion,
or any of the Truths, Commands, or Duties of it, have their Root in Lusts and
sinful Corruption within: Herein they are justly chargeable to Condemnation;
the Scandal within is the great Scandal.

He that has an impure Affection quenched into the love of the Law of God,
has nothing to Offend, or Scandalize Psalm 119. 156.
him. Scandal finds no place in him: He that loves his Brother, and God in him,
has no occasion of Scandal 1 John 2. 10.
in him.

But Scandal is Temptation so covered, as I have described, and therein it
differs from mere Temptation. Many Temptations to Sin are barefaced, and have
nothing but Pleasure, Profit, or Vainglory to bait the Hook with; the Lust of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, the Pride of Life; all which leave the sin
naked, or the covering is at least so thin, that Conscience is not at all
imposed upon. But Scandal has the seemingly fair
Recommendation of a Principle of Reason, or Doctrine of Religion, how false
soever.

And therefore, though in a free way of speaking, a man is Scandalized by his
Right Eye, his Right Hand, his Right Foot, interpreting them of his Lust
getting the Ascendant over his Judgment and Conscience; that has nothing of
excuse, but that he in whom it dwells has made it so necessary to him, that it
is become part of himself; yet speaking more accurately, and according to the
general course of Holy Writing, Scandal is Temptation shaddowed and sheltered;
there is some Screen betwixt the Eye of Conscience, and defenseless Guilt; some
Attire of Virtue or Reason about the Sin.

There may be some places, where Scandal may be very near signifying nothing
but Temptation; but generally there is as much difference, as between David's
Fall into Murder and Adultery; and Peter's Denial of his Lord; the one was plain
Temptation, the other Scandal, arising from the, to him, uninterpretable
Suffering of our Savior; though both were great and grievous Sins.

3. Scandal is a Temptation to some great Sin, or course of Sin: For though the
least Sin introduced upon the Counterfeit of Religion, and Reason, is truly
Scandal, and partakes in its Woe. Yet those Scandals of daily almost
unavoidable Incursion in this imperfect State are broken in their deadly
effect, by the daily and general Repentance and desire of Pardon, and Faith in
the Blood of Jesus, all true Converts live in the Practice of.

Who can understand his Scandals? Deliver thou me from secret ones, may every
good man pray. But keep back thy Servant from Insolent Scandals, that they may
not have Dominion, so that I be Innocent and free from the great Transgression.

The sins that Scandal precipitates upon, may be either in the refusal,
disavowment, rejection, or despite to some of the prime manifestations of God
in the World, in Infidelity or Unbelief, or some great Enormity of Practice;
and it may be absolved and finished in some Notorious Act of Sin, or may run
through the whole Course of a man's Life, in an habitual State of sin, or
Transgression of the Rule, that he acts in all a-long, Lives and dies in this
Snare of Satan, in this Captivity under him.

It may be partial only, there being a reserve of the Soul preserved by Grace,
by which the renewed Soul recovers it self; as the Apostles were Offended, or
Scandalis'd in Christ on the Night of his Passion; and Peter in a fouler
manner; and yet theirs, even his Faith did not fail. They and he most Eminently
escaped out of the broken Snare. But men devoid of any Principle of true saving
Grace, are, though in several degrees, locked within the Scandal, and cannot be
rescued out of it, but by a Renovation to Repentance, the first Repentance.

Yea, even the best men, under the power of Scandal, as we now discribe it, are
for the present inwrap'd and involved; so that the whole man seems to fall, and
the whole strength for that time so far, as is visible, is taken Captive.

Now by all this that has been spoken, it is undeniable, that a Man is never
Scandalized, but when he sins; he is not Offended in this Scripture-sense, but
when he himself Offends: To be justly displeased with other men's sins, or
defiling Religion with impure mixtures, is not to be Offended; but when a man
himself displeases and offends God, and against his Duty.

4. Scandal in wraps in Sin, and the dreadful consequents of it; for in the
mischief and deadly issue of Sin, is the complemental nature, and notion of
Scandal.

It is in the way of Righteousness only, that there is Life, and in the
Pathway thereof, that there is no Death, none of the beginnings and first
strokes of it, of the avaunt Couriers of Death. It is Wisdom alone that is
Health to the Navel, and Marrow to the Bones; whose ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all its paths are Peace.

But the ways of Scandal, so closely united with Sin, though they seem right in
a Man's own Eyes, yet are all along the ways of Death, and most evidently so in
their end.

Guilt, Divine displeasure, Perplexity, Anguish of Mind, Grief, if the Sin be
felt; however a wound, a stripe, upon Conscience, and a mark of that stroke, of
that wound and stripe, whether felt or not; that can never be worn off, but by
Repentance, and Faith in the Blood of Christ: Weakness, Inability, loss of
Vigor, to a Holy Life (...) Action, and often down right Apostasy, are the
Fruit^ (...) Scandal; for every Sin is a prejudice, a mortification, (...) dead
works upon the Consci^nce, dispiriting it to Holi^^^^ more and more: It is the
way of Righteousness that is strength to the upright, and the joy of the Lord
therein, is his double strength.

Through Scandal Men stumble and fall, are discouraged and lie down at length
out of Choice, and with resolution to continue where they are, as most easy:
Qui jacet in terris, non habet unde cadat: Upon all this ensues at last Eternal
Death, if not prevented by Repentance.

5. Scandal is covered under some plausible pretense, or disguise of a
principle of Reason, or Doctrine of Religion.

For Reason being an efflux from God the Sovereign Reason, and Light from the
Father of Lights, any true principle of true Reason, and rightly applied, is
undoubtedly a Divine Oracle, and would justify any pretension grounded upon it.

Now in all Cases wherein Divine Revelation is refused or avowedly forced from
the genuine Sense, because either the Revelation, or all Natural Interpretation
will not serve the turn of Scandal, but detects and exposes it; it then flies
under an umbrage of Reason, as separated from such Revelation, or sets it up to
limit and control such Revelation.

But if it professes to own the Scripture, it then serves it self of Divine
Revelation, but wrested and mis-applyed; for the higher the Authority is, that
is vouched and pretended, the deeper the Scandal; as we may see in the
Pharisees, the greatest, both Masters and Bondmen of Scandal, that ever were in
the World, (except the Galley Slaves of it in the Romans Antichristianisme) and
they were so, because they were defended and flanked on all sides, as they
miserably deluded themselves, with the Authority of the Old Testament, the Law,
and the Prophets, together with the, to them equal, or indeed superior, awful
Traditions of the Elders, by which they circumscribed and kept under the
Authority and Sense of Scripture, as the Papists do at this day, by like
Traditions, and Faith of their Church.

Now all these, as they would have it, joined in perpetuating the Ceremonial
Law, as irreversible by God himself, and settling an indefeisible state of
Inheritance in the true Religion upon the Jews alone, without the calling of
the Gentiles to be the People of God, but as their mere Proselytes.

All these, as they deemed, represented a Messiah of quite another Figure,
another Character, than our Savior; and therefore he (as they concluded) must
needs be an Impostor, and his Doctrine Blasphemy; upon which Rock of offense
the Vessel of their Church, and even Nation it self, besides their particular
Souls, was most dismally Shipwrack'd.

But not only things of so good a Title and Claim, as the Jewish Religion, are
counter-scarf'd with a Doctrine; but even such vile things as Balaam taught,
eating things Sacrificed to Idols, in honor of the Idol, and committing
Fornication, when contrived into Scandal, must have a Doctrine for them: For so
the Spirit of God calls it, the Doctrine of Balaam: In Scandal even Jezabel
puts on the Vail of a Prophetess, and calls her self so, and under it teaches
and seduces; which may abate to us the wonder of Romes calling it self a
Church; and its Adulteries, Sorceries, and Idolatries, Catholic, Christian
Religion.

6. Scandal by such a Principle of Reason, or Doctrine of Religion, edifies, or
emboldens Conscience: For although Conscience was made for the Divine Truth,
and Law of God, which is the Truth, and not for Scandal; it was made so even
and true to it, that they which love this Law, have great peace, and nothing
can scandalize or offend them; that is, either seduce or hurt them; yet in this
very Seat, in this very Throne of the Divine Law, in this Temple of God, in
this place of the Holy, this Tribunal of the Soul, that ought to be the
Sanctuary of Truth and Righteousness, and as a Tabernacle of Testimony, does
Scandal exalt it self, as if it were from God, and from thence it gives its
Oracles; but Conscience thus debauched and prostituted, bears no more
proportion to true Conscience, than Antichrist does to Christ, and is therefore
a pseudo-Conscience, an Anti-Conscience, Conscience falsely so called.

7. Scandal always dashes its own Principles of deceived Reason, and false
Doctrine, upon some true and grand Principle of Reason, and Doctrine of
Religion. For though every Truth of God is great, yet there are of the first
magnitude; on account of which opposed, the Spirit of God brands it Scandal
more remarkably; and hereupon, though the Sin derived from Scandal may in it
self seem small; yet in regard of some stable Law of Religion made void, and
thereby Sin introduced, it is a very great Sin, though in a matter of its own
Nature sometimes indifferent.

Now it cannot be otherwise, but Scandal must thus dash upon Truth, because, as
I have said, it herein differs from simple Temptation, that its rest is upon
some false Principle of Reason, or Doctrine of Religion; it frames mischief by
a Law; and it must needs be, that every false Principle and Doctrine must rush
against some true one; and though no Truth of God be small, or Sin little, and
Scandal is always proportionable, yet the wisdom of Scripture has appropriated
the name of Scandal to the violation of some grand Principle: As I shall now in
the next place (for the further explaining of Scandal) observe those Pillars of
the Divine Truth and Law, against which it throws and bruises the Scandalized
Soul, as the Sacred Books shall instruct us.

1. The Eternal Being, and Holy Government of God in the World, according to
those Righteous, Just, and Good Laws he has given, and according to which he
will Judge, and make Retribution to all Men, at that great day, is the
Fountain, and most Fundamental Principle of Religion.

So then whatever, upon pretense of Reason and just cause, undermines the
Faith, abates the Aws, or dispirits the Obedience, agreeable to so supreme a
standard of all these, is the Original* and final Scandal.

Here all Scandal begins, in the decay of the Faith and Fear of God; and hither
it returns: It ends in a further loss of God, and this upon offense taken, that
too much is required without reason.

This is that Eternal Rock of Truth, at which whoever stumbles, must needs be
hurt, wounded and grieved: Thus was I grieved in my Heart, and pricked in my
Reins, Psalm. 73. 21.
says the Psalmist on this very occasion. Whoever falls violently against it,
it breaks him; whoever contests to remove it, and burdens himself with it, it
falls upon him, and grinds him to Powder.

And yet against this, speculative and practical Atheism has in all Ages
hardened it self, and by shows of Reason, and high Spirit, been heaving and
pecking at it, and casting Scandals in all Men's way. Gods retirement (as they
fancy it) into the thick covering of the Clouds, and the pleasure of J^b. 21.
14.
walking in the Circuit of Heaven, and not coming down in visible shapes of
Glory and Power, have given to ungodly Men, the Boldness and a counterfeit of
Argument to dispute against his Being and Government: I say, a counterfeit of
Argument; for with an Apparition of Reason from hence, and an Insolency of
Wickedness, they Conjure down they Mo^mo of Religion, and the Goblin of
Conscience, as they esteem them.

Atheism has always spoken stout Words against God; saying to God, Depart from
us, we desire not the knowledge Mal 3. 13.
of thy ways: What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Or what profit is
it, if we should pray unto him? Job. 21. 14.
It has of old lifted up Men against God, and stretched out their hand against
the Almighty; so that they have run upon God, even upon the thick Bosses of his
Buckler, to mischief themselves to the utmost.

In the very days of Job, there was this Counsel of the Job 10. 3. and 21. 16.
and 22. 18.
wicked; as if it was the result of debate, and serious consideration, in a
Senate of Atheists; as if they had made the Experiment, and found upon proof,
there was no advantage in serving God, and no Man came by the worse in
despising him.

It is not the invention of one Age, of this last Age, as if it might pride it
self in finding it out; Scripture has not thought it against its Interests to
record the strength of the Cause, as it was managed of old; in those Elder days
of Job, in the last days of the Old Testament, in the time of the Prophet
Malachi: But over-runs it with a Flood of Truth and Eloquence, even as God
does, as he pleases, with a Deluge of Wrath.

Yet present Impunity, and the seeming confusion of Providence in the
prosperity of the ungodly, and the afflicted State of good Men, has been
always a stumbling Block to sudden and short consideration: Job significantly
calls it, Gods shining on the Council of the Wicked; as if it Job. 10. 3.
gave it a Luster, and Countenance: Even good Men, till they went into the
Sanctuary of God, and looked to the end of things, have found it a Scandal. The
Psalmist acknowledges, His Feet were almost gone, and his Feet well Psalm. 73. 2.
nigh slipped, when he saw the Prosperity of the Wicked, and Waters of a full
Cup of affliction, wrung out to the Godly: Yet upon full discussion of the
case, he confesses it his Folly, Ver. 22.
and Ignorance: So Foolish was I, and Ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee.
The wise King observed the Hearts of Eccles. 8. 11.
the Sons of Men, fully set them in to do Evil, because Sentence on an Evil
Work was not speedily Executed. God by his Patience sustaining, and making
wicked Men stand, Exodus 9. 16.
even when they deny him, is the occasion of their more dreadful fall; for
their Foot will slide in due time to their Eternal Ruin; how slack soever God
is misdeemed, he will be a swift Witness of his own Being and Truth, and the
Avenger of his own Glory,

Now, so far as any Man has, either in secret Suspicions, or in the silent
Murmurs of his Soul, said, There is no God, or vanquished the prevailing Awes
of God, so that Conscience has been emboldened or edified, or so much as
silenced, or dumb, and mute in the Commission of Sin, or neglect of Duty upon
these appearances, (and who can say herein, I have made my Heart clean, I am
pure from this Transgression?) so far has he been Scandalized and endangered
to his Ruin.

This is the first great Pillar of Truth, and the primary Scandal is placed
here; That Men think there is no reason, God should have so much Love, Fear,
Honor, Obedience, so much Worship and Service. And the Second is like to it.

2. Even the Faith of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the World, is like to that
first great Principle, and equal to it; both because the whole Riches and
Treasure of all Religion is deposited and concentered in it, so that he has
not the John 17. 3.
Father, nor the Knowledge of the only true God, nor the Eternal Life,
proceeding from it, who has not the Son, who has not the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, whom God has sent. Even as Christ is the brightness of the Fathers
Glory, and the express Image of his Person, so is the knowledge of Christ the
express Image of the Knowledge of God, and the brightness of it: wherever it is
revealed, if it be not believed in, the God of the World has blinded the 2
Cor. 4. 6.
minds of them that believe not, least they should see the light of the Glory
of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ, who is the Image 2 Cor. 4. 4, 6.
of God, shining to them.

Especially, and more particularly, that great Attribute of Divine Mercy, and
Pardoning Grace, is illustrated, and breaks out with brighter and warmer Beams,
in this Son of his Love, the Lamb of God who takes away the Sins Acts 4. 12.
of the World, by the Sacrifice of himself: His is the only Name given under
the whole Heaven, to the Children of Men, whereby they can be saved.

This indeed was the Scandal of the Jews, who assumed to themselves, as the
only Masters of the true Religion in the World; and foolishness to the Greeks,
who took Isa. 28. 16.
upon them as the like Masters of Reason; but this corner Stone of Truth was
laid so sure, and of so tried an excellency, 1 Pet. 2. 6.
that all that reject and spurn at it, stumble and fall, are snared and broken.
They are false Notions of God and Truth, that will not be reconciled to it, and
while even the Builders refuse it, it will yet rise to be the Head of the
Corner. Ver 7.


It has now surmounted (before any Impartial Judges) all other Names of
Religion in the whole World; so that to strike at it, where it is known and
received, argues a disaffection and being Scandalized at Religion it self, and
is become the same with denying God, Providence, and Eternal Judgment:
Corrupted Reason, and Lucian-Wit aims at Religion in its very Essence, when it
pretends to dash upon that; and if, when it seemed to encounter with Gods own
Administration by Moses, there was yet such a presence of God with it, that it
would be more tolerable Mat. 10. 15. etc.
for Sodam and Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment, than for those that refused
it, as the Lord in several places testifies, how much greater will the
Condemnation be now, when it has so perfectly antiquated all that pretension
against it, and worn out the Prejudices of Elder Paganism? And yet so far as
the Foolishness of God, (as the Apostle 1 Cor. 1. 25.
styles it) does not appear to us wiser than Men, and the weakness of God
stronger than Men, we are ready to be Scandalized at the Doctrine of a
Crucified Savior. And it seems the easiest place for the Attacks of Atheism,
Irreligion, and Profaneness, who yet at last will find themselves in a Gin, or
Trap, when they thought they had gained Ground, and made entrance, and
shattered to pieces, when they believed a Conquest: For God takes the wise in
their own 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20.
Craftiness, and he knows the wisest thoughts of Men, that they are vain:
Every Degree of Apostasy from Christ, is Heb. 3. 12.
departing from the Living God. Transactions in Prayer, or Public Discourses
of Religion, are so much the more Divine, as they send forth the sweet savor
of his Name, which is as an Ointment poured out. The Apostle desired to 1 Cor.
^. 2. Phil. 3. 8.
know nothing but Christ, and him crucified: It is the (...), the Top and
Transcendency of Knowledge. Apostolic Epistles, full of Christ, and the Truth
as it is in Jesus, are the best Patterns for Sermons, much exceeding the
Rationalism or Moralism of t^^ wisest Philosophy: It is a Degree of Scandal
first taken and then given, to speak little of him. All Preaching is not giving
the savor of his Knowledge; 2 Cor. 2. ult.
and if it have not Life to the Soul, it is deadly, a Symptom to Death. The
very diverting, though to other Parts of Sacred Scripture, speaks Men offended
in him, when they do not find him, and express him, the Alpha and Omega in all,
the Bright Morning Star, the Amen. And though a Battology, a vain Repetition in
naming him, is blamable; yet it is more blame to conceal him, even in the best
Discourses of his Religion. The Rays of Religion are paler, more weak, and
chill, as they fall farthest off from him: He is the Sun of Righteousness, with
healing in his wings; and, Blessed is he in these days, even in these days,
whoever is not offended in him.

3. The Spirituality, Purity, Cleanness, and Chasteness of the Worship of God,
dictated by the clearest and sincerest Light of Natural Conscience, approved by
Divine Revelation, or founded, instituted, and directed by that undoubted
Heavenly Oracle, is the next great Pillar of Truth, upon which the Glory of
God, and the Salvation of Men's Souls, is settled: But against this, sensual and
defiled Imagination has in all Ages raised Scandal, and so befooled Reason,
that it has cast down many wounded; yea, many strong Men in their Intellectual
Endowments, and Reputation for Wisdom, have been ensnared and ruined by it.

It has been the Renown therefore of those Princes in Sacred Story, that have
had the Religious Magnanimity to resist the Charms of this Sorceress, and kept
Divine Worship uncorrupted; in whose Glory, so much as the High Places was a
dark Shade, and eclipsed them, though it had fair Pretense. Idolatry and
Superstition have been most evidently branded in Scripture, for the most
wretched State of being scandalized; and Idols, for the most abhorred Scandals.
This was the Snare of Gideon and his House; and yet, as Interpreters give us,
in a Matter as innocent at first, as laying up the Ephod he had inquired at in
his Danger, as a Monument of Gratitude for his Victory; that was after turned
thus into a Scandal, Judges 8. 27. This was the Scandal Balaam taught Balak to
cast before the Children of Israel. These were the Wiles, the Gins, and Traps,
in which the Midianites, Numb. 25. 17, 18. enclosed, cramped, and vexed them;
first, with the Guilt rising up in the Face of Conscience, and then with the
miserable Consequence of the sudden Wrath of God revealed from Heaven against
them. This was the Stumbling Block of Iniquity the wicked Man in Ezekiel puts
before his Face, even the Idols he had upon his Heart. These were the
stumbling blocks, with the wicked, God would cut off, and remove, in the
Prophet Zephaniah. This was one principal Point of Scandal the Apostle
discourses of to the Corinthians, in the Case of Eating 1 Cor. 8. and 10.
things offered unto Idols; and that the Holy Spirit in the New Testament so
eminently remarques for Balaam's Doctrine of Scandal. The great Abomination,
and Lie, that deceives the World, in the Book of the Revelation, is the
detestable Rev. 2. 14.
Antichristian Idolatry, the notorious Scandal of the Christian World, both
within it self, and before the Jews, Turks, and even Pagans, who see their own
Brutishness acted under that excellent Name.

This is so great a Point, that God has departed from the Brevity of that
Majestic Law in the Second Commandment, for the guarding his Worship, as with
a Flaming Sword, every way, because in a Case wherein Humane Nature is so prone
to fall. Whether therefore it be the dividing the Divine Honor to any other,
though under the Name of Reverence to him, as the Original, or Supreme; or
whether it be the carving a Worship for God, he does not prescribe for himself;
whatever be the Dccency, or Expediency to help the Devotion, whether of the
Learned, or Unlearned; it becomes Scandal, and a Snare to those that are so
imposed upon.

And seeing (though the weakness of Passion be far off from God) he owns
himself jealous, we have reason to mistrust every thing, when he is so; seeing
not only foul Debauches, but even what is most innocent in all other Cases, is
suspected in that.

Hezekiah in the sense of this broke in pieces so venerable a Relic as the
Brazen Serpent, not only a Ceremony of 2 Kings 18. 4.
Miraculous Cure, but a Type of Christ; and degraded it into a mere piece of
Brass, when he saw the Israelites scandalising at it, and tempted by it to
impure Glances. When our Savior perceived so clean and harmless an Usage, as
Mat. 15. 1.
Washing before Meat, creeping into a piece of Religion, how severely he
disowned it! and was careless of the causeless scandalising of the Pharisees,
by his Doctrine concerning it, because he knew there was True and Real Scandal
in that Rite, so abused. And when all is said that can be said, the Heavenly
Pattern is that, in Divine Worship, and that only, of which it can be said,
That nothing in it can scandalize, that is, justly scandalize; except we think
God's Jealousy was a Jewish Style, wholly now out of date.

And yet how has this Scandal, this Stone of Stumbling, this Gin, and Snare,
always lain in the way of Humane Imagination, and prevailed upon it.

As if God, living in the Retirement of a Spiritual Nature, did not understand
how himself was to be addressed by Men, nor knew the Points of Honor due to
his own Glorious Nature, as is most Fashionable and Modish in the World; Men
take upon them to distinguish things better by the Breeding they have had in
this Earthly Country: they think God so much a Stranger, as not to know how to
appoint for himself, when Men have to do with him; as if what might be well
accepted in Heaven, would not yet be current upon Earth. Here Images, Pictures,
Elevations, Adorations of the Host, with innumerable Rites and Ceremonies, are
necessary to beget Devotion due to God the Savior they will serve: Here they
that can best judge what is most Stately, have determined, God must not make
himself so cheap, as immediately to receive Prayers and Supplications, or by
his Son only, as the Mediator: Angels and Saints must intercede, and then who
can deny them their share of Honor? Religion will be neglected and d^spised,
if it have not Sets-off besides it self, and the necessary Decency of Humane
Actions: There must be something unusual to dress it up, and amuse. But all
this is no more than the Greens and Flourishes laid over a Trap, to hide it,
and invite the unwary Passenger.

God, that understands himself so perfectly, as to know what will please him,
understands all Men too, and needs not that any should tell him of Man; for he
knows what is in Man; and he has pronounced it, What is higly esteemed among
Men, is abomination in the sight of God: He has Isa. 15. 9.
said it, In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of Men: All outward Pomp is but drawing nigh with Lips, when the Heart is far
off.

To worship God, is to give him the Glory of his own Perfections, and not to
make him such a One as our selves God is a Spirit, and they that worship, must
worship him in Spirit Joh. 4 24.
and Truth; in his Spirituality and Truth, not in their own Carnality and vain
Show. It is not to Paint, or Pourtray, or Carve a Deity, as the Heathen, that
changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and the Glory of the Incorruptible God
into the Image of Coruptible Man, and other baser Creatures, because they
thought it best; and yet worse than that, into Names of greatest Infamy, and
flagitious Turpitudes.

All frivolous Rites represent Divinity small and impertinent, to the Great
loss of the Glory due to that terrible Name, The Lord our God.

One great End of Worship, is the Conforming the Soul to the Divine Nature, by
Approaches to, and Exercises of the Mind upon it; but if this be misshapen,
the Soul is made more unlike to God Blessed for ever, as the same Heathen
became more licentious by the Pourtraictures they gave their Gods. A trivial
Temper of Mind naturally results from a trivial Worship, even as it forms it
first, and often meeting it there, it daily returns from it confirmed and
improved.

The Sincere Worship, directed to in the Gospel, is that Glass in which we
behold the Glory of the Lord, and are changed 2 Cor. 3. ult,
into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.

Looseness of Life has been always noted to be the Fruit of a Corrupt Worship:
It is naturally so, and God curses it to be so; God gave Idolaters up to their
Lusts, and an Injudicious Mind.

They that Worship him aright, according to his Word, Psalm. 36 8. and 6^. ^.
adhere to him, and by regular Conduits drink Life from the Fountain of Life,
and derive from the River of his Pleasures; they are abundantly satisfied with
the Goodness of his House, even of his Holy Temple.

They that Worship God after their own Imaginations, do but drink out of their
own broken or defiled Cisterns, that hold no Water; and therefore draw nothing
but Wind and Air, or Corruption, They walk in the Light of their own Sparks,
and have only this at Gods hand, to lie down in sorrow. Besides that, God in
just displeasure sends down upon them the Revenges of an abused and injured
Power and Godhead. Now all this expresses the Height both of the Deception and
Mischief of Scandal.

4. The fourth great Principle of Truth, is the absolute and indispensible
Necessity of Holiness, both in Heart and Life, without which no Man shall see
the Lord: Against which Heb. 12. 24.
there lies no such Scandal, or cause of Offense, as inward and inherent Lust,
and inordinate Appetite, which is obstinately set to obtain its Satisfaction,
and is no way to be tamed, but by being cut off, though it be the Right Hand,
or Right Foot, or even the Right Eye. The Love of God, Mark 9. 43.
and his Law, is the best Security against this Scandal, and daily
Mortification and Crucifixion of the Old Man, with Ephesians. 4. 22.
its sinful Lusts and Affections.

Pretenses from Reason, or Doctrines of Religion, there can be none in this
Case, to those who acknowledge either Christianity, or Morality.

But Men are carried down the violent Stream of ungoverned Passion, and that
falls into the wide Sea of general Corruption and Bad Example, which looks most
like an Authority. There are the Palliations and Excuses of Sin, which may
serve in a time of Peace, and Carnal Security; but cannot so delude Conscience,
as to be in a strict sense Scandal. The continual Practice of Sin hardens the
Heart, sears, benumbs, and stupifies all inward Sense, and cancels the Awe of
those engraven Laws and revealed Commands of God, for a time; but cannot either
deny their Just Power, or challenge them of Unreasonableness: So that, if any
where, Men are forced to take Refuge at the Atheistick denial of Religion it
self, or to blind Conscience with Superstitious Acts, which seem to commute and
make satisfaction for Sin: Or, if Men are resolved to blind their Eyes, and
obstruct all Sense, they may make the Profession of True Religion a Cover to
Sin, as they that cry, Lord, Lord, and Mat. 7. 22.
the Temple of the Lord are we; that name the Name of Jer. 7. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Christ with great ostentation, and so may deceive their own Souls; but to hold
out against either the Challenges of Divine Truth, or of their own Reflections,
is impossible. So that, upon the whole matter, Predominant Lust from within,
and Bad Example from the so abounding Iniquity of all sorts of Men, the Falls
of Good Men, the Miscarriages of Hypocrites and insincere Professors of
Religion, are the greatest Scandals or Stumbling Blocks in the Ways of
Holiness, to those that are not ensnared in the aforementioned Scandals.

But although the necessity of Holiness is above the reach of strict and proper
Scandal, yet it is the very Center of all Scandal in the effect of it; for then
a Man is indeed scandalized, when the Salt of Divine Truth, when the Spirit of
Truth can have no power nor efficacy upon him, because of that Scandal, to
season the Heart, nor govern the Life and Action in the Love, Fear, and
Obedience of God and Jesus Christ. But if it be possible for any Man to
understand in his Heart and Life what he does not promise by Profession; or if
he seem to deny any Principle of Truth, and does not understand in his Heart
and Life the Extent and Force of his Denial, but has better Principles, that
are an Antidote and Counter-poyson to any Mistakes in the Doctrine of Religion,
he is not scandalized with the great Mischief of Scandal: But that Man is
scandalized, that through False Principles, or the denial of True ones, wants
their Power and Virtue upon his Affections and Actions: For no Truth is for
Notions sake, but to make truly good the Heart and Practice; the very
Confession with the Mouth is to recoil back into the Soul, and make that
better, and to move forward, and engage the Life along with it.

5. It is a grand Pillar of the Truth of Religion, That we love our Neighbor
as our selves; and that he that loves 1 John 4. 21.
God, should love his Brother also: And there is not, there cannot be any Law
of Religion, wherein the Equity, the Love, Favor, and Compassion of the Lord
our God, and of Jesus Christ our Savior, toward Humane Nature, does more
evidently recommend it self: It is the Justification of the Religion of the
Scriptures to be the True Religion: And as the Love of God to Man, his
Philanthropy, does shine out more illustriously in the Gospel; so does the Law
and Doctrine of this Love of Christians to one another; and not only to
Christians, but to all Men: And in this, as of greatest concernment, the Gospel
is so abundant, and its Discourses of so great weight, that it is made another
Hemisphere of Religion to the Love of God. The one is the first and Mat. ^1.
38, 39.
great Commandment, and the second is like to it: It is the Law and the
Prophets; it is the whole Law. It is irreconcilable Romans 13. 8, 9.
to the Love of God, not to love our Brother: It is 1 John 3. 15.
such a Degree of Murder, that whoever is guilty of, cannot have Eternal Life
abiding in him. It is the great Mark 1 John 3. 14.
We have passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren.

So many are the Arguments, and so strong the Obligations to this Duty, that
they cannot be recounted; all may be summed up, in that God is Love, and he
that dwells in Love, is born of God, dwells in God, and God in him. Now
that this Love is fixed in an Uniformity of Opinions, or points of outward
order in the Worship of God, is most unreasonable to believe; for besides the
impossibility to reconcile all the innocent Varieties that are in Humane
Nature, though it be Christian humane Nature, in their Sentiments and Elections
in these things; the things themselves are not of that amount, as to be the
proper rest of this Divine Love; or that if it misses these Poles, it should
therefore cease to be the Axis upon which the Catholic Society of Christians,
and Christian unity, turns; for that, in the very Nature of the thing, must be
substantial Christianity it self.

And this is indeed the Great Schism, to be divided in Affection from
Christians; it is a wonder how it could be otherwise understood, seeing smaller
differences are frequently by the Apostle considered, and allowed for, without
the least allowance for Christians not loving one another.

Christianity carries no Gall, even toward utmost Strangers, upon the account
of its being the true Religion, much less toward those that are truly
Christians, though not each uniform with one another in all things.

The great Scandals against this Love are, private Men think it justifiable not
to love those that have injured them; but this Case has been considered, and a
forgiveness of seventy seven Injuries in a day, upon Acknowledgment Mat. 18. 22.
Luke 17. 4.
and Repentance, been taken care for, that Love may be continued. The
forgiveness of God and Christ, is set us as an Example, and that it may the more
affect us, the odds between our Offenses against God, and all Trespasses
against our selves, is stated as disproportionate as ten thousand Talents to a
hundred Pence.

But however Men think, they may justly not love where there is a difference in
Divine matters, in matters of Religion: This is the cause of God and Truth, and
yet this is generally but the greater Scandal; for when the things that
Christians differ in are small, and that they agree in great and momentous
things, it is evident the Integrity, Honor, and Interest of Religion should
much more unite, and indear, than little Interests divide.

In things that are evidently contrary to Divine Truth* and the Law of God,
there is a just denial of a (...), with respect to that Evil he travels with,
as the Apostle John, the great Minister of Love, teaches us; and a Method for
Reformation or Rejection, as our Savior, agreeable to that Law in Leviticus,
prescribes us; not to smother our Mat. 18. 15, etc. Lev. 19. 17.
hatred or disgusts in silence, and reserve by concealing the fault, a constant
cause and store for our Anger or Ill Will, but to bring it to an open
procedure, that either our misapprehension may be rectified, or the person
reformed, and so our love either way restored; or a just reason appear, not for
our hatred, but for our limitting the extent of our Love: In such a case it
ought not to be as is due to a Christian, but to a Publicane, or Heathen; who
is still the Object of our Love, but not of that kind, that degree of Love
adjust to Christians; but this must be in a case clear and evident, not every
Dispute. The Truth of Christian Religion, and the great Design of it, is the
Salvation and Happiness of all the Servants of Christ, and with an Universal
Favor to Mankind; and this is preserved only in Love.

Every thing then that cools and destroys Love, under a show of Just and Right,
is a Scandal; because it overthrows Christianity, which is indeed a Religion of
Love, and makes a man of great Name, Pretense, Authority in the Church, a
nothing.

It is a Scandal, for it rises from Scandal; it has the ill effect of Scandal,
both ensnaring and destroying, and it tends to further Scandal.

It rises from Scandal; he that does not Love has some Lust, some interest of
Profit, Dominion, or Pleasure, that he serves under a name of Religion: They
that cause Divisions, (...), Divisions in affection, taking advantage Romans 16.
17.
of Dissents in Opinion, these serve their own Bellies: That Lust which they
cloak with Religion, that baser Interest they cloth and cover with a better
name; that Lust so disguised deceives them, and enslaves them under it self:
This moves to further Scandal; every one that does not comply with the humor
of this Lust, and serve it, he appears as the Irreligious, or the Factious
disorderly Person; hereupon he must not be received, or continued in the Love
due to a Brother, a Christian; though the case be nothing at all to true
Christianity. Our Savior, as aware of this, in his so severe caution of not
Scandalising little ones, immediately subjoins those dreadful Precepts of
cutting off the Right Hand, etc. that Scandalize our selves, as implying, they
are the great causes of our Scandalising others. This still moves on to further
Scandal; Scandal to Strangers, who thereupon look upon Religion as Austere,
Morose, and Cruel, and so are discouraged from coming in to it: Scandal to
those, whom our Savior calls the little ones in Christianity, whom it may be
he so calls, not that they Marc. 9. 4^.
are always so in themselves (when yet despised) but because they may be only
so in the Eyes of those that despise them, and think not the honor and regard
owing to Christians due to them; or because, take the meanest in Christianity,
or those we think, or are indeed in most danger to be lost, our Savior in a
Scheme, in a Figure of little ones, would represent, they ought to be the most
cautiously and tenderly treated.

Lastly, They themselves become Scandalized too often to much higher degrees of
Scandal hereby, even against those things that carry the truest, and most
genuine Spirit of Christianity, because they would go as far off as they can,
and be most unlike those from whom they dissent in some things; that neither
their Praying, their Preaching, their Phrase and manner of speaking must be
accepted by them, till they even desert the Examples of the very Scripture it
self in those things; and come too near Burlesquing the Sacred guise of them,
or at least, what is so nearly united, that the reproach that falls upon the
one falls upon the other also; and all that they may be sure to stand far
enough off from the adverse purity of what they have espoused; whose Opinions
while they seem to strike, the things most agreeable to Scripture, are the
Sufferers too often. But he that loves his Brother, has no occasion of this 1
John 2. 10, 11.
sort of stumbling (which is not far from the Apostles meaning) because as his
Soul is rightly composed, and not Clouded with dark and black passion, so he
has no Temptation to dislike any thing in true Christianity, out of Hatred to
his Brother who professes it, but an additional Obligation to keep the Truth
entire, out of Love to his Brother who is united in it with himself; and
therefore it is said, hereby we know we love the Children of God, when we love
God, and keep his Commandments; when our love to them ingages us the more
close, in a Religious Union with them. He that hates his Brother, is ready to
fall out with every thing that he is for, and knows not at what he stumbles,
whether it be truly of God and Christ, or not, and so is no just occasion of
stumbling, though he stumble at it. 1 John. 5. v. 2.


6. The Government and Authority God has vested in Conscience to understand
with God for it self, and the Soul; and to guide it self according to his
Command, who is its only Father, and it ought to have none upon Earth, beside
him; even as Christ is its one Master, is a Grand Principle of True Religion.

And this is of so great concernment, that though the thing be good a Man does,
yet if he does it not upon a Judgment, a Sense, a Dictate of Conscience; or if
that he refuses be truly Evil, yet if it be not rejected in the same manner,
upon the same Motives, neither the one nor the other arises to a Religious
action, or is accepted with God, as done in his Fear, but is a vain honor of
him.

Now to the discharge of Conscience, in this its so high Office and Trust it
owes to it self and the Soul, that it be richly and abundantly furnished with
the knowledge of the Divine Will, and the Word of God dwelling in it; that
seeing it is both the Scribe and Doctor, or, if I may so speak, the Bishop of
the Soul within it self, it be as the good Householder, that brings forth out
of his Treasury things new and old, that it attend to all Means of Instruction
for the Kingdom of Heaven, entertain all Wisdom, lift up its voice for it; seek
it as Silver, and search for it as for hid Treasure.

And that its influence may be powerful and effective upon the Soul, to all
Holy and Heavenly Obedience, there must be a just preservation of its
Authority, and good Conduct, that so it may promote the Soul into all goodness,
having gained a high Reputation and Honor, by the success it has had already,
and the comfort and good expectation it raises within the Soul, upon its happy
Government: For the upright man, from this vigor of Conscience, holds on his
way, and grows stronger and stronger; and Job. 17. 9. Prove. 4. 18.
the way of the Just becomes as the shining Light, that shines more and more to
the perfect day.

And therefore one of the principal Scandals Scripture remarques upon, is this,
When Conscience, upon any Solicitation, upon any Insinuation, or Usurpation
upon it, betrays this Trust, and surrenders it self to any other Dictate or
Authority, but that which is Divine; and that shining within it self, and so
assuring it by its Rationality, Goodness, Purity, Majesty, that it is from God:
To take any thing upon trust from Men, that it does not try, and examine, or to
let go any thing it has so tried and examined, and found good, upon any
pretense whatever, is indeed to be Scandalized; that pretense, that does so
assume over it, and prevail with it against it self, Scandalises it.

For the charge of representing to the Soul, the Authority of the Divine Laws,
is committed to the Conscience; the supreme Moderation is in God, and the
Divine Law; yet it is transmitted into the Soul, it enters thither through the
Dictates of Conscience; whatever then so imposes on Conscience, as that it
recedes from its Government, Scandalises it; for the Government of God is lost
also thereby.

And though Conscience cannot justify a man in any error, nor ought to possess
a Man with unnecessary scruples; yet still the main Government of Conscience
deriving it self from God, and the true understanding of his Will, is by no
means to be shaken.

For Man, as a Rational Creature, as a Creature of Religion, cannot obey God,
but by the Mediation of Conscience. He must know, and judge within himself,
what is the Divine Law, and obey it. If he does in Conformity to that Will, and
does not know it, it is not true Obedience, because it is not Religious; it is
not reasonable, or rationally Religious Obedience.

The Obedience of God is seated in the Judgment, in the Conscience; if these
Reins are slack and loose, if this Golden Bridle be neglected, Men know not
whither they may run, upon what they may be driven, and never discover the
danger. A man cannot distinguish what is from God, from what is not; if this
gust of the Soul be not quick, vigorously exercised, and left free.

Conscience may be instructed, advised, persuaded, yea, even menaced and
terrified by the Applications of the Word of God to it; nay, it may be
overruled by Lawful Authority, wherein it turns Apostate, or Renegade to
Natural Religion; yet it can never be Lawfully deposed, or put out of
Authority: The Mystery of Faith, the Rule of Obedience, the Consolation and
Vigor of the Soul, are all preserved in a pure Conscience, and Shipwracked
together with it.

Now because Conscience is placed by God in this great Trust and Dignity; it
becomes, and it must needs become so great a matter of Scandal, as the Apostle
discourses: when Conscience not duly regarding its own light, and inward Sense
surrenders it self to a foreign Rule; steers it self by a compass out of it
self; says, another shall be wise and see, and Dictate for it; and so gives up
it self in an implicit Faith, and blind Obedience.

Here is Scandal in its Delusive, Deceptive Power; a Man thinks it modest,
cautious, a point of Honor and Subjection to those that are above him, to be
carried by an Authority out of himself: Conscience hereupon deserts its own
Principles, and its own place in directing according to them: Upon this it
falls into all the miserable consequences, the mischief of Scandal. Conscience
is wounded, grieved, weakened, and lies prostrate; and without Repentance, the
work of God in the Natural, or new Creation, is destroyed, and even the Man for
whom Christ dyed perishes.

God has concredited the Keys of Knowledge and Jurisdiction within the Soul to
Conscience alone; and I cannot find that it can be at all excused in resigning
them into any Hand, but his that gave them; no not to an Angel from Heaven.

The Ministers of Religion, and Magistrates in their place, have these Keys, as
they are Administered without a Man, to offer and press upon him all
considerations of his Duty.

But every Man must see with his own Eyes, and not another for him, he must be
enlightened by Beams and Rays that shine within his own Soul: He has a private
double Look upon himself, and none may open and shut but Conscience, in and
with God: whoever else does, becomes a Father, and a Master upon Earth to him,
in the place of God and Christ.

Upon this account the Apostle lays down these three Romans 14. 22, 23*
great Positions.

1. That whatever is not of Faith, of a free and full persuasion of Conscience,
is Sin. For though the Natures of things cannot be changed in themselves; yet
as we are conversant in them, it is an undoubted Rule, Bonum oritur ex integris
causis. Every thing conspires to, and concerts Good; but Evil being a
declension and fall from Good, every degree of fall or aberration from Good, is
Evil; and this Plenipotence of Conscience, committed to it by God, is a prime
necessary in every good thing, and the want of it greatly evil; though it has
not an Omnipotence of changing Nature it self.

2. From hence it follows, he that does, and doubts in what he does, is
condemned in his doing (whatever the thing be in it self) because to him it is
so far Evil, that he does it against that Domestic Authority of Conscience.

3. He is a happy Man, that (especially having fallen into doubt) in doubtful
things is come to so good a Resolution, as not to condemn himself in that
wherein he allows himself. He that has a good assurance rising, neither from
Ignorance nor Carelessness, is a happy Man; by way of Eminency. It is a rare and
extraordinary happiness, and he that has not, but is perplexed with Doubt,
ought not to be as a Lamp despised; he deserves great tenderness and
compassion: As I shall more fully have occasion to observe under the Second
Head; viz. Scandal about Indifferent things; to which I now proceed.

And I am here to undertake a particular and distinct consideration of Scandal;
as it has a most peculiar interest in those so famous Debates of the Apostle,
concerning indifferent things, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. and 10. when they can any way
be supposed to relate to God in the Notions of Religion, or have a presence,
how circumstantial soever, in Divine Worship.

But before I enter upon this undertaking, I must remove two Prejudices.

1. It must be acknowledged, Scandal in these cases has been indeed made
Trivial, by some Men's injudicious Zeal, and ignorant dealing with the Apostles
Sense herein; who having a crude Conception of Scandal, from what he has
spoken of it, as a most formidable Evil, both in him that gives it, or takes
it, have therefore called every thing Scandal that displeases them; and mean
nothing by being scandalized, but that they have greatly disliked such or such
things, without any other hazard of falling into sin, than what is to be feared
from their indiscreet anger, and too often over-passionate Inflammation; whence
has risen this Scandal, dangerous enough, That many are ready to believe,
there is no such thing as Scandal in Indifferent Things; except what unknowing
Zeal in a ferment creates; or at least have not taken into their thoughts this
kind of true Scripture Scandal, or entertained a just fear of running into it,
or ensnaring others in it.

But it will be evident to any one that duly weighs, that the Apostle proceeds
upon much deeper and more grave Considerations.

2. On the other side, the Fear of Scandal or scandalising has been blown off
by some, upon this mistake, That Men can be in no danger to be scandalized, who
keep far enough from being drawn by Example into any thing they dislike, and
are sufficiently angry at: The Obstinacy of such, they think, is a sufficient
Bar to them against Scandal, and against any ones being guilty, as an Author of
Scandal to them, how hardly soever they press upon them; while they profess so
loudly their Dissent, they must not so much as name Scandal, without the
imputation of gross Ignorance.

But it is to be justly apprehended, a man may be He, by whom Scandal comes,
though it find no place in him against whom it comes; as has been already
observed.

And further, Though the Apostle has in these two Instances fixed chiefly upon
that sort of Scandal, within which men are drawn by following Example against
their inward Sentiments; yet, by a parity of Reason, Scandal is to be suspected
to have much larger compass, even in things of Indifferency, and lying farther
off from men's doubtful complying in what they have Example or Command for, than
that such compliance should be the only measure of Scandal therein.

And even in those that do comply with freer minds, there are more secret Paths
and Tracks wherein Scandals are laid, than they generally and openly make
complaint of, and that not only in regard of inward Doubts, but upon other
accounts also.

I shall therefore lay down these two Preparatories, to make these Discourses
of the Apostle more concerning to us.

1. That we have great Reason to be assured, they have their Foundation in the
Denunciations of Woe by our Savior upon the World because of Scandal; upon him
by whom Scandal comes, by way of transcendency; and his Admonition to all, that
Scandals must needs come: For the same Divine Spirit of Truth descended from
the Master upon the Minister, and framed like Apprehensions in him, when he
spoke afterward of the same point. Nay we have Reason to believe the latter
Discourse looks back upon the former, because it was undoubtedly well known to
Christians then, and much more to the Apostle; who, besides that he had
immediate Revelations, most probably from the Lord, even of those things that
were written by the Evangelists, gives proof he had a very peculiar care to
know all He had spoken, and a singular respect to it; for he expressly quotes
our Savior in those immediate Revelations, as in the Case of the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 11. 23. in what was written in the Evangelists, as in the Case of
Divorce, 1 Cor. 7. 10.

And lastly, in what he had attained, as well testified, though not recorded,
as in that Acts 20. 35. Remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, It is more
blessed to give than to receive.

It is not therefore reasonable to suppose, in such Discourses of Scandal as
these, he neglected so solemn a one as our Lords upon it. The Little ones in
the Evangelist, and the Weak Brethren in the Apostle; the Woe in the one, and
the Conscience in the other; grieved, wounded, weak Christians, stumbling,
falling, perishing, and being destroyed, are of near affinity in their sense:
And those even Abjurations of Occasions of Scandal, It is good neither to eat
Flesh, nor drink Wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother Romans 14. 21.
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak: If Meat make my Brother to offend,
I will eat no Flesh while the World stands, 1 Cor. 8. 13.
lest I make my Brother to offend, or scandalize my Brother: These so solemn
Renunciations of Scandal are not far off from our Saviors Woe upon him by whom
Scandal comes: and that great Aphorism, Happy is he that condemns not
himself Romans 14. 22.
in that thing which he allows, is grounded upon that; Scandals must needs
come, they force an Entry at every the least Advantage; and therefore, Happy is
he that can preclude them.

2. That seeing the Instances of Scandal the Apostle debates upon, viz. the
Jewish distinction of Meats, and Eating things offered to Idols, were of a
narrow and particular Nature, and of a daily decreasing Occurrence; the
Apostles so laborious and industrious handling them being preserved in Sacred
Records, and transmitted down to after Ages, argues, he, or rather the Holy
Spirit by him, designed to remonstrate to the latest Posterity of Christians,
the great Play, Scope, and Force of Scandal in these Indifferencies, and in all
Cases wherein they may fall out to be Scandals (though not after the Similitude
of these) the danger of scandalising, or being scandalized.

Having thus far premised, I come now close up to these Apostolic Debates
themselves; of which I shall make such a Platform, with all possible brevity
and conciseness, as may comprehend the whole Doctrine of the Apostle upon these
two Cases, and then balance with it the whole Nature of Indifferents, as they
come into such an Account of Religion as I have before supposed.

The Platform I lay down in these Parts of it, all drawn out of these Debates.

1. The stating of the Nature of Indifferents in relation to God. 2. The way
how Scandal invades Indifferent things, when come into such a Relation. 3. The
several ways of Scandal playing it self upon Indifferents. 4. The great
Considerations against pressing Indifferent things, when they are come into
Scandal, so much as by Example. 5. The Answer of the several Objections that
may be used to disparallel Indifferents (because of other Circumstances) with
these Indifferents.
I begin with the first, the stating the Nature of Indifferents with relation
to God, in these four Characters of them.

1. They are things in themselves Lawful, Innocent, and in their Use, as of
themselves, no way displeasing to God. So the Apostle pronounces, with great
boldness and earnestness, of Meats that were forbidden under the Law of Moses:
I am (says he) in respect to them, persuaded by the Lord Jesus, there is
nothing unclean of it self, but all things are pure.

In the Case of Things offered to Idols, he declares, All things (viz. of that
kind) are lawful, that is, with regard to the things themselves, if they are
used aright, if they are taken by the right Handle.

Although Meats have been offered to Idols, yet there is no such thing as an
Infinite Evil, that can taint what God has made good. There is one God, the
Father, of whom all 1 Cor. 8. 6.
things are originally, and we in him, and for him; and in or for no Idol or
Demon: There is one Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator, by whom, in a reconciled
and attoned State, after the great Corruption and Curse by Sin, are all things,
and we by him, and by no Demon-Mediator or Intercessor. This Right, Title,
Claim, and Propriety of God, and Christ, no Demon can expulse. God and Christ
so fill all things, that an Idol can be but a Nothing.

2. These Indifferents, or the Use of them, cannot commend us to God, as of
themselves: we are not the better if we eat, or the worse if we eat not; Meat
commends us not to God.

3. There may yet be so Religious and Advantageous Use of them, as that they
may, by the observation of all due Circumstances, and the elevation of them to
the best and worthiest Ends, be Occasions (I say, Occasions only) of Religious
Service, and Glory to God, and that on either side; which shows their
Indifferency; for one side may be made an occasion of Religious Action, as well
as the other; and so neither side obliges us more than other: He that eats,
eats to the Lord, and gives God thanks; He that eats not to the Lord, he
eats not, and gives God thanks. He that eats Meat offered to Idols, in
Gods Right, and not in the Right of the Demon, is a Partaker by Grace; or
Divine Bounty, through Christ. For, the Meat is Gods, and his Provision; and
the Idol, to him that understands, has nothing to do with it; and therefore he
gives God thanks, and not the Idol. It is in relation to these things, the
Apostle commands, Whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, (that is, or
not eat, or not drink) do all to the Glory of God.

4. They may be used amiss both ways. In some Circumstances, It is good not to
eat Flesh, or drink Wine, even while the World stands. They may in some
Circumstances be inexpedients, and not edify; that is, by a diminutive way of
speaking, run counter to the Ends of Edification; and Scandalize others. They
that have knowledge concerning their true nature, and the best use of them, may
yet so use them, as to sin against the Brethren, and wound their righteous
Conscience, and so sin against Christ. But they that Eat without knowledge, Eat
so as to Eat with Scandal to doubt, and be damned in their Eating.

On the the other side, they which use them not, that Eat not, that will not
Eat, may so not Eat, as to turn them into another sort of Scandal, while they
grow superstitiously afraid to touch, taste, or handle; and therefore he that
uses Indefferent things aright, only makes use of that side of them he
chooses, as an occasion or acting ^o the Glory of God, as he desires to do in
all he does, without placing any weight on either side of the things themselves.

The Christian fully persuaded in his own mind to eat eats, and gives God
thanks; but knows meat commends him not to God, makes it no matter of Religion
to eat, and so in case of Scandal forbears it. The Christian that eats not,
makes use of the liberty he has, as in an indifferent thing, not to eat
either meats unclean according to Moses, or things offered to Idols; without
laying any stress of Religion upon his abstinence in either, but only the
assurance he is not the worse in not eating, and thereby avoiding the
inconvenience of either doubting in himself, or scandalising any other: In the
same manner he makes use of his liberty in distinguishing a Day, upon any good
occasion, that was distinguished under the Law, without observing of Days as a
point of Religion, but only places a Religious Action on that Day, according to
the liberty he has in an indifferent thing: And so avoids the Doubt in himself
of not observing what is Commanded, and the scandal to any other.

But now he that not eating slips unawares into a surmise of Evil in the things
themselves, and that he does a great act of Religion in not eating, and so
dares not touch, taste, handle; or he that would gain, as he thinks, upon God
by observing Days, he falls into the Scandal of making his Weakness a part of
his Religion; even as he that for the vaunt of his liberty eats licentiously,
and carelessly of others; or thinks in eating he does God service: or in eating
slides into his old awes or pangs of Devotion to the Idol, and eats in his
Right, to his Honor, and so is defiled: or lastly, eats when he is in doubt of
the lawfulness, upon the credit of Example, which is the proper Scandal the
Apostle aims at.

Now from all these Characters it is most evident,

1. Indifferent Things are far below the Scale of Divine Institutions, though
these Institutions are but Positive, and not of Eternal Goodness and
Righteousness.

All the Appointments of God and Christ are lifted up into that state the
Divine Appointment designs them to; and shall, if used according to those
Appointments, be made efficacious to those Ends for which they are appointed,
according to the effectual working of that Power and Grace from which they
received their Original: So that they do make us better, they do commend us to
God, if we observe the Will and Law of God concerning them; and we are the
worse in the sinful neglect of them, according to the degree of neglect.

2. They are not of the Scale of those things, wherein that Order, of which
God, by the very laws of Rational Nature is the Author, stands; and not of
Confusion; so that though this Order runs, or ought to run along, and conduct
all Humane Actions, and so is not in it self a point of Religion; yet when it
is applied to Religious Services and Actions, does indeed commend our Religious
Actions and Services to God, and the contrary is an Evil.

3. Of the same account is that Euschemonia, or Decency of Religious Actions,
required by God before himself, and before the Holy Angels, of which the
Apostle discourses; Every man praying with his Head uncoverd, dishonors his
Head; every Woman praying so, ought to have a covering on her Head, because of
the Angels; such a distinction of Sexes being founded in Nature; and in what is
beyond Nature, the grave Customs of Ages and Places, carry a great weight of
Determination.

4. The most indifferent Circumstances, that yet most necessarily attend all
serious, and important humane Actions, (and therefore Religious Actions) when
once determined, by the Prudence and mature consideration of those that have
greatest right to determine therein, as Times, Places, and general Order of
Public Worship, become (however indifferent in themselves) yet above
indifferent in their Observations; because the undue change of them is not only
Levity, but approaches to Frenzy.

And now I have so far settled the Nature of Indifferents, that I think no
variety of Circumstances can make an alteration in any, more than in those
Eternal Laws of the Natures of things. I come therefore to the Second thing in
the Platform I have given of the Apostles Discourse, viz.

2. To inquire how Scandal invades these so innocent Indifferencies, when they
come into a Relation to Religion.

And the very ground or advantage of its entry, is through this very Relation
to Religion. For therein is the very Center of Scandal, as a Corruption of the
best thing; there is its great Power and Sting, to disorder the state of things
betwixt God and Man; and the more any thing comes into that consideration, the
more efficacious is Scandal upon it, if not warily prevented.

And it is therefore the most Christian Policy, to leave all things without
the Line of Religion, or Religious Worship, that can be spared, and are not of
necessary use to it, to cut off all broad Phylacteries, on that very account,
that Scandal is so attempting, and invading, and nothing safe from its
Assaults; even as indefensible Buildings in a Garrison are pulled down and
slighted, lest the Enemy make advantage of them to cover himself. Incumbring
Religion with Indifferents, more than needs must, are but so many Shelters for
Scandal.

Scandal then, in Indifferent things pertaining to Religion, is an Occasion
taken upon them, as they stand in that Relation, to act, under some pretense,
contrary to any of the great Principles or Laws of Religion.

Indifferent Things are brought into a Relation to Religion,

1. By some Appointment of God, who alone has Right to do it, exalting
Indifferent Things into a Goodness above their Nature, or for wise Purposes
depressing them below their Nature; which Appointment ceasing and expiring,
they return each of them into their own natural Indifferency, and are alike
good and clean; and upon the just Level of their first Creation, of themselves
are nothing to Religion, especially as it is perfected in Christianity. This
was the Case the Apostle treats upon to the Romans: There was a Law of God by
Moses, distinguishing Days and Meats; this Law was out dated by Christ; all
things hereupon returned into their original State of equal Goodness and
Cleanness, and were wholly alike, as to any Religious Account of them, to all
that understood the abolishing of that Law, which at that time was but
beginning.

2. Indifferents are brought into a Relation to Religion, by Man's Idolatrous or
Superstitious Transmutation of them out of their Natures, either above or below
themselves; which being greatly abominable to God, as injurious to his sole
Right, and very destructive to Man's Soul, debauches these Indifferents into
great Impurity, to all that with Design and Resolution will understand and use
them so changed: To them that are unbelieving and defiled is nothing pure, but
even their Mind and Conscience is defiled. Tit. 1. 15.
But being understood aright, and according to their Nature, they return to
their own Innocence and Purity, that is, the Purity of their Creation, and
Disposition by God, (for to the pure all things are pure) and to an
Indifferency every way, in relation to Religion.

This was the Case the Apostle reasons upon to the Corinths.

The Meats offered to Idols, the Idols Temple, were most impure to the
Idolaters, and Superstitions:

Yet the Idol could not expulse God's Right, nor change the Nature of his
Creation.

This was most amply declared in the Gospel-state of Things.

They that understood this, had a most Lawful and Free Use of those very
Places, and Meats, that were so polluted by the Gentiles: So that whether they
eat, or not eat, it was all alike, in the things themselves, upon any Religious
account.

3. Indifferent Things may be made Appurtenances to Religion, without being
extravasated from their own Nature of Indifferency, by being put by the
Authority of Ecclesiastic, or Civil Rulers, into a constant Concomitancy or
Attendance upon such or such Religious Services, solely upon the account of
that Humane Significancy, Decency, and Order the Nature of Man is apt to clothe
all its Actions with. Just as in all Instalments of Magistrates, in Courts of
Judicature, in Proceedings of Justice, in all the Grandeur of Humane Actions,
there are some Rites, Formalities, or Ceremonies, Men find out, that give
Order, Life, and Grace to the Carriage of them: Even so in Religious Services
it is supposed they have the same Liberty; God is not so rigorous, as to deny
it to them; they may appoint some things of a mere Humane Significancy, for
Edification, which remain still perfect Indifferents, and only wait upon
Religion, and preserve Discipline; and yet they may be imposed, and pinned so
fast to Religion, that All must be observed together; no Public Ordinance may
be enjoyed, with Allowance and Approbation, without them.

Now whether there is such a Liberty granted by God to Men, to adjoyn any thing
to his Worship, especially so as to be made the Public Standard, is more than
the wisest can, I doubt, resolve in the Affirmative, to satisfaction: There are
so many Appearances from Scripture, from sound Reason, against any more than is
commanded by God himself, or is of absolute Necessity, Order, or Decency, so as
to offer it self to every sober Man.

But allow to these Institutions of Men all the Privileges of Indifferents, of
these sealed Indifferents, declared so by the Apostle, so that you allow no
more; (for more cannot be allowed, except you change them into Doctrine, which
makes them worse:) Allow, that they are the weak, who do not understand their
full Freedom herein; then it follows, He that uses them not, must not indeed
think himself the better for not using them; but still he has liberty, as in a
thing indifferent in it self, not to use them; and he ought by no means to use
them with doubt, and so long as they appear unlawful to him; for then comes
upon him that Thunderbolt of the Apostle, If he doubts, and yet does what he
doubts of, he is condemned; because whatever is not of Faith, is Sin. He that
is fully persuaded in his own mind to use them, may use them; and they ought to
appear of that Value to him, that he can give God thanks for them with
understanding; for that is one Character of the Apostles Indifferents, and a
severe Test upon them it is.

But yet he must not think himself the better for them, or that such things can
commend him to God.

He must not use them to the scandalising the weaker than himself, even while
the World stands; that is, while the Reason of Doubt can in the Nature of
that Reason remain.

And he must allow, that his Indifferents are as subject to Scandal, as the
Indifferents the Apostle discourses upon are; and if the very reasonably-to
be-suppos'd Scandal in these (of themselves) so harmless Indifferents, be well
considered, I doubt there will be found a great and wide Sea for this Leviathan
to roll it self in. Now that I may make this Consideration more orderly, I
shall distribute it according to the several Ranges of Persons concerned, and
endangered by Scandal in these Indifferents. And I begin with

1. Those that comply with that side of them which the Strongest choose, that
is, the Use of them; because this is immediately under the Apostles Eye: I say,
that comply, but are not fully persuaded in their own mind. Now the Apostle
imputes their Compliance to the Power of Example, which is the freest sort of
Compliance: For, though he had taken notice of Despisings in the former part of
the Discourse, yet he waves that; Impositions by Church Censures, or Penalties,
were quite out of his Thoughts; he arrests them upon Example, the most
ingenuous sort of Compulsion, and submitting to it the most spontaneous
Conformity: Yet both to the Romans, and the Corinths, here he places the danger
of scandalising and Scandal.

If thy Brother (says he) be grieved with thy Meat, that is, not grieved that
thou eatest, but drawn to eat, as thou do, yet not persuaded, as thou art,
and so receiving a real Wound and Grief in his Conscience, by following thy
Example, thou walk not charitably. More expressly to this purpose the Apostle
speaks to the Corinthians, If any Man see thee, which have knowledge, sit at
Meat in an Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him that is weak be
edified to eat those things which are offered to Idols? Thus evident it is,
Example is that which the Apostles (...) in the very words points to. Now in
that he lays this sort of Scandalising so low as in Example, he plants his
Argument with greater force against any other Way, that is more forcible than
Example. Here then is the Scandal, as given. The Scandal taken, is the rushing
against that Principle of Religion, That the full sense of a Man's own Mind, and
what is to him of Faith, is in Indifferent Things the Square of his Actions;
and the contrary is Sin, and Scandal. This is most evident in the Apostle to
the Romans; his whole Discourse runs into this, as the Scandal he intends to
speak of. To the Corinths it may be more Dispute where the Scandal lay, because
the Sin seems to be a Relapse into Idolatrous eating, in an Idols Temple, the
Meats offered to Idols: And that Expression, of eating with Conscience of the
Idol, things offered to Idols, as offered to Idols, is at the first view almost
enforcive of that Sense; but by closer attention, it appears much otherwise:
For, I observe, the Apostle upon the occasion discourses first the Case it
self, in the eighth Chapter: In Chap. 9. in a Figure transferred to himself, he
treats the necessary Retreat from our own Liberty in some Cases, as a motive to
all Christians to do the same. In the tenth Chapter he discourses the great
danger of Idolatry it self, which might be drawn as a Snare upon both the weak,
and the strong, by often Converse with Idolaters, and their Rites; and the
intolerable Guilt and Danger of that, made forcible by several Arguments; and
then toward the end of that Chapter, resumes the plain Case of the weak, who
not understanding Gods superior surmounting Right, over the Idols, considered
only the great evil of eating in honor to the Idol, and believed the Meat and
the Temple irrecoverably defiled by it: They had not the knowledge, that an
Idol was nothing, and therefore could not affect things themselves, to all that
keep themselves pure, and know that Gods Right overcomes, and his filling all
things excludes all others, and their Right becomes a Nothing. But some not
having this knowledge, eat in a Temple Meats that had the Idols Superscription
and Image upon them (as they thought) not in any Honor to the Idol, but tyded
along by Example to communicate in what they yet esteemed defiled and polluted,
though indeed it was not so, but to those that esteemed it so. This Point the
Apostle plainly enters upon, Chap. 10. v. 23. going off from that of Idolatry,
in these Words, All things are lawful, etc. And ver. 28. he thus opens what he
intends; If any Man, as in a fright at so heinous a thing, as eating the
defiled Meat, that had been consecrate to an Idol, say unto you, This is
offered in Sacrifice to Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it, and for his
Conscience Sake, not thy own, that was scared at it, as if unclean in it self,
and yet might be drawn to eat it, as such, by thy Example, not Idolatrously,
but with a doubting Conscience. And the very same Reason, why out of this Case
of another Scandal, a Man might eat, even because the Earth is the Lords, and
the fullness of it, his Right cannot be retrenched, nothing can be made unclean
in it self that is Gods; the very same is given for not eating, in case of
Scandal, The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it; that is, We are not
tied up to one Thing, to assert Gods Right in that only, that we must needs run
our Brother into Scandal for it: The Earth, that has room enough; and the
Fullness of it, a full Table (besides that supposed to be the Idols) is the
Lords, and his Bounty to be enjoyed in all, acknowledged, praised in all; so
that we may please All, that is, consult their truest Good, and give no
Scandal; for that the Apostle means by pleasing, and opposes it to grieving and
wounding. Thus large I have been in bringing the Case to the Romans, and to
these Corinthians to much the same level and pitch, (except the Meats be
suspected fouler by Dedication to an Idol, than by the mere Mosaic Interdict)
that the main Point of Scandal might be settled. For, though I shall allow just
Consideration to all other Points of Scandal, and to the other Interpretation,
viz. That the Apostle discourses against those Idolatrous Contaminations those
Pangs of Devotion, and Reverence of the Idol, the tender new-converted
Christian might relapse into, by eating in the Idols Temple, at the Idols
Feast; yet the main Point is, eating with offense, with a Conscience not
satisfied, the Meats that were pure in themselves, but to them appeared impure;
as is evident by the much different sharpness of Style the Apostle uses in the
danger of Idolatry, and the Case of the Doubting Conscience.

The immediate Principle offended against, is then, The Government Conscience
ought to have over Man, appointed it by God, against which nothing Humane ought
to prevail, nor can do, but with the great mischief of Scandal.

Besides this, there is some other Rule, or Principle of Truth, guiding
Conscience, and pressing upon it in case of Scandal; for Conscience is not to
guide a Man, but as it represents to him some Truth, to guide it self and him
by: else, as when the Blind lead the Blind, both will fall into the Ditch. And
when this Principle, that presses hard upon Conscience, and to which Conscience
defers it self, is overborn, then a Man is scandalized.

The Principle, Conscience, in the Case of the Romans, had lying hard upon it,
was this:

Whatever God has forbidden once, as unclean, is unclean, and is so long
unclean, till we know that Prohibition is removed. The weak Christian did not
believe the forbidding some Meats as unclean, was removed; yet by the
countenance of Example in the stronger Christians, they were so hardy as to
eat, while Conscience was unsatisfied, and so were scandalized.

Conscience in the Corinths had this Principle looking it full in the Face; To
eat in an Idols Right, in Honor to Idols, is an abomination to God. The weak
Christian abhorring Idols, or to eat in Honor of them, did not as yet
understand there could be a Separation betwixt the Pollution of the Idol, and
the Meat, or the Temple where he was worshipped: yet emboldned by seeing the
stronger sit at Meat in an Idols Temple, they eat, and were inwardly affrighted
at the unclean Meat they eat; they eat with Conscience of the Idol, the Meat as
offered to the Idol, through the force of Example; that is, abhorring indeed
the Idol, and his Meat; but withal, fearing it, as an Evil, and looking upon
the Meat as impure, because sacrificed to an Idol.

In both these Cases the Apostle levels against the use of Liberty in the
stronger, against imposing by way of Example, to the scandal of the weaker; so
tender a thing it is to offer but the Lowest Rule of Compulsion in these Cases.

The Imposer then, though but by Example, is he that scandalises: The Complier
against the Sense of his own Mind, instructed not by Truth and Reason
satisfying him, but by Example leading him, is the Scandalized.

Things being thus stated, let us observe the Scandal it self, how it works in
this Case.

1. There is an Act of high Disobedience committed against God, and his
Authority, represented by Conscience; both in that Conscience, deputed by God,
is deposed, and Example set up in its place; as also that a Divine Law upon
Conscience it self, supposed to continue in force, is violated; for though it
should be indeed antiquated, yet if Conscience knows not it is so, it cannot
act of Faith and full persuasion, and so sins.

2. Conscience is hereupon grieved, wounded, and loses its due Comfort.

3. This begets a Flatness and Formality in all Religious Services.

4. A Lukewarmness to Religion in general; thus a Man is weakened by his Stumble
and Fall, he lies prostrate in all Religious Powers.

5. Conscience loses its due vigor and exercise of Authority.

6. There is danger of Apostasy from Christianity it self, or the true Sense of
Religion.

7. Hereupon the Soul is in danger to be lost, and the work of God to be
destroyed, and he for whom Christ died, to perish, if not recovered by
Repentance. Thus it was with the Romans and the Corinths.

Now to bring this to the Balance with Impositions in Ceremonies, or
Indifferents, in Aftertimes. First, Suppose the Sentiments of the Mind and
Conscience of many Christians deeply engaged, and locked in this Principle,
That in the Worship of God, no Man may add, or diminish, so much as to a Point,
beyond Divine Institution, and the most natural Circumstances, and necessary
Adherencies of all Solemn and Grave Humane Actions: That there must be nothing
of Humane Device, for Edification or Significancy, but what is prescribed. And
no Man can deny, but this is a safe Position, considering both the Stream of
Scripture, sound Reason, and the Experience of all Ages, how much mischief has
come stealing up from Ceremonies, as high as to Idolatry and Superstition.

But let us withal allow, That though no Man can be the better for using these
Indifferents, nor the worse for not using them; yet there is a Liberty to use
them, without being the worse for using them, if a Man be fully persuaded in
his own mind concerning them. It must remain yet, that according to the
Apostles Doctrine, every Man that uses them, and doubts of their lawfulness
with respect to the forenamed Principle, is condemned in the using them,
because not of Faith, and so subject to all the just-now-recounted Mischiefs of
Scandal.

And that therefore, He that uses them so as to press those that are otherwise
minded, to a Conformity, by his Example (if it be no more), much more if by
Despisings, Censures, Vexations, Penalties; he does not walk charitably, he
sins against Christians, wounds their weak Consciences, and so sins against
Christ in a high Degree; and for his Ceremonies, the work of God is destroyed,
and he for whom Christ died perishes, if not saved by Repentance. Now how high
does this rise up to the Woe Christ denounces on him by whom Scandals come?

For, it cannot but be supposed, there are many that are wrought upon, against
the sense of their own Minds, to such a Conformity, as wherein they cannot but
condemn themselves wherein they seem to allow themselves, or do indeed allow
themselves, so far as the outward Act reaches: Who can doubt, but in these days
there are such, as well as in the Days of the first Christians? Yea, happy are
many of those that Conform, if they do not condemn themselves wherein they
allow themselves, and carry the Mischief of their Scandal within themselves,
silently from others, and often secretly from themselves.

And even where Men stand out against all pressure upon them, and will not
receive this Dint of Scandal, yet it is still a Scandal offered, while
unaccepted.

All this now seems so strong against imposing in things of Indifferency, for
fear of Scandal in them, that it is wonder there should be any Imposition known
in such things among Christians, for fear of Scandal; and yet in these very
things of Indifferency, Scandal has run like Wildfire, bluster'd and roared
like a Tempest, in these of all things, to choose, and that in all Ages within
the Christian World, and even under Protestancy it self.

But I a^ to consider Scandal in a second Rank, viz. of those who do vehemently
and zealously fall in with Conformity to these Impositions in Indifferents, yet
they may be scandalized, and that very deeply. This Case does not, I confess,
arise out of the Apostles Discourses, except by the other Interpretation of the
Scope of that to the Corinths; which gives it not only, as if Compliance
against the Sentiments of Conscience, upon the Trust of Example, were the Sin
and Scandal; but that the weaker Christians, not having the Knowledge of the
stronger, doing as they did, and not prepossessed as they were, that the Idol
was nothing, sunk into some Degrees at least of Idolatrous Reverence and
Worship, as if they knew no other Reason of eating in an Idols Temple, but
Devotion to him: And this kind of Scandal, though I believe the drift of the
Apostle is chiefly as I have explained it, yet too often falls out in these
Cases. Those Ceremonies that have been promoted into Divine Services, or into
the Ornament of Religion, and the Places of it, have been, though dangerously
enough, yet not so ill designed, as afterward abused by more Ignorant Persons,
who greedy and fond of a sensual and external Religion, have been transported
upon Superstition, and sometimes downright Idolatry; and this often noted in
Scripture under the very Name of Scandal. Thus I before observed in the Case of
Gideons Ephod, his House and all Israel were ensnared beyond the first
Intention: Thus in the Brazen Serpent, continued (no doubt) in memory of the
Miracle; yet afterward proved so great a Snare, that they burnt Incense to it.
And it is most likely, Balaam cast his Snare at first in a less-guilty Feasting
with the Midianites upon their Idols Sacrifices, not known to be such poisonous
Meat, and by degrees tolled them on into the midst of the Congregation and
Assembly of Idolaters. Thus the Apostles, by Divine Direction, condescending to
the weakness of Convert-Jews among the Romans, on consideration of the Divine
Command in some of their Rites but just now expiring, degenerated afterward
into such a Judaism, that the same Apostle was most severe against it; and that
very Strength of the Corinthian Christians, or at least the Weakness of the
Unknowing, following their Example, became afterward into an infamous
Doctrine, the Doctrine of Balaam, and the very enchanting Seduction of the
Prophetess Jezebel, who taught the People of Christ to commit Fornication, and
to eat things offered to Idols, in honor to them. The bringing in of Pictures
into Places of Religious Worship, suppose it as innocent as could be supposed
at first, yet was abused speedily into all imaginable Corruption; and it is
much to be feared, all the Remonstrances concerning more Innocent Rites, as
they cannot vindicate them from Scrupulosity on one side, so cannot preserve them
from Men's placing too much of their Religion in them on the other, whereby the
true Conscience of it is weakened, the Virtue and Vigor of Conscience in things
truly Religious, weakened and spent, by having been laid out unnecessarily upon
extern Observances; and looseness of Life, like Fornication with eating things
offered to Idols, breaking in upon the Commute of such Flatteries of Conscience
for substantial Piety, as the Jews would exchange New Mons and Oblations, for
Justice, and Mercy, and walking humbly with God.

It must be indeed acknowledged, not only Humane Appointments, but even Divine
Commands, are subject to the Injury of Scandal; but with this difference: One
cannot be cut off, though Scandal presses never so hard; the other may, and
ought: For, in all things not ordained by God, the Principle sinned against in
Scandal is the exceeding Purity of Religion, the substantial Piety, and most
Spiritual and Rational Worship of himself God requires and expects by his Word;
and that all things he has commanded be adjusted to those Ends, even as he
provided them; and all he has not commanded, should stand off, or at least be
presently superseded, when become the Prey of Scandal. Yet on the other side,
Scandal shelters it self under Order, Decency, or Edification of the Ignorant,
Obedience to Authority; and presses on to the utmost under them.

3. The third sort of Scandal arising from Indifferent Things, upon those that
will not be at all persuaded to a Compliance with them; even they may be
scandalized, by unlawful and very sinful Censoriousness, and Passion; placing
too much of their sense of Religion upon their dislike of such Additions to
Divine Worship; Divisions and Separations on both sides from the Publickest
Worship of God, and National Union in Religion, beyond the Merit and Quality of
the Cause, or further than the Case at its utmost extent can require; and if
the Sin of Schism be such, as the endeavored Notion of it would make it, a
Fall into the great Sin of Schism.

The Principle offended against in this sort of Scandal, is, That great Love of
Christians, and Union in Divine Worship, in Truth, and Peace, made so
Fundamental in Christianity by Christ and the Apostles.

The pretense of Scandal lies too both ways, That for the sake of such
Additionals, we may desert those much higher Considerations, and Reasons, and
Causes of Love and Union, and our Obligations to them.

The Apostle represents this great Mischief, not under the formal Account of
Scandal, in the Discourse to the Romans, though I doubt not he after refers to
it expressly as such, when he joins Scandals and Divisions together; but Romans
16. 17.
in the Discourse it self he both sets out the Heat on both sides, in judging
and despising, and argues on both sides, with highest strength of Divine
Reason, against the Evil both ways.

And this is certain, The more excellent our Religion, the more desirable our
Public Worship and Communion, for the Piety, Rationality, and Order of it, the
more pure our National Church, and Association in Religion is, and the greater
the Sin of Separation; the more does the Apostles Argument against scandalising
for the sake of Indifferencies, press and urge us: Why should our Good be
thought evil of, or blasphemed? Why should our Public Worship, and National
Religion, be once thought to be Ceremony? Why should our Communion be clogged
with things of no greater avail, than Meat and Drink? Why should we lose those
from our Communion, who own, The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; and contend for those Divine things, though they have
not leisure and freedom for Ceremonies; when they that serve God in them,
though they cannot join in lesser things, yet as they are accepted of God, so
should be approved of Men? Or if the Sin of Separation be so great, and even
Schism it self, why for our Meat, for our Indifferent things, should they
perish, for whom Christ died; or such a Work of God as appears in them, be
destroyed?

4. The Severity, Passion, Transport beyond the Values of the things
themselves, and taking up the Instruments of Cruelty, cannot be without Scandal
upon the Imposers of Indifferency; and those that will needs be Taskmasters
under them, cannot be without Scandal: For, while they seem to be zealous of
Order, Decency, Uniformity, they sin against the Precepts of Love, Unity,
Mercy, Peace, and exchange too often those excellent Pastoral-Staves of Beauty
and Bands, for the Instruments of the foolish Shepherd, Zech. 11. 7. 15, 16.
that extend not to any true Acts of Pastoral Care, Visiting, Healing, Feeding,
but Tearing and Rending.

Lastly, Bystanders and Neuters have the Woe to the World, because of
Scandals, coming upon them; for they mis-judge of the excellent Religion of the
Gospel, by these great Miscarriages; and it falls under their misrepute, as if
it stood in Ceremonials: in regard of whom, the Apostle was so cautious, that
the Good of Christians should not be evil spoken of, as if the Kingdom of God
was only Meat and Drink. For whereas the Substantials of Christianity justify
themselves to the Consciences of all Men, Ceremonials lead to Atheism; as if
Religion were but the Craft of Parties, using Trifles for Interest, Rule, and
Domination; and Differences in the Profession of it, when multiplied by
Disputes about these Indifferents, bring mistrust upon all, as if there were
nothing certain. Lastly, the Heats, Cruelties, and Persecutions used on these
Accounts, cannot but look very strange, and full of horror, to the very Light
of Nature.

For, how can it but appear Prodigy, and Portent, that Christian Religion,
that counted upon nothing but Persecution of it self in the World, should turn
the Weapons used against it, upon it self; as has been most notoriously
infamous in the Popish Inhumanities? Or what Stranger can think well of such a
Christianity? And then more dire it is, that Protestant Religion, branding
Popery as a Religion of Blood, shoud be so much as tinctured with any of that
Spirit; and that any of these Evils should be for the sake, and upon the
account of Indifferents, that are acknowledged to be devised by Men, that are
not equal to Gods Law, that may be changed, for which other Countries, that use
them not, are to be condemned; whereas Substantial Order and Decency are the
same throughout the World, some small Local Differences allowed for.

This is the great Cause of Complaint: But on the other side, the Reasons that
appear to Dissenters against them are great and weighty in themselves: Let them
be mistaken in the Application; yet a great Reason on the contrary to any
thing, if misapprehended, is of much more weight, than a very slight and
inconsiderable Reason for it, however true: And, though in a much inferior
Cause, I acknowledge, yet I hope it is not unlawful to make an Allusion to that
unavoidable Argument against Atheism, That the enduring of inconsiderable
Inconveniences, though certain, is much more eligible to a wise Man, than the
adventure upon intolerable and endless Inconveniency, though supposed
uncertain. In a like manner, though of a lower consequence, and yet not
altogether lower, The great mischief of Scandal, though possibly upon mistake,
is not to be hazarded upon, suppose, the more certain little Inconveniences of
Men's not conforming to Indifferencies.

But that there may be a more equal Poise of the Matter, I shall briefly
present the Objections against Indulgence to Dissenters in Indifferencies, upon
the account of Scandal, and the Answers that may be returned to them.

Object. 1. If Scandal were an Argument against things, we must go out of all
things, even out of the World, nay, out of Religion it self; for all things are
full of Scandal, even the best things.
Answ. It would be yet a considerable Service done to the World, the Christian
World, if but so much of Scandal were defalk'd, as has its play in
Indifferents: The abatement would be above what can easily be believed, if all
that has swelled the Account of Scandal from Indifferent Things, had been
wisely and thriftily cut off, from the entrance of Christianity to this day.

And the Sting of the Argument, why it should have been, and yet should be so,
is, That they are but Indifferents that are spoken of, the Use of which makes
us not the better, nor the non-use the worse: But the mischief of Scandal is
incomputably great, so that the advantage of such an Abatement had brought
Infinite Recompense with Usury, in Truth and Peace, for that little Profit, if
any, that could grow from barren and dead Indifferents in Religion, though
considered as separate from Scandal.

Object. 2. The Apostle himself was enforced to change his Voice concerning
Indulgence to the weak, in the Judaique Rites, and to vote the persisting in a
Love to them damnable; and the Holy Spirit brands the Idolothytes conceded by
the Apostle, to be afterward the Doctrine of Balaam: So that the Weakness of
Consciences about Indifferent Things becomes so masterless, unruly, and
headstrong, as to endanger main Concernments in Religion, if not reformed, the
due time of Indulgence being allowed for it.
Answ. The Mischief, if nearly observed, always grows from making more
Accessions to the Worship of God, and Religious Services, than God has made:
For the Judaizing in the Galatians, the Will Worship and show of Wisdom among
the Colossians, the forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats,
all grow upon the same Root: Even the Idolatry and Luxury of the Idolothytes,
came not from a wise and Christian asserting God's Right above the Idol's, but
from sinking down into the sensual Worship of the Idol, by a daily Conversation
at his Table in his Temple, and uniting Heathenism with Christianity; of one of
which, either Judaism or Heathenism, most Rites are but the Offspring.

The great Danger is either in exalting Gods Creatures into a state, and for
Uses and Ends, above what he Ordained them, at Humane pleasure and arbitrament;
or retrenching the Liberty God has given in the free use of his own Creatures;
for every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if received with
thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. Now this
cannot alike extend to the Signs and Ceremonies created by Humane Imagination,
and imposed with rigor, and that not only on Civil Accounts, which we meddle
not with, but upon Religious, where God is only Supreme: At which Door has
entered all the Idolatry and Superstition into the World, winding it self by
lesser Degrees, and so mounting it self to the very top.

The great Use of the Apostle's two Discourses, is therefore to be resolved
into this one main Position. That upon the account of Indifferencies, wherein
the use or non-use cannot commend us to God, we should not Scandalize, nor so
much as offer Scandal to any of the Servants of Christ.

In all which it is duly to be considered, That Scandal runs in the Industrious
Imposing and binding Observation, either by Example that expects Conformity to
it, or any more violent Influence upon Compliance: That which the Apostle
therefore persuades to, was not any thing of Ritual Distinction of Days or
Meats, but only the not eating such or such Meats, happened in these two Cases
to be the Expedient against Scandal, he therefore persuades the not eating upon
these Contingencies, as by the by, which was a very easy performance for
Christian Charity; but the Thing he was wholly intent upon, was that great
Doctrine of not Scandalising for the sake of Indifferent Things. These
Circumstances easily vanished, the main Point remains unmoved. They were only a
Scheme, a momentany and transitory one, to display this great Doctrine in, and
to present it upon.

When these things grew into a Ritual Religion, the Scheme was altered and
shifted, they grew sinful, and were condemned; the Doctrine stood yet, and for
ever stands firm, planted upon them.

Object. 4. The Rites used are such as are recommended from Antiquity, and were
of use of old, in the Primitive Church.
Answ. Allow it to be so. All that can be collected from thence, is but
Example, wound up to its highest Peg, when it does not reach Christ: And
whenever it does not reach him, it does not bind. Be ye followers of me, as I 1
Cor. 11. 1.
am of Christ, said the Apostle, just about to discourse of the (...),
Ordinances or Traditions. Those Concurrences, All, Every where, Always, must
begin in Scripture, and be found there, else they do but oblige our Prudence,
not our Conscience.

Only so far as Antiquity, or the Primitive Church, inables us to see with our
own Eyes the Sense of Scripture, or the Determinations of Natural Light and
Reason in any Case, so far it obliges us in Conscience. All else is but the
Deference of Modesty and due Regard, which cannot weigh against Scandal, except
we make the Oracles of Antiquity, equal to the Heavenly Oracles; and then we
must demand the same Certainty of the Divine Inspiration of the one, as of the
other, or else we may quickly run into the greatest of Scandals.

Object. 5. The Commands of Lawful Authority take away the Indifferency, and
make Necessary, what was before Indifferent.
Answ. The Question is not, Whether Magistrates ought to be obeyed in all
things Indifferent; for that is readily granted, if in all Circumstances they
are Indifferent; nor whether Rites are Indifferent Things, for that is also
supposed to be granted; but the question must be, Whether it is an indifferent
thing to give or receive Scandal, upon the account of Indifferent Things;
seeing that may indisputably fall out, or the Apostles Discourses fall to the
Ground; and in one sort of Indifferents, as well as others, else the Apostles
Discourse will be ineffectual to any the like Case: Seeing then the Tribunal
and Authority of God is higher, than of any of the Supreams of this World, and
that Scandal is cognisable only before him; and that whatever incurs Sandal is
inseparable from Sin against God; it must needs follow, that in a Case of
Doubt, from which a Man cannot acquit himself, he cannot obey Men in that,
without disobeying God, who has declared to him, Whatever is not of Faith is
Sin; and he that doubts, and does what he doubts of, is Damned; that is,
Condemned within himself, and in the thing it self: And the Reason in such a
Case must be the same, as in a Case of Obeying Magistrates against any express
Divine Prohibition. For though the thing doubted of, does much differ, if it be
indeed indifferent: Yet the Prohibition is as plain against doing what is
doubted of, and what is not of Faith, as in any Case.

Seeing then all Humane Authority must lower its Top to Divine, I cannot see,
but that, in Indifferent things in Religion, which is Gods peculiar, for we
speak only of that, the Magistrates Power is excluded, in case of real doubt of
Conscience, in which a Man can do nothing, but he runs into Gods danger, even
as in any other case of such danger, by reason of Sin. And what is offered in
Relief, will not avail, viz. That Obedience to Magistrates is certainly a Duty;
but whether there be any disobedience to God, about such or such Indifferents,
is in doubt; and if the thing be indeed indifferent, it is a doubt upon
mistake: And then there is a disobedience to God, in an undoubted Rule, and
Command to avoid it in a case not only of doubt, but of mistake.

This, I say, cannot avail; Because the measure is not to be drawn betwixt
Obedience to Magistrates in all lawful things, or things indifferent; but
betwixt Obedience to Magistrates, and Obedience to that Rule of the Word of God
in all cases of doubt, which is as clear, and as little subject to doubt, as
any Rule whatever. Yet does not this evacuate the Power of Magistrates, it
being restrained to things indifferent in Religion, and in Doubt, and the Doubt
fixed upon a grand Principle of Truth.

Nor is that of greater satisfaction, That in Obedience to Magistrates, there
are so many degrees of Good, and so many of Evil in the Disobedience; but in
doing well or ill, concerning Indifferents, there are much fewer Degrees, both
of the Good, and the Evil; therefore Obedience to God, in so great a Morality,
as Obedience to Magistrates, is always to be preferred before our doing well in
Indifferents; and the fear of Evil in one, to be avoided much rather, than the
same fear in the other.

The Reason of Dissatisfaction is this, That the Measure is not betwixt the
Morality of Obedience to God, in obeying Magistrates, and doing well or ill
about things Indifferent, but betwixt the Morality of Obeying God in one of his
clear and undoubted Precepts, and in another of the same Evidence and
Clearness; which must needs be one and the same, and of the same Rate of
Morality: Seeing Obedience to God is the Fundamental Morality.

If it were not thus, the Magistrates Prohibition of Sacrifice of the Cup in
the Lords Supper, must exempt from Obedience to God in those Duties; because
Obedience to Magistrates is a Moral Duty, but the other Ceremonial.

But it is out of Measure certain, Obedience to God is both the top and the
bottom of all Morality; and although Obedience to Magistrates is a great point
of Morality, yet Obedience to God is so before it, as to be the Measure of it.

Besides, if Obedience to God be to be valued not by his Authority, but by
weighing the Precepts themselves, much more Obedience to Magistrates is to be
estimated by the Commands they give, of which Indifferents in Religion will
never be made out to be worthy to be the Tests, either of their Authority, or
our Obedience; whatever unthinking Men have said therein.

Indeed among the Divine Commands, God has chosen Mercy, rather than
Sacrifice, honoring Parents, rather than Corban, but it is because he has so
declared in his Word, and in Men's Consciences.

But all the Laws of God do harmoniously Conspire, and Subordinate themselves
one to another, among which Obedience to Magistrates, and Preserving the
Government, and Peace of Conscience, are none of the least, nor of any contest,
or distance of unkindness between themselves: Whosoever is wise? He shall
understand these things: Prudent? And he shall know them; for the ways of the
Lord are right in themselves, and lie in straight Lines one to another; the
Just shall walk in them, though Transgressors fall therein.

In fine, Magistrates, especially Christian Magistrates, are as much obliged
against pushing on Scandal, as private Christians, and more, as they are the
Custodes, the Public Guardians of Conscience. But if they fail in their Duty,
Obedience to them cannot disannul the Charges against Scandal, lying upon all
Christians, in Relation to one another; nor can their Laws prescribe against
Moderation.

Obj. 6. But when time is allowed to the Doubtful to satisfy themselves, if
they come not off from their Scruples, it argues Humor and Faction are highest
in the Case; or a Superstition on the other side.
Answ. The Apostle tells us, it is a very happy, a very rare thing, when
Christians surmount their Doubts. Happy is he that Condemns not himself,
wherein he allows himself; It is a very Privileged Case to be well and wisely
satisfied after Doubt; and therefore it must not be hastily censured, if those
that have been unsatisfied cannot presently answer our Lure to the other side.

And the time is much larger, that is necessary in some Cases, than in others:
The Ceremonies of Moses, it was reasonable should go off more quick, as
Shaddows of the Night, by the brightness of the Gospel, and could never return
any more. But the Reasons against eating at an Idols Feast, being nearer Moral,
are much more durable, and may last, even while the World stands, where, or
whenever Idolatry has place.

In the first Reformation from Popery, there was Reason to expect, the
Superstitious Rites and Customs, that had gained upon Men's Minds with the
Reputation of Religion, should be daily wearing off; but the Reasons of Doubt
in Indifferents affixed to Divine Worship, taken from that perpetual Obligation
of preserving it pure, settled upon the Base of truest, soundest Reason, and
much more favored by Scripture, well armed with Experience of Events, must
always continue in force, and so no Time may be large enough for getting off
from those Scruples that spring from them, but that wherein they are indeed
taken away.

But if any thing of Turbulency, Faction, or Unruliness be supposed to lie
deeper than the Scruples; it is best to unmask it, by taking away so just a
Cause to manage it self, upon and by so great a kindness to Conscience, that
ought to be tendered, to heap Coals of Fire upon the heads of such Persons,
either to reform them, or condemn them beyond Apology.

Or if Superstition, and placing Religion on the other side, in having a Zeal
against Ceremonies be suspected; even that does but increase the Scandal
arising from these Indifferent Things, and makes them more necessary to be
removed, as Stumbling Blocks out of Men's way; you cure the Superstition on the
other side too, by taking away the Cause.

Object. 7. Order and Government in the Church, or National Religion, cannot be
preserved without such Guards upon both Piety, Order, and Unity; for besides
that Public Authority has thought them fit, there are many private Christians
zealous of them, and that would be scandalized, if they were taken away, as if
the Precept of the Apostle were broken, Let all things be done Decently, and in
Order; and of them greatest care is to be had, as owning the Public Authority
most.
Answ. I have already asserted, in answer to some parts of this Objection;

1. That Religion and Piety are its own best Guards, and Devotion to God
preserved most awful, as well as most pure, in its own Spirituality and Truth.

2. That all Natural and Necessary Order and Decency, are always to be secured,
as much as may be, as being above the Scale of mere Indifferents.

3. That Unity is to be preserved in the Inviolate love of Christians to one
another, centered in those principal Things, Love of God and Christ, and
keeping his Commandments; and not in one Face of Uniformity; which is, if
placed upon Ceremonials, in its own Nature, as variable as the Phase of the
Moon.

4. I add, The more Public Societies in Religion are intended, and desired to
be, the more Comprehensive the Forms of Union must be. The Prudence, and holy
Caution, of that first Council we read of in the Christian Church, is always to
be followed: When the Jews and Gentiles were to come into the nearest Union,
and as great an Uniformity, as was any way necessary, either in the several
Churches, or the whole Church; when Doubts and Disputes had arisen concerning
the Terms of their Union, was that prime Canon made, (happy had it been, if
that Pattern had been ever since kept to) It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and
to us, to lay upon you no other Burden, than These necessary Things; one
necessary by a perpetual Morality, one other in the fear and danger of
Idolatry, or Scandal: The other two necessary at that time, but by alteration
of Time they dropped off, as to any Religious Import; except as general Nature
may check at them.

5. The Banding of Societies in unnecessary Rites, is rather of Ecclesiastic
Interest and Domination, than of the Concerns of Christian Religion.

6. If there are such Varieties, that some cannot serve God, without adorning
their Worship with these Arbitrary Rites of Order and Decency, they must stand
or fall to their own Master: If they have such a Faith, seeing the Danger of
Scandalising lies most on the side of Ceremonies, they are those that should
have it to themselves before God, not they that doubt; or, because it is the
Publicly Established Order, they should carry the Happiness, the Privilege of
their full Persuasion humbly, and compassionately, being not high minded, but
fearing, lest in some parts of that, wherein they seem so clear, Causes of
Condemning themselves lie hid at present, and afterward start out.

But all this cannot be a Standard for others; they that are doubtful ought not
to be screwed up, by Engines and Pullies, to this Happiness: Seeing then there
are some that dare not serve God in this way, we must seek out other Terms of
Union, and they are very near us; the vital Union of Christianity, our National
Reformed Religion, which may subsist well enough, if we would let it, in these
lesser Distinctions.

It did not make diverse Churches in Primitive Rome, that some Christians
distinguished Meats and Days, and others did not.

Yet the asserting the Rights of the Gospel-Freedom from Judaick Bondage, was
of more concernment to the Christian Church, at that time, than all the Order
and Decency of Despotick Ceremonies can be worth to it now.

Let us therefore, as the Conclusion of this Head of Scandal, always remember,
upon the point of Indifferency, That, All that it is, has been named already,
and it is known to be Indifferency, and it may not contend with Scandal, that
is mightier than it; for Scandal is Scandal, real Mischief, and lays about it
from every Quarter with Mischiefs. How much better then is it, that indifferent
things in Religion were taken away, even while the World stands, than that
they should be kept up as the Sconces of Scandal?

For Indifferent Things let not the Work of God be destroyed, nor any for whom
Christ dyed in danger to Perish; the more we esteem our Church, our Religion,
our Worship of God, the better and purer they are, the more it is pity any
should be divided from it, should be so far scandalized, as to be Schismatics
from it, either in our account, or if it be that Sin, in the real danger of it,
and of perishing in it. The more excellent our Church is, the more the Apostles
Rules take hold of us. Let not the good of our Church be evil spoken of, as if
it was Ceremonial; Let us not lose any from our Church, for Meat and Drink:
Increase not the Woe of Scandal any way, for so mean Things, as Indifferents.

Let us not endanger our selves into the Woe of him, by whom Scandal comes, for
Elements.

But besides all these Considerations, there is not so absolute a security in
adding any thing, under any Name whatever, to the pure Worship of God, any more
than to his Word, lest we be found Liars to him, mismatching with it, what will
not endure the Fire. Greatest Peace have they that Prove. 30. 5, 6.
love thy Law, O Lord, and that only; nothing shall offend them, in nothing
will they offend others. Observing Rites that had been Divine, was not so safe
to the first Christians, having to do with Rites that had been corrupted
Idolatrously, and Superstitiously, proved very Fatal. Ceremonies are but
Shaddows, Superstition easily pervades that little thin Essence they have: They
have not the Right of being Gods Creation to bring them off, to lie lower than
their Corruption, and commend them: There is no such Cause to be over-zealous
of such things, in regard of which, a late Father Simmons 's Critical History.
Romanist has said, The true Religion of the Church of England, differs little
from the Romish, in outward appearance.

The Argument strikes all ways, if our Constitution be so good, and injured not
at all by Ceremonies, let us, as Christ, Seek, and save that which is lost;
those we look upon, as the least, that believe in Christ, let them not be lost
for Ceremonies. The Love and Compassion of a Savior, triumphs toward these
least, easily Offended, narrow-soul'd, morose, suppose them; Smoking Flax,
bruised Reeds, yet despise them not, if Christians, if Protestants. Their
Angels behold the Face of the Father, of Christ in Heaven. Let them not be
Offended, Scandalized from Union with our National Church for Ceremonies.

If on the other side, our Ceremonies in Gods account should be blemishes of
our Church, and Imperfections; or if they may be turned into such by an
ignorant use of them, or if they cause Divisions and Scandals; if the Mischiefs
of those Scandals fall upon Strangers to true Religion, and keep them at
distance: All these considerations weigh heavy against a Zeal for them.

But if none of these can be laid to their Charge; yet if Men doubt concerning
them, what must they do? How shall they escape that of the Apostle? He that
doubts is Damned if he Eats. Whatever is not of Faith is Sin. Why should this
be hazzarded for Indifferents? And when the Tide of Advantages, Preferments,
Public Approbation, are on one side; Deprivation of all those, Censures and
Penalties on the other; who dares answer for many Men, that they do not offer
Violence to their Principles, much more venture over their Doubts? And yet in
those very Doubts has the Apostle laid his Doctrine.

Or Lastly, Woe can reasonably suppose, Men would stem this Tide that is against
them, if they had not real Conscientious Doubts, or higher than Doubts, to
contest with in prejudice of their Compliance.

Upon the whole then, I cannot but conclude, Imposing Indifferent Things in
Religion, by a violent Example; much more by severe Ways, is very contrary to
the Apostles Doctrine in that Case; and that upon Reasons, that till I see them
answered, I must suppose unanswerable.

I have now thus far discoursed of Scandal in the more strict, and particular
Cases, Scripture has given us the notices of; but in the remaining Heads to be
treated of, I shall consider it in that largest and most comprehensive Grasp of
it, Religion in general.

And there is nothing that requires greater Wisdom, and the prepossessions of a
more Religious Prudence, than to sit, and count the Charge of undertaking
serious Piety, as the Lord has bidden us in relation to one Branch of Scandal,
Persecution; so with respect to the whole Negotiation of Scandal in the World.

It is the great both Wisdom and Goodness of God in the Scripture, that he has
given full and ample warning before hand, of all the Disadvantages we are to
encounter in our Faith, Love, and Obedience to him; as when we are assured,
There shall be False Prophets, There must be Heresies, There shall be
Persecution, There shall be an Apostasy, or general Defection from True
Symmetral Christianity, within Christianity it self: And so in the present
Case, it must needs be that Scandals come. For the Knowledge of these things is
one greatest Defense against the Evil predicted, as also against the staggering
of our Minds, concerning the Truth of Religion it self.

Let any man then enquire, and search this thing out, both in Scripture and
close Reason, and he will find Scandals must come; though he may at first
think, Religion, if it be so great and excellent as is given out of it, should
not be darkened and clouded with Scandal, but stand clear from it; and it be
impossible it should be any way liable to it.

Now that it is in it self Just and Right, even to Perfection it self, is every
where recorded and published of it. Wisdom speaks excellent things, and the
opening its Lips are Prove. 8. 6.
Right Things: It speaks Truth, and Wickedness is an abomination to its Lips:
All its Words are in Righteousness, and nothing froward or perverse in them:
They are all plain to him that understands, and right to them that find
Knowledge. The Righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting, give me
Understanding and I shall live. Gods Precepts are right concerning All Things,
and secure from every False Way. Psalm. 119. 104. etc.
His Law is the Truth. By the Word of his Lips Men are kept from the Paths of
the Destroyer. Amidst all the scandalising, Psalm. 17. 4. Hos. 14. 11.
and intangling Works of Men, The Ways of the Lord are all right, if Men have
but right Feet, right Intentions, Affections, and Motions. And yet when all
this is granted, let any Man cast the thing in his severest Thoughts, and he
will find it impossible, as things are, Religion should be free from Scandal,
and that therefore, as if any Man cannot deny himself, he cannot be Christ's
Disciple, so if any Man cannot Encounter Scandal, and overcome, he cannot be
the Servant of God, the Disciple of Christ.

Let us then resume the Notion of Scandal, and fit it to this general Prospect
over Religion, I am now upon, and we shall find, as the Lord speaks, that
Scandals must come.

Scandal then is any False Pretense or Appearance, whereby Religion, or any of
the nobler Objects, Parts, Rules, or Reasons of it, are exposed to Disadvantage
and Disgust, as unreasonable, unjust, untrue, weak and empty; morose, unlovely,
and undesirable; or the contrary, Sin, Irreligion, and Disobedience to God are
gloss'd over, and presented, as in all regards, more choosable, and to be
desired than Religion; and all things so entangled and perplexed among
themselves, that Men are seduced from the esteem of the Divine Law, and
Obedience to it, and ensnared in Sin; even by that justle, and disorder Scandal
makes in the several Laws and Rules of Religion among themselves; and the
blending with them the pretenses of Sin; upon which great dishonor to God and
Religion, sharp Conflicts of Conscience within it self, Mischief to the Souls
of Men, and a general Disaffection to Religion ensues.

And now, how this must needs be, I shall undertake to show, having only
observed; First,

That there are some main Things so necessary for our Knowledge, Faith, and
Practice, that they are made exquisitely clear, and most easy to be
understood. He that runs, may read them; wafaring Men, though Fools, cannot err
therein; the entrance of the Word of God, concerning them, gives Light, it
gives understanding to the Simple.

Again, There are some Things of very great advancement to the Soul, and its
Happiness, that are the reward of a holy, humble diligence to know, in such a
Measure, as they ought to be known, and of a preceding Obedience in those so
plain things, that (as the Resurrection of Christ) are not shown to all the
People, but to chosen Witnesses: Thus the secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant: What Man is he that fears the
Psalm. 25. 12, 14, etc.
Lord? Him shall he teach in the way, that he shall choose: The Meek will he
guide in Judgment; and the Meek will he teach his way. If any Man will do his
Will, he shall know of John 7. 17.
my Doctrine, whether it be of God, or not: On the other side Ignorance, and
Disobedience to those Divine Truths, that are nearest, and most plain to us,
are punished, either with concealment of, or leaving us to Injudiciousness, and
Insensibleness, in higher Divine Manifestations; where also that
Injudiciousness and Insensibleness are Condemned. For to him that has shall be
given, and from him that has not, Luke 8. 18.
by improvement and good use, shall be taken away, even that which he has: And
this is the Condemnation for not believing John 3. 19.
in Christ (that supernatural Revelation) because they loved Darkness rather
than Light, as a Cover for their Evil deeds.

But besides those plain Truths, written with a Sunbeam in Nature it self,
besides those of clear Revelation, there are necessarily some deep Truths,
concerning the Divine Nature, the Attributes of God, his Decrees, and Acts,
some Mysteries of Christ, of Providence, and the Government of the World, that
command Awe, Reverence, and Modesty, and are not to be fathomed and fully
understood, and yet cannot be so divided, nor separated from those Truths that
are necessary to be known; but that the Understanding must, and ought to have
an observation of, and search after them; though with Fear and Trembling, and
with a Wisdom to Sobriety, yet to know as much of them, as it is made to know
by Scripture.

These things now being premised, I come to show, That in the first and best
state of Things, Scandals might come; and that in the corrupt and degenerate
state they must come.

And first how they might come; and there must the same Original be assigned to
Scandal, as there is to Evil and Sin it self; for neither Sin nor Scandal can
derive themselves from the Holy, Wise, and Good Creator, who made all Things
just and even; He, most upright, weighed out the Path of the Just by his own
Eternal Perfect Way, and made the Angelical, and Humane, the whole Rational
Nature, according to it, upright and perfect, so that there was no Scandal from
this first beginning of Things. But when God made Creatures of Reason and
Understanding, and of Free Will and Choice; Understanding in the very Nature of
it could search and pry, and range every way; and look not only upon Things
that are, but by Things that are, they could collect Things possible; from the
Nature of Wise, Good, and Just, they could descry Folly, Evil and Wrong; and in
Happiness and Blessedness, they could behold, as in privation from them, Misery
and Unhappiness, or the Transcendency and Infiniteness of Happiness; and the
Degrees below it; they could trace and find out the Lines by which there rose
up a Supremacy of these, and back again, by which there was Declination of
Degrees from this Azimuth, or insuperable Height.

And as these Understandings are so great, so they are suited with Wills and
Appetites as great, by which they could aspire to be whatever they saw above
themselves; and to dislike in whatever they found themselves below. So that it
was possible for them to dislike their first Estates, to forsake their proper
Mansions or Habitations, and leave them, as if they were not loughty, large,
and roomthy enough for them. Thus the Angels left their Estate in Heaven, and
Adam his in Paradise, aspiring to something higher; and this through
mutability, from misapprehension, jealousy, and disgust, arising from perfect
mistake, false appearance, and mis-judging, which is perfect Scandal. Thus not
being Infinite, not being Omniscient, nor able to find out the Almighty to
perfection, nor resting in the Love and Obedience of God in those things most
certain, evident, and undoubted to them, but projecting beyond their own
Sphere, they might come to charge Gods Holiness, Goodness, and Wisdom
foolishly; to raise suspicions they were not high and well enough; observing
how Evil lay from Good, they might in Discontent draw the Line of Evil upon
Good, and charge Imperfection upon Perfection it self; they might disorder the
most orderly Alliances, and confuse the just Distances between Things and
Things.

This they might possibly do, except God did interpose with his Immutability of
Perfection for them, and secure them: But God permitting things to liberty,
this must be possible to fall out.

This possibility of Change was the Folly God charged the purest Angels with,
and in regard of which, the Heavens were not clean in his sight.

From the miserable Consequences of this Possibility coming into actual Event,
the Good Angels were Elected, and into them the Bad Angels fell, who abode not
in the Truth, but fell into cursed Scandal, and are wrapped up in Scandal,
fettered in it, even in Chains of darkness, which are Chains of Scandal, till
the Judgment of the great day; that Jude 6.
it may then be decided, whether they had just cause of Offense or not: Thus
the Devil was a Liar from the beginning, and the Father of it, of the Lie of
Scandal: For all Scandal is a Lie, John 8. 44.

And now, when there was an actual Fall, a Defection of any of the Rational
Creatures, actually come to pass, God still permitting things to their own
Liberty, then it cannot be, but that Scandals come; For when once the Activity
of an Understanding, carried with a perverse and disorderly Will, is in motion,
then it traverses all ways, cuts all those Lines of Alliance and Connection
betwixt Things and Things, scales the heights, dives down into the bottom,
fills all things with Confusion and Perplexity, that it may Scandalize,
mis-represent, and mis-report God, and Supreme Goodness, extols forbidden
Pleasures and Enjoyments, and an imaginary Happiness, as if enviously denied,
and that denial unreasonably, and to no benefit complied with.

And the more Agents there are thus perverted, and ill disposed, the more
Scandals must needs arise and show themselves; when therefore Angels fell, or
if some Principal fell first, there must needs be Scandals in motion from them,
and they drew down innumerable lesser Stars with them; when they propagated
Scandal to Men, as we read in the History of the Fall, and Men grew numerous
and wicked, Scandals must needs come amain, and multiply themselves: For so
many sinful and impure Understandings at work, and hurried on by extremely bad
and unholy Wills, Scandals must become like a Deluge, and cannot but increase
to a kind of Infinite, and must be pressing every where; for there is no Light
so clear, but a dim and dark Eye may report it black and obscure, there is no
way so smooth and even, but Lame Legs, Crooked Feet, being themselves unequal,
may stumble and fall in it: When a Man, as Solomon says, is cast into a Net by
his own Feet; when his Feet are a Net to themselves, he must be Scandalized,
and Caught wherever he goes. There is no Sense so grave, and seriously
composed, but a vain Fancy, that is full of odd and antic Shapes and Images
within it self, may travestee, and turn it into Ridicule. Even the plainest
Sense, by Ignorance, or Malice, may be so transposed, as to be made most
unintelligible Non sense, and by separating the parts from their due order one
to another, may be perverted into Falsehood and Blasphemy.

Thus therefore, by the Darkness of Men's minds, by the Maliciousness and ill
Designs of corrupted Intellectuals, enraged by impure Lusts and Passions, the
plainest things in Religion may be mis-understood, misrepresented,
mis-reported, and disguised out of themselves; much more the more secret,
retired, and even unfathomable parts of Divine Truth, Providence, and
Government.

God has made every thing good, that he has made, and his very permissions of
Evil, are all overruled by him to Good; and even to us they may be Medicinal,
and of use, if taken by the right Handle.

On the other side, Scandal turns the very best things into Evil, to the Person
Offended, and nothing can be so Good, that it both not so abuse: The Spies it
sends out upon the Land of Promise, bring up an ill Report of it.

Indifferent Things, that are by God prepared, and intended to turn each way,
either to use or not to use, according as Circumstances lead, and both ways to
be advantages for Good, Scandal has a great hand over, and turns them to Evil
all ways.

Things that are Evil, the Sins, and Falls of Men, either Good Men, or Bad Men,
or Men seemingly Good, and inwardly Bad, are as the proper Dominion and
Territory of Scandal, and it raises what it can against Religion by them.

Thus every thing, by the not only Permission, but Justice of God upon the fallen
World, is subjected to Scandal, not willingly, for all things work together for
good, as they are impressed with Motion from the Divine Hand; but deserted by
that, but so much as permissively, Scandal violently transports them upon Evil.

Now things standing thus, there is the God of Scandal and his Angels, the
Angels of Scandal; the Devil, and the whole Host of fallen Spirits; the Great
Reasons, and Wits of this World, the Prophets of Scandal; the Ambitious Powers,
and Interests of Worldly Greatness, Secular Policy, Ecclesiastical Domination,
Debauched Religion, and in one word, the whole Universe of Lusts, all at the
service of Scandal, and employed by it.

From hence are all those Atheistick Discourses, those Heretical Opinions,
those Monstrous Idolatries and Superstitions; those Burlesques of Lucian Wits,
those Bold and Authoritative Examples of general Wickedness, Profaneness, and
Irreligion, that have spread themselves over the whole Earth, those Severities
in matters of Indifferency.

And where there is in any Time, or Place, such a sense of Truth and Religion,
that any of these Evils, plain and barefaced, take very little, but are hated
and hooted at, every thing, that is better, is borrowed against it self, the
Mantle of Law and Right is put on, pretenses of Religion are made the Raiment
of things most contrary to it And in all times, True Religion, Piety and Virtue
expulsed under the worst Names, and covered with the ugly Vizor of Evil; it
being hard to bring Goodness into mis-repute in its own likeness, under its own
appearance.

To this purpose besides every Man, being the first and worst Scandaliser to
himself, besides the lower and lesser Ministeries of Scandal, within privater
Communities, there are in all Times and Places, the public Councels of
Scandal, and the Cabals of it, that are neither Idle, nor Lukewarm, but
pursuing all things to the utmost.

And the Men of this World are always greedy of Scandal, of receiving it,
either through miserable Ignorance, and Inapprehensiveness, or from Propensions
of their own, and to serve their particular Occasions; or as they embark their
Interests in the Bottom of a Common Scandal, as most safe, and of the richest
Return: or if it were no more, they are always so near of Kin to Degeneracy,
and Depravedness.

Now lay all these together, and we may easily find, Scandals must come, not
only lesser Scandals, but greatest and most prevailing ones, that do as it were
sweep the World before them.

If any thing therefore can be added to Scandal, it will be, we must expect it;
though there has been so much done upon it to improve it, and especially since
the Rising, Progress, and yet surviving Contest of the Western
Antichristianisme. And whether there may be yet a Reserve in the Counsels of
God for Scandal, before its Final Abolition, to unite and summon all its
Strength, and become in a sort Ecumenical; I mean the Scandal of
Antichristianism especially; these latter Days must discover.

In the mean time I will not be afraid to say, There is a very horrible Scandal
rising at this very time, even a Protestant Popery, placing such an absolute
Dependence upon Succession from the Apostles (without cautioning for any thing
of their true Spirit) and which so hangs Salvation at the Girdle of those that
would be their Successors, as turns Christianity into a most Arbitrary and
Tirannick Party.

But they that know the Scriptures, know assuredly, Christ has founded no
Rule, Government, or Authority in his Church, whatever, but whose whole display
of it self is in Teaching, Instructing according to his Word: If that be not
clear and evident, the whole Authority and Power falls to the Ground. This Word
appearing in and with it self, though by the Ministers of it, has the sole
Power over Conscience: They that would Rule without this, as Rulers appointed
by Christ in his Church, are but Lay Elders, Lay-Bishops, or indeed they leave
the Word of God, and serve Tables.

But in this Universal Rage of Scandal, God has not so forsaken the World, but
that his Spirit lifts up a Standard against it.

Evil is not Infinite, but is at all times stopped by Evidences of God, and
true Goodness environing it on every side, and bounding it, that it cannot do
what it has a mind to do, and is therefore forced to leave it undone; for it
can go no farther than the Beings that carry it can go, and God is always above
them, and hems them in on every side.

Scandal has only a permission from God, a Dispensation to manifest it self;
it is always subject to Truth, as Night is to Day: It is subject to be reduced,
and contracted, as God pleases.

And thus have I finished the Third Head of Discourse concerning Scandal, It
must needs be that Scandals come.

I come to a brief Dispatch of the Fourth Head, The Demonstration of the
World's Woe because of Scandal.

1. Let the Scandal be never so fair and plausible in its Pretense, or Reasons
of Seduction from God and our Duty, there is so great a Force of Truth and
Higher Reason against it, that our Guilt and Condemnation is unavoidable in not
resisting the Temptation: Nothing can justify a Plea against the Divine Law,
not an Angel from Heaven; we must pronounce Anathema upon him, if he undertakes
it. There are such Foundations of Truth laid by God, that cannot be moved; and
they have such Evidence and Assurance to all sincere Minds, that there is no
excuse against the Guilt of being taken with Scandal.

2. There is therefore always some most Guilty Cause of Scandal, and its
prevalency within every Man that is taken by it: Some Lust and love of Evil
that betrays him, and on which he is condemned. When Scandal rages most abroad,
and comes with lying Signs and Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, it is because Men have pleasure in unrighteousness, and
receive not the Truth in the love of it.

3. Scandal is it self Misery and Ruin: A Man cannot fall, and be snared, he
cannot be wounded and broken, but he must be miserable. Life, Health, Salvation
are only in Obedience to God, and Conformity to his holy Will. Who has Woe?
Who has Wounds? Who has Grief? But he that has received Scandal against the
Divine Truth. This is a deep Ditch, he only that is hated of God falls into
it, as not to recover. It is vain to pretend the Force, the Power, the
unavoidableness of Scandal, when it self is Death and Ruin: How many are
pleased with their Scandals, and will by no means part with them? Many excuse
themselves, they could not withstand their Deceit and Violence, and will not
apprehend their Case. The first closely embrace Death, or, as Solomon says,
love Death. The latter can have no other Pity at the highest, but that they are
undone; their Scandals are upon them, and they pine away in them, as they speak
in Ezekiel, and how then should Ezekiel. 33. 10.
they live? God has no pleasure in their death, yet still they dye, except
restored by Repentance.

4. Were it not for Scandal, were it not some unhappy and mischievous
mis-representation of Divine Goodness and Truth, were there not something that
imposed upon the Understanding, and seduced the Will, with a false appearance
of Truth and Good, Rational Beings could not resist Truth, nor fall out with
Infinite Goodness; or on the other side, entertain Falsehood, or fall in love
with Evil, and so would be every way secure from Destruction: Surely, were it
not for Scandal, some most mischievous possession upon our Minds, while there
are any hopes of Mercy, we could not refuse and reject it, nor cleave so fast
to sin and death, which can have no desirableness, but to the deceived Soul; as
Holiness and the Favor of God cannot be disgustful to any, but the
Scandalized: Were it not for some indissolvable Scandal, even the sin against
the Holy Spirit might be repented of, and forgiven; some irreconcilable
prejudice retains both the sin and so the punishment. And in Hell there is that
Eternal Scandal for ever holding fast the Damned, That a Creature deprived of
God justly hate and rebel against him: Or it is best for it in that
Circumstance so to do. Were it possible to be loosed from this Snare of Death,
this Everlasting Chain of Darkness, there might be an escape out of Hell it
self: Were there not an Eternal Discontent and Disgust to God, Hell could not
be Hell, nor Devils Devils any longer; so miserable a thing is Scandal.

The fifth Head in this Discourse is the accumulative Woe to him by whom
Scandal comes; the Woe by way of Transcendency.

1. The Designers of Scandal must be as so many Satan's in the World, of the
just contrary Spirit and Action to God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit in the
World; and therefore shall be for ever separated from that Blessed Presence,
into that Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; the God, and the Angels
of Scandal.

Some have in all Ages been brandedly infamous herein, but none like him, whose
coming is after Satan, with lying Signs and Wonders, and all deceivableness of
Unrighteousness.

All those Atheistical Defamations of God, and Religion, and the Scurrilities
of Profane Wits, are deeply dyed in this Guilt. They are like the throwing of
Firebrands, Arrows, and Death; so is the Scandalising of Men in such sports of
Wit, to their Ruin.

They that offer themselves, as Coppies and Patterns of Wickedness, in defiance
of Heaven, dwell near to this insupportable Woe.

They, whose Laws Armed with cruel Penalties, are so many destructive Traps,
and Engines of Mischief, against all that are Professors of true and sincere
Religion, shall be gathered out of Gods Kingdom, their Scandals, and
themselves, that work iniquity by them.

They that in Indifferent Things, that they themselves acknowledge Indifferent,
use a violent Example, that must be answered with Conformity, though Men do
with greatest Seriousness and Solemnity protest their Doubt in the Case, and
though Scandal be planted every where in their Indifferencies, had need, as our
Savior bids them, take heed, they offend not, they despise not, though they
should be but the Little ones in Christianity.

Let them sit down, and count their danger, a Millstone about their Necks, and
the bottom of the Sea, is safer in our Lords Judgment of the Case.

Wherever the Instruments of Cruelty are in any Habitations, upon the account
of lesser Differences in Religion, Oh my Soul come not thou into their Secret:
Oh my Honor be not thou united to their Assembly: In their Anger they dig down
Walls of Defense and Security to Religion, Protestant Religion: Unhappy, very
unhappy is their Anger, for it is fierce, and their Wrath, for it is cruel:
They divide Jacob, and scatter Israel.

2. They that are the Authors of Scandal, by their great Mistakes in Religion,
by their unhappy and miserable Falls into Sin, by their involving others in
their own Sin, without considering the sad Consequence and End of both; they
have this great Aggravation of Guilt, that Scandal, Mischief, and Death, have
spread from them, and fallen as a Snare upon others.

Yet their Guilt is measured by the proportion of the Scandal in its own
Nature, the malignancy of the Intention, the stupid, or seared carelessness of
the Event, but not by the Event it self; whether the Scandal prevail upon
others, or not; or whether they that are Scandalized, repent, or not.

Because the Guilt of the Scandalized is reckoned to him, by his own Degrees of
Light, his circumstances of defense against, or extreme danger of falling into
the temptation, by his own love of Sin, or enmity against the Divine Law, in
which every Man is the principal Scandaliser to himself; and his recovery out
of the Scandal, depends upon his own Repentance, or Obduracy against the means
of Repentance.

The Guilt of the Scandaliser is measured also, by his own state in Sin in
general, his state in relation to that Sin of Scandalising, his Continuance in
it, or Repentance from it, and not by what befalls the Scandalized; else the
Apostle Paul's Salvation had been hopeless, without the certain Repentance of
all those he compelled to Blaspheme.

Repentance, and Faith in Jesus Christ, and the Mercy of God in him, are the
only means of recovery out of this Snare of Death, both to the Scandaliser, or
Scandalized, and a certain means it is to either.

Before I come to the last Head of this Discourse, viz. to draw down the whole
Meditation so, as that it may be most fitted to Practice, I will endeavor to
resume the whole diffusive Notion of Scandal into one Uniform Representation,
descending from the General into the Particulars of it.

Original Scandal is that dislike, and exception, the Rational Creature took to
the Creator's Supreme dispose over it, and its disgust to that State wherein
infinite Wisdom and Goodness had placed it; so that instead of a thankful
acquiescency in it, to its happiness; it has proved a Fugitive and a Vagabond
from it, to its Ruin.

Reason of this at first there could be none, but a disdain to have its large
Capacities of Understanding confined, or dictated to, or its Freeborn (...)
bridled, or restrained, its Liberty of Will manacled, or fettered by a Divine
Law: As if it were not indeed greatest Understanding to be conformed with
Truth; and noblest Liberty, to adhere to Infinite Goodness; or as if
Understanding were not Understanding, if it could not take measures of Truth
for it self without God Authoritatively superintending it; nor Free Will be
Free, if it could not choose wholly for it self, and owe no account to God.

And whether this Scandal is first in the Understanding, or Will, is not
material; for the Union is so Vital between them both, that what is in one, is
at the same time, and as they say, ipso facto, in the other.

The Devil at the same time he abode not in the Truth, had, as our Savior
tells us, swelling Lusts in his Will, suitable John. 8. 44.
to his Prevarication from the Truth.

The very same may be observed in the fall of Adam, there was in one Act a
deception upon his Understanding, deserting Truth, a sensual Eye upon the Fair,
but forbidden Fruit, and the Lusts of the Mind aspiring to an imaginary Genesis 3.
6.
more mounted condition, than God had placed him in, to be as Gods knowing Good
and Evil.

This then is the first great Scandal, at which the Angels and Adam fell, a
discontent at a state of Obedience, and Subjection to God, and his Commands,
how Holy, Just, and Good soever; as if it were too Arbitrary upon Beings, that
could understand and choose for themselves, to be so limited.

They did not like to consider, to retain upon their Reasons, not only that
they had their Beings given them, and that their Obedience was an absolute Due
to the Creator, but that it was Obedience to an Infinitely Good and Faithful
Creator, truer to the Interest of his Creatures, than themselves could be: This
Scandal therefore prevailing upon them, drew along the whole Tain of misery
with it.

Scandalized Spirits always report ill of God and his Laws, so far as they are
Scandalized, and they that are entering into Scandal, too contentedly hear ill
of him, as appears in the Dialogue betwixt the Serpent, and the First Man and
Woman.

Spirits utterly lost by Scandal, act in defiance of God, and are the more
enraged by finding the Misery of their Scandal pressing upon them, even to
despair, as we see in the Devils. Humane Nature, is more modest and tender,
being succored by Grace, and the promised Seed, in our first Parents: and
their Posterity preserved from the utmost mischief of Scandal, by that Great
Restorer from Scandal; Not perfectly recovered, but in a state of second
Probation, of rising after so great a Fall, or being most unhappily again sunk
below those hopes, and made for ever the prey of Scandal, even after Grace
offered.

This State of Humane Nature is waved, and various. In some things Men are more
clear and free, in others hooked, and staked with Scandal; and wherein they are
Right in the Generals, they are often ensnared in the Particulars, and so that
their freedom in the one, giving them more room and space to stir, inwraps them
more in the Scandal of the other. By degrees, if not restored, men lose the
modesty and tenderness preserved to them by Grace, and fall into the very
Scandal of the Devils themselves, or very near to it.

However in all Scandal there are some of the Lineaments of Primitive Scandal;
and the greater the Scandal, the more, and the more apparent, are those strokes
of the first Scandal.

There is in every Scandal an Understanding that will be wiser than God is for
it, a disgust to self Resignation into the Divine Will.

There is some Lust that clouds and darkens the Mind and there is some false
Principle that imboldens Lust.

Scandal always wraps up sin with it self, else it were not Scandal; sin has
always Scandal to introduce it, else there could be no sin: Although therefore,
when we come to particular Cases, there are many sins lie wholly naked, and
uncovered of any pretense, according to acknowledged Principles of Natural
Religion, and the Word of God, yet they are not without the Shelter of some
Scandal, and if they are driven out of all else, they yet retire under this; It
is an undesirable state for a freeborn Understanding and Will to be under
Subjection; there is something Tyrannick and Oppressive in it, that they may
not know and choose what is best for themselves; and so there is a resolvedness
in corrupt Nature to do whatever goes out of its own Mouth.

The Apostle observes, The Carnal Mind is Enmity to the Law of God, it is not
subject to it, neither indeed can be. Romans 8. 7.
It is always offended at it, it always pretends some Cause against it, and, if
there be no other, that it is too Arbitrary: A pretense, a show of Reason,
seems* necessary to a Rational Mind and Will, that is so made under the power
of Truth and Goodness, it cannot sin, but by being deceived, and grasping at
some forbidden, appearing Good. Hence even the Devils think their Case
justifies an eternal quarrel against God, their Misery is to them a just Cause.
But the various Degrees, Kinds, and Shapes of Scandal are so many, so confused,
so perplexing, that the very view of it would enforce a thinking Soul, to cry
out, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord; as the Patriarch Jacob, in a
Prophetic Prospect upon Dan, out of whom some have fansied Antichrist should
arise, describes him as one would describe Scandal, and therefore near enough
to Antichrist that Man of Scandal and Son of Perdition, that yet will be as
Dan, Judge over the Tribes of Israel.

Scandal is a Serpent by the Way, an Adder in the Path, that biteth the Horse
heels, so that his Rider shall fall backward; most mischievous Ruin.
Considering therefore the Danger, the Multitude of Scandals, We wait for thy
Salvation, O Lord.

Scandals then in particular Persons and Cases are Infinite; but the more
general may be reduced. In Persons of no sense, no true love to Religion.

1. To the almost Universal Insolency of Wickedness in Humane Nature, bearing
away with the force and authority of so bad Example, all before it. And if
defended by Atheistick Boldness, wicked men clap their hands among themselves,
and multiply words against God, they go in Company Job. 43. 7.
one with another, and fulfill, or justify and make good, the judgment of the
Ungodly. They drink scorning like Water, and add Rebellion to their sin.

2. To the Ignorance, Sottishness, and Unconcernedness in Religion of Vulgar
Minds, which rests under such Shadows as these, God is Merciful and will not
Damn his Creatures; All have their Faults, even the Best, the Wisest, and the
most Religious. There is more ado than needs, Religion drives Men out of their
Wits.

3. To a False, a Formal Religion, Damnable Heresies, or a Superstition in
place of Religion, raging with great show of Zeal, and Devotion against True
Religion, which while men bloodily pursue they think they do God good service.

From those that are more serious in the True Religion, these Scandals
especially arise.

1. All Immoralities, impure Interest of Ambition, Pleasure, or Coveteousness
are very Offensive, and expose Religion both to Strangers, and even among
themselves, it being so very difficult, or almost impossible in this
Scandalis'd state to sever in our Censures Religion it self, from the
miscarriages of those that profess it; men will know the Religion, and not only
the men by the Fruits they bring forth; though Religion be the first, and most
severe, in condemning what ever is bad, and so should be judged only by it self.

2. The great and many, and sharp Differences among those, that are the
Professors of Religion, made most remarkable by the high Feuds, and furious
Rencounters that give sport to the Enemies of it, in traducing it, and every
way enfeeble it among themselves, are great Scandals.

3. The strange Antipathy in Religious persons against permitting the due
Liberty to Conscience in things indifferent, or in all things that are not
expressly commanded, or forbidden by God, that men either upon the known
Principles of Natural Religion, or their own Principles, and acknowledged
Consequences from them, cannot deny; which is many ways destructive of the true
power of Religion, wherever it takes, being the Scandal of acting against Sense
or Conscience. The Apostle, as has been shown, so remarks upon, and is however
a great discouragement to the entrances into, and loss of Reputation to the
profession of it, by the Clashes between those that cannot comply because they
Doubt, and those, that either will not believe them, when they say they Doubt,
or think them not able to understand whether they doubt, or not; or would drive
them against the express Rule of the Apostle, though it be allowed they do
doubt.

Thus I have described Scandal, in which the whole unconverted Nature of man is
Seated, though some are deeper than others in it.

The very best men are under the Remains of it, and are never perfect from it,
till in the state of Just Spirits made perfect, where Scandal cannot enter.

In Hell it remains for ever, even under the Convictions of Everlasting
punishment.

There is an Eternal Dislike, and Discontent at, a Reply against God and his
Government, as not worthy of love, and submissive Reverence, but to be rebelled
against, in the very midst of those Convictions: Could there be that humble
deference so due to God, it would be Repentance and Recovery to Heaven.

And now the misery of Scandal runs along with it: All Disobedience to the
Divine Commands, which are Eternal Life, is Scandal in the Deception first, and
after falls down into the miserable state, in which it always remains, but
never ends, expressed by the Worm that never dies, the Fire never quenched, the
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of Teeth for ever. Every one that makes, and he
that receives the lie of Scandal are cast into the Lake that burns with Fire
and Brimstone, which is the second Death, but he that makes that ^ye, sinks
deepest; for though they are so miserable, so great a Woe is to them that
receive it, yet still Woe in an Eminency to him by whom Scandal comes, has
been pronounced by the Lord, and cannot be reversed.

And now I am more immediately, and nearly, to fall upon what concerns us in a
way of Practice, from the consideration of Scandal.

1. Let us seriously apprehend the great Folly of taking hold of Scandal, and
making advantage of it against any of the Rules, and Laws of Religion: It is no
other, than sucking in a Common Infection, or Contagion, because it is common,
or taking into our selves a Reason, or a pretense of Reason, to be Eternally
undone and miserable, because the most are so. The Scandalising, and the
Scandalized World perish together; they that bring the Pestilentitial
Contagion, that runs deep in their own Veins, and they that draw it in to
themselves from others. What recompense, or allay of Anguish will it be to us,
that there were such and such Offenses, or Causes of Exception to Religion, and
the Ways of it? And that we saw they took mightily in the World, that they were
generally received? When all is but making a Covenant with Death, and binding
over our selves to it: Can there be any Cause just enough, why we should be
Damned, and lose our selves for ever? Or will it satisfy us for our Souls,
that others perish with us?

2. It is therefore every Man's Interest, to arm himself with all the Reasons he
can against Scandal, (as there are sufficient) and to resist this Enemy at the
very Gates. It is only that we are deeply Scandalized first against Religion,
that we go up and down, as it were inquiring for Scandal, for some to
Scandalize us, and to give us further show of Reason against being Religious:
Were our Hearts but true to Religion, we should easily find, they are more, and
stronger, that are with it, than that are against it. If our Eyes were opened,
the Reasons for Religion are like a Mountain full of Charriots and Horses of
Fire, that cannot be resisted. Our business therefore is not, if we sincerely
resolve, that we and our 2 kings. 6. 17.
House shall serve the Lord, to search every where for Offenses Josh. 24. 17.
against such a resolution; but to find out the pressing and undeniable
Arguments why we should so resolve to fortify our selves against all the
seeming pretenses to the contrary, by setting them before us, as Joshua does
before the People of Israel, to animate our selves the higher against them.
That we are so unequally poised, so propense upon Scandal, is, because our
Hearts are first bribed toward Sin, and Apostasy from God.

3. This should engage us to take heed to our selves, to beware of our own
proper Scandal, the motion, prejudice, and passion that grows from our own
false Understanding, or Lust, and does and will scandalize us, though there
were no other Scandal in the World; these will make us fall into Dislike or
Discontent with any of the ways of Holiness and our Duty, when they do not
satisfy our particular Apprehensions, Affections, or Desires. Let us commit
our ways wholly to the Lord, and he will give us the desires Psalm. 37. 1. etc.
of our hearts, a hundred fold, in our Design of Good, even in this Life, in
the room of what we would purchase with Scandal. Let us rest in the Lord, and
wait patiently for him, and he will bring it to pass for us. But let us not
fret our selves in any wise to do Evil, because any thing in our Duty lies
cross to our inordinate Concupiscence: We cannot do well in being angry to
Scandal, for that is indeed, to be angry to our Death; we foolishly pervert our
own way, when ever our hearts fret against the Lord. If we love the Law of God,
nothing can offend us. If we love God and our Brother, we can have no occasion
of stumbling or Scandal in us.

4. Seeing Scandals are so every where abroad, and our own Hearts so weak on
the part of Scandal, it is most necessary to commit our selves to Infinite
Grace, and the Divine Spirit, as our greatest Security and Protection; without
which no Flesh could be saved, not the very Elect: If we set our love upon God,
and place our trust in him, we shall dwell in the secret place of the Most
High, and rest under the Shadow of the Almighty, and he will deliver us from
the Snare of the Fowler, from noisome Scandal, though a thousand Psalm. 91.
fall at our side, and ten thousand at our right hand. They that be planted in
the House of the Lord, shall flourish Psalm. 92. 13. etc.
in the Courts of our God; they shall still, being unscandalised, bring forth
fruit in their old age; they shall be fat and flourishing, not blasted with
Scandal's East Wind, to show that the Lord is upright, a Rock of Security, not
of Scandal, and there is no unrighteousness, no cause of Scandal in him. Oh how
great is thy Goodness to them that fear thee, to them Psalm. 31. 19.
that trust in thee before the Sons of Men. Thou shall hide them in the Secret
of thy presence, from the Pride of Scandal that compasses men as a Chain, yet
they are proud of it, from the strife of Tongues, the Tongue of Scandal, that
are a World of Inquity, that are set on fire of Hell, that are set against
Heaven, and walk through the Earth.

5. We may from hence learn the great unreasonableness of being Scandalized;
that there are so many Scandals against Religion not marked with Vengeance. If
we consider well the state of the World, how can it be otherwise? It is neither
a Heaven, nor a Paradise upon Earth, that immediately spue out Scandal, and
having once spued it out, never receive it any more for ever. Nor is it a Hell
where there is Scandal, all Scandal and no Religion, but Scandal under Divine
Vengeance, Scandal all in a Flame with the Wrath of God, discovering what it
is, so that it can entrap none any longer, but those that are its Vassals for
ever.

This World then is a World of Scandals, and scandalized; only it is under a
Discipline, an Administration of Grace, like an Hospital, a Bethlehem for
Lunaticks, the Lunaticks of Scandal, the Infani, as Holy Writ calls them. They
are under a gracious Provision of all Necessaries, and a Method for Cure: In
the mean time, that they, that are at the height of this Lunacy, should throw
about Scandal with all their might, is no more strange, than that there are Mad
Men in such a Bethlehem at the height of Distraction: Indeed the Patience, the
Bounty that God uses to these is greater, than of the most compassionate
Hospitals generally in this world; yet no doubt they have the cruel twinges and
lashes of Conscience in order to their Cure, if they might proceed to their
Effect; but that their Cure grows desperate, is no more to be wondered at in
the one Case than in the other. Many never come to themselves. They truly have
Devils, and are Mad, Devils that are never cast out.

Others there are that are brought to a more quiet, but sullen state; others
that have their lucid Intervals; others again that have generally fair
appearance of Reason, yet not in their Right Minds; and lastly, some that are
reduced beyond danger of relapse, but not perfect.

What Reproach is it now to Right Reason, to Sobriety, that Lunaticks of all
sorts err from it, or that some rally at it, or that the very best among them
do some things unbecoming to it?

No more is it that Evil Men, or Imperfect Men, not sanctified to the
Perfection of Paradise, or Heaven, do unsuitable to Religion, according to
their several states, though they do insanire cum ratione, seem to be in their
Wits and Reason while they do so.

Or that there are Infamous Malefactors, Malcontents, under the most wise and
sage Government; or Wits ill employed, that Lampoon it.

6. Let us continually look to Jesus, who in himself subdued the whole power of
Scandal, keeping steady and uniform Obedience to the Divine Will, and did
always the things that were pleasing to it, though Scandals of all sorts
pressed in on every side. Who being in the Form of Phil. 2. 6.
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no
Reputation, but took on him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness
of Men; and being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient to death, even to the death of the Cross.

Hereby, even by the Dignity of his Person, and the Profound Humility of his
Obedience, he has not only done that Honor, given that Glory to the Divine
Sovereignty, and Righteousness, the Glory of that Supreme Authority, as has
made Recompense for all the Scandals of Angels and Men, so far as that
Sovereignty or Righteousness are absolutely concerned, whether any should
believe in him or not; but has also made Atonement, perfect Atonement, and
Reconciliation for all that do believe in, and obey him; into a share of which,
I make no doubt, the Holy Angelical Nature immediately entered, according to
their state, even from the time he was declared the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World; Through his Obedience and Meditaion adored, and
applied to, they have persever'd free from Scandal, by which so great a part
fell, upon account of which, when the First begotten came into the Heb. 1. 6.
World, all the Angels of God Worshipped him. The virtue from himself, as the
Exemplar, as the Firstborn among many Brethren, Romans 8. 29.
to whose Image they are Predestined to be conformed, does by degrees
extirpate all the very remains of Scandal in his Church; and he presents it
without blame, spot, wrinkle, blemish, or any such thing, (even by real and
efficacious operation) before the Eyes of Glory. His Example always stands
before them, as the most absolute and sublime Pattern, to which, they daily are
exercised in fashioning themselves. Thus our Lord does every way dissolve the
Works of the Devil, and deliver them, who by reason of Scandal were all their
lives time subject to bondage, by destroying Scandal, and him that has the
great Power of it, the Devil.

7. This should make Heaven desirable to us, where no Scandal dwells, nor any
more, since the Angels of Scandal were cast out of it, can so much as once
enter; where there is perfect light, without any variation or shadow of
turning. The Holy ones there are vexed with Scandal's Wiles no more, with the
Wiles of the God or Ministers of Scandal, or those that by his Stratagems are
made any way serviceable to it.

8. It makes Hell more dreadful; the seat, and Center, the Fund of Scandal,
where all the good Principles men have had, or seemed to have while they were
in the World, or the Church, the best state of this World, and their Temporary
good Actions are all swallowed up, and by the great power of Scandal turned all
into it self; wherein all the temporary, partial Righteous men of this World,
whose being Scandalis'd as to the main, the true love of God, and his Children,
turned their best things now into a sort of Splendida peccata, better
complexioned sins, have then all that they seemed to have taken from them. And
by reason of that great Stumbling Block, the Eternal loss of God, They turn
from all their Righteousness, and all that they have done is not remembered to
them any more for ever. They sink into that unpardonable Blasphemy against the
Holy Spirit, whch is an irreconcilable Enmity to what is known to be of God,
undeniably of him, and that Enmity expressed in the proper language of Scandal,
Blasphemy; and is never forgiven, whether committed in this World, or that
which is to come.

Now what is there more dreadful to the mind, that has any thing remaining of
an Ingenuous sense toward God, that has but so much Love, and Reverence
toward him, (though too faint for true saving Grace) as will answer a
profession of God, and the Lord Jesus, but will be horribly afraid at the
supposition of such a hatred of God, such a Blasphemy of him, and so of Hell on
this account, that every sin boils up there into this Height of Scandal.

9. We are dreadfully warned from being the Ministers of Scandal, either
through Design, or through great Falls, and Miscarriages in our Religious
Course; this we ought to take care of, in Relation to the World in general, but
especially toward the Little ones, that believe in Christ; stronger Christians
are most out of our danger, who grieve, or have a just Zeal against our
Scandals, but in the mean time themselves grow stronger, and stronger, as Trees
that cast their Roots the deeper, for being assailed with the Winds: But the
Little ones are, in the Eye of Christ, of the tenderest concern, because they
need it most.

While we are in the way of our Duty, if any receive Scandal, and are resolved
to do so, they create it to themselves, we must let them alone; but in all
things wherein we can save a Soul from Scandal, let us consider the Recompense,
we save a Soul from Death, and hide a multitude of Sins; a glorious Reward
without any more.

And herein let us always remember, we have an Eminent Seat of Doctrine, not to
Scandalize for the sake of Indifferent Things, a Doctrine prepared on purpose
for all Ages of the Church of Christ, concerning Indifferents, one of the
Eminent Seats of Doctrine of the New Testament, and more particularly in
relation to Scandal, and therefore by no means to be lightly regarded.

To Conclude all; that we may neither give nor receive Scandal, three things
are most necessary, to which I shall subjoin great Counsels of Scripture in
each Case.

1. That we have our Judgments well settled within our selves, in all the
substantials and necessary points of true Religion, upon a Divine, and not an
Humane assurance only, that in that part we may neither Offend, nor receive
Offense, for which Solomon's Advice is our great Security. Bow down Prove. 22. 7.
thine Ear to the Words of the Wise, and apply thy Heart to my Knowledge: For
it is a pleasant thing, if thou keep them within thee, they shall withal be
fitted in thy Lips: That thy Trust may be in the Lord, I have made known to
thee this day, even to thee: Have I not Written to thee excellent things in
Counsels and Knowledge? That I might make the know the certainty of the words
of Truth, that thou might answer the words of Truth to them that send unto
thee.

Or those Admonitions of the Apostle Paul.

That we henceforth be no more as Children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the sleights of Men, and cunning
Craftiness, whereby they lie in Eccles. 4. 14.
wait to deceive. But following the Truth in Love, we may grow up into him in
all things, who is the Head, even Christ; From the whole Body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that, which every Joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working, in the measure of every part, makes increase of the Body,
to the edifying it self in Love. Be not carried about Heb. 13 9.
with diverse and strange Doctrines. For it is a good thing that the Heart be
established with Grace; not with Meats, which have not profited them, that have
been exercised therein.

2. That we have a true and sincere Love of the Divine Law, and our Obedience
to it; the Blessedness of which, and its great preservation from Scandal, the
Psalmist thus describes. Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Council of
the ungodly, nor stands in the way of Sinners, nor Psalm. 1. 1.
sits in the Seat of the Scornful: But his delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and in that Law does he meditate Day and Night: And he shall be like the
Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, that brings forth his Fruit in due
season; his Leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.

3. That we order all things of Indifferency in Religion aright, both as to the
Sense of our own minds, and the Edification of others. To which purpose, the
Apostles Directions should be always before us.

The Kingdom of God is not Meat nor Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy,
in the Holy Ghost.

Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind. Romans 14. 5, 17. 1 Cor. 10.
22.


Give no Offense neither to the Jews nor Gentiles, nor to the Church of God,
even as I please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit, but the
profit of many, that they may be saved: Whoever thus serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of Men.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Several mis-pointings, and litteral mistakes, the Candid Reader is desired to
observe, and pardon; and what is most injurious to the Sense, thus to Correct.

PAge 6. line 32. for an read all. p. 13. l. 22. for they r. the. p. 17. l. 12.
dele not. p. 18. l. 11. for at r. with. p. 25. l. 30. for he r any one. p. 27.
l. 30. for purity r. party. p. 38. l. 4: for Righteous r. weak. p. 44. l. 24.
dele them. p. 48. l. 17. for rule r. rate. p. 55. l. 22. after are r. not. p.
61. l. 9. for Sacrifice r. Sacraments. p. 76. l. 29. for Party r. Polity. p.
79. l. 11. after justly r. may.

Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
THE whole Duty of a Nation, or National True Religion, Argued and Persuaded
upon greatest Motives of Scripture and Reason; Conciliated to all moderate
Apprehensions, though differing in smaller things; and to the strictest Notion
of Churches.

(II Book,) Liberty of Conscience, in its order to Universal Peace; Impartially
Stated; and proved to be the just Right, and genuine effect of True, Natural,
and Christian Religion, in Immunity from Penal-Laws, Church Censures, and
private Animosities.

A CATHOLIC CATECHISM SHOWING THE IMPOSSIBILITY THE CATHOLIC RELIGION Should
be varied to the Degree of a Thought from the Measures left Sealed by the
Apostles, WITHOUT THE LOSS of TRUTH And therefore The Impossibility POPERY, or
whatever else is not found in Scripture, should be CATHOLIC.

Composed to the Capacity of the Meanest, that will but Consider; that they may
know and be ready, upon un-movable Reasons, to give an Apology, or Defensive
Answer, for the Catholic Religion, if they are indeed of it; and be secured
from Temptation in Times of Danger.

2 Pet. I. 12 The Present Truth. Prove. 22. 21. That I might make thee know the
Certainty of the Words of Truth, that thou might answer the Words of Truth
to them that send unto thee. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst and Will.
Miller at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, and the Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Call this A Catechism, because I design it a Familiar Instruction in
Fundamental Truths, Resounding the same Thing from Question to Answer; the
easiest way of Conveying Truth, and Imprinting it upon the Minds of those that
are even of the meanest Capacity: But especially, because the Principles of it
are to be daily so Meditated upon, Pondered and Applied to use, as to be a
perpetual sound in our Ears, and so to be properly styled Catechism.

For Things of such great weight, as Principles are, must have as the most
Advantageous Adm^ssion, as the most Deep, and therefore Leisurely Insinuation;
as the most Resolved Adherence, when found True and Right, (which is Buying the
Truth, and not Selling it,) so they must have the most Easy, and Ready
Application to all their Uses and Ends: They must therefore be bound
continually about our Neck, that when we go, they may lead us; that when we
sleep, they may keep us; that when we wake, they may talk with us, Prove. 6. 21,
22.

I know the Things I have written cannot be duly received without much
Thinking, and without that they will be in danger of a Censorious rejection
from the most, or of a superficial unintelligent Acceptance in the Kinder;
which is as bad as the other, and therefore I present it as a Catechism; to
those that shall at all approve it, that they may be thoroughly versed in it,
and the Sense of it grow Domestic to them.

I call it a Catholic Catechism, only with Relation to the Great Subjects it
Treats of, the Catholic Religion, and the Catholic Church, in those things
wherein they are Catholic; or in which their Catholickness consist: That is,
that they are of God, and that the whole Society of Holy and Happy Spirits is
by that Catholickness united, and closely banded with it self. Catholic, as
the Epistles called Catholic, that is, after some Doubt Asserted to be Divine,
of the Public Spirit of God, and giving that Public Doctrine, in which the
General Assembly is one.

I have endeavored to contrive the Questions and Answers so, that the Answers
may be an Apology, or Defensive Answer of that Catholic Truth, giving a
Reason, or a Rational Account, to any Demand that can be made upon it: And it
is the Apology of that Truth it self; the Apology it gives and furnishes us
with, for other can no Man give: Truth can need no other, than its Native
Apology for it self; no other will it accept.

To give this, and to be always ready to give it, to keep it within us, and to
have it fitted to our Lips, is the proper Fruit of such a Catechetical
Instruction; and the Apostle assures us, it is the great Duty of Christianity,
and the greatest Honor we can do to God, First to Sanctify him in our Hearts,
by a full acknowledgment of him in his Divine Truth; by a Plerophory, or full
Assurance of Understanding in the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ. For a Devotion to the True God, without knowing him to be the True God,
cannot thus Sanctify or Honor him.

There is nothing we should be more Rational in, than in the True Religion, the
Account of which, and of its whole Content, ought to be so certain to us, that
nothing of a Diverse Spirit from it, can be added to it; nor any thing of its
Integral or Essential Nature taken from it; but we may plainly see, it would
change the Account; and so we need not make a Traverse over all Falsehood to
know Truth, but by having a Right understanding in, and Just Contemplation of
Truth, the most even thing in the whole World; we come to know it self, by it
self, and to be assured of it, although there were no other False Religion in
the World to compare it with, and set it off by, and withal to descry every
false way offered to us, and to hate it: Yea we observe every thing that is but
doubtfully Proposed, and stay it its due time of Examination, and so either
accept, or reject it, or if we see full reason for neither, still suspend.

It is not the Laws of our Country, our Church, our being Baptized, or Educated
in it, that will justify our Religion to be the True: It is not the High
Reverence of it, the Devotion we use in it, our hating of those that speak
Blasphemously of it, will make good our Religion, what Religion in the World
may not be justified upon such Topics? It is not that we find many great
Principles of Truth in a Religion, that will justify it: There is no Religion,
that can be called Religion, that does not espouse many True Principles: And in
Christian Religion, Antichristianism vies with Christianity it self upon the
Fundamental Creeds, which it self Confesses with True Christanity, but has
Built upon them New Creeds of its own, and so Corrupted all: For what is so
pure, and perfect, as True Religion is, must needs be Corrupted by any
Addition: All that is Pure and True, is already its own; who then can add to
it, and not be found a Liar?

Nothing therefore, as I have already intimated, can be our security for True
Religion, but the Just Divine Measure, the Common Faith, the True Catholic
Standard, which in all things necessary to the main End, is most evident, and
in entertaining nothing that is not so evident, till it becomes so upon this
Great Test, this is our Security?

For it is very plain, there is less danger when our Understandings are not yet
extended to the breadth of Divine Truth, (if none of the Vital Principles are
unknown to us, unsensed by us, which are so exceedingly plain, that we cannot
be, except wilfully, ignorant of them,) for no Injury is done to Truth, that
we do not understand its whole Compass; nor to our selves, if we do not hate
knowledge, offering it self to our notices, but in adding to Truth, seeing we
can have nothing to add, but what is of no worth, we must needs defile it; in
having only Truth, though we have not all Truth, we yet are under the Influence
of Truth only, but when we add, we enslave our selves to Lying Vanities.

Now hereunto have I levelled the whole ensuing Catechism, or Discourse;
against which I know many prejudices will lie, except full Consideration be
allowed: I know too many things raise a Detestation at the first, which being
Examined and Weighed by their Reason, gain not only the Discharge of these
Angry Passions, but much Acceptance and Assent: And I must take the Confidence
to say, in relation to any such Doubt upon the ensuing Apology for Catholic
Truth, that it is settled upon such unmovable Reason, and Weighed out by such
exact attendance to it, that I may write upon it without Immodesty; Lo this,
we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it for thy good; for good
in the Quiet and most Peaceable Course of Christianity, wherein to know the
True Grounds upon which it rests, alone makes the Soul both Wise and Good, and
determines it to the Square and Just Rules of that Holy Religion; for Good in
times of Temptation to a False Religion, especially that which calls it self
Catholic. For the truly Instructed Christian, in that which is indeed
Catholic, is even Impregnable against that Delusion of Catholic, falsely so
called; Lastly, for good, in the midst of great Differences, and Diversities of
Opinion and Practice, in relation to lesser things, pertaining more
Circumstantially, or Doubtfully to True Religion, wherein the Rational
Christian carrying it as Inoffensively and Communicatively as he can with all,
centers in that which is Catholic, as to his Faith, Love, Inward Esteem, and
Practice, and unmoveably fixes there, detesting all Animosity, and much more
rigor or severity toward others in Relation to such differences, than which
nothing can be more ungenerous, more unchristian, more irreligious, more
unworthy.

THE CONTENTS.
CAP. I. OF the Perfect and First State of Humane Nature, with relation to
Catholic, or Public Religion. page 1 CAP. II. Of the Violation of this
Catholic Order of Religion, and the Means provided by God to restore it. 7
CAP. III. Of the Vncontroversible Laws of Natural Religion. 10 CAP. IV. Of
Revelation, and the Reasons of so great Miscarriages against both the Light of
Nature and Revelation, with the Means of Cure. 14 CAP. V. Of the Public or
Divine Original of Sacred Writing, or Scripture. 23 CAP. VI. Of the Proof of
Scripture, That it is of God; and that the Proof also is Public and Divine. 27
CAP. VII. Of the Public Interpretation of Scripture. page 36 CAP. VIII. Of
Tradition and Antiquity. ^^ CAP. IX. Of the Church Catholic. 65 CAP. X. Of the
Officers appointed by Christ in his Church. 8^ CAP. XI. Of every Man's
Obligation to be wise for himself to Salvation. 89 CAP. XII. Of Schism and
Scandal. 93 CAP. XIII. Of the Anti-Church, and its Opposition in every thing to
the True Church. 109 CAP. XIV. Of the Power of Magistrates in Religion, and of
National Religion. 128
A Catholic Catechism,
CAP. I. Of the Perfect and First State of Humane Nature, with relation to
Catholic, or Public Religion.
Quest. WHAT is the most distinguishing Excellency and Perfection of Humane
Nature?

Answ. Catholic, or truly Public Religion; for it is the All, the Whole, or
Universal Man: Whoever therefore has vanquished the sense of that, has put
off Man, and degraded himself into worse than a Brute.

Quest. What do you mean by Religion?

Answ. By Religion I mean a close Binding, or Uniting our selves to, and with
God, the Supreme Being, in the Worship of him according to his Excellent Nature
and Attributes, in keeping his Commandments, and seeking his Grace and Favor,
according to all his Divine Manifestations of himself; and in so doing we are
joined, and join our selves, as far as we can, with one another, in the same
Religious Services performed by all.

Quest. Why do you call it Catholic, or truly Public Religion?

Answ. Because God, to whom we properly and first Unite in Religion, is the
most Public and Universal Being, in whom all holy Spirits unite one with
another; and from whom whoever separates, separates also from all good Spirits,
and so falls into the only dangerous Schism.

2. Because the One God, and Jesus Christ his Son, our Lord, the One Mediator,
would have all come to the Knowledge of this, as the Catholic Truth, that they
might be saved; and has therefore reconciled, and recapitulated all in Heaven
and Earth, into one Catholic Body, in himself the Catholic Head.

3. Because Gods Manifestations of himself are the only true Public Authentic
Records of this Religion, and all other not derived from hence are private and
false, and the Meetings set up to celebrate any other Religion, than thus
manifested, are indeed the close Schismatical Conventicles: For none can be
Public Assemblies, where God, the supremely Public, and all holy Spirits,
withdrawn with him, are not: And all are Public, though but of two or three,
where God the Public it self, and in whom the whole Assembly of Saints meets,
is in the midst of them.

Quest. Whence do you take occasion to call that Public, or Catholic, that is
Divine?

Answ. From the Apostle Peter, who when he is asserting concerning the
certainty of the Scripture Prophecy, affirms it a Principle absolutely
necessary to be known, that it is not of any Private Interpretation; and that
he may demonstrate it cannot be Private, he avows the Original to be Divine.
Now the plain Opposite to Private is Public; in that therefore the Apostle
does not oppose Public, but Divine, to Private; it is plain in his sense,
Divine is the only Public; and whatever is truly Public is Divine, and all
else Private.

Quest. How therefore are we to understand Private, to oppose it to Public or
Divine?

Answ. Idiotick or Private is applied to persons whose Knowledge is very narrow
and strait, and they have cognizance of nothing beyond their little own. 2. To
those that have no Public Character of Office or Magistracy. And lastly, to
such whose care, interest, and concern is confined to themselves and their own:
Even thus Private is justly affixed to all; except only to God, and Religion as
derived from him. No created Knowledge, either Angelick or Humane, is
comprehensive enough to be the Fountain; no Power or Authority is supreme or
vast enough to Enact; nor is any care or concern for the world of Souls, large
or receptive enough to Ordain a Catholic Religion leading to a Common
Salvation, but his who is the Father of the whole Family of Spirits in Heaven
and Earth.

Quest. What Evidence of this is there?

Answ. It is so much the Result of Reason, that whoever considers it, cannot
deny it; and upon this account, all who have pretended to found a Religion,
have pretended some way or other to derive and receive it from God. For who can
know all that is necessary to be known, but the Divine Mind and Spirit, that
knows and searches it self, the Spring of all things, and so first to be known?
Or what Authority can prescribe without, much less against Omnipotency? Or who
can spread tender Mercies over all the Creation, but the Faithful Creator
himself? All which are absolutely necessary to the Concernments of the truly
Catholic, Public Religion.

Quest. What are the Records God has vouchsafed to men, of this Catholic,
Public Religion?

Answ. They are two: The Law engraven upon Man's heart, justified and sealed by
the constant Miracle of Creation and Providence, that carry semblable Lines of
all that is written upon Men's hearts: For that which may be known of God is
manifest in men, for God has showed it to them: For the invisible things of
him, from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

The Work that God commands Men to do is written in their heart, their
Consciences bearing witness, and their Thoughts in the mean time accusing or
excusing one another.

The Eternal Word, or Reason, that made all things, is the Light that lights
the Reason of every man that comes into the world.

Quest. Which is the second Record?

Answ. The second Record is Divine Revelation collected into Holy Scriptures;
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine,
Reproof, Instruction, Correction in Righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work. No Prophecy of Scripture is
of any Private Interpretation; for Prophecy came not in old time by the Will
of Man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

And even as the Law of Nature is sealed by Creation and Providence, so has
Revelation always been by Evidences of Divinity, and Miracles; a new Creation,
proportioned to the Ends of those Revelations: Miracles of mere Power or
Justice, as upon Pharaoh; of greatest Mercy and Benefaction only, as by the
most merciful Savior; of Mercy, and sometimes of Justice, as by Moses, the
Prophets, and the Apostles, who were to establish the Laws of the Old and New
Testament.

Quest. I perceive then all the things of Religion were not clear to Man by the
Law written in his heart.

Answ. No: For some Parts of Religion are so necessary to our very Natures, as
Men, that they were concreated with us, and engraven upon our very Souls, and
the immediate motions of our Faculties must needs lead us to them, while right
and straight, and continuing in that perfect state wherein our Creator left
them.

For he looked upon all things that he had made, and behold all was good, and
very good: And he appointed a Sabbatism for all his Creatures, and especially
his Rational Creatures, the Morning Stars, to sing together, and praise him for
them.

But there are other Divine Truths, which are as the breaking up of the Great
Deep of the Infinite Wisdom, Grace, and Goodness of God, that can be known to
the highest Understandings of Angels, or Archangels, only by Revelation: Much
less to Man, a Reason of a lower Orb, and least of all, as fallen and corrupted.

Yet supposing the Souls of Men had abode in their first Clearness and Luster,
all his Faculties would have immediately received and adored God in all such
Manifestations of himself, and Congratulated those mighty Accessions of Light
and Truth.

Quest. But what need was there of any Revelation, when Man was made perfect
and good, while he continued so?

Answ. Revelation was even then necessary, to show, that it is not consistent
with the Nature of a Creature to have Happiness and Perfection within it self;
but to be in continual dependence upon, and expectation from the Creator: For
even that Perfection wherein Adam was made, was thus to maintain, continue, and
assure it self; and so to rise to higher Perfection; He had therefore at first
a Doctrine by Revelation, suitable to the two Sacramental Trees, so that though
he was Perfect, as such a Creature without Sin, yet he was made with a
possibility of higher Advancement, and Perfection; as he was of falling from
his present Perfection, by not adhering to his Creator, according to what was
revealed to him.

Quest. What Relation do these two Records bear to one another, being both of
God?

Answ. It is therefore impossible, they should either of them one contradict
another, but that they unite with, confirm, and justify one another, and one
pass out of, and repass into another; but the latter being more full, clear,
and perfect, makes not only the Additions of what was not contained in the
former, but does much inlighten and clear it; and since the Fall, it is no
where else perfectly to be found, but in Revelation: Yet so, that whatever of
it remains, or is reinkindled by Revelation, does both prepare a Man to
receive, and does also assure him the truth of Divine Revelation.

Quest. You have showed with what Wisdom, Goodness, and excellent Contrivance,
all things were laid by the Creator, let me now hear from you the use I am to
make of it?

Answ. This teaches us to adore, applaud the Fidelity and Goodness of our Holy
Maker, and to confess whatever disorder has invaded this State of things is
owing altogether to the perverseness and weakness of Man, whose Destruction is
of himself alone, and his help only in God, returning him to himself according
to this first Designation.

Quest. What then is the Supreme End of this Public and Catholic Religion?

Answ. God, the Universal Being, receiving into his own most Public Glory,
Life and Happiness, the Universe of his Holy Creation, is Praised, Glorified,
Enjoyed, and admired in them, and by them, to Eternity.

CAP. II. Of the Violation of this Catholic Order of Religion, and the Means
provided by God to restore it.
Quest. HOw did a change begin in this Catholic State of Religion, in the
place of which we now see endless Schism and Confusion?

Answ. The Fallen Angels, a higher Region of Spirits, being Anathematized out
of Heaven, settled in a black and detestable Heresy and Separation from God.

Quest. How did this affect Man?

Answ. They immediately endeavored upon Humane Natures being newly breathed
from God, and received into Society with himself, and all Blessed Spirits, to
propagate their own Malignancy into it, in our First Parents, and to separate
it with themselves from the Creator, and his happy Public.

Quest. With what appearance was so malicious an Attempt covered?

Answ. Under the plausible Disguise of Man's setting up for Happiness, and
becoming a Public within himself, without, and against the Divine Oracle.

Quest. What was the mischievous Design that lay hid under this?

Answ. To have enslaved Humane Nature under perpetual Vassallage to the
Pseudo-Catholick Synagogue of Satan, and to have depended upon a lie and the
Father of it for Infallibility.

Quest. What was the Effect of this Hellish Attempt?

Answ. Too unhappily successful it was; for drawing our unwary Progenitors from
the Royal Law implanted in their hearts, and rendering suspicious to them the
Oracle of the Divine Universal Spirit, they gave heed to an unknown obscure
Spirit, and to the Doctrine of Devils.

Quest. What was the dismal Consequence of so monstrous a Seduction?

Answ. They lost their place in the General Assembly, and Church of the
Firstborn written in Heaven, and forfeited it from all their Posterity.

Quest. But did these Excommunicate Spirits prevail upon our First Parents, to
become absolutely and immediately of their Separation?

Answ. No: For God clothing himself in his Son, with the Compassions of a
Mediator and Redeemer, laid hold upon Humane Nature, as the Head of its
Recovery, in that very Nature; certainly reconciling his own Seed, the Seed of
Abraham, or his Church, into a state more Catholic than the first, He,
God-Man, being so inseparably united with it: And with a redundance of Grace to
all Mankind, laid the Foundations of their Restoration to their first
Communion, with advantage, if built upon aright.

Quest. What were the Foundations laid by the Son of God, the Savior of all
Men, especially of them that believe, for the restoring them to the first
Catholic state of Religion?

Answ. The very same that were Ordained by God before the Fall, viz. the Law of
Natural Religion, preserved in the Soul, with direct Aspects upon God,
Obligations to serve him, and Desires of his Favor.

And when Man found himself in a fallen estate, and under Guilt, and yet that
God spared him, and had patience with him, there must needs arise from True
Reason, Hopes of and Desires after his Mercy and Pardon, and Motions of return
to him by Repentance, as is plain in the King of Nineveh.

2. Revelation, most exactly suited to our Recovery out of that miserable
Estate, with which God immediately succored our First Parents against Despair:
For that was the Word of Promise, in relief against Satan's taking possession
of Man, as his Spoil; The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's Head, an
everlasting Enmity being immediately kindled between them.

Quest. Who is the Supreme Superintendent., missioned or sent in the Son's
Name, to negotiate our Return to, and preserving our selves in the True
Catholic Religion?

Answ. The Divine Spirit alone, conducting us by Heavenly Assistances,
inlightning us in the uncorrupted Principles of Natural Religion by Revealed,
and assuring to us Revealed Religion by its Intimate Union with Natural, and
enabling us to cut the Lines of the one running into the other with innumerable
Mazes of Union: Sometimes preparing us for Revealed Religion by Natural, always
to the true Natural by Revealed, and so confirming them to us by one another.

Quest. You have made no mention of Creation, Providence, Evidences of Divine
Presence, and Miracles, what Place they have in the Renewal of Man's State
toward God by the Redeemer.

Answ. These are all in the very same Place they were in the first Settlement,
attending the Doctrine and Divine Law they are to seal, with Assurances they
are Divine, and giving the Image and Likeness of that Law in the Power,
Majesty, Rectitude, and Order they themselves carry, and so testifying of God,
and his Word, of what Excellency it is; and that even before the Reason of Man,
as it is imbodied, and ministered to by his Senses.

Quest. How shall there be a Distinction betwixt Miracles and Lying Wonders
that impose on Men?

Answ. There can be no Counterfeit of Creation and Providence, the Universal
Miracles; and all True Divine Miracles are like them, generally, in their
Beneficence to the World: Besides, the Excellency of the Doctrine they come
along with, manifestly distinguishes them.

CAP. III. Of the Uncontroversible Laws of Natural Religion.
Quest. THere having been so much of Account given in general of Public and
Catholic Religion, showing that it can be no other than what is from God; it
is now necessary to enter into a more particular Consideration; and first, what
it is that remains Certain, and Evidently Public; or, that is of God, in the
Law written upon Man's Heart.

Answ. Whatever is indeed written in Man's Heart, must certainly be from God;
seeing no Created Hand could write there. The Hand that Made, can alone Ingrave
it.

Quest. How then shall we make a Judgment, what is written upon the Heart?

Answ. That which is universally acknowledged, and, amidst all the Differences
in Religion, falls under no Variation, assures us, it was placed there by that
Supreme Hand, that alike fashioned all Men's Hearts: and especially, seeing to
this universal Acknowledgment there is no Temptation from the sensual and worst
Part of Man, it being against its Interest; but it springs from the wisest and
best Parts, most unconcerned in this World, or any of the brutish Pleasures of
it.

Quest. What Principles do you account thus to be of Natural Religion?

Answ. I account these following;

That there is a God, the Greatest and Best of Beings, that governs the World.

That God vouchsafes to be acknowledged, adored, and worshipped by Man; and
that he takes notice when he is so worshipped, or neglected, and that with
Favor, or Displeasure.

That there is a Distinction betwixt Good and Evil, settled by the Unchangeable
Laws of God.

That God being himself so Good, is pleased in Men doing well, and rewards it;
and displeased when Men do ill, and punishes it.

That Men have a Conscience, viz. a Knowledge of, and Government of their own
Actions, with Approbation of them if Good, and Dislike if Bad.

That there are Rewards and Punishments beyond this Life.

That therefore the Notions of Virtue, Righteousness, Temperance, Soberness,
Beneficence, and the contrary Vices, are of unchangeable Truth, and the Actions
flowing from them of the same Notion.

That God is both the Judge and Observer of them now, and will be so in the
Future State.

That in the time of God's Patience and Bounty to sinful Man, there is
Forgiveness with him, that he may be feared: and that he thereby leads Men to
Repentance.

That upon all accounts Solemn Worship of him by Prayer, Praises, Honorable
Discourses of him, of all Obedience to him, and Returns to him after our Falls,
are most due from Humane Nature, and according to the sociable Nature of Man in
Public Associations.

Quest. Do you believe these so close to, and inseparable from the Reason of
Man?

Answ. I am fully assured so; and that these, and all the immediate, genuine,
and natural Deductions from them, are so nearly allied with Humane Nature, and
Reason, that they are in no Parts of it wanting, however overcome; but where
extreme Barbarity and Brutishness in all things else make it plain, such People
cannot weigh against the wiser Societies of Mankind, in whom the more vigorous
Efforts of Reason show themselves.

Quest. But would you have Men rest in Natural Principles, without Revelation?

Answ. No, by no means: For, if Adam in Paradise had Revelation to make his
State toward God Consummate, how much more Man Fallen, in whom all Natural
Light is but glimmering and obscure, Heavenly Objects at so great a remove, by
his being sunk down so low from them, and the Mists and Fogs of this Earth so
prevalent upon him in the great Deordination of Spirit into Body, that whatever
true Principles of Reason might effect, if duly pursued, he is, without
Revelation, upon all Experiment, no better than in the Valley of the Shadow of
Death?

Quest. But does there appear any Expectation of Revelation in the Motions of
Natural Reason?

Answ. Very great; so that no Religion in the World has been without the
Pretense of it: And it is both most hopeful according to the Laws of Natural
Light, that God will reveal himself; and most just, that his Revelations should
be accepted with all Reverence, when vouchsafed: our very Reason being a
Revelation from him; and if any Revelation from him could be false, even That
might be so also: But in all things, Natural Light must needs bow to Divine
Veracity.

Quest. How happy might the World be, if all the Religions of the World were
but reformed to this Natural True Religion?

Answ. Undoubtedly so: for the State of it could not then be far from the
Kingdom of God; all True Religion, whether Natural or Revealed, being so
closely allied to it self: For though Revealed rises much higher, yet in an
inseparable connection with, and in a continuation undivided from Natural.

Quest. But as the State of the World is, and has always been, there seems to
have been no Effect of True Natural Religion?

Answ. Very great, in many respects. 1. To justify God in his Dealings with
Mankind, that there have been such Possibilities of Return to True Religion
laid up in them. 2. To be as Sense in a Man's Soul, upon which all Divine
Applications might take, either to Conviction, or Conversion. 3. To be at all
times ready to be re-enlivened by Revealed Truth, and to unite with it. 4. To
be an Universal Code of True Religion, in which it is always reasonable for
Mankind to agree, or in any Parts of it, on any Occasion, as Jonah and the
Mariners did in their Calamity, or as St. Paul and the Seamen with him, in
giving Thanks to God. 5. That it might be a Standard to punish Profaneness and
Irreligion by, without entrenchment on Conscience; which Revelation cannot be,
but in some peculiar Circumstances. 6. That Men may on all Occasions treat with
one another by it, on Terms of Reason and Justice, as the Apostle Paul with the
Men of Athens, with Felix; and generally Men one with another, in all their
Commerce: All Society, good Laws and Government, Restraint of excessive Evil,
depending upon it.

CAP. IV. Of Revelation, and the Reasons of so great Miscarriages against both
the Light of Nature and Revelation, with the Means of Cure.
Quest. SEeing there is, by all that has been spoken, so great a weight
resting upon Revelation, let the Accounts of Gods Revealing himself to Mankind
be more fully stated.

Answ. Besides Gods Revealing himself to Adam, even in Innocence, in a Doctrine
suitable to those two Sacramental Trees, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, and the Tree of Life; and besides that Original Revelation of Christ
after the Fall, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head; he has
been pleased to guide that Holy Seed, which is his Church, by Revelation, as by
a Pillar of Fire, throughout succeeding Ages, till he completed the whole he
intended, in a Kingdom of Truth, that cannot be shaken, which is to continue to
the end of the World.

Quest. How then did God deal with the rest of the World?

Answ. Even they were for some considerable Spaces, in the first Ages of the
World, within the Advantages of Revelation, by mixture with, or Neighborhood
to the Church, by Tradition from the Holy Patriarchs, which if they had
faithfully observed, together with the Improvement of Natures Light, it would
have secured them in True Religion: Besides, that they who were faithful in
these, were on all proper occasions provided for by the Faithful Creator
(though they were not strictly of that Seed) with immediate Revelations: But
when all these were corrupted, as they were in the generality of Mankind, God
withdrew himself by degrees, as the Glory did from the Temple in Ezekiel, till
there was nothing left but the Darkness of Tradition; fearfully debauched;
false Deductions from Nature's Light, and worse than that, the Devils Oracles
in the room of Gods; so that there was in the generality of the Nations a
second and more desperate Fall of Mankind from the true Religion, the Jewish
Church, and a small Proselytisme to that only excepted.

Quest. What Examples are there of Gods continuing Favor to any parts of
Mankind, out of Abraham's Family, justifying him, as not departing from men till
they departed from him?

Answ. Melchisedek, no descendent from Abraham, was King of Righteousness, and
King of Peace, at the same time the Church was placed in Abraham's Seed; Laban
was not wholly revolted from true Religion: But especially Job and his Friends,
of the Posterity of Esau, were eminent Instances of the Favor of God, that
whole Book of Job testifying, that being helped by Holy Tradition, together
with occasional Revelations, they held the Light of Nature at its own Purity.

Quest. How long did the Nations that deserted God, continue under that dismal
obscurity?

Answ. Till that Blessed Seed, in whom all the Families of the Earth were to be
Blessed, and who was the desire of all Nations, came, and shone as the Sun of
Righteousness upon the whole World.

Quest. How was the Light of Revelation conveyed to the People of God in Elder
Times?

Answ. In diverse Ways and Manners, in more immediate Appearances, in Visions,
Dreams, Prophesies, in inward Illumination, by a Voice: In all which there
were, when ever they were truly from God, such mighty Evidences of Divinity as
over-ballanc'd all doubt: Together with these, were the ordinary and familiar
Instructions of Patriarchs, and Holy Men, grounded upon Natural and Revealed
Religion.

Quest. How did God conclude his Manifestations of himself, in the way of
immediate Revelation?

Answ. By speaking in the last Days by his Son, and the Apostles immediately
Commissioned by him, sealing up Vision and Prophecy in the fullness and
Complement of Truth.

Quest. Did God take any care for the securing the Monuments of his Truth given
out by Revelation?

Answ. Yes, very early; how early we know not; but beyond Controversy in the
first forming the Jewish Church into a settled Body, he began the more sure and
certain way of committing his Word and Will to Writing, and for the Honor of
it, set the Copy with his own Hand, and continued it till the whole Revelation
was complete: Passant Revelation, or Oral Tradidition, not being sure enough.

Quest. Wherein is the Written Word more sure than the Word in passing
Revelation or Tradition?

Answ. The Word committed to Writing stands unalterable, Divine Providence
watching over what was Written, to keep it the same. All Covenants and
Treaties, all Monuments of Knowledge have been thus secured, transmitted into
all Parts, and consigned to after Ages: Appeals in Cases of doubt are more
safely made to what is Written, and every one concerned has a ready and open
way to Examine, and in all Cases to be resolved.

Quest. Have all Nations since the Days of the Blessed Seed been Communicated
with these Revelations?

Answ. There has been a Freedom given to Communicate them, and a Right in all
Nations to demand the benefit of them granted by God and Christ to them, but
there are many sad Accounts to be given, why this Universal Grace to Mankind
has not yet taken Effect.

1. The unaccountableness of the Methods of Gods Government of the World, in
the Efficacies of his distinguishing Goodness, even when things seem equally
disposed to the advantage of one, as of another.

2. The Experiment made upon so great a part of Mankind, that have the Gospel,
justifies God in not effectually conveying it to others, who would make as ill
an use of it: The Idolatry Superstition of some, the sottish Ignorance, Sloth
and neglect of others: The Cruelty and Barbarity exercised by Christians upon
one another, and the unanswerable living to it in all Sects, make plain the
great perverseness of our degenerate Nature, and how Nations that have not the
Gospel, would have abused it if they had had it.

3. But especially the great Enmity to, and Contempt of the Heavenly Doctrine,
great Nations are environed with, against the approaches of it, so far as it
has come within their notice; as among Jews, Turks, and Pagans, are a very
obvious Reason, why they receive not the benefit of the Gospels free
promulgation.

Quest. What then is the immediate Reason, why so many Nations that have the
Light of Nature to guide them, and the Jews that have the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, have been the one great Enemies to all Scripture Revelations, and
the other to the new Testament?

Answ. Because Nations, that have the light of Nature, stay not themselves upon
that which is clear and evidently Divine and Public in Natures Law, but either
by unnatural Collections, and miserable wrestings of its Principles, or flying
to false and dark Revelations, fortify themselves in falsehood, or misapplyed
Truth: As to the Jews; it is very plain, they were bemisted with the private
Interpretation they had affixed to the Old Testament, so that they could not
see the clear, easy, and certain Trains of the same Public and Divine,
running betwixt the Old and the New; but the Rudiments in the Old being more
kind to the Cabal or Cipher of their self-interested Sense, they venerated
them, and hated the Perfection and Life in the New, that would not at all bear
their privy Gloss; although both Scriptures had the same Credentials from
Heaven, and carried the same Public Sense: So great is the Delusion of Private.

Quest. But how comes it to pass, that even among those that enjoy the Light of
the Gospel, the Scriptures, and profess the same Christianity, nay, the most
Refined and Reformed Christianity, there are so great Differences and Divisions?

Answ. All proceeds from the same unhappy Spring; Men cannot endure to rest in
the Clear and Certain Oracles of Truth, but by forced Additions,
Misinterpretations, violent Detorsions, forsake that which is Public and
Divine, for that which is Private, and their own; and are greatly offended, and
too often enraged, that others do not concur with them.

Quest. It seems then, the best Method of keeping off from Error, is to rest
upon the most undoubted Points of Truth, before we remove from them to any
thing further?

Answ. It is undoubtedly so; Religion, in all the Branches of it, having
suffered much more by foreign and disagreeable Additions, than by wary
Suspensions: For hereby a Man keeps himself from False Religion; and stands
ready and open to receive Truth.

Quest. But how then should a Man make forward from Natural Religion to
Revealed, or from what he does not understand, to what he may in time come to
see very good Proof for?

Answ. By staying the due time upon the Uncontrovertible Doctrines and Commands
of Natures Laws, yielding full Obedience to God in them, trembling to add any
thing of baser Alloy to them. A Man shall see Revealed Truth shining out upon
Natural, and joining it self to it, and with it. Thus many of the Fathers came
over to Christianity: And so in all parts of Scripture, by rising from the most
Fundamental Truths, loved and obeyed, a Man shall ascend by due degrees to
those more remote. Thus Good Men in the Old Testament waited for the Kingdom of
God, and upon just Considerations moved upon the Line of Truth, from the State
of Religion in the Old Testament, to that of the New; except sometimes a Light
shines suddenly round about Men, as in extraordinary Conversions.

Quest. You seem then to think, False Religion, and All Divisions in the True,
have most nearly sprung up from overconfidence of Things, not of the Evidence
of Public and Divine Truth?

Answ. I do so indeed, although I know Men's not liking to retain Truth, but
being bewitched by false Imagination, betrays them both to the Plague of Lost
and Fallen Spirits, warring under the Prince of our disordered Air, the Ruler
of the Darkness of this World, and to the various Arts of Men, who corrupt
Religion for the Ends they have to serve themselves of by it. I know Men's
Faculties of Search, Inquiry into, and Comprehension of Truth, are much
shrivelled and shrunk up; I know Endless Doubts and Incertainties are brought
upon Religion, by Darkness, and false Appearances to Souls, that are so full of
all the Reasons and Causes of Delusion within themselves, and deserted by the
just Judgment of God, giving them over to believe a Lie; I acknowledge all
these Causes of Error: Yet I am assured, the close Adherence to God in Truths
evidently Divine, and not removing farther into a Religious Esteem of Things,
till upon the same Evidence, is the Means, under the Conduct of the Holy
Spirit, to be secure from dangerous Error or Schism from the true Public: And
whatever is not so evidently Public and Divine, is liable to Private
Interpretation, and so to Error: And when Men are overweening upon Private
Interpretation, they easily fall into Error; and when they are surly and
masterly upon it, it moves Wrath, Emulation, Strife; so that both Falshoood and
Cruelty have entered in at this Door, and ranged over the World.

Quest. But ought we to stupifie all Inquiry, and benumb Judgment, in every
thing not evidently Divine?

Answ. Not so; but to behave our selves humbly, and modestly; to acknowledge
there are vast Tracts of Truth and Knowledge beyond what we know; but we must
feel the Evidence of them, before we can receive them: yet to carry our selves
with due concession to every Man's Sense, that though their Sense cannot, nor
ought to master us, no more ought we to expect ours should them: which would
exceedingly reconcile or abate Differences, and retrench the mischievous
Effects the World has so long groaned under by so many Religions of Nations,
Names of Churches, and Persons propagating their Private, that is, not Divine
Sense, and that with Clamor, and too often with rude Force.

Quest. What are the Instances of the Mischief of making Defection from this
Public, Catholic, Divine Truth, for Private Sense?

Answ. The Angels Fall from Heaven was certainly upon Private Sense and
Interest; Adam's from Innocence and Paradise, upon the same; the Jews Fall from
being the Church and People of God, was upon the Idiotism of having Religion
for their own: All Idolatry and Superstitions of Heathens have risen from
hence: All the Heresies in the Church have come from an over-love to Private
Opinion. This is the most damnable Antichristianism of Rome, to make its
Private, Catholic. All Persecutions of Heathens, Romes Inquisition, and
Massacres, have been inflamed in this Furnace, the love of making Private,
Public. And in lesser and more unfundamental Points, Private Interpretation
enfore'd, as if it were Public, has discomposed the Peace of the Purest and
best reformed Churches, and not only disturbed their Peace, but stained their
Purity.

Quest. I seem to my self in all this unhappy Babelism, or Confusion of
Religion, to be very apprehensive for the Glory of God, and Religion.

Answ. It is most necessary to be zealous for Divine Glory, and for the Honor
of Religion; that Rivers of Tears should run down our Eyes, because* of the
Injuries done by Men to the Divine Law: But yet to be so concerned, as to be
scandalized, is to forget that God is infinitely more the Public, than we are;
and therefore to be offended at his Disposes, is to make our Private the
Public. We must then consider, that if God does not miraculously interpose, it
must needs be so, it is no other than the Necessity of the Case, Men moving
with so great Disadvantages, as the Active Soul of Man does in so great a
Concern as Religion is, in our highest Interest: and as thereupon Men will make
use of it in the present World, it must needs be so: There must be Heresies in
Religion. But that this Mormo, or dreadful Apparition, may vanish, we must
remember, 1. That to the Soul humble, and fearing God, all that is of Grand
Interest in Faith, Worship, and Practice is so Public, and evidently Divine,
that no Man need be ever learning, and never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth. After this God has given this Employment to those that through Office
or Desire set themselves to seek and intermeddle with all Knowledge, to travel
with advantage to themselves, and others, in their Inquiries into the whole
Compass of Divine Knowledge; whatever Difficulty can be supposed to be in
things of higher Advance to Salvation, is resolved to them, that do the Will of
God, as a Reward of their Obedience; They shall know the Doctrines that are of
God, that rise higher toward Heaven than others.

The due and diligent Search after Wisdom, is a Test upon the truly Sincere,
and well-resolv'd in Religion, that have in them another Spirit, as Caleb, to
follow God fully, and do not, as the Israelites, bring up an ill Report on this
good Land, as if the Difficulties were unconquerable, and the Entertainment
Hungry and Barren, through the many Disputes and Differences in Religion.

Hereby, lastly, the Conduct of the Free Spirit is seen, leading into all
Truth; and the Unction of the Holy One, by which the True Christian knows all
things necessary to him to be known, appears most desirable and necessary. Thus
the Wise and Holy Government of God, who brings Light out of these Clouds and
Darkness, is made manifest; and it is to be ascribed to the Infinite Perfection
of Light, with the Father of Lights, who is without any variation, or shadow of
turning.

Quest. What Rule is then to be observed in the great Diversities of Men in
Religion, that may most abound to the Honor of Catholic Religion?

Answ. To own and embrace any thing we find in any Man, or Society of Men, that
is truly Catholic, if it be but according to the Light of Natural Religion; to
join with them in the Performance of any of such Services, so far as they will
admit it, and keep to the Simplicity and Sincerity of them, according to the
Instances before-named, of Jonah and St. Paul: And much more should we do this,
when True Revealed Religion is joined with Natural, if nothing be required of
us that corrupts and defiles it: No Man's Error, in which we are not forced to
communicate, should drive us from Truth, or any part of it: And upon these
Foundations we should endeavor to win further and further upon all, to bring
them home to God, wherein they wander.

We should make Allowances to every Man, differing in smaller things, receiving
him without conditioning him to subscribe to us, in things of Doubtful, that
is, Private Disputation.

If any one err from the Truth, and one convert him by Evidences of that
Truth, let him know, that he that converts a Sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a Soul from Death, and hide a Multitude of Sins.

But if we cannot be admitted to such Communions with those that are so
enslaved to False, or would bring us under the power of Private, or will have
nothing to do with us, nor admit us to them; we must not yet desert our
Catholic Respect to all that is True and Good among them, but acknowledging
what is so, value and praise it, desire the Divine Acceptance for them in any
Good thing, so as to bring them out of the Errors they have adjoined to it,
and, as you have opportunity, reason them out of the one by the Evidence of the
other.

CAP. V. Of the Public or Divine Original of Sacred Writing, or Scripture.
Quest. SEeing Scripture is the only Public Record of True, Pure, Natural
Religion, and more eminently of Revealed; it is most necessary to be fully
informed in all Points concerning it: And first, What Care God has been
pleased to take, that his Word, and purely that, should be committed to Writing?

Answ. God held the Hands and Pens of Holy Men, by an efficacious overshadowing
their Minds, and conducting all their Motions, that they could not err: In
some things he so fully possessed their Understandings and Affections with a
full Knowledge and Sense of what they were to reveal, that they could not so
much as muse any thing Strange or Diverse from what they were so carried and
born by the Divine Spirit in, even as Elijah in his Body.

In other things, wherein they could not look round about them, nor fully
comprehend what the Spirit in them did signify, though they conveyed it to
Aftertimes, yet they were by Almighty Impressions upon all their Faculties
necessary to that Service, held in stronger than Adamantine Consinements, that
they could not extravagate from Divine Truths. Even Balaam, thus overpowered
against his will, could not go beyond the Word of the Lord, to speak either
Good or Evil, upon the greatest Reward; much less Holy Men, whose Wills were
perfectly resigned to the Divine Will.

Quest. But was not there a Possibility, those Holy Men, Writers of Scripture,
might at other times, when the Spirit was not so immediately present to them,
alter, or add of another Alloy, to what themselves had been the Instruments of
conveying from God to the World? Or might not Pretenders arise, and give out
False Scripture to the World, that had none of that True Spirit?

Answ. When once any Part of Divine Testimony was committed to Writing, it
became a Boundary to those very Penmen (much more to all others) that they were
always concluded by it: So that besides the Dread and Awe of God, and of the
great Sin of Falsification of his Truth or Name, they could not alter any
thing, so as to disagree with what they had before spoken by the Divine Spirit,
whose Righteous Judgments endure for ever: nor could they so much as imitate
themselves, when unassisted by the Holy Spirit.

When therefore they did not understand by immediate Assistance, the utmost End
and Reach of what themselves were enabled to speak and write, they did (and
they could do no more) search, and pronounce by all the best ordinary Helps God
afforded them, but could change nothing, could add nothing; they searched what,
or what manner of Time the Spirit of Christ in them did signify; they could
not pronounce of the Time, when not revealed to them: They knew the dreadful
Anathema ready to fall, even upon an Angel from Heaven, that should preach
another Gospel. The least Iota, once established by Unchangeable Wisdom and
Goodness, was less movable than Heaven and Earth, and would bear no Addition,
but of the same Authority by which it self was given.

And even the very Manner, Method, Words, as they meet to carry such a Sense,
have their Majesty and Divineness; so that whatever was by Inspiration from
God, bridled that which was not; and they that were inspired, knew in what they
were inspired, and what they spoke as so inspired, and in what they were not;
but were as Samson with his Locks cut, no more than like other Men; and most
cautiously distinguished betwixt the one and the other. Nothing therefore has
assayed to join it self to Scripture; if any has dared to do it, it has been
rejected by it, when not of the High and Public Spirit of it.

Quest. But did not the Writers of the New Testament reverse the Writings and
Commands of the Old; which thing so scandalized the Jews against our Lord, his
Disciples, and Gospel?

Answ. No otherwise than as the Sun commands the Shadow to fly away, and the
lesser Lights to retire, when it self appears; or the things typ'd out being
come, make useless the Types, so that they necessarily give place, or, as
Pictures vail when the Life is present: Else there was such a Respect to the
Scriptures of the Old Testament in those of the New, as to avow them of God
before them, and Elder Scripture than themselves: so that they vouched them for
all they said and taught, and staid the time of themselves being tried, proved,
and sufficiently confirmed, and Canonized into Scripture, by the Scriptures
that were undoubtedly so before them, and in the very same Methods that they
came into the Honor of being Scripture.

Upon which account, the Apostle calls them the more sure Word of Prophecy;
more sure, because of greater Antiquity, and Elder Reception into Scripture,
than that Historical Relation and Doctrine, which yet was immediately to pass
into Scripture of the same Authority and Value with former Scripture, and of
greater Evidence and Divine Clearness, and recommended by Higher Appearances of
Divinity.

And on this same account the New Testament derives it self from the Old,
sometimes by Proofs out of it, drawn according to the most regular Trains and
Consequences; sometimes by more immediate and autho^^tative Interpretation, but
of the same Public and Divine Inspiration with the Prophecy of Old Time it
self, as shall be presently more fully discoursed under the Head of
Interpretation.

Quest. How far, and to what things does the Rule of the Word of God extend?

Answ. To all things, most assuredly, that are necessary to Salvation and
Eternal Life, or to the true perfecting the Conscience in Purity and Peace;
whether they are things to be believed, as the Springs of Heavenly Action; or
Things to be observed in the Worship of God, or to guid^ the Practice, and
order the Conversation aright to tha^ Salvation; or that are prescribed
according to the Will of God, for Discipline and Government of the Church: Al^
these are plainly written, or by just Consequences to b^ derived from the Word
of God, so far as they are necessary to show Men the way to please God, or to
assure them they do please God, that so they may attain the Promise of Eternal
Life.

Quest. Is there no other Rule of Religion then, but the Scriptures, embracing
the Law of Nature?

Answ. There can be none, except either Religion were not derived wholly from
God, and therefore not so Catholic as we have asserted it, or except any other
Record of Religion can show its Descent as High and Public as Scripture does:
Of which Proof which Scripture gives of it self, and what it is, Inquiry is in
the next place to be made.

CAP. VI. Of the Proof of Scripture, That it is of God; and that the Proof also
is Public and Divine.
Quest. WHat kind of Proof of so Divine a Record as Scripture, is high enough
to prove it to be so Divine?

Answ. That which is, even as the Original of Scripture, Divine also.

Quest. Why must the Proof or Evidence of Scripture be Divine?

Answ. 1. Because it is below the Dignity of Divine, to receive its principal
Proof from Private, or lower than Divine or Public.

2. Because nothing but Divine can so reach the Conscience, as to fill and
possess it with satisfactory Evidence in so great a Concernment as Religion,
nor strikes the Heart with those great Effects of Love to, Fear of, Joy in
Scripture, and the Word of God, so essential to Religion, but Divine: When ye
received the Word of God, ye received it not as the Word of Men, but as it is
in Truth the Word of God.

3. Because it is impossible what is truly Divine should not dart the Rays of
Divinity, as all other Things of Excellency send out the Beams of that
Excellency they have, and thereby discover themselves; For, we know all things
especially by themselves. The Light remonstrates it self by it self. The Genius
of every Writer shows it self first by it self. We see the Divineness of
Creation, and Miracles, by themselves. Best and Greatest is self-evidently
Divine; and whatever it is written upon, is evidently Divine also.

Quest. How does Scripture show it self thus Divine?

Answ. By a Majestic Assumption to it self to be Divine, it speaks so in and
of all things it speaks, and as it pleases effects as Divine only does and can
effect, and is the Best and Greatest Record of Truth to all Holy and Wise
Minds: The only extant inviolate Record of Natural and Revealed Religion in the
World, is Scripture.

Quest. Is Ratiocination then, or the Just Compass Reason goes, to be neglected
concerning Scriptures?

Answ. By no means: For when these Self-evidences of every thing have struck us
earlier than our Scrutinies of Reason, and its Inquest can be performed about
them; that they may neither appear Fancies to us on our second Thoughts, nor we
run into Mistake concerning them by the Power of Imagination, there is then
liberty for Reason to inquire further, and assure it self.

Nor will the Evidence hereupon amount to less than Divine; For, Divine only
can satisfy the Reason that rationally, and like it self, inquires into Divine.

Quest. What then are the great Assurances to Reason, of the Divinity of
Scripture?

Answ. I account this the Chief; That there are Two great Volumes, the Book of
the Natural Law of Religion, written upon the Heart, and engraven in the
Conscience; and the Book of Scripture: That both these are addressed purely to
the Mind, as abstracted from Sense: That each of them is Counterparted by Two
great Manifestations of Divinity to Sense, which Sense is Reason incarnate, or
Mind acting in and by Body. These two are either Ordinary or Constant, as
Creation, Conservation, or Providence; or Extraordinary, as Miracles: That each
of them have also two Executive Powers, acting them to their Ends; The Motions
and Activities of Reason, enabled by the constant Concourse of General
Illumination; and the Supernatural Illuminations and Motions of the Divine
Spirit: And that all these agree in one, unite with, and fortify one another;
all of them carrying the Evidences of Divine Presence, and filling all the
Apprehensiveness of our Faculties concerning God, that he is in them: so that
nothing is Divine in the whole World, the contrary of which we may feel, or
Scripture is Divine.

Quest. But what is to be allowed to Consent of History, Universal Tradition,
and Education, in the Belief of Scriptures?

Answ. All that can be desired to be allowed; for it speaks the Absolute
Sovereignty of God, in making use of whom and what he pleases, in introducing
his Word into any Parts of the World, and contriving the Testimony of Men as
preparatory to the Testimony from himself, which is much greater; even as our
Savior received the Service of John's Testimony, but had much higher; or as
Reason may receive from Sense some accidental Testimonies.

Quest. But is there not much more to be yielded to the Rational Assurance,
that such Historians as the Prophets, Apostles, and Inspired Writers, of such
Honesty and Integrity, would not prevaricate, nor give any false Account of
Things, of the Miracles wrought by themselves or our Savior, of the Doctrines
of Christianity, or of their Divine Original; especially when they sealed all
these with the Contempt of all things in this World, even of Life it self, and
died in the constant Affirmation of them; which removed all base Designs far
from them, even the suspicion of it?

Answ. These Proofs of the Doctrine and Divine Descent of Scripture, are
undoubtedly of the highest Account that any Created Testimony can be, and are a
down-weight of Proof to all sober Reason: Yet that they can rise above the
Value of John Baptist's Testimony to Christ, I cannot find; and therefore we
must remove higher to the Doctrines that those Holy Men preached and writ, the
spiritual Wisdom and admirable Contexture they used in Writing, the Works they
did, carrying the Evidences of Divinity in themselves, and applied by the Holy
Spirit to the Senses of true Believers, with its own assuring Attestations, and
gracious Operations: of which, all that was but created is no more than the
Tube, Pipe, or Channel of Conveyance, if we enter it into a compare with what
is Higher and Divine.

But if the last Resolution of Proof were into any thing Humane, there might be
mistake in that; for Humane at its highest elevation is but Created, and
Created is not firm and sure enough for a Foundation, nor can it raise an
Assent noble and generous enough for a Faith in that which is Divine. All that
can be summoned, may be an outward Fortification or Introduction; but the Rock
of Truth is the Son of God, Divinity it self: Upon this the Church is built,
that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it.

Quest. But are there no Parts of Scripture that receive greater Service from
Humane Testimony, than others?

Answ. There are some Parts of Scripture that are but Ministerial, and almost
Servile, in comparison of others. And that these are found in all Authentic
Copies, and have been delivered down from Age to Age with the Sacred Rolls, may
depend more upon Humane Testimony, especially where the Connection with the more
Divine Parts is not evident: For these being but as the Body, and some of them
of the more remote Parts from the Soul of Scripture, cannot sparkle that Divine
Light and Heat the Spirit of Scripture does, and so may stand in need of
borrowed Light from the Superior Luminaries of Sacred Truth, and in many Cases
may, like the Moon, need Reflections of Light from our very Earth; but the Sun
of Scripture receives the Highest Testimony, by the strongest Reflections of its
own Original Beams.

Quest. How comes it to pass, that there are such different Degrees of
Scripture-Excellency in the several Parts of it, and that it is not one Even
Form of Doctrine, methodically laid together, and of the same Tenor of
Discourse.

Answ. In this seeming Disorder appears the great Wisdom and Majesty of Divine
Contrivance, that without obliging it self to the low and even pedantick Laws
of Humane Discourse, it raises so great a Record of Truth upon variety of
Occasions, and by an Infinite Foresight predetermining to it self the several
Measures and Ends of Scripture, raises them out of a great variety of
Accidents, and in such an Order as seemed best to it self for those Ends, so as
to give easy and ready Advantages to him that runs to read, and gather
Instructions of weightiest moment, and also of quickest and suddenest sally
upon his Mind, of greatest aptness to fix upon the Memory without loading it,
and yet in the mean time to lay the Obligations of all Degrees of Search and
Diligence to join one part of Scripture to another, so as to comprehend the
whole Complex of Divine Doctrine, and extract the Order of History. For by a
most natural, free, and unaffected occasional way, all Truths to make wise to
Salvation, and a complete Sum of all Goodness, is to be found in Scripture,
with infinite Varieties of Address, all the ways possible, to the
Understanding, Will, Affections, Conscience, Memory, Imagination, suited to all
Capacities, States, Conditions, full of plain and obvious, of most retired,
secret, and farthestreach'd Wisdom, which no Mind can fully grasp, nor Tongue
express.

And with these Things of main Importance, runs along such a Chronology of the
Dealings of God with the World, and especially with his Church, as serves the
main Design. All Learning and Knowledge in the mean time attending with
lowliest Submission, and not with pompous Appearance.

Now from this Supreme Dispose of all things to the Ends of God in Scripture,
out of such a variety of Emergencies of all sorts, arises such a diversity of
several Excellencies in the Parts of Scripture, that yet all meet in that Great
Center of the Glory of God, in a Communication of his Counsels concerning Man,
and that turn round those Two Globes, that little one of the present World, a
Point like this Earth, and the other that vast Circumference of Eternity.

Quest. But is there not as great a difference arising from the various States
and Conditions of the Writers of Scripture, and the so different Periods of
Time they were upon?

Answ. That there is, and must needs be a difference, is undeniable; yet, to
the great Glory of Scripture, and assurance it is from God, even those smallest
and lowest things last spoken of are all treated with all the Purity, Gravity,
becoming the Penmen of the Holy Spirit, and with all the Usefulness their
Nature can extend to; Even so the Holy Men used by God in this Service, how
various and differing soever in their several Ages and Times of writing, in
their Circumstances of State and Condition in this World, High, Low, Rich,
Poor, Learned, Unlearned, how distant soever in their Times of Writing, in the
outward Forms and Modes of their Worship of God, in the Things that fell under
their Account and Relation, before the Law, under the Law, in the Days of the
Messiah, after his Death; yet there is the same Spirit, Scope, Chastness of
Style, Majesty, and Authority in the Contexture; one Aspect upon the Glory of
God, Obedience to him, Desire of his Favor, as the whole Happiness of Man; the
same Reflections upon the great Evil of Sin, and the consequent Misery, and even
of their own Sins: So that where any Combination, or Conference to concert
things, was impossible, yet there is such an Union without a set Uniformity, as
assures the One Hand of the Divine Spirit and Guidance upon All.

Quest. Is not the Church of God the Trustee and Depository of Sacred Oracles?

Answ. It is so in Divine Ordination, and the general Course of Providence; but
yet it adds nothing to them, but receives all from them. The Church is known to
be the Church by the Scriptures, not the Scriptures by the Church, except
declaratorily only. The Church is the Pillar and Rest of Scriptures, where God
is pleased to fix them, that they may be exposed to Public View; but their
Authority is of God, evident in themselves.

Quest. Do we then attribute nothing more to the Church, in which we were
Baptized, and received the Knowledge of Religion?

Answ. A very great Favor it is of God, that when he writes up the People, he
counts that we were born within his True Church, where all the Springs of
Salvation run: but as to the Proof of Religion, or the Records of it, it can be
no more than a Private Proof: For, till we make a true Judgment, by what is
Divine and Public, and of God in the true Church, it does no more than equal
other Societies walking with Confidence and Assurance, with great Awes and
Devotion, in the Name of their God, in the Profession of their Religion. Till
therefore there is a Trial of every Religion, and the Records of it, all such
Societies are upon the same Level. When the Religion, and Oracles of every
Religion, come to be tried, and duly examined, the Church of God rises to
Heaven, and all else, except so far as they join in any Parts of the same
Truth, sink down beneath.

Quest: But how can we know that every Book of Scripture is Scripture, but by
the Testimony of the Church? or, that we have all the Books of it, but by the
same Testimony?

Answ. That the Books we own for Scripture are Scripture, and all of them so,
arises to our Assurance by finding the same Divine Spirit of Truth running
through one, as does through another: For, upon this account the True Church
received them, when first received, and so transmitted them, making the same
Judgment successively in the several Ages, as the first did, the same Reason
always continuing. What is besides this, is to be attributed to the Discerning
of Spirits in all the Times while Scripture was writing, by the due Exercise of
which True Scripture was received, and all other shut out: for, the Writings of
Prophets was subject to Prophets, and by them enrolled into Scriptures. That we
have the same Scripture justly and faithfully consigned over to us from Age to
Age, is to be owned and acknowledged to Divine Providence watching over his
Church and Oracles together, and conveying to us by the ordinary Security of
the Churches Testimony, the Precious distinguished not only from the Vile, but
from the less Precious also: but yet we must have greater Testimony than this,
as has been already urged.

Quest. But how could we be assured we have all the Scripture, were it not for
the Churches Testimony?

Answ. Finding so much Divine, and no more of the same stamp in the World, we
may be concluded that way, and abundantly satisfied, that God will accept us in
our Faith and Obedience to so great a Revelation. When any measure of Divine
Truth has been adhered to sincerely, the Danger has always been greater in
losing True Religion by corrupt Additions; and the injurious Refusals of
further Revelation come to pass more through the Prejudices of that Corruption,
than by humble and modest Suspensions, till God has assured us of his further
Revelations. But besides this, we may easily find, we must needs have the whole
Globe of Truth, and the Horizon of the Gospel gives us the whole Heaven or
Kingdom of it, as it is administered in this World; so that all further Degrees
of Light, and Discoveries of it, shall be but greater Clearnesses of what we
already have in the main and Substance: For, if even the New Testament, though
it made so great a change, did but thus complete and illustrate Christ
yesterday and to day the same, how much more may we be assured, who have the
New it self, so much excelling the Old, as it every where assures us? So that
we can expect a Milennium, or the New Jerusalem on Earth, only for the highest
Exaltation of what we now have, till we come to Heaven it self.

Quest. Do the various Readings, so often bandied by Learned Men, make no
Abatement from the Certainty of Scripture?

Answ. Those various Readings are such as excite and quicken Search, and yet
cannot distract the Doctrine, being not able to alter the Scope, Coherence, and
Design of the Context, much less to change the Analogy of Scripture in other
Places: While therefore they do not that, they take away the suspicion of
Conspiracy, they preserve from greater Corruptions, by turning the Eyes of Men
to look every way; they show how many excellent Senses dwell near the Divine
Writing, and the Bad are manifestly enough thrown off: For in main things there
is so much repeated, and said over again and again, as that all such Truths may
be fully presented and assured, and yet not so much be said, as might be said
of the same kind, without any Tautology; for the Subjects are so rich, that
even the World would be over-charg'd, and not able to contain the Books that
would be written. Amen.

CAP. VII. Of the Public Interpretation of Scripture.
Quest. THat the Progress upon this great Point may be made with the best
Advantage, it will be necessary to state the Amount of what has been already
asserted, viz. That Scripture is a Public and Divine Record; and, That the
Proof and Evidence it is Divine, is Divine and Public also: What therefore do
these two Positions arise to?

Answ. They arise plainly to this; 1. That True Religion is at once given,
unalterably fixed on Monuments of its own, and cannot receive the various
Phases of Increase or Decrease, like the Moon, by new and upstart Decrees,
Canons, or Anathemas. 2. That Religion is in this Sense Public, even as God
himself, that it is of free and open access in the Scripture, and its
Entertainment as liberal as the Light and the Fountains of Water; and no Man
need wait till his Religion be drawn out of the private Repository of Breast or
Breasts. 3. That the Assurance and Evidence of Scripture is very near us, when
we come to treat with it; so that we need not send up to Heaven, that were to
bring Scripture down from above, when it is come down already; nor beyond the
Sea, to oldest Antiquity, for a Scale to it, which has always the Broad Seal
of Divinity with it; for that were to bring Scripture a second time from the
Apostles and former Ages, through which Divine Care and Providence has already
passed it down to us, with the very same principal Assurance it gave them, viz.
that Divine Life of Truth and Holiness that cannot be far from any one of us;
for in it our Understandings and Consciences live, and move, and have their
Beings, and in that Light alone see Light.

Quest. But has the Private Spirit of Apostate Angels, working by Corrupted
Humane Nature, made no Attempt upon this Public Record, though so every way
guarded, as it is, to introduce a False Religion, even under the Appearance of
this Public Authority of Scripture?

Answ. Yes; that very notorious one of Private Interpretation.

Answ. What is Private Interpretation?

Answ. That it may be well understood, being a very great Instrument of the
False Spirit, we must proceed by degrees to the true Comprehension of it: And
first, in the strictness of its Notion, it is an affixing a Sense to Scripture,
or any part of it, that does not so evidently and indisputably flow from
Scripture, as to partake of the Divinity of Scripture.

Quest. How should an Interpretation be so made of Scripture, as to partake of
its Divineness?

Answ. An Interpretation is as Divine as Scripture, when it is the true evident
Importance and Sense of Scripture Words and Scope, and carries the perfect
Spirit and Analogy of Scripture with it, or is a Deduction and Doctrine
arising from Scripture, measured by the Context by its usual ways of expressing
it self, and the compare of one Place of Scripture with another, so as to
evince it self to be a just and necessary Consequence.

Quest. What is the Effect of such Interpretations?

Answ. Every one that soberly, and impartially, and piously attends to it,
cannot but be convinced and instructed by it, as the true Divine
Scripture-Sense, opened and applied to him.

Quest. How else may Interpretation be Public and Divine, even as Scripture it
self?

Answ. When there is truly a Divine Presence, and such Motives of Credibility
by which a rightly qualified Person may be induced to believe, that such an
Interpreter is immediately assisted by the Holy Spirit to give such an
Interpretation, that else could not be found by any Created Sagacity or
Industry, in such particular Places of Scripture, either from the Importance of
the Words, the strength of the Context, or Scope, or in the Analogy of
Scripture, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual.

Quest. What are to be understood to be Motives of Credibility in so great a
Case?

Answ. The Divine Sense of an Interpretation, agreeable with all those so
self-evident Notions of God, and all Goodness; the Weight and Gravity of the
Matter; The Authoritativeness of Scripture Language and Elocution; Miracles;
Agreement with all former Scripture; Awes upon the Conscience; Inward
Illumination of the Holy Spirit, in its Sanctifying and Heavenly Influences
breathing in it, and with it. These are a Divine and Public Presence, and
absolutely constitute further Scripture, even as they illustrate and put a
greater Splendor upon former Scripture, and complete it.

Quest. Who were such Interpreters of former Scripture?

Answ. The Prophets were such Interpreters upon the Law in their Time, even all
that writ after Moses, who either by Histories, compiled by such Divine
Inspiration, gave Examples agreeable to the Scope of the Law, or by Sermons
stirred up to the Obedience of it, and reproved the Disobedience; or by Divine
Meditations, Discourses, and Hymns, displayed it; or by Prophesies foretold the
Government of God in his Church, and in the World according to it; but
especially accommodated all things in it under Prophetic Veils, to Christ, and
the State of True Religion under the New Testament: All the Prophets from
Samuel, and all that followed after, as many as have spoken, foretold likewise
of these days: All which together fill up wholly the Spaces of Scripture in the
Old Testament.

Quest. How did the New Testament, and the Writers of it, succeed in this great
Office of Expounding and Summing up Scripture in this Public Divine Authority?

Answ. They were above all that went before them: For, John the Baptist, than
whom a greater Prophet among them that were born of Women had not risen, yet he
that was least in the Kingdom of God, in the more explained State of
Christianity, was greater than he.

Quest. How is this Notion of Public Interpretation, contradistinguish'd to
Private, made good out of Scripture it self?

Answ. From the Apostle Peter, who expressly tells us, Scripture is not of any
Private Interpretation: Whose Sense in that place is very necessary to be
pursued, both as it much clears the Nature of Private Interpretation, and also
strengthens the Foundations of the New Testament, as laid in the Old.

Quest. But you know the Original Word there used, and translated
Interpretation, is by some understood for no more than the Prophetic
Declaration, or Interpreting the Mind of God, revealed by Inspiration; and by
very many, another Word signifying Inspiration it self, o^ the Illapse of the
Divine Spirit in those Prophetic Revelations, is preferred to the Word
translated Interpretation, as the more genuine Reading.

Answ. I know the Current of Expositors both the ways you mention; but against
them both there is this great Reason: No other but Interpretation, and that
strictly taken, will fit the Apostles Purpose.

Quest. What was the Apostles Purpose?

Answ. To assure the Jewish Christians in the Truth of Christianity, out of
that more sure Word of Prophecy in the Old Testament.

Quest. Was it not then to the purpose, to assure the Divine Original of that
Word of Prophecy, and to assert its immediate Descent from the Public Holy
Spirit?

Answ. That indeed was necessarily supposed and included, or rather concluded
on all hands; but not the close Point in discourse: For, the Sacredness of the
Old Testament being agreed both by Jews and Christians, the Apostle commends
the giving heed to it, as to a Light that shone in a dark place, a great Lamp
shining when all was dark and deep Night about, till the Day of the Gospel
dawned, and Christ, the Day Star, arose in their Hearts by Faith.

Quest. What was the precise Mark the Apostle was to aim at?

Answ. To vindicate the true way of Interpreting this sure Word of Prophefie.

Quest. Why was this so much to his purpose?

Answ. Because the whole Stream of Interpretation of the Old Testament among
the Jews run against Christianity.

Quest. Whence came this Current of False Interpretation?

Answ. Even from whence Interpretation might seem least of all to deserve the
name of Private, from the Scribes and Pharisees, Doctors of the Law, Elders of
the People, who vogued themselves the Public, and so Proprietors of the Sense
and Interpretation of the Scriptures; but, as our Savior says, they had indeed
taken away this true Key of Knowledge, neither entering in themselves, nor
suffering those that would.

Quest. How does the Apostle vindicate this Point?

Answ. By a vehement Caution on those to whom he writ, to measure from the
Public and Divine Original of Scripture, to the Interpretation, as necessarily
to be Public and Divine also; You do well (says he) to take heed to the Word
of Prophecy of the Old Testament, as yet more sure to you than the New can be;
if you do but know and well consider this first, and lay it in the Foundation,
That Scripture cannot be subject to a Private Intetpretation, whose Original
you your selves, together with us, acknowledge as Public as the Holy Spirit:
For, can that be subject to the Will and Dispose of Man in the Interpretation,
that came not by the Will of Man, but by the Supreme Motion of the Holy Ghost,
in the Original?

Quest. Wherein lies the Strength of this Argument?

Answ. In this: If the Interpretation of Scripture be not as high as the
Original, so high an Original is to no purpose: For Sense being more Scripture
than Words, and Interpretation assigning the Sense, if That be Private, All is
Private at the Rebound, and not Divine: else a Divine Original shall be
mismatch'd, controlled, and even made servile by and to a Private, and often a
False and Unworthy Interpretation.

Quest. Into what Use and Effect did this Argument issue?

Answ. To a silent calling them to compare the Manner and Kind of
Interpretation used by the Lord and his Apostles, and that other of the Jewish
Doctors, and then to judge which appeared Divine, and from God, which not; and
they would easily give the Preference to our Lord and his Ministers, as the
only Divine Interpreters.

Quest. How then did our Savior and the Apostles justify their Interpretation
to be Public and Divine?

Answ. By one of the two forenamed ways; either from the evident Importance of
some very express Scriptures of the Old Testament, applied in the New; as
David's calling Christ (who was his Son) Lord, which muzled the very
Adversaries; or by the immediate Presence of the Divine Spirit, discovering
what it had treasured and sealed up in such Expressions, which Eye could not
see, nor Heart conceive, till in due time the Spirit it self revealed them: The
Spirit, that knows its own Depths; the Spirit, to whom are known all its own
Designs, from the first Foundations or Beginning of Scripture, to the highest
Stone in the Structure, or End of it: The Top is known to it in the very
Bottom; the End, in the Beginning. That therefore which was seen to Men only in
the Rudiment or Foundation, and seemed to mean no more, appeared at that very
time to him in the Complement, and he applies it to that Complement, as
certainly and justly as they did to the first Rudiment or Foundation: As, Out
of Egypt have I called my Son, was as truly applied to Christ's coming out of
Egypt, being then come to its Perfection of Sense, as it was applied to Israel
coming out of Egypt in the first Rudiment; and the Divine Spirit as truly meant
the last as the first, though none could know its Sense but it self, till it
self revealed it.

Quest. How could it be proved the Ministers of the New Testament had the true
Key of Interpretation committed to them by the Spirit?

Answ. By the concurrence of all things that justified the first Writers of
Scriptures to be Commissioned by God; Great and weighty Truth, Holy, Heavenly,
becoming God, as the Author; such Speech, as none beside the Writers of
Scripture ever spoke; all of a piece with former Scripture; Miracles; mighty
Efficacy upon Consciences; the Glory of God; the Salvation of Souls; the
abolishing of Sin, the Ends designed in all; the removing all lower Forms and
Ceremonies for the time being, into a most High, Spiritual, Substantial
Religion; True Peace of Conscience introduced. These, with innumerable others,
concurring in any Interpretation of former Scripture, that could not else be
found out in its full Meaning, do both enlighten former Scripture, and enlarge
it into further and more Scriptures.

Quest. If then our Lord and his Apostles, in Interpreting the Old Testament by
the immediate Presence of the Holy Spirit, resting without measure on our
Savior, and in full measures on the Apostles, discovered that Sense in the
Ancient Scriptures which was indeed deposited there, but could not be unlocked
by any Created Wisdom; it will follow thence, That it is an unnecessary Labor
of many Worthy Expositors of Scriptures, to press too hard in every Quotation
of the Old Testament we find in the New, for a free and full Confession of all
that Sense it there expresses, as if it could naturally arise from so many
Words and Syllables so put together, having power and virtue by themselves to
signify so high; since the Holy Spirit had a reach in them, which none could
grasp or fathom, but it self; and contrived that Sense so into Words, as none
could summon it but it self; and that it rested upon the Lord and his Apostles
to bring it to light, and reveal it into New and Higher Scriptures; and that it
appears as undeniably they did so, as that the Old Testament it self is
Scripture.

Answ. The Industry of such Worthy Persons is not to be blamed, to trace the
Sense of the New Testament in the Words of the Old, as far as it is possible
for them to go: But if they cannot give Satisfaction to cavelling Atheists, or
Infidels, or to the Scruples of Good Men, it still remains a just Ground of
Satisfaction: The Spirit, that carried, by an Almighty Hand, the Writers of the
Old Testament, carried those Penmen of the New by the same also; and from one
single Glance of its Meaning, that it self, with Divine Artifice, had left
drawn there, it derives that full Face of Truth in the New, to be its Sense in
the Old, than that Samson's Riddle in the Exposition, should be his Sense in
the dark Cover of it in Words that could not else import it. He that created
the Words in the Old Testament, and even then inspired them with that Divinest
Sense, as with Life, might yet suffer it to lie intoomb'd in them, till it
self, that entrusted it there, gave it a Resurrection in the New.

Quest. But would you have none undertake in the Interpreting or Expounding
Scripture, except by Inspiration, or the Evidences of immediate Divine
Presence, where either Scripture is not so express as to be its own undoubted
Interpreter, or the Interpretation deduced as evidently as any Consequence by
Reason?

Answ. Far be it from me to discourage or lessen such Undertakings; I rather
wish all the Lord's People thus far Prophets, to search the Meaning of
Scripture, with all the Helps and Advantages they can attain; and that in the
mean time all those who have any part of the Prophetic Office upon them, would
read and meditate day and night, to Interpret Scripture to themselves and
others.

Quest. But how is such Interpretation consistent with the Apostles so great
Assertion, That Scripture is not of any Private Interpretation?

Answ. First, Interpretation guiding it self by the plain, evident, and
Self-Interpreting Oracles of Scripture, in things absolutely necessary to
Salvation, displays a Body of Divine, Public Truth, which in regard of the
Darkness, Inattendence, and Inconsideration of the generality of the very
Professors of the Faith of the Scriptures, and much more in regard of the great
Indisposedness of their Hearts to the Obedience of Scriptures, need such
constant Displays by Applicatory Interpretation, and a distinct Office, to
attend continually on this very Thing. And yet the main Concernment of such
Interpretation lies in what is so plain, that, when opened and applied, it is
impossible to be doubted of, as Scriptures Sense.

2. Such Interpretation as may be Private in regard of its Derivation of any
Doctrine from such or such a particular Place of Scripture, yet keeping it self
to the Analogy of Scripture, in the plain and undoubted Sense in other Places,
does still maintain the free and Public Course of the Waters of Life.

3. Interpretation of Scripture thus guiding it self according to the evident
Sense of Scripture, in its clearest Parts, and taking that as a Clew into the
more abstruse Parts of Scripture, necessarily encounters much Sound and
excellent Truth, nearly allied to Public and Divine, in all Knowledge,
Natural, Historical, Chronological, Moral, Political, pertaining to Language
and Eloquence, which makes the World more lightsom, and less subject to the
Tyranny of the Prince of Darkness. How great a Light of all Learning has
broken out from the very Endeavors of Interpreting Scripture, to the Glory of
the Father of Lights, the high Honor and venerable Estimation of Scripture,
the much Ascertaining True Public Religion, and the Universal Good!

4. Many great Truths, and undoubtedly Divine in themselves, that, being more
at a distance from those that are necessary to Salvation, it has not pleased
the Public Wisdom of the World to give such Assurance of them, as that they
should be imposed upon the Belief of all that acknowledge the Sacred Authority
of Scriptures, and yet may present very large Satisfactions to the Minds of
those who are assisted by the Holy Spirit, into the great Scripture-Reason, in
such Points, though but particularly for themselves: They may then taste the
Graciousness of God, and the Gratefulness of Truth in them, without imposing on
any others, who cannot see by their Light.

5. Yea, even in things controverted between Holy, Wise, and Good Men, in
Interpreting Scri^^ure, each part of the Controversy, when both cannot be
reconciled in their Sense, yet supports and makes stronger to their Faith some
grand, evident Principles of Divine and Public Truth, in which both Sides
meet, and are firmly united, and to which each reconcile their own Opinions,
wherein they seem to differ from such Principles, or from one another, and
leave a Middle, in which they may meet one another, and wherein Persons
unconcerned in their Controversies rest: Upon which Agitations yet follow great
Illustrations and Confirmations of such Grand Principles, and Enlargements of
Knowledge, by the very Traverses of Dispute, among Men sincerely affected to
Truth, and who search into it, without the Love of Contention, without
Bitterness and Animosity; but humbly, modestly, and with largeness of Mind
toward those that dissent from them.

6. God, the Friend of Universal Knowledge, allows the Souls gratification of
it self with probable Sentiments, restrained within due Bounds, that may grow
from Scripture-Interpretation.

7. And lastly, Pardons the Infirmities adhering to Humane Transactions, in
this most necessary Duty of Searching the Scriptures, and overrules such
Miscarriages, yea, and even the more malevolent Distempers of Men herein, some
way or other, to Good; and makes them oftentimes Servants to some great Points
of Truth.

Quest. All this that has been described, I confess, agrees with so Public
and Catholic a Record as Scripture is: A Record, wherein every one that comes
to it, may search his own Interest and Concern in it, and improve it to the
utmost: A Record that offers and exposes it self to be understood and closely
inquired into by all. But how is it secured from a multitude of Private
Interpretations, when so many Interpretations, acknow^^dgedly Private,
continually pass upon it?

Answ. Herein it is secure; 1. That Scripture is not of any Interpretation, but
its own native Sense: It is not under the Power of any other: It stands free,
and clear, far above all Interpretation of Men, to be considered by any one in
it self, and not under such Interpretation. Such Interpretation does not become
Scripture, nor bind any one under the Curse fixed on those that add to
Scripture, or take from it. These Interpretations may be added to, or taken
from, according as Men see Reasons of Scripture preponderating one way or
other. This is the Freedom of Scripture, to suffer all due approaches to its
Sense. This is its most severe Constancy to refuse all, but its own true Sense.

2. As Scripture is not of any Interpretation, but its own Native Sense, so its
Sense is of no other Evidence, but of Spiritual Divine, and truly Rational
Evidence; so that if any Man does not bring such proofs of Scripture Sense, as
agree with Scriptures way of Evidencing it self; and Scriptures way is not that
of Private Authority, or Humane Imposition, but of Divine Authority and
Presence; his Interpretation, however true, yet does not bind, as it is his
Interpretation, or upon any other Recommendation, but Scriptures proper ways of
recommending it self: I speak as to Wise Men, judge ye what I say.

Quest. What then is that Private Interpretation the Apostle remonstrates
against?

Answ. All Interpretation that brings no Credentials from evident
Scripture-sense, nor from Heaven, of immediate Inspiration, much more if False,
or Mean, and impossible to be so derived, and yet would impale and enclose
Scripture within it self, and impose it self upon the Consciences and Judgments
of others, and so bring them under Bondage: That which forbids Men to Interpret
for themselves, though with utmost Industry, and all the Assistance they can
use, and the Implorings of Divine Assistance: That which gives out Private
Oracles at pleasure, and too often most False ones, as if they were Scripture,
and for its own Private sake would lock Scripture from the possibility of being
Interpreted even by it self, sequestring it into an unknown Tongue, from great
Multitudes of all Nations professing Jesus Christ. This is indeed Private
Interpretation, and adding to Scripture, making another Scripture, which yet is
not another.

And thus are all lower Degrees of this Tyranny to be estimated, according to
their several Graduations in it; imposing upon Men, as from some Scriptural
Authority, what is not of the True Excellency, Spirit, and High Descent of
Scripture, nor manifested in Men's Consciences, as Scripture manifests it self.

Quest. Is it not then necessary, in regard of the Confusion arising from the
variousness and incertainty of every Man Interpreting for himself, and without
certain Divine Evidence, that there should be some Infallible Public
Interpreter, so Divinely assisted as you describe? And is it not reasonable to
believe there is such a one, seeing we cannot suppose God is wanting to his
Church in such a Necessary?

Answ. 1. Scripture it self is such an Infallible Interpreter, it being in all
things necessary to Salvation both clear and certain, to all but the
self*condemned Heretic, or Ignorant.

2. When there comes such an Infallible Interpreter, bearing the Seal of such
Credentials, as the Scripture does, we will receive him. Till such an
Interpreter, so armed, comes to us, we are never the better for his Pretense to
Infallibility; But all that receive him are destroyed by him, when he brings
Falsehood for Truth under so great a Title; so that he becomes more an Apollyon,
or Destroyer of the Church, than an open Enemy can be.

Quest. Must we not then necessarily suppose great Tracts of Scripture lying
like unknown Land, for want of Public Interpretation?

Answ. That there may be so, cannot be denied, in Controverted or Prophetic
Parts of Scripture: Yet that God has been pleased to communicate much useful
Knowledge relating to them, is most evident, and most thankfully to be
acknowledged to his Goodness and Bounty.

Quest. What Expectation is there of a Full and Certain Public Interpretation
of all such Scriptures?

Answ. It is not for us to know the Times and Seasons, which the Father has
put in his own power: But, most probably, at the time of fulfilling the great
Prophesies of the New Testament, there shall be such ex^raordinary Effusions of
the Divine Spirit, as shall expedite all Doubt, and make every thing clear, the
Knowledge of which is not reserved for Heaven, to adorn the Absolute State of
Perfection there.

Quest. Seeing by all that has been said, it appears, how incongruous Private
Interpretation is to Public Scripture, or that the Will of Man should be
trusted with the one, and not with the other; What Account therefore can be
given of Translations? May not they bring in a Private Interpretation upon
Scripture, if not performed by an immediate Divine Assistance?

Answ. Even as in the safe Conveyance of Scripture it self, and preserving it
pure from gross Falsifications, so in Translations, we must leave God to be the
Governor of the World, and of his Church. He has been pleased to order the
Conveyance of Scriptures into so many Languages, by raising up many to travel
in the Knowledge of all Tongues, and the Keys of them, as in the Originals, to
find out their Meaning, and to transfuse them into all other Languages, and
that, by so many, of several Ages and Nations, as makes all Combination to
deceive, impossible; and Universal Deception, next to impossible, upon the
Translators themselves. These things are under his supreme Care: It is enough
to us, there is brought to our Knowledge such an excellent Doctrine, rising out
of so many Divine Sayings and Discourses, that are as so many Stars in the
Firmament of Truth, clear as the Luminaries of that name in the Heavens. Why
should we then be more than modestly and humbly concerned to know all the Ages
they have passed through before they came to us, or all the Secrets concerning
their Motion and Appearance, that he only knows, that calls the Stars by their
Names? It is enough, they evidently and undeniably declare God to us, and
assure us by their Light, by their regular Motion according to the Laws of
Truth and Goodness, that they are Stars, the Greater and the Lesser differing
one from another in Glory, yet all Stars, and of a truly Divine Luster,
Certain, and not Wandering.

Quest. Let us now hear the Conclusion of this whole Matter.

Answ. It rests in these two things.

1. That the Evidences of the Divine Presence in the Scriptures, and all the
principal Branches thereof, are as clear and certain, and do satiate the Soul
and its Faculties, enlightened by the general Influences of the Divine Spirit,
much more by its sanctifying Efficacy, even as the clearest Notions we have of
Things do, and much above them: And that these Evidences are the same in the
Original Scriptures, and in the Translations, for that they are indeed All
Original, and not capable of any Translation, but make even Translation an
Original.

2. That as Scripture is such a Contexture, and makes up such a Book, God, the
supreme Governor of the Church, and of the World in general, has always, and
does always take care of its preservation* from such Corruptions as would
injure those Evidences of Divine Inspiration he has engraven upon it, not only
upon the Substance, but upon the very Contexture; and the very same care he
has taken for the Conveyance of it, by agreeable Translations, to the several
Nations in their own Tongue, to whom he has vouchsafed the Scriptures
themselves, or the Doctrine of them.

Quest. Has God wrought miraculously to these Ends?

Answ. That need not be asserted; but he has, by the ordinary Interposals of
Providence, watchful in every thing over its own Ends, brought all to pass he
in Wisdom thought necessary.

Quest. What Visible Means has Providence used for the secur^^g Scriptu^es
against foul Corruptions?

Answ. Continual and various Copyings of the Original, even in the Days of the
Writers, in the very time of the Inspection and Ministry of the Prophets and
Apostles; and downwards from them, both by Manuscript and Print: which various
Copies being compared, though they have not to the degree of a M^racle agreed
in Minutes, have yet concerted the Substance.

Quest. What care has God been pleased to take with regard ^o Translations?

Answ. Very eminent, where it needed most: For, some Ages before the coming of
the Messiah, it came (no doubt by Divine Superintendency, which has the Hearts
of Kings in his Hands, and turns them as the Rivers of Water) into the Heart of
a Great and Learned Prince of Egypt, to procure the Translation of the Divine
Law into the Greek, the then most known Language of the World. Seventy two
Seniors of the Jews, as History most generally agrees, the Learnedest in their
Native Hebrew, were employed in it. This Translation was generally and
publicly received among the Jews, was approved by our Lord and his Apostles in
several Quotations.

Hereby there was at once a Preparation of those Scriptures to the most Public
Notice, an Assurance of the true Import of the Hebrew Tongue, and an authorized
Translation: And in the same so known Greek Language, wherein are reposed such
Treasures of all Literature, is added that most Sacred Roll of the New
Testament.

And from that time have there been, by the great Industry God has excited Men
to, several Versions of the Old and New Testament, into a great variety of
Languages, with strict Expository Researches, and Criticisms, upon all that
concerns either the Readings, or the Sense of Words and Phrases, as well as the
Doctrine contained in them; by which there might be a freer Propagation of
Sacred Knowledge, and a Security against such Corruptions and Mistakes as might
efface the Divine Image, or any of the Lineaments of it, in ^^ese Records, or
their Translations, however differing, as I have said, in minuter Things.

CAP. VIII. Of Tradition and Antiquity.
Quest. BY what has been said, Scripture and its Interpretation appear guarded
by their own Divineness, against all Private and Counterfeit, as by Cherubims,
and a Flaming Sword turning every way. But has there been no Stratagem of the
Adversary to undermine Divine Catholic Religion, and the Authority of
Scripture, the Public Record of Religion, with its Public Interpretation; and
yet that all these should seem still to rest firm upon their own Base?

Answ. The great Enemy of God and Truth has been wanting in no Artifice, and
therefore has fallen upon that very Method inquired of; that what could not be
achieved by denying Scripture, by bringing in False Scripture, or Private
Interpretation, monstrous to the Text, (all such gross Frauds being in some
Times and Places exposed and exploded) might be more successfully attempted and
effected, by yoaking Tradition with Scripture, a Private Uncertain Oracle with
a Public and Certain one, and so avowed to be by the Traditionists themselves.

Quest. What is Tradition?

Answ. These four things concur to the making up Tradition.

1. That from the Divine Authority of Scriptures, and the True Religion of
them, which (as has been said) it acknowledges, it borrows not only
Countenance, but Occasion, and more than that, a show of Reason and Necessity
for it self.

2. That it therefore endeavors to tack and join it self to Scripture, and the
Religion of it, as necessary to complete and fill it up* or to provide
something more requisite to that Religion, that Scripture has not provided for.

3. That it having grown up from no true Root, nor risen upon any just
Foundation, it has stolen into its Authority and Reverence, by being passed
from Hand to Hand so long, that its Elderliness looks like a Patent for that
Authority and Reverence: And its Original (some Injudicious Devotion, at the
best) not being easy to be traced, it comes to be supposed, or rather
superstitiously to be suspected to be Divine; and at length, like a long-told
Lie, assuming to be Truth, it takes upon it self to be Divine, and to curse all
those that derogate from it.

4. That having thus rivetted it self, it by degrees, like Pharaoh's Lean Kine,
eats out the generous and rich Sense of Scripture, and devours the Authority of
it, and yet it self remains a jejune and starved Superstition.

Quest. Who are the great Masters of Tradition?

Answ. They that have, under the True Religion, set up some private Diana of
Profit, Honor, or Worldly Advantage, and cannot maintain it by that True
Religion, they eke out therefore with Private Tradition what may support it.

Quest. What Antidote is there against the Mischief of Tradition?

Answ. To cleave with full purpose and resolution of Heart and Soul to the Word
of God, and to that only; to have no Religion, nor any thing in Religion, but
what is enjoined and recommended by Divine Authority, in that Blessed Word of
God; and this is indeed to be of the truly Catholic, Apostolic, and Public
Religion.

Quest. But is the Sense that has now been given of Tradition, the best Sense
of it in Scripture-use?

Answ. No, it is not; and the Consideration of a better Sense will much clear
to us the Nature of Tradition. When therefore our Savior discoursed of the
Commandments of Men, delivered down from Hand to Hand, subsisting only upon the
Private Authority of the Elders, not founded on the written Canon of the Old
Testament, at that time the only Rule of Faith, Worship, and Practice, he
always names Tradition in the ill Sense already given: But when the Doctrine
and Rules of the New Testament, in those grand Points, were just breathing from
the Holy Spirit, and not yet fixed in that abiding Canon, Tradition is so long
accepted in a good Sense. The History of the Things done by our Savior, though
most surely believed, Luc. 1. 1. was first but delivered or tradition'd by Word
of Mouth, but afterward written, that the certainty of them might be more
fully known to those that had been before Catechized in them by Oral Tradition.
All the Ordinances of the Christian Worship were first Traditions, 1 Cor. 11.
2. and the very Rules of Life were in Tradition, 2 Thessalonians 3. 6.

But yet all these, though they were Trad^^^ons delivered by those that were
Commissioned immediately by the Holy Ghost, and were themselves Eye witn^s^^^,
and Earwitnesses of most Things they gave in T^^dition, were yet not sealed so
sure as the more sure Word of Prophecy, because they were not yet written by
Divine Inspiration, though given out by it, nor generally received and assured,
as so written, till the due time of Trial by former Scripture had passed upon
them. The first Christians did therefore well to take heed to that former
Scripture, till they had the full Day of the Gospel, as has been before spoken.

If Tradition then was not so sure in the first and truly pure Times of it, how
much less would it have been sure afterward, if it had continued in Tradition?
All therefore of Doctrine in the New Testament was first prepared by Tradition,
laid in and proved by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, either by direct
Consequence, or by Interpretation from immediate Revelation, demonstrated, as
the First giving of Scripture always was, by Miracles; and so all at once, and
once for all, consigned over to the Posterity of Christians by Divinely
Inspired Writings, so assured, so confirmed, as to leave no place for Tradition
o^ the Best sense: There remains therefore nothing for Tradition now, but its
Ill sense.

Quest. Why might not True Religion continue in Tradition, committed all along
to Faithful Men, even as it did in ^^e Custody of the Apostles, and such
Faithful Persons as they committed it to?

Answ. Even in the time of the Apostles it was trusted no longer to Tradition,
than it must needs; for the Apostle John, the Survivor of them, closed the
Canon of the New Testament, that was drawn apace into Writing all along: But at
that time there was such a continual immediate Energy or Efficacy of the Holy
Spirit, that Truth moved every way, like Lightning, and both by its direct and
straight forward Motion in Doctrine, and its reverse strokes in the Conviction
of all Falsehood, Error was blasted every way: But when this Extraordinary
Appearance ceased, there was then no safety for Truth, but in an unchangeable
Written Word, that was in such an extraordinary Season of Miracles and
immediate Revelation, settled and established, under so great a Supervisal, in
the midst of so many Witnesses of all things, by their Eyes and Ears; and it
being once written, and always so secured by Divine Providence, as has been
represented, it always speaks the same Things, in the same Words it first did.

Quest. Why might not Divine Truth be committed, some more Fundamental Parts to
Writing, and some, according to variety of Occasion, to Tradition?

Answ. God, to whom all Futurity is present, who foresaw all that was necessary
to be written, before he had done writing cannot be supposed to commit his Will
in part to Writing, and that upon great Reasons; and the same Reasons
notwithstanding, to leave a considerable part, or so much as any one Branch
obligatory upon the Conscience, to Parol-Tradition: For, if he that offends in
one Point is guilty of all, there needs the same Authority, and as well
assured, for one Point of Faith and Obedience, as for all the rest.

2. It is unconceivable, what End Tradition, unconsign'd by Scripture, can
serve, that Scripture does not more fully and effectually take care for.
Public Religion reserves nothing to be a Cabal for Private Interest, within a
close Cabinet or Conclave.

3. Whatever is supposed to be entrusted to Tradition, must either be the very
same we have in Scripture, and then Tradition is needless and superfluous; for
we have it in Scripture, if we duly exercise our selves in it: or it is more
than Scripture has declared, and yet supposed to be of equal Authority with
Scripture; and then it must be a Motionary and Itinerant Word of God: But where
are the daily and continual Seals and Credentials Divine Tradition had, and in
a constant fresh Motion with it, as it moves; for so it had need be, in so
fluid a Thing as Tradition, if it would pretend to be Sacred; and so Divinely
Inspired Tradition had, while it continued in Tradition: But what Reason can be
given, Tradition, as we now speak of it, was not incorporated into Scripture,
as was argued before? Or that in so long a Course of Time it has not been
enrolled into Scripture, as the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles still
was? Seeing, if it had all things else, it cannot but want the Benefit of the
Divine Contexture and Conveyance that Scripture has, in Words chosen, and put
together by Inspiration, and the ready, easy, and certain Access to it by all:
For all are equally concerned in it. Now seeing Tradition wants all these, how
can we accept it? How can we look off from Scripture, to pore upon Tradition?
or what hold can we have of it?

Quest. But how can it be, but there must be Tradition, seeing there were so
many Things spoken and done, more than the Scripture contains, or the World it
self could contain, if they were all written? These then being known in the
first Times, have been conserved by Tradition, Tradition made valuable by those
of Honorable Name among Christians, and their Discourses of Christianity?

Answ. Granting such things so preserved, suppose them the Actions and Words of
our Savior himself, yet if not written by Inspired Penmen, they are not
recommended as obligatory upon After-ages: For whatever was necessary, that we
might believe, and have Eternal Life, was so written; and that not only just so
much as might serve Necessity (for that the One Gospel of St. Jo^^ might serve
to That, it self witnesses) but also be matter of Bounty and Abundance; so that
out of that greater World of Truth, than our World could receive, there was so
much selected as was bountifully sufficient, and abundant to all Intents and
Purposes of Clearness, Certainty, Enforcement upon the Affections, Variety,
continual Exercise and Delight, that so every Christian might be thoroughly
furnished to every good Work, to all things that pertain to Life and Godliness.

As for all that Christ did and spoke, or that the Apostles spoke or did by
Infallible Guidance, and Immediate Assistance, if it be not written, a Veil is
drawn over it, and a Cloud has received it out of our sight: It is a secret
thing, that belongs not to us, but is sealed up from us, like the things which
the Thunders uttered in the Revelation.

And indeed the Wisdom of Providence seems to have dealt with all such Sayings
or Actions, as with the Body of Moses; all Monuments of Worth and Certainty,
after Scripture, in relation to them, are concealed from us: There is a great
Darkness upon the History of that Time, lest we should superstitiously
venerate, in place of that which is divinely written and preserved to us, the
things that were not prepared for our Learning, and so, to us, but as a Body
not divinely inspired, that is, a Body without a Soul. All too fierce Disputes
about them are therefore raised only by Satan, the Enemy of Light and Truth,
to no other purpose than that about the Body of Moses, that is, to found an
occasion of Superstition, and silently to whisper, Scripture is not sufficient.
And yet we see with what an eager Zeal Men are set upon such Researches, not
satisfied with the Proportion of Manna allowed by God; but even as the
Israelites, that gathered much, had nothing over; so may it be truly said of
those that would abound beyond Scripture, in that which pertains to the true
guidance of Conscience, That they have nothing over, and what they will needs
keep, as such, corrupts.

Quest. Is there Reason sufficient to support this Sentiment?

Answ. This great Reason: If we had undoubted, but not inspired History of that
Time, it could not be like the Evangelistick History, or the Acts of the
Apostles to us; we should in some things want the Application and Direction to
our use, dictated by Divine Wisdom; in others, the unerring Censure of even
Apostolic Actions, as in that of the Apostle Peter, Galat. 2. 11. Now because
our Consciences would be apt to be drawn into subjection to things of so great
Reputation, and yet there would be no Divine Authority to draw them, nor
Infallible Authority to support them, in which Cases it is the Absolute Will of
God they should not be in subjection, God has therefore in his Providence left
that time so much in the dark, that we may trust in his written Word only.

For separate Immediate Divine Presence from the Prophets and Apostles
themselves, and there remains nothing at the highest, but the Wisdom and
Prudence of Understanding, and Good Men, applying General Rules to particular
Cases, Times, Places, and Events as they for that time could best judge, and
yet besides the variation of Circumstances in every Age, they themselves were
as Men, subject to mistakes, as Nathan about David's building the Temple, as
Paul assaying to go into Bithynia; to like Passions with other Men, as in the
Contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas; to like Temptations, as in the
Miscarriage of Peter before referred to: All they did and said, not shining
with immediate Light from Heaven, must be tried in the Light of what
themselves, together with all the other Penmen of Scripture, had written. They
themselves therefore acting or speaking by way of Prudence or general
Assistance, must be tried by themselves, acting or speaking according to
Revelation, and special Assistance, in which only they are and ought to be
Authoritative.

Quest. But it still remains, There might be some things that were not so sit
for vulgar Knowledge, and so were Secreted into Tradition apart from Scripture,
and that Tradition deposited with Trusty Men, who should successively so
deposite it, that it might at convenient Seasons be brought forth, as Goliah's
Sword from behind the Ephod.

Answ. None like it indeed, to serve a purpose: But to satisfy Reason and
Conscience, nothing so improper. For, first, let these Traditionaries give
clear Expositions, and such as are worthy to be acquiesced in, of the
Prophetic, or otherwise Dark Places of Scripture. If they cannot do that,
where is the Wisdom above the Vulgar? and why did not Tradition, without
Scripture, enclose those mysterious Visions of the Revelation from Popular
Inspection? But the things Tradition is employed indeed in, are quite of
another Nature; either the Prelation of Men in Church-Office and Dignity, or
some Rites of Worship, that should change Devotion into Superstition, or lull
it into Ignorance; or some Canons, that turn Religion into Trade, or Doctrines
suited to that End; or, which serves to all such purposes, a Tradition to call
back all Scripture out of the Written Word into Oral Tradition, by locking it
up in a Tongue unknown to the generality of Christians. And yet if there were
any seemingly Purer, or more Contemplational Traditions, seeing they are not
enrolled into Scripture, they must, as has been said, give such Evidences of
themselves, as Divine Revelation has, or be, at their highest, but Enthusiasm
and Fanaticism.

Quest. But what Esteem is to be had of the Writings and Iransactions of the
Ancients, whom we call Fathers, Doctors of the Church, Men of eminent Holiness,
great Abilities, Confessors, and Martyrs of Christianity?

Answ. It may be easily judged, by what has been said already, that they must
be brought to Scripture, laid at its Feet, and submitted to its Acceptance,
whether according to its true Sense, or not: For, if the Apostles, when the
Holy Spirit was not upon them, could not exceed Humane, how much less can any
of a lower Class pretend? The Fathers therefore had so great an Awe of
Scripture, that they did not assume any thing to themselves or their Writings,
or yield any thing to the Persons or Writings of those of the same Time with
them, but according to the undeniable Sense of Scripture.

Quest. But the nearness of these Fathers to the Days of Christ and the
Apostles, must needs enable them, either from what they themselves received
warm from their Lips, or from what they had from others, not quite cold, to
know the Apostles Doctrine, Discipline, Manner of Life, Purpose, their Sense of
the Scope and Meaning of those Things wherein they were Divinely Inspired, and
so to deliver it to After-ages.

Answ. Whatever they have spoken, or written, giving us more light and
advantage to understand, and behold Scripture in its own Light, ought from
them, or from any other, to be accepted with great regard; but if it do not
thus, it cannot be accepted, even from the Writers of Scriptures themselves
upon a single, or divided Authority: They were so bounded by the very Things,
and Words, they themselves had once spoken and written by the Holy Ghost, that
all the deference to their knowledge in Divine Things above others, was to be
made reasonable in the clearest Expounding what themselves and others had
written by Divine Inspiration, and to be discerned in the very Writings
themselves, and not to be drawn oracularly out of their Breasts, when the
Evidences of Divine Inspiration were not upon them: For he that is Spiritual,
i. e. that God vouchsafes Inspiration to, or pretends to it, must acknowledge
all that is either truly written, or spoken by the same Inspiration, to be the
Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37.

And as for the newness, freshness, and life of Truth given by Divine
Revelation, God graciously providing it should remain, as Revelation left it,
and the Evidences it has done so, appearing with it; it is the same in all
Ages; Divine never loses of its life, nor abates of its vigor; what it was so
many Ages ago, that it abides now; what the Holy Ghost spoke so many Ages ago,
that it speaks now as warmly as then: All Divine Truth given, is after the
power of an endless life, the Eternal Increated Spirit lives in it, and gives
Divine Quickness to it. It is yesterday, to day, the same for ever; and so
breathes its own sense in Scripture, by the ordinary Assistances it vouchsafes
to Holy, Humble, and diligent Waiters upon him in this, even as it did in the
first Ages, though the extraordinary Motions are withdrawn.

Quest. But still the Gifts and Endowments of those Eminent Men, with all the
Light, Truth, Grace, Learning and Reason, they shine to us with, ought to be
esteemed and improved?

Answ. Yes doubtless: For whatsoever Things are true, whatsoever things are
pure, are of Virtue, and deserved praise, they are Public, and of God,
wherever they are found: And whatever there is in these Elders, in their
nearness to the First Times, their Holiness, their Sufferings, their great
Learning, their Encounters of Paganism, their Apologies for Christianity, their
Heavenliness, their Contempt of this World, all is a Donation, and a Grace of
God by them to his Church, and Mankind in general.

Quest. And does not there arise great Evidence to Christianity, and the
Doctrines and Practices of it, from such eminent Witnesses?

Answ. No doubt there does, both to Christianity in particular, and to all
Religion, Virtue and Goodness in general: But yet neither their Writings, nor
Practices can in any wise become Scripture to us; they all lead to Scripture,
and ought to do so; they are all to be seen, and reflected in Scripture Light,
and from thence they receive their luster: For though they are a Subordinate
Testimony, as has been said, yet Christian Religion has greater Testimony,
and first enabled them to give a valuable Testimony to it self, by
Communicating so great knowledge and worth to them: And besides all that has
been spoken, the Writings of the Fathers are so Voluminous, as not to be read
over by the most; so doubtful in their Genuiness, that they cannot be Examined,
but with great Labor, and well prepared Judgment; so disputable in their
sense, that to attain a certainty in it, would cut off Time from the greater
Employment of Meditation in the Word of God, day and night, where Men's
Callings lie otherwise; so that to receive our Religion from hence were of too
remote an assurance to any one, much more to those who have not Books, and
study for their Profession: But every Man, whether learned or unlearned, is
concerned deeply to try his Religion with his own Eyes, and not another for
him; and God has therefore provided a Word nigh him, even in his Mouth, and in
his Heart; and has also taken care by stirring up so many both of the Ancient
and Modern Christians, to separate themselves to intermeddle with all sacred
knowledge, that there is a worthy exercise of the learned World herein, and
great advantages arise thereby for universal knowledge even to the less
learned, and the very unlearned.

Quest. But did the Fathers themselves distinguish thus their own and one
another Writings from Scripture?

Answ. It is most evident, as has been already affirmed, they put a greatest
difference betwixt the most excellent Monuments of Christianity, that were but
Humane* whether their own, or others, and inspired Pages; else Clement,
Ignatius, and others, might as well have been Canonized by them, as what is
from them come down to us for Sacred Canon it self; and even as they did, we
may see the great odds betwixt the one and the other; and as we adore God the
supreme Author, so the Sovereign Preserver of Scripture, who by Divine
Evidences, and by superintending Providence, has divided the bound of
Scripture at so great a remove from all the Writings in the World, whether
Christian or Profane, the Apocryphal Books not excepted, which though too
adventurously joined so generally in a Volume with Scripture, yet are evidently
disproportioned in the Majesty of Sense, and Divine Eloquence.

Quest. Is there no greater Authority of the First Councils?

Answ. How many Humanes soever meet, they cannot make up Divine, where it was
not before; nor can a multitude of Privates constitute a Public: Divine and
Public may be declared, but cannot be made so by such Contribution. All
Determinations of Councils are infinitely outweighed in Value, and overruled
in Authority by Scripture indeed Public and Divine.

Quest. But in such a number of his Servants, may we not conclude, God is
certainly among them, and does guide them?

Answ. Give them all the advantages that can be given, and either we must say,
they are Infallibly guided, and then we must receive their Decrees, as
Scripture, and they must be attested to us, as Scripture is attested; or they
are not Infallibly guided, and then their Decrees must be tried, as all
Fallibles ought to be, by a Rule surer than themselves: If even Divine
Revelation it self was at first tried, and found perfect; nay, if even all that
God proposes to us, as from himself, comes laden with its own proper Evidences,
how much more must that which is confessedly humane, be tried by that which is
confessedly Divine? The great use of Councils is therefore so to debate, and
bring things to a Result, by a confluence of Wisdom and Learning, that we may
see Divine Truths in their own Light, in Scripturelight, to hold out which they
are but ministerially employed, and not to impose upon any under the name of
Public; for that alone is Public, that is Divine: All Comparison of Privates
among themselves, must needs be lost in this Public, before which the greatest
name of Public, is but as the drop of the Bucket, and the small dust of the
Balance: And the union with that true Public makes the most Private a
Public; and Separation from it, the most seemingly Public, a most Idiottal
Private.

And it were very happy, if the Experiment hereof were not too evident in the
Councils that have been, how little Number of it self can Contribute to truly
Public, or Divine; yet the fitness of the Means is withal to be acknowledged,
as ordained by God.

CAP. IX. Of the Church-Catholick.
Quest. SCripture, the Public Record of Catholic Religion, being thus far
Established and Secured, both by Internal Characters, and External Care of
Providence; it still remains necessary, there should be some stated Ordination
of God, for the Actuating this Record to its several Purposes and Ends.

1. Because Divine Revelation having now finished its measures, there cannot be
expected those immediate motions of Truth, that were vouchsafed by God in his
extraordinary Presences, but all is to be derived from, and displayed in
Scripture.

2. Scripture yet being but of the nature of a Record, it would lie still, and
unmoved, and, as it were dead, if not produced and applied; even as other Laws
and Records do, that are not continually executed to their proper Uses, be
their Virtue never so great, if so Executed.

What therefore is that Ordinance of God, in the Cessation of Immediate
Presence, for the exposing this Record to its universal notice, and for the
applying it daily to its great purposes, which is the Executing it, as far as
it is to be Executed in this World?

Answ. God has by his extraordinary Ministers, whom he gave his Divine
Revelation, and Word, first founded the Church, and, according to the Degrees
of that Revelation, exalted it to be serviceable to this great End, and so to
supply the place of Immediate Presence.

Quest. What is to be understood by the Church?

Answ. The Church is The Catholic Congregation of Mankind, called to the Faith
and Obedience of that Word it self; and which being called it self, is
entrusted to call others to the same Faith, and Obedience, and so is Governed,
and Governs according to it, by daily Exercises in, and according to that Word.

Quest. Why do you give the Church the style of a Congregation, are not the
Parts of it so distant that they cannot be Congregated in the Worship of God?

Answ. They are yet all so united in the Faith and Obedience of this Sacred
Word, and in the Worship of God according to it, as to be most properly called
a Congregation in that regard.

Quest. But still, how can the Church be called a Congregation, seeing that
speaks it always actually Congregated, but those very Members, that in regard
of nearness one to another, are at due seasons Congregated, cannot yet be
always Congregated?

Answ. The Twelve Tribes of Israel, (that is, the Church in its several
Members) always united, always ready to the Instant serving God, Day and Night,
are beheld and seen by him, as in a perpetual actual Congregation.

Quest. Why do you call the Church, The Congregation?

Answ. Even as Holy Writing is The Scripture, and The Bible or Book; so the
Church is The Congregation, by way of Eminency, the only Excellent Assembly or
Congregation in the World: And indeed, upon a true account, there is no other
Religious Congregation, but either a rude Multitude, or a Conspiracy and
Faction against God.

Quest. Why is the Church said to be a Congregation called by the Word?

Answ. Because Humane Nature, uncalled, lies in the Lapse of Separation from
God, in Private and False Religion, and in those Assemblies, justly branded as
before, till it be recalled by him into the Church, united again to him: So
that a Church is not a Natural, but a Supernatural Assembly; yet it is ready to
embrace all true Nature, an^ the Associations of it, into it self.

Quest. Why is the Church described to be One Catholic Congregation, when both
Scripture and daily Observation assure us, there have been, and are, so many
Particular Congregations, very Regular Churches, and duly so styled?

Answ. Because the Church is of the Nature of those Things that are
distinguished only by the several Accidental Receptions they find, and yet
still remain One; the Catholic Church, and a Particular Church differ no
otherwise, than as a Beam of Light differs from the whole Globe of Light, or a
Stream of Water from the Ocean: Even the most Particular Church is in this
regard Catholic, that it is united to God and Christ, that indeed give both
the Name and Nature of Catholic from themselves. Particular Churches, yea even
Particular Persons, truly of the Church, have every one the whole Character,
Title, Promise, and Privilege of the Catholic Church, so far as they can need
or receive them, even as Heaven is Entire Heaven to every single Glorified
Soul: Every Lively Member of the Church touches the Head and Cornerstone, and
so, in him, the whole General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, both in
Heaven and Earth, and is at last consummate with them to Eternity.

Quest. How is this Church Congregated?

Answ. It was begun and has always increased by Particular Persons converted
and brought home to God, according to his Word, in several Ages and
Successions: For the Church, as it is a Church, is not a Society formed by a
common Consent of Men, or by their Will, but its several Parts are added by
God, so that it consists of all that are inwardly and truly of that Catholic
Religion in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Eternal
Spirit, all the World over, and in which meet all that have been, are, or shall
be thus converted by the Word of God, as the Church is, and shall be triumphant
in Glory.

Quest. The Call then that makes this Congregation, is first to God and Christ,
and not to the Church it self?

Answ. It is evidently so: All true Converts first give themselves to God and
Christ, and, by virtue of That, to the Church. The Apostles were not
sollicitous of any other Conjoyning Men to the Church, than what most
necessarily followed upon their receiving the Gospel, and were afraid of their
fixing upon them that were but Ministers and Servants: We preach Jesus to be
the Lord, and our selves Servants for Jesus sake. The Corinthians heading
themselves under Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, was very mischievous; and
therefore the Apostle knowing the Union ought to be only to Christ, directs
himself so vehemently against it, as also against any fanciful Distinction of
themselves under Christ, as an ordinary Chief of a Party, and not as the Divine
Head of the whole Body in the Catholic Truth: Even as he erred, that vulgarly
called Christ Good, not knowing him to be God, the Supremely, Solely Good.

Quest. Are they all true Converts that are of the Church?

Answ. All that are indeed the Church, are so; but all that may appertain to
the Church, are not so: as all that were of Israel, were not Israel. There is a
visible Profession, that is too often not sincere; yet this makes Men Of, or
belonging to the Church, but not truly The Church: Many are so called, that are
not chosen. But all that are truly The Church, are also truly called, and truly
Converts, not only outwardly and visibly the Church, but inwardly and invisibly
so too, whose praise is not of Men, but of God. In the mean time, they that are
only of the Visible Church, have the Means of Grace, and are not thrown out of
that Register of God's People, till the Final Judgment cuts them off: A very
great Benefit in it self!

Quest. Is not the Church then so Catholic, or General, as the Profession of
the True Religion is?

Answ. The Catholickness of the Church, as has been often inculcated, is its
Union to God and Christ, and that in sincerity. As to the general Profession,
though the number of it be as the Sand of the Sea, a Remnant only shall be
saved: For God will finish the Account, and cut it short in Righteousness; for
a short work will the Lord make in the Visible Church: There shall be an often
eating, or brousing it off, a retrenching of it again and again; it shall cast
the Leaves of its mere Professors, as the Teyletree or Oak, when yet their
Substance is in them; the Holy Seed are the Substance of it, Isa. 6. ult. not
losing them, it loses nothing.

Quest. In what sense is it then said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church?

Answ. It is undoubted, none can fail while they are the Church, while united
to Truth, to the God of Truth, to Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: It
is also certain, from this high Declaration, there always shall be a Church in
the World, so united, Hades, or Mortality, shall not prevail over it; and how
much farther it assures the Perseverance of those that are once truly the
Church, I leave the thing it self to speak. It is said, They that overcome ar
Pillars, that never go out of it; and, They that go out of it, were not of it;
for if they had been indeed of it, they would no doubt have continued with it:
And how the Church it self shall always continue, if any True Member of it may
perish, is not easy to conceive.

Quest. How is the Church ordained by God to actuate Scripture, as it is the
Record of Catholic Religion?

Answ. The Apostle, in his Noble Description of the Church, has laid the
Foundations of our Instruction herein, in those three Honorable Titles he has
given it:

1. That it is the House of the Living God. 2. That it is the Pillar of Truth.
3. That it is the Ground of Truth.
Quest. Before the Explanation of each of these Titles, in the first place, I
desire it may be determined, whether these things are spoken of the Catholic,
or of a Particular Church, the Particular Church of Ephesus?

Answ. Although I have already affirmed, That the Catholic Church differs from
a Particular True Church only in the Compass and Comprehensiveness of it; yet I
very willingly represent it over again in this Instance: These things are truly
applied to the Catholic Church, to the Particular Church of Ephesus, to every
Particular Church; nay, it reaches down to every single living Member of the
Church, so far, that God makes his abode with him, dwells in him, he is a
Pillar in the House of God, the Truth rests and dwells in him, and shall be
with him for ever; so that he is a Ground of Truth, and has more of the Church
in him, than greater seeming Portions of it, that err from the Truth.

Quest. If you please now to proceed in the Explanation of these Titles; and
first, What is the Importance of the Churches being the House of God, for the
actuating the Scripture?

Answ. God, the most High Possessour and Owner of Heaven and Earth, places his
Court, Family, and particular Residence where he pleases; and he has chosen
the Church to be this to him. This is my Rest, here will I dwell for ever, for
I have desired it. Heaven is my Throne, Earth is my Footstool; where is the
House you will build me? To this Man will I look, that trembles at my Word. And
where God dwells, there he manifests himself: As a Master of a Family makes
known in his House and Family his Nature, Will, Laws, and Government; so God
does in his Church: In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel. In his
Church he shows the Light of his Countenance, expects and rewards Services, as
a Great Master, and makes known his Dislikes and Displeasure. This is brought
to pass in the Church by those many Ways that God has of bringing his Word to
any Places or Persons, giving it Reception among them, and then stirring up his
Children and Servants to hear his Voice, to search his Mind and Will, and to
understand it; so that it is as a Voice continually behind them. In his Temple
therefore, in his House, every one must needs speak of his Glory: His Word
cannot lie still, for all are concerned to meditate, ponder, inquire, and
discourse of it, and are by Supreme Management excited so to do; and so much as
this Exercise in his Word is by any means depressed, so far God is withdrawn,
and the Excellency of the Church State lost. Now of the Church being the House
of God, there was this great Type: God dwelt in the Temple at Jerusalem, as in
a Palace; there was such a Diet of Shewbread, changed every day; of Sacrifices
of all sorts; such Perfumes of Incense and Odours, such Officers and Servants
attending continually, such Resorts of the whole Body of the People to the
Court of this Great King and Princely Householder. Together with this State,
runs along in a mighty Stream, Gods showing his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and
Judgments to Israel. In the New Testament, the Pomp and Ceremonial Part is
wholly transferred into Spirituality; but Spirituality is not lower, but higher
in the Substance of all that could be figured by these things: and the
substantial part of that State, the Communication of the Word of God, is much
exalted in the true Christian Church, that the Light of One Day is now as much
as the Light of Seven was before. Thus the Church, as the Family of God, cannot
but actuate his Word.

Quest. What is the meaning of the Church being the Pillar of Truth? Does the
Church support Truth?

Answ. Not so; for, it self is built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.

Quest. How then is it said to be the Pillar of Truth? And of what Importance
is that to the Actuating Scripture?

Answ. As the Laws and Ordinances of Courts and Governments are publicly
fixed, that every one may know and take notice of them; so the Church in all
its Members, but especially by Deputed Ministers, giving themselves wholly to
it, proclaims, preaches, and makes offer of the most Public Notice of the Word
of Truth, within it self, that all the Children and Servants of the Family may
be continually catechized and built up therein, and Strangers have opportunity
to know, if they would apply themselves to it. Thus it is a Famous City set on
an Hill, that cannot be hid; and therefore its Laws, Constitutions, Manners,
cannot but in all reason be inquired of, by all that do so much as pass by it:
It is a Candlestick, bearing the lofty Torch of Divine Truth. Of this the
Pillars of the Temple at Jerusalem, and the affixing to them the Rolls of
Divine Revelation, was an eminent Type, and alluded to by the Apostle. As
therefore from a Prince come forth Edicts, Proclamations, Manifesto's, and
Declarations, according to Laws, which are fastened to Public Pillars of the
Court it self, and all open and conspicuous Places of Concourse; so are there
in the Church the most advantageous Publications of the Divine Truth and Word,
to all, both the Natives and Freeborn of the Church it self, and Ingenuous
Strangers, that would hearken out the most Reasonable Proposals of Truth, or
whom God is pleased to Naturalize to himself.

Quest. What is the meaning of the Church being the Ground of Truth? And how
does this actuate Scripture?

Answ. It means nothing but the Perpetuity and Continuation of Truth with the
Church, establishing it self by all that Firmness of Divine Evidence and
Reason, and on those very Securities taking Possession of the Church, as the
Ark of its Strength, where it self, or the God that is Truth it self, places
the Soles of his Feet, as on his unmovable Footstool, for ever: Of which the
Ark in the Hol^est was a Type, the Footstool of the Throne of Mercy, the secure
Repository of the Tables of the Covenant, the Ark of Testimony, over which the
Shecinah or Glory appeared as enthroned, attended with Cherubims, and setting
its Feet upon it; the place of my Throne, and the place of the Soles of my
Feet, Ezekiel. 43. 7. For thus the True Church, against which the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail, is the unchangeable Rest of Truth: It adheres to Truth; it buys
the Truth, and never sells it; Truth dwells with it for ever: God never suffers
it to apostatize from Truth; but by the constant holding of the Judgment, and
retaining the Love and Zeal of the Affections of those that are indeed his
Church, he has settled his Word in his Church on Earth, even as it is for ever
settled in Heaven. The Church therefore actuates Scripture, by finding out
Reasons, debating, enforcing, defending by all Arguments, that Truth of
Scripture, and so persisting in it for ever.

Quest. Cannot then the Church fail?

Answ. It has been said before, the True Church cannot fail: For, the True
Church is (as has been described) the House of God, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth; and that which is so, cannot fail, and God will have such a Church
always in the World. If any Person, City, or Nation, that seem to have been the
Church, have this Light eclipsed, the ^an^lestick removes; for it is only a
Candlestick for the sake of the Light: and the Pillar it self shakes and falls,
if the Records fixed to it are taken away: and the Palace and Court remove with
the Prince, who is always with his Truth, and the lively Motion of it. So much
Truth therefore, and active Display of it, so much a Church, in any Place; and
the Truth removing, or lying dead, the Church removes also, or is ready to die
in that Place.

Quest. But is there no higher Sense of the Church being the Pillar and Ground
of Truth?

Answ. No other, but what arises from the most intimate and inseparable Union
betwixt the Church and Truth; Truth taking an undefailable possession of the
Church: so that wherever Truth, in that Fullness as to lead to Life and
Happiness, is, there is the Church, and no where else. The True Church then may
be styled a Pillar and Ground of Truth in the highest Sense, if rightly
understood; that is, Truth it self, that is the unmovable Pillar and
everlasting Foundation, has so closely banded the Church with it self, that it
is One Pillar and Foundation with it. Thus the Church may be both the Building;
and the Rock and Foundation, to succeeding Parts and Members of the Church: The
Building, as it self rests upon the Pillar and Foundation of Truth; else it
cannot be the Church: The Pillar and Foundation of Truth, to the still
succeeding and rising Church, as it is One with Truth it self, to which every
True Member first comes and unites, and therein to the Church; even as every
Degree of Building is a Foundation and Support to the still growing Building,
not in it self, but as it is surely cemented to the Foundation, regulated by
it, and partakes its Strength: Yet if it swerve never so little from the
Foundation, it is presently a Deformity; and the more it swerves, the greater
danger of the Ruin of it self, and all that rests upon it.

Quest. May not this help to explain that so much disputed Expression of our
Savior, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the
Gates of Hell shall not preval against it?

Answ. I shall be glad if it may give any Light to it, and hope it may: For the
Apostle Peter making that Confession of the Divinity of Christ, not singular,
but representing the whole Body of Apostles and Christians, and being possessed
with and by that Truth he confessed, was both part of the Building upon that
Rock, and, as united with that Rock, he became Rock it self, upon which
succeeeding Christians were to be built. The Prophets and Apostles are in this
Sense Foundations, and the Twelve Apostles Twelve Foundations, Christ himself
being the Cornerstone, in whom alone the whole Building, even the Apostolic
Foundation it self, rises, in a strict and proper Sense.

Quest. Is there not a good Security then in joining our selves to the Church,
to those that have been in the Building before us?

Answ. No otherwise than as we join our selves, by their Ministry, to that
Foundation it self, which always lies sure, upon which they themselves must
alone rest, if the True Church. For, by placing our selves not upon them, but
upon that Common Foundation, we are adjusted to the whole Building that was
before us, that lies regular with that Foundation, by the Care of him who is
both the Foundation, Cornerstone, and is also he that built all things, even
God in Christ

Quest. We must then seek to find the Truth by it self, and then the Church by
that Truth; and not the Church by it self, and then the Truth by the Church?

Answ. Very true: For God has so in his Infinite Wisdom established the very
Nature of Things. Truth can give many Assurances of it self to us by it self,
so suited to our Faculties: The Church can give us none, but by its agreement
with Truth, revealed in the Word of God. We could not have known such a
Congregation as the Church at all to be, much less which it is, but by that
Word manifesting it self in our Consciences, and so distinguishing to us the
True Church among the many Associations in the World, each calling to us, as
having the best Religion among themselves. Even the True Apostles themselves
could be known to be so, and False Apostles tried and found Liars, no other
way, but by this Truth, viewed, and considered singly, and distinctly by it
self.

Quest. But when we have found the Church by the Truth, may we not then deliver
up our selves wholly to the Church, as so united to Truth?

Answ. No, by no means: We can never so deliver up our selves; nor will the
True Church desire any such thing of us, seeing its Office is not to hold out
it self, but the Word of Truth; and in doing any thing else, it acts not as a
Church, but as any other ordinary Society; and on no other Terms can we have to
do with it: For the very Attempt to hold out, as a Church, any Laws of its own,
ought to enter us into a Jealousy whether it be the True Church, which is, as
a Church, the Pillar and Rest of Divine Truth only.

Quest. What Reason is there of such a Jealousy, when once we have found it a
Church, by the Truth it holds out?

Answ. Because a Church, that has been a True Church, may several ways decline
from its State.

Quest. How then can it he said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it?

Answ. That Prophetic Promise does not secure this or that Particular Church,
but that there shall be a Seed of the Church in the World, with which the
Covenant of God is Eternal: My Word shall not depart out of thy Mouth. nor out
of the Mouth of thy Seed, or thy Seed's Seed, for ever.

But it is yet further true, the True Seed, the Holy Seed, the Substance of the
Church, can never utterly and finally fail in any Particular Member of it; for
if it could, it were too great a violation of our Savior's Truth in that
Declaration, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church, or force
that Immortal retrograde into Mortality, even that most dreadful one of the
Second Death, for which a Succession of others, and in the same Danger, is but
a faint Salvo, though it go on so to the End of the World.

Quest. Who are this True Church in every Age and Place?

Answ. They which are by True Saving Faith united to Christ the Son of God, the
Rock of Eternity; and being so founded upon him, are Pillars that never remove,
and a Rest of Truth for ever, having been taught, and learnt it, as it is in
Jesus.

Quest. Who are the Professionary Church only?

Answ. They that though they may, as Artificial Pillars, give some Ornament to
the House of God, and offer Truth, yet not being indeed united to the
Foundation, are movable, and may go out of the House. They are such as have not
received the Truth in the Love and Obedience of it within themselves, and so
may fall away from it: It cannot be said of them, as of the former, The Truth
shall be with them for ever, having made its Edr^^^ma or Settlement in them.

Quest. How does the Professionary Church fall away in the Bulk and Body of its
Professors, and Profession?

Answ. The Office of the Church being to Actuate Truth, and only Truth, it may
fail, either in abating the Fervours due to Truth, though nothing False or
Foreign be admitted, or in receiving Falsehood, or things of a baser Alloy, for
Truth, and wasting those Fervours due only to Truth upon them. The one may be
called a departing from the true State of a Church; the other, from the State
of a True Church: and they usually meet one in another.

Quest. How does this come to pass?

Answ. From the Judgment of God upon the present sinful State, permitting
things so to themselves, that in very few Instances it is, but that the
Imperfections of Good Men, and the prevailing Corruptions of Professionary
Christians, change the Holy, Lively Activities of the True State of a Church,
into Lukewarmness and Formality, or by admitting Falsehood, and impure Mixtures,
into Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, corrupt the State of the Church, so
that it loses its Truth.

Quest. What becomes of the Professionary Church, when it loses the True State
of a Church?

Answ. It is, as the Prophet expresses a Civil State, or a City that has lost
its Splendor; It becomes like a burnt Mountain, or extinguished Globe of
Light: It retains the Form, but loses the Life and Vigor of a Church, like
Ephesus, that lost its First Love; or Sardis, that had a Name to live, but was
dead; or Laodicea, that was neither cold nor hot.

Quest. What becomes of it when it is corrupted, and loses in its Truth?

Answ. It exchanges the Lively Oracles for Forms of Doctrine, and Lifeless
Discourse, not of the High Spirit of Scripture: It debases pure Worship into
Ceremonialness, Superstition, or Idolatry; and the Gospel Rule and Discipline
it sells for a Worldly Polity; and the true Graces of Christianity, expressed
in a Holy Conversation, for what is much beneath, or contrary. Sometimes it
forsakes Truth in some Fundamental Article, that it swells out from the
Foundation, in a Breach, ready to fall: And there is one Instance of all these
in the Anti-Church, which will deserve a greater Consideration.

Quest. How does God deal with such Churches?

Answ. Sometimes sweeps them with the Beesom of Destruction, taking away both
the Candlestick and Place of it together, Alienes Both to them and their
Religion thrusting them out of their whole Possession: Sometimes he suffers
them to continue even for Ages, yet so that their Candlestick is moved out of
its due stately Positure, hardly appearing like a Candlestick, and that by the
Indignation of God.

Quest. In these Cases how does it fare with the True Holy Seed, the
Substantial Church?

Answ. God chastens them to Repentance, Self-purification, and greater Zeal, in
that Case of the Churches losing its Brightness and Vigor, that they may
recover their first State and Work, aad sets them on work to retrive Truth
lost, in that other Case of the Churches Defection.

Quest. How is it with them, when the very Place and Candlestick are taken away?

Answ. They are either first removed into the higher State of the Church in
Heaven, or driven before into other Parts of the World, by Persecution; or the
violence of the Judgment makes no distinction, but carries them Captive with
the rest, though in different Baskets, as the Prophet Jeremy represents.

Quest. How do they survive in the time of the displaced and dejected
Candlestick?

Answ. They are either called out to a Zealous Appearance and Suffering for
Truth, or sometimes retired into Corners, like the Seven thousand in Israel, or
the Church in the Wilderness, that they cannot appear like a Church, offering
those Public Notices of Divine Truth a Church is designed for.

Quest. How is a Visible Profession lost from Particular Persons?

Answ. It is too often thrown up by Apostasy or Profaneness, or dwindled into
a very Spiritless Form; but very often a Profession without the Power being not
inconsistent with the working of Iniquity, it may pass out of this World like a
Lamp burning: but being found to burn only in a small Temporary Light, without
Oil in the Vessel, a Plenitude of Grace in the Heart, shutting out every Lust,
it becomes a Lamp put out in utter Darkness.

Quest. What is to be inferred from all this?

Answ. That there is no Trust but in the Lord himself, the Truth it self, by
which at all times the Church, that is indeed the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
and wherein it is so, will be known to us; and in uniting to Truth, we are
united to That.

Quest. There remains one thing yet to be understood in the Description of the
Church, which is, its Power of Governing, even as it is Governed by the Word of
God: Under what Notions, I beseech you, is that Government expressed in
Scripture?

Answ. That Power is by our Savior represented under the Mataphor of Keys; and
the Use of those Keys, in opening and shutting, or in Binding and Losing.

Quest. What is the meaning hereof?

Answ. The meaning is plainly this; When the Church of Christ has by the Key
of Knowledge inquired into all the Divine and Heavenly Doctrine of the Gospel
and Word of God, it has in and according to that Word, and only so, a Power of
Application of that Doctrine to Particular Cases, binding Men under the Sense
of Guilt, and fear of Damnation, in such or such Sins, and an impenitent
Continuance in them; or of Absolving, and assuring Men of the Divine Favor and
Acceptance, in a holy course of Life, and Obedience to God, and of Pardon upon
Repentance, after Falls into Sin, and Disobedience; and so of Declaring and
Pronouncing upon Men, as to their present State in the Church, by
Excommunication, or Absolution; all these are the Power of Binding and Loosing;
according to what our Savior speaks in parallel Words, Whose Sins you remit,
they are remitted; whose Sins you retain, they are retained; meaning still
according to his Word, the Pole Star by which they are to direct all their
Motions, who claim any such Power: For, only where it is declard according to
the Word, is it, that what is bound on Earth, is also bound in Heaven; and what
is loosed on Earth, is loosed in Heaven; there being an Invariable Agreement
between what is Published from Heaven, in the Word of God, concerning the State
and Actions of Men on Earth, and the Transactions in Heaven, in relation to
them. He then that pronounces agreeably with that word, pronounces as Heaven
does and will pronounce; Heaven binds what he binds, and looses what he looses,
because he speaks the Voice of Heaven in both Cases.

But that there should be any Binding or Loosing, except in the Power of this
Word, and according to it, in its Virtue, in its Truth, nothing can be more
contrary to the Ends, to the Glory, to the Sovereignty of Christ. To bind any
single Christian by Excommunication, and not according to this Word, is as much
a Brutum Fulmen, a Thunder to no purpose, a causeless Curse, that shall not
come, as for the Pope to Excommunicate whole Protestant Churches.

Quest. What is a Particular Church?

Answ. It is the Catholic Church in a Neighborhood, or number of Christians
Communicating one with another ordinarily; even as the whole Cotholick Church,
would, if it were possible, Communicate with it self, in the Ordinances, and
Worship of Christ, exactly according the to Rules of his Word; wherein this is
the distinguishing Character of the True Church, that its Communion is not with
it self primarily, but its Communion is so with it self, as to be with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ principally, as the Fountainhead, Center and
Rule of the Communion, and therein it holds out, and invites to its Communion.

CAP. X. Of the Officers appointed by Christ in his Church.
Quest. CAn there be either an Orderly, or an Effectual Actuation of the Truth,
by the Church as a Congregation, without distinct and separate Offices and
Officers that may attend continually on this very thing?

Answ. It is imposible; for, an Assembly without Order, would cease to be an
Assembly, and fall into a Confusion, or Rude Multitude. All Wise and Prudent
Assemblies have always had Elders to preside over them; and our Lord has
ordained such to moderate throughout his Congregation or Church, to conduct all
the Public Services of Religion: For all things therein are actually
administered by the Ministers of Christ, the Noblest Organical Parts of the
Church, like those Senses that attend upon the Understanding most immediately;
Seeing Eyes, and Hearing Ears; so these upon the Word of Christ. And that they
may be most fitted, engaged, and provoked hereunto, they are, even according to
the very Laws of Nature, separated to their Offices, and unto all Preparations
for them, by Reading and Meditation, as to their Proper Calling and Business of
Life, seeing they do not pretend to Immediate and Extraordinary Inablements, or
Excitations to their Service.

Quest. What Titles or Characters does the New Testament place upon these
Officers?

Answ. Those that we have especial Respect to (for in the Deacons, if strictly
taken, we are less concerned) receive Denominations either from their Work and
Service, or from that Honor and Estimation due to the Faithful Discharge of
such a Service. From their Work they are styled Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, Ministers, Servants of God and Christ, and in a just sense, of the
Church also. From the Estimation and Honor due to the Discharge of their Work,
and the Authority it ought to carry in the Hearts and Consciences of
Christians, they are styled Bishops, Elders, Rulers, Guides, and Ensamples, as
also, Ambassadors: And the Work and the Honor do so enclose one another, that
they ought not to be separated, and are in their Institution the Measure one of
another, extending both to Obedience, and Support of them in their Work; and
the Titles are so prepared by the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, that they ought not
to be changed for any other, nor the Scripture Language herein to be altered,
for any Words not importing the same proper Sense.

Quest. How shall the True Ministers of Christ be known, that there may be that
Obedience and Submission paid to them that is commanded?

Answ. There can be no other Means to discern them, but by the Word of
Righteousness, of which all True Ministers are the Ministers, on account of
which alone, Obedience and Submission to them is due: Their bringing that Word
in its own Life, Evidence, and Power, is their best Commission.

Quest. But how are they most orderly enstall'd into so high a Function?

Answ. Christ as the Head of the Church, has ascended up on high, and given
gifts to Men, and as the Lord of the Harvest takes it upon him, as his Supreme
Care, to thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest. The several Congregations of
Christians, observing Ministerial Abilities, and Meetness to Teach, call out to
such to help them; and herein, in the Cessation of Extraordinary Gifts, the
Schools of Learning and Religious Education, like the Schools of the Prophets,
do best prepare; and the Judgment of those that have been Pastors and Teachers
before them, does most orderly recommend to Choice and Acceptance, in the great
Service, such as are Scribes, instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, and commits
to them the Charge of Teaching others: For in this, as in all other Acts, the
Elders of the Church are to preside, with due Respect to the Congregation.

Quest. Is the Lord Christ pleased then to act generally by the Elders and
Officers of the Church?

Answ. Generally and ordinarily he does so; the Officers are therefore more
particularly entrusted by Christ with the Keys, even as the Church in general
is. Thus eminently, by the Ministry of the Apostles, our Lord founded his
Church, and so edifies and builds it up in After-ages, by Pastors and Teachers;
and when great Defections have prevailed upon it, summons it to Reformation, by
some raised up among those Officers, and whom he sends out, as such, to reform
and recover his Church: Yet still all this Power is in and according to his
Word, and no other; and so, that in all things, as much as may be, the
Knowledge, Judgment and Approbation of the Church is to be joined in all the
Officers do, as having their Interest in the Keys also; because they have their
Interest in the Word of God, in the Understanding, Opening and Applying of
which to Particular Cases, the whole Power of the Keys rests. The Apostles,
Elders, and the Brethren, or whole Church, were together pleased, and together
joined in that Famous Conciliary Epistle, Acts 15. 22.

Quest. I desire your more full Explanation of the Public Offices of the
Christian Church, and the Power accompanying it?

Answ. I will very willingly do as you desire, and begin with the Apostles.

Quest. Wherein stood their Power?

Answ. It stood in their Preaching, Acting, Directing, Governing, by that
Immediate and Infallible Assistance of the Divine Spirit, by which they writ
and sealed Scripture, and by which they were so guarded every way, that they
could turn neither to the Right Hand nor to the left, in any thing wherein they
exercised this Power.

Quest. How was this Power Justified?

Answ. By the Divineness, substantial Goodness, and Reasonableness of all their
Prescriptions, proposed in all the Methods of Rational Discourse, and
manifestation of themselves in Men's Consciences, witnessed to by the Holy
Spirit, and authorized by a Power of Miracles, generally of Beneficence, or
doing good; and in some, but sparing Instances, of infliction of Bodily Pains,
or Death.

Quest. Did the Apostles never err in their Administration?

Answ. Whenever that Infallible Guidance was not present to them, they might
err, as was before observed in the Apostle Peter's Miscarriage, which no doubt
was recorded to show their Power was not in themselves, but in the Divine
Spirit acting by them; that none in After-ages, might pretend to dictate as
their Successors, having not their Power, and yet requiring Obedience, as if
they had it; whereas even the Apostles themselves might err, and so lose their
Power, if never so little deserted by the Holy Spirit: And therefore what they
consigned over to After-ages, was winnowed from every thing Humane and
Fallible, that both Officers and People might know the one Common Rule, by
which one is to Govern, the other, in the Application of it, is to be Governed.

Quest. Who were next to the Apostles in this Office and Power?

Answ. Evangelists, such as were Timothy and Titus, who having a Portion of the
Apostolic Work, to plant and settle Churches, and Ordinary Officers in them,
had also a Portion of their Power to enable them to it, it being absolutely
necessary there should be such, till the General Rule was fully settled and
fixed.

Quest. Were not the Apostles and Evangelists above Ordinary Pastors and
Teachers?

Answ. They were, in this great Point of Difference, that they had the Word of
God by Immediate and Infallible Revelation committed to them, to commit the
same to others, by direction from the same Spirit, who gave them Discerning to
whom to entrust it, till all things relating to the Kingdom of God in the
Church were sealed in the Canon of the New Testament; else they owned
themselves Compresbyters, as the Apostle Peter styles himself, A Presbyter with
Presbyters.

Quest. From all that has been spoken, we are to conclude, That the whole
Power in the Church, and in all things pertaining to Religion, is retained in
the Word of God.

Answ. It is so: For Christ in his Word is the only King and Lawgiver of his
Church, which Glory he will not give to another: Whatever Power can be supposed
resident in the whole Church together, is no other than in that Word of Truth
publicly offered by it. The Apostles Power was only the presence of that Word
to them, by the Immediate Revelation, and infallible Guidance of the Holy
Spirit, for the Preaching it throughout the World, and thereby founding the
Christian Church: Such was the ordinary Power of any extraordinary Ministers
under them. The and constant Rulership of the Elders of the Church remains
unmoveably in the Word, which it is their Office to speak.

Quest. Are not those we distinguishingly call Bishops, Successors to the
Apostles, in that Preeminency they had over other Pastors and Elders?

Answ. That Successors to the preeminency of the Apostles may be well
established, Three things are necessary,

1. That there be found, and produced Distinct Commands given in Scripture ^o
the Inferior Ministers of the New Testament to obey Superior Ministers, or
Bishops; Commands to Christians to obey Inferior Ministers, or Ordinary
Presbyters, as Inferior Ministers, with respect to Superior Ministers, and
those Superior Ministers, as Superiors. We must find the Apostle
distinguishing, ordinary Presbyters; as Inferior Ministers, with respect to
Superior Ministers; and those Superior Ministers, as Superiors; as we find him
distinguishing Civil Magistrates into the King, as Supreme; and Governors, as
those that are sent by him.

2. Seeing it is very clear, and apparent, there is nothing more distant from
the Design of the Gospel, than to Constitute any thing for the sake of making a
great Figure, without as great an Use, or End; and that Christ has not given
Power to his Rulers to Command the very least thing, but as Commanded by
himself first, for then they would be Lords, which he plainly declares against,
and absolutely denies to them, and that what they do as Commanded by him, they
should do so in Duty and Service to the Supreme Lord, and Subordinately to his
Church, as not to be called, or esteemed Benefactors for their Services; so
that it must be evident, what their Superior Service is; it must be plainly
expressed in the Word of God, and there at least so determinately set down, as
to be deduced with greatest clearness to the Understanding and Conscience of
Christians, and distinguishingly from the Service of other Subordinate Rulers
appointed by Christ, that so it may be waited for, and received according to
his Ordinance with Faith and Obedience.

3. Seeing Christ appoints none to an Eminency of Service, without a suitable
Eminency of Abilities, as is plain in the Apostles, and Evangelists; it is
therefore reasonable to expect some extraordinary promises of the presence of
Christ to those Superior Ministers, to assist them in the Conduct of their
Superiority, wherein they might, above any other Ministers of the Gospel,
Visibly and Experimentally make some approaches to the Eminent Assistances the
Apostles and Evangelists had in the time of their Ministry, and that they have
continued, and succeeded in their High Function in the Church of Christ, so,
that the History of the Real, Substantial Services of Bishops to Christianity,
has come near to the Acts of Apostles, and as much excelled that of Common
Presbyters, as the Order it self is supposed to do: Now without these three
self evident concurrent marks of Superiority, secret invisible Characters are
of no signification.

Quest. How then is such a Succession of Bishops, in a Superiority over
Presbyters, so uncontrolably deduced from Antiquity?

Answ. Besides all other Coincident Accounts, there is this to be given. After
the Apostles, there was but a Gradual Cessation of Apostolic Men, Men of
Eminent Graces and Extraordinary Gifts, though not of the Infallible Guidance
of the Divine Spirit for the Revelation of the Gospel, or the writing of
Scripture; yet of more immediate Divine Assistances, in resemblance of Timothy
and Titus, for the Confirmation of the Churches planted by the Apostles,
Supervisal over them, and Care for them; and also for the further propagation
of Christianity, which being but newly set out, had not arrived many places,
where it was to come, and so needed some more than ordinary Assistances: Even
as Miracles did not immediately Cease, no more did these Personages
extraordinary in their Endowments: Such as these were worthily in a Degree of
Superiority over those that had not the same miraculous Inablements, nor
Knowledge as yet in Christianity. Afterward such Manifestations of the Divine
Presence by Degrees retiring, and Christianity having fixed it self where it
was then to go, and the Churches settled, the best accounts of the continuing
Distinction between those that were upon the same level, in regard of their
Gifts and Graces were but Humane Prudence and Order, which oblige no Man's
Conscience beyond the valuableness of the Reasons of that Prudence and Order.
Except undeniable Holiness, Industry, and Improved Understanding recommend any
Person to such Eminency. For Eminency, and being Taller than others in those
Qualifications, will make any Person a Bishop, in the true sense of one,
whether so ordinated or not; and cannot make him that is a Dwarf in these,
truly a Bishop; however for Orders sake he may stand in the place of that
Figure.

He that excels in his Knowledge of, Obedience to, Zeal for, and Authority in
the Word of God, seeing that Word conveys all this kind of Power from it self,
must needs have more of that kind of Power so conveyed than others; for the
more purely this Word is understood and Preached, the more Power goes out of
it, and along with those that display it, and so they become Pastors of a
higher Character, whether of a higher Order, or not.

CAP. XI. Of every Man's Obligation to be wise for himself to Salvation.
Quest. ACcording to all the precedent Accounts of the Church, it seems not
only reasonable, but most necessary, every Man should be wise for himself unto
Salvation?

Answ. It is certainly so: for every Man is to be determined by the Word of God
to the True Religion; to which purpose, he is to apply his Mind to search for
true Wisdom, as for Silver, and to seek for it, as for hidden Treasure.

Quest. How should Men of so great Disadvantages to such High Things be enabled
to Judge?

Answ. Wisdom assumes most justly to it self to be of so high Value, that every
Man should think it worth his while, to Labor, and Travel herein; and to them
that do so, it has promised the most certain Success, even the pouring out its
Spirit to them, and that they shall understand the Fear of the Lord, and find
the Knowledge of God: The Things of greatest moment are not of such difficulty,
but that they are attainable in the use of Right Means, under so great Promises.

Quest. What are those Right Means?

Answ. Bowing down our Ears to the Words of the Wise; that is, of those that by
Inspiration from God have been Wise, and written their Wisdom for Future Ages;
and by applying our Hearts to Divine Knowledge, upon which they come to be
inlay'd within us, and to be fitted to our Lips, to be agreeable and well
matched to our Discourse, and not like a Parable in a Fools Mouth.

Quest. But are not these things spoken, and written to the Learned and Elders
of the church, that they might know for the People, and the People put their
trust in them?

Answ. No: They are written to thee, even to thee; that is, to every one, that
they might have their Trust only in God; that is, find the Rock of Divine
Veracity, and Infallibility, and have no need to trust in Men; ^ut to know the
certainty of the Words of Truth, and be able to answer the Words of Truth,
either to those that advise with them, as Friends, or challenge them, as
Enemies.

Quest. If this was the sense of the Old Testament, it is undoubtedly much more
so of the New?

Answ. It must needs be so, as a higher, and more Intellectual State of the
Church, as much freer, and clearer in its Notions of Truth: The Apostles
Discourse Christians, as no Christians, if they are not able to Judge, as Wise
Men, what they say: If they are not Men in understanding, if they attain not to
the state of Teachers, by skill in the Word of Righteousness, and have senses
exercised to discern, by an Intellectual and Spiritual Gust, Things Good and
Evil; if they cannot give an Apology, or Defense of the Hope that is in them,
that is, of their Christianity, to every one that asks them a Rational Account
of it.

Quest. But in things of Perplexity, and Doubt, are not Christians bound to
submit to the Judgments of their Teachers?

Answ. If they can receive and digest their Reason, and take in the Light they
judge by, so as to make it their own; else if they cannot find their Reasons,
nor acquit themselves from doubt, they must suspend. For a Christian is
Commanded by his Lord, to call no Man upon Earth Master, or Father.

Quest. What is the meaning of that?

Answ. It is this very Thing, that we should receive nothing as Doctrine, or
Indisputable Truth, or Precept, upon any Man's Word, that does not offer such
Reason and Authority from God, and his Word, that we our selves see Reason, not
to receive it as the Word of Man, but of God.

Quest. But is it not said, that they that have the Rule over us, watch for our
Souls, as they that must give an Account for the same? If we are not to believe
them, and surrender our Judgment to theirs, how can they give an Account?

Answ. They that Rule over us, watch for our Souls, and must give an Account,
as Ezekiel's Prophets and Watchmen, by giving Warning, laying Truth before us,
offering the sincere Word of God in all Cases; the success of which upon Souls
Converted and Saved is their Crown and Glory; and their unsuccess looks like a
sorrow, to see those Souls lost, for whom they labored in vain, and spent
their strength upon them for naught; yet so, that if they have been faithful,
though without success, their reward is with the Lord, and their Work with God:
But notwithstanding this, every Man is so to account for his own Soul, that the
very success is not a Blind Obedience to Rulers, but as is said, a Receiving
the Word, not as the Word of Men, but as it is indeed the Word of God: And if
these Watchmen neglect their Duty, or Seduce instead of Teaching, Men are to
apply to better Means afforded by God; and if they do not, they still die in
their Iniquity, and, following their Blind Leaders, fall into the Pit; which is
an unanswerable Argument, that we may trust in no Man, but in God only: For if
an implicit Faith could be a saving Faith, it should save those that followed
such Guides, though they themselves were justly Condemned in not discharging
their Trust.

Quest. But were not the Apostles, and Prophets, to be Trusted at a higher rate
than thus?

Answ No: There were such evident Marks of Divine Doctrine always given by God,
to those that desired to Know, Love, and Obey him, that even the very Prophets
and Apostles were not to be received without them, nor to be believed but
according to them, nay, to be plainly Anathematized, if they varied from it:
Christians were therefore to judge, to try the Spirits, to search the
Scriptures, whether the things spoken were so; to have recourse to undoubted
Principles of Truth, that were as standards to all that came after, besides the
Unction from the Holy One, whereby they were enabled to know all things
necessary to Salvation.

Quest. But is not all Humane Teaching, and Instruction, hereby taken away, and
what becomes of the Ministry, the Eldership of the Church, and their Rule?

Answ. They are all hereby Established; for they are the Ordination of God to
this very purpose, to make Men see, to bring them Light, to clear things to
them, that by the awakening their Judgments, the summoning and collecting their
Principles, they may see with their own Eyes the ways of God and Religion; the
Holy Spirit graciously adjoining it self to their Ministry: They have no
Dominion over their Faith, but are helpers of their Joy; that is, they
facilitate, and make pleasant the knowledge and assurances of Religion; and
they Rule, by Exhorting, Admonishing, Rebuking, Comforting, and even Commanding
in the Evidences of Divine Authority, on Account of which they are to be
obeyed, and highly esteemed for their Works sake.

Notwithstanding all this, no Man is excluded from his own Office to himself;
for every particular Christian is in some Sense a Congregation, and Preacher to
himself, as Solomon; his Conscience has the Keys, binds, and looses within it
self; nay, Christians are not excluded from Rule in the Church; when they have
the Word of God on their side, they may plead and reason with their Mother,
Hos. 2. 2. When they have more understanding than their Teachers, or the Rulers
Rule not according to the Word of God, they that speak according to the Law,
and the Testimony, even Rule their Rulers, and prove the more noble Organs of
the Church; when those that should Rule it, are as the Idols Eyes that see not,
Ears that hear not; or as the Idol Shepherd; a Blast is upon their Right hand,
and Right-eye, that their Arm is clean dried up, and their Eye utterly
darkened; the most naked unfurnished Christian with outward Accomplishments,
that yet knows the Word of God, is among the Prophets in such a time of
necesity.

CAP. XII. Of Schism and Scandal.
Quest. FRom the precedent Discourse of the Church, I conceive, the truest
Notion of Schism may be deduced: I desire you therefore to Explain what the
true Nature of Schism is?

Answ. The Question concerning the Nature of Schism, follows very pertinently
upon the right settlement of the Nature of the Church; now the whole Being of
the Church consisting in its Union to God and Christ in Love, according to the
Truth of his Word, and that it receives all its Members into Union with it
self, by their being first united, as it self is. Schism, which is Division,
must needs, in its strictest and most formal Notion, be a Division from that
Truth, wherein the whole Church is one, and so from the Love consequent upon
such an Union.

Quest. What is that Truth of the Word of God, in which the Church is One?

Answ. The Truth of the Doctrine of God, or the Unity of the Faith of the Son
of God in things to be believed; and the Truth of his Law and Commands in
things to be done.

Quest. How is the Love of the Church United in these?

Answ. It is a Love in the Truth; and hereby we know we Love the Brethren, when
we Love God, and keep his Commandments, John Epist. 2. No Love, how great
soever, is Christian-love; nor Union, how close soever, Christian-union, if it
be not in the Truth, and Commandments of God: From whence it necessarily
follows, the Schism, that is a Schism from the Church, must be a Disunion from
the Faith of the Scriptures, and the Love springing from that Faith; and there
is no danger of any other Schism from the Church, as it is a Church.

Quest. How does Schism differ from Heresy?

Answ. Heresy in the highest Sense, and worst Sense of it, is a Disunion from
Truth in some Fundamental and Grand Concernment of Religion, either in the
Doctrine, or Commands of God, so that a Man is subverted, and sins, and must
needs be Condemned of a Separation from the Assembly of Truth, both by himself,
and the Thing it self; and that both as to Faith, and Christian-love, he is so
separated. Schism is a Disunion in some less momentous parts of this Truth,
under an apprehension of a greater moment, than there is indeed in the Causes
of such a Disunion, and a proportionable abatement of Christian Love arising
from it.

All Heresy therefore includes Schism, but all Schism does not rise up to
Heresy.

Quest. Are these the Scripture Notions of Schism, and Heresy, according to
its use of those Words?

Answ. They are most agreeable with the Sense of it, but the words were not so
set, solemn, and formal in Scripture, as afterward in Ecclesiastic Writers;
for Dichostasyes, or Division into two or more Parties, and Contentions, are by
the Apostle used to the same Sense as Schism; and Heresy sometimes signifies
no more than a Sect or Division, though that is remarkably used in its worst
Sense by both the Apostles Paul and Peter.

Quest. Is every different Apprehension, and Practice ensuing upon it, though
distant from Truth, immediately to be Condemned of Schism?

Answ. By no means; if it be a Modest and Humble Distrust and Suspension
concerning the Truth, and Command of God, in some things of smaller moment, and
doubtful; yea though it comes to a positive Determination, so far as a Man's
judgment, and yet erroneous, can at the present discern, it cannot be branded
as Schism, if there be no stress laid upon the Thing beyond its desert, if the
Union in the greatest and clearest Truths and Commands remains firm, and the
Love due to such an Union with the Church of God, be sincere and fervent; yea
even Dissent in greater points thus qualified, and free from ill practice, has
not been rigidly censured for Heresy.

Quest. Is there no danger then of running into Schism, if there be an Union
with Truth?

Answ. In this Sense only; when the weakness or misapprehension of others are
rated against them beyond their Merit, and without regard to the greater Truths
they agree in, and the Love due to them, upon Union in those greater Truths is
withdrawn, or the Spirit of meekness in endeavoring to restore the Erring
Christian denied. This may be justly esteemed like Schism, as it recedes from
the just value of Great Truths, and from the Charity of Christians upon Union
in them; but no Man is to espouse any Man's Errors, or to receive even Truth by
an implicit Faith, for fear of Schism; in things that carry not a broad
Evidence of Divine Truth, there is great scope for Modest Suspensions, and even
Dissents, without Imputation of Schism; for Truths of magnitude either in
Doctrine, Worship, Practice, or Discipline, are too bright to be refused by
sincere and honest Minds, after due admonition.

Quest. Wherein lies then the great Evil of Schism?

Answ. That Schism, and the Evil of it, may better be understood, I will set
before you the several Instances of Schism in Scripture, and the Evils noted by
the Apostle in each of them.

1. The first sort of Schism, is the Disunion in the sincere Doctrine of the
Gospel, and bringing in upon it the necessity of the Judaique Rites to concur
with it: This the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 16. 17. calls making Divisions,
or Parties, beside, or contrary to the Doctrine received: The great Evil of
this adding to the Word of God, is, that it lays Scandals before Men, and draws
them into this great mischief, that instead of the pure nourishment of Divine
Truth, all runs into this over-beloved Sentiment, and so deprives the Soul of
the true and vigorous Spirits of Truth; and also the Service due to True
Christianity is drained away, and consumed upon this private Opinion, which is
indeed the mischief of all Falsehood in Religion, and Devotion in Things not
appointed by God, who only can prescribe what is truly fitted to our Good, and
bless it with suitable Effect: Miscarriage from Divine Truth is always found in
Schism, with this mischievous Consequence, that it deceives the Soul with a
Cloud and Wind, instead of Truth and solid Good.

2. A Second kind of Schism the Apostle Notes, 1 Cor. 11. 19, 20. was the
Disorder in Divine-Worship, in that great Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
wherein they that were reproved were necessitated to withdraw, and to stand
apart for the manifesting themselves in the purity of that Worship and Service,
for the very honor of it. The great Evil of this Schism is, that it brings in a
necessity of divided Parties in Public Religion, and the Duties of it, seeing
good Men must separate from such Corruptions, and stand at a Distance from
them, on Account of which Religion it self is dishonored, as if it were a
Jumble of Sects, and gave an uncertain sound; and further than that, is
charged, as if it were but a Sect it self, because it stands by it self: Thus
Christianity was called, This Sect, and the Sect of the Nazarenes: Idolatry
damns the True Worship of God, as a Heresy from it self, and the False Church
charges the truly Publick-Assembly with Schism, and a Private Religion.

3. Another Degree of Schism the Apostle taxes in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.
11. c. 4. 3. was, that this one entire Profession of Christianity in the one
Universal Church of Christ, they thought, ought to be shred into little
Fraternities, under the Names of some prime Minister of Christianity, or even
under the Name of Christ himself, as an ordinary Master of a Party, except we
will understand, that, Those Approved, who stood firm in Christ alone, were
manifested, and stood alone, by being at a distance from the Schism of others,
and so appeared, as was said before, like a Schism themselves. Thus vain
Philosophy parcell'd out it self under its great Masters. The great Evil of
this, is, that it raises Feuds, Contentions, and Factions, as if this one
Integral Christianity could have distinct Interests, and some ingross one
Interest, others another: Whereas the Apostle thus reduces this Schism; all
Ministers, says he, with all their Gifts, Graces, and Functions, are the whole
Churches, without any cantoning, other than, that Order and Convenience
requires the more constant administration of Religion, in certain Congregations
with their Elders. Cephas, the Apostle of the Circumcision, was the
Corinthians, though Gentiles, as well as the Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul
himself; and not only the Churches Ministers, ^ut the whole World, and the
Cargo of Light and Truth in it, are the Churches. Every Truth, every Ordinance,
every Minister, whither of Truth Natural, or Revealed Religion, with all the
happy Effects of them, are all the Donation of Christ to the Catholic Church,
whose the Catholic Church is, and no Ministers whatever; and Christ is Gods,
who is the Foundation, Center, and Supreme Head of this Unity, and Union.

4. The last Instance of Schism (I find in Holy Scripture) is intimated to us,
under that curious Parable, 1 Cor. 12. 12. of the Wise and Excellent
Temperament betwixt the several Members of the same Body, set in different
Degrees of Dignity; the less comely parts have more abundant Comeliness, and
those that we think to be less Honorable, on these we bestow more abundant
Honor, that there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the Members should
have the same care one for another; under this Elegant Shade the Apostle
teaches, that a neglect, and a contemptuous over-looking the Rights and
Interest of the lower and less Honorable Members in the Church, incurs the
guilt of Schism, as arguing the want of that Compassion, and Feellingness, that
springs from the head of the Church, down through the higher, to the meanest of
his Members; for no Man ever hated his own Flesh, even the meanest, and lowest
part of it, but nourishes, and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. They
therefore, that carry the greatest Grace, and Honor in the Church, should
invest the least comely Members with more abundant Honor and Comeliness, in the
most humble Christian Condescensions, and kindest Treatment, covering all their
defects, in Imitation of God, who has given most abundant Honor to that part
which lacked, and being more tenderly careful of deferring to them the utmost
God has allowed them: On the other side the groundless, and unreasonable
Repining and Discontent of those Inferior Members, that they are not the most
noble parts, is Schismatical also; not feeling the Glory of those more
excellent Members, as their own Glory, with delight and complacency, even till
it rises up to the Glory of the Head Christ, and God. To be perfectly united
therefore in the same Judgment and Mind, and to speak the same thing God has
spoken in his Word, and herein to Love one another; to observe the same pattern
of Worship given by God himself; to look upon our selves, as only Christ's, and
all Ministers to be the whole Churches, given it by Christ alike, so far as God
gives us opportunity to enjoy them; to rejoice in the Honor of the highest
Members, and to Honor more abundantly the meanest, as being all the Body of
Christ, and so tempered by him; and wherein we cannot in this State of the
Church come up to the exactness of these things, yet to perform thus in the
greatest instances of each of them, and in the smaller to tolerate, and
forgive one another, these are our security, and certain preservation from
Schism.

Quest. Is there not another sort of Schism yet to be spoken of?

Answ. No other that I can find spoken of by the Scripture.

Quest. Is it not Schism, when the Church, or that part of it, wherewith we are
conversant, prescribes Indifferences, to make orderly and decent the Worship of
God, and any Christians separate themselves into particular Assemblies, to
Pray, to Hear, and Speak the Word of God, to Admininister Sacraments, that they
may be free from such prescriptions? For this is setting up an Altar against an
Altar, and one Part of the Church against another, what can it then be, but
most notorious Schism, and so esteemed in all Antiquity?

Answ. I know not whether it is at all Schism: I am sure, if things were
rightly managed, it were the least Guilty kind; for there being an Union, as is
supposed, in all things that are Commanded by God and Christ, if there be that
Value and Love for one another in those things wherein they unite and agree; a
desire of Interest in, and benefit by one another Prayers, and a Joy in the
Gifts, Graces, and Spiritual Abilities one of another, a care mutually to
impart, and receive the benefit of them, as far as may be; such an Union in
things Commanded by God, shall overruled the little distances in indifferences,
and no more divide, than Worshipping God in different Congregations, by reason
of Distance of place; or the Church of God using differing Circumstances of
Worship in different Countries and Places.

Quest. But what, if besides these mere and simple Dislocations of themselves,
and use or non-use of these Indifferences, there be Anger, Strife, Emulation,
Bitter Zeal in one against another, as is generally and usually seen, do not
these sour Passions beget Schism?

Answ. Wherever these are found, they must needs amount to that kind of Schism;
That Christians do not love Christians in the Truth, and in keeping the
Commandments of God: Since it is supposed, that each part are united in the
Fundamentals of Faith, and Divine Commands; upon which ought to flow, from the
Love every sincere Christian has to God and Christ in these, love to one
another also: For Faith works, or is effectual by Love; and this is Love,
that we keep his Commands: This Love therefore must needs to all united in
these mighty things, wherein True Christians are united, surmount the
disaffection that arises in the Disunion about Tything, Mint, or Cummin; or
else we must value our Confidence in small things, or our Doubts about them,
above the clear and undoubted Truths and Commands of God, which must indeed
needs be Schismatical in both parts, or on whatever part it ^e found.

Quest. But seeing these Contentions are so hard to be avoided in the midst of
different Judgments, and especially diverse Practices of Christians, and in so
distinct Congregations, and that in the Eye of one another; and further, that
the Assemblies of Christians together ought to be as Universal, Numerous, or at
least as Free, and Mutual, as is possible in regard of nearness of place one to
another, for that it is most for the Honor of Christianity they should be so,
and most advantageous to the imparting Spiritual Gifts and Graces between all
the Pastors, and People; seeing all this is so undeniable, how can separation
from the Assembly of one another, do less than carry the guilt of Schism?

Answ. There can be no Schism in keeping close to the Doctrine and Commands of
Christ, without adding or diminishing, turning to the Right Hand or to the
Left; for therein, as has been often said, is the Bond of the Churches Union,
therein alone is the Church a Church; and the Peace lies infolded in the Truth;
the more than the Considerations forenamed are pressed, (and they deserve very
earnestly to be pressed,) the more absolutely necessary it is to stay in the
Doctrine of God, and the Commands of Christ, or (which are as truly the
Commands of God) the Dictates of Nature: Nay, it is better to allow Men a
Suspension of their assent to some Truths, and of their Compliance with some
Commands, that are but upon the outward skirts, and marches of Christianity,
and so not so evidently revealed, than rush them upon a precipitate belief of a
blind obedience; the plainest things, (and those are always the most necessary)
being the safest to pitch Christian Communion severely upon.

Quest. But may it not be reasonably supposed, that according to the
Constitution of Church Governors by Christ, they have a Power in things
neither Commanded nor Forbidden by God, to interpose their Authority, and to
determine them this way, or that way; and that Obedience cannot be refused
without Schism?

Answ. There are very great Reasons against any such Supposal.

1. The Apostles, the Highest Authority under Christ, as will be easily
acknowledged, had Commission only to teach the Observation of things Commanded
them by the Lord himself.

2. There is a constant Disclaimer in the Gospel of any Despotick, or Lord-like
Power in Church-Rulers; Christ expressly Compares the Power he gave with Civil
Powers, and Resolves, it shall not be so among his Disciples, as was among
them: He says, the Chief among them shall be Ministers, and Servants,
delivering the Will of their Lord, and not Lords themselves; they must have no
Will of their own to promulge: They profess they Preach Jesus the Lord, and
themselves Servants for Jesus sake; Servants of those they Preach to, as they
Minister to them the Divine Will; not Lords over Gods Heritage, but ensamples
of the Flock; Ambassadors, delivering only the Messages of their Master, and
beseeching Men: But if the whole scope of Indifferent Things were given them
for a Dominion, how great would it be?

3. These Circumstances in Religion may grow so bulky, and cumbersome, and make
such a Medly in it, that no one would know what Religion it self is.

4. The Free Votes and Suffrages of Christians in all things they receive, as
most con-decent and convenient, is that more abundant Honor God has given to
the meanest Members of his Church: Thus the whole Affair in that Council, Acts
11. was managed by not only the Apostles, the Elders, but the Brethren also;
each according to their Station, and Situation in the Body the Church: For that
there may be no Despotique Power; what is Command^d by Christ, must be so
represented, that the Evidences it is so Commanded, must be duly Represented,
and the Divine Authority sufficiently remonstrated; what is of Advice, and
Convenience, must be carried by free Suffrage, and Consent.

Quest. But still the Church being a Society, and the best of Societies, it
must be Subject to the Laws of Nature concerning Society; and what is carried
by the Votes of People, being always subject to Turbulency, and Confusion; have
we not great Assurance, seeing Christ reversed nothing Natural but confirmed
it; that there are many things not written in Scripture, but left to their
necessity and expediency according to Natures Laws, and so what is nearest to
Monarchick, being farthest from Confusion, the Rul^rs of the Church, and among
them the Bishops, ought to determine all things neither Commanded nor Forbidden
by God?

Answ. There is in the Church the perfect and absolute Monarchy of Christ in
his Word, and besides this, there is no other, nor can the Laws of Nature
dictate any other; there is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, or destroy, and
there need not any more Masters, for more would certainly breed Confusion;
whatever therefore is clearly according to the Word of God, or to be made out
to be so, whatever is the evident Dictate of Nature, as distinction of Sexes, 1
Cor. 11. 3. in their public appearance in Religious Assemblies; administration
of Divine Services in a known Language, 1 Cor. 14. v. 5. the speaking of one
Prophet only at once, and not in a Confusion of Voices, v. 31. All such Natural
Order, and Decency, or whatever is of Indisputable Decency, according to the
Manners and Custom of our Native Country, these are the utmost Bounds of
Prescription: All things else are to be Comprimiz'd by Agreement, and Suffrage,
and even these necessary things are to be Managed by Doctrine, Rational
Convicton, Exhortation, Admonition, Rebuke, and even Charge and Command with
all Authority in the Evidences of the Divine Word, and Will, and no otherwise:
For this, I say again, is the more abundant Honor, the Rulers or more
Honorable Members of the Church are to invest the lowest with, to Circulate
with them the Life, and Spirits of Truth, by transfusing the Advantages of all
the Light and Knowledge they have, that they as Living, Wise, and Intellectual
Members also, may judge what is Commanded them by God, and not be as Fools, or
Lifeless Members: For what Blood, Spirits, and Life are in the Body, that is
Spiritual Wisdom and Understanding in the Will of God in the Church: And in all
Indifferent things, the very same Freedom the Foot has to represent to the
higher Powers of Nature, what offends it, and is immedately heard; the very
same Power the lowest Member of the Church has to remonstrate to the Higher,
what Scandalizes it in the accepting this or that Indifferent Ceremony, and it
ought as feelingly, as immediately to be heard: For as the same Soul is present
to all parts of the Natural Body, so the same Spirit of the Head of the Church
animates his whole Body, the Church; which is the Fullness, or Complement, the
Receptacle of his Fullness, the Fullness in which he will appear Full, and
Complete, who fills all in all: As therefore the Head it self feels by this
Spiritual Union, so are the Eyes and Ears, the Higher Members of this Body, to
do: And if they do not so feel, it argues an Interruption between them and the
Head it self; for that most concernfully reciprocates with the whole Body, and
the extremest part of it; and so does every part inliven'd by him also, if
there be no Intercision, nor Obstruction betwixt it and the Head.

Quest. Is there yet any further Reason against a Power in the Rulers of the
Church, for imposing in things of indifferency under the Names of Decency and
Order?

Answ. There is the great Reason of the Mischief of Scandal, to be added to all
that has been spoken.

Quest. What is to be understood by Scandal?

Answ. Scandal is a Subject of Discourse of too large a Compass for the present
purpose; but as it is strictly to be adjusted to it, it may be thus understood:
Scandal is that Hurt, and Grief, a Man receives in Submitting either to Humane
Example, or Imposition, in things of themselves neither Commanded nor Forbidden
by God, when the Conscience is in doubt whether that which is required to be
done, be not displeasing to God, and forbidden by him, or that which is
required to be omitted, or not done, is not pleasing to God, and Commanded by
him, and yet submits it self to be led by that Example, or Commanded by such
Impositions, and so falls into Sin, and under a wound of Conscience.

Quest. When the thing is indeed neither Commanded, nor Forbidden by God, how
can it be changed by the Conscience being in Doubt concerning it?

Answ. Because the Conscience is that complex, or congregated Power of the
Soul, wherein are preserved all the Doctrines to be believed, and Rules of
Action, to the end that it may observe, and direct, how the Soul is to Govern
it self, and square all its Actions to the Will of God; and that it may comfort
or check the Soul in doing Well, or Ill, according to those Doctrines, or Rules.

Wherein then Conscience is mistaken, and misjudges either way, against that
which is Commanded by God, or for that which is forbidden by him, there is
nothing to be done, but to reduce Conscience to its Right Rules, which is the
Will of God in every thing, revealed in his Word. But in things neither
Commanded, nor Forbidden, if Conscience be apprehensive of danger any way, this
is the Honor and Dignity that God has conferred upon Conscience, as his
immediate Vicegerent in the Soul, and carrying his Authority, (by always
presenting it in his Word, and Command,) that a Man should suspend his Action,
wherein Conscience is not satisfied, and at rest concerning the Goodness of the
Action; and this is the Honor which those that are above, either in their
Authority in the Church, or the strength of their Understanding, Gifts, or
Graces, should bestow upon those that are below, that they should not either by
their Authority, Influence, or Example, Scandalize the little ones, or the
weak, that are so, either in regard of their low Station, or the weakness of
their Gifts, and Graces, that is, draw them into the Sin of doing any thing, of
which Conscience has a mistrust of displeasing God in so doing, in regard,
that it both weakens, and disables Conscience in the discharge of that Trust
reposed in it, for the carrying on the Soul in a Christian Course, its
Authority being violated, and prostrated in the reverence due to it, and
disturbs the Peace and Comfort it ought to Minister to the Soul in that Course:
For by this sort of Scandal, the Apostle Witnesses, the Weak Christian falls
into Sin, his Conscience is defiled, is wounded, is grieved, is made weak: All
the mischief of which, the value of indifferent things is not such, as that it
can answer, and make recompense for; and so to sin thus against the weak, is to
destroy them for whom Christ died, and therefore to sin against Christ; which
is the reason of those weighty Discourses of our Savior against Scandal, Mark
18. and of the Apostle, Romans 4. and 1 Cor. c. 8. and cap. 10. which being
compared, give great light one to another.

Quest. But it seems, that a Conscience only in doubt, might be settled by the
Advice, Example, and Authority of those that are the Elders, or Eminent Members
of the Church; for when Doubt supposes the Conscience inclining neither this
way, nor that way, in it self, but standing between both, or sometimes moving
to one side, and then to the other, the coming in of those Considerations,
taken from the Example and Authority forenamed, should give an over-weight to
that side on which they fall?

Answ. Yet on purpose to show the great Dignity of Conscience, and its
Government, without which approving, and directing accordingly, even Obedience
to the Divine Commands wants the just Complement of a Good Action; and also to
show of how little moment in Christianity, all things are, not under a Divine
Sanction, the whole weight of the Apostles Discourse is hung upon a doubting
Conscience; a Conscience in doubt concerning things indifferent, when urged
either way.

Quest. But are not all Sinnews of Government hereby cut, and dissolved, even
of Civil Government; for Conscience may be in relation to such Commands
disatisfied?

Answ. As Scripture every where supposes the whole Government in the Church of
God to be confined within the Monarchy and Word of Christ, and nothing to be
Imposed or Forbidden but according to that; so it does every where disinterest
the Church of Christ to judge or intermeddle in Civil Government, or Things
pertaining to it; it supposes Civil Powers will oblige to, and determine
Indifferencies in Civil things, this way, or that way, as they please, and
therein exercise a Lordship; but Christ having declared, it shall not be so
among his Disciples, does yet Command by himself, and his Apostles, all
Obedience to these Principalities and Powers, even thus Commanding, if not
against Gods Command directly; so that in all such things the Doubting
Conscience is only to be instructed in its Rule and Duty, but can have no more
Relief against Obedience to Civil Commands, than it has against Obedience to
the Commands of God, when it is mistaken about those Commands; for such
Obedience to Magistrates, is Obedience to the Divine Command.

Quest. There appears so near an Assinity in the Commands concerning
Indifferent Things, of those that have Rule in the Church, with the Commands of
those that have Civil Rule, that the one may be a Measure for the other; or
wherein is the difference, especially when they join in one in their Commands
concerning these Indifferoncies?

Answ. The Commands of Civil Authority concerning Indifferent Things in
Religion, deserves a particular consideration, for which a proper place shall
be reserved. But that the Church is such a kind of Political Regiment, that
should set up for it self, as one of the Polities of this World, by Canons and
Constitutions of its own, not founded in the Word of God, but introduced on
other pretenses, and that if Christians do not Submit to them, they should be
accounted Schismatics; and Excommunicated as Heathens, if they do not hear the
Church, that is, the Rulers of the Church, thus Ordaining in their own Wisdom,
and all this by the Charter of the Keys, or the Power of Binding or Loosing, is
as gross a Forgery, as Popery has any in this Point: Indeed if there were such
a state of things, there were reason to believe the whole Church should by
proper ways and means, found out by Christ, be modelled into one universal
Uniformity of Government and Ceremony, seeing the whole Church is but one, and
that the Roman, supposing it had not so grossly contradicted the Laws of
Christ, might sooner pretend to be the Metropolis of it, and the Bishop of Rome
the Head of the Unity, than any other, it being the first Imperial City that
was famous for Christianity.

But how little Uniformity is to Christ or his Kingdom, in those things wherein
he has not interposed at all, but left Christians free, and intended they
should be free, appears in the Ununiform Unity of the History of the
Evangelists concerning his Life, Doctrine, Death, and Resurection. To suppose
therefore the Church to be in this manner Uniformed by the Prudence of its
Governors, is to turn it so far into a Civil State, and the Bishops of it,
into Lay Elders.

CAP. XIII. Of the Anti-Church, and its Opposition in every Thing to the True
Church.
Quest. IS there not an Anti-Church, or Antichristian-Church, that stands in
Opposition to the True-Church?

Answ. There is, and has been so for many Ages, and that has taken upon it in
the most Public way, to be the Church of Christ, the House of the Living God,
the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

Quest. With what Advantages has it been armed thus to take upon it self at
all the Name of a Church?

Answ. It having risen out of the True Ancient Apostolic Church, that received
the True Christianity from the Apostles at Rome, and the Faith of which, as the
Apostle Paul witnesses, Romans 1. 8. was spoken of throughout the World; it has
retained the Scriptures, and the Fundamentals of Christianity, the Writings of
the First Christians and Apostolical Men, and so has continued to do from*
that very time of the Apostles to this Day, and has also actuated the Truth of
the Scripture, and those Fundamentals of it, according as its Interest has led
it, in some Ages more, in some less, as shall be presently more discovered.

Quest. Having then the Scriptures, those Fundamentals of Christianity, and the
Discourses of the Ancient Fathers, and Doctors upon them, in such a length of
time, with what reason can it be looked upon as an Anti or Antichristian-Church?

Answ. With very great reason, because by a multitude of Additions, fowlest
Idolatrous and Superstitious Corruptions, and false Interpretations upon the
Scriptures, the Fundamentals of Christianity, and the Discourses of the
Ancients shamefully interpolated, and by Spurious Writings under their Names
despited, it has turned whole Christianity into a very contrary thing to it
self: while therefore it holds those points of Christianity, and the Records of
it in veneration, and yet supports all its Falsehoods thereby, it becomes
perfectly an Antichurch, or Antichristian: It has in regard of those Articles
of Truth it holds and actuates, so much, as to have the Name of a Church, and
Christian; and yet having them so falsified, corrupted, and changed from
themselves, it becomes a Mock-Church, a Mock-Christianity, that is, an
Antichurch, and Antichristian, in despite of the True-Church, and
True-Christianity: And as to its Actuation of Truth, it has so Actuated Truth,
as to Actuate by Truth its own Falsehoods, and Lies upon Truth.

Quest. How then did it rise to such an Eminency and pretense of being
Catholic and Public?

Answ. The many Concurrences of Divine Providence, under his deep and
unsearchable Judgments in the Government of the World, in relation to that
state he had appointed for his Church, I leave to the History of the Church and
Roman Empire in those times; by which may be understood, how the Papacy took
the advantage to Exalt it self, not only above the Episcopal Chairs then in an
Ambitious Contest for Supremacy, but above all that was called God, that is,
the Imperial Power it self, and so set its Foot upon the Necks of Christian
Princes throughout the World, till the great Cheat began to be detected; and
all this, by and upon pretense of being the Vicar of Christ, or the Head of the
Catholic, that is, the Roman-Church.

Quest. These things I confess not so convenient to my Inquiry; I desire only
to know, how, in the middle of so many horrible Corruptions, this Antichurch
could be so bold, as to vaunt it self the Universal Church of Christ.

Answ. Taking the utmost benefit of its Antiquity in the Christian-Faith, and
Fundamentals of it; and especially of the Conspicuousness and Famousness of its
State, and in the mean time the Corruptions growing up by degrees, and not so
observably as at once, (for Papal Rome was not built in a Day,) It usurped the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven as its own; the Key of Knowledge, in its
Infallibility; the Keys of Power, in opening and shutting Heaven Gates, so as
that in the Darkness then overspreading the World, and the Church, Ignorance,
the Mother of False-Devotion, so bewitching the Minds of Men, that they all
wondered after the Roman-State, as new modelled under the Beast Armed with two
Horns, like those of a Lamb, counterfeiting Power from Christ the Lamb, but
that spoke as a Dragon, pursuing all its pretendedly Christian Decrees with the
extremest Salvageness of any of the greatest Earthly Tyrants, but all under a
Mask of the Catholic Apostolic Church, by which Fascination of Zeal to the
most excellent Religion, though so Vitiated, Princes and People Surrendered
their Power to this great Sorceress, using at once all the Frauds and Cheats of
False-Prophesie, and the Arts and Policy of the most Designing Universal
Monarchy: Thus while this Antichurch stole into Power by the best appearances
of True-Religion, and secured it by all the Blandishments of a Meretricious
Religion; it found it self so strong, as to force its False-Religion by its
Power; and using both together, raised the Grandeur of both a Secular and
Spiritual Tyranny to such a height.

Quest. But how did the True-Church in this time Actuate Truth, or agree with
those Characters of being the House of God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth?

Answ. It was by the might and prevalency of this Secular and Spiritual Tyranny
so suppressed, that it was in a manner known only to God, who reserved a number
to himself in the midst of so great a Defection, wherein that promise was made
Good, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church: Exposing and
Actuating Truth, pure from those Corruptions, is hardly and very hardly to be
found in History, in any of the Lines and Motions of it, in the most dark and
dolesom period of that Defection.

Quest. How was it with the True-Church recovering it self from this great
Darkness?

Answ. God raised up by extraordinary Measures of, though but an ordinary
presence, such, who by Indefatigable searches into his Truth, and Word, and
those Records of Christianity that Antichurch was concerned to preserve,
because, as was said, it could not without so much of a Church, be an
Antichurch; and by bold Publications of it, shook so that Enchanted City, that
a tenth part of it fell: And by the great contrivance of Providence, even the
chief of that Antichurch were forced, by way of Repercussion, to raise greater
Light, by endeavors to defend themselves, from Scripture, Antiquity and
Reason, by the Summons of all, that Learning, Wit and Industry could levy in
their Defense; so that they were necessitated to awaken out of that Barbarity
and Ignorance in which they had been so long drowned, and to Actuate even Truth
more fiercely, that they might together with it make as potent and prevalent as
they could, and give countenance to those great Falsehoods they had interwoven
with it: From all which broke out such a light in the World, that Princes
rowz'd themselves, and no longer crouch'd down under such an intoxicated
Servitude, which had long galled and pinched them, but that they knew not how
to rid themselves from it, till the Sorcery was laid bare, which still gave
greater scope for the display of Truth.

Quest. Could the Scripture be inconscious, or silent concerning so great
Revolutions in the Church of God, as these?

Answ. It is in all True Reason most impossible; and therefore it is a mighty
Argument, that those great places of Scripture, that do so notoriously agree to
such a purpose, as the Discovery of this Antichristian State, are justly
applied to it by Protestant Interpreters.

Quest. If you please, point me to the chief of those places you refer to?

Answ. I will do it very briefly, as being too large for the present purpose to
enumerate many, or enlarge upon any of them: But what more proper to delineate
such a State, than the Apostasy the Apostle describes, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and 1
Timoth. 1. 4. or than the Church in the Wilderness, Revel. 12. 14. the
Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, being slain, and lying dead three Days and
a half, True Christianity being in all appearance extinct: The measuring the
Altar, the Temple, and those that Worship in it, signifying the close
Retirement of Pure Religion, and the outward Court left to be trodden down by
the Gentiles, or Heathen Christians, and their impure Rites, and Worship; and
therefore excluded from those strict measures true undefiled Christianity is
enclosed within, Revel. 11. 1^.

Now upon all these Representations of such a State of the Church, so
exquisitely shadowed and resembled, and compared with that deep plunge and
immersement of Christian Religion in the time of the Popish Midnight, who can
but believe, these, with many concurrent Delineations in all those forecited
Scriptures, were on purpose to give the Portraicture of that so Fatal
Apostasy, that believes it at all to be Prophesied in the Book of God? and
who, that considers the weight of the thing, can but believe it foretold, if
there be any thing prophetic of the State of Christianity to the end of the
World? As it most evidently appears there is.

But if any be so incredulous, as to suppose such a State of Christianity
beneath the Prefigurations of the Divine Spirit, he cannot, if he be indeed a
Protestant, but agree, that nothing does with more Art and Divine Skill
Pourtray, and Draw to the Life such a Devastation of Christ's True Religion, as
all History knows Popery has made, and as far as it can prevail, does now, and
would do much farther, and in its very Frame is constituted so to do.

Quest. But seeing you suppose these Types of Popery may be applied another
way, though it is, I confess, very hardly to be supposed; yet I desire, if any
thing has fallen under your Observation, that can be less avoided, to make
plain, how different a Religion Popish-Christianity is from the
Scripture-Christianity, you would give me leave to ask what it is?

Answ. I must needs commend your Rational Enquiry, for I know neither the
Veneration given to any Religion by the Natives of it, nor the ill Words
against any Religion by those that are Strangers and Enemies to it, should
conclude against it: The Professors of every Religion are startled at any
reproach of their own Religion, as at horrible Blasphemy, but freely speak ill
of a diverse from it: Mahometans call themselves Believers, and Christians
Infidels. Popish Religion calls it self Catholic, and Protestancy a Grand
Heresy, and Schism. Judaism charges whole Christianity with Cheat and
Imposture: It is therefore necessary, we should have some Magnetic Needle to
point us to the True Religion, and to the True Christianity, seeing its Name is
not only distributed to many, but so solemnly divided into the Popish and
Protestant Profession of Christianity.

Quest. What then can be our Invariable Northpole in Religion, in such a Wide
and Tumultuous Ocean?

Answ. I hope you have not forgotten what was at first given in Instruction
concerning Natural and Revealed Religion, their exact Agreement with one
another, and with all our Faculties; so that no Religion in the World can
deserve the Name of a Religion, but looks monstrous and horrid, only so far as
it borrows some or more of the Grand Principles of our True Religion; nor can
be at all Weighty and Considerable, but is vain and ridiculous, if it receive
no Ballast from True-Religion.

That then, which was accounted for in the beginning, being remembered, I shall
especially apply my self to ascertain True-Christianity in contradiction to the
false, or Popish Christianity, by that which will much ascertain all True
Religion also in General, and difference it from all False Religion.

Quest. I much desire to have some such Test, as you seem to intimate and
promise?

Answ. I cannot furnish you with a better, surer, and more lively, than that
Emblem of the Divine Spirit, representing the New Jerusalem by a apiece
City, the Length, and the Breadth, and the Height of which are equal: The Walls,
and the Gates, and the City it self amounting to so many Square, Solid
Furlongs, all exactly regulated by the Number Twelve, all of Massy-Gold and
most precious Pearl, Rev. 21.

Quest. The very General view of so rich an Emblem much affects me, but I
desire you to lead me into the Application of it to each particular purpose,
and in the first place, what am I to understand by the City?

Answ. It is evidently told us, it is the New Jerusalem that is coming down
from Heaven, the True Church Seated in the Christian Religion; for so the
Apostle Paul assures us, the Christian Church so Spirited with True
Christianity is Jerusalem, which is above, the Divine and Spiritual Jerusalem,
which is free, and is the Mother of us all, if True Christians, Gal. 4. 26.

Quest. What do you understand by the Foundations, the Wall, the Gates, the
City it self?

Answ. I am not bold, or curious in pursuing Emblems too close, but understand,
in general, by the whole of all these, the Doctrine, the Worship, the Rules of
Life, the Discipline of the True Church.

Quest. What are we directed to, by all being reduced to the Number Twelve?

Answ. It is very evident, the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb give the Honor to
the Number Twelve; for the Prophets and Apostles, that is, the Truth ministered
insallibly by them, is the Foundation upon which the True Christian Church is
built, Jesus Christ himself being the Cornerstone; and so to show True
Religion has been always Substantially the same, The Twelve Tribes of Israel,
and the Name of Jerusalem, the People and City of God of old, are Recorded with
Honor, as expressive of the True Church, fixed in the True Religion in the
Times before Christ.

Quest. Why are all things in the Christian State described to be of Pure Gold,
and Precious Pearl?

Answ. To teach us by sensible things the transcendent Purity and Worth of
Christian Religion, and the equal Purity and Worth of all things in it, of a
most transparent clearness, being all Spiritual, Intellectual, full of Light
and Truth, and so to be received and enjoyed by Purity, and Intellectuality, or
Clearest Understanding, Wisdom, and Prudence in the Knowledge of this Divine
Revelation, and by greatest Innocence, Cleanness and Heavenliness of Heart,
Affections, and Life.

Quest. But can this be supposed to be the present State of the Church of God,
as it is here upon Earth?

Answ. This is the certain and most unalterable Constitution and Designation of
God concerning it, and whoever plants it lower, in any of the Things before
Named, viz. the Doctrine, Worship, Rules of Life, or Discipline, contradicts
the very thing it self, or degrades and embases it, though it must be
acknowledged, its being thus prepared and adorned as a Bride, must be from
Heaven, in some just season appointed by the Father: This is yet always the
Trial of the True Church, and the True Religion, although the Church be not yet
perfected to it.

Quest. But you seem to have forgotten the City, and all the Parts of it lying
Foursquare, and being solid square measure, for so it must be, if the Length,
Breadth, and Height are all equal?

Answ. I did not at all forget it, but suffered your Questions to lead through
all, I less designed, that they might come to the Principal Character of the
True Religion and the True Church, so exactly adequate to one another.

Quest Will you then more fully explain this Similitude?

Answ. That I may the better do it, I must repeat it from the very Ground and
Bottom of it, which is, that God makes use, as he pleases, of all the Knowledge
and Science that is in the World, to Minister to Divine Knowledge, in which he
principally intends to Instruct, as being most absolutely necessary for all, of
what condition soever: As then Mathematics is the most Demonstrative Science,
and some things in it are of most retired and fine Speculation, so are others
most known, and necessary to all employed in Mechanics: Thus God has been
pleased to deposite some Prophetic Truths in the most mystic parts of that
Learning, and some of the more general use in the most known and acquainted
parts of it; now those that are more secret, and not so necessary, I shall
leave to those that are most fitted thereunto: But what is most plain, and
imports what is most necessary for all, I will insist upon.

As then Number and Measure are means Ordained for Humane Nature, and principal
Instruments of Reason, to come to the most certain knowledge of things, and to
be secured, they are, and continue what they justly ought to be; so True
Religion is thereupon presented to us under exact Number and Measure, falling
in one with another, the Number Twelve multiplied into a Square Cube of Twelve
thousand Furlongs.

And as the Foursquare Figure does so bind, and is so compact with it self,
that it cannot receive the least Addition, but with the loss of its Square, nor
the least Diminution, but under the same Forfeiture; thus True Religion is so
perfectly it self, that it can neither be added to, nor diminished from, but
with a proportionable loss of it self: God was pleased upon this account to
choose this Figure for the Altar under the Law, for the Breast Plate of
Judgment; this was the Measure of Solomon's Oracle, how far the Measures in
Ezekiel agree, I leave. The Heathen by Natural Wisdom had such a Sense of the
so Just to it self, Foursquare, that they called a Good Man, (...), or a
Foursquare Man.

And lastly, as Solid Square Measure is in all parts of it, and throughout
every part, exactly Square, and gives the most certain account of the whole
content of a Body; so is True Religion in all its Parts exactly so it self, and
every Part of every Part is reduced to the same exactness; for so the Length,
Breadth and Height of it are equal; and so is the True Church exactly adequated
to True Religion: The Faith is therefore said to be at once delivered to the
Saints, because it can receive no New Measures, and it is called, the Common
Salvation, or Doctrine of it, because the Universal Standard is one.

This then is the Measure of a Man and the Measure of the Angel: For by that
Wisdom, that is natural to a Man, in which Beasts have no share, that is, to
Number and Measure, is made plain to us Angelical Number and Measure, that is,
the Number and Measure of True Religion, as the Angel delineated it, beginning
in the Apostolical Twelve, and Multiplied by it self to an exact Square Figure
or Measure; Square in the whole product, Square in every particular part, and
of that just content. And with this exact Number Twelve, so Foursquare, agreed
the Altar, Temple, and they that worshipped therein; when the outward Court was
left out of Measure, to be trodden under Foot by Heathenish Idolatry, and
Superstition, disguised under Popish Christianity; of which whenever it shall
be perfectly freed, it shall appear in that Glory here described. All richest
Pearl, pure Gold, most transparent Jasper, that is Brightest, Clearest Truth,
and of the exact Apostolical Number and Measure.

Quest. Is there no farther Improvement to be made of this Divine Symbol, the
Foursquare City?

Answ. There is, when I have first observed to you False-Religion is out of all
Square, just Measure, and even Number; it is a constant and perpetual Odd,
wandering from True Religion, and the justness of it to it self; and that both
in Doctrine, Worship, Rules of Life and Discipline, so that it is impossible in
it to Measure one thing from and by another, or any one point of any of these
by it self, uneven in the whole Product, uneven in every part; uneven in the
Root: The most significant Emblem of the Popish-Church, which having the
Fundamentals of Christianity, has yet lost the Apostolical Twelve, by
innumerable most irregular, and wild Additions, and deformed every Single
Article of Truth by most disagreeable Corruptions of it; and therefore, as a
Man most Learned in Numbers has demonstrated, the Number 666, a Number no way
to be reduced to a Foursquare Figure, is the most Fit, and Significant
Hieroglyphick of it, and indeed, of all False-Religion, that must have
something of Truth, to make it a Religion; but as it is false, is an Odd from
that Truth.

Quest. Let me now desire the most plain and useful Application of this
Parabolick Scheme?

Answ. You shall have it; and it consists in observing Four Prime Characters of
the True Christian Religion, that may be as Four Equal sides of this
Foursquare, and of the Church adjusted to it; from each of which may be
measured to each of the rest, and the Equality, or Inequality, will discover
the Truth or Falsehood of all that is brought to the Trial.

1. The Transcendant Holiness, Goodness, and Purity of the Doctrine, Precepts
of Worship, Rules of Life, Discipline, is one side of this Christian-square,
with which whatever does not Square, is convicted not to be of that Doctrine
and Religion; whether it look toward God, in all the Highest, most Honorable
Apprehensions of him, suitable Discourse, Worship, Love and Obedience; or
whether it look toward Men, in all Justice, Righteousness, Mercy, Compassion,
Charity, Benevolence, Beneficence; and these, as they respect all the
particular Offices of Life; Public, of Magistrates, Subjects; or Private, as
of Parents, Children; Husband, Wife; Master or Servants: The Peace and Welfare
of Mankind are treasured up in the Law of Christ; or lastly, whether it look to
a Man's own Person, in Soberness, Purity, Continency in the Thoughts, the Words,
the Actions. The Honor and best State of the Mind and Body are provided for by
this Doctrine that is after Godliness, not only in the World to come, but in
this Life: Whatever now does not agree with these wholesome words, is detected
not to be Christian; which is all Truth, Virtue, and Praise.

2. There being nothing more intimate to Man, in this fallen state, than the
Sense of Guilt, and knowledge that he is a Sinner, the whole platform of
Redemption by Jesus Christ is become like the Original Law of Righteousness, by
which Man was formed, and Answers to it in all the Attributes of Perfection; as
therefore the Plot of Restoration by the Son of God infolds it within it self,
and answers every way exactly to it, so that very Law and Doctrine of Holiness
owns the Reconciliation and Atonement by that great Sacrifice, as Equilateral
to it self, the Dimensions of one being found correspondent in the other, and
each to be Tried one by the other; so great a Sacrifice would be unnecessary,
if it had not so great a Law to answer; so great a Law can be answered by so
great a Sacrifice, and only by that: It must have that; it can need, it can
acknowledge no other. So then, the one may be Measured by the other: The
Holiness, Purity of such a Law violated, requires such an Effectual
Pacification, and Purgation of Conscience, such a Renovation as Christianity
sets before us. Such a Sacrifice, such a Renovation or Sanctification by the
Divine Spirit from it, teaches us, what an excellent Law was violated; so often
therefore is the Lamb made the Title of our Lord and Savor, so often it is
Signally Recorded in the Revelation; and the Names of the Apostles of the Lamb
are said to be written in the Foundations of the New-Jerusalem, to show the
weight of the Doctrine of the Christian Sacrifice in the Blood of Christ, and
the Holy Spirit breathing in and from it, in Renovation and Sanctification.

3. The Liberty that Jesus Christ has brought in by his Gospel, is another
Equilateral Character of his True Religion, to be Measured by each of the
former, and it also Measures them: It is not a Liberty from Holiness, it is not
a Liberty from close application to the Redemption of Christ, and not to need
it, on any pretense whatever; but it is a Liberty from any Imposition that is
Ceremonial, and does not by its Intrinsique Worth and Goodness, or by its
Supreme Ordination from God, center in the true Perfection of the Mind,
Conscience, and whole Soul: yea, whatever God himself had Commanded the Jews,
is not only reversed, but despised for the sake of Christian Liberty, if it
does not square with it, so that no Yoke of Ceremonial Bondage is laid upon us
by God himself; that which had been, is taken away, and a Yoke of humane
imposiing is under the Gospel-Anathema: the Doctrine of Godliness, of
Redemption by Christ, may be justly measured by the true perfection of
Conscience. To do well in things intrinsically good, according to the Rule of
Christianity, and being inwardly purged and atton'd by the Christian Sacrifice,
do also truly measure this Liberty: for on one side, the Kingdom of God is not
Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. He that in
these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men: It is
not applying to the Blood of Bulls and Goats, that can never take away sin, but
to the Blood Offered by the Eternal Spirit, which certainly makes the comers
thereunto perfect: On the other side, this Liberty lays not open the Enclosures
of a Holy Life, nor removes the Barriers of Justice against Sin, if not
satisfied and attoned by Faith in the Blood of Christ.

4. Lastly, That which answers to each of these Characters of True Religion,
is, that is has no Secular Interest, no Interest of this present World, that
it looks not upon the things that are seen, that are but for a Moment, but on
the things that are not seen, that are Eternal; such is the Godliness, such is
the Sacrifice, such the Christian Liberty, that their Uses and Ends are too
great and large to center in Earthly things; and though themselves are the True
Interest of the present state, yet they no way make it, or the Grandeur of it,
an Interest, but seek a Heavenly Country, and City; even as the Lord of this
Religion said, My Kingdom is not of this World: Now as this measures each of
the other Characters, so each of them measures it; such a Transcendant Holiness
and Purity can alone see God in Eternal Habitations; such a Sacrifice alone can
have its Blood enter into the Holy Place made without Hands, having obtained an
Eternal Inheritance; such a Blood speaks alone in the Heavens, better things
than the Blood of Abel; a Conscience so free, so perfected, has boldness to
enter into the Holiest, and none else: These are all fitted and Consecrated to
Eternity, and Eternity to them; Light and trivial Holiness, Insignificant
Ceremonies, and Rites of Purgation; a cumber of External Observations, invented
by Men, can never enter within the Vail, nor endure for ever. And on the other
side, by such Divine Things to grasp at this World, and a Patrimony on Earth,
is as gross and out of Square; so that these things exactly measure one
another, and square together.

Quest. How is the Apiece City, or the True Church, adjusted to these
Dimensions?

Answ. In all these things I before mentioned, in having these, and these only,
in its Doctrine, its Worship, its Practice and Obedience, its Discipline or
Government.

Quest. How is the False Church out of Square to all these?

Answ. In that retaining the Profession of the Christian Religion, constituted
according to these, and pretending an Imitation of them, and the Miracles
attesting them, it has been most extravagant from them, by its Traditional
Additions and Counterfeits of them, every of which are a Violation and
Irregularity from one or all of these Characters, or equal Sides, of True
Religion, a great Lie upon them, with which they can never be brought to agree,
being not only an endless Variation from, but a flat Opposition to them, and a
despiting them with themselves, so strangely, so monstrously misshapen, and
that in so great numbers, that as in mockage to the many excellent things our
Savior did and taught, so many, that if they were all written, the World it
self could not contain the Books that would be written; even so, if all the
numerous and prodigious excursions of the Antichristian Church, and Antichrist
the Head of it, from Christian Religion, by its indeterminable swarm of New
pieces of Antichristianism, should be written, the whole World it self would
not be able to contain the Volumes that would be written.

Quest. But does not the Profession of so much of the Christian Religion in
such an Eminence, like tbe City upon the Hill that cannot be hid, give it the
Reputation of a most Famous Church, if not the Catholic, as it calls it self?

Answ. Christianity so abused, as in the Popish Religion, is infinitely the
more dishonored for the Eminence of the Antichurch, that so exposes it; and it
is only the Eminence of Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God, and the
exalting himself above all that is indeed and truly God in his Church, and
showing himself, that he is God, in his Oracles, Wonders, and Miracles, but
they are all but one great Lie of this Son of the Father of Lies, the Image of
the God of this World, the Son of his falsehood and perdition, contrary to
Christ the Son of the Father in Truth and Love. But if any one receiving
Christianity or the Scriptures from the Antichurch, and measuring them in and
by themselves, separates True Christianity from the Antichristianism, and
retains it Pure; it is but like the Service God received from the False Prophet
Baalam, when he Prophesied Truth, into whose Place and Office Antichrist
succeeds, and is therefore styled, the False Prophet, Revel. 16. 13.

Quest. What then can this pretended Catholic Church be, in relation to the
True Catholic Public Religion?

Answ. It can be no other, upon strict account, than the Synagogue of Satan,
the Pseudocatholick Antichurch, in a Damnable Heresy from, and hatred to the
General Assembly, and Church of the First Born, written in Heaven, united with
the God of Truth and Love, and the Son of the Father, in Truth and Love, in a
Hellish Schism and Separation from the Apostolic, Catholic Church, of which
God and Christ are the Head.

Quest. How can it be believed, that so great a Lie upon Christianity should be
received by so large a proportion of the Christian World, or that Persons of so
vast Abilities and Comprehensions should so deceive others, or be themselves
deceived?

Answ. Scripture has taken all the care possible, to Arm us against this
Objection, which is indeed very great: It calls this Apostasy, a Mystery of
Iniquity, and to assure us, the Apostle Paul, and the Divine Person in the
Revelation, point to the same Thing; upon the Forehead of this Adulterous
Church is written, Mystery; (Now a Mystery, if it were presently understood,
and all easy and plain, were no Mystery:) It has the Energy of Delusion, in
causing Men to believe a Lie; it is the whole Deceit of unrighteousness; it
sets up a great Stage of Counterfeit Miracles that it vaunts upon; and that it
might have that Reverend Face of Antiquity to deceive with, and say it comes
from a faroff Ages; It was a Mystery that was then at work, in the Apostles
time.

Lastly, It has its effect upon them that may be Christians, and receive
Truth; but not the chaste unprostitute Love of Truth alone.

Quest. But it seems imposible, that any parts of the Christian World, that
have been once disabused, should return any more under so great a Delusion?

Answ. There are very great hopes, that God, who has Commanded his Light to
shine out of this Darkness, will interpose by the perpetual Brightness of his
own appearance, and by that Divine Breath of his Mouth in his Word, against the
return of so great a Darkness. This set aside, there are so many Reasons of
fear, and such possibilities of laying a Train of Causes reaching to such an
Effect, that there can be no place for Security, but in the Almighty
Providence, and yet what Degrees of that deadly Scourge may fall on the
Protestant World, God only knows; we know our Sins deserve very ill.

Quest. What is the greatest Security, under the Divine Grace and Providence,
against so great Desolation upon True Christian Religion?

Answ. A perfect Acquiescency of the Protestant Nations upon the Foursquare of
Divine Truth, and Resolvedness not to move from thence. For as a Foursquare
never removes from its own Base, because it is All Base; so they that are
Squared to it, and settled upon it, never move: For it always bears them alike
with it self, and by its own Justness recalls them, if they offer to wander:
mere angry prejudice against this or that False Religion, is not enough,
without being thus grounded upon Truth; Entertainment of Truth with any
Addittaments will secure no Man, for he that receives one Addition, may receive
another: He that receives Truth lying Foursquare with it self, is called back
by that Even of Truth: He that adds one to it, and makes it Odd, may go on
indefinitely, as Popery has done, because he has forsakent he Just Even that
should stay him: He can no longer wait for the Voice of Truth, that by it self
always answers it self, but to what is not like it self it will not answer, but
discover it to be off from this Square; it will not on any respects hearken to
any thing different, because it will not be solicited to move from it self: So
that upon the whole, the Laws of Symetry and Commensuration are the great
Security of True Religion, and ascertain the True Church both to it self, and
all Beholders. For Additions to Religion, like Surds or Irrational Figures,
incommensurable to the Rational Square, can never be reduced to this Foursquare
of Truth, but are like the Deaf Adder, that will not hearken to the voice of
Reason, Charming never so Wisely: Nor can they ever be reduced to a certainty
or exactness with themselves, but are one thing to day, another to morrow. But
Divine Truth, is (...) Rational, Certain, Expressly it self, Deaf indeed to any
thing else, but in it self it is Yesterday, and to Day, the same for ever.

He therefore that daily ponders, meditates upon, has a just Measure of the
Fundamentals of Divine Truth, and does all things in a Regular Square with
them, shall know the Doctrine that is of God; all the Fruits of the Tree of
Life, though they are various, yet come all within the Apostolic Twelve, and
he that has a Spiritual Gust, exercised to discern betwixt Good and Evil, by
tasting any aright, will taste all, and find them Apostolical, and know
whatever pretends, and is not, and so reject it: He will know all the Gates of
Wisdom and Truth, and the Angelical Guard attending at them, and go in and out
by them, but the Disorderly Breaches and Gaps, that Wild Beasts, or Deceitful
Foxes have made, he avoids, knowing they exceed the Apostolic Twelve, and are
therefore dangerous, and pernicious; and whatever Apparation of Angels may be
at them, he knows it is only Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, and his
Ministers transformed as the Apostles of Christ, as the Ministers of
Righteousness: Thus the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles Numbered, and
Measured exactly by it self, is the Security of the Twelve Tribes of Israel,
that is, of the True Church.

CAP. XIV. Of the Power of Magistrates in Religion, and of National Religion.
Quest. IT is I think very clear, by all that has been spoken, that the
settlement of Religion in the Word of God, is most stable and certain, and that
by no Powers he has given in his Church, it can be changed, nor receive any
Arbitrary Additions, that should be Obligatory: But I am in great doubt, how to
reconcile those Commands of Scripture, to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, with those strict Precepts, to keep close to the Word of God, and to
turn neither to the Right hand nor to the Left, where Rulers so often prescribe
in Religion, contrary to, or different from the Word of God?

Answ. I aknowledge, the Resolution of this Doubt contains many difficulties in
it, and cannot be given at once, but I shall endeavor so to lead your
Questions, by every Degree of Answer, as may direct into the best method for
your satisfaction.

Quest. What, I pray you, is the first step necessary to be taken in order to
the Resolving this Doubt?

Answ. To settle a True Understanding, how the Magistrates Power and Authority
in Religion made entrance into the World.

Quest. I very much desire to know that, and believe it to be of very great
Influence into all things that concern the unfolding this Question?

Answ. This then I take to be the best Account of it; After the apparent
Degeneracy of Humane Nature, so that the Laws written in Men's Hearts, were
evidently defaced and blotted by contrary Practices, there was a necessity of
forming the great Notions of Natural Religion, Godliness, Righteousness, and
Soberness, into Laws, that Men might be thereby preserved from highest
Irregularities, and excess, under the pretense of being at Liberty, or every
Man being a Lawgiver to himself.

Quest. I desire you further to Explain how this brought in Magistracy?

Answ. That such Laws might be made and Executed, there must be some supreme
Legislative and Executive Power in every Community; whether placed in one, or
more; whether by the Title of Paternity or Primogeniture; whether Hereditary
and Successive, or Elective; whether by Agreement and Covenant primarily, or by
Submission and Pacts after Conquest: These things a^e variously ordered by God
in his Paramount, but secret Government of the World. But the Laws of
Godliness, Righteousness and Soberness, are so necessary, and Men know them to
be so necessary, that they cannot be without them, nor without some Supreme
Legislation and Execution of Laws formed according to them: They that are
above, see a necessity of Governing by them; they that are below, see a
ncecessity of being Governed by the same; and therefore submit by Common
Consent to some supreme Authority, and Subordinate Magistrates under the
Supreme, to that end. Mankind is touched by this Impression from God, and all
that are not, are branded as Sons of Belial.

Quest. But how are Princes and Magistrates secured in the Exercise of their
Power against those that would not be Subject?

Answ. Besides the Laws of God, written in the Heart, and promulg'd in the
World, besides the secret Touches, and Motions of Providence, and Interlinkings
of Common Interest, with the Rights of Sovereignty; Princes and Sovereign
Rulers are both by the Will of God, and the Common Consent of Mankind,
surrounded with Grandeu^ of Highest Estate, that they may draw Subjects into
their Service, and Dependence upon them, by the greatness of their Rewards,
being both the Fountain of Honor, and of Splendour of Condition: But
especially, they are Armed with the Power of the Sword, entrusted with them by
God, that by the awe of their Wrath and Vengeance they may bring People into
Subjection and a Readiness to Obey.

Thus they appear as Gods in the World, as Living Images of the most High, in
their Vicegerency, according to what is said to them by Inspired Wisdom, I have
said, ye are Gods, and Sons of the Most High.

Quest. But why has it not pleased God, to appear himself in this Authority
and Power, Visibly, and Immediately, which would cut off all Dispute, as to
Supreme Right, and Maladministration; which do now often disturb the Peace of
Government, and the People under it; or at least why has he not given Angels a
Superiority, and Visible Presidency over Kingdoms, as that which would much
more awe, and Compose the World?

Answ. The Wisdom of God has in all things appeared, in attempering things one
to another with greatest Equality. So he has thought fit in infinite Wisdom,
to Govern Men by Men. He has Committed all Judgment to Christ, because he is
the Son of Man; he will Judge the World at last by that Man whom he has
appointed, Christ Jesus: Thus he Governs Men all along by the Men of his
Right Hand, as Images of himself, but more immediately of Christ, the Great Son
of Man; thus in his Word he speaks to Men, by Men like themselves. And as to
the Conceit of Mankind Submitting with greater awe to a Government from Heaven,
it is but like that of having one from the Dead to speak to them, when they
have Moses and the Prophets, by which if they are not persuaded, neither would
they be persuaded, though one should rise from the Dead; nor would they be
Governed by one from Heaven, that are not Governed by that Humane Majesty and
Sovereignty, Created by God on purpose for them, as is most Evident in those
many Rebellions of the People of Israel, under so evident a Theocrasie, or so
immediate a Government of God.

Quest. Is the Power of Magistrates only in those clear and undoubted poi^ts of
Godliness, Righteousness, and Soberness?

Answ. Because under the two latter of these, there is a vast Compass of the
Interests of the Peace, and Weal, and Honor of Nations, in all Traffic and
Commerce, in provision for safety and security, and adjusting of Laws to all
these ends; there must be a vast Compass also of Power in these, extending to
all Indifferent things; Indifferent till they come to be determined by Princes
and Powers, but then, by the Ordinance of God, to be observed according to
those Laws, determining them this way or that way.

Quest. But I desire you to give yet a closer and stricter Account of the Power
of Sovereigns in Religion, or Godliness, being the main point of of the present
Enquiry?

Answ. That I may answer your desire, I must consider Religion as it is Natural
Religion, written in the Hearts of Men; as it is Revealed Religion, published
by extraordinary Ministers, and Consigned to after Ages by inspired Writing, or
Scripture; and lastly, as Religion is so or so Circumstantiated and Modelled in
the External Administration of it.

Now by Natural Religion, as distinguished from Revealed Religion, I do plainly
intend, that Religion, whether it be drawn out by the mere force of Natural
Conscience, without any plain or known Assistances of Revealed Truth; or
whether it was not known to be Natural Religion till being Revealed, Natural
Conscience acknowledges it, and must needs Confess it to be True Natural
Religion; or that the wisest and soberest part of Mankind confesses it to be
so; or whether it be what Natural Religion teaches, upon the supposition of
Revealed Religion, acknowledged, and confessed to be from God; for then Natural
Religion confesses, and urges, that all Revelations from God, that evidence
themselves to any Man's mind to be from God, should be received with Reverence,
and submitted to with Obedience: In all these cases of Natural Religion, I
boldly and positively assert, the Sovereign Power has a Right given it by God,
to Make, and Execute Laws according to the Obligations of Natural Religion,
even as in all Cases of Righteousness and Soberness, or Common Peace and
Welfare, and to punish Offenders, and Transgressors according to the Degree of
their Guilt, and can no more be Impeached in that procedure, than in any the
most undoubted Functions, or Rights of Government whatever.

Quest. I must desire to be guided in my Thoughts concerning the Power of
Governors in Revealed Religion?

Answ. Besides the Legislative and Vindictive Power of Supreme Magistrates in
Natural Religion; there is that Divine stamp of Authority, God has Engraven
upon them, so that besides their Laws, they recommend Religion by the very
representation of God himself, whose Presence they bear, and have not only the
more Remote Authority of a Prince, but the nearest, most Natural, and kindly
Authority of a Father. On account of which Solomon, as a King, so often speaks,
Hear, O ye Children, the Instruction of a Father, and (as having all Parental
Affection in himself,) forsake not, says he, the Law of a Mother. The Care of
all means for Instruction, and Propagation of Religion, is most proper to
Government: And all these Administrations in Religion, run not only through all
points of Natural Religion, in that ampleness before expressed, but do most
genuinely and freely stream through all points of Revealed Truth, and the whole
Counsel of God in the Scripture, nothing being more Princely and Paternal, than
the utmost Providence, and Influence of Princes, and Sovereign States herein,
wherein they fulfill the Prophecy, of Kings being Nursing Fathers, and Queens
Nursing Mothers to the Church of God.

But there is this difference between Natural and Revealed Religion; Natural
Religion is written in the Heart, and may certainly be found there, (however it
comes to be known, clearly, and truly, only by Revelation) and so may be
absolutely Commanded: But Revealed Religion is recorded by Faith, and Faith
comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, and therefore cannot be
Commanded, but must be expected by the Blessing of God upon Instruction: But if
any Man profess to believe Revealed Religion, to have received it as the
undoubted Truth of God, it is then the Law of Nature, he should deport himself
in it, and toward it, as to the Truth of God: Nebuchadnezzer, Darius, and the
King of Nineveh, their Laws were rightly grounded upon the Principles of
Natural Religion concerning the True God: The Laws of Moses, and the Princes of
Judah in Revealed Religion, were upon the so unavoidable acknowledgement of the
Divine Presence and Authority in and with those Laws, the so many Repeated
Covenants, Indentures, and Engagements of that People, on the evident
Appearances of God, to be obedient to those Laws. But in the Revelation o^
Jesus Christ, we find no tracks of Humane Power, b^^ ^ll was done by
Instruments fitted from Heaven; naked of ^ll Humane Authority, that the
Excellency of the (...) might be of God and not of Men, till Princes and (...)
agreed in the Faith of the Gospel, not by Compulsion, but by Evidences and
inward Assurances of the Faith; and so it is still to continue.

Quest. Before you pass from this point, that it may be made the clearer; will
you give the Distinction between Sovereign Powers, and the Elders of the
Church? For they are both called Rulers, they are both called the Ministers of
God?

Answ. This is indeed most necessary to be known, as tending much to Illustrate
this whole Matter.

1. The Power of the Elders of the Church lies wholly and entirely in the
Evidence of the Truth, and the Word of God they Minister, without which their
Persons are Invested with no Power, or Authority at all. But there is a Sacred
Character upon Sovereign Powers, and their very Persons, so that Reverence,
Prostration, Obeisance, Honorable Titles, and Obedience in all Lawful Things
are due to them, even when their Commands, in some things being unlawful,
cannot be obeyed, as appears every where in Scripture.

2. The Authority, Power, and Majesty of Sovereign Princes remains Inviolable,
and not to be invaded by any, no not by those who have Commission to speak the
Word of God: There is no Temporal Power in order to Spirituals Conferred by
Christ, or Ordained to his Ministers, to Create a Civil-Spiritual Power within
a Civil, and to rencounter it: But Princes are in all Causes, and over all
Persons, within their own Dominions, under God, and according to his
appointment, Supreme Governors; so contrary is Scripture to the Usurpation of
the Anti-Church herein: All Religious Princes guiding themselves by Gods Word,
have great Power and Authority, not only by that Word, but by Virtue of that
Authority and Majesty God has Clothed them with, as his Vicegerents, to
Direct and Govern according to Truth; wherein the Divine Spirit is pleased
often to be so immediately present with them, that a Divine Sentence is in the
Kings Lips, that they may direct according to Truth; and in all Truth they are
to be Obeyed, not only for the Truths sake, but for that Authorities sake also
God has Invested them with.

3. The Elders of the Church lose their Power by erring from Truth and the Word
of God; for of what Authority is the False Prophet, or the False Teacher? But
Princes and Sovereign Powers have a Power, though misapplied, to vindicate
their Authority upon those that cannot Obey them; except they should Disobey
God to Obey Magistrates, which none dare assert that acknowledge God; in which
Power Magistrates must not be resisted, even while they cause Men to suffer for
Righteousness sake.

4. The Admonitions, Excommunications, Anathema's of Church Rulers, have no
Force, when not grounded upon Divine Truth, nor ought to make Impression upon
Conscience, but to be rejected with Disdain: But the Penal Sentences, and
Vindictive Decrees of Sovereign Powers have their Effect so far, even when they
are unjust, as to be received as an Ordination of Power appointed by God,
though used to a wrong purpose: Where the Word of a King is, there is Power,
and his Wrath is as the Roaring of a Lion, and it is so appointed by God:
Against such a Supreme Executive Power, Armed with the Supreme Legislative
Power of a Nation, there is no rising up, no remedy, but appeal to God by
Prayers and Tears.

Quest. This whole Account might be much Illustrated if it be declared on the
other side, what Obedience is due to the Ministers of the Word, and Truth of
God; whether extraordinary, as Prophets and Apostles; or ordinary, as the
Elders of the Church, and Ministers of the Gospel, even when Supreme
Magistrates Command the contrary?

Answ. The Word, and Truth of God are of so Supreme Authority, that though the
Ministers of it are of no Authority, separated from that Word, yet the Word and
^^uth o^ God of which they are Ambassadors, is much high^^ (...) ^he Kings and
Princes of the Earth, and there is no Compare between the one and the other;
God therefore raised up extraordinarily what Messengers he pleased, and sent
them with what Messages he thought good, to what Princes or Magistrates soever;
because immediately (...) God, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: and yet
there extraordinary ^inisters, in all things wherein they were not Commanded by
God, preserved the Just Rights of Sovereignty. Thus the Word of God ought by
ordinary Ministers to be faithfully declared, by those who are called to do it;
and if it be so declared, it has, and ought to have a Sovereignty above all
Earthly Sovereignty, both with Princes and Subjects; and yet the Publishers of
it, and they to whom it is Published, stand in their Just Distances, and in all
things pay the Homage due to Sovereignty, by Obedience Active, wherein they are
not Countermanded by God, or by Submission to penal Laws, and Decrees made
against them, by the Supreme Legislative Power of a Nation, wherein they cannot
Obey God, and the Powers at once; because so is the Will of God, that they
should by suffering for well doing, put to silence the Cavils of the Ignorant
or Malicious.

Quest. But ought we not to expect, that Princes should be the Supreme
Interpreters of the Mind and Will of God, that so their Command and Superiority
might be more absolute; and because that Government that does not determine the
Religion of the Subject, cannot have so free a display of it self, nor rest so
secure, as is necessary to Government?

Answ. While the Holy Patriarchs Ruled, who by the Laws of Nature, more
unsullyed so near the Creation; by purer Tradition; by Divine Revelation
vouchsafed to them, as occasion required, preserved Religion Undefiled; Supreme
Authority and Instruction in True Religion Resided in the same Persons: yet
even then their Authority in Religion, was from the Evidences of Divine Truth,
even as afterward in Moses, Samuel, David, and Solomon, who were both Supreme
Princes, and immediately Commissioned by God as Prophets; for wherever Men are
Deputed by God, either as ordinary, or extraordinary Ministers of his Truth,
the Authority is not in Man, but in the Word of God, evidencing it self to be
the Word of God: When therefore the Patriarchal, both Power and Holiness
expired, and the Revolt of Princes and People from True Religion grew greater,
God begun to Instruct his Church by Messengers sent on purpose, and Separated
betwixt Princes and Prophets: Yea even in the time of so Sacred a Priesthood,
Established by God himself among the Jews, he taught his Church very often by
Prophets of an extraordinary and immediate Character. And lastly, by the
Apostles Founded the Christian Church, without any Consultation with, or
Concurrence of the Powers at that time in the World, (and yet those Apostles
taught all Subjection to those very Powers) until the whole was settled in the
Canon of Scripture, Consent with which is now the only Credential of a Teacher
appointed by God, however he be Ordinated by Men.

Quest. What is to be Inferred from hence?

Answ. Especially, that the Truth of Religion is so independent upon all Humane
Sovereignty, that it is to be accepted only upon Trial by its own Evidences,
and not by those of Humane Authority: This Treasure is therefore for the most
part entrusted to Earthen Vessels, not only to Men, but to the Men of unguarded
condition, that the Excellency of the Power, and Evidence of Divine Truth, may
be more apparently, as it always is in it self, of God, and not of Man.

Quest. What other reason may there be of Separating the Administration of
Divine Truth from that of Princely Government?

Answ. because each Administration requires the whole Attendance of those
engaged in either, except they are, at least, immediately inspired: It is said
of the Magistrate, he is the Minister of God, attending continually on this
very Thing: To the Elders of the Church, ^t is said, take heed to the Ministry
thou have received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Give attendance to
Reading, to Exhortation to Doctrine; give thy self wholly to them; make full
proof of thy Ministry: Be Instant, Preach the Word in Season, out of Season, or
without Season; Publicly, and from House to House.

Quest. I desire you, now to apply your Discourse to the Administration of
Sovereign Powers, in modelling and Circumstantiating Indifferent things in
Religion, what their Power given them by God therein is?

Answ. That I may give you an answer in that, I must observe our Saviors
Distinction of the Things that are Gods, and the things that are Caesar's; and
his charge, that the things that are Gods, be rendered to him; and the things
that are Caesar's, be rendered to Caesar. Now none of the things that are Caesar's
are his first, but they are first Gods, and given to Caesar by God.

God then has entrusted Caesar with the rendering the things that are Gods to
God, that is, to take care, that the Obedience due to God according to
Godliness, Righteousness, and So^erness, may by the making of Good Laws, and by
the Vigorous Execution of them, be given to God; and also that the good
intended to whole Humane Nature, may be preserved to it, as a Service of great
Acceptance with God, for every Governor is the Minister of God for Good, to
every Man; he is the Minister of God for Public good.

But in the mean time, all these Supreme Notions, are so Gods, that they must
not be changed by Magistrates, or their Laws, but must be rendered entirely to
him, as he gave them, in the Glory of them, not Adulterated or Imbas'd.

And especially in all things that concern God himself more immediately, as in
the Purity, Spirituality of his Nature, the Divineness of his Truth and Word,
the Service and Ordinances of his Worship, and whatever he has herein reserved
to himself, all these are so his, that no Caesar has any Power in or over
them, to add, or diminish, or make the least alteration: So that though they
may have great Power in many things relating to Religion, to the Accommodation
of the most External Exercise of it to Government, and the Peace of Nations,
yet as to the very Religious Actions themselves, and the Management of them,
they must be close confined to Gods Manifestation of himself, how he will be
Worshipped, and to those things that are absolutely necessary to Moddel, and
decently to Circumstantiate that Worship, and so it is to be rendered to God,
perfectly according to his own Pattern; and the Magistrates Care is, that it be
so rendered; if in things evident to Natures Light, the Magistrates Laws have
place; if only to be known by Revelation, the Magistrates Power cannot rise
above the means appointed by God: that is, Instruction producing Faith, and
Obedience, and not Compulsory Laws, seeing Natural Reason may be Obliged, but
Faith is the Gift of God. Now these things God has by the Prerogative of his
Divine Power reserved to himself, and they are to be rendered to God, distinct
from the things of Caesar, that is from all Civil things given by God to
Coesar, and so to be rendered to Caesar: Yea, even distinct from the Appendant
Laws for the securing Justice, and Soberness; which though they are Gods, yet
having not so immediate a Respect to him, as Godliness, or Religion, are more
under Humane Legislation in the particular adjustments to the General Ends. But
both the inward Court of Religion, or Divine Truth, and Worship it self, and
the outward Court of Decency and Order, are within such Limitations of the Word
of God, and the Laws of Nature, that all indifferent things therein, not
prescribed by God, are left to the freedom of every Man by God, and no Power of
Prescription ought to come there, that a Man may not be either incumbered by
unnecessary Observances, or in danger to mistake them, as having any influence
into his Worship of God, which ought not to have any, and can indeed have none
that is good; Nor lastly, be in doubt whether he do not displease God in adding
to his Worship. But if a Man can see his Freedom in all these, it is serving
out of Love, and being made all things to all Men, and going to the utmost he
can, in Obedience to Magistrates; if a Man cannot see his Freedom, but doubts
of the lawfulness, he is under as severe a prohibition of Compliance against
his Doubt, as in other Cases of Sin: For the Sentence is Positive, He that
Doubts is Condemned in doing the Indifferent thing he doubts of; and
whatever is not of Faith, or assurance, it is pleasing to God, or not
displeasing to him, is Sin.

Quest. But this Doubt may extend to Civil Things, and Indifferences there, or
to those Rights of Sovereignty, and Grandeur of Supreme Power, God has
invested them with?

Answ. When Obedience is enforced in such Things, the Magistrate has this to
justify him, he is within his own Territories, given him by God; he requires
the things that are Caesar's upon Gods Donation: But in Religious things, ^e is
within Gods Peculiar, and so cannot be justified in that enforcement, because
the things are so peculiarly Gods.

Quest. The great Question now remains, what are Subjects to do, when Authority
stamps it self upon False Religion, or enforces Indifferent things against the
apprehensions of Conscience concerning their lawfulness, so that they cannot
Obey, but with a doubting Conscience, and the danger of that has been already
opened?

Answ. There is one Rule in all these Cases, even as it is impossible, Laws of
Injustice, and Licentiousness, when Sovereign Powers so Err in Government,
should change the True and Everlasting Notion of Righteousness, or Soberness,
or those Eternal and Immutable Laws of them, in themselves; even so impossible
it is, the Laws of a False Religion should change those of True Natural, or
True Revealed Religion; or, the Laws imposing Indifferent things in Religion,
should take away the Liberty God has given, or the sinfulness of Obeying
against Doubt of Conscience, when a Man does not see that Liberty: That
therefore which is Eternal and Unchangeable, must be adhered to, and obeyed.

Quest. How then is there a Subjection to Magistrates?

Answ. The Subjection then is in this, as in all other Errors of Magistracy, in
Cases of Justice, or Soberness; not to resist the Power, vindicating its
Commands by Sufferings and Penalties upon those that cannot actively Obey,
wherein Religion, Justice, or Soberness are contradicted, which are Gods, and
must be rendered to him according to themselves, who is able to make them
recompense, who suffer for Righteousness sake, as he pleases in this World, or
most certainly in the Resurrection of the Just.

But if there were not such an absolute Legislative and Executive Power in
every Community thus fixed, and unmovable, and accountable only to God; the
Restless Love of Change would be always disturbing, and calling to account
Government, and every Man take upon him to be a Lawgiver, and a Justicier, or
indeed to be Licencious and Inordinate, and as they could Consult and together
Collect themselves into a Rebellion, would enter into open Hostilities against
it, and so the ends of Government in the Peace and Order of Humane Societies be
quite lost; so that till any Principalities, sitting on the Seats of
Government, are so bad, as to retain less of the Uses and Ends of Government,
than they destroy, and it can be made apparent, endeavors of Change cannot
introduce so great and general Mischiefs, or that even Anarchy it self cannot
introduce greater Mischiefs, than that Government is the Author of, (which has
come to pass in few Instances) till then, I say, we must fear the Lord, and the
King, and not meddle with them who are given to Change, For their Calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Quest. But what are Christian Subjects to do, when Titles of Sovereignty, or
Legislative, or Executive Powers of Laws are Disputed, either betwixt various
Pretensions of Princes, or where the bounds of Power, and Rights of
Sovereignty, and the Liberties and Properties of People are in Controversy?

Answ. I shall no more intermeddle in that, than the Doctrine of Christianity
does, which leaves all those things to the Laws and Constitutions of Nature, of
Nations, and of each Particular Country. The Duty of Christians is to those
Sovereign Powers, whose Authority is Current, whose Image and Superscription is
upon all things Public, the Powers that are in being, are to be Obeyed
according to the Ends of Government already Discoursed, that is for the
Punishment of Offenders; for the Executing Judgment betwixt Man and Man, for
the securing Common Peace, in all Godliness and Honesty: Our Lord, and his
Apostles intimate nothing either way, to strengthen or weaken the Claim of the
Powers then present; but declare Obedience to them, Prayers and Thanksgivings
for them, as they then were, although they could not have the clearest of
Titles; Christianity as it is strictly the Religion of Jesus Christ, does not
make it self a Divider over Men, nor Decide such Controversies, which are quite
of another Cognizance: yet it subverts no Rights, it betrays no Liberties,
justly so called; it reverses no Laws of Nature, nor rescinds Constitutions,
and Compacts of Government, but teaches Men to do all they can to preserve
Common Good and Right determinable upon other Principles: Only this, the more
clear, ancient, and indisputable the Titles of Princes are, the more
indisputable Boundaries betwixt Prince and People are kept, the greater are the
Obligations of Obedience, of quiet and peaceable rest in that Obedience, of the
most vigorous Defense of the Power over us; and the greater the Guilt of any of
the Sins of Mutiny, Faction, Sedition, Rebellion.

Quest. The Discourse of the Power of Magistrates in Religion, has brought to
my thoughts, National Religion, and a National Church, wherein I desire your
Instruction?

Answ. I can but apply, what I have said in general, to this Particular Case,
which I shall endeavor to do to your satisfaction, in these six Propositions.

Quest. What is the first Proposition I am to be Instructed by?

Answ. It is this, That to join in True Religion with our Native Country, or
Nation, is such a Law of Nature, that cannot be reversed: For the sake of the
True Religion, we may be obliged to forsake not only our Country, but our
Fathers House, and to unite to the Church of God founded in that True Religion;
yet in the mean time we must own all that is Divine, Rational, True, weresoever
we find it, much more in our Native Country, and if it be possible propagate
True Religion upon it: For we shall not only be judged in this World with our
Nation, but shall rise with it at the Day of Judgment, in the same Station or
Lot, wherein we were placed in this World; according to our doing good in it,
we shall receive our Reward with those of it, that are saved, who shall then
survive in Glory, and become, as if they were the whole Nation; the perishing
part being lost; as we therefore desire the prosperity of it in this World, so
ought we to endeavor by all means the Eternal Happiness of as many of it as we
can, by joining with them, and engaging them in True Religion.

Quest. I desire your Second Proposition?

Answ. It is this, That in a Political Sense, National Religion is, when
Magistrates and the Body of the People join in the True Religion, and Establish
it by Law, and devote to it the most Public Advantages, that the Largeness and
Grandeur of such a Nation have in their Power, fixing Characters of Civil
Honor, and ample Condition upon the Rulers of the Church, and Communicating to
them Magistratical Power in things pertaining to the External Defense, Honor,
and Provision for the True Religion, as it is National; all which, so far as it
is Serviceable to the best Ends, is acceptable to God our Savior, who is not
the Author of Confusion, but of Peace; and ought to be Submitted to with
Reverence, both in Obedience to Government, and also as it is done in Honor to
the Name of God, and True Religion: The State of the Church in times of
Persecution being not the Standard (as to these things) in the prosperous times
of it.

Quest. I now desire the Third Proposition?

Answ. The Government of a Nation in Religion, appointing and prescribing
Liturgies, Confessions of Faith, Catechisms and Public Forms of Instruction,
or Homilies, they may be so far useful, as when they are composed according to
the Word of God, to secure True Religion, and the Public Administration of it,
by so much publicly Ratified; and requiring of all, whom it Intrusts, as
Ministers of the Word of God under its Approbation and Maintenance, to assent
to the Truth of Religion so Comprised, and Publicly to declare it, by using
them, as is appointed: But these are not to be understood to put Limits upon
the Ministers of the Word, first entrusted by Christ, who are both in Prayer,
Preaching the Gospel, and all means of Instruction, to search into all the
Scripture, that is profitable for Doctrine, Instruction, Reproof, and to Pray
with all Prayer and Supplication according to the particular occasions, and in
that abundance and liberality of the Divine Oracles, that they themselves may
speak as the Oracles of God, and Pray with the Understanding, and in the Holy
Spirit, and that all their Service may be matter of Bounty from their own
Minds, and not of Constraint and necessity, as imposed: For how should they
then, as every Good Scribe Instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, bring out of
their Treasure Things New and Old, or like the good Householder, that has made
provision and laid up in store to that End. In all these things Solomon's
Example is Great. According to which the Preacher ought to be Wise, and to
teach the People Knowledge, and give good heed, and seek to find out acceptable
Words, that may be as Goades and Nails, not blunted with Common use.

Quest. I now desire your Fourth Proposition?

Answ. The Benefit of National Religion Established by Law, is, That every
Subject of that Nation, has a Right to the True Religion so Established, and
may claim his Interest and Property in it, as in all Things else legally due to
him, and is not obliged upon the account of Passive Obedience, to desert or
relinquish his Right in it, any more than his Righteous Claim, or Title, to any
thing else he enjoys by Laws, and yet Trangresses no Rule of Christianity, but
has the same Obligation to defend that his Right, as any other Right whatever,
so far as the Laws of the Nation enable him, nor can there be any Resistance to
Government in so doing; even as there can be none, but it is the Duty and Trust
of Subordinate Magistrates to adhere to the Laws in the point of True Religion,
as in all other Cases; and of the Supreme Legislative Power of a Nation, to
foresee Dangers and prevent them by Additional Laws, as necessity shall
require: And all this with the Prerogative due to Religion.

Quest. I desire your Fifth Proposition?

Answ. National Religion, seeing it is designed to Comprehend a multitude of
Persons of most necessarily, and unavoidably various Sentiments and
Apprehensions, must be so prepared, as that with greatest Ease and Room to
Consciences and Understandings, of so many several Figures and Impressions,
there may be an Union in National Religion with least Scruple, and therefore to
give all the Liberty, that Truth gives, not imposing Arbitrarily, because
Religion as has been said, is Gods Peculiar, and in that, the Doubting
Conscience cannot Obey farther, than it sees the Divine Rule before it, not in
things Dark and Disputable, because clear things are only necessary to
Salvation, not forcibly, except when Natural Religion is Violated, because
patient Instruction, Counsel, and Ratiocination are the Divine Methods in
giving and working Faith.

Quest. I now expect the last Proposition?

Answ. I shall give you the last, and therein Conclude this whole Enquiry, and
Instruction, and it is this,

The True Religion of the Word of God in a Nation, or City, does overtop all
the False and Private Religions in it, and become in the Sacred Register, the
National Religion. In the Sacred Maps, the Christians of Achaia, were Achaia it
self: The Seven Churches of Asia, were the Cities themselves: And whatever
Lesser Differences, or Divisions, this or that Name of Distinction may seem to
make in National Religion, yet, the True Substantial Religion in all of them
shall be one National Religion; and become one Rod and Scepter in the Hand of
Christ, and the Nation be as one National Tribe, and Church: For let Men do
what they can against it, True Religion, as it is the only Public Religion,
and no Separation of Men from it, however called Public, can make it Private;
so in what place soever it is, it shall have the most Public Character, and
the True Religion in all those that sincerely profess it, shall be one True
Public Religion, and those little Differences shall not cleave it into more
than one. Without the Change of True Religion it self, there cannot be a Schism
of a deeper Sense in it; if Bitterness and Animosity, Censoriousness, and the
Persecuting Spirit were away: God will graciously Interpret Scruples on one
side to a Jealousy for the Purity of Religion, the freedom of the other to a
desire to Propagate it under the favor of Laws, and thereby to be capable of
doing most Good. In Heaven they now are all one, and shall be one, and the
Envy, Strife, and Contention (which the Good Lord Pardon) shall be utterly
Abolished. This is the Honor of True Religion, of Public Divine Religion.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead, our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, by the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make his
Church, and his Church in this Nation, perfect in every Good Work, to do his
Will, Working in it, that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 36. l. 20. for scale read seal. p. 70. l. 9. r. Record.


