A most Humble REPRESENTATION In a Further Review, ERECTING A Pillar of Praise,
In acknowledgement of what GOD has been pleased to Do in this Last Remarkable
Year.
WITH Reasons from thence of Expectation of a Happy Revolution in the Rising of
the Suffering Witnesses of Christ, or Protestants in France, etc. The Fall of
the Papal and Ottoman State, and the Beginning of the Kingdom of Christ in the
World, speedily to be brought to pass by the Stone cut out of the Mountains not
in Human hands, but to become Himself a Great Mountain, filling the whole Earth.
I Am most sensible, The great Events, I hoped this last Year, have not had
their Complement; and that therefore, The Censures of many are very severe upon
me, according to the great Rigor of Human Nature upon it self in this
Degeneracy of it.

But upon the Review of the whole Year, and the Events of it, which must needs
be acknowledged to be very Extraordinay Ones; and the particular Times, in
which the Divine Providence did advance them, I find great Reason of
Encouragement; For it pleased the great LORD of Time, through Grace in Jesus
Christ, the Mediator of His Churches Times, the Great Palmoni, or Wonderful
Numberer of Time; the Supreme Apocalyptes, to whom God gave that Illustr^o^s
Prophecy of the New Testament; The Revelation; to direct me in a Paper
published in the Fifth Month, called, July to the most particular. ^^^^^se
Times of the greatest of Events this Last Year, in both, Old, and New-Stile.

The times I fixed upon, were, the Month of August from the 15th to the end of
the Month; the 1st of September the Ancient Feast of Trumpets; the 10th of
September, the Day of Jubilee; the Feast of Tabernacles from the 15th to the
22th of the same Month.

Accordingly on the 22th of August, Old-Stile, just on the Time of the
Cessation of the Empire of Rome in the West, (as was more fully set out in that
Paper) and in New-Stile, September the 1st, the Feast of Trumpets; The French
King comes forth, taking upon himself as a Caesar-Augustus, or Universal
Monarch, to shut the Temple of Janus in an Universal Peace, or, as he spoke,
Giving Repose to Europe.

On the same 22th of August, Old-Style, and September the 1st New-Style, the
Imperial Armies were in motion toward the Turkish Forces, and on the 31th
Old-Style, That so extraordinary and monumental Victory was obtained over the
Grand Signior and his Bashaws.

On the 10th of September, Old-Style, the 20. of September, New-Style; the
Articles of Peace were Signed at Riswick.

These Things came to pass at the very times of this Year, that had been
Foretold (as ^ath been said) in that Paper; which, as it may be subject to
Censure because Things have not risen to that h^i^^h^, yet ought to be
considered and justified, in what the Year has attained in such Determinate
Times for Events; That though not to the highest themselves, yet ^ontain within
themselves the Seeds, Beginnings, and Principle, or these Highest, and are the
Pledges, Earnest^, and Assurances of them; As the Peace, which the French King
takes upon himself to have given, imports (however he understand it not the
Resignation of Universal Monarch; and the Universal Peace of the ^^rce of
Peace: The Mabo^etan Ottoman Def^^t ass^^es the passing aw^y of the s^^ond ^^o.
viz. Of the Ottoman lyranny; and That ^^in^^ coming to an end, and none to help
him; His Day. Hour, Month, Year, being expired, and the Kingdom of Christ
immediately ready to succeed; and therefore, the Papacy, on which it is a
Judgment, certainly to ^ad with it.

And though I do not pretend to have affixt the following Events to their
proper Points and Times; They are yet great Events of this Year, that ought to
be Recorded as so. The Articles of Peace, with the Empire, after a time of
Suspension, holding the Peace at some incertainly, were accepted by the
Emperor, ^^lob. (...). and Signed N^v. the 1st. New Style, and Remarkably so,
as it Divine Providence would Note the Half ^^^e, or an (...) Years past, since
The Reformation by Luther more illustriously showed it self in the Empire; who
affixed his Antipapis^^ed Positions to the Church-doors at Winemberg the same
^^bob. 31. for the s^^re of the Popish high All-s^irts Day following, to be
thereby made of the most Public Noteri^ty in the Empire; and it gives great
Hopes, some great Intentions of Providence, for the Glory of His Gospel in the
Reformation, and (...) his ^^ngdom in the Empire, are laid up in (...) Peace.

This Year has produced a very observable App^^^ance of the ^^zir of Mus^ovia.
and in a Victoriousness over the Ottoman S^g^iory, as (...) B^^^in^n^ of the
C^^^iar (as we ^tile^em) (...) out of their I^norance, Bar^^^^^, Sla^^ry,
^^^ording to preph^^; of which (...) Prince i^ a i^^st Fruits, and the m^^re
for his co^^^^^ into so cle^r an Air of (...) in this Nation; and whene^^r That
does come to pass, I am In^allibly certain. the Great City Rome shall be ready
to (...)

But That, which in the last place, but with a Primary Intention, I Record as a
great Event of this Year 97. is, That, though It is much to be Lamented, The
Protestant Interest could not be comprehended in the Peace; and that the
Herodian Spirit has appeared in a time of Universal Peace, which slaughtered
the Infants at one time, and at another time streached forth its hand on the
Christian Church to vex and to kill; So a Persecutory Spirit has even, since
the Peace, raged in the French Monarch: A great Remove from the Magnanimity of
Christian or Princely Compassion, that would overslow at such a time toward
all. Oh that there were a due sense of it among Protestants, that are at ease;
and that solemn Fasting and Prayer, without ceasing. were made for such
Sufferers; For why should there be Wrath agairst Protestant Princes, Churches
and Nations! Who would not bewail, That Protestancy, our greatest Privilege,
Glory, and Enjoyment, should be punished on them as their only Crime! But I
cannot but hope that God has been pleased to suffer it, that it might be made
Evident, that the Suffering Protestant; beyond the Seas, who at this time, Keep
the Commandments of God, and Hold the Faith of Jesus, are those Witnesses of
God, in whom God is pleased at this time, as in an Epitome, or Summary, to draw
up the sufferings of all the Confessors, and Martyrs under the Papacy, and
Antichristian Apostasy for so many Hundreds of Years, before their Full, and
Complete Ri^^ng, and the op^ning of his Kingdom. There is therefore a perfect
Sciagraphy, or platform of the Apocalyptick Vision, cap. 11. in their present
Case and State.

They lie, at this time, in a Large Breadth of the Great City, the Roman
Artichristian Church, viz. The Empire, In which the Reformation h^^an; and more
especially in France, where so many Dread^^l Scenes of their Massacres, and
Persecutions have heretofore been pre^en^ed; and in Pi^^mo^t and S^rcoy, where
They have been (as many Faithful Historians witne^^ continued by an
uninterrupted succession of so many Hundred Years, as will make up the 1260. in
the pure Profession of the Gospel; and However Persecuted, they have been
preserved, as Moses his bush, burning, (...) not confirmed; Now in this very
Year, They (...) this Breadth lie dead, (but as was said especially in France)
and under A^athemaes, Proscription, Edicts for D^at^, and Banishment, Able
^^^ion to the Galleys; their Testimony to Christianity, and their Sufferings,
as it were Vying one with another.

They of the Popish People, and Kindreds and Tongues, and Nations, have by
their Plenipotentiaries looked upon their Dead Bodies to the purpose, and
determined they should lie Dead: and the Protestant Plenipoteniaries have
beheld them dead, and professed they could not help them.

They cannot yet be Buried, in Regard of God's Gracious Bearing up of their
Spirits with Renewed Resolution, to keep up their Faith to Christ in the midst
of so great Crueky upon them; and further, There are such great Kingdoms, and
States, that standing upon their feet; that is, subsisting upon their own
Strength. Authority, Laws, and Government; Avow the same Profession publicly,
in defiance of Papal Powers, whatever, and so are called Protestants, or open
Avowed Witnesses.

They that dwell upon the Earth; The Popish Princes, and States, The
Ecclesiasti^k Head, which the Scripture calls The Beast, as the Image of
Ancient Empire, have sent their Compliments of Congratulation and Joy, and
their Gifts, and Presents, one to another, upon the suppressed State of
Protest^ncy so far, as they have attained; and what Alliances they are forming
further, if the Stone cut out of the Mo^ontains should not surprise them, Time
would Dis^over: And that they may think themselves more secure, and That they
are still to continue. Providence has given them the returns into that
Adulterous B^so^t, of one of the German El^^lors, in the Count and Territories
of whose Predecessors, Protestancy had its first Protection; that babylon may
say, I sit a Queen, ^d^a^^ no Widow, and shall see to sorrow, and that so, Her
Plagues may come in one hour. For therefore I Record these as signal Events of
this Year, because I look upon all these as signs at the Time, God has
ordained, when the spirit of Life f^o^ God small enter unto the Witnesses;
their whole tim^ of 126^ Years of Sa^k^loth Prophecy being expired; and their
present po^^are, such as Prophecy has described it at their Ri^ing and
Deliverance.

But it is y^^ a most Remarkable Event of this Year. That God has been
pleased, this Year, by the Peace, to place it, as an Honor, upon the King, as
Prince of Orange, to provide ^^at His Principality, as a Sanctuary; that his
Witnesses there may not only not be buried, but not so much as lie Dead; but
their Profession (...) born up there, when in Regard of the Seve^^ty of the
Pe^se^^tion they lie Dead in other ^^rts of that Nation. And in Regard, it is a
^^^toration of the Kingdoms of Protestancy, (...) ^he (...) before the Peace,
had e^^^ of the Kingdom of France; It bears the face of a Resurrection; and the
Return of their Four Fastors thither in so solemn a manner, out of their
Imprisonment at Lions, as is related in their Letter Mont^ Accou^^ the Mont^
led Fe^ary.
to the Pastor of the Walloon Congregation at Rotterdam, (I hope most
Authentic) carries the very Type of a Spirit of Life from God, entering into
them, setting them on their Feet, and A Voice from Heaven, saying, Come up
hither, Their Enemies beholding them; and many Papists so moved, as to give
Glory to the God of Heaven by Conversion to Protestancy. All which, is both an
Earnest, and pledge, and Assurance of the Resurrection of the Witnesses in
general, speedily to go on; And one may even say, They have begun to Rise; and
I cannot but hope, hereby God has made the King, whom the Enemies have called
in contempt, Prince of Orange, The Prince of Orange le Grand! and on this very
Account, as on others, A Signet in God's own Right Hand.

But it ought not to be omitted, that God has been pleased by a Spirit from
himself, now in the Close of the Year, to set a further mark of Honor upon it;
the Unanimous Address of the Honorable House of Commons for the Honor of
Jehovah, in a Reformed Nation and accepted with such a Zealous Cheerfulness by
the King in so great a Proclamation: This is, I hope, laid up, as Scripture
expresses it, as a Memorial before the Lord in his Temple, for the Glory of the
King, and Parliament, in his approaching Kingdom; It being a Testimony for God
unparalled, since what is styled, The Restoration; and looks as if those
earnest Motions for Reformation, that have been at any time before, since the
Reformation from Popery, were Reviving by joint Supreme Authority, near to The
Restitution of all things.

Now, by way of Reflection upon all these Imp^^^^^, of Divine Providence, upon
this Year (...) which being so many, and all clear Matter of Fact, cannot be
supposed to be by chance. I cannot but Remonstrate; That though Thing are not
Ascended to the H^^^h^hs I had hoped and expected, yet, it ^^^not be denied,
God has not left this Year ^^stitute, Naked, or without Witness from Himself,
and that He has, in an Eminency, Graced those very particular Times in this
Year, I had singled out, as designed, by Prophecy, for Engravings upon with
Effects of Divine Power, and Goodnese.

Now, whatever has come to pass this Year, of so great Remark, and so
ag^^^able to Prophecy, deserves some of that Ast^ri^k upon and Resurrection,
and of the Mission of the Holy Spirit, Remarking it That Year, and That same
Year, on occasion of that so Memorable Prophecy of Caiaphas, their High Priest
that Year, as Productive of it, and Impelling it: In like manner these things
have come to pass, this Great Prophetic Year 97. because This same Year.

And as In a Wonderful Resemblance of Caiaphas, and his Prophecy, I cannot but
look upon that Oracular Acknowledgment of the French King, as what he was
Impelled to, on the Account of his being permitted, and so far upheld by
Providence, to take upon himself, as an Universal Monarch in the Peace, This
same Year. He Writing to the Archbishop of Paris, in desire of the Popish le
Deum, as a Thanksgiving for the Peace with the Emperor: Thus begins: COVSIN,
THE TIME, WHICH HEAVEN HAD ORDAINED, FOR THE RECONCILIATION OF THE NATIONS IS
COME. I hope This is Prophetical of the Reconciliation of all Nations by the
Kingdom of the Prince of Peace.

How, therefore, God will please to promote these Beginnings, through this
following Year School. (Being very positive the 1260 Years of the Delay of the
Kingdom of Christ there expired) viz. Beginning at the Apocalyptick Epoch, the
time of our Lord's Resurrection, Ascension, and Mission of his Spirit; Down to
the time of the Cessation of the Roman Empire; Month the 6th; Then on the Feast
of Trumpets, Jubilee, and Feast of Tabernacles in the 7th Month; I will not
Pronounce, but Humbly Wait with greatest Hope, and Expectation from Him, who
Magnisies his Word above All his Name.

For I am humbly Conscious to my self, whatever Thoughts Any may have, I have
not Rashly, or Rudely, seized on the Time of the Last, and of this Year, as the
Time of the Great Revolution I expect for the Kingdom of Christ; but I have,
through the Grace of the Wonderful Numberer, and through His Redemption,
extending it self to every Th^^^ of His Kingdom, that is the Kingdom of
Redemption; drawn a Line of Time. according to the Scriptures, made Illustrious
with the greatest Events that have been known in the World; coming down to this
very Time from Solo^^^^^. Death, the very Time where Prophetical ^^^e begins,
and goes in a strait Line (...) or expressly, for the space of seven 390's, or
2730. Years, viz. the Changes made upon the Ancient People of God, the Ten
Tribes of (...) and the Kingdom of Judah, in their so (...) Desolation; the
Babylonian, Persian and Gre^^^ Monarchies; the Roman Empire, and the Gre^^
Changes, and Revolution of it; which in regard of the coming of the Messiah,
His De^^ Resurection, and Ascension the Mission of the Spirit, and the
Preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles falling within it; is of all other the
most Remarkable (next to that of Israel) Subject of Prophecy in the Old, and
New Testament; and has dependent upon it be Great Revolution of so great a
part of the World coming under the Name of Jesus Christ But imediately attended
with the Black and Dark Eclips of Antichristianism, Styled very justly
Romanism; The time of which Prophecy is so Intent upon, as to have given ten
times the exact measure of, and in all kinds of Characters: On which Follow the
Dreadful Judgments of God in Revenge of such a Traterous Undermine of his
Kingdom; In letting out the Barbarous Nations to Ravage upon Rome, and to Break
in pieces (...) Empire into Ten (or a variety of) Kingdoms, Intoxicated into
Papal Subjection; Then came Mahometarism with it Two W^e^ the Saracens and the
Turkish Ottoman Power, which has seated it self in the Room of the Grecian
Empire, and in it is very Atr^^^lis, or at Constantinople; All which is become a
very great part of the History of the L^ter Times; And since that, The
Reform^^^ by Luther which has made so great a Change in the Papal State, and
the Kingdoms of E^rope in General. Now all these, I have so Adjusted to their
most Lively Types in Prophecy, and to their most exact Situation, in what I
look upon to be the Express Prophetic Line of Time, or Prophetic Chronology;
And with such Attestation; of General History, and Chronology, (especially in
some most Eminent Joints of Time) so undoubted as thereby to assure in what may
seem more Dark and Doubtful; and all to this day, That I am sure, The most
Learned and Sagatious cannot draw such another Line, so Justly s^^^ved, and so
supported.

But however, or whenever These things shall appear, I will not Fail
Incessantly to Cry out with the Spirit and the Bride, and to provoke him that
hears to say, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly in thy Kingdom.

T. BEVERLY.

LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by William Marshall, at the Bible in
Ne^g^te-street. And by John Marshall, at the Bible in Gra^^-Church-street,
1608. (...) ^^ease to do (...)


