A ^ETTER FROM W. B. in the CITY, To his Friend at ^ARWICK.
(...) Friend.
^UT of sight out of mind, does without doubt often prove true, but you may
believe (...) is not so with me, notwithstanding my so long silence and your
frequent Provocations. In Troth the various shapes our publik Affairs have put
on, the general Confirmation, that had in a manner seized all truly Loyal
hearts, and impudent actings (...) Gentlemen of Forty One, had so non-pluss'd,
and staggered my apprehensions and that I resolved my self into my old Mum,
till Providence should afford me a more cer^ comfortable Subject to accommodate
my Friends; And now my hand is in (...) acquit your self as well as you can.
Your Letters have bin read by many an (...) who say indeed, that you Write
wittily and ingeniously, and that you are an (...) Loyal Subject, and a true
Churchman, but I hear of no great noble or (...) you or your Town have done
for either God or the King, as Bristol (...) Places. Now is the time or never.
We have Writers enough, who have suffici^^^^^ done and foiled our Adversaries,
in so much that diverse of the Godly, or rather Un^ have long since cursed the
Pampleteers and other Writers, and were willing to cross the (...) that
incomparable and unwearied Asserter of true Loyalty, the Observator especially,
and (...) would leave gauling them and laying open their old and new intended
Villainies; the (...) which has gratified them in laying down first, as you may
find in his Paper of the 24 of (...) his Reasons and Resolutions upon it, to
which I referr you. But what will Writing or (...) or even Preaching do, if the
Magistrate bear the Sword in vain? nay, what can the (...) ^e do, if all true
and loyal Subjects, I mean the established Church of England Protestants, (...)
earnest, and actively forward to assist him in the execution of the Laws
against all se^ Conventicles and unlawful Assemblies whatsoever. It Is plain,
that Indulgence has en^ ^ and made them impudent, and nothing but severity will
calm and make them subject. (...) I may now say, that the Boot is on the right
Leg, and will (if we are not wanting to our (...) and our selves) there
continue, tho the Devils labor hard to pluck it off again. (...) which they
have taken diverse Methods and Measures, as by lies and lying Wonders, (...)
Enemies whereby they ever carried on and supported their Infernal Cause, by a
new (...) for taking and interpretation of all Legal Oaths, squared to these
Saints Consciences, Po^ (...) fitted for our Republican Hogs-heads, the pretty
Intrigue with our Rennegado, who came with the Morocco Ambassador; Salamanca
pick-Locks for the black Box, being th^^^ invention of a Masquerading Jesuit
spawned of Anabaptist Parents; Evidences kept in (...) help at a dead lift,
Ignoramus Juries, who make all Laws truckle to their omnipotent Co^ces,
Midsummer-Moon Frolicks in choosing of Sheriffs; and lastly, by frighting the
chief Man and other Officers from doing their Duties, with Actions and Suits of
Law, and broaching ^nies against them. I might add many more, but these may
suffice at present, only let me leave to remind you of my prophetic Spirit in
my Letter to you upon the first discovery (...) Popish Plot, when I told you,
that I feared another would arise out of the Ashes of that (...) which is now
as plainly visible as the Nose in an honest man's Face. The good old (...) men
may call it a Sham plot, and swear in an Ignoramus Way, That there is no
Presby^ or Republican one; So, they may drink Healths to the pious Memory of
Steven Colle^ (...) condemned Traitor, and say they are the Kings best and most
loyal Subjects; Nay, they endeavor for a Bill of Exclusion as soon as they
have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Sup^^^^cy, and think they are not
perjured, They may do evil, that good come thereby, and say, S^ ^berty have all
their Saints; They may cry out of Arbitrary Government, and set up an ^ring
Committee; They, when it serves their turn, may maintain, that the Servant is
ab^^^ (...) Master, that the Sheriffs are above the Lord Mayor, and that the
Mobile or Rabble are all. That Vox Populi (by which must be understood our
Republican Saints, as heretofore ((...) Army) is Vox Dei, And that the Kings of
England are elective, and but Servants to the (...) which was the common
Doctrine before the taking off the Head of that blessed Martyr (...) the first.
But no more of this Subject, till I see what returns you make and issue of
(...) depending upon the Quo Warranto, or our new Sheriffs give bond and sworn.
Howeve^ I conclude, it may not be amiss to acquaint you that the old Fox and P
-- S are pa^ that some of the Patriots of the Whiggs and Troublers of Israel
are gone beyond Sea, (...) aside, as Bethel, Starkey, Wilmore, Aaron Smith, and
Langly Curtise. William Pen with some (...) Gang are gone to Pensilvania, and
many others to Carolina, as Harbingers to their mighty A good riddance say I,
and the more the merrier, that we may have the better Cheer, puts me in mind to
tell you, that merry Tom the Teaser is dead before he could take (...) with his
Comrogues. In a Word I am

Sir, Yours W.^.
September 1.
Printed at the Importunity of some Loyal Gentlemen for I. ^ in
Little-Brittain. 1683.


