Evangelical Repentance UNTO SALVATION Not to be Repented of, Upon 2 Cor. 7.10.
And as most Seasonable; Short Considerations on that Great Context Hebr. 12.26.
Yet once more I shake not only Earth, etc. Upon the Solemn Occasion of the Late
Dreadful Earthquake in Jamaica; and the Later Monitory Motion of the Earth in
London, and other Parts of the Nation, and beyond the Sea. Whereunto is
Adjoined a DISCOURSE on Deathbed Repentance, On Luc. 22.39. Now God commands
every one every where to Repent. Acts xvii. 20. By T. Beverley.

London: Printed by R. Smith, for W. Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with Bound Books of
most Sorts, Acts of Parliament, Speeches, and other sorts of Discourses, and
State-Matters; as also Books of Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons
on most Occasions, etc. MDCXCIII.

Licensed and Entered According to ORDER.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE KING and QVEEN.
TO Their Majesty's is most Humbly presented These Discourses of Repentance,
extending to National Reformation, in order to the Kingdom of Christ. Into
which are inserted Considerations upon the late Earthquake in Jamaica, and the
later Motion of the Earth in London, and other Parts in the Nation, and beyond
the Seas: And all this on greatest Right and Due. For who, as Religious
Princes, are so concerned in Public Reformation according to all the
Precedents of Scripture? Who, as Protestant Princes, are Interested in the
Kingdom of Christ? of which the Protestation against Papal and Antichristian
Abominations, and Usurpations, was a Preparation; even for that Kingdom of
Christ; tho at the distance of 180 Years, styled in Prophecy, Half Time, near
expiring into the Succession of that Kingdom; when Reformed Princes, truly so,
shall not lose, but highly gain in Glory; Who, as Good, and, indeed Gracious
Princes, are so deeply affected in public Judgments, unhappy Revolutions; or
general Mercies and happy Revolutions; foreboded by Earthquakes or Gentle Moves
of the Earth? For they are Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers of their People.
And of what Princes can we hope or promise our selves better than of their so
United Majesty's, Two-One in True Religion? As therefore the Supreme Majesty
was pleased to give particular Directions to Themselves of those Tremblings of
Earth; whether for Judgment and Repentance; or for Mercy; in their Port in
Jamaica; styled Royal; and in this their Capital City; and not only so, but
peculiarly in the Camp Royal in Flanders; So All these Discourses upon All, are
most Humbly and with profound Obeisance first laid at their Majesty's Feet; as
having the first National Episcopacy committed to them from God in Succession
to Constantine the first Christian Prince; in much greater and truer Right,
than the Popes have their Primacy from Peter; or his Hierarchy their
Episcopacy, from the Apostles; And next it is Presented to the National
Episcopacy so Constituted by their Majesty's; even as an Evangelical Ministry,
is, I hope, more immediately committed to them by Christ; wherein being near to
Christ; as in their National Episcopacy to their Majesty's; they can, and I
doubt not, will Represent to them what is according to his Gospel by this
Ministration. For wherein have we in the History of Scripture found a greater
Configuration of the happiness and stability of Times? than when David's, and
Nathan's; Jehosaphat's, Micaiah's, and Jehaziel's; Joash's and Iehoiadah's;
Zerubbabel's, and Joshuah's; Nehemiah's and Ezra's have been conjoined! And in
Church History, than when Constantine's and Athanasius's; Theodose's and
Ambrose's; the Protestant Princes and Luther's etc. and in our Nation; than
when such as K. Edw. VI. and Cranmer, etc. or Q. Eliz. and Jewel, etc. have
been United in Public Reformation. And oh that at such a time as this, General
Reformation by Both might be tinctured with the Knowledge of the Kingdom of
Christ; when (by the Sure Word of Prophecy (deeply to be searched,) it is so
near; How great Honor would be returned from hence! All which is most Humbly
Prayed by

Their Majesty's most Humble and Obedient Subject and Servant in the Kingdom of
Christ, T. BEVERLY.

TO THE READER, BY A Friend of the Authors.
WE live in an Age, wherein Names and Professions are many Thousands; and ten
Thousands are distinguished thereby, every one saying, Lo, here is Christ, and
Lo, there; that thou have a Name, that thou live, may be said to the National
Church, and to all the Dissenting Churches among us; the Temple, the Temple,
says the one, and says the other; yet may it not be said to the most of these
Churches; But thou art dead, be watchful and strengthen the things, that
remain, that are ready to Dye, Rev. 3.2, 3, 4. God has (I am persuaded) a few
Names in all, and every the said Churches, who have not defiled their Garments,
but do indeed repent, and turn to the Lord; who are born not of Flesh, nor of
Blood, nor of the will of man, but of God; such to whom the kindness and love
of God our Savior has appeared, not by works of Righteousness, which they
have done, but according to his mercy he has saved them by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; and for others, let them be of
the lowest, or of the highest form, such that have made the first step to
Reformation, or higher and greater steps thereto; they are but the leaves of
the Fig Treee that is cursed of Christ, and shall soon wither away: It is no
matter what name you have (I would there were not any Name among us but
Christian); It is the Nature and Power of Christianity: What is the Chaff to
the Wheat? It is said in the Phrophesies of Isaiah and Micah, that the Mountain
of the Lord's House shall be exalted to the top of the Mountains, and all
Nations shall flow unto it; I do not think by Mountain in these places is meant
any one particular Church, by what Name soever they be dignified or
distinguished: But the true Living, Mistick and Catholic Church; such, who
having been in the Apostasy, with others, do Repent, and turn to the Lord; and
that you may the better know them, you have these following Discourses to help
you in so great a work; some Despise this great Grace, and stumble at this
mighty work of God upon the Heart, as too high, too hard, and too difficult a
work; but God has his Fire in Zion, and his Furnace in Jerusalem and he will
throwly purge his Floor: There must be a cutting off a right Hand, a plucking
out a right Eye; and it is better going to Heaven with one Eye, and with one
Hand, maimed and Halt, than to go to Hell with both. Others say, Repentance is
a legal work, fit only for old Testament Saints; There is indeed a sorrow, a
rapentance that works Death; but the Repentance here called for, and exhorted
to, is such, that is never to be Repented of; That which brings the Soul poor
and naked, trembling, and melting to Christ, the Prince and Savior, that gives
Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sins; And blessed you: For ever
Blessed are they, whose sins are forgiven, and whose Iniquities are pardoned;
here are the Rivers of the Waters of Life, the Tree in the midst of the
Paradise of God; Jesus Christ thus Revealed, and thus received, and heartily
embraced, will put an end to all differencies, debates and controversies; He
that has this Anointing from above; this well of Life springing up in him unto
Everlasting Life; will not Bless himself in an Idol, nor be pleased with any
pompous Worship, knowing the King's Daughter is all glorious within, and
Circumcision is that of the Heart; he knows not, nor acknowledges any, as
Lords, over God's Heritage; but is assured, That the Son of Man came not to be
Minister'd to, but to Minister. The things contained herein are the true
sayings of God, according to the Holy Scriptures, making the man of God
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work; Did all men that have the
worthy Name of Christian, profess, and practice, what is herein pressed to, and
called for, we should see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, a sure Dwelling Place;
for none shall then indeed harm us, if we are followers of that which is good:
Here are plain Gospel Truths, that whosoever stumbles thereat, it is, because
Christ is to him a stumbling stone, and rock of offense; and yet misterious and
deep, that one can never find the bottom; a River that men may swim in: O
Christian! whenever thou art so conversant in these things, let thy profiting
appear to all men; let the Dead bury the Dead; but go thou and follow Christ,
as soon as ever he calls thee; Never go to thy Father's House, and bid them
there farewell; go to Christ, whenever in the Gospel he calls thee, or speaks
to thee by any private whispering; Go in all thy rags; say with the Prodigal,
Tho I have spent all upon Harlots, and am Starving, having fed upon Husks; I
know in my Father's House, there is Bread enough, and to spare, and here I
perish with hunger; I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him,
Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; yet Take me into thy
Family, tho I be but as one of thy Hired Servants: To whom the Father will say;
Don't stand Doubting, come in, come in to my House, bring forth the best Robe
and put it on him, etc. I think nothing too good for thee (my Son) now thou art
returned, not a word what thou have been, now thou art returned, I will receive
thee; tho thou have not a penny in thy Purse, nor any good quality in thee, but
this thy coming back to me; Thou must starve if thou keep wandering from thy
Father's House; If I don't feed thee, thou perishest; thou have be-thought thy
self at last, and art come home; stand not at the door any longer starving in
the cold, and for hunger; Away, Away, with thy provious Dispositions, and good
qualifications before coming Welcome, Welcome, come in, come in, do not stand
at the door, I am glad thou art come; Who ever thought to have seen thee
returning again? Bring hither the Fatted Calf, kill it, and eat, and be merry;
How merry (sinner) can thou be? And they now begin to be merry, yea, and all
the Angels stand by, and rejoice: O! here is a Feast indeed. But this makes the
Elder Brother, the proud Pharisee, to stand off powting and grumbling; And he
will never more come into his Father's House; For he was never so kindly dealt
with, yet never Trasgressed at any time, he was qualified, and deserved
Entertainment, he had done many a good Work, he had bore the Burden and Heat
of the Day, and therefore expected to have received more than they that came at
the Eleventh Hour; to whom God will say, Is thine Eye evil because mine is
good? Let us then all be deligent to lay up for our selves a Treasure in
Heaven; we see, or may see, All things here Perish with the using. This is a
shaking time, God is now shaking all Nations, and it is, that the desire of all
Nations may come. He that Epistolizes this, is a Friend to the Author, and well
acquainted with his endeavors to press after, (and Witnessing for him, as well
skilled in) the truth and the inside of Religion; That he is a man taught of
God, and wishing well to all that are gone beyond him; and hoping the Lord will
not despise the day of small things; knowing, the humble he will teach his way,
and the meek he will guide in Judgment. I have pressed the Author to permit
these things to come to light, which at last is condescended to: If God bless
it to they Edification, Conversion, Reformation, say, It is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy; for neither is
he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters Any thing; but God that gives
the Increase; to him be glory, and praise for ever, and ever, Amen.

To the most Reverend, THE EPISCOPACY OF THE Church of ENGLAND.
I Do not arrogate to my self (Most Reverend in our Lord) in Presenting to your
Hands this following Discourse, to offer you any thing but what you have before
received from the most Excellent Master, and Teacher, the Holy Spirit, in the
Scriptures, and Word of God; Given by the Great High Priest, and Apostle of our
Profession, that One Shepherd, the Chief Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls,
Christ Jesus; and what you your selves have often, I have greatest Reason to
hope, and believe, Discoursed, with clearest Evidence to the Understandings,
and Convictions upon the Consciences of them, that heard you.

This notwithstanding I have very great Reasons, for making this Humblest
Offerture to you.

1. That by discoursing and arguing a point so acknowledgly Great, so
Fundamental and Essential, not only to Christianity, but to Natural Religion,
and all Morality: If it shall be acceptable to you, as I cannot but trust it
will, because it is so agreeable to Scripture; I may reconcile my self to your
more, not only Favorable, but Deep Consideration in so great Points of the
sure Word of Prophecy, as I have heretofore presented to you; and have made
some Reference unto, in this very Doctrine of Repentance, as most Connatural to
it.

For though I know there is a Difference between such a plain, and
uncontestable Truth of Scripture, as Repentance is; and what lies in the darker
Folds and Plaits of Scripture, in the Hieroglyphick Figures, and Prophetical
Numbers of it; and it may seem therefore impossible, or highly improbable, that
I especially should attain the Certainty of the Words of Truth, to answer and
apologize the Words of Truth, in the great dependencies of Prophecy, to them
that send to me for them.

But, as it is well urged against the enemies of the Natural Religion, as well
as Revealed; that though there cannot be Mathematical Demonstration of those
Great Truths, as of Euclid's Propositions; yet there may be as Convictive
Proofs, in their kind, and as satisfactory to true Understanding: Even so I
affirm, that the Prophetic Images, and Numbers, if they are attently eyed, and
compared, may be as certainly Assured; and Intellectual enquiries even satiated
with the evidence of them; Though they are not under such Proofs, as the plain
Doctrines and Precepts of Scripture, yet by such a Probation, as is most proper
to them, they are certain in their kind: As the proof of so plain a point in
its kind, as Repentance is, is as certain in its kind, as the proof of Natural
Religion, in its Kind; which is as certain, as a Mathematick Proposition, in
its kind: So sure is Prophecy: In the Goodness of our Creator, and Mediator; in
giving, and sustaining our Faculties in the true use of themselves; so sure are
each of these; and each of them, in their kind, as sure the one, as the other;
even the Word of Prophecy, sure as any.

For as I have often said, even these Enigmatical parts of Scripture, are most
certainly, as will be easily allowed, infallibly true in their own sense: They
are therefore to be understood; For so is all Truth: They are Revealed; and
therefore it is intended by God, they should be understood. If to be
understood, they may be known, they are truly understood, by the Consciousness
to ones self of the evidence of those Critierions, and Marks of Truth, most
Connatural to them; that All Parts answer one to another; that they answer to
what must be most apparently the main Scope and Intention of the whole; and
that Historical Matter of Fact answers all along; which makes all certain; As
he that has a Key to a Cyphar, or to History in Picture or Emblem, may be
assured he has it, when he Finds all agree, one part with another; and the
whole with what was reasonable to be expected, and supposed to be the Design.

And if any one should say, Why should this be Revealed to me so unworthy; so
little prepared with all the Advantages of Learning and Books.

I do most humbly Acknowledge the Dint of this Prejudice; and can only Answer,
as I have done (...): So it pleased him, and to humble me to lowest Abasement
(However I most humbly Confess wholly by my own sin, and guilt) as in a
solitary Patmos for it; And I cannot but hope, now I look upon my Testimony as
near Finished, and that things are just now upon their Complement, he may be
pleased also to Disconfine me when his Witnesses are so near, Coming out of
their Sackcloth, and that I shall in their Rising, rise out of this Civil
Death: But not my will, but his will be done.

I have therefore, I say, upon the whole, presented this Discourse, as upon one
Reason; that by it you may look upon my other Treatises, as not the
Performances of a Fanatic or Fantastic; or one that would (...) but (...).
Much less, (...), or what is Written, but to speak forth the words of Soberness
and Truth, as well in the one, as the other.

2. That from the Conjunction of the one part with the other, the Prophetic
with the Doctrinal, you may be, (as however I Hope; and am Persuaded you are)
more excited, and may move more Vigorously and Zealously in the Promoting
National Repentance and Reformation; as I have also in the Inferences of the
discourse, pressed; seeing therein is most certainly the greatest Magnification
of your National Office, or Episcopacy; that as having greatest nearness to the
Affairs, and Persons, that are at the Top; and who, as Springs, move what is
below them; you do therein (...) minister in Offering them up to God; For not
Worldly Grandieur, nor any of the Cathedralities of your State, nor an Animal
or Sensitive, (however not Sensual) Hospitality will sustain you; but this is
the best Account that can be given of such a Pre-eminence; when it is indeed of
National Superiority in an Elijah Like Fervor, and Influence for National
Reformation; seeing it is certain in an Union in true Religion; a National
Episcopacy Devoted to its true ends, tho in it self but Civil, may be
serviceable to National Godliness.

Hereon I have set my Foot in this Dedication to you, and Acknowledgment of
you; that if you are indeed for, and with God in your Pre-lations; you will be
Blessed, not only with Good Wishes, and Endeavors, but with happy Successes;
not only in Word, but in Power, in such your Character and Station. For all
Wise and Good Men's Eyes are now upon you, to know not your Names or Titles, or
Speech, but your Power in Holy Influences upon the Nation from you.

But the very want of Blessing from Heaven and Success therein, and to find
that National Vices, and Irreligion surmount your Sphere, and grow up above it
to Heaven, is reason for great Humiliation, and even Jealousy over your
Constitution; tho without your guilt.

But this will bear you in so great a Revolution, so near, as I declare to you.
For even as that Building, called Paul's, that is rising so Sumptuous, e're it
climb to its top, shall only stand, if it can be any way Serviceable in that
Kingdom's Succession so nigh; so it may be supported; else its goodly Stones
and Building will not, at least, to such an use, as Cathedral only, be one
Stone left upon another, with how magnificent a Zeal soever it be carried on:
It is begun too late to such a purpose, if it be so intended: Even so a
National Episcopacy suffering the Loss of all that is but Hay and Stubble in
it, as by Fire, may yet be Saved, or Continue in its National Presidency, if it
can be found as such, Serviceable for Offering up whole Nations more speedily
to God, and Christ; else it will vanish away as Froth, and empty Bubbles; For
let us all be sure, the Kingdom of God is coming upon us, which is not Word but
Power; Although therefore, you do not smite the menservants, or Maidservants,
or eat and drink with the Drunken; Yet I humbly beseech you to take heed, that
as Wise, and good Stewards set over the Household, you give diligently that
portion of Meat in due Season, all the most efficacious Persuasions, and
Influences for Repentance, and even National Reformation.

And herein what can be so mighty to persuade, as if with United Applications
to it, You would search, and encourage all that do search, and hold out that
sure Word of Prophecy; that has shone so long, and yet shines in the Dark
place of this Apostasy, till the very day dawn, and the day Star arise; Because
I most Humbly Assure you in the Name of the Great Master of the Family, he will
no longer delay his Coming, but he is very near at hand. I hope Providence has
Introduced you to such a purpose; and as I humbly hope, this Doctrine of
Repentance is presented to your Hands, together with so many Discourses, that
the Kingdom of Heaven is nigh at Hand; that upon that very Consideration you
may be most Zealous in it: So I earnestly Pray, you may be Blessed in your Lord
finding you so doing: Verily, I say unto you, he shall make you greater Rulers
in a truly Evangelical Sense, than now you are: And as to the black and dark
side I make no mention of it; because I am persuaded better things of you, and
such as Accompany the Salvation, and Glory of that Kingdom.

Herein I am Your most Humble and Affectionate Orator, T. BEVERLEY.

A Discourse upon Evangelical Repentance to Salvation, not to be Repented of,
and the Godly Sorrow working it.
2 Cor. 7.10. For Godly Sorrow works Repentance to Salvation not to be
Repented of, but the Sorrow of the World works Death.
THERE is no more Universal Notion in the Soul of Man in those Things, wherein
he has to do with God, or even with Man, or with Himself, then to Repent; that
is, to be sorry for what he has done Amiss, and wherein he has Offended: and
to Resolve, and Promise to Amend, and to do the Evil he has done, no more; It
is fitted as a great Instrument of Reconciliation, and a second state of
Innocence; a Reserve after the Ruin and Shipwreck of our First Innocence, a
Remedy, a Reparation after, the first Advantages of doing well, are lost; And
it is the infinite Grace of God in a Mediator, that there is such a Notion in
the World; It preserves it from being a Hell in regard either of the extremity,
and utmost Rages of Wickedness; or of the Horrors, and Fury of Despair. It is
the infinite Grace of God in a Redeemer, That there is a Place of Repentance,
as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 12. that is, place, and room for it in man's
Heart, and that there is place for it in the Acceptance of God; that God does
not scorn, and utterly reject it, against him, that has once sinned; That he
is not inexorable, and not to be entreated concerning it; For how woeful, and
even Hellishly Miserable would man be without it? That the Nature of Man is
inclined to offer, and accept such Repentance, one toward another, and so,
that there are mutual Forgivenesses among men, and not unappeasable hatreds;
and that there is in a man's own Conscience a preparedness to acquiesce, to be
satisfied, to Rest, and to be Appeased upon finding in the Soul, and Action, a
sorrow for sin, and Reformation from it: All this keeps the World from being
absolutely Hell.

For Sorrow, Dislike, Trouble, Remorse, for what a Man has done evil, move a
man to review, to acknowledgment, to bewailing, to confession, to change, and
reformation, to a new course of Life, and Action.

Seeing then Man is such a fallen, such a Peccant, and offending Nature; it is
infinite grace in God, that there is such a Notion, such Action in man's Soul,
as Repentance; and that there is not an utter irreconcilableness, an
unpardonableness after Offense committed: neither in Heaven nor on Earth; not
in the Court of Heaven, nor in the Court of Human Nature one toward another;
nor in the Court of a man's Conscience within himself. If it were not so, every
sin would be like the Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, Matt. 12.
Unpardonable; and because Unpardonable, Impenitable, or not to be Repented of;
and that not only in this World, but in that which is to come; the World would
become a Theater of sin, and damnation; even a Hell, without any Chancery, any
Appeal to Grace, to Mercy; or Relenting of Repentance from the hopes of Mercy,
the reverence and awes of Goodness, and Forgiveness.

Now that which lies loose and scattered, or disseminated, sown through the
whole human Creation; That, the word of God, especially in the Gospel, in the
New Testament; that the Spirit of God has collected into a more full, and
solemn Doctrine, and opened the Foundation, and laid bare, and in view the
root, or the great place of it; How it has room, and reception; what are the
Sources, springs of Efficacy, from which it Rises: even in the Sacrifice,
Blood, and Redemption of Christ; and the mighly Efficacy, and Grace of the
Divine Spirit; what is that godly sorrow, which is given by God, as the
Elaboratory or the Instrument of God for the Operation of it; what are the Laws
and Rules of it; the true form and constitution of it; what are the motives,
and inward considerations mooving to it; what are the signs, and evidences of
its Truth; what is the proper time, and space for it; It resolves the Scruples
or Cases of Conscience, that may arise in the Soul of Man concerning it; it
shows the great Fruit, certain Benefit, and Advantage of it.

And all these are either most innately residing or some way reducible to this
great, and excellent Context of the Apostle; in which regard I have chosen it,
and shall endeavor to bring Light accordingly to it; and according to these
heads, I will by the grace of God endeavor to Discourse it.

1. In regard it is Repentance to Salvation, and that Salvation is no other,
but in Christ alone, Acts 4.12. it plainly shows, That the whole Redemption and
Salvation of Christ, is the proper Basis, and Foundation of it; the whole Area,
Court, Space and most proper place of it; and that the whole Notion and Spirit
of it, as any way Commensurate to, or extended upon the whole human Nature,
has its Rise, and Original; flows from some Communication to the human Nature
from Jesus Christ, the Redeemer; and that yet the word of God and his Gospel
only Reveals it fully and genuinely; and his spirit is the supreme Operator of
it.

2. Here is plainly laid down to us the Elaboratory, or Instrument God has
prepared in infinite Wisdom, and Grace, and inlay'd the Soul with, in order to
Repentance. First, as it is a Natural Affection subservient to it; and then as
it is Sanctified by God to so great an end. Godly sorrow, or sorrow after, and
according to God works down Repentance, or brings it forth; a sorrow opposed
to the sorrow of the World, that works Death.

3. In that it is, 1. Repentance to Salvation, effectual to it.

2. Repentance not to be Repented of.

1. Not as a false counterfeit Repentance to be Repented of.

2. Always to be carried on, and promoted; and not recall'^, repealed, or
reversed, but confirmed by progressive, repeated Acts, and renewed after Falls.

3. In that it is, to, or lays hold of Salvaetion.

4. In that it rises not from an earthly spring, or any sorrow, not after God.

In all these Regards, it yields just reason to Discourse the true Laws, and
Rules; the Frame, and true constitution; the motives, means and considerations
for; the signs, and evidences of sincere Repentance.

4. The admirable Fruit and Benefit of it is most visibly, and illustriously
set forth before us in those words, It is Repentance to Salvation, not to be
repented of.

1. It is to Salvation; It is a great and certain security against Ruin,
Damnation, Perishing for ever.

2. It shall not only be a security from Damnation, but an assurance of a state
of Life, Glory, Blessedness.

3. There shall never be the least cause to Repent, to look back with Sorrow,
or Regret, that we have Repented. For we shall find, we have lost no good, we
have run upon no evil, in having Repented.

4. It shall give us Reason of everlasting Joy, Rejoicing, Triumph, Blessing
and Adoring God in Christ, we have so by his grace Repented to Salvation.

5. I will Reduce to the Doctrine of Repentance the s^ruples, and Cases of
Conscience that may arise concerning either the true Doctrinal State of it, or
the grace of, or practice it self of repentance,

These are the heads, I Propose by Divine Grace, and Assistance, to Discourse
the Doctrine, and grace of Repentance upon; but I find it is in the first place
necessary to give some short descriptions of the thing, Repentance, according
to the very importance of the word; and of the General Importance, and Nature
of the Notion, or the thing it self.

The words used by the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, are either that
strict word (...), a word that also signifies Consolating a man's self; showing,
after sin, and offense reflected upon, viz. with G^ief, and Trouble supposed;
the greatest consolation is recovery of a man's self by Repentance: Or else, it
is a word, that signifies Turning from what a man has been Turned and Posited,
and set himself ^o before. On this Account we meet so often with the words of
Turning in the Old Testament, and being Converted, and Turning in the New.

The most proper and strict words in the New Testament, are either an After
Care, a Reflection with sorrow, and sollicitousness upon what a man has done,
with Trouble, He did so; and a care, a caution not to do so any more for the
time to come; or an after-mind, an after-wit, an after understanding, a
transmentation, a new Mind, a new Heart and Spirit.

To speak of it therefore in the general; Repentance is given by God, as a
mighty Spiritual Instrument, or Engine in the hand of his Grace, in the Arm of
God made Bare, by which the sinful Nature, in every true Penitent, is unhinged,
uncenter'd from sin, and corruption. It is a return of the Soul home to it
self, after a Spiritual Phrensy, and Madness; The Prodigal is said to come to
himself: It is a return to its Fathers House, after a long bewildred State;
This my Son was lost, and is found. But beyond all this, it is a Spiritual
Resurrection, a return from Death to Life; This my Son was Dead, and is A Live,
Luke 15.

And indeed, as there is no notion of Scripure, that is more suited to express
the corrupt Nature of Man, than Death; so the first Threat Ran, In the day thou
eatest thereof, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall dye the Deatb. Death hy sin passed upon all. Dead in Trespasses,
Romans 5.12. Ephesians. 2.1.
and sins. Universal Death. And so in the Levitical Law, there was no greater
uncleanness than the Touch of a Dead Body. Accordingly when the Apostle, Heb.
6. names Repentance among the grand Fundamentals, or, Principles of the Doctrine
of Christ, He calls it Repentance from Dead Works, or Re-enstating the Soul in
Life after sin, or Works, as Unclean, and Loa^hsome, as a Dead Body removed
from the sight of the Living. Or as a Dead Body was in the Eye of God under the
Levitical Law.

This is the general Notion of Repentance; but it may be further Explained in
these three Particulars, and yet in a general way.

1. Repentance is an inward, sincere, habitual Change of the Heart, and of the
design, and purpose; and so of the outward Action, and Course of Life, and
Conduct of a man's ways; arising from an utter dislike of his, former Counsel,
Purpose and Design, and the course of Conversation, Life, and Action proceeding
from it; so that it becomes wholly New: This is the generel Nature of
Repentance, as it looks to the government of a man's self, and of his Actions:
Now this in Scripture, and Evangelical Repentance is the change from sin to
Holiness, from a worldly state, and conversation to an Heavenly; and from the
Creature, to God, and to Christ; an utter dislike of, and trouble at the former
Regiment, and steerage of a man's course, so as utterly to forsake it; and with
sorrow, shame, and astonishment, to say to his sinful ways, so contrary to the
Rules of Holiness, Righteousness, and Purity, Get ye hence, and what have I to
do any more with you? I will now guide my self by the word of my God, and hate
every false way, Psalm. 119. This is that, o^ which Scripture is full every
where; the through amending she ways, and doings, which were not good; the
wicked man forsakes his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and returns
to the Lord; Jerem. 7.3. Esaias. 55.7. Acts 3.26. James 4, 8. Romans 6.21.
Christ blesses in Turning us every one from our Iniquities. Cleanse your
Hands, you sinners; and Purify your Hearts, you double minded. What profit had
you in these things, whereof you are now ashamed? For the end of those things
is Death; 1 Cor. 6.11.
such were some of you. But now ye are washed. etc.

2. Repentance, as it looks to an offended Person, is full of sorrow, that it
has offended; moves earnestly to Pardon, and Reconciliation; and is ready to
make use of any powerful Mediator, in order to Reconciliation; and desires ever
after to please, and to offend no more; and herein the Affections are all moved
according to the degrees of obligation. Now in Scripture and Gospel Repentance,
the offending person, the sinner, has ^o do with God, the offended person, in
^^d through Christ; and so bewails offense, and moves earnestly to Pardon, and
Reconciliation with G^d by the Mediation of Christ, and with Christ ^or his own
Names sake. I beseech thee, O Lord! Take away the Iniquity of thy Servant. Hos.
14.3.
^ake away all Iniquities: Receive us g^aciously.

And here also ^^ises an ingenuous sorrow, shame, and confusion, that we have
offended a God so Good, so Holy, so Wise so Tender, and Compassionate a Father,
and despised so gracious and obliging a Redeemer. David's Heart sm^te him; and
he said to the Lord, I have sinned in that I have done; I have done very
foolishly, 2 Samuel 24.10. I was ashamed, yea, even confounded. I smote on my
thigh, Jerem. 31.19. Ezra. 9.6.
because I did bear the Reproach of my youth. We are ashamed, and blush to lift
up our Faces. They shall under a spirit of Grace, and melting sense of God,
Zach. 12.10. Job. 34.31; Deuteron. 31, 6. 1 Timothy 1, 15.
look upon him whom they have peirced, and mourn. It is meet to be said to God,
If I have offended, I will do so no more. Oh foolish people, and unwise, do you
ihus requite the Lord our God. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all
Acceptance; that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I
am chief. The deep and duly Affecting consideration of God, and of Christ, the
infinite excellency of their Nature, their so great Benefactions and loving
kindness toward us; and that God professes, He is Grieved, Vexed, Provoked,
pressed with our sins, as a Cart with sheaves; wearied, made to serve; that he
cries out, as one that would move compassion; Oh! do not that abominable thing
that I hate; These so enkindle all the Affections of shame, sorrow, gratitude,
holy desire, zeal, revenge upon our selves, that there is such a change
wrought, as is always found in true Repentance.

3. In Repentance in general, there is found, as motives and perswasives of it;
self-preservation; a desire of happiness, and an avoidance of, and flying from
misery; Men, dearly, as we say, Repent it, when the folly of their own ways is
seen in the bitter Fruits; the loss of their Health, loss of Estate, Prove. 5.11.
loss of Friends, of Reputation, and of all Enjoyment; and when they see all
manner of distress, c. 1.24. Marc. 9.43. etc.
anguish, and misery, come upon them; then they mourn at the last, when they
see all consumed, and say, How have we hated Instruction, and despised Reproof!
Thus in Scripture, and Evangelical Repentance; there is a fear of Hell, and an
Eternity of Misery; A cutting off the right hand, and Foot, a pulling out the
right Eye, when any of them are understood in Repentance, to have offended, and
to continue to offend; under the sense; It is better to enter into Life, blind,
halt, than having two Hands, Eyes, Feet: maimed, rather than to be cast into
Hell whole; where their Worm dies not, and their Fire is not quenched. There
is a seeking Honor, Glory and immortality, By engaging in Repentance into a
patient continuance in well doing; on the other side tribulation, and anguish,
indignation, and wrath, vehemently Agitate the Spirit, and Thoughts, against a
continued course of doing evil. What shall it profit a Man if he gain the whole
World, and loose his own Soul; or what shall a man give in exchange for his
Soul? I say unto you, my Friends, fear not them that Kill the Body, and have no
more that they can do; but I will forewarn you, whom you shall fear, fear him,
who after has killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear
him: Oh! that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end: I say unto you, repent, else you shall likewise
perish; who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come; God has
commanded all men every where to Repent; because he has appointed a day, in
which he will Judge the World: Repentance unto Life: Repent, and turn your
selves, that Iniquity may not be your ruin; Repent, and be Converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when the times of Refreshing shall come forth from the
presence of the Lord; Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Thus
Scripture having these two handles of the Soul, Fear of Evil, and desire of
happiness, mightily moves it to Repentance by them; it holds these two great
Globes, the World of Happiness, and the World of Misery, both present, and to
come; and so with a Scepter so Potent, it sways the Spirits of Men; as the
Divine Spirit, that dwells in it, pleases.

I have thus far given the Nature of Repentance in general, that it may be the
better understood, what we are now to Discourse: I begin therefore with the
first Head: that Repentance, which is so Communicated to the very inward sense
of mankind, springs from, and has its whole place in the Redemption of Christ.
The Apostle speaks of Esau, that he found no place for Repentance; there is a
proper place for Repentance. And this, I say, is the Redemption of Christ, that
has laid the Basis, the Foundation of Repentance; that has spread over Human
Nature, the notion and sense of Repentance. And where it is truly wrought, the
Spirit of Christ takes it from Christ, and gives it to the Soul, and it is
accepted only in, and through Christ.

It is therefore to be understood, that there had no Place been Found for
Repentance, had it not been for the undertaking of Christ; For Repentance being
a rational Act, it must have a Rational Foundation, and Encouragement. If there
were then no Mercy, no Forgiveness, no Salvation; there could be no Repentance
but that of fruitless sorrow, horror, and despair: the Repentance of wailing
and Gnashing the Teeth: that is, the Repentance that is in Hell, a Repentance
without being changed or made better. Seeing then Salvation, Forgiveness, Mercy
are all bound up in the Name of Christ; For they are no where else; the
Redemption of Christ is the only foundation of Repentance, such a Repentance as
has in it a change from sin to Holiness: David gives us this great
Instruction, Psalm. 130. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared; that thou may be feared with the Awes, with the Reverences of
Repentance, there is Forgiveness with thee; there had been no place for such
Fear of thee, if thou had been so extreme to mark what is done amiss, as that
there had been no Forgveness with thee.

And this is most evident also in that Doctrine of the Apostle before mentioned,
concerning the Repentance in the case of Esau: When he had despised and sold
his Birthright, and would after Inherit the Blessing, he was Rejected, or
Reprobated from it; and he found no place of Repentance, tho he sought it, that
is, the blessing carefully with Tears; Heb. 12.17. He found no Place of
Repentance, because he was rejected. Whether we understand it of Isaack's, or
of Esau's Repentance, it is much at one: If we understand it of Esau's
Repentance, finding no place in himself; so it has this sense; That Repentance
flies into Despair, if it be not accepted, when we tender it: Or if we
understand it of Isaac not Repenting, when Esau wept to procure it, but still
fixed the blessing on Jacob, it is still the same thing; for if God did not
please to accept our Repentance, or himself, to Repent in a sense worthy of
him; our Repentance would be to no more purpose, than Esau's Tears, or than the
weeping in Hell; we should be Rejected, and Reprobated in our Repentance.

The Law, that says, cursed is every one that has not continued in all things,
to do them, Gal. 3. and Do this in the first Act, and Live, leaves no room for
Repentance; but the bringing in a better hope even pardon of Sin, Atonement,
and Reconciliarion in the Blood of Christ, does, by this we draw nigh to God in
Repentance, Heb. 7.17.
and are not Rejected but Accepted.

Here then there is Rational Foundation, and Encouragement for Repentance;
because it shall not be thrown upon, and into Despair; there is Hope concerning
this thing in the Gospel; let us therefore by Repentance press home, and return
to God in Christ.

2. Again, Repentance is the gift of God, a Grace given by him; If God,
peradventure, will give Repentance, and, then has God granted unto the
Gentiles Repentance unto Life; Christ is a Prince and Savior raised up by God
to give Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. Acts 5.31.
and Remission of Sins. So Repentance is a Gift or a Grace; It cannot be
Educed, it cannot be drawn out by an^ Powers of Nature; It is not of Man, or of
the Will of Man, It is not of Bloods: It is not by Derivation, or Descent from
Adam; It does not run in the Channel of Human Blood. God therefore does not
give such Grace in Vain; but when he has settled a Fund of Pardon,
Reconcilement, and Salvation: He first settled that; else Repentance had been
in Vain, as the Eye would have been, if God had not first made Light; Light is
alone in Christ: He does not give Grace that shall be to no purpose, he gives
no man the Repentance he will not Accept and Pardon upon: He does not expose
his own Grace to Damnation, or to the Flames of Hell; nor does he give any
Grace, but in the Mediator, in the Redeemer: So the Redemption of Christ must
needs be the Foundation of Repentance; there had never been else the Notion the
possibility of Repentance; there had never been the sound, or report of it
heard in the World.

This then being the Foundation, let us take the true degrees of the state of
Repentance in two Positions.

Posit. 1. God has wri^ten in the very Heart of Man the excellency of this
Grace, and Duty of Repentance; tha^ it is not far from him, that he should go
up into Heaven, Romans 10.
or down into the Deep, or beyond the Sea for it; It is in his Heart: So the
Knowledge of it is very near him: God has also put a Tenderness, toward it, a
Flexibleness, he has made the Soul of Man, the Conscience, and Affections
pliable to it: And this, we shall see, is from the Mediator.

I confess, this may seem hard to be understood; seeing Repentance is fitted
and prepared for a sinful fallen Creature: Now in that man was at first Created
upright, and perfect, and good; and what was written in man's Heart, was written
there in his Creation; what place could there be for Repentance? Adam was so
righteous a person he could need no Repentance, why then should repentance be
written in his Heart?

And yet notwithstanding, we find by experience, and universal Observation; It
is a notion very intimate to every man's Soul, and even indear'd to his
Thoughts: Every man seems to be glad, there is such a notion, such an Idea in
his Soul; and they that hear of it, and know it from Scripture, acknowledge
immediately the goodness and reasonableness of it, and rejoice in it: And tho a
man do not fall down right upon the Practice of it, yet he is pleased with the
promise to himself, he will at some time repent, and reform, and grow better;
and there is proportionably a general Faith, Repentance will be accepted, and
the repenting Offender Pardoned. If men are told, they must of necessity
change, repent and reform from their sinful courses: If they are persuaded to
become other men, they are not so apt to be Angry, but rather say, Acts 24.25.
They will take a convenient time for it; tho Temptation carry them away, yet
they heartily Embrace the thing it self, as to the assent, and submission, and
acknowledgment, that it ought to be so. Men are convinced, that while they
defer to enter into the Practice, that yet they ought to repent.

This I assert is through the Grace of the Redeemer; I would therefore
endeavor to find out, how this notion of repentance comes to be so very
intimate and connatural to man's Soul; and with such a Engraven, Engrafted Hope,
and belief of Pardon upon it? How it comes to pass, that the demands of Natural
Conscience do so wonderfully lead to Repentance; and are like those of Natural
Justice, and common Honesty; of Soberness, and Temperance, of Truth, Mercy, and
Compassion, or whatever is accepted in the World as morally good and excellent;
and even as the deep impressions of natural Religion, sense of God, and
obedience to him? All these give an honor ^o Repentance, exert and urge the
Soul to it. By the same sentiments of Soul, we allow the one, we allow the
other also: If the remains of natural Conscience call a man out to the one,
they summon him to the other also: And yet all this, I affirm, is from the
Grace of the Redeemer. And this I would make out by two things.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ, the one Mediator, between the one God, and man; who
is the Light that Lights every Man that comes into the World, 1 Timothy 2.5.
John 1, 9. Heb. 1.3.
has natural Conscience under his hand, and upholdeth all things, ^ven as
Redeemer, by the word of his Power: He th^n bears up that Law of Holiness,
engraven on man's Heart in Creation; he holds up that rational Moral Frame; he
keeps that Light, that Candle or Taper of God in man's Spirit, that it may not
be a Lamp put out in obscure Darkness; Through him therefore, there are remains
of that excellent Image, wherein Man was first Created; even in that Knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness; so that Man does not sink, either into that
blackness of darkness, an utter Ignorance of God, and insensibleness of him; or
into an extreme hatred, and enmity to God, and all Goodness, as damned Spirits
do: Here is the great Efficacy of the Mediator, that he shores up, and stays
this Law of Original Goodness and Holiness in Man's Heart, that it does not
slide utterly away, nor sink.

2. Through the Redeemer, there is yet so gracious an Administration of the
Government of the World; the Vengeance of God, his just Indignation and Fury
against a sinful World, and against particular Sinners, is restrained; God
Refrains himself in, and through Christ; and does not speedily execute
Judgment: He Exercises an admirable Patience and long Suffering, Jere. 9.24.
and loving Kindness in the Earth. The Earth is full of his Goodness in the
midst of much Provocation; Lamen. 3.22 Malac. 3.6.
It is of his tender Mercy we are not Consumed, and because his Compassions
fail not. I am the Lord, I change not; therefore you the Children of Men are
not Consumed: The Lord is gracious, merciful, long-suffering, slow to wrath,
Exodus 34.6.
and of great mercy; And all this is very Visible, every Man may see it, Job
36.25.
Man may behold it afar off. The Heaven and the Earth, the Sun and the Moon,
and the Stars Proclaim it; every motion of Nature within and without us, Psalm.
136.
tell us, that his mercy endures for ever.

Now these two laid together, explain to us how Repentance is through the Grace
of the Mediator, written: even as all natural Religion, and Morality in the
very Heart of Man, and discernable by that Light: For when the first Commands
and Emotions of Natural Conscience are to do the things that are Holy, and
Righteous, and Good; and we find, that tho we have violated and perverted the
thing that is right; yet we retain a love to those Laws of Eternal
Righteousness and Goodness; we have not lost all sense of them, of desire of
likeness to, and agreement with them; thus we find a sorrow in and trouble
within us, that we have offended; and that the wrath and justice of the supreme
Ruler, and Governor, and Judge of all the World is not so sudden and immediate
in his Revenges upon us; but that we have space and time for return to God, and
to Holiness: There is by the very same Authority of natural Conscience, that
required Holiness in our first Acts, and thereby to please God: a close
obligation to return to him by Repentance, and to amend what we have done of
evil against him, and to beseech Pardon and Reconciliation with offended
Justice: Now when on the other side, the Patience and long-suffering of God
gives encouragement, and even Assurance, he will accept Repentance by his
giving scope, space and opportunity for it: Here is great ground for
Repentance: For the Soul and Mind of Man finding still in it self that
Primitive Love to, reverential sense of Righteousness, and that it cannot bid
defiance to it, as lost Spirits do, there immediately rises in it an earnest
endeavor to Self-restitution, to restore, and recover ones self by Repentance;
thus that Light given to a Man in his first Creation, and the state of
Innocence (the grace of Christ sustaining it by an Universal Grace to human
nature) does not loose it self by sin; but as it points and directs it self,
first to H^liness without sinning or falling from it; so it now points and
directs it self to Repentance, when it has fallen by Iniquity; and, as first,
it mooves it self to the Favor of God by not offending, or sinning against
him; so after sin finding him not presently executing wrath, and taking
vengeance, it beseeches him to Receive it. Graciously, Hosea 14.1. etc.
and to take away its Iniquities, that may not Die: For that God is a most
good, and gracious, and merciful Being in himself is a clear principle in the
Law of Natural Religion; even where ever God has not awakened that Natural
Conscience, to find it self in the Chains of everlasting Displeasure, as the
Devils and Damned are; against whom he has in Anger shut up for ever his
Tender Mercies; when therefore a man finds, notwithstanding the so great
degeneracy, and boldness in sin, that every where Testify to our very Faces,
and that we so well know; yet that God leaves not himself without so great
Witness of his goodness, Acts 14.6.
giving fruitful Times and seasons; filling men's Hearts with Food and Gladness;
and that in Relation to himself in particular, he has spared, and forborne, it
draws out Natural Conscience to return to him by Repentance; For the riches of
Goodness, the long Suffering and Forbearance of God lead to Repentance, Romans
2.4.

Thus the King of Nineveh by Natural Light reasoned, even when God had
positively declared, Yet forty Dayr, and Nineveh shall be destroyed: Surely in
that there are forty Days allowed, they are allowed as a Quarantine, as a time
of Trial and Probation whether they would Repent, or not; else why not
presently Destroyed? Why forty Days delay, if there were not Hope of Pardon in
such a Repentance; so they humbled themselves in that extraordinary manner, and
turned to God by Repentance; and God saw it and Repented of the evil, ^e bad
said, he would do unto them, and he did it not. Jonah 3.5. etc.

How much more have the generality of Mankind, against whom no such positive
Denounciation has gone forth from God, and to whom the time of Patience is not
so limited and defined: How great reason have they to look upon the time of
God's forbearance, as a most gracious Call, and Opportunity, and space for
Repentance.

Thus we see Repentance, in some light and sense concerning it, runs through
the whole World, so that the very Heathen, who have not had, nor so much as
heard, many of them of Scripture, yet have great sense of some way of expiating
sin, and turning from evil; and the very seeing, God has made Repentance and
Forgiveness a most necessary and useful expedient of mutual Conversation of Men
one with another; without which Human Society could not support it self; it
shows very plainly there is a Mediator between God and Man, a Redemer of lost
Man* that has for the great purposes of his Redemption inlay'd the Soul of Man
with the intimate and inward notices of Repentance; and that men show the work
of it written in their Hearts, and that their Consciences accordingly, either
Accuse, or Excuse; to allude to Romans c. 2.14, 15. and has given assurance from
Providence, and the manner of God's Government of the World; That Repentance
shall be accepted, and therefore has given the same motions of Natural
Conscience to Repentance, when a man has sinned, as to Holiness and
Righteousness before sin; and has manifested them, both alike, within man, and
has showed it to them; and by the visible things of Human Preservation has
made clearly known the eternal Goodness and Mercy, that pardons sin through the
Redeemer, to allude again to Romans 1.20.

Thus we read in the Book of Joh, a Book treating much of Natural Religion;
assisted by such measures of Divine Revelation concerning Christ, as God had
vouchsafed to Job and to his Friends; very high expressions on this great
point, c. 33.27. God looks upon man, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted, that which is right, and it profited me not; he will deliver his
Soul from going down into the Pit, for he will say, I have found a ransom for
him, and his life shall see the Light. A man, any of mankind have just reason
to say thus, have great occasion to say so; I have sinned, and perverted that
which is right, and do find, it has not Profited. It is very near to any man
to say so; and if this take place in them, and they do from their Hearts say
so, and ratify it by Action; God looks upon them, he beholds them with
Acceptance, he Delivers through the great Ransom, Jesus Christ, etc. It is
repentance to Salvation; so c. 34.31, 32. surely it is meet to be said to God,
I have born Chastisement; I will not offend any more; That which I see not,
teach thou me; If I have done Iniquity, I will do no more. Even according to
the sense of Natural Religion, and natural Cnnscience, It is meet to be so said
to God; All this is meet to be done. This is even the Discipline of Natural
Conscience, as God is said to open the Ear to Discipline, and to seal
Instruction, c. 33, 16. c. 36.10.

This is that earnest motion of Natural Conscience; to take fast hold of
Repentance, to return all it can, after it has lost its Inocency, Purity and
^erfection, of Righteousness and Obedience; even as it should have moved, first
powerfully and effectually against sin, and to good: and the same motion of
Natural Conscience, that is to the one, is to the other also; when it is
stirred up by further Grace from the Spirit of God; and there are generally
such motions as argue this work in the Heart, when the Conscience is not
deprived of sense, Feeling, Vigor, not twice Dead, pulled up by the roots,
delivered up to a reprobate sense; and when God has given so great, and
gracious Aussrance, that Repentance shall find Pl^ce for it self; That this
state is not Hell, either in regard of the height of Wickedness or
unpardonableness; it is an easy and very Intelligible Declination of Conscience
from the Azimuth, the highest point of Innocence to the next point Repentance:
which by the righteousness and obedience of the Redeemer shall transcend the
very first height; But that indeed is known by Revelation, and not by Natural
Light: But take Repentance, as it is the necessary reserve after sin, and that
God has provided it a Place; so it is near, and even next to Natural
Conscience.

Posit. 2. The second position I lay down concerning Repentance, and that gives
the truest degree of its Elevation through the Redeemer, is; That the word of
God in the Old and New Testament gives the clearest and fullest knowledge of
Repentance, and of the Divine Spring of it; the grace of God in Christ, and the
blessed operation of the Holy Spirit through his Redemption: Repentance
therefore is found to be one of the principal Doctrines of Scripture, whein it
is conveyed unto us under all the variety, and complex of Notions, that can
express so great a point to us, viz. remembering, bethinking, turning,
converting, renewing, amending, searching and Trying our ways, turning to the
Lord, bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance. The Rev^lation of the word of
God beyond all expression excells Natural Knowledge concerning it: It opens to
us the great Prince, the Redeemer and Mediator; who gives it a place, a
possibility; he is the Prince, whom God has raised up to make this supreme
Donation, Acts c. 5.35. c. 3.26.
repentance, and forgiveness of Sins, and blesses in turning us away from every
one of our Iniquities: Scripture opens to us that great and blessed Spring, ^^d
^fficient of it, viz. the true grace of God; and the blessed Spirit is the
efficient of it; It lays before us the great motives of it, the sense of the
favor and goodness of God who will have mercy, Esa. 55.7, Heb. c. 12.24. v. 29.
and abundantly Pardon; sealed to us by so great an Atonement, as the Blood of
Jesus speaking better things than the Blood of Abel; and on the other side, a
dread of him, who is a consuming fire; the living G^d, into whose hands in his
wrath and displeasure, It is a dreadful thing to fall; the wrath that is to
come, 1 These. 1.10
and ever to come; it gives us all the qualifications of it, Repentance with
the whole Heart, turning from all our evil ways, and all the evil in our evil
ways; it moves us with all manner of Applications, that may stir us up to it;
commands, exhortations, counsels, Threats; it never leaves speaking, Ezekiel. 18.30
and crying out to us, Repent; it says to us, Repent, and turn your selves;
Matt. 4.17.
so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin: It preaches, Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; Ezekiel. 18.30.
it even weeps over us, that we would do it; Luke 19.42.
Turn you, turn you, for why will ye Die? It weeps, when we have not known,
even we, in our day the things of our peace; It offers it as the only remedy
against Eternal Misery; Repentance is advised expressly to five of the seven
Churches, Revel. c. 2. c. 3. to show the universality and necessity of its use:
It is one of the great principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1. and thus
Repentance is the most Native, Domestic Doctrine of the Word of God, and of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; so that what is found in the Light of Nature, serves to
these lower purposes only:

1. It serves to the purpose of Human Order, Government, and preservation of
the World from falling into a perfect Hell; for were there not some sentiments
of God, of his Mercy, and readiness to forgive, tending to make men better;
were there not a sense of the goodness of Righteousness, Temperance, Mercy, and
of all Virtue; not only as what we should first be, but also, what we should
endeavor to return to, when we have Fallen; were there not such a thing, as
Vicious Men being restrained from running into utmost excess and extremity; and
as, being reclaimld, corrected, reformed, moderated, and cultivated by precepts
of Natural Religion, Wisdom, add Morality; all which flow from, and are
specimens of the Scripture Doctrine and grace of Repentance; the World would be
a stye of sensualists and impure Creatures, wallowing in brutish, and worse
than Swinish Lusts: And did not this Notion sweeten men one to another, the
World would be a Desert or Wilderness of Savage, and Wild Beasts, tearing in
pieces one another; and both ways a Hell of a World.

2. Hereby God will justify himself in the condemnation of the Pagan World;
that they have not only the Law Written in their Hearts, but so much of the
Gospel also, as this great notion of Repentance Teaches; For when the Respit of
forty Days imported it to the King, and City of Nineveh; why should not that
Patience, wherewith God governs even the Pagan World, Preach Repentance to it?
Why should they not be led to Repentance by the Witness they have of God, and
of his goodness in giving them fruitful times and seasons, and silling their
Hearts with food and gladness; which he would not leave himself without in his
great Wisdom, and Righteousness, as well as Mercy and Grace? How does this
riches of Goodness, Long-suffering, and Forbearance, Romans 2.3.4.
if not lead them to Repentance, justify their Condemnation; who after their
hardness and Impenitent Hearts Treasure up to themselves wrath, against the day
of wrath? So that as Niniveh shall rise up in Judgment with those, who repented
not at the Preaching of Christ, the greater than Jonah; so it shall rise up in
Judgment with other Heathen Nations, Cities and People, who might by the same
proportion have been argued to Repentance; so that tho God has in his supreme
Dominion and Justice, thought fit to deny them, what Christ says, They would
have repented in Sackcloth and Ashes upon; yet even by the standard of
Nineveh's Repentance, they are not Repenting by that Light they have, will be
Condemned at the manifestation of that righteous Judgment of G^d the Apostle
speaks of in that forenam'd, Romans 2.

3. The great Goodness of God, in Christ, giving the Notion of Repentance into
the Heart of Man; (seeing the Original of whatever is worthy, or Excellent in
Man, is but a Transcript, or Copy taken from the sup^eme Excellency and
Goodness) has thereby dlspos'd the Hear^ of Man to a Readiness to forgive, one
man to forgive another; and thereby to be engaged to an Acknowledgment of
Offenses one against another: to desire Pardon, and to offend no more: Wherein
much of the Peace and Happiness of Humane Nature, in this present state, is
supported and preserved: And herein, and by these very mutual Repentances
toward, and Forgivenesses one of another, is there a greater Illustration of
the Grace and Goodness of God, in Pardon and Forgiveness upon Repentance, and
thereby an Invitation, Encouragement, and leading to Repentance toward God.
For in that the Gospel-Command, to forgive them, who having trespassed against
us, tho seven times a day, turn again, and say, I repent: and that if we
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will our Heavenly Father forgive us:
Our Lord both appeals to the Sense of Mankind, and excites and encourages unto
Repentance toward God, in hope of Forgiveness; as well as to mutual
Repentances, and Forgiveness for the Peace and Good of Mankind; to which our
Lord had great Regard in all he said, and did.

4. The Natural Light God has given concerning Repentance, and the Sense in
Man's Soul concerning the Goodness and Reasonableness of that Grace and Duty;
upon which the Redeemer has pointed the Law written in the Heart; is as a
Ground, and Rude Draught, that the Knowledge of Repentance, by the Word of God,
and Divine Revelation, accomplishes, and fills up; and that the Spirit of God
plants his Supreme Operations upon; even as Sanctification is engrafted into
that Sense of Good and Evil that is found in the Soul of Man; and those
Irritations, and Provokings of Natural Conscience, to do the Good, and fly from
the Evil.

For thus Jesus Christ has, as our Creator and Redeemer, our Preserver and
Mediator in one, taken Care to secure a Remnant, and Remainder, of whatever was
excellent in his first Creation; that it may be taken hold of, and be applied
to in Redemption.

And thus I have ^^deavoured to discourse the Groundwork and Foundation of
this Grace, Duty and Doctrine of Repentance; That it is all settled in the Grace
and Mercy of God in the Redeemer, without which it had been an utter
Impossibility, and there had been no more, nor any other Repentance, than what
is in Hell. I come therefore to the Second Head:

Head 2. Here is plainly laid down to us the great Elaboratory, or Instrument
God has prepared in infinite Wisdom, and Grace, and in-laid the Soul with in
order to Repentance: Godly Sorrow, or Sorrow after, and according to God,
works down, or brings into Effect this Repentance: This God has prepared as
a Natural Affection of it self, and in its own General and Original Form, fit
to such a purpose; and then God sanctifies it to rhis Great Purpose, Acts 4.12.
to work this Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of. It is an
immediate Instrument in the Hand of God, to operate under his Spirit, to so
great an Effect: Of this I shall discourse in Three Generals:

General 1. I begin therefore with a Description of Sorrow, first, as it is a
Natural Affection, or Passion of the Humane Nature; and then as it is
sanctified by God, or as it becomes a Sorrow after God, and is fitted to so
great an End and Purpose; and as it is so, it is counterdistinguish'd to
worldly Sorrow, that works Death.

General. 2. I will consider the excellent Use and Service of godly Sorrow, to
so great an End and Putpose, as the working Repentance to Salvation.

General 3. I will open the Wisdom of God, and the Reasonableness of his making
use of Sorrow, and fitting it as after himself, or according to himself, to so
great an End and Purpose; and that according to the very Reason and Nature of
Things, it could not be otherwise, but that godly sorrow must be so made use of
above, and before any other Affection; and that it becomes him, by whom, and
for whom are all things so to make use of it.

General 1. For the Description of this Affection of godly Sorrow: First, as it
is a Natural Affection, or Passion of the Humane Nature; and then as it is
sanctified by God, or becomes Sorrow ofter God, and is counter-distinguish'd to
the sorrow of the World, that works Death.

Sorrow then, as it is an Affection, or Passion of the Humane Nature, must be
considered Two ways; and each of them must be applied to the Sorrow that works
Repentance, or to Sorrow according to God; and so a different and opposite
Sorrow to the sorrow of this World.

1. Sorrow, that is a Humane Passion, or Affection, must either begin in the
Body, and so passes from the Soul, and ascends up to the Spirit of a Man; or
it begins in the higher Region, the Spirit, and descends by the Soul into the
Body, and makes Impressions suitable to its own Nature there; and the Body is
governed according to this Affection, and to its Place, Estimation, Power with,
and Interest in the Spirit.

Now indeed all Affection, and even Passion, to speak most strictly and
properly, is in the Spirit; For it is all one to matter, how it be used; or
into what Form it is made to pass: or out of what, or in disjunction from what
Form it is forced to move: So that All we feel, by way of suffering, or
Enjoyment, is by the Spirit's having a Pleasing, or an Afflicting Sense of
Things: But this I wave, as not so necessary to the Practical Discourse of
Repentance I intend. It is plain and certain, the sense of some things begins
in the Spirit; viz. those things which are proper to the Narure of a Spirit,
and which are so, proper to a Spirit, whether it dwelt in a Body or not: But
yet when the Spirit is affected with them, because it inhabits a Body, the
Affection of the Spirit, even whether the Spirit will or not, works upon the
Matter and Fr^me of that Body; and thereby the Truth, and Reality of the
Spirit's being affected, is discovered to it self; and it may also be thereby
discovered to others: On the other side, there are Passions, or Affections,
that the Spirit is affected with, as finding it self moved and concerned; as
that Frame of Body, wherein it dwells, is either more or less fited for its
Enjoyment of it self in that Body; or put, quite out of Order; or is in pain,
and afflicted so, as to afflict the Spirit: And both, and each of these is in
some Degree serviceable to godly sorrow, though the first is the Chief and
Principal in godly sorrow.

1. The Spirit of Man affected with the consideration of sin, as it has all
the Reasons of sorrow in it; as it is a foul, and impure, and shameful thing;
and as it is an Offense against the Holy, and only Wife and gracious Majesty of
God; and as it brings Wrath, and Ruin, and Condemnation upon it; contemplates,
considers, and weighs those Reasons, and thereby finds it self affected with
sorrow and affliction, as if it were after the manner of a broken Bone, or
bruised Flesh: Thus we read of a broken and contrite Spirit; and of those who
are bruised in Spirit, and grieved in Spirit; and of a wounded and a troubled
Spirit; and of a sorrowful Spirit: And this when it eyes God, as a Father in
Christ, Gracious, and Good, and ready to be Reconciled, and to forgive, is a
true godly Sorrow, or a Sorrow after God: For it is in the True Region of godly
sorrow, the Spirit; and it has the Right Sense and Affection, even such an
apprehension of God: And such a Sorrow the Spirit communicates to the Body in
which it dwells, so as to make the Appearance of it Solemn, Humble, and Lowly:
It denies it those Ornaments or Refreshments, that it self at other Times
desires for it; it bridles, and curbs its own appetites and desires of pleasure
and satisfaction in it; it humbles it by Fasting, it lays it in the Dust, it
keeps it waking, it dissolves it into Tears; and if it be very great, as
sometimes, it dries up the Benign Juices of it, and it carries all the Marks of
the Spirit so affected. And because these arise from a sorrow within, after
God, God is pleased with them, and accepts them, as signs of such sorrow, and
calls for them.

2. The Sicknesses, or Wants, or Pains, or Notes of Disgrace, that the Wise,
and Holy Providence of God sends sometimes upon the Body, that make it an
uneasy, or a dishonorable Habitation of the Spirit: These the Spirit takes
Notice of with troublesome and unquiet thoughts; the thoughts being in a
Motion, a Conflict, and Agony; if by the Grace of God, they are guided to
search the Causes of these Strokes on the Body; and finds them to be an
offended Justice, a provoked and displeased Holiness, upon the account of Sin
and Iniquity; and that it apprehends These are but the Beginnings of Sorrows;
and that they are Indications and Fore-bodes of Wrath to come, and of further
Judgments from Heaven, even at the present, upon both Body and Spirit, if there
be not that course taken, of seeking Pardon and Reconcilement in Christ, and
turning from Iniquity: These thoughts sanctified, and conducted by God upon
himself thus, upon the occasion of outward affliction, become that sorrow after
God, of which the Apostle speaks, and often works that Repentance to salvation,
never to be Repented of.

Thus Scripture very often speaks of Outward Afflictions, made serviceable to
Conversion, to returns to God: Famine, and Pestilence, and War, and Captivity
in the Land of Enemies, are Represented in the Prayer of Solomon, as great
Motives, and even procuring, and exciting Causes of Humiliation, Bethinking our
selves, turning to the Lord. The Afflictions of Men are often spoken of by God,
and used as Arguments to such Resentments as call to Self-judging, and so to
reforming: ^ven often not only in the Old but in the New Tectament: We are
Chasten'd of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the World;
Affliction yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to them, who are
exercised thereby, 1 Cor. 11.31. Heb. 12.11.

Both these Operations of godly sorrow, seem to be Represented with a great
Elegancy, V. 14.
and Holy Eloquence, Job 33. the first, when this Sorrow begins in the Spirit
of a Man, and Thoughts arising therein. God speaks once, and twice; in a Dream,
in a Vision of the Night; He opens the Ears of Men, and seals their
Instruction; That he may withdraw Man from his purpose, and hide Pride from
Man: He brings him to such Humiliation, as keeps him from going on in his
former purpose.

Again when sorrow begins in the Body, v. 19. He, a man, any man upon whom the
methods of God for Repentance are so laid; is chasten'd with pain upon his Bed,
and the multitude of his Bones with strong Pain; so that his Life abhors
Bread, and his Soul dainty meat; his Flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be
seen, and his bones that were not seen stick out; yea his Soul draws near
unto the Grave, and his Life to the Destroyers; if there be a Messenger with
him, an Interpreter one among a thousand, to show to man his uprightness, then
he is gracious unto him, and says, deliver him from going down to the Pit; I
have found a Ransom; his Flesh shall be fresher than a Child's; He shall pray
unto God, and he will be Favorable unto him; and he shall see his Face with
Joy, he will Render unto man his Righteousness.

And now this sorrow, thus after God, sanctified thus, to have Respect to God,
and carried out after him, is Counter distinguished; it is most different from
the sorrow of the World, that works Death. The sorrow, that has no higher
spring, than this World, works Death; that is, however the Mind, or the Body be
Affected; when it does not mount up to a consideration of God, offended for
sin; when it does not seek pardon of him, and Reconciliation to him in Christ;
when it only pores upon the things of this World, and agitates it self about
them; it runs down into the dead Sea of Sorrow, that weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth that is in Hell. It is an Idolatrous Sorrow, arising from an
Heart deeply set on this World, and glewed to it; and so goes down into the
Vault and Pit of eternal Sorrow: It tends to the Death of the Body; it brings
down the Head to the Grave: It tends to wear, and grind bodily Nature to the
Dust; every such sorrow not after God, that has no tincture from him on it; If
it be not Antidoted by sorrow after God, and by Repentance to Salvation, It
tends to eternal Death, and is the Inlet unto it; For it is certain, all sorrow
here, that comes from Heaven, ascends up to Heaven, as Water ascends as high as
its Spring; But that which is of a terrene, earthly Nature, sinks down to the
Center, which is the neathermost Hell.

I come now to the second Head, to show the excellent use and service, sorrow
after God, yields in this wise, and holy preparation of it by God to that
Repentance to salvation, not to be Repented of.

1, In that, so great, and principal an Affection of the Soul is given up to
God; It has an use, and a service to steer the Soul to God; For the Affections
are, as the Rudder of the Soul, as the Helm of it, guided by the judgment, as
by a Pilot: And these affections are all in a Linck, and in a chain: If any one
of the principal Affections are moved, that mighty Vessel of the whole Soul is
turned this way, or that way by a very small thing, as it may seem; even by one
Affection, because all are joined and united with it: For where Sorrow goes,
Love goes, because sorrow is for the want of some good, the Souls desires; If
then sorrow be after God, and for Holiness; It assures, the Soul has a
springing Love for God and Holiness, and in the distance it apprehends it self
from these, it laments. Where sorrow goes, there hatred also goes: For sorrow
arises from some evil that the Soul hates and abhors, that presses in upon it:
In sorrow after God, sin, and the wrath, and displeasure of God, is, what the
Soul hates; and it finding these near, and closing upon it, it sorrows and
laments that they may be cast out and removed. And how do these, the Love of
God, and hatred of sin work to Repentance? And thus also it might be shown, How
Fear, Hope, Joy, Delight move as sorrow moves. The Apostle knowing with what a
strength, and force, and presence the Affections move, writes to the
Colossians, c. 2. To set their Affections on things above: For if the
Affections are so set, the Spirit and Soul will be so set, and therefore the
whole man will be so set. O^ the contrary, the sorrow of the World carries the
strength of the Soul, the Affections on the World; which not able to sustain
and bear up an Immortal Spirit, it often destroys the Body by Violence; and
leaves the Soul to sink also, the Spirit to fall down from God, which is the
Death of it.

2. The Affection of sorrow, is the Affection that is most properly conversant
about sin, and the consequences of it; the wrath, and displeasure of God, the
curse, and evil. Now then, as sin is a departure from God the fountain of Life,
and happiness, the supreme good, and so ushers in, and introduces all
unhappiness: so sorrow that is after God, begins in the apprehension of God,
and of his Law; and so descends on all the evil consequential, or following on
the loss of God: But the sorrow of the World, not beginning with God, fetters
it self with the Evils which press upon it, with relation to the present World;
which can never be well removed without removing the principal cause, sin, and
the displeasure of God for it: But to this the sorrow of this World has no
regard, and so is never cured, but becomes of a piece with the sorrows of the
second Death: For so all sorrow here not Healed by the repentance to Salvation,
not to be repented of, (which Heals the sorrow after God) becomes one with the
sorrows of Hell, and everlasting wailing: By godly sorrow therefore, sorrow is
made to be its own Death, and Plagues. For working repentance to Salvation,
never to be repented of, When it is sorrow after God, it is the Destruction of
all sorrow. For it can be no longer, but, as Scripture speaks, forrow and
sighing shall flee away, and there shall be no more sorrow. As it came in by
sin, so by sin Repented of, and Pardoned, it for ever ceases, and vanishes
away: So sorrow is conversant about its proper object, and cause, and it has
the great effect of removing it self; and of it self loosing it self in that
Joy, that follows upon the Salvation of that Repentance it self has wrought;
which must needs make an end of Sorrow, or Perfects it into it self never to be
Repented of.

3. The serviceableness of godly sorrow to Repentance, is, that this Affection
of all the Affections, or Passions of the human Soul, is that which makes it
wise, and considerative; seeing Repentance then, that is to Salvation, is a
most Wise, and prudent grace; This Affection of sorrow is most preparatory, and
contributary to it. The sorrow after God is no Ignorant, or unreasonable
Passion, or Affection; called Attrition; no superstitious Penance, or ceremony
of Sorrow, not a mere softness, and dissolving into Tears; not any desultory
Passion, that falls into some morning Dew, or as it were, heat Drops; but a
deep inward trouble, that we have offended God, and sinned against him, and
endangered our selves to Eternity by our sins: And however, there may be at
first some sudden stroke, or Impression, and a Passion upon it, that may go
off; yet it is indeed a spring that dis-embogues it self through the whole
course of a Christians Life: There is a sorrow, and a relenting of Soul, that
is a soft Dew, or Distillation from the Soul upon it self, that makes it very
tender, humble, and Apprehensive of the Evil of Sin; of the Ingratitude, and
unthankfulness of having sinned against God, and given Offense to the Eyes of
his Holiness, and of his Glory. And as this arises from understanding, so it
begets understanding, and close Consideration; It is observed in Nature, that
sorrow and sadness incline to Wisdom, and attentness of Mind; Vexation gives
understanding, is a saying: And hereunto the wise King Solomon agrees, Eccles.
7.3. etc.
sorrow is better than laughter. It is better to go to the house of Mourning,
than to the house of Feasting; for the Living will lay it to Heart. And by the
sadness of the Countenance, the Heart is made better. In the day of Adversity
consider, that is the proper season of it; Generally, our Mirth and Rejoicing
is too lighr and flashy; it scatters, and sets the Spirits in wandering; I said
of Laughter, it is Mad, and of Mirth, what does it? As the cracking of Thorns
under a Pot, so the Laughter of Fools is Vanity. Sorrow is like a shade that
congregates, and gathers up the Spirits to think, and weigh, and poize things.
Sorrow loves solitude, and so the Repenting Person is described; he sits
alone, and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him. Lam. 3.28.
Vanity, and folly, the pleasures of sin, that are but for a season, cannot
endure the tediousness, and melancholy of an Hour alone: And this is the
unhappiness of mankind, they cannot endure to be alone, and to speak with
themselves; I hearkened and heard, but no man spoke aright, Jerem. 8.6.
or said, What have I done? We are so naturally for Diversion, They that are
not so mad, as to to be for the roar, and madness of Company; yet they cannot
be content, without what, we call Divertisement and Merryment, and cannot
endure sorrow and sadness.

Let us now but ask our selves, whether we think Solomon was a Wise Man, or
not; and whether he was not in circumstances of greatest advantages to rejoice
in all the Pleasure, Mirth, and Enjoyment of this World? which he calls, Laying
hold on folly; Eccles. 2.1. etc.
while yet he acquainted his Heart with Wisdom to understand, what was the
utmost amount, or to be had from all the Entertainments of that kind: And when
he assures us, as he does, that Mirth is but Madness, and the Laughter of this
World so unreasonable; that no Man can tell, what it serves for, or to what
purpose it is; and that he so much commends sorrow to us; let us then take
Counsel with our selves, whether he spoke wisely, or not? And what shall we
think of the words of our Lord, Luke 6.21. Blessed are you that Weep, and you
that Mourn; and, woe to you that Laugh. Now it is not to be supposed that so
Good, and so Merciful, and so Gracious a Savior, as our Lord Jesus Christ is,
should envy to man any thing, that could be to the Good, and Welfare of his
Nature. But he knew how much the Carnal Joy, and Mirth, that is so common, and
so much valued among Men, lavishes out those Thoughts, and Spirits; and that
Time, that should be laid out upon so serious, and great things, as
Reconciliation to God, Pardon of Sin, Newness of Heart, and Life; and that
Sorrow, and Mourning, and Weeping are prepared by God, as fitted in their
Nature to make us more Grave, and Pondering of Things; and that being
Sanctified, and in the Hand of his Grace, are made use of to bring us home to
himself: For when men are under sadness, finding the prints of the Wrath,
Justice, and Displeasure of God upon them, they enquire after the Reason; Their
sins, as to Joseph's Brethren, come to their Remembrance; They are provoked to
move to God by Humiliation, Confession of Sin, Prayer for Pardon, Desire of his
Grace, and Spirit to enable them to Reform; they enquire into his word, how
they may cleanse their way, order their Conversation aright to please him; they
are moved to consider by these drops, and Touches of Sorrow, what that state of
sorrow without Banks or Bounds or Bottom is, where there is weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of Teeth: They are taken off from that Pride, and
Self-Conceit; they find so little in all things here below, and in this present
State, that they enquire for those better, and greater Things that are Above,
and in Eternity: When sorrow, that disposes to strong, and serious enquiries
becomes sorrow after, and according to God; Oh! how excellently does it work?
How do men search, Lam. 3.40.
and try their ways that they may turn to God.

Now because of the Order, that God has placed sorrow in to all these great
Effects; therefore our Lord pronounced a Blessing upon Weeping, and Mourning.
For else he loves our Joy, when it is Spiritual; he commands to Rejoice in the
Lord all way; and again he says, Rejoice: He spoke many great things, John
15.11.
that our Joy might be full; that he might fill our Mouths with Laughter, and
our Tongues with Singing. But our carnal, our sensual Joys, he knows, are our
Death, and Destruction; he knows we are in no better case in our profane,
foolish, sinful Laughter, than they who are stung with the Tarantula, and Dye
Laughing: Thus we have greatest reason in the midst of such Laughter to be
Sorrowful, and the end of that Mirth will be heaviness: Thus it will be
bitterness in the latter end, therefore he warns us of it before, and in
greatest Love to us, declares a Woe on such Laughter.

But now to conclude this particular, The sorrow of the World, How different a
thing is it? For tho it causes Thoughts and Enquiries, yet it is only how to be
rid of the Worldly Causes of Sorrow, and it turns only to Worldly Remedies: And
it is very often in a rage at the causes it finds; and when either the Remedies
are not to be found, or fail in their Success, it is in a Rage, and flies out
too often against God, and Providence, and so it works Death: It begins that
Hatred of God, that Blasphemy, and Rage, that is in Hell; or if it does not
thus, it is a sullen, despondent, unactive state of Mind, that shuts, and seals
up all Activity; like the Night wherein no Man can Work; John 9.4.
and so goes down into utter Darkness. It either say^, This evil is of the
Lord, 1 Kings 6.33.
why should I wait any longer? Or like Cain, My Iniquities are greater, than
can be Forgiven; and so hastens out from the Presence of God; or it recoyls
upon it self, as Saul, Achilophel, Judas; or the Heart under the Power of it
Dies as a stone within it self, as Nabals Heart died within him. 1 Samuel 25.27.
Thus it every way works Death, because it has nothing to do with him, who is
the Fountain of Life:

For the Being of God is infinitely happy, and blessed, and all light, and
luster; and in him is no Darkness at all of sorrow as not of Sin; he therefore
when sorrow is after him, springs a Light into it; that whereas, the Dark and
Black part arises from sin, and the sinful Creature; yet because it is after
him, it shall never set in the darkness of Death, and H^ll; It receives from
him as a Tincture of Holiness, so a Tincture of Life, a Ray and Beam of it; It
works Repentance unto Life and to Salvation, and so it springs up aft^r into
Jo^ in his Favor in the Light of his Countenance, in the assurance of his Love.

But the Sorrow of the World is like a Night, that no kind of Light at all
Enlightens. Like the Night Job Cursed, it does not turn to the Light, because
it is not turned to God; and so is a shade of Hell. before Hell it self, a
valley of the shadow of Death: and the horrors of it are the beginnings of the
horrors of Hell: As therefore Carnal Joys are sparks of our own kindling, Esaias.
50. notwithstanding which we shall lie down in sorrow, even so is sorrow not
after God, as a black shade of our own.

4. The service of sorrow after God to Repentance unto Salvation, is, that it
breaks, and forces asunder that sinful Frame in our Hearts, of sin, and
contrariety to God, and to Holiness: The very Natural Affection of sorrow
loosens, and Divides the Heart, from that which is the Cause and occasion of
such sorrow: Because that great Self-love, the force of that Law of
Self-preservation is so strong upon us; that seeing sorrow is an Affection,
that stands in an enmity to our Peace, Comfort, and Enjoyment, and to our Life
it self; if it be extreme, or too long continuing; we therefore come off from
what is the occasion, or that gives reason to our sorrow; though we had
exceedingly loved it before. This we find in all Cases, and through the whole
Nature of Things; when therefore sin, and loss of the favor of God because of
it, is made by the grace of God the just Reason, and most sensible, and
prevailing reason of our sorrow; It dissolves the Frame of sin in our Heart,
that had been before compact, as the Adamant, and as the neither Millstone;
Now this sorrow dividing, and separating between sin, and the Soul; it brings
forth that broken and contrite Heart, that God will not despise.

Again, This sorrow is a spiritual melting, softning and dissolving Thing. It
separates the Soul every particle as it were from other; so that it is supple,
soft, and ready to t^ke any figure, tha^ God, would have it take; It brings the
Soul to quick, and lively sense, which is as it were taking the stone out of
the Flesh, and giving a Heart of Flesh; It is that Spirit of Grace, of
Ingenuous sense of our Ingratitude, and unworthy carriage toward God,
mentioned before out of Zech. 12. and Ezekiel. 36.

Hereupon the Apostle James presses to a great Mourning after God, or exercise
of Godly sorrow, James 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you;
cleanse your hands you sinners, purify your hearts you double minded: How
should this great Self-Purification be Effected? By being Afflicted, by
mourning and weeping; by having the Laughter turned to Mourning; and the Joy to
Heaviness. This Godly Sorrow, like washing and rubbing the Hands with Water,
and the close Application of it, softens and loosens the Filth that cleaves so
close, adheres and sticks so fast to the Hands. And it arises from that Love,
and Compassion, that is seated toward our selves in our own Natures, which,
when it is by the Hand of Grace pointed aright; It is made a mighty Instrument,
a mighty Efficacy for Conversion, and Repentance; because when our great
Disgust, our Sorrow and Self-Affliction is pitched upon sin, we cast it off, as
that, which is the reason of our sorrow; and that stands in our Eye, as
hateful, loathsome filth, and impurity, that we can by no means endure; and
therefore we say to it, get ye hence, Oh! you Foul and abominable Lusts, what
have I any more to do with you?

But more particularly, two ways this Godly sorrow works to Conversion,
Repentance, Self-Purification.

1. By being so prevailing upon the Soul, as to drink up all the impure, and
unholy Affections in our Hearts. God giving it therefore by that his Spirit of
Grace, and ingenuous sense, an ascendency, a superiority over all other
Affections in the Heart, at this time, he is working Repentance; it drinks up
all the pleasurable sensual Affections in a Man: when a man is in bitterness,
as one is in bitterness for his first Born, and for an only Begotten Child; He
has no more Appetite nor Emotion of his Spirits to Lust, and Sensuality, and
sinful Pleasures, than such a one has to do the usual Entertainments, and
Pleasures of Life; when God therefore calls for this sorrow, he looks upon it
as a great Offense; when there is slaying of Oxen, and drinking of Wine, Esaias.
22.13. Amos 6.3. etc.
lying upon beds of Ivory, Chaunting to the sound of Viols, Inventing
Instruments of Music, like David; when there is putting on Apparel, and the
Furniture of Pride: For then he commands us, as he did the Children of Israel
after the sin of the Golden Calf, to put off their Ornaments, Exodus 33.5.
that he might know what to do to them, whether the^ should, as true Penitents,
be spared, or destroyed in their Impenitency; And indeed when any are under the
power of this Godly Sorrow, in such a posture to Repentance, all such Ornaments
are nothing; All such pleasures are quite out of Taste. The Soul has no relish
of them.

2: Godly sorrow thus made an Instrument in the H^nd of Grace for working
Repentance, has by that its ascendency and superiority, an engagement upon all
the other Affections with it self, to the working Repentance also; this the
Apostle shows in the very next words to these, we are Discoursing upon, 2 Cor.
7.11. For this very self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort; what
carefulness it wrought in you, how great is the care and solicitude it works
in all, that so sorrow, to get out of their Sins, and to return home to God?
What Apology for Holiness, for God, and against Sin? what Judgment against sin?
What Fear and Awe of God striking to the very Heart of sin? what vehement
desire after God, after true Grace, and perfect Reformation? and this boiling
up to Zeal, or the height of Desire; that Powerful Religious Affection, under
the Operation of which a Man cannot bear Evil, no, not for a moment. And
lastly, there is an holy Revenge upon sin, Satan, lust, even a man's sinful
self; by which the Irreconcilable Hatred to every sin is Discovered, and a
Monument of that Hatred set up in the Soul.

Thus works godly sorrow to Repentance; but the forrow of the World having
nothing to do with God, with sense of his Displeasure for sin, with sin, as so
great a reason of sorrow and trouble; the Spirit remains in all its former
Frame of union to the world, and to sin; and so with the whole state of sin,
and of the World, and of sorrow, it sinks down to the center, to the place of
sorrow for ever; For when sorrow that is the Instrument of God in working
Repentance, does not prevail to that God's end; it more certainly sinks down to
its Center, and that with great Violence; as we see in those fore-nam'd
Examples of Cain, Esau, Saul, Akitophel, Judas, who not sorrowing to Repentance
went down with greater violence to the Chambers of Death and Sorrow, even
everlasting sorrow.

5. The efficacy of godly sorrow to Repnntance, is, that it makes the Soul very
humble before God; the natural effect of sorrow is to meeken, and bow the
Spirit; heaviness in the Heart of Man makes it stoop, Prove. 12.25 the guise and
mein, or Posture of sorrow, is to bow down the head like a Bull-rush. The
Hipocritical mourner does so, to imitate true sorrow, Esaias. 58.5. Now this
indeed, except it turn to God, and have Relation to him, is the meanness and
pusilanimity of a Man; but it is the true greatness of Mind to lie down before
God, and Tremble in his Presence, as the melted Metal trembles and quivers
before the Founder: This dissolving, melting Efficacy of godly sorrow is that,
which turning to God makes the Heart submit it self, as the Apostle James
speaks in the same Context, c. 4.10. Under the mighty hand of God, Acts c. 9.6.
c. 16.30.
that he may lift it up; it says to God, Lord what will thou have me to do? It
says, what shall I do to be saved? What shall I do, what shall I do in
obedience to God? It treads softly before God, as if it said to him, Lord,
which way will thou have me to go? Which Ahab doing, tho not with a perfect
Heart, received some degree of Favor by, 1 Kings 21.27, 29.

Now this Humility, how acceptable is it to God! How yiedling to his Command!
God gives grace to it; Esaias. 66.2. c. 57.15.
God looks off from Heaven and Earth to look to that man that is of a contrite
Spirit, and trembles at his word: He that is the high and lofty one, that
dwells in the high and holy Place, and Inhabits Eternity, will Dwell also with
the humble spirit to revive the Spirit of the Humble. Job 33.17.
This sorrow hides Pride from man, as the expression is in Job, and so fits it
to all holy returns to God by Repentance: It withdraws man from his purpose: It
changes the purpose of Man; Acts 11.13.
that which was the full purpose of the Heart before, was to cleave to sin, and
the world, now the heart cleaves to God with its full purpose.

This humble broken Spirit is the Sacrifice of God, the Sacrifice he will not
despise, because it is ready to yield up it self in all obedience to him. Psalm.
51.17.


But the sorrow of the World, not eying God, nor having regard to him, never
changes the Heart, nor Life into obedience to him; and so leaves a man in the
same lost undone state; and so becomes desperate Sorrow and Anguish, as the
Scripture calls it, Esaias 8.22. and may be most fitly described by Jer. c. 4.28.
They are all grievous Revolters; they are Brass and Iron; they are all
Corrupters; the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire; the
Founder melts in vain; for the Evil of the Heart is not pulled away;
reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. When
God therefore, as the great Founder, Casting men as into the Furnace of sorrow,
they are not purged from Evil; the Melting is in vain, and they are therefore
Rejected by God, as Reprobate Silver. When Sorrow and Affliction, which are as
the Surgery, or Blood-Letting of the gracious Hand of God, Effects nothing
of Good; it is as the Corruption of the whole Mass of Blood, and is certainly
to Death.

6. When sorrow is placed upon offense against a Person, and upon unthankful,
and disingenuous Treaty of him, there arises a Love and Compassion to that
Person, a shame to offend further; a resolution to make him all the reparations
we are able, and the greater the Bitterness, the greater the Effect: And though
these cannot be properly placed, as issuing from the Creature toward the
Creator; yet Scripture representing God, as has been said, Grieved, Peirced,
pressed with Sin, it represents the grieved sorrowing, relenting sinner, so
Affected, as if there were an Ingenuous, even Compassion and Love toward God
the Creator; and unwillingness so to grieve, and provoke any further; It
represents therefore the highest degrees of Bitterness, and a sorrow as for a
First Born, Zech. 12.10.
and for an only begotten Child, or Son; or like that most compassionate
Lamentation for the excellent Prince Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 25.25.
slain at Megiddo, that was so continued a sorrow, as to be spoken of in
Lamentation to that day, as Scripture uses to speak; now seeing Repentance it
self, as has been shown in the general Nature of it, has so much of this; The
sorrow, that is Affected like it, is most fitted, and prepared to work it; and
it is so blessed by God to work it; whereas the sorrow of the World is like
Clouds without this Rain of Heaven, and Wells without this Water of Salvation,
and therefore settles, as into the Lake of the second Death, and smells of its
Brimstone.

And thus far I have proceeded, to make out the serviceableness of godly
sorrow, or sorrow after God, that works Repentance to Salvation never to be
Repented of.

General 3d. I come now to the third General, concerning sorrow for Sin, viz.
To show the Wisdom of God, and the Reasonableness of his making use of sorrow;
and fitting it, as after himself, or according to himself, to so great an end
and purpose; and that according to the very Reason, and Nature of Things, it
could not be otherwise; but that godly sorrow must be so made use of above, and
before any other Affection; and that it becomes him, by whom are all things,
and for whom are all things, so to make use of it.

1. There can be, according to what the Apostle says, no other object of
Rational, Intellectual Sorrow, but only the loss of the Favor of God, or his
displeasure for sin, or subordinated to it; which makes it sorrow after God.
For if on one side the sorrow so placed, and fixed, has so blessed Effects,
that he that so sorrows, receives no injury by it, but so great good, as
Repentance to Salvation, never to be Repented of; that it is not so much Lost,
as changed into Fullness of Joy, and so perfected; and on the other side, that
sorrow laid out on any other object, (which is sorrow after the World) works
Death: Then it must needs become the wise, and gracious God, of whom, by whom
are all things in bringing many Sons to Glory, to bring them to Perfection, by
such a sorrow as this.

For if God was pleased to make such a Rational, Intellectual Nature, as man,
that might, though made Holy, fall into sin; It must needs be, that it must
have a fitness to turn it self with sorrow upon such an evil, and reason of
sorrow, as God offended and displeased for sin; supposing a man, by that sin
had not lost either the use of his Understanding, or not lost the sense of God,
Holiness, and Goodness; seeing if it did not lie Dead, and Benumbed, or
strongly diverted and turned off from its Object; or that God does not appear
an Irreconcilable Judge, and Revenger, and give up man to the wickedness and
rage of Death. It must so turn.

Whenever therefore God by his grace in Christ, and by his Spirit, turns any
sinner to himself, and stirs up those Powers of understanding, and Conscience
after himself; The very order of the Creation of God Requires, that the
understanding and Natural Conscience, and Affection of Man should be turned
upon him, displeased by Sin, by this humble sorrow of Love; even as upon his
wrath, and Vengeance, with a sorrow of Pain, Fear, and Terror; so that both the
Bondage of Fear of Death, Heb. 2.15.
and the Reverence of godly Fear, and Love move to this sorrow, and the wise
order of Things settled by God, cannot allow it otherwise.

On the other side, if the turn of the Rational Nature, and Affection, be drawn
out upon the sense of any evil with trouble, and dislike, and reflection on its
disagreeableness and inconveniency, and yet its pressure upon it; which is
sorrow, grief, and sadness; it must either be turned upon God offended, and
displeased by sin; or it is to no purpose of good, that there is such a Passion
or Affection in man: For if it be placed on any other object, it is but sorrow
of this World, how just so ever, in regard of any evil of suffering, it may
seem to be: It is but sorrow to Death, and so of no good at all to us, but
evil, till it be derived into a higher and more excellent Channel: So that it
may be said of this sorrow, as Solomon says of Laughter. It is madness, and
what does it? And in place of Thorns crackling under a Pot; It is as the slow
Fire, Eccles. 7.2. etc.
of too near agreement with that of Brimstone of the Lake: It is not of any
merciful or gracious use, but for the manifestation of the wrath, and
displeasure of God against sin.

2. Let us consider seriously, what Jesus Christ our Lord suffered under the
sense of sin; and then think whether it be reasonable; that the whole should
fall on him, and none of the drops, and end of it, come to us, and so be filled
up by us? Col. 1.24.
We should never read that part of Sacred History of the Agony of Christ, but
we should deeply take it to Heart, Luke 22.44. He being in an Agony, Prayed
more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were drops of Blood: Christ was not at
this time seized upon, and in the hands of those that Crucified him, but was in
perfect Meditation, in an entire solitude of Thoughts: He was in Contemplation
of the great evil of sin, and of the wrath and justice of God upon it:

We may then say, Dyed Christ as a Fool? Or was Christ in an Agony, as a Fool,
or as a weak person? Did he not pursue the true Reason of Things? Did he not
follow sin by his holy and wise consideration of it from its beginning to its
end? Did he not see it, as God looks upon it, and as the Nature of sin
requires, it should be looked upon? Did he not behold it in the ruin, and
damnation of mankind, in the everlasting horror of Conscience in Hell? If not,
why this Agony? Did he not behold our sins in all the aggravations of them?
Else why was our Lord under a sorrow, that no ones sorrow was like to it: He
might justly say, to all that Read of it, behold, was any man's sorrow like to
mine? Ought we not therefore, though we cannot suffer, as he did, nor to such
an effect of Suffering? Yet ought we not to be Conformed to our Head? If these
things were done in the green Tree, ought there not to be a Conformable Sense
of them, upon us, who are as the dry Tree, and much more reasonbly to be so
affected?

3. The great disadvantages that come upon the profession of Christianity, in
the want of this godly sorrow, press for it.

1. Either Men rest and center in a false Repentance: The fallow ground of the
Heart is not truly broken up, Jerem. 4:3:
so that they sow on the Rock, or among Thorns, and build in the Sand; and
their Repentance is not this Repentance, the Apostle speaks of; they do not go
down to the bottom of the Heart, nor dig deep to find the Springs of true
Repentance:

2. Or, 2dly, Suppose the Repentance not False; such are yet in Danger of Falls
after Conversion; for no man is so truly, and continually afraid of sin, as he
that has found the smart and evil in profoundest sorrow for it.

3. There is Danger, when godly sorrow has not had its perfect work, there
should arise after perplexities of Conscience, either upon the surprisal of
outward Afflictions, or on the Death Bed; and sometimes with great Agonies,
because we have not gone through the exact course of Repentance in sorrow for
sin, and after God.

4. Oftentimes God leads through outward Chastisements, to bring us through a
more solemn sense of sin, and the evil of it; and to closer acts of self
Judging, and more exact Reformation of our Hearts and ways.

4. That we may be under the full efficacy of godly sorrow, God has made that
gracious promise, Ezekiel. 36.25. That he will take away the Heart of Stone, and
give the Heart of Flesh: Thus that Adamantine and nether Millstone Temper is
removed, an^ a soft tender Heart, that fears the first approach of sin, is
Introduced.

It may seem an objection against this Doctrine of sorrow for sin, as if the
pressing of it is a Derogation from the Blood of Christ, and the fullness of his
Redemption; as if his sufferings, sacrifice, and satisfaction were not enough,
without our sorrow, as a kind of Penance.

But this I shall endeavor fully to remove hereafter, as the same Objection
may seem to lie against the whole Doctrine of Repentance.

I will therefore conclude this part of the Discourse, viz. concerning sorrow
for sin by giving some practical inferences by way of Application from it.

Infer. 1. Let us be content to suffer in the Flesh, as the Apostle Peter
speaks, 1 Peter 4.4. by deep sorrow for sin and after God, as it were the Death
of the Flesh. and of the corrupt part; that we may Live according to God in the
Spirit: arm your selves with the same mind, that was in Christ: Be willing to
be as Condemned, and put to Death in the sense of sin; desire to know Hell, and
everlasting Misery as he did, in your own sense of it; he went down to Hell in
the Contemplation of it, though not Locally: Let us be in the (...), in the
Communion in the Fellowship of his Sufferings: Phil. 5.10.
It is better to know it now, and here, while it may be escaped, than to know
it hereafter; when there will be a gulf between it, and the state of Life, that
cannot be passed.

Infer. 2: Let us possess our selves with the mighty Reasons and Arguments of
godly sorrow, the Motives, and inward operative Influences of it; the serious
consideration of the great evil of sin, the foulness of it, the dishonor, the
neglect, the contempt of God, that is found in it; the unreasonable
ingratieude, and unkindness of it to the Lord our God, and to Jesus Christ the
Savior, and Redeemer; but especially let us earnestly beg that Spirit of
Grace, and Ingenuous sense, that may cause us to be in bitterness, as he that
is in bitterness for his First Born; that we may thus sorrow after God.

Infer. 3. Let us sweeten to our selves, that which may seem very harsh, and
contrary to Flesh and Blood; this sorrow after God; with the consideration of
this; that Christ has established a Blessing upon it, the blessing of an
everlasting Consolation, Luke 6.21, 25. Blessed are you that Mourn, and that
Weep; for you shall be Comforted: And on the other side, there is a Woe on them
that Laugh now; Consider; Christ the Captain of our Salvation, and all the
Saints of God have passed through the Valley of Baca, this Valley of Weeping,
the way to the Heavenly Jerusalem, while the mad roaring merry World are going
that broad way down to Destruction: This works that Repentance to Salvation
never to be Repented of.

Head 3d. I come now to the Third Head in the Doctrine of Repentance, and that
is to Discourse the true Laws and Rules of Repentance, the Frame, and the true
constitution of Repentance; the Motives, and considerations for it; the signs
and evidences of true Repentance; all which must needs be very great; in that,
it is Repentance to Salvation, not a false, or counterfeit Repentance, or but
to be Repented of; not to be recalled, reversed, or repented, but to be
confirmed by progressive, repeated Acts, and renewals after Falls, even till it
lays hold of Salvation.

General 1. In the opening the grand Doctrine of Repentance, as on this head, I
shall endeavor to guide the Discourse of it, by keeping to the strict, proper
and precise Nature, and notion of Repentance; For I know it does not really,
and substantially differ from other grand Evangelical Notions of a through
change of Heart, and Life; as Regeneration, the new Creation; a new Heart, a
new Spirit: the Laws of God put into our Hearts, Jerem. 31. Ezekiel. 36,
and writ in our minds, that we may never depart from him; the Heart of Stone
taken out of our Flesh, and having Hearts of Flesh; a being caused to walk in
his statutes and judgments, and to do them: His fear put into our hearts and
his spirit; within us; Psalm. 19.12.19.
It is Mortification, and Sanctification; It is Conversion, and turning to the
Lord; a being cleans'd from secret sins and kept back from presumptuous sins, a
cleansing our way, by taking heed thereto according to the word of God; the
ordering our steps in his word, Psalm. 119.133.
that no Iniquity may have dominion over us: Nay, It differs not from Faith in
the Blood of Christ by any Essential Difference; from seeking Pardon and
Reconciliation by Faith in that great Atonement, and Sacrifice; nor from the
Love of Christ, constraining all those, who Live; that is, have their Lives
given to them, through his Death, to Live to him, who dyed for them: All these
are, as I have said, Essentially, and substantially the same: But yet there is
a very Distinct, and even Critical consideration of Repentance, that I shall
apply to in the present Treaty, under these three heads.

Particular 1st: Repentance carries always a Notion of severe, and rigorous
Acts in relation to our selves upon account of our Sins, and high Offenses
against God:

Particular 2. Repentance imports very close, and particular Negotiations, and
Transactions with God in Relation to Forgiveness; and such, as express our
particular shame, and sorrow, that we have offended him; and earnest desires,
that he would show to us, that he is at Peace with us, and has Pardoned all,
that is past in Christ:

Particular 3. Repentance is a hearty an universal Change of our inward
Thoughts, Counsel, Purpose, and Design; and of our outward Conversation, out of
a true, and real Hatred, and dislike of what we have been, done, and chosen;
and a Love, Choice, and Delight in what we have not been, and have not done,
nor delighted in.

Particular 1. Repentance consists of many great, and severe Acts in Relation
to our selves; upon Account of our sins, and High Offenses against God; under
which I will in every one of them, show the great excellency, and usefulness of
this duty, and the acceptableness of it to God.

1. The seriousest, closest, and most deep examination of our Hearts, and
Thoughts, and Lives, so as to know them, and to sit in Judgment upon them, is
found in true Repentance: This is a wonderful Power, and grace that God gives,
when he gives Repentance; that a Man shall be made to sit upon himself, and to
call himself to an Account, to search himself, as it were, with Candles, and to
say, what have I done? To search, and to try his ways, and to turn to the Lord,
to think of his ways, and to turn his Feet to God's Testimonies; to declare his
ways in God's hearing; and because his own search cannot be close, and exact;
to cry out to God, to search, Psalm 139.23, 24.
and to try him, and to lead him into the way everlasting: And this is
performed by laying a man's Actions to the Line and Rule of the Law of God, and
entering into the p^rticulars of every Command; of every Age, and, as much as
may be, every great and r^markable Action.

Now this is evidently a very supernatural ^fficacy; for we see how afraid we
are all of it; a Man in this way of Inquisition, and Visitation of himself, is
in a manner, as afraid of himself, as he is of God; and hides himself from
himself, even as from the Eyes of God; it is true, when men are in the cariere
of sin, they are bold enough with themselves; they devise mischief upon their
Bed, the secret Thought and Heart of every one of us is very deep in sin; and
we know it, and are willing enough to know, we know it, when all is of a Piece;
to go on in sin: But when a Man finds himself coming, as a Judge upon himself;
he is presently aware of himself, and desirous to hide himself from himself,
and to start away from himself; when any therefore come to say to themselves, I
will find out all the secret ways of my own sinful Heart, of my Pride, of my
Lust, of my Hipocrisy, of my Deceit, of my Formality, and vain shows in
Religion, and the worship of God; that I may Reform all, and cast out all that
is evil: I will be known to my self, even the worst of my self I will make
known to my self, to hate and to loath it; we may certainly say, It is very
hopeful, God is giving Repentance to Life: For I would not walk in Disguise,
under a Vizor, and a Mask to my self; we hear therefore so often this Voice of
Scripture, Examine your selves, prove your own selves, 2 Cor.
know ye not your own selves? except we are in a state that as to its present,
is reprobated by God. So let a man Examine himself, let him prove his own work,
Gal 6.

There are certainly many Truths of God, and parts of Religion, and of the
Action, and Duty of it, that a^e more smooth, and agreeable to Men of Reason,
and Ingenious Temper; that do not, though seemingly complied with, search the
carnal unregenerate Heart to the bottom: These therefore will not give such
Evidence of the Truth of Grace, and of the mighty Operation of the Divine
Spirit: But this Duty of Self-examination, it can serve no Carnal Interest; so
far as a man is led in it, he is led by the mighty Hand and Power of God: For
in this Point, he is else ready to be Merciful to himself, to spare himself.

W^^n God causes a man to search himself, that what is lowest, and at the
bottom in him, may rise up; when he makes a Man pursue himself, and all his
sins, till he can find none that he has not had his E^e and his Search upon;
surely, there is nothing that more assures a sincere work of God upon a man's
Heart, nor nothing, more than the want of this, Discovers Insincerity.

2. In true Repentance there is an Authoritative and down right Self-Judgding,
a Condemnation of what is Evil, and contrary to the Word of God, and the Laws
of Holiness, and Rules of the Gospel of Christ; In Repentance, a man must
plainly say with, and in the Authority of God upon himself, 2 Samuel 12.1. etc.
Thou art the Man, Thou art such a sinner, such an unclean, sensual, voluptuous
Person: Thou art such a Covetous, Worldly, Griping, Extorting Person: Thou art
such a deceitful, unjust Cheat, or Liar: Thou art such a Hipocrite, that art
more afraid of the Eye, of the judgment of the censure of Man, than of God:
Thou art he, that choosest any, or such, and such a Sin, rather than
Affliction: This plainly, and in the Name of God, and of Conscience, that is
made a Judge within a Man, and the Soul hearing it with Terror, and Awe upon it,
is the true Work of Repentance: This is a severe Discipline, a day of Terror
indeed upon the Soul, when it is carried home by the Hand* and Finger of God.

Now this Scripture calls a Judging our Selves, and this Self-examination, and
Self-judging are recommended to us, as what would save Gods Judging us: If we
would judge our selves, we should not be Judged of the Lord; 1 Cor. 11.31
and surely if it be done to the purpose, and so as strongly to affect the
Heart; it is a very great Effect o^ the Spirit of God, and and of Christ,
convincing of Sin, and of Righteousness, John 16.8. etc.
and of Judgment; And I should rather choose it, as an Evidence of the Grace of
God, than some fair appearances, that corrupt Nature can better bear.

3. In Repentance there is a real Trembling, and Afflicting, and Grieving, and
Shaming a Man's self; a smiting on a Man's Thigh, a being Ashamed and Confounded
by bearing the Reproach of our ways; a loathing our selves, an abhorring our
selves in dust and ashes; a not opening of our Mouths in any self Apology, or
Justification, but a smiting on our Breast, as so great sinners, as the chief
of sinners. This is the true, and real work of Repentance in this part of it:
This is a truly Spiritual Penance, in comparison of which all imposed Bodily
hardships are nothing; and yet if God lays Affliction upon us, though it be
very severe; there is an Acceptance of the Punnishment of our Iniquities. Lev.
26.41.


Oh! that God would enable us to these secret Acts upon our corrupt selves, to
rend our Hearts, and not our Garments, to Sacrifice to God broken Hearts, and
contrite Spirits, to Tremble at his word, to humble our selves, and to lie down
before him, with our very Souls and Spirits, as well as to roll our Bodies in
the Dust. Oh! that God would give us these proofs of true unfeigned Repentance.

4. There follows in a true Repentance, a real execution upon our corrupt,
impure selves, a cutting off the Right Hand, Mark 9.43.
and the Right Foot, a pulling out the Right Eye, a true Spiritual being put to
Death, a slaying, a crucifying our selves in the Flesh, that we may Live to God
in the Spirit; a suffering the Spirit of Judgment, and of Burning, a salting
the Saorifice, not only with Salt, but with Fire.

Now All these Things are of great use, as they are Acknowledgments of the
Righteous Judgment of God, due to us in our Eternal Condemnation, as they are
Judging our selves to the very Fire of Hell; As they declare the exceeding Evil
of Sin, and the Foulness of it; as they show us the absolute Necessity of a
Redeemer; as they lay a Foundation of separating our selves from sin, and of
the utter Hatred of it. And lastly, They are such, as must needs result from
Rational Nature, endued with most powerful Principles of the Law of
Righteousness, Knowledge of God, and of his Righteous Judgment, written in the
Hearts and the Thoughts he has made; the Conscience he has created, either
for Accusing or Excusing; and especially all these mightily set home by the
power of the Spirit of God; that so he may have, though not Real Satisfaction
from the Sinner; for that is alone from Christ; Yet such an Honorary
satisfaction, and Acknowledgment; as is due from a sinner, even in his very
Soul, and from the bottom of his Heart; in the Day, wherein the Lord is
pacified toward him, that flies for Refuge to the hope set before him.

Particular 2. The second Particular in this Head, concerning Repentance, in
the strict consideration of it, is, That it imports very close and particular
Negotiationn, and Transactions with God, in relation to Forgiveness; and such,
as express our particular shame, and sorrow, that we have offended him; and
earnest Desires, that he would show us, that he is at peace with us, and has
pardoned all that is passed in Christ.

Under this I will Discourse these following Particulars:

1. In Repentance: The Humble, Repenting Soul casts it self down in the most
lowly, and Self-abasing Acknowledgment of sin, and confession of it. Scripture
therefore points so much at Confession: He that confesses, and forsakes: He
must first confess, and then forsake his sins, and he shall find mercy, Prove.
28.13. And David describes a Penitent, as one, in whose Spirit there is no
guile: that is, he makes an open, sincere, hearty Confession. This is one
Branch of the Description of the Blesled Man, whose Iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered; and to whom the Lord will not impute Iniquity: And
after, it follows, I acknowledged my Iniquity unto thee, and my sin have I not
hid: I said, I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest
the Iniquity rf my s n. But before I did this, and while I kept silence, thy
hand was heavy upon me; so that my moisture was tu ned inio the drought of
summer, Psalm 32.1, etc. I acknowledge my tnansgression, and my sin is ever
before me, Psalm 51.3. Ezra thus made confession, c. 9. So Nehemiah. c. 9. So
Daniel, c. 9. And the Apostle, John, Ep. 1. c. 1.9. says, If we confess our
sins he is f^ithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Thus we see how much Scripture puts upon Confession throughout.

Now Confession of sin is not accepted of God for it self: For what can we
suppose, the Relation of our sins can be to God, the Eyes of whose Holiness,
and Glory, are so p^ovok'd by our sins? But he has only Regard to us, that we
should in hatred of our sins, and of our sinful selves, expose them with
hatred, and abhorrence of our selves; and because we are resolved to have no
more to do with them, we discover and detect them, without any thing of Guile,
without any Reserve: For, as the Expression is in Job, when we spare our sins,
we roll them under our Tongues. The more therefore we confess them with trouble
of Mind, and in bitterness of Spirit, and with Resolutions of having no more to
do with them, the more acceptable is our Confession to God; because thereby our
Confession the more attains God's Ends, and what he is most pleased with in our
Confession. For therein is our sincerity, when we confess sin, because it is
Reasonable to expect we will not be reconciled to the sins we confess: For that
is for the Dog to return to his Vomit. Confession of our sins, with Loathing
and Abhorrence, is vomiting them out of our mouths. And sherefore to return to
them again, is to return to our Vomit: and Confession is like Washing and
Purifying our selves: To retturn therefore to the sins we have confessed is
wallowing our selves in the mire, after washing. This seems so Reasonable, and
even Necessary, that when it is first said, He that hides and covers his
sins, shall not prosper: Then, he that confesses, and forsakes, shall find
mercy. It is supposed, if any Man does not confess, he will not forsake; but if
he confesses, he does it in order to forsaking. But yet because Men are so apt
to deceive themselves with Formality, and to think, God may be so put off, and
pleased, he adds; He that not only confesleth, but does that which is so
necessary with Confession forsakes; shall find mercy.

Thus Solomon, 1 Kings 8.
all along his Prayer, joins many Expressions, that are the undoubted Acts of
sincere Repentance, together with the Confession of sin. And if Confession be
thus joined with Sorrow, Shame, Trouble, Hatred of sins and utter separation
from them; it could not deservedly fall under that Ridicule, and Contempt, that
profane men put upon it; as if it were the telling God only the Story of our
wicked Hearts, or Lives: But without other sincere, effective Powers of
Repentance, it too justly falls under that Reproach; but any such Reproach, our
Lord will return upon us, and our Confession.

2. In Repentance there is an earnest and most vehement, but also most humble
Application to the Throne of Grace, in Jesus Christ, for Pardon and
Reconciliation; and with such a Continuance and Perseverance, as till there be
some Answer, that God is our Gracious Father in Christ; that we hear the Joyful
sound, that our sins are forgiven us. It is not only that common and formal way
of asking Pardon, whether we mind it or not; but to make it our Business, the
Aim and Design of our Souls, till we receive some gracious assurance, that our
Desires are answered, and our Prayers heard. The truly Repenting sinner sits
alone, and keeps silence; that is, he is in a waiting, and earnestly
expecting posture; He puts his mouth in the dust, if there may be hope; He
says of God, He is my portion; he has promised pardon, the^ef^re will I hope
in him: For indeed the Lord is good to all that thus wait for him; to the soul
that thus seeks him: It is good therefore for a man, that he both hope, and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord; It is good for a man to bear the Y
ke ^n his youth: Till G d is pleased to say to him, Be of good cheer, I am ^y
salvation: Fear not. I have blotted out thy Trans^ressions as a clo^d, and thy
sins as a thick cl^ud: When they are sought f^r, there shall be none; and
though they are s^a^ch'd for, they shall not be found. For thus the trul^
repenting sinner f^ll^ws hard after God: Repentance is a Grace on purp^se for
the suing out ^ardon and Reconciliation. And because it is moved and acted by
Faith* it seeks this Pardon in Christ, and through the Mediator, ^y whom alone
Repentance bath place, and from whom alone the Notion of it springs, as has
been shown: Thus David in his Repentance renewed, through the whole Psalm 51.
repeats and redoubles his pra^er f^r pardon; as if he would not cease, n r be
quiet, till he had the a ^urance of it: He turns himself therefore every way to
God, and all the Efficacies of his Grace for Pardon, and with a Respect to the
Blood of Christ, under the Hysop.

Particular 3. In true Repentance, the Soul makes Full and F^^m Resol^tions of
New Obedience, and Amendment of Life; and such as are ready to issue out into
A^ti^n; and this through the Grace, and Power, and assistance of the Divine
Spirit.

And herein, indeed, is the very great Point of Repentanc^, an^ that gives
Evidence to the Truth of all that goes before: When there is such a (...); such
an after solicitude, and serious afflictive Concernedness for the sinfulness
and unholiness of our former Actions and Life; that we can no longer endure
that State, or Course, in regard of the very anguish, and trouble of Thoughts
upon us; as it also issues into a strict Care and Government over all our
Future Actions, to keep them within the Holy Rule and Government of the Word of
God, the Laws of Holiness, and of Obedience to him: And herewith is joined a
(...); such an After-mind, such an After-counsel, such Second Thoughts as
change the whole Purpose and Manner of Life: Matt. 3.8.
such an engaging the Heart to approach to God, Jere. 30.21.
So that the True Penitent is prepared, and actually brings forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, and amendment of life. Acts 26.20.
There is a turning from Darkness; that is, from the whole Night of Ignorance,
Injudicious Mind, Unholiness of Action, Sinfulness of Life, under a continued
Night, and Darkness; to Light; that is, to a true sound Judgment and Mind, ^ven
the Spirit of a sound Mind, and rightly Informed Vnd^rstanding; to an high and
perfect sense of things, and to an universal Holiness, Purity and ^leans^dness
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; and so a perfecting of Holiness in the
fear of God: 2 Cor. 7.1.
a just Account of ^he Time past, as that which may have much more than
sufficed, to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles, and to have spent in the
Lusts of our Ignorance, and now we are wholly Dedicated to God.

This is the Noble Grace of Repentance, that is, indeed, to salvation, and
never to be repented of: So wonderful and admirable a Contrivance of the Grace
of God, and such an Illuststration thereof, that Angels, even the whole Heaven.
Rejoices over one sinner that repents, more than over Ninety Nine just persons
that need no Repentance: That is, there is a greater Resplendency, and shining
out of the Glory of the Divine Compassion, and Efficacious Power of his Spirit
in Repentance, than even in an Innocent State. It is the Joyful Astonishment of
Angels and Saints: They adore, and throw their Crowns before God, even the
Crowns of Angelical Perfection; Luke 15.10.
and adore the Infinite and Incomprehensible Mystery of the Divine Will; that
when the sinning Angels had no allowance of after, or second thoughts; of
after-care; or judging better, of an after-mind, but are under Final
Impenitency, and in Chains of Darkness, to the Judgment of the Great Day, when
Repentance to Life is granted to men.

The Lord has been pleased to bring out of that Reprobate Silver in it self
such Vessels of Mercy, Jerem. 6.30.
which he had before Prepared to Glory; 2 Timothy 2.21
making them by Repentance Vessels meet for the masters use, prepared to every
good Work; and who herein yield this great Glory to Righteousness, and
H^lyness, that upon full J^dgment and Experiment made; They imcomparably prefer
Holiness to all the Pleasures of Sin, that are but for a season; and choose
even the bitter Draught, if I may so speak, the bitter Waters of Repentance,
before the Intoxicating Cup of the Pleasures of Sin that are but for a season;
and stand for ever obliged and deeplyest indebted to true Grace, that not only
their after thoughts, and Judgment in Repentance are accepted; but that they
are Retrieved by the E^^cacious Operations of it to Newness of Life.

General 2d, I have thus far opened the Nature of Rep^n^ance, by considering
the strict, and precise Notion of it, and showing how excellent, admirable, and
even noble a Grace, this Evangelical Grace is, even in that strict and precise
Notion: I will now go on to consider it in the excellent motives, and
Incentives to it; that will further show the excellency of its Nature, and then
the signs of its Truth, that it is Repentance of the true Alloy; the truly
excellent Nature under that great sign, It is Repentance to Salvation, and that
is never to be Repented of, which is the Second General under this Third Head
in the Doctrine of Repentance.

Particular 1. I begin with Motives to this true Repentance, wherein I Record
these following, of which I will but briefly speak, having already comprehended
much of them: And as they are motives, so they are to be looked upon as the
highest means, and instructions, fitted by God for Repentance; and the Soul
accordingly is to apply and stretch forth it self in the use of them.

1. The principal, not Motive, but Mover is the Supreme Grace and Operation of
the Divine Spirit, who si^s as a Refiners Fire, and F^llers Soap within the
Temple of the Soul; Malac. 4.2. Zech. 12.10 Esaias 4.4.
is a Spirit of Grace, and of Supplication, a Spirit of Judgment and Burning,
washing away the Filthiness of the Flesh, and of the Spirit; The divine Spirit
is the great Superintendent of the Grace, and Work of Rep^n^ance, by his inward
Motives, and Overshaddowings of the Soul; For seeing Repentance is the Gift and
Grant of God; Acts 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. Luke 11.20.
the Divine Spirit, that is the Power and Finger of God, must needs be the
Supreme Operator: What the Love of God is the Fountain of in the Divine
Operation; that the Spirit of God, by whom, the last Operation, and ^ffect is
in every thing perfected, is the immediate Hand and Finger that b^ings it to
p^ss; and so what Jesus Christ is a Prince to Gi^e; that which is his, the
Riches, the P^^chase of his Redemption; his Spirit is sent, John 16.15.
he sends him in the Fathers Name, to take of it, and to give it to ^is
R^d^emed. Repentance therefore being the ^urchase of the Re^emption of Christ,
he gives it as ^he Fruit of that Redemption, and whence else should Repentance
arise? For except by virtue of the Redemption of Christ, it were Created and
Lorn with us, It is no^ in a^y Created Power to raise, or to bring it forth;
That belongs to the all Crea^ing Power: That Christ has shored up the Moral
Faculties so far, as to preserve the possibilities of Repentance is Evident;
and to his Glory be it declared; That by him the same motions and endeavors;
that Natural Conscience has to Holiness, and Righteousness before sin; the
same it has to Repentance after sin; and so even as in sinning, so in not
Repenting the Impenitent Sinner is most righteosly Condemned.

But even as a Man cannot exert, nor put forth his Faculties to Holiness, and
Righteousness before sin without a Reg^neration, and new Creation; even so can
he not after sin, either, as it is habitu^l in his Nature, or as he is fallen
by innumerable Actual Sins, return by Repentance, except by the speci^l
Assistances of Divine Grace, and Almighty Power.

For surely, as nothing lies for ever in a state of nothing, except an almighty
moover gives Being from himself; so Impenitency lies for ever in a state of
Impenitency, except an infinite Spirit of Grace give Repentance to ^ife; which
shows, that mankind stands in no other state for Repentance, than it does to
Holiness, and Righteousness; There is that preserved in him, that shows the
goodness of both, and moves him to both; but how to Perform in either he finds
not, but as he is Assisted by Infi^ite Grace, and by an Infinite Spirit: And
this shows Supremacy of Grace, distinguishing between those, to whom it gives
Repentance unto Life, and to whom it does not give; even ^s it destinguish^s
between those, to whom it gives Regeneration, Renovation, new Creation to
Holiness, and Righteousness; and to whom it does not give.

For except these, even Repentance, new Crea^n, Reg^n^ra^ion, were so by Christ
communicated to our very Natures; that every man had them by the very Grace of
con^i^^ing Cre^tion; except he Lost it for himself (as Adam did Original
Righteousness for himself, and his Posterlty) which no man will dare to assert;
it is so evident to the contrary; else what is not, never will be; and what is
at Rest will never move, except an Almighty Mover give it Motion.

For though, it is true; the Engrafted Notions of Righteousness, and Holiness,
first; and then of Repentance in case of sin, or Fall have a Residence in the
very Spirit of Man, or Human Nature; except utterly quenched by a Malice even
Diabolical as in the sin against the Divine Spirit; yet they cannot rise beyond
themselves to true Repentance, without a new Donation from God and Christ by
the Holy Spirit; and only show the exceeding first Corruption, and Degeneracy
of Human Nature and aggravate Condemnation, in that they reach not that end,
they should reach to, nor indeed to their own utmost possibility; but men are
condemned, and deprived of further Grace by not improving the Talent given to
them, so far as they indeed might.

But from all this it arises, that the Supreme Mover in true Repentance, is the
Holy Spirit of Grace; and if there be any appearance of Repentance, that is not
a Repentance given from the Divine Spirit; it is not the Repentance to
Salvation, not to be Repented of, but a semblance and Counterfeit only of it.

Now in this point, I have been the larger, be cause I had not before spoken to
it: I shall but just name th^se following, because I have before comprehended
them in former Particulars.

2. The sense of our own lost condition without Repentance is generally the
first motive to Repentance; in which regard our Lord pronounces once, and
again; except ye Repent, you shall all Perish, ^uke 13.3.5. Repent, and turn
your selves, so iniquity shall not be your ruin: Cast away your Transgressions,
make you a new Heart and a new Spirit; for why will you Die? Implying this as
the great motive to Repentance; that without it we must needs Die, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Acts 17.31. God commands all Men every where to Repent; because he has
appointed a day, wherein he will Judge the World: The consideration of a
Judgment, to wit, of Condemnation upon an Impenitent Person as one great motive
to Repentance.

God is pleased therefore generally to usher in Repentance by a shaking, an
Earthquake in the Soul, showing it the Horrors of Wrath and eternal Punishment;
which is called the Spirit of Bondage, Romans 8.15. For that Law of
Self-preservation being seated so deep in Man; the fear of an evil so
Destructive to ^our Beings, as wrath to come, and the eternal Displeasure of
the Supreme Being; Nothing moves so strongly and powerfully, nothing makes so
violent concussions in the Heart of Man, as these deep apprehensions, or tears
up the very Roots of that old sinful Frame, and make it fly every way, to
change its Situation, and Posture for the avoiding of that Displeasure: Thus
Nineveh affrightned with that present dreadful D^nunciation of Judgment, turned
it self every way to Atonement with God; although the Judgment then Denounced
did not r^ach to Everlasting Punnishment; how much more do the Apprehensions of
Wrath to come, and ever to come, as was before observed of it, move? And though
this is not the highest, and noblest Kind of Motive; yet it is such as our Lord
earnestly, and doubly recommends to his Friends. I say unto you my Friends,
fear not them that kill the Body, and have no more that they can do; Luke 12.14.
but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear him that after he has
killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him.

3. The so great Assurance God has given in Jesus Christ the Mediator, and
Redeemer, that our s^^s shall be Pardoned upon our Repentance, is a most
excellent motiv^ to Repentance, and follows the former; as that still Voice,
wherein God is, did the ^arthquake, 1 King^ c 19.12. This Assurance is that,
which gives Life, and Spirit to Repentance, and also the true Eva^gelical
Sweetness, and Divine Temper to i^; which else would turn into the Horrors of
Cain and Esau, which afterward relapsed into a Wor^ly s^curity, senselesness*
and sensi^ility; for Cain went out from the P^ese ce of the Lord* Genesis 4.15. c.
36.15.
and dwelt in the Land of Nod, and fell to Building: Esau b^came a great
Earthly Prince, and Father to many D^kes, without any further thought of the
Birthrig^t, or Blessing; or else the ho ^ors arising from the sense of sin, and
Divine D^spleasure turn into the D^spair of Saul, and Judas, ^^at are but the
for^casts of Hell, and everlasting s^p^ a^ion from the presence of God, and the
light of his Countenance. This sense of the Love, and Favor of God in Christ,
is that which draws the Soul, by the melting, and dissolving that Stony Heart,
and making that stiff Neck, and Iron Sinnew to be ready, and pliant to all Holy
Rules, and Heavenly Motions; and sweetens fear, sorrow, and horror into Love,
and Reverence, and filial disp^sitions to Obedience; while there are any
beginnings of shedding abroad the Love of God in the Heart, and when the Love
of Christ begins to Constrain us: This glance of the Eye of Christ on Peter
wi^h Love and Grace, made him go out and weep bitterly; this sense of Mercy
humbled David, and Distilled into all those Heavenly Penitential Expressions,
we have Psalm. 51.

4. When, by the grace of God, the Heart is deeply Aff^cted with the sight of
the great Evil, abominable Foulness, and Hatefulness of sin; and with the
Beauty of Holiness; this is a most effective motive to Repentance; when we are
struck with the sense of the Intrins ck shamefulness of every evil way, the
falseness of those appearances of good, that a^e found upon sin, but were an
Inheritance of Lies; it makes us hate every false way, and cast away the
Things, that can yield no true good or prof^; and of which we have reason for
ever ^o be asham^d; the end of which is Death, Romans 6. Through the word of thy
Lips I keep my self f^^m the Paths of the Destroyer. Psalm. 17.4. Through thy
Precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate every false way. Thy word is
very pure, theref^re thy s^rvant loves it. I h^ve found thy Precepts
concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way. The
righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting, give me understanding, and I
shall live, Psalm 119. The Law of the Lord is right, converting the soul; the
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the Statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the heart. How sweet are thy words to my taste? sweeter
than honey to my mouth. Moreover, by them is thy servant warned, and in the
keeping of them there is great reward, Psalm 19, All these are Expressions of
the mighty Power of Holiness moving to Repentance; from the Beauty and
Amiableness of it self, and the Odiousness of Contrary Sin and Evil.

5. The Word of God, throughout all these, is the Instrument of the Holy
Spirit; and with the Variety of its Divine Representations, Collects, and
Diffuses into the Soul, and Univers^l Spirit of a Man, being suited to every
Faculty and Affection, the Reasons and mighty Efficacies ^oth of Fear and Hope;
viz. the Wrath and Indignation against sin; of Grace and Mercy in Christ to the
truly Repenting sinner; and together with them, the Beauty of Holiness, and the
Hatefulness of Sin. For the Word of God is the Sword of the Spirit, executing
Vengeance on sin, and yet sparing the Humble Returning sinner, and effectually
moving him by it to Repentance.

6. The sixth, and last Motive I shall use, is the true Consider tion of the
Gospel state, both as it is now, and as it shall be in its Glorious
Manifestation: For that being a state so New, and so different from the present
state of Sin, and Flesh, and Corruption, we can never be suited to it but by
this great Change, by Repentance for it: the putting off the Old Man, which is
corrupt, according to its deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4.22, 23.
and putting on the New Man, which is renewed after God, in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness, is most absolutely necessary to enjoy this
Kingdom: And this is the Truth of Repentance; It is the having such an Eye upon
him, 2 Cor. 5.15.
who is Risen from the Dead, and to the Resurrection of the Dead it self, as to
know neither Persons, nor Things, as we knew them before, after the Flesh. On
this account our Lord sent John as an Herald before him, preaching, and saying,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And as soon as John had finished
his Ministry of Repentance, to show it was not only the Message of the Fore
runner, but of the Lord himself, whose way he was to prepare. Jesus himself
from that time, began to preach, and to say, Repent; for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand, Matthew. 3.1. c. 4.17. he showed to us, this New state requires New
Persons, New Hearts and Spirits, New Lives and Actions, to lay the Foundations
and Beginnings of it here, and now; and that it may break out into Salvation,
and Glory, at the Glory of that Kingdom: That it may be so tried now, as to be
found unto Honor, Praise, and Glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

I come now to the second part of this General, viz. to discourse the signs of
the sincerity of this Repentance, under that great Note, and most signal
Character of it, That it is Repentance to salvation, never to be repented of.
Which gives these Four great Characters as signs of it.

1. Repentance that is not to be Repented of, must leave no known evil or sin
unrepented of: For then that sin so eats into the very heart of such
Repentance, that it needs to be begun anew, and to be entered upon a-fresh,
being not through, and sincere, and therefore false and counterfeit: This makes
Scripture so often insist upon the through amending our ways and doings; and
returning to God, Jerem. 7.5. Acts 3.26. Psalm. 66.18.
not feignedly, but with the whole heart. And Christ blesses in turning away
from every one of our Iniquities. If I regard Iniquity, viz. any Iniquity, in
my heart, the Lord will not hear me. The leaving of one sin unrepented of,
makes a man d^uble-minded, and so unstable in all his ways, James 1.8
who can obtain nothing of the Lord. He misses that Great Wisdom, that
after-mind, or Wisdom of True Repentance: David in the sense of this so
earnestly prays; Search me, Oh God, Try my Reins, Psalm. 139.
and my Thoughts; and see if there he any evil way in me, and lead me in the
wa^ everlasting: And to show his sincerity, he says, All my ways are before
thee: James 2.10.
As he therefore that breaks one Command, is Guilty of all; so he that
repents not of all, truly repents of none: Matrh. 5.19. Psalm 18.23.
He that breaks one of these least Commands, and teaches men so shall be
called least in the Kingdom of Heaven I was upright before him, and kept my
self from my Iniquity. By all this, and many mo^^ such like Scriptures, it is
most evident, a Repentance not to be Repented of, requires Universality: For
wilfully missing in one sin, or Duty, it betrays it self insincere throughout,
every way; it has forgotten it self, if it neglect any one known Grace. Such a
Repentance is blind, and cant look affar off and see every way.

2. It is a persevering continuing Repentance, that is never to be repented of.
It must go on; it Renews and repeats it self, but never is so to be repented
of, as to be reversed, repented, or recalled. It goes on even till it touches,
and even enters into salvation it self: For it is better not to have known the
ways of Righteousness, 2 Peter 2.21, 22.
than having known them, to depart from the holy Commandment given to us. For
to such it happens, according to the true Proverb: The Dog is returned to his
Vomit, and the Swine that was washed, to her wallowing again in the mire.

He that has truly repented, finds such satisfaction in his Repentance, that
as the upright man, he holds on his way, Job 17.9.
and grows stronger and st^onger in it. And in case of any Falls or Returns to
former sins, there is both a daily Renewal, and p^rf^c^^^g of R^pentance for
lesser Failings, and s^ ^et Faults; and more solemn for greater Sins and ^alls.
The true Repenting Soul is as the ^ight that shines more and more to the
perfect Day. Prove. 4.10.
But the false Penitent washes in Darkness, and kno^s not at what he stumbles.

Thus true Repentance knows not, finds not any Reason of calling ^ack, or
Repenting of it self, either as if there had not been Reason, or greatest
advantage in Repenting in General; or as if it had nor been true, of the right
kind, like precious Repentance (as the Apostle speaks of Faith) with that of
all Saints.

There may be indeed in the sincere Servants of God, some Fears, Misgivings,
Suspicions arising from Godly Jealousy; but in such Trials sincere Repentance,
after some time, comes forth, as Silver out of the Furnace, more pure and
refined. Or these Doubts may arise from Temptation, or Gods seeming forsaking,
or Desertion, or from the Weakness of Repentance in its Beginnings. But this is
but as the smoking Flax, or the Bruised Reed, which Christ will not quench,
nor break, but will send forth Judgment to Victory, in the behalf of such his
Servants.

So this Repentance is not to be begun again, and to be repented of, as a
false, insincere Repentance is; but to be vindicated and cleared, as the Sun
covered with a Cloud, that is yet the true Light of the World; however it have
been shaded, or obscured; and as the true Fire, that shall never be put out, or
reputed False, as a Glowworm Light, or Foolish Fire, however it may be hidden
sometimes as under the smo^k.

3. Repentance not to be repented of, is effective, and produces that great
Change; that as heretofore men yielded up their Members, as Instruments of
Vnrighteousntss to unholiness, and uncleanness, and to Iniquity unto Iniquity;
Romans 6.16.
so now the^ yield their Members, as Instruments of Holiness unto
Righteousness: and as heretofore they were Free from Righteousness, as being
the Servants of Sin; so now they are free from sin, and become the Servants of
Righteousness: Such an effectual Repentance, of which, not the Speech, and
Word, and Profession, but the Power is known; needs not to be begun, but to be
proceeded in, to be consummated. But a Repentance that can do nothing, that
cannot change a man's Way, nor Course, but he remains under the same sins; so
that he has forgotten (he can forget it,) that he was purged from his old
sins: 2 Peter 1.9. Heb. 6.1.
such Repentance needs indeed to have the Foundations laid anew: and as a great
Error, a great sin in Repentance, to be repented of indeed; as most Ruinous,
Psalm 75.57.
as well as most False and Deceitful; and starting from its End, as a broken
Bow from the Mark.

4. The Repentance not to be repented of, gives some of the F^retasts, and
happy Dawns of salvation it self; siilling the Soul with the Joy unspeakable,
and full of Glory.

For when the Apostle describes Repentance unto Salvation; it does not only
show the blessed Fruit, and consequence of Repentance; but it also defines and
distinguishes Repentance, that is true, and sincere, from what is False and
Counterfeit: Now seeing Repentance, tho it be to Salvation, cannot be known to
be so, till it lay actual hold of Salvation; except it have some what of the
Joy of Salvation; except there ^e a Life in the Hope it gives; except there be
a Witness rising from it: Therefore herein there must needs be a distinguishing
Character of true Repentance, and a sign of it, that contrary to the sorrow of
the World, that works Death, and casts a shade of Death; Repentance to
Salvation has some Precursory, or before Hand-Rayes, and Dawns of that
Salvation; the Effect of the Righteousness of Repentance is that particular
Fruit of Righteousness, Esaias 32.17. Heb. 12.11.
even Peace and Assurance for ever. There is some Portion of the hidden Manna,
and cast of the white Stone, some of the Fruit of the Tree of Life in the midst
of the Paradise of God; and even in any of the sadnesses of the Servants of
God, by reason of Afflictions, Temptations, any Agonies of Conscience,
Desertions; there is Light in the midst of that Darkness; whereas in the false
Joys of counterfeit Repentance, there are such either presumptuous sensual
Intermixtures, or such a want of true Spiritual Light, that the midst of that
Joy is Heaviness. But the Fruit of this Repentance is that Peace of God that
passes all understanding; Phil. 4.7.
guarding the Heart and Mind through Jesus Christ.

5. To all these, both Motives, Means, and Signs of Repentance, must be always
added, Prayer; even, all Prayer, and Supplication with Perseverance, and
continuance therein; even to extraordinary Watchings and Fastings, as occasion
requires, Ephesians. 6.18. Colos. 4.2. Luke 11.9. For as the Soul in Prayer and
Supplication feels the strong motions, and excitations of Repentance by;
setting before our selves, and making close Applications of our selves to; the
great considerations of God, of Christ, of Sin, of Holiness, of Eternal
Happiness, and Misery; so herein is the earnestness of Supplication, asking,
seeking, and knocking, for the Holy Spirit, engaged, and employed; as knowing
him the supreme Mover, Principle, and efficient of Repentance; and the Divine
Spirit, coming down to Dwell in the Spirit of the true Penitent, and shedding
its efficacies, and operations in it, as a Spirit of Grace, and Supplication,
seals to the Soul the truth of Repentance, and becomes a spiritual visible
sign, and evidence of the Truth of it; as Christ says of Paul upon Repentance,
behold he Prays, Acts 9.11.

6. Some Great, and Heroic Acts, and Effects of Repentance according to the
Ability, and Opportunity of Persons; and according to the Sins, persons have
been guilty of, before Repentance, are sometimes absolutely necessary Evidences
of the Truth of Repentance; and sometimes Illustrious, and extraordinary
Signals of the mighty Power, and Force, and largeness of Efficacy in this grace
of Repentance; where it meets with Subjects, whom God by outward enablements of
Providence, as well as inward Grace, and Power has fitted hereunto. Such are
in cases of great Scandal, and public Offense public and open Confessions of
sin; endeavors, and close Applications upon Persons, that have been of the
knot, and fellowship of our sins, or private Parties, and confederates in them,
moving them by all the Sentiments of our Minds, and the Affections of our
Hearts to Repentance; sollemn Fastings and Humiliations, with usual Watchings,
not only for the Taming, bringing Down, and Abasing of our selves, and by the
acknowledgment of our own unworthiness of the least of Mercies; and that we are
worthy of Wrath, and Judgment only, and to be stripped of all Enjoyments; but
because the Heart is so taken up, and engaged, that it can mind, nor attend,
nor be at leisure for the most necessary Refreshing of Bodily Nature; which is
made, and taught, and disciplined, as heretofore to serve sin; so now to cry
out for Mercy, and Pardon, and to undergo the severities of Repentance; and to
be brought under to them in extraordinary Weepings according to the most
Affectionate Emotions of the Soul, and suitable Temper of Body.

And such as these are also the Acts of just Restitution to persons injured
according to our utmost Abilities; or great Alms-givings and acts of Mercy; of
which Zaccheus, Luke 19. is a great Example. Great Acts of Service to Jesus
Christ in the Salvation of Souls, either by our own personal Ministry, as Paul
so zealously Preaching the Faith, Gal. 1.23. Psalm. 66.16.
he once destroyed; or private endeavors, by Holy Discourses, and Declarings,
what God has done for our Souls; by Exhortations and good Counsels, by Holy
Examples, by great Liberalities for the promotion of Christianity, and the
Powers of it in Repentance, and general Reformation, and bringing in Souls to
the most public, open, and notorious renunciations of former sins, and the
very instruments of them; of which we have a great example in the burning their
Magical Books of so great value, Acts 19.19. Job. 34.31.

These are not to be Bound, as heavy Burdens to the entanglement, and
enthralment of Conscience, upon All; but according to the opportunities, and
advantages Persons have, their state of Body, temper of Mind, freedom of Time,
abilities of Estate; and leaving to supreme Grace, the giving of various
degrees of Grace, and making among the Pleiades, the watery Weeping Stars of
Repentance, one Star to differ from another in Glory. But when there is a
meeting, and concurrence of all these, or an eminency in any; they who can show
forth the truth of Repentance in these Fruits, Job 38.41. 1 Timothy 3.13.
purchase to themselves good Degrees, in the Academy, or School of Repentance,
and bring great Honor to Christ, and to it; and according to our Talents
received, sincerity in each of them is essential to the truth of our
Repentance; and if they are in us, and abound, they make us to be neither
Barren, nor Unfruitful in this great Gospel Grace, given from the Lord Jesus;
but without any trurh of them we are as a Well without Water, Clouds without
Rain, frothy Waves, driven of some Imaginary, or Earthly Winds and Vapors,
Epist. Jude v. 12.
and tossed; and in great danger of prooving falling Stars; for whom is
reserved the blankness of darkness for ever.

4th, I come now to the Fourth Head in this Head of the Doctrine of Repentance,
viz. The great saving benefit, the blessing of this Grace, and Gift of
Repentance; which has the upper, and the neither Spings; Josh. 15.19.
from the neither Springs all gracious Affections, and Fruits of a sollemn, and
serious Resipiscency, or growing Wise upon sad Afflicting Remembrances, and
reviews of sinful ways; and the upper Springs of Joy, Peace, Happiness, and
Blessedness for ever; and eternal Rejoycings, we have so Sorrowed, so Repented:
Of this I will give but a very short Representation, because the enlargement
upon it more properly belongs to another grand principle in the Doctrine of
Christ; and yet what I do say, I will endeavor distinguishingly to Discourse it
to the Doctrine of Repentance, and with a peculiarity to it.

1. In that it is Repentance to Salvation, wrought by a sorrow after God; it is
ordained by God, as a security, and preservative by his especial Grace in
Christ from everlasting Weeping, Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth: a Repentance
without any Fruit, or Effect, but a continual Circulation of it self in
Horrors, and fruitless renewals, without ease, or remedy, without possibility
of Amendment, of recovery to God, and Holiness; For in Hell there is no such:
Woe therefore to you that Laugh now, without this true Repentance; For you
shall weep, and weep for ever; it is the state of utter Darkness, extremity of
Darkness, and to extremity of Duration, even Eternal Duration: But true
Repentance has had its Proportion here (...) this World, of sorrow that God
Accepts in Christ and through his Agonies for sin.

2. It is not only a security from Damnation, but an assurance of a state of
Life, Glory, and Blessedness; For upon this very reason, because God has
Sanctified Repentance to Difference, and separate his Servants by, from all the
lost, and perishing, Repentance is so eminently called Repentance unto
Salvation; and Repentance unto Life: For when the miserable, and undone shall
complain, and endeavor to Impeach the Divine Justice, with the Salvation of
Sinners, as great, or greater than themselves, Publicans and Harlots, such as
the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 6.

When many sober moral Men, both Heathens, Jews, and Christians are shut out
from Heaven, Salvation, Life, Matt. 8.11.
and Happiness; and fall into the Condemnation of Hell; God justifies and
Vindicates himself by the vast Distance between the one, and the other,
Repentance has made; which, as it should engage our Thoughts in deep search,
what kind of Repentance we have, whether it can make such a Difference; so it
assures us, there is a great excellency and Dignity in true Repentance; when it
shall be seen in the Glory of the Righteousness of Christ, wherein it shall be
displayed, as in its chief Light, Life, and Luster.

3. There shall never be any cause, the least cause to look back with sorrow,
or regret, that we lost any of the pleasures of Sense, or of this World; or
that we passed through the Severities, or Rigors or Sadness of Repentance, or
that sorrow after God, by which it was wrought: And which expresses the
Blessedness and Grace of this Repentance much more; we shall not look back upon
any of the Imperfections, and impure Allays of it, the Vacuities, and
Emptinesses of it, that were not filled up now. For it shall, in every regard
be filled up to the Highest Complement of Perfection. because it is surrounded
with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and Adorned with its Rays, and
Perfections; and the mighty Operations of the Spirit of Christ, holds them fast
in that very moment wherein his servants go out of this World; He apprehends
them, he holds them in his mighty Hand, and Arm, to perfect them to the Mark,
both in their Repentance, and in all other Graces.

4. There shall be Everlasting Joy, Rejoicing and Triumph in the Acceptance of
our Repentance by Christ: So that all truly Repenting Sinners shall say with
everlasting Hallalujahs; blessed be God, who has given us Repentance to the
Acknowledging of the Truth; whereby we recovered our selves from the snare of
the Devil, when we were taken Captive by him at his Will. Blessed be God, 2 Timothy 2.26.
who has granted us Repentance unto Life. Blessed be the Lamb, who has loved
and washed us from our sins; and even our Repentance from sin in his own Blood;
that it might, how ere Imperfect, be accepted before him, who sits on the
Throne: Blessed be he who as a Prince and Savior has given us Repentance and
Remission of sins, Revel. 5.6. Blessed be the Eternal Spirit, who as seven
Spirits before the Throne has Diffused his Graces, and among them this Grace
of Repentance, as the Spirit of Grace, and Supplication; Blessed be the word of
his Grace, that held out Repentance in its whole Circumference and Center:
Blessed be God for all the Preachers and Ministers of Repentance; and Blessed
of God are our Spirits, and all the Faculties, God has given them, that
Ministered each in their courses to this great Grace, and exercise of
Repentance; Hallelujah, for ever, and ever.

Head 5th, I come now to the Fifth, and last Head in the Doctrine of
Repentance, that is, to reduce the Discourse of the Scruples, and Cases of
Conscience, concerning Repentance; that have not yet fallen under any proper
resolution; to this great Doctrine, as I have now laid it down:

Herein I shall propose only these three as necessary to be more fully Debated;
any other, that have Represented themselves to my thoughts I have already laid
in Provision for the satisfying them, in the plain Doctrine of Repentance;
easing the scruples, without express naming them.

Quer. 1. Whether Repentance, wrought by sorrow after God, be not either
unnecessary; seeing there is full satisfaction for sin, and Redemption for it
in the blood of Christ: Or, 2dly, If it must be acknowledged necessary, whether
it does not derogate from the Freeness of Grace, and the Fullness and Perfection
of Redemption in that Blood; and so entrench upon Faith alone in it.

Quer. 2. Whether our Repentance is not made subject to Human Judgment in two
Cases?

1. To the Judgment of Ministers, or (as men speak of the Church) seeing so
many expressions of Christ seem to suspect it there; whose sins so ever you
remit, Matt. 16.19. c. 18.18. John 20.23
they are remitted, and whose sins you retain, they are retained.

2. When our sins are Trespasses, and Injuries against Men, whether, if they do
not forgive us, it be not a prejudice, and Bar to Divsne Forgiveness; yea
though we have but grieved, scandalized; or especially drawn them into sin by
our example, or even solicitation, and temptation to sin, seeing some
Scriptures command us to Agree with our Adversaries, etc. To leave our gift
before the Altar, Matt. 5.23, 24, c. 18.15. etc.

Answer 1. Sorrow for sin, and Repentance are by no means to be looked upon as
separate from the Blood and Redemption of the Lord Jesus; but as flowing from
it, and Ordained by God, in the hand of the Mediator; who truly gives it,
washes it in his own Blood, and as the great High Priest, Offers it with the
Incense, Ointments, and rich Perfumes of his own Holiness, Righteousness, and
Purity. He Promotes, Advances, and gives Grace of a continual Renewing of it.
And this is the true account of the room and place all Graces have in the
Covenant of Grace; so that though they are required of us, as indispensable
Duties, and even, as it were, Conditions of the Covenant of Grace on our parts;
and we are spoken to in a way of Rational and Intellectual manner of
Exhortations, Counsels, Reproofs, Promises, Threatenings; yet these are all but
instrumental Conveyances of the Efficacies of the Spirit of our great
Melchisedec, who blesses his People in turning them every one from their
Iniquities. Even from every one of their own Iniquities; and makes up, whatever
is wanting in the severities, or Powers of Holiness in Repentance, by his own
Sufferings and Obedience. And thus the weight of the Covenant, that shall never
be found fault with, because the Covenantees brake it, is suspended upon him,
that is mighty; the Nail fastened in a place so sure, that the weight of not
only Cups, but Flagons, Vessels, of all Quantities, both the Issue, and the
Offspring, rest secure upon him, even to Eternity, Esaias 22.23. And thus
Discoursing of Repentance, it can be no derogation, either in the sorrowing,
nor the Reforming Parts of it.

Answ. 2. The Administration of the Church, or of the Pastors, or Elders (who
are also the Evangelical Bishops,) has no other Power but of Ministry in the
Declaring, and Applying, as they find just occasion, all the Promises to the
True and sincere Repenters; and the Denunciations, and threatenings to the
Obdurate, Obstinate and Impenitent Sinners, and on Insincere Repentance; and if
they do this Errante Clave, not according to the Truth of the Gospel, it
neither Binds on Earth, nor in Heaven; else the Power of the Church, or the
Ministers were Despotic, and Lordly; they would Exercise Authority to purpose,
which Christ says, They shall not; nor be accounted Evergetae Indulgers of a
Repentance, however but Counterfeit, or Insincere; or on the other side
Dominate over true Repentanc, Luke 22.25. They have no Dominion over their
Faith, no more have they over their Repentance; but are helpers of their Joy,
or Godly sorrow; and the Publishers of the Wrath to come on all obstinate
Sinners, or Hypocritical Repenters, 2 Cor. 1.24. c. 10.6.

Answ. 3. Although it is indeed the Duty of a sincere Penitent to Ask
Forgiveness of those, whom they have offended, either by Injury, or Scandal;
and to make all the Spiritual Reparations, they can in case of Scandal; and in
and by this Worlds goods, as they are able, in case of that Kind of Injuries;
Yet it is also the Duty of those, who are, or have been so Trespassed upon
either way, to Forgive and under that highest Obligation; that except they so
forgive, as They are Commanded, their Heavenly Father will not forgive them
their Trespasses.

But whether they do according to their Duty, or do not; God retains those
supreme Keys of Pardon of sin, and Absolution of the Penitent in his own Hand;
and he has the right, and just Title so to do; For he is the not only
Lawgiver Paramount, and if there be no Law of his broken, there is no
Transgression; but if he Pardons, and Justifies, none can condemn;
Transgression is Covered, and taken away, whether men forgive, or not; else
they could not be Blessed, to whom he imputes not sin, if men had power still
to Impute it: And lastly he is the Sovereign Proprietor; the Offender, and the
Offended are alike his: They are both not only his Vassals, but have Forfeited
themselves and their All, to his Justice; upon all these Accounts, David said,
against thee, Psalm. 51.4.
thee only have I sinned, and not against Vriah; but in such an Inferiority, as
that my offense against him is Bound or Loosed, as thou Pardonest; so then if
God Pardons, though Vriah's Family, or Posterity, or himself (if he could have
survived) had not Pardoned; yet God would be Justified in Speaking, or
declaring, David a Pardoned Sinner; and clear in Judging him so, in so taking
away his Iniquity, that he should not Dye for it. And this is the true sense of
that great Penetential acknowledgment of David, and not any intention of
setting himself up in his Royal Dignity, as above the general, and ordinary
Rank of Sinners, or Offenders. He had something else to do, when he was thus
humbling himself before God, and beseeching mercy, than to Magnify himself
above his fellow Creatures: He was laying fast hold of Infinite Power, and
Grace, and Pardon; and from which there was no Appeal: For unto thee Lord,
belongs Mercy uncontrollable, who have the Ultimate Judicature of Rendering to
the Trespassor, and Trespassed according to their Works.

Now, Seeing the generality of Christians, trust to Death-Bed-Repentance, I
should give a Resolution to that great, and concernful Question; whether there
be a possibility of a Sinner, and saving Death-Bed-Repentance. But in answer to
that there is added unto this Treatise of Repentance a Discourse Printed
several years ago of the same sense and Spirit with this Doctrine of
Repentance; and is therefore under review, and as in second Edition presented
with it: I will therefore conclude this with some few and short Practical
Inferences, the whole being composed to Use and Practice.

Infer. 1. How admirably Wise, and Holy is God in his Grace, Mercy, and
Pardoning Goodness! He is not Loose, or Prodigal in his Forgiveness, but has
provided this Admirable Grace, and Duty of Repentance, to show; that as he does
not cut off Awes of him, and Reverential Returns to him, by offering no Mercy,
but giving up to Despair; so he does not turn Wild the Hearts, and Consciences
of them, whom he Pardons, by Licentious Forgiveness, but so stated, and bounded
that his Grace may not be turned to Wantonness.

And this is the Name of God in the Redeemer, he is a Holy, and wise Redeemer;
he does not Redeem without Repentance, he has upon him the Spirit of Wisdom,
and Understanding, and of the Fear of the Lord; he is quick of Understanding in
the Fear of the Lord; he does not judge after the sight of the Eyes, nor Reprove
after the hearing of the Ears. But righteousness is the girdle of his Loins,
and Faithfulness the girdle of his Reins, Esaias 11.2. Let us then aright
understanding this Wise Grace of the Gospel, as not take Sacriregiously out of
it these Richest Jewels of its Wisdom, and Holiness; denying Repentance in
either our Doctrine, and Principles, or in our Lives and Practice.

Infer. 2. Seeing God has not only in his Gospel, but by the very Law, and, as
I may call it, Gospel of Natural Conscience, Commanded all Men every where to
Repent; and Because, that is, not full enough, clear enough to lead to true
saving Repentance; he has therefore written it to us with the Sunbeam of his
Gospel; let us therefore think, If it be Intolerable for Tire and Sidon; for
Pagans, and Indians, in the Day of Judgment; How much more will it be for us in
that day? For if they are Condemned, who have not Comported with so clear, so
absolutely necessary, so Wise, so Holy, so every way Rational, Gracious,
Inviting Doctrine, made known to be so, by a much dimmer Light, what will be
done to us, who have not been drawn and led to it by so Glorious Rays of the
Sun of Righteousness; whom such Riches of Goodness have not led to Repentance?

Infer. 3. How Adorable is the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, who has not only
given us the Doctrine of Repentance, but by his Spirit gives the very Grace it
self! He has put no Trust in our own Powers of Understanding, Will,
Affections, Natural Conscience, Reason, or Morality, but only in his own
Spirit, and Grace in his Son; nor does he Accept our Repentance upon its worth,
value, perfection; but wraps it up in the rich Robes of the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, and so it is pleasing in his sight; so he does not lessen, nor
derogate from the graciousness of his Gospel by Imposing such a Duty; But he
magnifies it by giving so high, and admirable a Grace and Divine Power within
us.

Infer. 4. Seeing Repentance is a Grace of such truly Evangelical Excellencies;
so agreeable to the Infinite Wisdom, and Holiness, as well as Mercy, and
Compassion of the Redeemer; let us try this Gold in the Fire of severest
search, and examination by the Gospel Light, that we may not be pleased, and
contented with a Counterfeit, with any other Repentance, than that unto
Salvation, not to be Repented of; Least we for ever Repent of our Repentance,
in Hell, where there is no place of Evangelical, saving Repentance; but of that
only, which is a barren Fiery Horror, and Despair scorching the Conscience for
ever, and not allaying it with a Drop of Water to Cooll outrageous Tongue; Luke
16.24.
Blaspheming at the same time God, and Christ; and our impenitent selves, who
would not Repent, while we had space, and place for our Repentance.

Infer. 5. Let us by all the most moving Considerations of the Evil of sin, the
hatefulness and unreasonableness of it; the sense of the Goodness, and Grace of
God in Christ; all his Judgments, all his Mercies; the sense of an Eternal
Misery, and Punnishment from his Presence; be strongly moved, excited, stirred,
and led to Repentance.

Infer. 6. Let us rejoice in the sweet Reposes of Conscience, when we have
truly Repented; in the infinite Power, Authority, and Supreme right of God to
Pardon upon Repentance; not dependent upon, Man, nor upon the Will of Man; Who
is a God like unto him, who Pardons Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, and casts
it into the depth of the Sea; who makes by his Pardon, sins, as Scarlet, and
Crimson to be White as Snow, and Wool, that blots out Iniquity as a Cloud, and
a thick Cloud with the same Potency, and Ease, that the Sun does off a Cloud;
and with infinitely greater.

Let us Rejoice in the great Efficacies of the Redeemer, Pardoning sin upon
Earth, as the great High Priest of our Profession, and the Bishop of our Souls;
Absolving truly Repenting Sinners, by the Witness of his Blood, sprinkling the
Heart from an evil Conscience, and speaking better things than the Blood of
Abel; The Blood as of a Lamb without spot, Offered by the Eternal Spirit,
Purging the Conscience from dead works, together with, and even as the Author,
and Finisher of faith and repentance from dead works, to serve the Living God,
Heb. 9. c. 10. c. 12.

Let us rejoice in the Witness of the Divine Spirit, Sealing, and Witnessing to
us by Repentance, washing the Body, the whole Conversation, as with pure water.

Let us rejoice in all the Blessed Promises, and Assurances of the Word of God,
made by it to sincere Penitents, which are yea and Amen in Christ.

For all these are of far greater Authority, Truth, Certainty, than All
Bindings, or Loosings on Earth, whether by the Ecclesiastical, as we call it,
Administration of the Keys; or by Men forgiving one Another, however necessary
these may be in their place.

Infer. 7th. Seeing the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven is the great Motive to
Repentance, as has been before on great Reason made out; The high Reason we
have, to believe, that by the Apostles calling it the Last time, the last hour,
the ends of the World, so many Hundreds of Years ago; we must needs be now upon
the very last issue, and determination of that Time; when the Kingdom shall
appear in Glory, and all other kind of Time shall be no more; How great a Cloud
does therefore Encompass us, that we should, by no means, be willing or able,
to Rend; to Engage, us to run with Patience the Race of Repentance set before
us; Heb. 12.1.
and to that End, to lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily
beset us; looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Repentance, that
it may be to Salvation, and never to be Repented of; Hearing him who in the
days of his Flesh, because the offers, and first appearances, and First Fruits
of his Kingdom, were then begun, Preached saying, Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand: so the full Harvest of that Kingdom, being now ready to
appear, he does by the Voices of all his Prophets in the Old, and New
Testament, instantly Preach to us; Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand.

And of how strong, and close Connection the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, and
Repentance, are, I shall more fully, and largely at this time Represent, as a
most solemn Conclusion of this Discourse.

There is a fixed space given, and a peculiar Interval Appointed: Lying between
the time of the Apostasy, called, the Time, Times, and Half Time, or the 1260
Days, and the Time of the Vials. And it is 30 years making the 1260, 1290
Years, Dan. 12.11. even as the 45 Years of the Vials to the Absolutely blessed
state of the Kingdom of Christ in Glory, when the Saints shall all stand in
their Lots, fill up to that very Fullness of Times.

Now at this space of the Thirty Years, the Spirit shall be powered out from on
High: The Song of the Lamb, which has been so long out of use, that it
becomes, as it were, a new Song; and can be at first learnt only by the 144000
shall be Taught by them immediately; and the Everlasting Gospel shall be
without delay upon it, Preached to every Nation, Tongue, and People under
Heaven; and then there shall be as in preparation to the Glory of the Kingdom
of Christ, but under the Influence of that Kingdom in Succession, a mighty
Spirit of Godly Sorrow working Repentance to Salvation, never then indeed to be
Repented of, poured out upon all Flesh.

Now because this is a point of great moment to the Doctrine of Repentance, and
sets forth much of the Excellency of Repentance: I shall give very great
Scriptures, and argue upon them for the truth of ir.

Scripture 1. The first Scripture I would insist upon, shall be from a
consideration of that great Ordinance of God concerning the Day of Atonement
among the Children of Israel: This Ordinance We find, Levit. 23.27. In the
tenth day of the seventh, the Sabbattical Month, there shall be a day of
atonement: It shall be an Holy Convocation to you: and you shall afflict your
Souls: And you shall do no work in that same day: For it is a day of Atonement
to make Atonement for you before the Lord your God: for whatsoever Soul it be,
that shall not be afflicted in that same Day, he shall be cut off from among
his People: And whatsoever Soul it be that does any work in that same day, the
same Soul will I destroy from among his People: It shall be a statute for ever
throughout your Generations in all your Dwellings: It shall be to you a Sabbath
of Rest, and you shall Afflict your Souls. And on that day there were the great
rites of Sacrifice; the Bullock, the sin Offering; the Blood of which was
carried into the Holy of Holies, to make an atonement for the Uncleannesses of
the Priests and People, and to reconcile the Holy of Holies, and the Mercy
Seat, and the Tahernacle of the Congregation, and the Goat that was to be
Kill'ed in the same Manner; and the Scapegoat, throughout c, 16.

Now that which I lay in the Foundation, is, That God never appointed any of
these great Rites, but they had a Solemn signification; a signification, as
sollemn, as the Type was: So that there must be some great sense of this day of
atonement; I know it had a great fulfilling in Christ; and in him, as an
Offering once for all, that immediately Entered into the Holy of Holies, with
his own Blood to appear in Heaven for us, It had very great parts of its
accomplishment: But there are other great Parts that are to be fulfilled in his
Saints and for them, as in themselves: And especially in this solemn
Affliction: So that as if any did not afflict their Souls, they were to be cut
off so now.

And in these things, this day had many very remarkable Lines of the sollemn
affliction and atonement, that shall be in the very last parts of Time, and
near the state of the Kingdom of Christ.

1. It was an Ordinance throughout the Generations of both Natural, and Adopted
Israel. A Statute for ever, that is, until the very Kingdom of Christ.

2. It was in all parts of it Sabbattical; prepared for the great Sabbatism of
the Kingdom of Christ.

3. It was when the Holiest of all, and the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and
even the Mercy seat, and Altar, were Purified and Reconciled; not in
themselves; for they were separate and pure, especially the Holy of Holies;
much more the Heavenly Antitypes: But in regard of the Uncleanness of the
Children of Israel: For with relation to all the Saints, and Servants of
Christ, even to the very last of them in this corrupt World of the First Adam,
they must be Purified and Reconciled; that so God and the Lamb coming down with
the Holy of Holies, and Tabernacle to be with Men, and to dwell among them, may
appear in visible Glory.

4. That peculiar Sacrifical Rite of the Escape Goat on this day sent away into
the Wilderness, was a most lively signification of the final act of Oblivion,
and act of Amnesty upon all sin, and the Curse for it born away into the Land
of Forgetfulness, and so perfect atonement made, and all former Evils of the
Curse Forgotten, Esaias 65.16, 17.

5. It was followed immediately by the Feast of Tahernacles; So great a Type of
the Kingdom of Christ, in the Trees of Paradise, and the Paradisiac Branches;
when the Tabernacle of God is with Men, as before.

When thus the Glory of the Atonement and Redemption of Christ shall come into
open View, and the Holy State fully purified from all Uncleannesses of the
Saints, and perfectly reconciled, above, manifest, and reveal it self: Before
that, there shall be a general Afflicting the Soul, the most solemn,
Penitential, that ever was in the world.

Script. 2. The Second Scripture I urge to this purpose, is, Psalm 84.6. Who
passing through the Valley of Baca, or weeping, make it a Well. The Rain also
fills the Pools: They go from strength to strength: every one of them in Zion
appears before God. So Jerem. 50.4, 5. In those Days, says the Lord, the
Children of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Israel together: Going,
and Weeping; they shall go, and seek the Lord their God; they shall ask the way
to Zion with their Faces thitherward. This speaks a solemn weeping and
mourning, immediately before the going up to Zion: as if the Rivers overflowed
in this Day of Mourning with the Tears of the Servants of God, as after some
great slaughter, with Blood; or as the Blood at the Battle of Armageddon shall
come up to the Horse-Bridles of Christ, and of his Saints, upon their White
Horses of Triumph: So before this, the Pools and Wells shall be filled with the
Tears of Saints in their Day of Great Mourning and Repentance.

Script. 3. A Third Great Scripture I insist upon, is, Zech. 12 12. In that Day
there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon,
in the Valley of Megiddo: And the Land shall mourn, every Family apart, and the
Families that remain, apart. This Prophecy is most apparently, by all that went
before, and follows after, a Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ; and for that
Kingdom of Christ, there is so great a mourning, as in preparation to it; There
shall be a Spirit of Grace and Supplication; an admirable universal Grace of
Repenting, in all parts of Repentance, poured out upon the Israel of God in
Jerusalem, looking on him whom they have pierced, and so long Rejected; and a
joint mourning of Convert- Gentiles, represented by the Mourning of
Hadad-Rimmon, or of the very glory of Assyria; known by the name of their God
Rimmon, and their Dedication to his Glory; this Mourning of the Gentiles shall
be in Megiddo, as in Israel for all their Idolatries, and Crucifying of Christ
in his Witnesses slain in Spiritual Egypt; of which that excellent Prince
Josiah slain in the Cause of Assyria, by Pharaoh King of Egypt was a Type, and
so lamented by both Israel, and Assyria: Israelites by Nature, and Adoptive
Israel, in that great day shall mourn; and it shall be so deep, and sincere
that all Families shall Mourn, not only together, but apart: They shall not
Mourn for show, form, and Company, or need that Natural Excitation of Mourning,
the seeing one another Mourn; but they shall Mourn apart. The Royal Family,
signified by the House of David; the Prophetic Families, signified by the
House of Nathan; the Priestly Family signified by the House of Levi, and
Scribal Families signified by the House of Shimei; and the converted Gentiles,
signified by the Families that remain; the usual Character for the Heathen
Nations: Because Israel, in God's account, is the principal; The Remnant, whom
the Lord our God shall call, Joel c. 2.31. and the Residue of Men, even all the
Gentiles, as the Apostle James, Acts 15.17. interprets, Amos 9.11.

Now in this Day of the great mourning, and afflicting the Soul, this Day of
atonement, there shall be an opening the Fountain for Sin, and for
Uncleanness; for the washing of the Robes of all Saints, and making them white
in the Blood of the Lamb: that as it is granted to them, they may be arrayed in
Linen white and clean; which is the Righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 7.14. c.
19.8.

4. The last Scripture, wherein I will draw up, and sum this Point, is
Revelations 14.6. I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven; having the
everlasting Gospel to preach to all, etc. saying, Fear God, and give glooy to
him, by Confession, Humiliation, and Repentance. At which time the Gentiles
shall come from the ends of the Earth, and say, Our Fathers have inherited
Lies, and things, wherein there is no profit: Shall a man make himself Gods of
them who are no Gods; who have not made the Heavens, nor the Earth, the Sea,
nor the Fountains of Water. This shall be when God this once (that once, when
he is just ready to shake Heaven and Earth) and this once signifies the doing
it so, that it shall never need to be done any more; and they shall know that
his Name is Jehovah; that he is the true God, and all other Gods shall perish
from the Earth, and from under these Heavens, Jerem. 10.11. c. 16.19, 20, 21.

Thus, as at the first preaching of the Gospel, there were so great
Conversions, prickings in the heart, and Repentances, Acts 2, etc. Because that
was the fullness of time: So there shall be much greater, when the fullness of
times, eve^ of All Time shall be: For whatever was done by way of Inchoation,
and Beginning, in the fullness of time, shall be much more done at the fullness
of times, or of all time: For That Gospel, that was always the everlasting
Gospel, shall then appear in that style, and be known by it. The everlasting
Gospel, and therefore its Force, Effect, and Success, shall be much greater
than ever.

And it immediately follows upon this Preaching the Everlasting Gospel, another
Angel proclaimed with a loud Voice; Babylon is fallen, is fallen; before this
it could not be done. The Church of ^ergamus was blamed for having them, that
held the Doctrine of Balam; and who taught to eat things Sacrificed to Idols;
and Thyatyra for suffering them; They had not Mourned, that they might be cast
out, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5.2. and therefore they were Commanded to
Repent, and draw to Repentance all such among them, that belonged to the
Election of Grace, Rev. c. 2. and here is that great Repentance, by which
Babylon is utterly cast out, and fallen, as it follows in the next Thunder, or
Voice from Heaven, to that of the everlasting Gospel: And then, as it was in
that Apostolic time, they brought out their Books of curious arts, and burnt
them publicly, even to the value of 50000 Pieces of Silver, so shall the
curious arts of Idolatry, Sorcery and Impurity be exposed and for ever devoted
at that time to the Flames, Acts 19.19.

Now how does this Recommend to us the Doctrine of Repentance throughout all
our Generations, and through the whole course of our Lives, seeing the World of
the Saved shall be thus Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance for the
Remission of Sins, just before Salvation.

And into this Treasury, all ages of Saints in the World, before this time,
have cast by Mourning, Godly Sorrow, and Repentance: For have not their Tears
been put into God's Bottle, and are they not in his Books? And at what time are
they more likely to be Produced to their Etternal Account, and Advantage, than
in such a day of Atonement, and Reconciliation? When the days of Refreshing,
that Blessed, and Happy Age shall come forth from the presence of the Lord, his
immediate Appearance, even the same Appearance that shall utterly abolish the
man of sin, 2 These. 2.8. and revive and re-enliven the Saints, that have Dyed
and Slept in Jesus, into the First Resurrection, upon whom Blessedness is then
Proclaimed; when all sins shall be perfectly blotted out, and their holy Works
alone shall follow them (among which Repentance is one of the Principal) in the
Day of the Restitution of all things, in the day of Salvation when it shall
appear, true Evangelical Repentance is never to be Repented of, Acts 3.19, 21.
Rev. 14.13.

And to move us therefore all, and to provoke us to either the first
Repentance, if we have not yet Repented; or to Renewed and advanced Repentance;
Romans 13.12.
let us consider, how far the Night of the Apostasy is passed, and the Day of
Salvation is at hand? How very near it grows? How much more we see the Day
approaching? Heb. 10.24.25.
For we are now in the 1255th day of the Witnesses 1260 days of Years, of their
Mourning and Sackcloth; and upon the 25th day of the Last Month of the 42 Moons
of Apostasy: and when they end, the Kingdom of Christ shall be immediately
Proclaimed: How near then is the Kingdom of Heaven at Hand?

Infer. 8. Because, I know, there is so great an unwillingness to believe such
an Approach of the Kingdom of Christ; Let us take, as we stand in the National
Community, whereof we are, this great Doctrine of Repentance into deepest and
closest consideration. For we find Scripture, whenever it speaks to a
Community, as to the Kingdom of Judah, and Israel, in the Prophets it still
speaks to them, as such Communities, as in the Language, and Doctrine of
Repentance; and when it speaks to the Churches, as in the second and third
Chapters of the Revelation, it speaks to them as such Communities, and commands
them to Repent, as was before observed.

How necessary therefore to the National Body is the Doctrine of Repentance,
taken as relating to a Community? How necessary must it needs be to every one
of us, not only as for our own Immortal Souls, but as Parts and Members of the
National Community, and to the Church, or Churches of this Nation; that of the
Church of England, or the National Church, as so, many love to speak? or to the
Churches, that are in England, or Churches of England; as others agreeably
enough with Scripture, speak as of the Churches of Judea; of Galatia; and thus
undoubtedly there is a truth in both ways of speaking.

For when God has given a Nation an universal consent in the Profession of the
Name of God, of Christ, and of the Gospel, they do in many great Regards, and
Accounts of Scripture, come under such an Obligatory representation, as a
National Church; as Judah and Israel in the times of the Old Testament came
under. And all particular Churches, wherein so ever they differ in many
particulars, and make distinct Associations of themselves, may be looked upon,
as particular Churches; and so Scripture vouches for them; because they do in a
Particular Union give themselves to the Lord, and to one another; yet
notwithstanding, they cannot, what ever they may think, put off their Relation
to the whole Nation, whereto they are United as parts; nor to it, as United
with them, in the substantial Essential Points of Christianity, not so
Adulterated, but that such Church is looked upon as a true Church, by God, and
by Christ.

Nor can the more general or National Church Dis-interest it self in any of the
more particular and Dissenting Churches; seeing in God's account they are
within it; even those that are purest, and have most of the Spirit, and Power
of Christianity, and truly Purer than it self, as in the general; as the more
general Church of Sardis had within it self, the few purer Names that had not
Defiled their Garments. Rev. 3.1. etc.
This is when a more general Church is pure in substantials of Doctrine,
Worship, and Laws of Holy Conversation; it is otherwise when what is called a
Church, is Antichristian and Idolatrous in its substantials; as in those of the
Papacy; and have no more Right to the Name of a Church, than that Idolatrous
assembly, that cried up Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. though it be there
called by the same Name of a Church, or Ecclesia, that the Churches of the
Saints are. v. 32.41.

Now this I have Premised, to show, how necessary the Doctrine of Repentance is
to be Offered, and to be Received by the generality of the Church, Churches,
and People of this Nation; according to the Doctrine of both the New and Old
Testament, even that Repentance that has been Discoursed; the Repentance to
Salvation, never to be Repented of, and to be wrought by a Godly sorrow, or a
sorrow after God.

It may look like a Difficulty; how a Nation Composed of such Variety of
lesser, and distinct Communities, one from another; and much more so many
single persons, should be brought to Unite in Repentance; or a Church, that
has so many lesser, and different Churches; or, How such a Repentance can be a
Repentance to Salvation; seeing Nations are not so much saved as Nations, but
particular Persons, of those general Communities are the Saved.

This may be three ways Reconciled.

1. By considering, there is the Face of a Nation, and of a National Profession
of Christianity, in the Princes, Rulers, and Councels of it: and When these set
themselves to Repentance, of Reformation: How greatly necessary therefore is it
to Represent with greatest Efficacies of Persuasion to them the duty to Reform
themselves; and to be examples of the same to the Nation: We find therefore
Universally in Scripture, there is so much application to the Kings, and
Nobles, the Counselors, and Judges of Israel; and Remonstrances against their
sins, and not Reforming.

And this lies with especial Obligation upon those, who are Exalted into the
most public Stations of the Christian Ministration; those, who are the most
public Seers. So we find Nathan, the King's Seer, was chosen out by God to
speak to David, in those two great services of showing David his sin, and
moving him to Repentance, 2 Samuel 12. When he had so fallen; God sent to move
him to Repentance by his own Seer, or, as I may Express it, Bishop. And so in
the Case of Numbering the People; God sent to David by Gad, another of his
Seers, 2 Samuel 24.11.

Again, when God declared to David the Building the Temple, not by himself, but
by his Son Solomon; to encourage his Preparation for it; but to Countermand his
Building it; he did it by the same Nathan, his Seer, 1 Chronicles. 17.3.

And thus when God, by his Providence, Exalts any to a Precedence, or
Presidency in the Gospel Ministry, so as to be near Princes, and Councels, and
Senates in that high Administration; when they are Zealous, and Successful in
their Preaching Repentance; and such Higher Powers are moved by it: This
generally goes down from such Heads of a Nation, to the skirts of the Garment,
viz. The subordinated Ministry of a Nation, and its Magistracy, and so to the
generality of the People: And it becomes in God's gracious acceptance through
Christ, and Account, a National Repentance, though there may be many particular
Persons, both in Ministry and Magistracy negligent of their Duty, and much more
many unreformed Persons among the Multitude.

And such Repentance may be called Repentance to Salvation, For it does not
only, as in the King of Nineveh's Case, give a Reprieve from presenr Judgments,
and bring in great Blessings, and prosperity to a Nation at the present; but
there is very great Reason to believe in the visible Glory of the Kingdom of
Christ: There are, as I may so speak, Constellations of Saints, who have joined
together in the same Nation, and time in Repentance, and earnest Endeavors for
Reformation; for, as Daniel says, The Wise, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, and as the brightness of the Firmament
for ever, and ever, Dan, 12.3.

Now how does the present state of the Nation require the joining of all that
fear God, to retrench that boldness, and insolency of wickedness that rages
throughout the Nation; and to necessitate the Vices and Prophanesses of Men,
who have no fear of God, to keep within, and not to show themselves, as they do
openly, and abroad! and in the mean time, to give such an Honor to Godliness,
Righteousness, and Soberness; that the contrary to these may not be charged as
National sins; and therefore herein, those that are principal Seers of the
Nation, and have opportunity to do it to Princes, and Councels, are under
greatest obligations of Duty, Love, Honor, and Service to God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ; to move with light, and Heat in their Orb, and Sphere; to make
due remonstrances of the absolute necessity, that there is, to discharge the
Nation of that great weight of Public Guilt, that lies upon it by the
Enormities; that not being restrained, and Punished, Redoun'd from particular
Offenders (whom they have first invested, and covered all over) upon the
Community, to which they belong; and to incite, and greatly to encourage all
whatever denomination, or distinction soever they are of, to Unite in this; to
give a stop to the overflowing wickedness, that there be not wrath against the
Royal Family, the supreme Powers of the Nation, the superior Episcopacy of it;
and against the whole Nation; which Episcopacy above all, ought to cry aloud,
and not to spare, but to show to the Court and Councels of it, the sins and
transgressions of the Nation; which they make their own by not turning their
whole Power against, and to exhort all to join with one shoulder against them.

For the present state so Unreformed, so Luxurious in Wickedness, shows, that
according to all the word of God, and the general course of his Providence,
that has ever been in the world; some one of these three things must needs be.

1. That there must be an Universal, National Reformation from those sins, that
being of a public, and sensible appearance; sins that may be felt, and that
are so palpable to the common sense of Natural Conscience, and so cognisable,
and ought to be taken notice of by the Courts of Human Judicature, may be
restrained; and kept from Dying the Nation in so Crimson, and Scarlet a Guilt,
such a Purple Hiew by the abominations, now it is, all over stained with; the
horrid Oaths, or Swearing, for the great commonness of which, even on seeming
better accounts, Lands mourn very often; the noise of which bellows in all
streets, and public places, as well as in private Families; the dreadful
Cursings and Dammings that every where resound; the fearful Sabbath-breakings,
that turn it not only into a Day of Idleness and sloth, but of leisure to all
manner of Wickedness; the Excess of Pride, and Vanity in apparel, which the
very Prudence of sumptuary Laws should reform; the Impudence and Outrage of
Lust and Luxury, declaring, and not hiding it self, as in Sodom of Old; the
Great Unmercifulness to the Poor, of all Kinds, and not strengthening their
hands to such profitable service, and employment in their Places, as might
abound, not only to their own private (which ought to be) but to public Good.

These things, with all Care and Zeal, not only ought, but must be reduced and
redressed in Towns and Cities, and in all our Villages; and most particularly
in our Camps and Navies, where they more than any where else (if possible)
abound; and where there ought to be greater Guard, and Watch against them, than
any where else; according to that Great Precept, Deuteronomy. 23.14.

2. If this be not done, It cannot be, except God has left the Earth more than
ever yet he has done; and forsaken it; and walks in the Galleries of Heaven,
without Regarding; but that there must be a Visiting for these things; and that
his Soul must be avenged of such a Nation as this; Jer. 5.9. whether by Plague,
or Famine, or War, or evil and noisome Beasts, or by a Complication of these
Four: yea, though it be by a Fire yet unblown, that is ready to flame out; or
by an Army of Wounded Men, that our Destruction must come; and much the more
because the Light of his Truth is so open and clear among us; because his
Mercies and Deliverances have been so-Great, and the Methods of his Providence
so unusual; in his unhinging for us the General Laws of Nature, in Dethroning,
and setting on the Throne for our preservation. Now if These his Great Acts and
Wonderful Doings do not work to Reformation, They certainly shall justify God
in our Destruction. And yet we daily see our sins and Transgressions Growing up
to the very Heavens:, so that that our Destruction cannot but be speedy.

3. Except the Kingdom of Christ be as I have declared, very near us; And that
we are not yet under some most dreadful Judgments, it is an argument to me, it
is certainly so, that the Kingdom of Christ is very near us; when he will take
to himself his own great Power, and Reign, and Reform by a through Purging his
Floor; either by pouring out his Spirit, and persuading by his everlasting
Gospel; Malach. 4.1.
and sitting as by a Refiners Fire, and Fullers Soap, thoroughly to purify;
that Baptism with Fire: or by the Day, that shall burn as an Oven, and consume
the Wicked, Root and Branch; and because of this, notwithstanding our great
Transgressions, and mighty provocations; even though he has lifted up his
hand, that he would destroy us, yet he has wrought for his Great Names sake;
that is, his Kingdom's sake and has done nothing yet so remarkable against us.

Let us then, that fear the Lord, speak often one to another, that a Book of
Remembrance may be writ for us, as for them that have feared the Lord, and
thought on his Name, and that we may be spared in the day, when he makes up his
Jewels; and gathered as Wheat into his Garner, when he shall burn up the Chaff
with fire unquenchable, Mal. 3.16. Matthew. 3.12.

Infer. 9. Seeing Nations and Persons are under so strict Commands to Repent
with that Repentance to Salvation; the contrary whereof is expressed by Death.

There is therefore in the Kingdom of Christ a City of Life, and under it a
City of Death; a City of Salvation, whose Walls and Bullwarks are Salvation;
and a City of Destruction, distinct from it, and opposite to it, Esaias 19.18. c.
26.1. The one is the Residence of those who have Repented with that Repentance
to Salvation, not to be Repented of. The other is the dark and dismal
Receptacle of those, who have either been wholly dissolved into the worldly
Laughter and Mirth; or been Sorrowers only after the worldly Sorrow, that
works Death.

The New Jerusalem is the City of Life and Salvation; the City that has the
Tree of Life, and the River of the Water of Life; and the Nations of the Saved
walk in the Light of it; and are healed from any possibility of Dying by the
Leaves of the Tree of Life; and the Living are written in it; Whatever lives
in it, shall live, even for perpetuity: The Second Death has no power over
them, Esaias 4.3. Revel. c. 20.6. c. 21.24. c. 22.1, 2.

On the other side, there is the City of Destruction, Esaias 19.18. when Five
Cities shall speak the Language of Canaan, being of the Nations of the Saved:
There is one City, that shall be called, the City of Destruction; the contrary
to Salvation; being of those appointed to Death.

This is the Congregation of the Dead, Prove. 21.16. This is the City of Gog;
that is, of the dead, slain with the sword of Christ's mouth, who has a place
of Graves, the Valley of Hamon Gog, of the Multitude of Gog. Ezekiel. 39.11, etc.

These, though they are the dead, that is slain with the sword of Christ's
mouth; yet they are as in a Community, in a Polity; for though they are
condemned by the Word and Sentence of Christ, they are yet the Wicked raised to
Condemnation; and so are in the State of Living, but of a Living Death:
Therefore these dead have a City, and the Name of it is Hammonah; as the Name
of the New Jerusalem is Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord is there; so the Name of this
City is (...), its multitude, or a multitude is there; For broad is the way,
and wide is the Gate that leads to this City of Here Is, to destruction; and
many there be which go in thereat, Matthew. 7.13. These are the multitudes that
are gathered together to the Battle of Armageddon; the Day of God Almighty,
shaded by a Battle; the multitudes in the Valley of Jehoshaphat; the Valley of
the Judgment of Jehovah; the Valley of Decision, of the Doom and Sentence of
Christ, as the Sword of his Mouth; and the Valley of Excision, of Destruction,
Joel 3.74. Revel. c. 16.14, 16.

Now these dead, in their City of the dead, lie dead during the Thousand Years,
bound Hand and Foot for that space; The Rest of the Dead, slain with the Sword
of Christ's mouth. But when the Thousand Years are expired, they are let loose
into the Appearance of Life, Motion and Action: They whose multitude are as the
Sand of the Sea, under their Name Gog Magog, come up against the Beloved City,
and the Camp, or Tower, and Castle of the Saints, and cover the breadth of it;
showing themselves the same Impenitents they were, and had been before the
Thousand Years began; the Never-Repenting Enemies of God, and of Christ, and of
his Kingdom: So they are finally judged; Ezekiel. 39.11, etc. Rev. 19.21. c. 20.5.
to the end.
cast with Satan, who had always deceived them, with Death and Hell, into the
Lake. This is the second Death.

Thus in the opening this dark Scripture, Behold in these two Cities the
Repentance to Life and Salvation never to be repented of; the Impenitency to
Death and Destruction, never also to be repented of; that we may choose the
first, persuaded by Eternal Grace and Love; and abhor the other, as the Black
Mark of being the Esau hated by God, who found no place for Repentance; as the
Vessels of his Wrath, the Border of Wickedness, against whom he has
Indignation for ever, Malach. 1, 4.

Infer. 10. Upon all this, I conclude with that great Scripture, Hosea 10.12.
Sow we to our selves in Righteousness, the Righteousness of Repentance,
springing from Faith in the Blood of Jesus: Let us break up all our Fallow
Grounds: For the Just and proper time is near for an universal seeking God;
till he come, and rain Righteousness, upon us, upon all the Earth.

This is indeed prepared peculiarly for Israel, the Ten Tribes at their
Conversion, after the so long Captivity; shadowed under riding, ploughing,
breaking the Clods, till the sowing in righteuusness, at their restoration. It
is now near, that they who have been so long lost, that it shall be said of
them, These where have they been? shall with the whole Gentile World, seek the
Lord. Let us count which way we can, the time must be near, exceeding near.
Whosoever is wise, and he shall understand the Scripture concerning these things;
prudent, and he shall know them: For the ways of the Lord are all righteous and
true concerning them. Upright men shall know how to walk in them, while
transgressors fall most dishonourably and finally therein.

And when this is, there shall be a great Rain, a Rain of Righteousness, that
shall come down upon the World. This shall make a mighty Change, as the Earth
is changed by a mighty coming down, a pouring down of Rain, after a long
Drought: so this Rain shall refresh the Inheritance of God, that has been so
long weary: Righteousness shall come down, as showers upon the Grass, and as
the soft Rain upon the mow'n Grass; as the former and latter Rain in their
seasons. It is prophesied of Jesus Christ coming in his Kingdom, he shall come
down so, Psalm. 72.6, etc. So that in his days Righteousness, For the Righteous
shall flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as the Moon endures: and then,
as Psalm. 85.9, 10, 11. His salvation shall be nigh all them that fear him, that
Glory may dwell in all the Earth. Mercy and Truth shall meet together;
Righteousness and Peace shall kiss each other; Righteousness shall look down
from heaven; or as the Rain from heaven, shone upon with the healing wings of
the Sun of Righteousness, It shall represent the bow of the Covenant in the
Clouds, in the Day of this Rain, Ezekiel. 1.28. Rev. 10.1. and Truth shall then
spring out of the Earth in abundance.

This State shall be as irresistible as the Rain; against which, tho Princes,
Powers, Councils, and all their Armies should conspire, they cannot help it;
yea, the Heavens themselves, commanded by God, cannot withhold, or restrain
their showers, any more than they can give them, till the time appointed by
God. So it shall bring into the ways of Righteousness, when Righteousness shall
come down thus from Heaven. All the profaneness, and wickedness that is at this
time, shall not be able to hinder it, any more than we can hinder the Rain. It
will not stay, nor tarry for the children of men.

All the Promises and Prophecies shall come to pass at this time, that God has
appointed, and shall tarry no longer: the windows of heaven shall be opened,
the waters above the Firmament shall come down; the deep shall be broken up.
And whatever shall not then be rained upon, shall be given to salt for ever.
And This shall be sudden as Elijah's Rain, sudden, and at an Instant; beginning
in a Cloud, about as big as a man's hand, and so covering the whole heaven.

But it cannot be, till after the Apostasy, till the droughty Moons of the
Gentiles, and of the Beast, are expired. It cannot be while the Days of the
VVitnesses Sackcloth Prophecy last: For they have power to shut heaven, that it
rain not in the days of their Prophecy; That is, it is determined by God, It
shall not rain in those Days. Rev. 11.6.

There was some of this Rain in the very beginning of the Reformation, when the
Thunders uttered their Voices: But it stopped at their sealing; yet the Effects
remain to this Day, in so much enjoyment of the Gospel as we have. The heavens
opened so far, because it was the Morning of half time: It stopped, because it
was but half time begun, and not r^n out: At the end of half time, or 1697.
there shall be a full and effective Thunder, and a much greater Rain of
Righteousness, even preparing for the Harvest; Then he who sits upon the white
shining Cloud, shall bring forth even the harvest it self in the Glory of his
Kingdom; when he will weary, as the Expression is in Job c. 37.11. the thick
Cloud of Righteousness, by so abundant a watering the Earth, and scatter the
bright Cloud, by dispersing Righteousness in so great an abundance. And it
shall be turned about by his Counsel, to do whatsoever he commands upon the
face of the world in the Earth. He causes it to come, whether for correction,
or for his Land; Judgment upon his Enemies, Mercy for his Kingdom: Hearken unto
this, Oh, whoever we are that profess the Name of Christ; Stand still, and
consider these wondrous works of God, as held out to us in the Prophecies of
Scripture. And then shall be held that great Feast of the Thousand Years to the
Lord, in which all the Feasts of the Lord, that were the Types, shall concur,
meet and unite: the Feast of Weeks, or Harvest; the Feast of Passover, the Day
of Trumpets and Atonement; the great Feast of Tabernacles.

Brief Considerations OF THE Late Trepidation of the Earth, so sensible in this
City, and other Parts of this Nation; and beyond the Sea, particularly in the
Kings Camp: TOGETHER With that Tremendous Judgment on our English Plantation in
Jamaica, and so, as upon our Selves, by an Earthquake; as both an earnest
Persuasive to Repentance, and Prognostic of the Kingdom of Christ.
UPON Hebr. xii. 25, etc. See that ye refuse not Him that speaks, etc. Whose
Voice then shook the Earth, but now he has promised, Yet once more, I shake
not only the Earth, but Heaven also, etc.
I Hope it will not be thought impertinent, if I take advantage of the fresh
Providence, that have given an Alarm to this Nation by the late Concussion of
the Earth, most gently and by way of Admonition in this Chief City, the Royal
Camp, and with so much dread and terror in that Colony of it self, Wherein 2000
perished, according to the most perfect Account Printed by Mr. Miller at the
Gilded Acron in St. Paul's Church -- Yard.

Price 2, d.


in Jamaica. Because the Things are very great, as they reveal from Heaven
either the Power and Wrath of God in the Desolation he made by the last
mentioned; and of his Power and Goodness in the first mentioned within our
selves immediately; that he did so much, and no more; and so both ways move to
Repentance, and to Serve him with more Heed-taking of him; with Reverence and
Godly Fear, as being a consuming Fire. And also because this Warning God has
hereby given in this Nation, and its Camp, and the full Accounts of that
Desolation in Jamaica and Port Royal were so just upon the Finishing the
foregoing Discourse of Repentance, as to give leave to take a very short notice
in the Introduction, Printed last, and no more. But it is of so great Concern
and Interest to a National and Personal Repentance, and Reformation; that it
could not in such a Discourse be passed over, without a great disregard to the
Works of the Lord and to the Operation of his hands, which is so branded an
Evil in Scripture-Account, Psalm. 28.5. Esaias 5.12. that an Appendix concerning
it was even demanded. And lastly, because Earthquakes, the Shaking, Trembling,
and Moving the Earth is used as so constant a Symbol or Emblem of the Kingdom
of God and Christ; Bowing the Heavens, Coming down, and making a change in the
Heaven and Earth that now are, and in their whole State and Administration, as
appears by this Context, I have therefore chosen to discourse upon: And seeing
as I have all manner of ways endeavored to demonstrate, and do not doubt I
have by divine Assistance, according to Scripture attained to do it; that that
Kingdom of Christ by Computation upon Times given by the most Sure Word of
Prophecy is nigh at hand; These Motions of the Earth in any parts of the World,
and more particularly relating to our selves, and in this City, where such a
Symptom so generally observed, as to be uncontestable, is very rare; ought to
be taken notice of, as calling aloud to us to Repent, because the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, and a Forerunner of the change that Kingdom is to make.

That therefore which I design in this Discourse upon this Text, is to show,
That the great Symbol or Representation of the Kingdom of Christ in this so
great Text of the Kingdom, is the Universal Shake, Concussion, and Convulsion
of Heaven and Earth; and that therefore, all the Shakes of this Earth ought to
be taken notice of, as parcels and pieces of that Greatest and Last Shake, and
as Pledges and Assurances of it; and especially when by the Sure Word of
Prophecy, and the concurrent Judgment of most sober thinking Men concerning
this matter, (who will not yet pitch upon the Time,) it is concluded it cannot
be far off; It is known, that the Kingdom of Christ is so near.

I will therefore endeavor to comprise this short Discourse in these Heads:

1. To observe how throughout this Text the Kingdom of Christ is shaded by the
shaking Heaven and Earth once for all.

2. From thence to make Remarks upon the nature of such Motions, or Trembles of
the Earth, and their fitness to be such a Shade of the Kingdom of Christ, and
wherein they are so according to the Light of Scripture concerning these things.

3. To observe the holy use that is to be made upon such Motions of the Earth
in general, and particularly in these proposed to our Observation now; and that
with relation to Christ's Kingdom.

To begin with the first: The occasion of this Context is thus; The Apostle
having given the Description of the New or Heavenly Jerusalem-state in the
former Verses, You are come to Mount Zion, etc. ver. 22. etc.
he makes that great practical Application; See that ye refuse not him that
speaks in order to the setting up a Kingdom; for so, by what follows, must
needs be intended, that the Speaking is in order to the setting up a Kingdom:
For if they escaped not, who refused the same great Prince when he would form a
Kingdom on Earth among the People of Israel, to be a Type of much a greater
Kingdom; How shall we escape, who refuse him, who now spoke from Heaven in the
Effusion of his Spirit, as a First Fruits of his Kingdom? and who is to be the
Great Prince, and who will appear in the Glory of his Kingdom, the Lord from
Heaven, as he is called 1 Cor. 15. and then will set up a Kingdom in the New
Heaven and the New Earth, in a far greater Glory. For though Christ came in
great State then, the Chariots of God were then twenty thousand, etc. As great
Princes come with mighty Retinue, of Horses, and Chariots; so did Christ on
Mount Sinai: yet that was but Christ, as on Earth; this from Heaven. Psalm. 68.

For his (even the same Lord's) Voice shook the Earth; Mount Sinai, and the
Parts about it, did exceedingly shake. But now, as he is setting up a Kingdom
both in the New Heaven and the New Earth, so he has promised; I shake not only
the Earth, but the Heaven also.

It may seem strange, an Earthquake should be given in promise; it is rather a
Threatening, and Denunciation: but because it is a close Forerunner of the
Redemption of the Servants of Christ, and even of the whole Creation; therefore
it is given in promise. And because so blessed a State is not in present, and
immediately, but to come; therefore also it is promised, as a thing future, and
to come; I will shake. And because this whole frame of Nature is defiled with
Sin, and Apostasy, up to the very Heaven of God and his Saints; therefore
Christ promises to shake not only the Earth, but the Heaven. For there are
spiritual Wickednesses in High Places, or Heavenlies, Satan, and his Host, who
are the Princes under him of the Power of the Air, as well as the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World; and so the Heavenlies, or Heavenly Places are more
defiled than all the wicked Men on Earth can defile the Earth, though they
defile it so much; but then Satan shall fall as Lightning from Heaven; All
must be dislodged, and dismounted; For that Heaven shall be the Residence and
Palace of Christ and his Saints, and shall shine down into the new Earth
beneath, purified by Fire from the Defilements of Men; so Heaven and Earth must
both be shaken. And therefore the shaking of Heaven and Earth may well be by
promise, since a new Heaven and Earth rise from hence by promise.

And, Because all this is fulfilling of Promise, therefore the Servants of
Christ at so great a shake of the Powers of Heaven and Earth, shall be less
afraid than they are of a small Earthquake now; they shall receive it with
Triumph, and rejoicing, they shall say, Oh blessed Day! Oh blessed Appearance!
They shall lift up their Heads with joy, because their Redemption draws nigh.
Let us not therefore say, That Day will be so terrible, how shall we endure it!
It shall be given us in that Day to Rejoice, who are his Redeemed.

And this Christ will do once more, even at his Kingdom, as if he should say, I
have shaken, or permitted, or ordered the shaking of the Earth many Times, in
various Places, and on sundry Accounts, I have shaken Nations and Kingdoms; but
now, says he, I Will do it once more, and once for all: And we may be sure, this
shaking has never been yet; for there has not yet been a shaking so
universal, and things have never yet been so shaken, but they have gotten again
into their old posture, state, and, as we say, wont, so as to need to be shaken
again. But this once is like the Expression Jerem. 16.21. Behold, I will for
this once, I will cause them to know my might: I will do it so at the Great
Conversion of the Gentiles then spoken of; It shall never need to be done any
more; They shall know by that once, for ever, Even as it shall be known to my
People Israel, Amos 4.13. For in this Kingdom that Name is known indeed, which
was known but in Type, Exodus 6.3.
that my name is Jehovah. God has done these things in a Degree, and in some
measure a Hundred and a Hundred Times. But now they shall be done once for all.

I am fully assured, we shall All be at this shaking of the Earth: You may
think you may be in your Graves; but you shall certainly be brought forth, to
see, and feel God's doing this thing once. The Earth shall cast out it is Dead
by the beginnings of it, that all may see it in its Fullness.

Now this Doing the Thing shall make a great Change, a Transpose of the Things,
that are, or have been made, or done. The Word Metathesis signifies a Dispose
of Things out of the Places where they had been, into Places where they had not
been before; or into a different Order or State. And it is of very great
importance, because it may be a Transpose for the better, or for the worse:
Enoch was thus Transposed; the same Word is used several times concerning him,
Heb. 11.5. and it was highly for the better, he was Translated to Heaven
without Dying; So Transposed. It is used for the Galatians being Removed to
another Gospel, and that was for the worse, Gal. 1.5. This shake of the Earth
shall make a great Transpose of Things; Many poor Persons, that have feared
God, and yet embraced Dunghils, who have been forced to lie on the Earth, in
the Dust, and in the filth of Things, shall be Transposed; for they shall
Inherit the Throne of Glory, 1 Samuel chapter 2. The Bodies of Saints, that lie in
the Earth, or wherever, in the Dark, the Dust of Death, shall be Transposed;
they shall shine above: But on the other side, the Great, the Rich, and the
Brave, and the Honorable, that have been High and Honorable, they will be
woefully Transposed; they shall be turned down into a State of Everlasting
Contempt. And so there shall be a Translation, a Transpose, of the very
Creation, out of this Earth, as under the Curse and Defilement, into a new
Earth, and of the Heaven into a new Heaven; not where Spiritual Wickednesses,
but Christ and his Saints, shall inhabit. Things shall not cease to be, but
shall be changed, and removed, some for the better, some for the worse, as to
themselves.

But all Things of this World shall then be changed and removed; All the Things
that have been made or done, (...). There are great Things in the World of all
kinds made or done, Great Palaces, great Cities, great Temples or (as we call
them) Churches, Great Castles, Fortifications, Navies. There are other great
Things made and done. There are the several Laws and Constitutions of
Government, great Volumes of Books, great Furniture of Palaces and Houses,
Bravery of Equipage and Apparel, exquisite Engines and curious Pictures; all
these are Things that have been made, or done. There are the heaps of Gold, and
Silver; so impressed, so minted, so coined: All these, and an unexpressible
variety more, shall be Transposed, for the Day of the Lord shall be upon them
all, Esaias chap. 2. It shall be upon the High and Lofty, every one that is
lifted up shall be brought low: It shall be upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, and
upon all the Oaks of Bashan, both in a natural and figurative Sense; and upon
all the High Mountains, the mountainous Towers, and Piles of Building; upon all
great Ships, those floating Palaces; the Loftiness of Men shall be brought low,
and the Haughtiness of Men shall be humbled, and the High Looks shall be bowed
down. And they shall cast their Images of Gold, and Silver; he means not only
their Idolatrous Images, but their minted Gold and Silver, bearing the Images
of Princes, which Gold and Silver they commit Idolatry with also; to the Bats
and the Moles; to go into the Caves, and the Rocks, and the Tops of the rugged
Rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty; and all this in
the Day when he rises to shake terribly, once for all, the Earth. Oh how great
will this Transpose then be!

And then all the Religion that Men have made shall become a perfect Transpose
into a Nullity; and indeed, there is not a greater Poema or more made thing,
than False Religion, and particularly the Religion of Popery: it is a strange
kind of Fabric, a strange kind of Frame; so indeed is Mahometanism, and so was
Paganism heretofore, but none like that of Popery. But yet, whatever has been
of the Substance of either true Natural or Revealed Religion in any False
Religion adulterating it; shall be then Transposed back into Truth; and all
else shall be abolished.

And lastly, That Heaven and Earth that are now, viz. since the Flood, to which
Flood this once more may refer, shall be changed and transposed by Fire; all
shall be removed by Fire, as I remember, that most Learned, and Ingenious, and
Christian Philosopher Dr. Burnet of the Charterhouse shows; Theory of the
Earth, 1st and 2d Parts.
How much the State of our Heaven and Earth, as before the Flood was changed,
and Transposed by the force of Water, the Water of the Flood, for the worse;
But they shall by the force of Fire be Purified, and Renewed and Rescituated
for Beauty and Glory; as he also asserts: All shall be Transposed; All shall
come under a new Make: It is called (...) the Work of God; it is (...), What
has been already made; It shall be changed by him, that will say from the
Throne upon which he sits, Behold, I make all new, Rev. 21.5. They had been
made before; but says he, Now I come to make All over anew. I will bring them
to that Excellent State, wherein they shall continue, till God be All in All.

For only the Things that cannot be shaken shall Remain: Now what are those
Things that cannot be shaken? They are the Blood, Sacrifice, and Redemption of
Christ; his Redemption and Intercession, these are for ever. They remain in his
Priesthood for ever after the Order of Melchisedech, after the Power of an
Endless Life. The Spirit of God in his Grace upon his Servants, in Conversion,
Faith, Repentance, Holiness, shall remain as in the Glory and Salvation they
are unto. This is an incorruptible Seed from the Word and Truth of God, that
abides for ever; He that does the Will of God abides for ever; No Saint
shall be Transposed out of his Saintship; He that is Righteous, let him be
Righteous still; He that is Holy, let him be Holy still. These Things are
Asaluta, not to be shaken.

And then on the other part, it must be sadly said, that Wickedness shall not
be Transposed; in regard of its Guilt; in regard of its Filth; If not removed
in this World by Faith and Repentance; not in the World to come; Wickedness
shall be Wickedness still; it shall have a House builded; it shall be
established, Zech. 5.11. and it shall be settled on its own Base, and wicked Men
shall be wicked Men still: When once it is come to that Time, there shall be no
Transposal; He that is Unrighteous, let him be Unrighteous still; He that is
Filthy, let him be Filthy still, Rev. 21.11.

Now seeing all this great Doctrine of the Apostle is conveyed to us under this
Symbol or Representation of an Earthquake, or the Shaking of the Earth, and not
only of the Earth, but of the Heaven also; let us enquire into the
Scripture-Accounts of an Earthquake, and apply it to the present Occasion, that
it may bring us to a serious holy sense; and that what we have seen in a hand
breadth, may move us to consider, what we shall see, and feel, as in the whole
Heaven and Earth, in large and in full: For if what we have been sensible of,
as in a Glance, or in Passage, has affected any with Fear; especially what was
done in a part of our Nation beyond the Sea, which is but a very little Thing,
yea a Nothing in comparison of what shall be in its own Times, in its proper
Times; How much more ought we to be affected with the Assurances God has given
us of a Change so much greater? For as it may be said to us, If we have run
with the Footmen, and they have wearied us, How shall we contend with Horses?
If in the present State, which is as a Land of Peace, and wherein we trust, we
have been so affrighted, What shall we do in the swelling of Jordan!

I come therefore to the second Head; viz. To make Remarks upon the nature of
such Motions and Trembles of the Earth, and their Fitness to be a Shade of the
Kingdom of Christ; and wherein they are so. And herein I propose three things:

1. To consider the strict nature of Earthquakes according to the
Scripture-Foundations of Discourse concerning them.

2. To enquire into the Causes, why God is pleased to make such Concussions,
and Convulsions in Nature.

3. To observe upon the great Metaphorical or Figurative Earthquakes, that is,
Changes in the present State of the World, that have been since the Death and
Resurrection of our Lord; and how the Observation of them may be made
subservient to the due Improvement of our Thoughts in regard to the late
Earthquakes, we have heard of, or been at all sensible of more of late.

I begin then with the first Head, in Four Points.

Point I. The Scripture teaches us, This great Globe of Earth and Water is
hung by the mighty Wisdom, Skill, and Power of the great Geometer of Heaven and
Earth, The Earth being Round, is on every side encompassed with Air and Sky,
as they who sail it round, find, as well as by Reason it is demonstrated.
as a Ball in the Air: So we read Job 26.7. He stretches out the North over
the empty Place, (for so to our eye and motion the mere Air seems to be) and he
hangs the Earth upon nothing. I know this is a Point proper to Philosophical
Discussion, that it may go as far, as it can, upon: But those Questions God
asked Job 38.4. etc. would pose the wisest of the World; Declare, if thou have
understanding, Who has laid the Measures of the Earth? If thou know, who
has stretched the Line upon it so, that it is in just number, weight, and
measure. Whereupon are the Foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the
Cornerstone thereof? There may be handsome and plausible solving the
Phenomenae (as they speak) before Men, who know as little, the best of them,
one as another; but before God, all is but darkning Counsel by Words without
Knowledge. Now when it is so, that the Earth hangs thus, How must it needs be,
that God as he pleases may shake the Earth out of its place with a touch of his
hand, and all the Inhabitants thereof, and his Enemies particularly be shaken
out of it, or off from it, or whither, or how he pleases: For if that bold Man
of Mathematics durst say, Give me where to set my foot, and I will remove the
Earth, what can infinite Understanding and Power do? or if he does but slacken
his hand from holding the Balance even, keeping the Scales of Earth and Air
just; or if there be such a one; as with great Reason has been thought; the
Poize of the Central Fire, Even, all would be in immediate Confusion.

On this Consideration then, any kind of Earthquakes is no wonder; the wonder
is, they are not every day, and not to the utmost. The only security is, the
unchangeableness of Divine Ordination for such a time as he has decreed, since
the Flood; wherein, in all appearance of Reason as well as Scripture, there was
even in this regard a Jog, as one may say of it.

2. The Balance is in this regard yet so Even, and just, that nothing we
account most surely founded, stands so fast, so firm, and secure, as the Earth,
that it cannot be moved: So that allowing it to have a Diurnal, or every days
Revolution from East to West; yet it is with such equality, that it disturbs
all upon it, no more, than a Fly sitting it self fast on a Globe, is unsettled
by its being turned round. Notwithstanding this motion, the Earth is founded on
the Seas, and Established on the Floods; that is, the Waters are so every way
compacted, under, and about, and over it, that it is as it were founded upon
it, as on Pillars of Marble, which may have been understood, first according to
the excellent forementioned Theory of the Earth: 2. As the Cement and Fixation
of the upper Parts of the Earth is the moisture it receives from the Waters: 3.
As the ambient or round-about Air has a more immediate force upon the Waters
to crowd and keep them close to the Earth, than the Air it self could have upon
the Earth, the Water being a middle Body between Air and Earth, even as the Air
is between that subtle Matter we call Either, and Air. So that the Earth has
Foundations, Pillars, Cornerstone in Scripture Language. And this is indeed
absolutely necessary for such kind of Bodies, and Works, as are to move and
rest upon this Earth; which is as a Sea in regard of the variety of Creatures
in it, wherein are Things creeping innumerable, and both great and small
Beasts; and Man the highest Order of Animals. Now these require such a solid
Floor and Pavement to move upon, such a Bed to rest upon: Upon this Earth is
the whole Vegetative Nature, both nourished and supported, as in a Nursery;
even from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hysop that grows in the Wall: Hereon have
all the Great Buildings, the Palaces, Castles, Towers, multiplied into Cities
and Towns their Foundations.

Now seeing all these have their Order, their Quiet, their Safety by the
steddiness of the Earth; whenever it is moved, there is an immediate Shatter,
Confusion, Disorder, Desolation, an Amaze, a Horror upon all Creatures of
Sense, and especially of Reason; an Affrightment and Terror upon Nature it
self; because hereby the great Laws, and Sanctions of Creation, and Providence,
are violated. For concerning the Earth, God spoke, and it was done; he
commanded, and it stood fast, Psalm. 33.9.

3. The Earth is stuffed with variety of Matter, Humors, and Vapors in its
Bowels; Fire, Water, Vapor, Air, Minerals, Sulphur, Piceous Matter. Now it self
is so made, as to lie close, and to lie still; every clod of Earth compacts it
self, and would lie in as little room as it can. It is heavy, and sluggish, and
unapt to move; whereas all the rest of its Inmates are for Motion and Action,
some of them of very earnest and vigorous Motion, and for Propagation and
Enlargement of themselves: The Earth will not move, but on some great violence
and force; so when those working and active Parts find they are fettered, and
imprisoned, and cramped, they grow furious and outrageous, and rend and tear
every thing, to make and force their way; and all on the sudden and at once
very often; for being either gathered together in great Caverns and Hollows of
the Earth; their Room grows too strait and little, and so they are forced to
transplant themselves; or having, as one may say, very often a Spirit of
Contradiction one to another, they fall into Feuds and Wars one with another,
and they that are overcome and fall under the Mastery of others, are forced,
and driven, and made to fly, out with great violence: and the very same thing
may fall out in diverse lesser Veins and Tubular Passages or Pipes in the Earth;
where though the Stores of these Vapors or Mineral Spirits are lesser; yet if
it be in many of them together, the Contest may be very great, and the Fury
very discomposing to the Earth.

Thus there are within the Earth those Bombs and Mortars, those Cannon and
Ordnance, those Battering Rams and Engines, those Mines often sprung, and natural
Gunpowder and fiery Bullets, those lesser Screwed Guns: all which are the
Ammunition of Nature, or rather of the God of Nature: Thus when they are
discharged, and let off, it is with great Noise, Dread, and Astonishment, and
oftentimes Destruction to the Inhabitants of the Earth. Who almost has not
heard of Aetna and Vesuvius, and other the Mountains spouting Fire in several
Parts of the World? And as there are such constant, known, and open Eruptions
in Nature, so are there secret, sudden, and extemporary ones.

And thus in the Heavens over us there are like Contests and Collisions,
falling, and clapping of Clouds, Thunders, Lightnings, fiery Meteors, and
flaming Balls, and these often corresponding, and as it were holding
Intelligence, with the same in Earth. And these are certainly often Causes one
of another by the Tone or Link of Air being broken, and the Elastic Force or
Spring of it flying this way and that way; as lately in Jamaica according to
the most prudent Accounts from thence: Every thing then must needs be torn and
havock'd, as those Motions hurry this way or that way, Persons, Animal
Creatures, and Things, at such times.

And as these are in the World of Nature; so are they in the Political World;
when Nations or People are too full for their Place, and transplant themselves
by forcing into other Nations; when Wars, those great Disputes of Nations
arise; when People or Armies fall into Mutiny; these are Political Earthquakes;
and when Men are oppressed in Religion by domineering Superstition, and Laws of
Uniformity, and imposing on the Consciences and Faith of Men; There are
Religious Earthquakes: The Psalmist puts them altogether, Psalm. 65.7, 8. Which
sets fast the Mountains being girded with Power; which stillest the noise of
the Seas, the noise of their Waves, and the multitude of the People. This God
does in Mercy, when he keeps all quiet; but there are Times when all these
being in Hubbub and Mutiny, the Mountains shake and roar together with the Seas
and Waves; and the Multitude of People in their Strivings; who are therein
emphatically called the Mobile; that They that dwell in the uttermost Parts are
afraid of these Tokens; thus from one end of Nations, or even of the World, to
another, there arise dreadful Fears at the Tokens of God, unhinging the World;
called therefore Prodigies and Portents: For what Interest God has in these,
shall be spoken in the next Particular.

I only observe further, There are in the Little World by the wrestling of
contrary Humors in the Bodies of Men, such Spoutings of Fire, as in Fevers;
such Deluges of Water, as in Dropsies; such Earthquakes in violent Diseases;
such sulphurous Vapors in horrid Melancholies or Fits; or in the Arteries and
Sinews, as in Gouts and Rheumatisms; in those Arthritical Pains in the strait
and close Tubes of the Body; such Swimmings of the Head, as resemble what has
been spoken of in the outer World; but above all in Consciences.

4. Let all these things be traced, as much as they can to their natural
Causes; yet Scripture ascribes all to God, Psalm. 148.8. Fire, Hail, Snow,
Vapor, all fulfill his Word: He works his Signs and Wonders among the Armies
of Heaven and the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand; (for
all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing in such a Case, Dan.
4.35.) except he pleases to stay it himself; or can say to him, What do thou?
As if they should say What do thou mean, who have made Heaven and Earth, and
preservest it; to put it into these Disorders? But he gives no Account of his
matters in these Things. And seeing he holds all natural Causes in his hand,
and balances them every moment; what is it to say, All these Things have their
proper Causes; but to say in true sense, that God does all These; for all
Nature is indeed Miracle, constant, and as we say in ordinary.

But God indeed does in more lofty Style, and Elegancies, and Eloquences of
Language, assume to himself the Government of these affrightful Motions in
Heaven, or Earth; Thunders, Lightnings, Earthquakes throughout Scripture; as if
they were immediately done by his own hand, as if he took this Globe of Earth
and Sea, which he has Hung upon nothing, and shook it out of its place; or as
if he immediately shot off his great Pieces either in the Bowels of the Earth,
or in the Skies, or sprung a Mine in the Earth: And it must needs be so; if all
natural, voluntary and fortuitous (as we Poreblind think them) Causes work in
and out of his hand. For if in the Killing King Ahab a man drew a Bow at a
venture; or as in the Margin out of the Hebrew; In his Simplicity, without
Design, without Aim, and yet it was directed to Ahab, as by God's immediate
Hand to fulfill his Word upon him, How much more are all natural Causes directed
by him! 1 Kings 22.34. And those Things which he knows will with such
extraordinary Amazes change the World; he ascribes them more emphatically to
Himself; His Thunder, his Lightnings; I shake Heaven and Earth.

Let us then consider, Why God does thus disorder Nature; And I shall instance
in these following Reasons.

1. That when we see these Contests, and Jars in Nature, we may adore and
praise the infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God, who keeps All so much
in Peace and Quiet: For as great Engines or Machines, that have various and
cross Wheels and curious Works in them; it requires as great Art, to harmonize
them at first, so great care to keep them in order; and as vast Armies call for
the highest Spirit, Wisdom, and Conduct of the Generalissimo, as Men speak, to
inspire them with Order, Peace, Regular Action, in their several Stations; so
it is said of God, Job 25.2. Dominion and Fear are with him. He makes Peace in
his high, (and in his Deep) Places also. Is there any number of his Armies? All
which he yet keeps in Peace, as he pleases. Oh therefore that (as in that Song
of Praise, Psalm. 107.) Men considering All these Things well, would make it
Glory to God.
the Foot of every Thing! Oh that Men would praise the Lord for his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men! For we see by a little what great Things he can
do. Whosoever therefore is wise, and will observe these Things, even he shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. For indeed, That on which the
Pride, and Profaneness, and Insolency of Men is grounded, is, That God will
still from Time to Time keep Things in the Quiet and Peace he generally does:
And if he does not, they fall down into Death and Ruin immediately in his
doing otherwise: He therefore shows sometimes by such Disorders, what he always
does, how he exercises Long-suffering, Loving kindness in the Earth; for if he
did otherwise, Nature would be always cracking in pieces; and if it were so,
What could the greatest Monarchs say to it? Would they stay his hand, or would
they render him a Recompense for not doing as they think he should and ought to
do? Their Recompense he would speedily return upon their own heads. God
therefore shows, How all the World is bound and beholden to him by showing at
such Times, what he can do without any Control, and yet does not; and what he
does in maintaining Order and Peace when none can compel him to it, if, He did
not please to do so.

2. Men loath what they have constantly, as if it were no Argument for fear of
God; as if God were tied to do so; but think at least, such Wonders of
extraordinary Power, which they do not see every day, would, like one from the
Dead, move to Repentance: But even this depends on Grace.
That he may give Witnesses and Demonstrations of his Wrath, Justice, and Power
to; either, as he pleases; punish, and execute Judgment from Heaven; or move to
Repentance: For as he gives Fruitful Times and Seasons that he might not leave
himself without witness of his Goodness leading to Repentance; so of his Wrath
and Justice to necessitate Men that way; For all these Things Preach
Repentance, and Reformation aloud; and for that End I have thus superadded to
the Discourse of Repentance.

3. That God may give notice of any great Changes he will make in the World,
that are near at hand, and which within any little Time he will make in it, he
gives Warning by Earthquakes and other unusual Things: For so in spite of all
that can be said to the contrary, God has generally ushered in any great
Changes, he has made in the World, by such Signs and Wonders in Heaven, and
Shakings of the Earth beneath: and therefore with great Right he clothes his
Denunciations and Threats of such great Judgments in such Language of Thunder
and Lightnings, and Earthquakes. A very remarkable Instance we have of this in
the Prophet Amos. When God was about, as it were to Ride a Circuit in Judgment
upon the Nations for Three Transgressions, and for Four even upon each single
Nation or People, Amos dates his Prophecy two Years before the Earthquake in
the Days of Uzziah. Amos 1.1.
How general that was, is not known to us. But there is plain importance, God
first began to give notice of his Judgments by Amos his Prophecy in his two
first Chapters. That not prevailing to Repentance, he gave a loud Alarm by the
Earthquake, which it is most probable, was as general as those Nations
threatened by Amos. Then follows the Judgment it self on the several People
named and executed by the Assyrian and Babylonian Conquests. And why was there
a mention of the Earthquake two Years after; if God had not pleased to give
that Intimation, that an Earthquake was a fit Forerunner of that Judiciary
Progress, that follows in those two Chapters of Amos; so our Lord Matt. 24.
makes Earthquakes in Diverse Places, the certain Forerunners of the Desolations
of Jerusalem.

4. The Lord Jehovah is pleased to suffer Earthquakes, because he has
determined upon this one Earthquake, wherein he will shake not only the Earth,
but the Heaven also; a great Earthquake, such as has not been since men were
upon earth; so mighty an Earthquake, and so great; wherein every Island shall
flee away, and the Mountains shall not be found, Revel. 16.18.20. And of this
God foretold Hagg. 2.6. Yet once I will shake Heaven and Earth, etc. And in
this Text, Yet once more I shake not only the Earth, but the Heaven also. Where
though the Apostle opposes the once more to the shaking of the Earth at Mount
Sinai, because that was to his present purpose; yet it leaves room for that
most sagacious Interpretation of Dr. Burnet, in the forenamed Discourses, That
it is opposed to the shaking not only the Earth, but the Heaven also, in and by
the Flood; for in that he says once more, it supposes, that not only the Earth,
but the Heaven, had been shaken before: And when could that be, but in the
Flood the on purpose-Type of this, as appears by what that excellent Person
has said on 2 Pet. 3. Although This shall be greater, and to far greater
purpose in the new Heaven, and the new Earth to perfection: Whereas That Flood
brought forth a Heaven and Earth for the worse; and Men grew as, and more
wicked; but here Righteousness shall dwell, and This shall be the greatest
since Man was on Earth. This is the Time of Trouble, of deep Tribulation and
Temptation, such as none ever was before, to All, but the Servants of God and
Christ, Dan. 12.1. Mat. 24.21. Rev. 3.10. c. 7.14.

Now therefore, It becomes him, by whom are All things, and for whom are All
Things; seeing he has determined so great an Earthquake at last, to give such
Terellaes of it; such little Parts, Pieces, and Models of it, that might
Inlighten, Awaken, and Assure the World concerning it; and to have set up such
a Pyramid of it by the Flood, in general to all the World; and to Sodom, and
the Cities about it in more particular, in the Beginning of the World; and to
speak in the Eloquence of what he will do, on every occasion of a greater
Judgment on any Nation or People; and to ioyn with it the Thunder and
Lightnings of his Power and Voice, that are as the Shakings of Heaven; and
generally fall in with the Shaking of the Earth. And thus we find all along the
Scripture, and with great Relation to this very Earthquake ushering in the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Destruction of Babylon, the great Symbol of his
Enemies; so Psalm. 18.7. Esaias 13.13. with very many Pieces more. And this is to
make the Thoughts of it familiar to Men, and to acquaint them thoroughly with
God's great purpose herein; for hereby a short Work will God make on Earth; yet
every Man, Woman, and Child, shall be raised on purpose to see this great
Sight, and to feel it; The Earth shall cast out her dead for it, and no more
cover them. This is that Earthquake in which God arises to shake terribly the
Earth, Esaias 2. wherein it shall be indeed as a cha^ed Roe, and as a Sheep no
man cares to take up, tho now they are so greedy of it. Then the Lord will make
it empty and under the great Desolation overthrowing, and turning upside down
Persons and Things, and all distinction of Servants, Masters, and Mistresses,
Purchasers, Sellers, Lenders, Borrowers, as is described Esaias 24. which shall
end in the Sun's being confounded, the Moon ashamed, when God comes to Reign
before his Ancients in Glory.

And in the New Testament; we find at the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat.
27.50. when he gave up that mighty Breath, and with that loud Voice commended
that immortally blessed Spirit into the Hand of God; There was a Great
Earthquake, and the Rocks rent, and the Graves opened; and after his
Resurrection, many Bodies of Saints came forth, and appeared to many in the
Holy City; a most admirable Type of the Last Great Earthquake. At the
Resurrection of Christ there was again an Earthquake. Matthew. 28.2. At the
Pouring out of the Spirit, Acts 2.1. There was from Heaven a mighty rushing
Wind, that filled the House, and so must needs shake it, and as the Appearance
of Fiery Tongues: when the Apostles Prayed after that solemn Conference with
the Elders of the Jews, the House shook. c. 4. When Paul and Silas had praised
God in Prison, there was an Earthquake, and the Foundations of the Prison were
shaken, the Doors opened, and the Chains of every one were loosed, Acts 16.25.
All these were real Historical Earthquakes, or Matters of Fact; and they are
also great Types, and Emblems with Relation to what shall be at the Kingdom of
Christ, and even Predictions and lively Assurances thereof.

In the Revelation, that most August Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ, we read
of Four great Earthquakes, that were so many Advances of the Kingdom of Christ.

1. That grand Deturbation of, or dismounting Paganism, or the casting down the
Dragon or Devil inhabiting it from Heaven, who was worshipped in Paganism as a
God; and all his Host in the Fourth or Roman Empire, were cast down with him,
when that Empire in Constantine became Christian. And this was celebrated by
those lofty Expressions concerning it, as a great Shaking even of Heaven and
Earth, Rev. 6.12. c. 12.5. as shall be at the Kingdom of Christ.

2. The final Extirpation of Paganism, or Rooting it out; though with that
unhappy Revolution of Antichristianism, ready to come in with the Barbarous
Nations into that Empire, and so undermining the Kingdom of Christ. This was at
the famous Victory of Theodosius; And this was as Church Historians tell us,
with a very great Tempest of Thundering and Lightning and motion of the Earth in
the Letter, as well as the Prophetic Representation of the Thunder, Lightnings,
Voices and Earthquake, the great Emblems of the Kingdom of Christ.

3. The Earthquake that shall be at the Rising of the Witnesses, when that
Great City, whose Emblem is Ten, or Tenth; in regard of the Ten Kings, who give
their Kingdom to the Beast, that carries it, shall fall. Rev. 11. cap. 17.

4. The whole Time of the Seventh Trumpet, shall in regard of the mighty
Effects, and Events be a continual Earthquake; even till the great and real
Shake of Heaven and Earth, the once more in the Text; that what cannot be
shaken may remain, as has been explained. Rev. 16.18.20. compared with c. 11.

Now that Earthquake named last, but this last, viz. the Fall of the great
Antichristian State, I affirm to be so near as 1697. approaching; wherein the
Kingdom of Christ shall be in its Succession.

Now what arises from all this, Inference.
but that it may both urge the Necessity, and give all Invitations and
Incitements to Repentance; which cannot be higher expressed than in the
Apostle's own Words, as it is used in this Context. Let us have Grace, or rather
Take Hold, lay earnest Hold of Divine Grace, and Power in Christ; that we may
serve him with Reverence, or all Holy Awes of Modesty and Shamefacedness, as
the Angels that cover Faces and Feet, lest we give distaste; and with good
Heed-taking, as the Israelites that kept within bounds, lest God should have
broken out; And this Service of God with holy (...) Modesty and shame of our
own Unworthiness and horrid Nakedness; This Good Heed-taking not to run into
God as a Consuming Fire, is most shown, exercised and practiced in timely
Repentance. For all at that Day of Earthquake, Thunders and Lightnings, once
for All, All must be near; for God will come near to them, as a swift Witness;
and to All not Repenting and Reconciled in Christ, he will be a Consuming Fire,
Mal. 3.5. With this Heb. 12.

And to this purpose, Let these very late Motions of the Earth be considered in
all the foregoing Discourse; for I cannot but be persuaded, they are Pledges of
that great Change, that shall suddenly be in the World in the Fall of the whole
Papal and Antichristian State; besides their general strong Motive to
Repentance, as they speak God, both in his Divine Power, and Ability to execute
Wrath; as also in his Goodness, Long-suffering, and Patience, leading to
Repentance; and how much more, if the Approach of his Kingdom it self, the
greatest Motive to Repentance be by it declared so near.

That I may therefore improve so remarkable a Providence upon the English
Plantation in Jamaica, (which is therefore to be reputed a part of England it
self) and the so gentle and tender Admonition of that Motion of the Earth among
our Selves (as also on other Parts) I would discourse them first, as an
Argument to Repentance, and then, that they are a Prediction of a great Change
on the World.

1. I first consider that of Jamaica, which, we must needs acknowledge a part
of our Selves; and therefore it is to be looked upon as England, though beyond
the Sea; and so we are all equally therein concerned, particularly that many of
us had Interests, and Relations that suffered in it; we are therefore nearly
concerned; and so are strongly called upon to Repentance by it; and the more,
that it fell so particularly upon that Town or Port, that bore the Ensigns of
Sovereignty and Government, called Port Royal; that was the Key of the Island
and Plantation, the Port and Harbor, the Seat of the Kings House, and of the
Houses of the most considerable Merchants and Traders; and of the Defense and
Strength of the Place, by its Bastions and Fortifications.

2. I consider, that the Judgment bears a very great Resemblance to the
Judgment on Sodom and Gomorrah; For the Thunder, and Lightning, and Balls of
Fire that came down from Heaven; according to the most credible Accounts of
Eyewitnesses; though the Town was not, that I have heard, touched by the Fire,
carry the Signatures of Sodom's Judgment after a serene Rising of the Sun,
which must be by an Earthquake and Inundation; for the Earthquake and
Inundation was in the Suddenness, and dreadful Desolation, and Destruction that
it made, How like to that which turned Sodom into a Lake or Dead Sea to this
day! And herein what was short of Sodom's Judgment in the Fire, was made up in
the Dread of the Earthquake: and so many, about 2000 Persons perished, as by
that newly sober published Account before named appears; A Shade of the Place,
and of the Parts on which the Earthquake had greatest Power is given in it.

From hence then I argue;

1. That it is not to be ascribed to natural Causes any other way, than as the
supreme Counsel and Being has all Causes in his Hand, and at his Dispose. If
it had been only an Earthquake and Inundation, there had appeared less of God,
and of his Supreme Dominion; But when there was a Correspondence, and as it
were Intelligence between Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, above and below; It leads
us to consider Him, Who does whatever he pleases in Heaven and in Earth, and in
all Deep Places. He causes the Vapors to ascend from the Earth, He makes
Lightnings for the Rain, He brings the Wind out of his Treasures, Psalm.
135.6, 7. Were not Men resolved, as Pharaoh, to stand up like Rock against God
they must needs acknowledge Him in this: The Works of God, his Judgment on
Sodom of old, is an Ensample to all After Ages; How much more This so upon our
own Times, on whom the Ends of the World are come; though we had no share in
it, but it was upon another People; How much more when so upon our Selves,
though in another Climate!

2. I consider, as a further Argument to Repentance herein that great Scripture
Amos 4.6. That it comes upon this Nation in a Train, and Connection of
Judgments; all within less than half the Age of a Man at Moses's Computation:
Or 70 Years, Psalm. 90.10.
The Pestilence and Dreadful Plague in the Year 1665. The Fire on this City in
1666. The several Intestine Commotions, and Wars abroad: And now it is come to
this Judgment, though but on some of us; yet it was but so upon Israel, v. 11.
I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. And this is
the last, till God come to a Judgment so great, he would not name; Therefore
will I do Thus, or this, unto thee. Therefore prepare to meet thy God, Oh
Israel, in his severest Judgment, if thou return not. And so according to the
general course of the Word and Dealings of God, especially with a People under
such a clearness of Divine Revelation as we are: It must needs be, whether Men
will Hear or Forbear. It must end in utter Destruction, if upon this we do not
Return to God, according (I say) to the General Rules, and Standards of his
Word.

3. That great Admonition of our Savior's is an utter Prohibition of our
sheltring our selves under such an Imagination, that they were greater Sinners
than we are; for he has solemnly denounced, That whoever does not Repent,
shall not only Perish, but shall Perish (...) in like manner with those, who
have Perished by extraordinary, and most eminent, and remarkable Judgments,
Luc. 13.3, 5. So that without Repentance we are always under the Impendency,
the hanging over of so great Judgments upon us; as came indeed upon the Jews in
the Roman Desolations soon after; and must upon this Nation according to
ordinary Rules, and Standards of the Word, and Providence of God, as I have
said: But if not; seeing that Word of Christ shall be true, that we shall
likewise perish, if we do not Repent; We must be raised to that Greatest
Earthquake, Thunder, and Lightning, and the Dreadful Tempest, the Snares, Fire
and Brimstone God will then Rain, and the Horrible Tempest, that shall be the
Portion of every wicked and impenitent Person's Cup, Psalm. 11.6. at that Time,
that Day, that shall burn as an Oven, and consume the Wicked Root and Branch;
at that Battle of the Great Day of God Almighty in the Valley of Jehosaphat and
Armageddon, when he will go through, and burn up all together; What Cause have
we therefore to look diligently, we may be found of him in Peace at that Day,
and not in a State of War, of that War, that is a War in Righteousness or a War
of Just and Righteous Judgment in the Day of Judgment.

4. I observe from so many Persons, taken away so suddenly in Jamaica; How
great an Argument it makes against Trust to a Death-Bed-Repentance, when the
very Possibilities of a Deathbed to Repent upon may be so snatched from us:
and therefore with how great Force and Evidence, and with what a just
Timousness, the Observations on these Providence There, and Here, are to be
adjusted to these Discourses on the general necessity of Repentance, and the
great Hazard of committing our selves to the Adventure of a
Death-Bed-Repentance; when so suddenly Providence, that is as in a Course of
Earthquakes, and has given us such Warnings, may take us away living, and, if
we Repent not, in his Wrath.

5. As between those two Dispensations of Providence; the Dreadful Earthquake
in Jamaica, and that here; I consider with what a Goodness, and yet with a
Faithfulness to move to Repentance, God has shown us both the Tenderness and
the Skill of his Hand in the Motion of the Earth we were sensible of. For as in
the most admirable Knowledge of his Almighty Hand, he took up our Earth, and
poised it; and in the Doing of it, did as it were say, How shall I give thee
up, London? How shall I make thee as Admah and Zeboim, the Cities the Lord
overthrew, as Jamaica, or Port Royal? My Heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together; I will not execute the fierceness of my Wrath;
I am God, and not Man; I will not enter into this City, Hosea 11.8, 9. as into
Jamaica. Behold then on Them Severity, to Us Goodness, if we Turn to him in his
Goodness, and so abide in it; or else according to ordinary Rules we must be
cut off also.

And there is indeed most of the Power and Wisdom of God in doing so much, and
no more; For a rude and unskilful Hand can Throw Down, Spoil and Destroy; but
only an Understanding and Almighty Hand could weigh the Earth as in Scales; and
as in a Balance, lift up and set down in the very same place and state. And
how much more of Love and Grace to melt and soften us! as if he had said,
Behold what I am able to do, to Ruin you in a moment! But I will only show what
I can Do, and I will Do you no hurt. Oh that this Riches of Goodness, Long
suffering and Patience, might lead us to Repentance! who himself staid his own
Hand, and said to Himself, What am I doing? (when none else could) and He did
it not.

I come now to the Second Head I proposed, for the Improvement of our Thoughts
on these Earthquakes in general, but particularly of that but just, a Motion of
the Earth in this City, and the Royal Camp, and other parts beyond the Sea;
That it is predictive, and foretelling of a great Change in the World: And of
this I give these following Arguments.

1. It is beyond all denial most evident, that Scripture makes use of
Earthquakes, as the Conveyance of its Description of the great Works and
Changes God will make for the Kingdom of Christ, till it appears: That course
of Earthquakes Providence has been in of late years, is surely a Declaration
of those great Changes he is about to make, first by the Succession of that
Kingdom, and then by its own Appearance: For if first Christ convey his Kingdom
by Earthquakes, as Types and Pledges; it is but reasonable to expect, when he
alarms the World with Earthquakes, he has something to do more than ordinary in
the Advancement of it; else his so great use of them in his Word would be but
as the sounding of the Mountains, and Amuse in vain. By the so often use of
Earthquakes he teaches us to expect by them; Seeing as on one side he uses
Earthquakes in his Word to express great Things for his Kingdom by; so on the
other side he uses Earthquakes, that are so in Fact to and in his Providence,
to foretell some Changes for his Kingdom following them, according to his Word.

2. The Nations, and Places, where this Motion of the Earth came, are such, as
are closely concerned in the Change, that God is about to make; being either of
the Protestant Profession, or of the Ten Kings, that yet give their Kingdom to
the Beast.

That God was pleased therefore to guide the Motion of unquiet Vapors over so
many Countries and Cities, it was like the sending the Cup and Yoke in Jeremy
to so many Nations, on whom he would execute his Displeasure by Nebuchadnezzar,
Jerem. c. 25. c. 27. so now he has sent by this Earthquake, as it were by a
Messenger, to make known to the Nations his Kingdom so near. For so mild and
gentle a Motion, that had nothing of Wrath, and execution of Vengeance in its
Commission, seems entrusted only with so great a Notice. And I cannot but hope,
and am even assured, That this City is to bear so happy a Part in the Kingdom
of Christ, that it shall be preserved for his Servant David 's sake, and that
God in Christ is the Holy one in the midst of it.

3. That which above all assures me so, is That Sure Word of Prophecy; that
Time is so near for the Succession of the Kingdom of Christ, (which is by
Prophecy described by a great Earthquake) that I can understand nothing by this
Move; but that Introducing, or Bringing it in with the Call of the Witnesses,
and the Fall of the Tenth of the Great City: For I cannot understand that there
is Space or Room for any other Change but of That to the Kingdom of Christ,
entering into its Succession; wherein all shall have the Advantages of
Repentance and Reformation by the pouring out of the Spirit, and the Preaching
of the everlasting Gospel; even to all the World; and the Converts of that Time
shall be, as the Drops of Dew from the Womb of the Morning: A Change of so
great advantages to the World, that none have any reason to be offended, or to
complain of the Tidings; except They, who hate to be Reformed. I desire no
other Beauty of Feet or Face than to bring and pub^ish it. It is all holy,
pure, spiritual, benign, and beneficent, to those who have but any Desires
after God Christ, and Goodness, both in inward and outward Bounties: There is
greatest reason it should be dai^y prayed for, and daily it is to be praised;
Verily, It may be said, Many Kings, Prophets, and Righteous Men have desired to
see the Things that shall then be seen; and have not seen them; and to hear the
Things that shall then be heard, and have not heard them. Oh therefore, that
this may be what this gracious Heave of the Earth does presage; (as I have
great Assurance it does,) That there is no more danger by it, than this, That
we should take notice; This Earth with great Sedateness gave a Motion with joy,
as John Baptist in the Womb to foretell; It is with all its King^oms soon to
become the Kingdom of the Lord and of his Christ, wherein Righteousness shall
dwell: That soon after, upon a Purification from all Defilements the Heavens
over it, and it self, may become a New Heaven and a New Earth; and the Will of
God done as in parallel, as in that Heaven, and upon Earth.

But though I have endeavored to make good my way all along; yet I would in
the Conclusion give a more solemn Answer to the chief Objections, I have taken
notice of.

Objct. 1. Some of the sagacious Observers of Nature have so traced
extraordinary Events to their Causes, that they have foretold particularly
Earthquakes, by observing the Ripeness of natural Causes for them.

Answ. 1. Whatever Observations the wisest of Mankind have made, they are not
able, so far to penetrate the Screws of Natural Causes, fitted to the
necessitating one another to such Effects; but that supernatural Agents may
give a Lift to the Wheels of Second Causes, that usually move, but on Earth,
viz. in a natural way; to move much above Earth, that is, Supernaturally: and
in the same manner to set Bars to, or hinder their Motions. Ezekiel. 1.19.20.

Now that there are such Supernatural Agents; the very Evidences of rational,
and even sensible Experiments compel the stoutest Gainsayers to confess, but as
they bid defiance to all Things for the sake of their Atheistic Sentiments.

Answ. 2. He that Knows all his Works from the very Foundation of the World,
and foresees All Causes and Effects, could with the same Ease balance them for
their just Time, both as to particular Persons, and Nations with their Sins
filling up their measure; and so that All should roll down to their highest
Effects at that time when he will once more shake, not only Earth but Heaven
also; even at that Time of Trouble, and Day of Battle and War, as it is most
Prophetically called Job 38.22.23. compared with Dan. 12.1. Mat. 24.21. and
Revel. 16.14. the same Spirit that dictated All, Fitting the very Words one to
another in these Scriptures.

Object. 2. But still, If this be allowed, that such natural Causes and Effects
are adjusted for the Purposes of Divine Judgment, and even for that Dissolution
of this present Frame, Why at this Time?

Answ. 1. Such a Time according to all Scripture and Reason must be at some
Time; and why may it not be now so near?

Answ. 2. The very Time since the Coming of Christ first in the Flesh being
almost 1700 Years ago, was called the Fullness of Time; what then can be after
it, but the Ends of the World, the Last Day, the Last Hour, running apace to
the Fullness of all Times? Gal. 4.4. and Ephesians. 1.10.

Answ. 3. Men's Heats in all the Business of this World, Buying, Selling,
Planting, Building; the Little Faith on Earth, it is near; are no Arguments it
is not near; for these are foretold to be even at the nearest Approaches of
that Day.

Answ. 4. But in sum; The Sure Word of Prophecy, and Line of Time according to
Scripture, in full Agreement with History, as I have so often affirmed, is my
Grand Assurance.

Object. 3. But those Words of our Lord's Marc. 13.32. Of that Day and Hour
knows none, etc. contradict any such Calculation making known that Time.

Answ. I affirm upon greatest Evidences of Scripture Reason; The Son having all
Judgment committed to him, and the Spirit resting upon him without measure; did
know of that Day, and of that Hour; but in that Par^bolical Speech Christ
acknowledges the Supreme Dominion of the Divine Being, which is so often said
to have the Panto-Cratorate, the Almighty Ordination of that Day, and the so
unfathomable stupendous Process of it; As the Revelation, or Bringing All
Things to pass in order to it, is said to be given by God to Jesus Christ to
show to his Servants: and the Conduct of them, originally in God, is given to
him; even so the Knowledge of the Time and the Administration of that Day.

Object. 5. But the contrary Prevalencies of that French Prince, the so great
Enemy of the Witnesses, who keeps them now from Rising, shows, That Time is not
so near.

Answ. As God gives in all Ages such Dominion and Greatness to some Princes,
that no Confederacies can withstand it; as to Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander,
Caesar, Mahomet; so has he given much Greatness to that Monarch: but when such
Time of those Princes came, and so of this Prince, that they must have End; At
that very Time, as they, so he must end; and none shall help it; nor any
precedent Greatness stay him up.

Answ. 2. An Universal Monarchy is Embarrassed to him; He shall never be more
than one of the Ten Kings, till he, or his Successors with the Rest shall hate
the Whore. As Prophecy, so Providence has Embarrassed him, as with a Band of
Iron; and so far the Confederacy, or some other certain Interposal shall
prevail, till then

Answ. 3. We are not earnest enough in Prayer, we curtail the Time of
Humiliation, and seeking God; especially, in that strongest Argument of his
Kingdom. Oh that this Counsel might be acceptable to the King, and to the
Counsels of the Nation, and the Ministry of all Names! that we might by
earnestest and loudest Prayers of a Winters Humiliation, and seeking him by
Fasting and Supplication prepare for a Summers Action, and not grutch God the
Time.

Answ. 4. He has had the usual Space allowed to such notorious Enemies of the
People of God; And give me leave to use it as an Emblem, tho not as a Forebode;
As Divine Providence commanded so great a Leviathan or Whale; which he calls
King over the Children of Pride; from Playing in the Ocean, where he had room
enough in the pursuit of his Prey; to come, and strand himself, and dye on the
Shore of Scot^and, the Twin Island of our Great Britain; even so he will
shortly work his Signs and Wonders in Heaven and Earth, that he may abase such
Tyrannick Leviathans walking in Pride.

For the Time is near, and All, however it seems otherwise, shall be ready. A
King shall Reign in Righteousness; and Persons compared to the Basest, Vilest,
shall no more be called Most Christian, most Serene, Magnificent, Beneficent.

But there shall be a Breaking out of the Glory of the Gospel, The Tongue of
the Stammerers shall speak plain, The Lame shall leap as an Heart. The Ears of
the Deaf shall hear; The Esaias. 29. c. 32 c. 35. Eyes of the Blind shall see out
of obscurity; The very Ears of the Deaf shall hear the Words of that Book of
Prophocy, which the Learned will not now meddle with, because, say they, It is
Sealed; nor the Unlearned, because they are not Learned. Abundance of Converts
shall be brought in; Foolish Virgins shall be made Wise, and not Err in the way
called the way of Holiness; and no ravenous Beast shall be there any more for
ever.

Let us then, to sum up all, Seek him who made the Seven Stars and Orion, Amos
5.8.
who makes the Day dark with Night, and yet turns the shadow of Death into
Morning, who calls for the Waters of the Sea, commands them out, and pours them
on the face of the Earth; who rends the Rocks with his mighty Winds, and shakes
the Earth out of its place, 1 Samuel chap. 2.
and Thunders down with his Fire upon the wicked; 1 Kings 19.11.
and comes himself in the Still Voice of his Kingdom.

And hereof he has given notice, as he saw good, with dread of Wrath on
Jamaica, as an Emblem of the Day of Judgment on the World of Ungodly; which, as
it should stir up the Remnant that are there escaped, even as our Selves, to
deep Repentance; so it should excite us to all Acts of Mercy to them, and
Prayers for them.

To us he has sent, as it were the Still Voice, to let us know he is coming
himself; to which the Earth moved it self, in token of Obeisance.

FINIS.
THE GENERAL INEFFICACY AND INSINCERITY Of a Late, Or Deathbed Repentance.
WITH Earnestest Dissuasives from committing our Eternal Condition to that
Unspeakable Hazard. AND A full Resolution of the Case, how far a Deathbed
Repentance is possible, to be Sincere and Effectual. By T. Beverley.

(...). To Day, whilst it is called, to Day; Lest any one be hardened through
the Deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.7, 13. LONDON. Printed by R. Smith, for
William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard, where Gentlemen
and others may be furnished with Acts of Parliament, Speeches, and other sorts
of Discourses, and State-Matters; as also Books of Divinity, Church Government,
Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions, etc. MDCXCII.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT may seem unseasonable, and morose, to deny the value of any kind of
Repentance, in such an Age as this; wherein there is a Generation arisen, Oh
how lofty are their Eyes, and their Eyelids lifted up with Scorn and Disdain
of all Religion! An Age so irreligious, that it seems necessary to gather up
all the Fragments, tho but of a seeming Piety, and make the most of them,
rather than to call things to so strict a Balance: A thinner, and more dilute
Repentance, than would formerly have admitted a Man into a visible Church, may
at such a time as this, hope for Heaven.

To all this I must answer, First, The Looseness of an Age does not slacken or
dissolve Eternal Laws; Wisdom abates nothing of its price, of that timely and
early search after it, whether Men think good to give it, or whether they will
forbear. It has no meaner Esteem of it self, because Folly, that is, simple,
and knows nothing, sits upon the high places of the City, full of Noise
and Clamor, and entices to its Entertainments the Multitude, and Grandeur of
the World.

All the Severities of Scripture, that make the way to Heaven narrow, and the
Gate strait, stand like a Rock, from Generation to Generation, alike in all
times. Nothing that is prodigally loosed on Earth, in compliance with a
licentious Age, will be therefore loosed in Heaven.

The goodly price of a Deathbed Repentance, at which God is prized by Men,
even then, when Religion is at the lowest, is rejected oftest with Indignation,
and the everlasting State purchased by it, may be sadly called an Aceldama, a
Field of Blood.

If this Severity of Divine Truth offend any one, The Resolution is that of our
Savior. Mat. 15.17.
Every Plant, whether Person or Thing, that our Heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up.

2. It is no improbable way of Contesting against Atheism, and general
Irreligion, by the strict Doctrins of Christianity, as well as by Arguments of
Reason: Nay, Authoritative Applications of the Truth of God, often strike the
Conscience within the Reason, sooner and quicker than industrious Attempts upon
the Reason: as Lightning melts the Steel, and neglects the Scabbard. Pressings
of Faith, Repentance, Holiness, Eternal Judgment make Men (even Unbelievers)
fall down upon their faces, when the Secrets of their Hearts are discovered,
and confess God is there

For the Soul of Man is more easily wrought upon by those domestic Rebukes,
God gives it by his Word, than by more solemn Treaties.

Especially, corrupted Reason takes upon it self to be a lawful Authority, when
an honorable War is commenced against it by the better Reason on the other
side; It contemns Laws of Discourse, as precarious, and makes account, it gives
Reason for Reason. But the Rod of God shaken over it makes it tremble, and
confess it self a Slave: Thus the Slaves in the Story were more easily reduced
by the servile Chastisements they were acquainted with, than by the force of
Armies. Atheism grows the prouder generally for being reasoned with: It does
but dissemble, while it pretends its disease to be in the Head, which it knows
indeed to be in the sensual Heart. And therefore is pleased to be struck in the
Head; but cannot endure to be wounded in the Heart, which the Word of God
especially aims at.

Not, but that it is indeed a most generous and honorable Achievement to show
Religion to be the highest Reason; and to detect those pretending Sons of
Reason, of the greatest Irrationality. But it is still to be acknowledged, the
plain preaching of the Gospel, which the Apostle calls the Foolishness and
Weakness of God, is alone wiser and stronger than Men: The Reason of that,
couched under an Heavenly Authority of Truth, carries those (...), those mighty
Weapons, whereby every high Imagination and Reasoning is to be subdued, that
lifts up it self against God.

Upon this occasion, I cannot, but bewail those unhappy Divisions, that have
separated the Preachers of the Gospel one from another, and thereby opened a
Lane for that Black Troop to advance in, and made the Trumpet of the Gospel to
sound so incertainly, that it has rather scattered Men, than prepared them to
the Battle.

Our Savior foreseeing the Consequences hereof, according to that great Maxim
of his, Mat. 12.25.
Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation, did so
earnestly command Unity and Love of one another to his Disciples in general,
and more particularly to the Ministers of his Word, as the most effectual
Demonstration; Joh. 17.21.
He was sent from God, and his Doctrine from Heaven. From whence it follows,
where ever this Union is broken, Christianity is liable to the Imputations of
being a great Cheat and Fraud. Upon which advantage loathsome Irreligion
enters, and spreads it self in those empty spaces, begotten by our Distances,
and removes from one another: All divisions in Christianity are Scandals to it,
and weaken it. This we see verified in our days; the differences in Religion,
and the profane scorn or stupid neglect of it, being alike visible, and
notorious throughout the Nation.

Yet upon just Accounts: the Irreligion consequent upon Divisions in Religion,
turns to the advantage of Christianity, that thus it must be, else how should
the Scriptures be fulfilled? But this abates nothing of the Sinfulness and
Unhappiness, or Necessity of Amendment.

To guide us then into that; It is very observable, the venom of this Distemper
falls not so much upon the several Parties in Religion, as upon Religion it
self; while we wound one another, Religion is the Martyr, lies a bleeding, and
even dying. And while good Men lament it, the Enemies of it make merry and send
Rev. 11.10.
gifts one to another, in token of Triumph.

The method of Cure therefore, is not, for every Party to weigh up it self, and
press down others, but to buoy up Religion it self; and that is best done, by
Preaching and living the very Thing, without distinction of Names. If we did
but yield it its own Integrity and Universal Goodness, it would soon rise into
that Honor it has lost, by being captivated to Opinions.

For as our human Nature would be much more beautiful and happy, if cemented by
that Philanthropy, or general love of Mankind, so indearingly charged upon us
by our Savior; who demonstrated, that he embraced within his own Immensity,
the whole latitude of our Nature, without contracting it into the narrowness of
a human Person, by the great care he took; That this Nature should not be
dishonored, abused, and torn by it self through that bitter Censoriousness,
Revenge, and Contempt, Men exercise upon one another, even there where Christ
is professed.

So would our Christianity, that is now evil spoken of, appear, as it is in it
self, Acceptable to God, and approved of Men, if we could unite in those
comprehensive Interests of Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost, that
substantial Christianity; Those healing Wings of the Sun of Righteousness, in
the Rays of which our little differences about Meat and Drink would play up and
down, as smallest Motes of Human Frailty, easily obtaining a mutual Pardon; and
that black and most abhorred Vapor of Irreligion, be forced to dislodge at so
Illustrious a Presence.

If there be any Interest to keep afoot these Divisions, it is an Interest of
Dishonor, that dares not name it self; it is not only, (...); but (...). It is
not barely to serve an Opinion, (much less the Lord Jesus) but the Belly.

3. But to return from whence I have digressed, upon so great a Cause. Lastly,
we may find, in the very Notion of a Deathbed Repentance, enough to defend the
seasonableness of this Discourse, notwithstanding spreading Irreligion. For it
imports a design to Dye well: and we see very Few, and those Few deprived of
the common Modesty and Sobriety of Mankind; and who thereupon become an horrid
Story, but dye at least in a fair and calm Temper toward Religion. Now if we
join to this, that of many Millions for one, every one dies as he lives, not
only as the Tree falls, so it lies; but as it has inclined along its growth,
so it falls. How great is the necessity then of living well, that we may dye
well! For this Deathbed Repentance, that rises and sets at the same time,
generally proves but a falling Star. That Repentance only wheels orderly into a
higher Orb, that has given proof; it was a true Light, by shining here for
some considerable space.

A good Death receives Being from a holy Life, else there is not such a thing
in Nature, no not in Grace, except by Miracle of Grace.

Thus far I have made Apology for the Seasonableness of this Discourse. In the
Discourse it self, I am not conscious of having wandered from the Universal
Doctrine of Divines in this Point; except it should seem too high a strain to
place this Repentance, (when true) among Miracles. To justify that, I have the
warrant of Sacred Story, the Dying Convert, which being the only Example of
such a one in Holy Writ, was in the days of the Messiah, that great Period of
Miracles, singled out upon that greatest occasion, viz. To display the power of
the dying Mediator, to forgive Sins, not only upon Earth, but in his lowest
Humiliation, his very descent into Hell; which argues it a very great Miracle.

Yet I have not trusted the weight of the Discourse to any thing that looks
like a private Opinion; but to most avowed Principles, and have therefore
reserved my particular Sense as the Conclusion of the whole.

I have only to add, there is a National late Repentance, as appears by the
Vnsuccesfulness of that unparalleled 2 Kings 23.26. and 24.3, 4.
Reformation of Josiah; sincere indeed in him, and of full Effect: but not in
the Body of the Jewish Nation, as appeared by their Relapses under the
following Kings; and therefore, notwithstanding that seeming Return, the Lord
turned not from the Fierceness of his Wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled
against Judah, for its guilt in the Sins of Manasseh; which the Lord would not
Pardon, and therefore would not give a true Repentance of those Evils, they had
so long continued in, against all the early Admonitions of the Prophets: This
is the just Parallel of a Deathbed Repentance.

The due Application of all these Considerations, to every one, into whose
hands they may fall, is the earnest and affectionate Prayer of,

T. B.

THE GENERAL INEFFICACY AND INSINCERITY OF A Deathbed Repentance, etc.
Luke 23.39, 40, 41, 42, 43. And one of the Malefactors that were hanged with
him, railed on him; saying, if thou be the Christ, save thy self and us. But
the other answering; said, do thou not fear God? Seeing that thou art in the
same condemnation. And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds, but this Man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord
remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him; verily
I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
THE generality of Men that have been at all acquainted with the name of
Repentance, and understood in any Measure the importance and signification of
the thing, acknowledge it beyond all dispute necessary: Yet they allow
themselves a leisure for the Performance of it, and such a leisure as swallows
the whole time of Life, and leaves only the last and lowest part of it, for the
discharge of so great a Business; so that their Repentance, if any at all,
falls out to be a Deathbed Repentance.

The inconveniences of which are unexpressibly great, because the lives of Men
are left naked of that Holiness and Purity, that should adorn them, and all
over blotted with Sin and Vanity. Their Conversation wants that light of good
Works, that should shine before Men, and glorify God in Heaven. Their Life is
without form, and void, and darkness is upon the face of it. And in the end
they are cast upon the great Sea of Eternity, as in a Vessel of Paper, a thin
and superficial Repentance.

It is therefore most necessary to use all means, to show the Insufficiency of
this Refuge, which most of those, that live in common under the Profession of
Christianity, design while they live to fly to when betimes they dye. To
demolish this House upon the Sand; that Men may not by hopes of shelter at it,
conceived long before hand, be kept off from laying their Foundation upon a
Rock; which possibly they would do, if these hopes were cut off.

And because this piece of Sacred Story has been generally taken, as an
Instance of great Favor to a late Conversion, not that it is indeed so, but
that it seems to be so, let it be the Ground of the present Discourse.

For I observe Divines, in their Doctrine concerning the danger of a Dying
Repentance, are careful to wrest out of the hand of presuming Imagination, this
Example, and to allay the vain Confidence built upon it.

Indeed the Mistake of it is very fatal, seeing if it be duly considered, there
is nothing more forcible against what it is pretended for, than it. It is true,
it is a Relation of a dying Man returning from great Sins to God; but so
circumstantiated, so defended on all hands against Boldness upon it, that there
might have been more reason to hope well of Last-Breath-Penitencies, if there
had not been a Pattern of such a one in all Points, as much above the
imitiation of those of our days, as the Heaven is above the Earth. It is such a
one, as if God had said of it, if I accept a Dying Repentance; behold this,
consider it every way, and take notice by it, Ante mihi fidem latronis ostende,
and tunc tibi latronis beatitudinem policere. August.
what a one I will have it. God putting the Case, and resolving it thus, has
given a much more positive Determination concerning it, than if the Case had
never been put.

The End therefore I aim at, is to make it evident upon general Reasons, and
particularly from this Instance.

That a Deathbed Repentance is a hazard so unspeakably great, that no Man can
without Folly extremely prodigious commit to so much adventure an affair of so
great importance to an eternal condition.

Hereunto I will raise this Treaty by these degrees.

1. By observing the Judgment of Divines concerning this Case, and balancing
the most favorable with the more severe.

2. By detecting the Follies that have given a Reputation to a Deathbed
Repentance.

3. By examining the most hopeful Appearances of this kind of Repentance, and
showing there are plain Causes of them very much below the Nature of true
Repentance, wherewith I will compare them.

4. By observing the Extraordinaries, of which the Repentance of this Dying
Malefactor was composed, because of which it can hardly be drawn into a
Precedent.

To all these I will subjoin pressing Considerations on every side; that Men
should not delay their return to God, to the latter Times of Life.

For the First, the Judgment of Divines in the Point, I begin with that severer
one; Dr. Taylor's Invalidity of a late Repentance.
yet built upon great Piety and Reason, that asserts it a plainly impossible
thing, a Man on his Deathbed should Repent with that Repentance, the Scripture
so often Discourses of, and promises Pardon to, and threatens the neglect of,
with Perishing; and therefore concludes, a Dying Man that has not already
repented, must needs fall, not into the Sin of Despair. For who is bound to
hope, that has not the reasons of his hope given him by God? but into the
Misery of Despair: For how miserable is he whom God has left to the boiling
Sea of his own Horrors, and thrown him out no Anchor of Hope?

However this Sentence seem rigorous, yet when we consider the ponderous
Arguments it uses, it may rather amaze us, than provoke our Censure: For First,
it is very irreconcilable with the Glory of God, that Men who have had the
knowledge of God, and been called upon all their Lives to give up themselves to
him, should be accepted, when they pour out to him the Lees and Dregs of Life,
instead of the generous Spirits of it. That he that has had in his Flock a
Male, should vow, and Sacrifice to the Lord a corrupt Thing, and yet escape the
Curse of the Deceiver. The Expressions of Scripture are innumerable in which
God Disavows such Prostitutions of his Grace, (as is hereafter to be urged) but
seals such, e're they are aware, under Hardness of Heart, and a Reprobate
Sense, to Destruction.

2. It appears impossible, there should be a discharge of the Duties of
Repentance, when Men are a Dying; that they should draw within the hollow of
that little Span, that is also otherwise encumbered, the vastness of that
Action, that is necessary to take off the Brawn of a long Impenitency.

That a Man should live the life of Holiness that is just a Dying; that the
Tree that has been always barren, should bring forth good Fruit, now it is a
hewing down: These things are very contradictious; how can Repentance plant it
self in the Soul, and settle gracious habits there in so short a space? Or in
an instant by Mortification root out those Lusts, and sinful Affections, that
have been many years eating into the Heart? Repentance must have a time for
Fruits, and those Fruits for Ripening and Concoction, which a Deathbed will
not afford: So that it cannot be that Repentance of the Gospel, but at the
best, only some first strokes of it.

3. There must be a living to God before a Man dies to God. It is the Supreme
Law, every one must glorify him here on Earth, and finish the work he has
given them to do in the World. They must work the works of him that sent them
while it is day, before the night comes, in which no Man can work. After this
Men are received into the glory of God.

4. In Repentance, we must be in the same Circumstances of Temptation we were
in, in the time of Sinning. But it will be hard to find in what the state of a
Dying Man differs from that of him, that is already dead, as to this business
of Repentance; but that he may as well be allowed to Repent, that is entered
into Eternity, as he that stands on the very brink of it.

This Censure cannot be injurious to Men living, and in their full Opportunity;
suppose in Speculation, it stretches Principles of great weight and truth too
far, yet it recompenses for it self by the wholesomness of it to practice; for
who can suffer by being necessitated to an early Repentance, so much his Duty,
so much his Safety?

Further it is most Prophetic, most undoubtedly true of most Men's late
Repentance; That it is too sudden, too Mushrom a Birth to have any worthiness
in it. This Repentance almost universally withers before it grows up, and proves
an Abortion; whether it comes to the trial of a longer Life, wherein it
vanishes as a Cloud, and former Impiety returns; or whether it pass immediately
into Eternity, where it sinks down into Misery; for attempting the Regions of
Life, and wanting the Purity that rises thither, it is beaten back with all its
Pretensions, as a Foggy Exhalation, that would climb to Heaven, but is forced
down, and made to rest below; so that for the Universality of Deathbed
Repentances this Judgment is truly calculated.

If it should seem too Cruel to the dying Condition, to smother Men alive with
the second Death, (as Hazael spread upon the dying King a thick Cloth dipped
in Water) to stifle and benum at once all motions toward God, let us consider
what advice it offers against the Stupidities of Despair.

When we are fallen into so unhappy a Condition, that the whole weight of
Eternity depends upon a very little Moment; it persuades Men would do all they
can in return to God, though that all must be trusted with the Prerogative of
Mercy; for that Mercy which is stated in the Promises of the Gospel, and is in
ordinary, cannot help them in the great point of Salvation, however it may
alleviate their Condemnation, and lessen their Torment.

I mad add, if that which appears a Messenger of Death should have secret
reprieve in its Instructions, and what seems a Deathbed, prove only a
Discipline: It may be a happy beginning of a true Repentance to him, who lives,
after his being near the Grave, to perfect it, according to that of Job, 33.
ver. 22, 23.

Thus this Opinion does not cut off the Action of its desperate Person; and if
by that Action, he pass the needles Eye, and get through the strait Gate of
Repentance and Regeneration, it will be able to give him no Resistance: For
those to whom the two-leav'd Gates of Faith and Repentance open, this Air of
Discourse cannot bar, that they should not enter into life.

But on the other side, they that are confident, and make themselves sure of
Repentance and Mercy; cannot when they meet the solid Obstacles of things,
force their way by the Breath of their Mouth; but they and their intended
Repentance are together locked up in the closeness and compactedness of those
Decrees; First; They cannot Repent, Then they cannot be Saved.

To conclude; let such a Decision of this Case be never so austere, it is a
thousand times more Just than the delay of our return to God in the
Contemplation of doing it at the last can be; and the Reasons upon which it is
planted, are such, that though they may not reach the height designed, yet do
they exclude thousands from Eternal Happiness; and although they may not make
good the Complement of the Censure, yet are they of so awful a regard, and so
worthy of all Observation, that they are most vehemently to be pressed to the
main scope; that Men would by no means trust to this Extreme Repentance, to
which purpose I shall hereafter take further advantage of them.

But let us come to that tenderer apprehension of the generality of Divines,
with which I will concur, that all things of Opinion and Dispute may be taken
away in so great a Point. Let it then be allowed, that a Deathbed Repentance
is no impossibility.

First, in regard of infinite Mercy, that cannot be limited, but by it self:
Now long Impenitency, though it be often doomed irrevocably by God in
particular Generations of Men, or Persons; yet is not that Sin, that shall
never be forgiven. Nor is it upon that account, that the Scripture says of
some; It is impossible to renew them to Repentance. So that though there be
many Examples of such Impenitency, that have proved in the Event unpardon^ble,
yet not from the precise Nature of the thing it self: We may rather believe,
that as the unmeasurable Being of God has delighted it self in so many
varieties and gradations of the Creatures down from Angels to the darkest
footsteps of himself in the World; so the unsearchable Riches of his Grace are
made known in all kinds of Pardons. As therefore it has chosen some of the
worst of Sinners for the sorts of their Sins, chiefest of Sinners, and brought
them home; so some that have made the utmost adventure of continuance in Sin,
that in these manifold Glasses it might be seen, Where Sin has abounded, Grace
has abounded much more.

2. Though the time of this Repentance be short and narrow, and the Duties of
Repentance exceeding long and broad; yet where there are found the true
signatures of Repentance unfeigned, God beholds the Fruit in the Seed and Root,
he knows the Perfection of his own Creation, though Infant, or we may conceive
such (...) in Repentance, Repentance born out of due time, as Paul was in the
Apostleship, suddenly accomplished, though they had not the regular time of
forming, like a Nation brought forth in a day. Cyprian de coena Domini.
Thus thou Lord anointest in a Moment Herdsmen into Prophets, Shepherds into
Kings, Publicans thou ordainest Apostles, nor does their Disease take leisure
to remove, whom thou recoverest, but in that very Moment thou make them every
whit whole, wherein they have thee for their Physician.

3. Although there be according to the general Rule, a necessity of living to
God here in the World; yet God may dispense with the Continuation, or drawing
out of the Action of it in these late Penitents, as we easily allow in the case
of Infants, or Men dying within short space after a Repentance begun upon sad
Consideration, and not in the Exigency of a Sickness.

In the mean time, it is not at all supposed, that God dispenses with the
sincere Preparations and Resolvedness of the Mind to that Action; but that they
must be most true, sound and unfeigned, and the very Action it self, according
to the time, high, full and most significant; and as extraordinary as the
Repentance it self.

4. Although the Condition of a Dying Man do in many regards nearly resemble
the state of him, that is already in Eternity, as he is under a necessity of
leaving Sin and the World, and set at a distance from Temptation; yet it
differs in that great Circumstance, that he is not in Termino, he is not fixed
upon his unchangeable Point, he has not undergone that Sentence that
immediately passes upon the Soul removed, and so may not either have suffered
that more secret one, conceived by God upon long Provocation. The whole time of
Life may be a time of Grace, and he that has not yet been concluded by the
incommutability of Eternity may hear the Voice of Christ, and enter into his
Rest. Quando isthinc excessum fuerit, nullus jam poenitentiae locus. Libr. ad
Demetrianum.
Cyprian, who is positive, That whenever a Man is launched into another World,
he finds no room for Repentance; he is out of the climate of Repentance, who is
beyond the line of Time. All kinds of Penitencies which are a secondary
Satisfaction under the Sufferings of Christ are then desperate and fruitless.
Yet he allows the greatest liberty to Repentance in this Life; For he says, In
isto adhuc mundo manenti nulla poenitentia sera est, etc.
No Repentance is late, that is earlier than the Grave. He says, Here a Man
takes hold of Life, or loses it for ever. Yea he grants, Ad immortalitatem sub
ipsa morte transitur. De coena Domini.
It is possible by Repentance, though we are just a Dying, to be safely landed
in a blessed Immortality. And In eodem articulo temporis cum jam anima festinet
ad exitum, etc.
when the Soul has left its inward Residences, and is now sitting upon the
dying Lips, before its last farewell to the Body, and when in haste to be gone,
yet even then infinite Clemency disdains not Repentance, nor accounts that late
that is true, nor deprives that of pardon, which has the free and full act of
the Soul in return to him. Et quaecunque necessitas, etc. Yea though, as he
goes on, this Repentance had its first rise from Necessity, yet neither that,
nor the Immenseness of Guilt, nor Straitness of Time, nor the Lateness of the
Season, nor the Foulness of former Actions fore-prize from Pardon when the
Humiliation is sincere, and the Soul exchanges impure Delights for those of
Holiness, without Counterfeit or Dissimulation. It may seem in all those
Discourses, that he had forgot to enter a Caution against Presumption; but it
is to be considered while he thus frankly pours out himself, he was one while
inviting In Libr. ad Demetrianum. Credit and vivite and qui nos ad tempus
persequimini in aeternum gaudete nobiscum.
Persecutors of Christianity into the Confessions of it, whom he would not have
debarred with the sense of so great past Offenses against it. Another while
designing against the Novatian Heresy, which took upon it to tie up the
freeness of Grace, as he says, Velit nolit Novatus Haereticus, omni tempore Dei
gratia recipit penitentes.
In spite of the Heretic Novatus, the Throne of Grace is early and late
accessible to true Repentance. This therefore is not to be pressed beyond the
design of the excellent and holy Writer, but will very well agree with all that
I am presently to add as a Balance to this favorable Judgment for such a
Repentance.

Daille.
For as that most prudent Discourse of the right use of the Fathers teaches us;
we must always attend their scope, in the pursuit of which they were often
transported toward the other extreme.

But that a dying Repentance in the nature of the thing is no Incompossibility,
we have fullest Assurance in the Example of the Text, wherein we see one in a
moment conceived, brought forth, and even a grown Man in Repentance, one
passing through some short Instants of holy Action, and entering into Paradise,
like Aaron's Rod budding, blossoming, and bringing forth ripe Almonds in a
Night, and laid up in the Sanctuary for ever.

That it was most probably the first Call he had to Repentance, agrees fully
with the Intention of my Discourse, which granting so much as a Possibility,
would yet take all advantage against the easy Confidence of those, that living
daily under the offers of Grace, and yet despising them, commit themselves
first to the Intentions, and at last to the faint motions of a late Repentance.
To whom that Admonition of Austin is most seasonable concerning the Instance we
have in hand. Ad consequendam fidem non fuit illi extrema hora, sed prima. Nec
Religionem ante, nec Christum scivit, non remedia status sui in momenta ultima
infoelici fraud posuit. Sermon. 120. de Temp.
If we respect his Opportunities for attaining Faith, his Repentance was not
late, but early and soon, he took the very first Season; as soon as ever he
descried Christ and Religion, he embraced them. He did not wretchedly cheat
himself of the Remedies of his miserable Condition by adjourning the Use of
them to a late and uncertain Futurity, which seldom or never succeeds well.

This Consideration leads me therefore from the most favorable, the light side
of this milder Sentence, to the black and dark part of it.

That is to say, There is an Extreme peradventure, whether God will give
Repentance at the last or not; for this Grace being acknowledged extraordinary,
if it were common, it would cease to be extraordinary.

It is most undoubted in Scripture, God is often provoked against Men to swear,
they shall never enter into his rest, Heb 3.8, 9. etc.
when they have long tempted him, and Erred from his ways.

The Heart is daily hardened by the deceitfulness of Sin, till it grow to that
the Apostle calls (...), a Heart that is Irrepentable, Romans 4.2.
or that cannot be repented of: Customs in Sin long settled become like the
Ethiopians Skin, Jerem. 13.23.
and the Leopards Spots, that cannot be changed. And though it is true, the
Spirit of God is not hindered in its Inspirations, but that it blows where it
lists; yet the course of it is so attemper'd to the state and motion of the
Soul it self, that it most usually takes the opportunity so generally requisite
to the settling a Constitution and Temper in us; that is; the freest and most
unprejudiced, and larger spaces of a Man's Life: So that whenever it works upon
Dying Men, I mean those that have had the free use of the means of Grace of
old; It works by such a Prerogative, that a Man may as well expect a
Prerogative of Providence to bear him walking upon the Sea, because it did once
so to Peter, as this.

Most even of the fairest Appearances of this kind of Repentance miscarry,
having no true Virtue in them; and though in regard of their vehemence they are
called early Seekings of God, yet (which is horrible to be spoken) they are as
it were prepared for the Triumphs of the Justice and Indignation of God over
those, Prove. 1.28.
who would have none of his Counsel in former times, but despised all his
reproof.

Lastly, Whoever seeing and knowing calls himself with design upon Repentance
at Death, is like to fall headlong by tempting God, and expecting he should
stand ready for him with that Grace at last, he has so long resisted and
refused.

And now when this Judgment of Divines with this Balance upon it is compared
with the former, the result will be only this, the kindest Divinity in the
point, and that seems to do the most favor, is very dreadful, and leaves such
Men in a Condition next to desperate, which is but an Aggravation of the
danger, when what Men would choose to appeal to, so far condemns them.

It is then agreed on all hands, that for any Man to live so as if he did
contrive and forecast a Dying Repentance (although it be yielded him, it is no
impossibility) as the safe expedient, first of an Irreligious Life, free from
the troublesome Thoughts of a present Amendment, and then of a secure Passage
into Eternity; It is first an exceeding Irreligion and Immorality in it self;
and then to run so desperate a Risque and Adventure for an Immortal Soul; that
he is a pardonable Madman, in comparison of such an one, that drinks a deadly
Poison, because he has heard there is a certain Antidote in the World, that
will expel it, though he cannot tell whether he can have it at all, much less
whether time enough for his necessity; and lastly, whether the Endeavors he
uses for it will not be deluded with the Counterfeits of it, it being supposed
they are thousands for one of the true kind; and he thereby perish, pleasing
himself with the hopes he has it, when he has indeed but a likeness of it.

2. Head. I come now to the second Proposal, which is to make inquiry, seeing
the Case is thus, as it every way appears to be, How the name or notion of a
Deathbed Repentance, as such an universal Refuge, came up in the World; for it
is a new Repentance, ( much like those new-come-up Gods Moses speaks of, Deuteronomy.
32.17.) that Christianity and the Gospel know not. The Scriptures that treat
most professedly of Repentance, always insist upon it as a reformed course of
Life, to be undertaken even now, while the Proposals of Grace and
Reconciliation are made to us; and only by very silent Intimations, the track
of which is hardly discerned, leave it possible, that God should by miracle
save some very few out of the Fire, and pull them as Brands out of the Burning,
by giving them Repentance at the last. Whereas this is now become the only
Repentance in use, and has devoured the other; as if to press Men upon it were
to torment them before their time, and to lessen the Validity of this were to
take away the Mercy of God, and deny the Grace that is so free and universal.
Let us search therefore how this sort of Repentance has come into such Repute.
And if we observe, we shall find it first rising from the intimate Sense the
Conscience has of the necessity of Repentance; For were it not so clear and
evident a Duty, a Deathbed Repentance had never been heard of; most would
choose to go out of the World as they have lived in it, not suffering any
degree of the trouble of Conscience, or vexing themselves with Reflections upon
an unholy and ill-spent Life. As Men have chose to live freely and
uninterruptedly in forgetfulness of God, and an Eternal Condition days without
number, Jer. 2.32. so would they choose to die, were there not a Law within,
that however it has lain covered with the Dust of Sensuality, yet is now
restored to its Authority, and urges the Soul with the Terror of Punishment for
so long Disobedience.

And secondly, this necessity of Repentance, though secretly understood, yet
was not sufficiently considered in the time of Health, for had it been equally
regarded, it had not been now to begin. He that had rightly measured it, would
not for a thousand Worlds so have adjourned it.

These two things then meeting so often together, viz. The necessity of
Repentance; and the neglect of it all along our Life: the necessity it should
be performed some time, ere Men go out of the World; and the neglect of it in
the freer Opportunities of Life; These, I say, bring forth hasty motions of it
at last: For it losing nothing of its necessity by its delay, it must be done,
as well as it may be at that time; even as the last Moments, wherein Businesses
of great Consequence are to be dispatched, press for Expedition the more
earnestly, because they must be done then or never, though it often falls out,
the time is so far past, they suffer not only much disadvantage, but even
defeat by the delay.

The Notion of a Deathbed Repentance then we may perceive rising from the
great Indisposition to Repent, while the Pleasures of Sin are in their Season,
and flourish, and Men in Health and Strength to enjoy them; and from the
necessities of Repentance falling upon them at the last, and wringing from them
sometimes very high Acknowledgments of God and an Eternal Condition, passionate
Expressions of the folly, evil and vanity of former Life, desires of Mercy,
Professions of strong Resolvedness to serve God, and if they had many Lives to
give God, they would give them all. All which being so unusual to hear formerly
out of such Mouths, and coming from Dying Men, for whose Sayings we have a
natural regard, Charity toward them, and willingness to hope well of them,
gives these Semblances, the Reputation of Repentance. To which may be added,
That those who are Guides and Seers in Religion too often, errante Clave, by
too Liberal an Absolution open the Kingdom of Heaven to such, and taking the
Instruments of a foolish Shepherd to themselves, heal the hurt of their Souls
slightly; so that their Repentance is saincted here, and though it miscarry in
the other World, yet the miscarriage is hid also in that other World.

From all this has arisen a downright Opinion of this kind of Repentance, as
the only (...) the Prudent Expedient, that compounds two so different
Interests, first that of a worldly Conversation, to which it gives no
hinderance; then that of Eternal Life in appearance, because it assumes the
Promises of Mercy to it self, especially those gracious Assurances in Ezekiel. 18.
Chap. 33. it reckons as made on purpose for it. All which argues a very vile
Sense both of the Justice and Mercy of God; of his Justice as if it had no
authority, of his Mercy as if it had no sense of Honor.

And lastly it is grown into a general Expectation, rhat however ill and
carelessly of God Men have lived here, yet they should go out of the World with
good words of him and Religious Professions, as an Inbalm to their Memory and a
Dirge to their Souls into the Happiness of an Everlasting Condition.

Thus they call Repentance and Heaven after their own name. This their way is
their folly; Psalm. 49.11.13, 14, etc.
yet their Posterity, men of like Inclinations, approve their sayings; because
such Men (as they speak) go away like Lambs, but as the Scripture says, like
senseless Sheep are laid in the Grave, and Death feeding upon them, the Error is
not discovered till the morning: when the upright have dominion over them; that
is, infinitely excel them, and their counterfeit Repentance, which cannot stand
in judgment, nor they in the congregation of sincere Penitents, Psalm. 1. verse.
5.

Now this account I have given of a Deathbed Repentance obtaining among us, is
too comprehensive; yet I must acknowledge, that there are many whose Judgments
are more enlightened, and the Sentiments of their Consciences quicker than to be
satisfied at so easy a rate, who yet fall into the common unhappiness of not
having repented, till they come to die: I will therefore enquire further, why
many who are able to feel beforehand the necessities of a speedy Repentance,
and also to draw their Death so near them, as to die daily in the sense of
Death; and thereby further perceive those Necessities, do not yet Repent daily,
but betray themselves to an Evening or Twilight Repentance.

The Resolution of this lies not only in the immoderate love of Sin and its
Pleasures, and the too low apprehension of God and Eternal Things, (though
these are always present in the case) but chiefly it lies in the great
Confidence such Men have in the present time, not sensible of the continual
waste of it; Under the favor of which they put away the evil day far from
them, and stretch themselves upon this moment, Amos 6.3. etc. that they may
take their full Ease and Satisfaction: In the mean while stifling the Thoughts
of Dying and Judgment. Were it not for this, no other Reason would encourage
them to delay their Repentance; for when this Fails, all others generally fail
also, and therefore none are so passionately moved, as such, when they come to
die.

This Cloud that is but as big as a Man's hand ( our days are as an hands
breadth, Psalm 39.6.) yet looks like the whole Heaven; It stands as a Firmament
over their heads, It looks like an Eternity to Men. In this time Repentance
finds as little place with them, as it is like to do with God in the Evening of
Life.

In this occasion the wild Asses of the Wilderness snuff up the wind at their
pleasure, and none can turn them, Jer. 2.24. The lust of the Flesh, the lust of
the Eye, and the pride of Life swallow all and can spare nothing; Yet in the
midst of all this the Soul promises it self, it will ere long take a Season of
recollecting it self, and that it will do it time enough, so timely as to leave
space sufficient for a large Exercise of Repentance; for although it is but
upon the edges and skirts of Time, yet it seems to it self to be upon the
Center, and in its Imagination commands the future, as if it were in its own
hand; so that through the endless returns of Pleasure and Business, through
Indisposedness to holy and serious Action, through Intentions and Purposes of
being better hereafter, it slips down, e're ever it is aware, into the lowest
of Life, and has the business of Repentance lying whole and undiminished upon
its hand: Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep, deceives men, till their last end comes as an armed man, Prove. 24.12.
The hopes that to morrow will be as to day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56.12.
so as to leave enough for sadder Thoughts, befools Men, till the very Course of
Time rows them before they think of it upon Eternity.

Of great moment therefore it is to number our days rightly, that we may know
how frail we are, Psalm. 39.4. And to apply our Hearts to Wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.
For this time of Life though it be but little, yet it boasts great things, Jam.
3.5. This Vapor stretches out it self as far as it can: It rejoices in its own
boastings which are evil, Jam. 4.16. In the mean while the Moments of it are
winged, and fly from us; they glide away, and we cannot, except we bring them
to strict Account, take hold of them to graft any thing upon them: How does to
day like an Egale, or Poast, or swift Ship, or Arrow get from us, leaving no
path? Wisd. 5.9, etc. And if we offer to take the Account, how many things
snatch it from us, as an impertinent Disturber from him that is catching
slippery numbers? Here is Wisdom, let him that has it count the number of
Life, for it is the number of a Man, Rev. 13.18. A short number. It is all but
Dying Man, Eccl. 6.10. And yet it requires great Ingenuity, The Ingenuity of a
Man, that is indeed a Man, to find it: But he that misses it, is found at the
end of his days a Fool, and finds that dreadful reward of a Fool, Jer. 17.11.
That the great God, that formed all things, gives to the Fool as well as to the
Transgressor, Prove. 26.10. But those that are wise shine as the Sun in the
Firmament, Dan. 12.3.

Thus far I have insisted upon the Accounts, how this Baptism of Repentance for
the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.29. came in upon Christianity, that is, How it comes to
pass that Men will not be baptized with this Baptism till they are given over
for dead Men, like those Clinici of the first Times, that delayed their Baptism
to their last Bed, of whom some Expound that place, 1 Cor. 15.29. Vid. Estium
in locum.

But the Mistake in this Case (though that passed not without some note of
Disgrace) is in a point of much higher Consequence, and so far more dangerous,
and has also less of reasonable Pretense; for while they thought, Baptism
washed away all past Sins, and was but once to be done; it seemed a necessary
Providence to take the full Benefit of it at the last, upon which account
Tertullian even Expostulates, Quorsum festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem
peccatorum? while he Discourses of Infant Baptism.

Whereas the Water of Repentance is never forbidden, Acts 10.47. but may be
both evenly drawn through the whole course of Life, and often renewed to supply
the Defects of it self; which is one Signification of that (...), 2 Cor. 7.10.
that Repentance, which is always promoted, but never retracted. Nor do I indeed
doubt, but the Water of Baptism, wherever it has effect, as a Spring, that
from the first Moment wherein it is truly received, runs down with a free
Current upon the whole Course of Life, and is therefore universally Operatur in
Baptismo poenitentia, tanquam in fundamento. August. Expos. Ep. ad Roman.
to be applied. And whenever Converting Grace works, it leads back the Soul,
though through many Years past, to the Virtue of that Sacramental Fountain.

But to return: Although these Accounts I have now given of a Deathbed
Repentance, obtaining among us, infold the whole Multitude of dying Penitents,
yet according to the former state given I do not deny, but that some very rare
Example there may be, giving a better Sense to this sort of Repentance;
Examples of the Grace of God, acting in a way of Prerogative, as has been
said, and working effectually the truth of Repentance in some; upon whom he
lays the hand of his Salvation and Rescue, while they stand upon the very last
minutes of the Season of Grace, and are just dropping down into Hell; and
guides them to take their Latest steps in the ways of Life, wherein they had
hitherto been strangers; upon whom a great Miracle is wrought, that they should
in their almost perfected motion to endless Ruin be stopped, and when they had
just finished their Course thither, they should yet be transplanted into the
way Everlasting.

But I proceed to the Third Head. To examine the most hopeful appearances of
this kind of Repentance, and to show there are plain Causes of them, much below
the nature of true Repentance.

And first in the general: It is no wonderful thing to find Men in a Paroxysm,
in a high Passion of seeking after God, when they are a Dying. It is indeed
more strange to find any so sotted, so seared, That their spirits seem only to
go downward: They are Beasts while they live, and as such they go down to the
dead, Eccles. 3.18, etc. There are no bands in their Death, Psalm. 73.4. They go
down in a Moment, Job 21.13. There is not a Moment between the first and second
Death of the Soul, not a Moment of Life between, not so much as of the Life of
natural Conscience. They are twice dead, Jude 12. dead in the common Corruption
of Nature wherein they are born. Dead in the loss of Natural Principles: pulled
up by the roots, there is nothing to quicken or move in them. This is amazing
Stupor: They die like a stone, Exodus 15.5. 1 Samuel 25.37. they plunge down with
the whole weight and force of Impenitency.

This way of Dying has certainly greater Punishment, and heavier Condemnation;
and though it seem more chooseable than a fruitless Repentance, yet doubtless
Eternity makes a difference, though not such an one, as should give any one
Confidence to imbarque into it in a Coffin-Repentance.

But whether it be rather to be chosen or not, this is past question; It is
unavoidable to some; whether they will or no they are surprised with Thoughts,
what will become of them for ever, and few Men but have thoughts this way at
such a time above ordinary.

But I intend to speak of the fairest and best spread Repentance that is found
upon a Deathbed. That which gives the liveliest Hopes of it self, that it is
true and sincere; not such an one that to a serious Observer betrays it self;
not either that forced composure, to the Expectation of the World, which looks
for a solemn Profession of God from every one that dies; nor an ignorant and
formal Repentance; but a Repentance that has much of Vigor, and inward
Affection, and is driven on by great knowledge and light; that is accompanied
with much Sorrow, and very considerate Apprehensions of Eternal Things: And if
such an one be so questionable, what can become of others?

There is no reason any Repentance should be the better esteemed because Men
are Dying, but much the less. Now while Men are living a thousand of these
seeming Changes for the better, are evidently confuted without more ado, by
after returns to Wickedness; and they that have to do with such shows of
Reformation, have no regard of them, nor of the Persons for them. Apud illum
Cordis Interpretem Ars non admittitur ad salutem. August. Sermon. 120.
Now God, who is the exact Searcher of Hearts, can much less be imposed upon by
the fairest appearances; nor can Men wise according to the Rules of Scripture
be easily well persuaded of them, and when they are best persuaded, there must
needs be a very trembling Consideration of so great a hazard.

But to come more particularly to what I have proposed, viz. To show that
Repentance is a Height, to which these general Motives of this late Repentance
can never mount the Soul. In which I will begin with the Descriptions of true
Repentance, in that wherein it is most difficult (not to say impossible) to
rise to it upon a Dying Bed.

Repentance in all the parts of it, is the fullest, clearest act of the Soul
and Judgment, wherein it is most perfectly it self. Remove a Man never so far
from all kind of Fears, from the Appearances of Death, if he were to live Ages,
he would be of the same Sense. He that truly Repents, does not snatch up
Repentance, as an Expedient for a present Extremity, (...). Hieroc. Carm. Pyth
Pura voluptatum mutatio. Cypr.
but chooses it as an entrance into the best state of Life, and lives always,
and rests himself in this choice. For however this may be introduced by very
troublesome and tumultuous Motions, yet it is it self the easy sitting down of
the Soul with abundant Pleasure and Satisfaction in the abhorrence of Sin, and
love of Holiness, in the dislike of Vanity and Sensuality, in the Approbation
of heavenly Purity of Heart and Life. It is not a Trance wherein Sin lies dead,
and a Man is in a Rapture of Goodness for a time, but a most settled State.
Godly sorrow, that works Repentance, works Carefulness, Fear, Revenge,
Desire, 2 Cor. 7.11. and by these accomplisheth a Repentance to Salvation, that
has no after-pain or trouble, no (...). Verse. 10. These Affections are
Preparations. Repentance enters as a Soul into these, which is a still, solid,
clear Act of Reason renewed, and a Mind which gives an uniform Vote at all
times. A Change that is never changed back again, no more than things can put
off themselves, or evil it self become good. It is therefore upon fullest
Deliberation to choose with Joshuah, I and my house, those whom I can govern,
will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. It is Engaging the Heart to approach to God,
the joining our selves to him by an everlasting Covenant, never to be
forgotten, Jer. 30.21. and 50.5. The cleaving to him with full purpose of
Heart, Acts 11.23. When all forerunning Affections are laid and quiet, or worn
out, this Judgment still remains, and raises other Affections like it self,
that ever remain with it; into which the Spirits of the former are extracted,
and wherein they exercise all the true power they had. But now on a Deathbed
there is often a great Commotion raised, a loud blustre of Passion never
arriving at this point, at this Settlement: But if a Man should live after, it
would go off, as Clouds and Storms, that when they have spent themselves,
vanish and lie down: And when a Man dies, it is to be feared, that as they were
raised by approach to the unappeasable Tempests of Darkness, so they are
hurried with their Violence.

2. It is carefully to be observed, that there is in true Repentance a due
Proportion betwixt the contrite Indignation of the Soul against past Sin, and
the love and zeal it has for Holiness: whereas in Deathbed Repentances, it is
oftenest found, that there is either a terrifying Presence only of former Sins,
appearing to the affrighted Conscience, without a more hopeful Indication of
the Soul truly composed to Righteousness: or else some high flying Resolutions
of better Life afterward, offered, as a kind of Bribe to the Patience and Mercy
of God, in hopes of present Deliverance, or at best, as a Ransom from Hell and
Eternal Damnation; but without a deep sense of the guilt and evil of past Sins,
or the just apprehension of that continually running issue of Corruption, that
is still defiling anew: Either of these is a main Error, and pernicious; For if
on the one side the Heart in a Rage be forced to cast out some Sins for the
turbulency of them, if it be not immediately filled with better Guests, Seven
other Spirits are ready to enter, and make the last state of that Man worse
than the first, Mat. 12.43. For Repentance is no void space, no silent, or
unactive state, but when it has dislodged Lusts, furnishes and fills the Soul
with the best things, and carries the vigor of a Man's Action to the best
effect; When by repentance a Man ceases to do evil, he learns to do Well, Isai.
1.16, 17. And brings forth fruits meet for repentance, and amendment of life,
Mat. 3.8.

On the other side, he that seems to make a hasty motion to Holiness without
due sense of Sin, first thinks to overrule the method God has set, who
requires Humiliation, godly Sorrow, Anger, Revenge, Fear, as preparing to
Repentance: And further, he conceits a freedom to himself, when he is fettered
and bound; without a power given him from God, he offers to cast out Devils
with ease, that cannot be cast out, but by fasting and prayer, Mark 9.29. (that
is) severe courses of Self-abasement, and lowliest dependences together with
earnestest Application to the Grace of God. These unclean Spirits therefore,
that dissemble a retreat, return immediately, and make a Prey of the deluded
Soul, Acts 19.14, etc.

3. Although Heaven and Hell, Happiness and Misery, take up the thoughts of a
true Penitent, yet not separated from God and Christ, but as it were compounded
into the Sense of God angry, and the desire of Atonement with him in Jesus
Christ. Happiness and Misery considered apart are not the object of the
gracious Soul: But God and Christ considered apart are an infinitely sufficient
Reason of Repentance. The clear love of God upwards the Soul, as a Father in
Christ without Reflections upon Happiness, is, though not the single, yet the
paramount Consideration in Repentance unfeigned. But Men a Dying are generally
so over-possessed with the Terrors of an Eternal Suffering, and mere desires of
Freedom from pain; and of well-being, and so in haste, that they generally miss
these higher Considerations, which being further off, not only from corrupt
Nature, but even from natural Conscience, are not commonly espied, but
therefore argue greater Sincerity, and truth of Heart.

4. The truest Repentance lies in the bosom of Faith, the apprehensions of the
Love and Goodness of God in Christ melt the Soul, and give it most perfect
Separation from Sin, the most effectual Purification of the Heart; all which
express the height of Repentance. Upon the soft Fire of the pardoning Goodness
of God, the Soul most kindly distills into repentant Tears. Here flows that
Spirit of Grace, and ingenuous Goodness, which brings forth the clearest and
holiest Affection toward God.

But at the time we are now speaking of; It is very seldom, that either Horror
or Presumption do not swallow all: Presumption, where there is little Sense or
Judgment of the Case; Horror, where the Judgment is clearer and the Sense
quicker; for evey thing disposes now rather to Fear, and to the Spirit of
Bondage, Romans 8.15. and a Man naturally does all he does under a servile dread
of God, and his Eternal Justice, And though there may be much mention of
Christ, and desire of Mercy through him; yet it is but as a Malefactor
convicted, beseeches the Mercy of the Judge, no otherwise than as of a Judge:
So such call out for the Mercy of God to pardon them, but still as a Judge, not
with the Spirit of the Son sent into the Heart, the Spirit of Adoption crying
Abba, Father. Nor with that love that casts out unworthy Fear, Gal. 4.6. And
indeed how can it be otherwise, there having been no acquaintance with God in
the way, Job 22.21. but a long Enmity; and the time now too strait for a free
and full Consideration of the riches of Grace, such as may still an awakened
Conscience: Fear presses in every way, and shuts out Faith. What can now redeem
the Soul from this hellish Terror, but a light from Heaven immediately darting
into it, a Grace above that Grace, that ordinarily saves Men? For a well settled
Trust and Confidence in Mercy according to the general Rule, is not, but after
some sad debates, and experimental Consultations, that have passed between the
sense of Sin, and the affiancing Acts of the Soul upon Christ. This Repentance
then is in great danger of missing the Spirit of the Gospel, and falling into
the Rank of those Repentances of Cain, Esau, Judas.

This I have endeavored to show, that though we suppose a Dying Man to spread
his Soul and Thoughts every way, and to all the parts of Repentance; yet it is
extremely to be suspected, there will want the true and right quality of them;
in regard of the very disadvantageous Circumstances, wherein such an one is
found; and the great unfitness of the Soul at that time, to begin to do
anything worthy, to which it has not been before inured; or if it did begin,
it would be much more unlikely to bring forth fruit (as our Savior speaks) to
perfection, Luke 8.14.

I add nothing of the Exercises of a full and well grown Repentance, whereby it
is daily espying the risings of Sin, and suppressing them, and filling up the
Defects of Holiness and Obedience; because they are not to be thought possible
in the point I am now speaking of, and I have already given a Resolution in
that Case.

I shall now set my self to find out the low Causes, that are always to be
suspected to have the great Influence upon such a Latter-end Penitency.

In general therefore, we must take notice, that there are several vapors of
misapprehension, rising upon the Soul, when we are a Dying, that do so disguise
it to it self, and disfigure the true face of it, that from thence arise
dangerous Mistakes concerning a Man's Condition toward God.

We see into how many shapes upon ordinary Occurrences we change, and how
easily we exchange them for quite different, without any good Cause; what
continual Ebbs and Flows there are of the Humors, and how do these cast the
Balance of the Superior Soul? One Man is every hour some several sorts of Men.

How much more do great Accidents, and removes out of one Condition into
another, alter us? Which yet are but the sudden and just now state of our Minds
upon such Alterations, which not continuing we return to our former Figure,
Unstable and weak as water, Genesis 49.3. we take the form of every Vessel we are
put into. Who knows then whether his Dying Repentance be any more than the
Mould, not of his Mind, but of his Dying Condition approaching him big, with so
great a Change? We know many things befall us in our Lives, which put a greater
sense of Religion upon us, than we find at other times; and yet how variable
are we? our goodness at such times is as the Morning Dew, and as the early Dew
it goes away, Hose. 6.4. How often are we from the occasions of Mercies,
Afflictions, Fears, Hopes, good Discourses, carried into high Apprehensions of
God? And we lose them again we know not how: Now out of doubt a Dying Condition
of any thing we meet with in the World is most apt to move us upon God, and a
Sense of him. But can we think, Those fleeting Shoots of the Soul, that have no
certainty, are accepted for Repentance?

How strangely does Melancholy, and Oppressions of that transform Men? which
when it falls upon the Motions of Conscience, gives us strong Imaginations of
Eternal Things; which yet being nothing but the cast of that Melancholy upon
the Thoughts; when that is removed, they are quite of another hue.

It is evident the Mind sees much through the Body, and the Representations are
colored by its Temper. As the Eye sees through yellow or green Glass,
differently from the things themselves: So the Serenity or Cloudiness of the
Humors makes a different Reflection of things upon the Mind, and the
liveliness or heaviness of the Spirits incline us to very varying Apprehensions.

Now what time is more like to be so encumbered with these Clouds and Vapors
than a Dying Hour? When every thing is ready to contribute them, and nothing to
scatter them? If then Natural Conscience, and implanted Sense of God together
with the Notions given us from Scripture pass through these, they become very
impressive, and affecting for the time; and yet he much mistakes Repentance,
who thinks it no more, than a fit of Religious Melancholy.

But let us enquire after some more settled, and constant Causes of these
Penitential Motions near Death, and we shall find many very likely to be so,
that are not yet worthy of true Repentance, and therefore what springs from
them, is not accepted before God.

1. When Men find all their Being in the World at an end, and feel themselves
falling, they know not whither; It is no strange thing they should catch at
God, and that they may take hold of him, at Holiness also; Seeing ingraffed
Principles together with general Discourse teach every one, how dear Holiness
is to God.

If God and Goodness were no more than Imaginary things: It would be no wonder,
if they who are tossed off the World, and thrown overboard from it, should
snatch at them; if there were no more in the Case than this, that every one
has heard so much speech, and talk of them among Men. For to him that has
nothing in reality, even a Shadow, a Fancy are valuable. Men that are dropping
through the Air, or sinking under Water, without Consultation offer at every
thing they meet with.

In great Extremities short of Death, they that are bereft of all worldly
Assistance, fly to the Divine Succors, though as Jonah's Mariners they pray
to an Idol instead of the true God, and their Devotion is no better than
Superstition, which is but a Fancy in Religion. What strange thing then is it,
for nature to cry out for God, and Christ, for Pardon of Sin, to be delivered
from Hell, and to have Heaven for an everlasting Rest, when all things else
evidently fail as they do in Death; and when not only Fancy, and general
Opinion, but most substantial Reason enlightened by the Scripture provoke up a
Man to it, even for Self-preservation?

Yet this differs but little from howling upon our Beds for Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, Hos. 7.14. for though the things differ much in their Nature, yet the
Esteem Men have of them, and the desire they have after them is much upon the
same ground; for these Spiritual things appear to that natural Sense of
Self-preservation, as necessary in Death, as the other do in Life and Health.

But if the approaches of Death happen to be again drawn off, the value of
Spiritual things removes with them, and the things of this World, with all the
sensual and sinful Delights of it, return to their former price: which argues
the ineffectualness of this cause of Repentance, and the Unacceptableness of
the Repentance it self to God, that flows from it; God disclaims Men, that have
never come to him before their Extremity, and come then only because of it. In
the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us: But where are thy
Gods that thou made? Let them arise if they can save thee, Jer. 2.27, 28.
Thus to such Dying Men crying out to him, God says, Let your former Lusts and
Pleasures now be your Happiness. Fools and scorners, that would not be warned,
call upon God in their calamity, and seek him early, when the whirlwind of
their destructions hurries them, but cannot make him hear, cannot find him,
Prove. 1.14.

2. Suppose the desires after God, and Eternal Happiness, with all the Retinue
of those Desires rise not, so much, from the Necessities of remove from this
Life, and sensible Supports, but immediately from the sight of Eternal things
themselves: yet will not this conclude the Repentance sincere. For we may
easily pitch upon several so plain reasons of these quick Apprehensions of
another World, that it is much more strange, if any Man be not struck with
them; and they that are, are not in greater Ecstasies of these Considerations,
than that most die in some fair inclinable Temper toward them, and others are
extraordinarily surprised with them, yet without true Repentance.

For First, If it were no more, but the leisure, and uninterestedness of the
Mind in all worldly things, that Death brings: It is no wonder that the Action
of it should immediately, and necessarily flow upon God; for it being always in
action, and motion from its very Nature, and God having made it for himself;
and the manner of its living here in the World being a slavery willingly
undertaken for the Service of the Body, and the Enjoyment of this present Life,
in its being fallen from God: It is nothing strange, that that Drudgery being
now at an end, and the chains wherein it was held, just a breaking, it should
fall upon God, and Spiritual Objects, whither the stream of it was prepared to
run, and which are most truly its own business. For the distance being so wide,
and irreconcilable between Man, and this Earth in Death; the very having
nothing else to do must carry him upon the Future State; seeing his Soul is
such a Being as cannot naturally lie still, and that State is all, that it has
to work upon, and further than that, it is so nearly allied to it.

Secondly, The very loosening and uncementing the Soul from the Body, wherein
it dwelt, and wherein the Motions of it were restrained, Multi enim quum
remissi and liberi sunt futura prospiciunt, ex quo intelligitur quales futuri
sint quum se plane corporis vinculis relaxaverint. Cic. de Senectut.
has been thought very probably to give Men lesser degrees of those Advantages
near their Death, which naked and free Spirits not enclosed and pent up in
Bodies have, whereby they have been able to make Conjectures of future things,
and to speak prophetically. The less the Soul is bound to work by the Body, the
higher are its Operations. All extraordinary Motions of the Soul are a kind of
Ravishment from Sense. Those great Prophetic Blessings of Jacob and Moses were
near their Dying. Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 32. c. 33.
It is therefore very easy to be thought, that when the Soul and Body are
ready to cleave asunder, and the Spirit to be separated from Flesh, that it
should make an higher flight toward Eternal Things.

The nearer every thing is to its own Residence, the more vehement is its
motion said to be thither. So there may very well be quick sallies of the Soul
toward Eternity, before it enters into it, when it is so near that everlasting
Receptacle of it self.

Thirdly, We may observe in the Experience of all times, every appearance of
the other World has strange effects of Fear, and affrightment upon Men's Minds:
When any one is entering then into that whole World, it may well put him upon
purifying himself, more than they that fall upon Leviathan, Job 41.25. When Men
are just upon that Region of Spirits, what appalements of Mind and strong
working of Thoughts must there needs be? Much more if the Soul have any sense
of its approach to the infinite Holiness of God, at whose rebuke the Pillars of
Heaven tremble; whose presence astonishes the purer Spirits of Angels, and
beats down the Souls of good Men to the Dust, as of Moses, Heb. 12.21. Isai.
6.5. Job 42.6. Dan. 10.8.
Job, Isaiah, etc. in his interviews with them. How much more of those that
have never thought of God, and now must come near his Seat?

Nothing so composes the Soul to this amazing change of Condition and Converse,
as long continued Treaties with God through Christ: when though Men change
their place, they do not change their company: Job 24.17. Job 38.15.
Others, when this great light strikes them, are in the very terrors of the
shadow of death, and shaken out of their place, out of all the Security, and
quiet Sensuality they lived in.

Let us now take the estimate or avail of these things to true Repentance, and
we shall find, when the Soul lies thus uncovered to the things of Eternity, it
has natural Reasons for all, it may seem to do like return to God, and so that
all argue nothing of the true Grace of God; but if a Man were again in his
former State he would be the very same he was: For first, as one thing strikes
upon another with a natural Effect, Light upon the Eye, Sound upon the Ear, so
Eternal Things upon the Immortal Spirit, when there is nothing between to
intercept the stroke. Further, 1 John 2.16.
when the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life are as
a Scene removed, and a Play at an end; and instead of them another World
drawing near, just as Men defeated in all their attempts for Riches, and
Honors, and beaten off from them to a private Life, call all these things
Cheats; not out of true Reason, but because they cannot reach them: on the
other side they praise Retirement and a Cloister, not that they like it, but
because they must live so, which begets some kind of Contentedness so to live.
Thus and no otherwise do many Dying Men call all this World Vanity, and profess
an high Esteem for all things pertaining to that to come.

Cause 3. There is yet a more pressing Account of the most notable motions that
were ever found in any of their Repentances, viz. The awakenings of Conscience
usual at this time, because of the Sense of a Judgment: while common Experience
tells Men, It is appointed, to all Men once to die, Heb. 9.27. and sinking
Nature gives notice, This is the time: Conscience lifts up to the next thing.
After that the Judgment.

Now no Man sees Judgment, a Judgment Omniscient, Omnipresent, Eternal, without
great shakes of Soul, especially that has done nothing seriously to agree with
the adversary in the way, Luke 12.18. Conscience then rising up with the Awe of
a Tribunal upon it, stirs up all the Powers to fly from the Wrath that is to
come, by desires of Pardon, and Resolutions of Amendment. The very hearing of
Judgment made such a one as Foelix tremble. Acts 24.25.
When Judgment seems to us, at the other end of Heaven, all is quiet; but when
Death brings us to the very seat of it, how loud may be the cries for Mercy?
The bewailing the former evils of Life? Now Men pour out their Complaints for
the want of God, the misimprovement of former time: Now they make large offers
of a strict and severe Mortification, and Devotion to Religion. Now they would
give the thousand Rams, the ten thousand Rivers of Oil, their first born for
their Trasgression, the fruit of their Body for the sin of their Soul, Mic.
6.6, 7. And yet all but the Eye opened to see the flaming Sword of Justice,
that makes even a Balaam wish to die the death of the Righteous, Number. 22.32.
cap. 23.10.
and to have a latter End, Sober, Just, Religious.

The very Suspicion of a Judgment inclines Men thus far universally almost,
that hardly any choose to die in a Rant, in a Madness; but had rather by
virtue, and Religion be consigned over to another World; and have their Eyes
closed by Mercy, and Grace in Christ: They would see the Salvation of God, and
so depart in Peace.

Object. 1. But it may be objected: Seeing these granted to rise from true
Conviction, and not to be Dissimulation, or counterfeit Pretense, Why may not
they have the worth of true Repentance?

Answ. 1. To answer this: Let me consider, pure Conviction, and enlightened
Apprehension, and the Affections begotten of them, are no Argument of true
Goodness, where the Light has not a benign, and free Operation upon the
Judgment, an Allurement upon the Will, an Indearment upon the Affections, to
turn them to a full Delight, and Satisfaction in God and Holiness, and to a
dislike and abhorrence of Sin. For else, the Devils, who believe and tremble,
Jam. 2.19.
must be thought Converts. For who have clearer sight of things than they?
Balaam, whose Eyes were opened, and spoke so great things of God, and his
People, must be concluded a good Man. Esau and Judas, who had so sad
apprehensions of Sin, Matthew. 27.4. Heb. 12.7. Dan. 4.17. and 6.26. Luke 6.20.
Acts 24.25.
and their loss by it, must be affirmed to be Penitents. Nebucadnezar's and
Darius his acknowledgments of God must be taken for true Grace. Herod his
hearing John Baptist gladly. Felix his trembling at Paul's Discourse, may be
thought Evidences of true Repentance.

Object. 2. But Secondly it may be supposed, because these very Convictions and
Affections are not universal; but we see multitudes go out of the World without
them, carrying little better than a decent and civil Respect to Religion, that
therefore there is something of God, something Heroic in them, that have them.

Answ. 2. This indeed may be no other, than the wise and good Government of God
over the World; whereby he takes care, there should be Testimonies of himself,
and the Goodness of his ways; that Atheism, and Wickedness may not carry it, as
if all were their own, as if there were an unexceptionable Concurrence on their
side against God and Holiness. For as he receives witness from the constant,
gracious and religious Lives of good Men, so he constrains some of them, that
have lived contrary to him all their lives, to give him glory at last, for the
good of others, though without saving benefit to themselves. Which he may
justly do, and without any injury to them. Seeing all the Service every
Creature can do to him, is infinitely due, he may make use of that which is his
own, so far as he pleases. And because what the word God puts in their mouths,
Number. 23.5. Matthew. 12.35.
is not their own, not arising out of the good treasure of their hearts (as
appears in Balaam) therefore their everlasting Condition is not determined by
it, but by their constant Course of the former Life, the true Image of their
Hearts, as we see in the same Balaam, who after died by the Israelites hand,
Number. 31.8.
whose greatness he had prophesied. Yet I will not deny, but they may have
their reward in mitigation of Punishment for any Service done to God.

If God did not interpose thus sometimes, he might seem wanting in something
that concerned him, at least as a gracious Ruler of the World. He therefore
overrules some, who have lived so, as to make a constant Argument against him,
and a future State (so far as Wickedness could do it) to retract the whole
Course of their Life, and give their Vote, for what they had so long withstood.

I will yet further add another Cause of a Deathbed Repentance, that sometimes
falls out to have a most powerful Influence, and yet the Repentance that
springs from it, is very unsafe to confide in.

Cause 4. Dying Men are often under the play and force of other Men's Reason and
Religion. For it is a general, and necessary Charity of Men affected to
Religion themselves, to offer the sense of it to others, in a time when they
think it likely to be accepted, and so infinitely necessary; which Practice
however needful, and most commendable in it self, yet by accident may have
raised higher the opinion of a Deathbed Repentance, and is often the occasion
of great Error in the thing it self.

For suppose a Man followed with sound and affectionate Persuasions, to do all
that may be done for his Soul in this exigent; how conceiveable is it, that Man
may be so far wrought upon, as to entertain a present sense of Religion, and
yet have no true Life, no Life that arises from a true intimate Principle. But
as those Bodies of Air taken, and moved by Angels seem to perform the Functions
of living Bodies, yet do but seem to do so, for they have no Principle of Life
natural to them; but as soon, as they are forsaken by the Spirits that made use
of them, they fly abroad, and disperse themselves. Thus that general sense of
Conscience, that lies scattered through the Soul, and unable for action, being
gathered together and united by good and holy Applications, and acted thereby,
may have force so long, as that Union continues; but that Discourse that holds
it together ceasing, it immediately falls asunder, and loses its Efficacy.

The Stone that receives motion from the Hand, that throws it, goes on whilst
that motion lasts, when that is spent, it falls to the ground: so the force of
Exhortation ceases too often, when he that gives it, leaves those to whom it
was given.

The Instrument to which the Musician's Hand gives tune and voice, lies dead
when he deserts it: Man's Soul is made by God capable of religious tune and
motion, and while a skillful hand plays upon it, it may give that sound very
distinctly, and yet have no Life in it self.

The striking of Conscience makes the Sparks fly out, yea and sometime kindle
in a flame, and yet it presently dies, because not supplied with a continual
Oil to feed it.

The Mind of one Man is very apt to receive Impressions from another; we see
what Passions and Motions are raised by an Eloquent Speaker; how the
Understanding is carried captive, while the Orator works upon it: and yet all
the Affection thus blown up falls flat again, when the Breath that swelled it
lies still, and is apt to be carried the contrary way by cross Persuasions
equally insinuated.

How much more may this be in religious things? Conscience being so easily
stirred by such Applications, as we see in Felix, though it is as easily
becalmed, when sinful Lusts, through the Efficacy of Temptation, are loud and
high.

And all this is certainly much easilier done near Death, when Men are so soft,
that they are apt to take any stamp; so melting, as to be gathered into any
mould.

It is possible for one Man's Spirit to carry another for some considerable
space of time, as we see in Jehoiadas influence upon Joash, who was not yet all
that time possessed with the things themselves, 2 King. 12.1.
whereunto he was directed.

But true Repentance is a Frame set up by the Spirit of God in the Heart,
subsisting by that Spirit upon it self, and makes use only of all Helps
subordinated to it, by the Wisdom of that Spirit; but does not live from that
Help, but from it self through that Spirit, its supreme Life.

To draw these things therefore to a Sum, It will appear, after all these
Causes have done, what they can, these great Errors following are generally
found, and always to be suspected in a Deathbed Repentance.

1. In a Deathbed Repentance, There is only a Judgment made of the Case of
Eternity, considered by it self, and without a Conterpoise: The Excellency of
God and Eternal Things are minded, as they stand out of the Air of Temptation.
Now though this be a good Opportunity for the first consideration, yet that
Consideration must grow so strong, as to retain the same sense, in the midst of
all Pretenses from the World and Satan. Else in the time of Temptation this
Repentance falls away. Dr. Jackson, Book 10. Chap. 23. Sect. 3.
For there may be many true Apprehensions, which may make deep Impression not
only in the Brain and Fancy, and upon our Affections, whilst these are calm,
and unprovoked, and yet both the Apprehension and Impression quickly vanish
upon the starting, or provocation of contrary Fancies or Affections.

When the Blood cools in the Veins, and the Spirits are ready to stand still,
when a Man is no longer to live in the World, the season of the pleasures of
Sin is over, then to cast out his Lusts, What excellent thing does he? does not
even nature, Matthew. 5.46.
whether he will or no, the same? True Repentance encounters Temptation, and
resists unto Blood, when those Pleasures of Sin are at the height, and the tide
of Corruption from within swells most. As Moses chose to suffer affliction with
the people of God rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb.
11.25. although they were in their growing, and ascending Morning. Repentance
will not worship that Sun in the East. It is a very small thing to despise it
in the West, and just a setting; to choose Religion, when there is nothing to
vie with it.

2. It is not a Consideration of heavenly Things in their true worth, but only
as recommended by the present Necessity. For who would not die the Death of the
Righteous, and have his latter end like his? Every Man at that time would be
glad to find, he has lived well; and he that has lived worst, except he be
outrageous in Profaneness, will wish he had lived better. Eternity at hand
gives value to all Holiness and sense of God, in spite of the World; and
lessens all things else to a nothing, and less than nothing; imprints a
Ghastliness and Horror upon all Wickedness and Sensuality. The thirty pieces
are nothing worth, Mat. 27.3.
and the innocent blood above all value, when Men suffer in the Agonies of
Conscience, and Fears of the approaching Judge. A House full of Silver and Gold
will not buy a Man to resist God, when indeed he appears to him; when the
terrible Majesty opens it self, Numb. 22.18.
what is so precious, that Men will not fling to the Bats and Moles? Isai. 2.20.
When the Breath is going out of the Nostrils, how precious is Repentance,
Faith, a Pardon in Christ, a happy Eternity, to those, who have heretofore
slighted them, as the offscouring of all things?

But these things are always so rich, Wisdom is always so precious, that it
disdains to borrow Esteem from a minute of Extremity; and therefore it most
often falls out, that those who would none of its counsel, but despised all its
Reproof, when they come to seek it early, cannot find it, but it laughs at
their Calamity, as Men laugh at the unhappiness of Fools, that would not be
corrected in their Folly, till their Misery confute their Confidence.

3. From hence it follows, That this Repentance is a Choice, when there is no
other Choice: If a Man loved his Sins, or the World never so passionately, he
must leave them; if he disliked God, and his Holiness, and an everlasting Abode
with him, to the utmost; yet he is even forced upon them, or dashed upon an
Eternal Misery, and Unhappiness, which it is impossible to choose: And
therefore though he would not choose the holy ways of God, if he might still
enjoy former Vanity, yet that being out of his reach and way, he must take what
is to be had. The Sense therefore is no more than this, All these things are
good, when a Man is just a Dying; but while he lives, and can have the World,
they are troublesome and unprofitable: Death makes them good, upon this account
only, because else there would be something worse, and there can no longer be
any thing better. A Man is now willing to offer a Life he has not to give, but
Eternal Life is not worth any part of that Life he thinks in his power to do
any thing else with. Let us then observe at what rate it is set; for to use
Tertullian's words in another Case, we may thus Reason. Quale bonum hoc est,
quod melius est, poena, quod non potest videri bonum, nisi pessimo comparatum;
ut ideo bonum sit resipiscere, quia deterius est ardere. Caeterum si per mali
collationem cogitur bonum dici, non tam bonum est, quam genus mali inferioris,
quod altiori malo obscuratum ad nomen boni impellitur. Tertul. De Monogamia.
Chap. 3.
What a mean sort of good is this, that only excels Punishment, which needs the
worst of States for a Foil to it self, that it may be thought Good? It is good
to repent, and be saved, because who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? But
if it must purchase the Reputation of being Good from Evil, it is not so much a
Good, as a lower degree of Evil; which while the greater Evil Eclipses it is
compelled as it were to accept the name of a good, being driven upon the
confines of Goodness by the Violence of greater Evil.

4. This Repentance is not the Free, but inslaved Judgment and Choice of the
Soul; as Men cast out Goods in a Storm, and receive a Power to Rule over them,
that they cannot endure, but that it is too strong for them. Men are afraid
what God will do to them, therefore they submit. His Enemies in Heart are found
Liars to him, they flatter him with their Mouth, as Julian oppressed by the
Almightiness of Christ, is storied to have cried out, Vicisti Galilaee, Thou
have overcome me, Galilean. Thus they are overcome by Death, and the
apprehension of Judgment. In the sight and view of the Danger Men resolve to
part with their Sins. Let but that remove, they call for their Sins again, as
Mariners wish for their Goods after the Storm. They throw up their Lusts in
their sickness, but drink them in when their trouble is past, as the Dog
returns to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. In all this there is nothing of the love of
God.

5. In this Repentance, the Soul of it is generally a pitiful mean Self-love,
even the meanest kind imaginable, wherein a Man considers himself as a Creature
in being, and likely, or at least possible to be for ever; without any
apprehension of himself, as a rational Creature made for God, and the Enjoyment
of him, in conforming with whom his Happiness consists, and in the resting for
ever in his love. Of this part he has no distinct apprehension, only he would
be happy though he knows not what it is, or rather he would not be miserable;
yet even that he truly understands not. But as the Jews said to Christ, when he
spoke to them of the Bread of Life, Lord ever more give us this bread; and yet
were scandalized at his Explanation of himself to be that Bread, so far as to
leave him. John 6.34.
And the Pharisees hearing of the Vineyard to be let out to other Husbandmen,
and the Judgment upon themselves to be executed, Luke 20.16.
Cried out, God forbid, yet run on in the Sin, that brought it upon them.

This little point of Self-love into which all is crowded is ennobled with no
sight of the Excellency of the things themselves, or a due Estimation of them,
as the true pleasure, and joy of an Immortal Spirit.

This is not that allowable love of a Man's self, which incircles it self
within the love of God, as the lesser Circle is comprehended by the greater,
but this either leaves out that love wholly, or debases it to basest self.

Let us now compare both sides together, and see how much true Repentance
differs from that, which is always to be feared, lest it should be the height
of the Deathbed: And of that which has been spoken, this is the Sum,

True Repentance is the most free Election of the Soul enabled by the Grace of
God, upon a clear, and just Dictate of the Judgment, attended with sincerest
Affection, to give up it self to God through Jesus Christ, and when it is most
it self, not under any irregular fear or constraint, and (at least would be the
same) in a time, when it has all the probability that can be to lay hold upon
things present.

The other Repentance arises from a Soul all troubled, and discomposed with the
throws of Death, the fears of Hell, the Doubts what will become of it in
another World, the Uproars of a guilty Conscience; when it supposes it self
necessarily at the full stop of its former Courses, by being cut off from
longer Life, in the midst of all which arise vehement Resolutions to turn from
Sin to God, and possibly with many fair Apparences, but without opportunity to
give proof of themselves.

Let any one Judge between these two Repentances, and accordingly even counsel
himself concerning them.

Yet I must acknowledge this Discourse subject to these following Limitations.

1. That the Arguments I have insisted upon prevail not only against a
Deathbed Repentance, but against all Repentances, that have no higher Spirit
to move them, than what I have now represented; from hence therefore we may
take the trial of our Repentance in general, for though a Deathbed is most
subject to these mistakes, yet whatever Repentance falls under them, is by
reason of them invalid; and the later any Repentance is, or the more it is
occasioned by any Extremity, which it does not outlive, the more subject it is
to them.

2. What I have said is not at all to be understood of the perfecting and
consummating Repentance, by higher and fuller Acts toward God at Death, though
enforced by the present Circumstances of the Case. For true Repentance running
through the whole life, takes advantage of every thing, much more of so
considerable an Opportunity to unite all our strength for God, as a Deathbed
brings with it. All that has been spoken is designed against trusting to the
Extreme Unction of a dying Repentance, just then begun.

3. I have before resolved upon that tenderest Doctrine, that it is possible
among all the unhappy Circumstances of a Dying-Bed, there yet may be this true
Act of the Understanding, Will, and Affections turning to God; and if there be
this, it would be the same and alike, however these Circumstances alter, and
then it excels those temporary Amendments undertaken in the freest times of
Life. But because it is but possible and so almost impossible, so unhappy a
Case, (as not to have repented till just we die) should fall out so happily,
the Intention of this Discourse stands good notwithstanding.

4. I acknowledge, the choice of the Soul can never be so free, but it must be
subject to infinitely the most worthy and preponderating considerations of the
love and goodness of God, the Redemption of Christ, the greatness of eternal
Happiness most indearing on one side; of the fear and terror of the Lord, the
loss of a Soul, everlasting perdition, most persuasive on the other side; so
that if a Man cannot be free in his choice of Religion, except he choose it
without the force of any such consideration, he can never be at all free, for
these are on all sides of him: And further, there is always the supreme motion
of the Grace of God, which does not lessen, but steer and exalt the freedom of
the Will toward God.

The difference then between true and false Repentance in this particular is
the same, that is, between just and rational consideration of all the motives
of Hope and Fear; and the hurry of them moving us not intellectually, but as a
Tempest, or with the force of a mere Engine. 2. Between the highest reasons
carrying the chiefest force, and leading along with them the lower ones, and
the lower doing all without the higher, for want of which they are Sensual or
Hellish. 3. Between the government of mere Providence, and of the Spirit of
God. 4. Between the Repentance of Cain, Esau, Saul, Judas, and the Repentance
of David, Manasseh, Peter, and Paul.

5. I acknowledge the first Preparations of the Soul by God for himself, may be
with a great deal of noise and confusion; Clouds and Darkness are the Dust of
his Feet, Storms go before him to prepare his way; while these last, there
cannot be a serene calm Act of the Soul, and he that does not live till he hear
that still Voice, in which God is, is in great danger of being lost in the
Storm. But if out of this Darkness and Confusion, a holy and gracious
Settlement proceed, it is not the worse for being so introduced, but is
agreeable with the usual method of God.

The fourth Head I proposed, is to weigh the Repentance of the Crucified
Malefactor against our common Deathbed Repentances; which duly performed will
be of great force against Presumption, rather than minister it any Confidence.

For we shall find so much gathered together, and pressed down into it, that as
Jewels have their Riches in a little room, so his short Life of Penitency had
an Age of Repentance in it.

It is so composed of Extraordinaries, that it can give very little
encouragement in ordinary Cases, except just thus much; that Repentance at
Death is no absolute impossibility.

1. Let us observe how his Repentance looked to the several parts of
Repentance; for though it had but little time in this World to breath in, yet
with extraordinary diligence, it was busy in all the great, and most
concerning Points. Yet I account this of the least Remark in the History of his
Repentance, because it is easily imitable, That in which it Excelled, was the
Evidences of Sincerity it carried.

1. Yet take notice of his Sense and Acknowledgment of Sin, which was not only
a Confession of Words, but of his very Soul; for, deliberating things in a
Moment, he pronounced himself self worthy of the Condemnation and Punishment he
endured. Magnum est poenitentiae signum in poena sua acquiescere. Grot. in
locum.
I confess this is not so infrequent in those, who forfeited their Lives to
Justice, but how often is it rather a Formality, than the inward sense of the
Mind condecently affected? and possibly if we look upon the outside of things,
we can find no great difference between him and others. Yet it is a necessary
part of Repentance, The sacrifice of God is a broken and contrite heart, Psalm.
51.17.

2. In his Repentance lay a lively Faith in Christ; first resting upon the
principle, And truth of the thing; That Christ was a just Person, that he had a
Kingdom; and then a particular Application to him for Mercy, Lord remember me
when thou come in thy Kingdom.

3. A quick sense of Eternity supplied Vigor to his Repentance, an evident
sight of something beyond this world. For what more excites the Soul, and shows
it the necessity of a gracious Change, than an everlasting Condition appearing
to it? To this end has Jesus Christ brought life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. of which this Penitent made a very full Confession; Lord remember me
when thou come in thy Kingdom. He saw a Kingdom beyond the Cross and Death.

4. An earnest desire to promote and propagate a sense of God into the Hearts
of others was the immediate fruit of this Malefactors Repentance. He admonishes
the Impenitent Thief on the other side, Do thou not fear God? He had such a
Reverence of God, that he expostulates the want of it in the other as monstrous
and horrid. His design was also exceeding Compassionate, as well as Pious: For
it was an Endeavor full of Charity, desirous his guilty Fellow-sufferer should
be brought into the same Condition with himself. We want much of the Compassion
due to the Souls of others, because we are so insensible of the misery of our
own; and taste but little of the sweetness of Reconciliation and Grace: But
when we drink largely out of these Fountains, we derive the Streams upon
others, that have flowed upon our selves.

All these things were evidently much to the purpose, if we look upon
themselves: Yet were there nothing more extraordinary in them, we might doubt
whether they were any more than the good Mood, into which Principles of
Conscience excited by the unhappiness his Condition might put him: Let us then
consider the Evidence, that all this was truly Supernatural; for I account it
no Injury to so memorable a Repentance to suppose, that as great and fair an
outside may have failed of Paradise, into which he entered. But,

2. The acknowledgment he made of Christ gives testimony to him in two things.

1. That it was made, when Christ was under all the Infamy, and Misery of a
shameful and painful Death, and nothing to make such a Greatness, as he
ascribed to him probable. Among us that in general Language speak honorably of
Christ, Professions of him are cheap, and prove nothing. But if one bred in
Turcism, or Judaism, should confess him, it would argue much more; yet not so
much as in this Malefactor, who saw him in so despicable a State: Whereas now
so great a part of the World acknowledging him, Acts 1.9.
has carried him up to Heaven, as it were in that Cloud, wherein he ascended
long ago, and hid the reproach of his Cross in so high a Glory, especially
among us.

To confess him in his worst estate, and before any thing of the Consequence
was known, was very great: Extrema fides, sed non minima. Aug. Sermon. 122. de
Temp.
Christ was revealed to him, Mat. 16.17.
not by Flesh and Blood; but by God himself. Such an Heroickness is indeed
necessary to assure a Deathbed Repentance, which had need be as great, as it
is late, when Men do not live to see the ordinary fruits of it.

He that could see Christ, and his Glory, through so dark a Vail, had his Eyes
anointed with that Eye Salve, Christ speaks of. Ad rem credendam a sensibus
remotissimam excitatus est. Grot.


We find the Apostles, who had seen his Miracles, heard his Divine Discourses,
made long Acknowledgments of him, were fearfully shaken by this Assault of the
power of Darkness upon him; Rev. 3.18.
even to a Despair, that he was the Christ. But while they were in a swoon of
Faith, Quando passus est, omnes discipuli desperaverunt quod ipse esset
Christus. A latrone victi sunt Apostoli. qui tunc credidit, quando illi
defecerunt. Aug. in Psalm. 68.
this Faith with Christ triumphed over Principalities and Powers, even on the
Cross.

We looking upon the things of Christianity in the common Profession of the
Nation, It is a hard thing for us to see them otherwise, than that casts them;
as it would be for those that have known nothing but the Religion of Mahomet,
Paganism, or the Jewish Synagogue, to take up upon the sudden the Doctrine of
Christianity against their own.

We believing not with our own Faith, but Vulgar Opinion, easily make a
Confession of Christ; yet oftentimes the Power and saving Effect of it is far
from us, as from those that are Strangers to him: sometimes they that come from
the East, and from the West, sit down in the Kingdom of God, when the Children
of the Kingdom are thrust out.

The Acknowledgment of Christ in those Times, was a much fairer Evidence, than
it can be now; yet without inward Grace was nothing then; much less must it
needs be to us, who have it made ready to our hands by Education and common
Consent in it; we must therefore the more narrowly observe, what Characters the
Truth of Christ imprints upon our Hearts.

2. This Acknowledgment was made without any manner of Inducement, or
Temptation to it, Tanto namque pondere appensum est, tantumque valuit apud eum,
qui novit haec appendere, quod confessus est Dominum Crucifixum, quantum si
fuisset pro Domino Crucifixus. Aug. De Anima and ejus Origin.
from outward advantages, it could possibly afford; but rather an increase of
Shame and Scorn was to be expected from it; and that if it were possible, he
should suffer the second time for such a Confession, and become of a Malefactor
a Martyr. Nay further, there was no Dictate of Natural Conscience, that could
incline him to it; for that runs not into the Confession of Christ, nor is any
way quieted concerning former Sins through such a Confession; but eyes God
only, and Moral Righteousness: Lastly, no general Tradition prompted him to it,
the Jews at that time condemning him. But in us, all Applications to Christ are
securing our selves in the common Barque, and keep us from being censured, as
profane, and irreligious Persons. For to die without any address to Christ, is
accounted very ungodly, and senseless of a Future State; but to deny him,
monstrous and desperate. Further, Christianity is incorporated with our natural
Principles, so that they never move, or heave themselves in us, but that also
rises with them.

Now it is of great Importance in the trial of Sincerity, upon what Grounds and
Motives we do, what do; and the more we can clear it from inferior Springs,
the more certainly it is Grace descending from above, and resting upon us, Jam.
1.17.

Every one therefore that would justify a Deathbed Repentance, must exceed
all common sorts of Repentance, else he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. N^y he must do something, that in the little space of time, he has to
do it in, must equal a Course of amendment of Life; must be as great in him, as
this Repentance of the Thief.

And do but think, if our Faith were to cut those waves, his was to pass, to
row against such a Stream, to remove such mountains, among how many thousands
there would be found a Faith to do it; we should immediately be stopped; or
sunk, and cast away, and lost. Yet such are they we are to pass through into
Eternal Life, though of different Circumstances from his.

But after all I will allow it possible, there might be a secret flaw in this
whole Penitent's Deportment, we now insist upon; and that it fared with him as
with some among us, who after a wicked and debauched Life fly to the Sanctuary
of the Romish Religion ( as Joab to the horns of the Altar, 1 King. 2.28.) To
Reconciliation wherewith Hopelesness of any good from that they have so long
sinned against, and natural Superstition hurry them. So this Person hearing a
great Fame of Christ, and observing his pretense high, might lay hold upon him
in a desperate Case, if peradventure any thing of good might follow on it: It
being very incidental to the Nature of Man to cast himself upon Religion, when
all else fails, and upon one new to him, when he has offended against the old
one, beyond hope of Pardon; whence Men generally receive this Recompense, that
Conscience is put into amuse, having nothing at present to say against it.

And had this been the top of his Case, that it had been thus, could it have
been saving? Nay, that it might possibly have been thus, though indeed it had
been otherwise, yet this very liableness to such a mistake had unspeakably
abated the rational Security, and safety of his Condition, so that there had
remained good cause for Conscience to have mistrusted which way his Condition
would have fallen to Eternity.

3. The Third thing therefore, that gave him, and gives to all Ages undoubted
Testimony of the Truth of his Conversion, is the immediate attestation to that
Truth and Sincerity of it, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Now that
Repentance which enters into Heaven, that passes into Paradise, not hindered by
those flaming Cherubs of Divine Truth; that which is within the Door, before
the Master of the House is risen up and has shut it to, Luke 13.25.
that is true Repentance and prosperous, and successful, how late soever. But
to know that it is true, when it is so late, needs a Voice from Heaven, or
something proportional to it, to verify it, as is after to be urged.

The last thing I take notice of in this Repentance, is the unparallellable
Circumstance of time wherein it was accepted.

1. It was in the time of a public act of mercy to the World, Joh. 3.16.
God was in love to Mankind giving his only begotten Son. Ephesians. 5.25.
Christ was giving himself at this time. Therefore that there should be an
Instance and Monument of this Mercy, seemed condecent to so great and solemn a
time.

2. This Penitent stood close to that Sacrifice, that was offering it self up
to God: He stood within the Savor, the Odor, the Incense of it: That
Sacrifice, that purchases men from a vain conversation; 1 Pet. 18.
that draws down all the Blessings of Salvation; that therefore the force of it
should reach so near it self, is not strange: I know no nearness of place
signifies at all. How many saw his Miracles, heard him Preach, looked upon him
Dying without benefit? yet was his Presence also, as he pleased, full of Divine
effects. That therefore there should be an experiment of so great a Balsom,
just as it was preparing, was most suitable.

3. It was in the time that Christ was triumphing over Principalities and
Powers, and making a show of them openly upon the very Cross. Vicem versam
reddidit Christus Diabolo; quemadmodum Diabolus depravando hominem abstulerat
de Paradiso, sic Christus latronem confitentem erueret de inferno: Ille de
interdicto ligno praesumentem decepit; Iste pendentem de poenali ligno redemit.
Aug. Sermon. 122. De Temp.
That he should bear off in the Field the prey taken out of the mouth of the
proud Foe, was very agreeable to the expectation so great a Conqueror raises.
Colos. 2.15.

But whoever considers the Thief on the other side not converted, or saved,
will find Cause to observe; The Salvation of Christ does not sweep the World,
but is rarelier vouchsafed than we think; That a man may die without going to
Heaven; That the mercy of the Gospel is most arbitrary and sovereign, choosing
and leaving; That it depends not on humane Expectation, or any Superstitious
phancies, that have been raised about the Cross of Christ; for so much appears
by one only taken here, the other left, though upon the Cross together with
Christ, and near him in the great and mediatory Act; who that considers will
not tremble to think of one left in his sins, falling down into Hell from such
a Heaven as Christ in his great Act of Redemption.

And although it may be truly said, it was the fault, and negligence, and
obstinacy of the Unconverted Malefactor, that he did not use aright the Grace
offered, or the Light vouchsafed him; yet it does not alleviate the danger, for
it still remains very uncertain to whom God will give a Heart to use
Opportunities aright, though they have them from God with an equal Liberality,
as those that do so improve them.

But indeed, the Supremacy of Grace is here very much acknowledged by all, that
a Ray of the Divinity of Christ with infinite kindness smote his Soul. Nova and
insolita quaedam divinae virtutis efficacia, in exemplum omnibus seculis
memorabile, etc. Grot. In locum.
I infer nothing from that increase, the Evangelist Matthew. c. 27.44. gives the
Miracle, That he was Converted after he had joined with the other Malefactor in
reproaching Christ; Because Hieron. In locum.
some Interpreters question it.

Upon the whole then of this Example, let Men that would be befriended by a
Dying Repentance, examine whether these things found in this Example, are like
to meet upon them. I will not say, till there be a time, Beneficium multis
modis insigne and non temere trahendi in consequentias exempli. Grot. In locum.
a fullness of time, wherein Christ shall again die for Sinners, such a
Repentance is not to be expected; but I may safely say, he that in the
Observation of this Example trusts himself to a Dying Repentance should startle
his Presumption with this Interrogation, Will there ever be such a Conjunction,
as was here, again, while the World endures?

I come now to the last Head of downright Arguments against committing our
Eternal State to a Deathbed Repentance.

1. It is against all the Prudence and Providence of a Man, seeing no Man knows
what kind of Death he shall die; whether it will afford him the possibilities
of Repenting: How many die suddenly, and in so short a Breath, that they have
not time to desire Mercy in general? How many of Apoplexies seizing upon the
very Top of Sense at first? Many by Phrensies have no rational Motions of
themselves; innumerable Accidents (and oft-times made dreadful by the
Wickedness wherewith they have been accompanied) have snatched away Men in a
Moment. Such are taken away living and in his wrath before the Pots can feel
the Thorns, Psalm. 58.9.
before ever those hasty flames of Motion toward God blown up for such an
Extremity can be raised. Such are taken in the very manner without so much time
as to put off the Every-Day Habit of Sin, like those that were carried out dead
in their Coats, Lev. 10.5.

And though from the ordinary manner of Dying, we may hope for the warning
ordinarily given; yet we see others surprised, who have had the same reasons of
Hope with our selves. We cannot then without madness trust our selves to
accident, or boast our selves of to morrow, of which we know not what is within
it, Prove. 27.1.
seeing the future is wholly concealed from us: They that make a Covenant with
death, and are at an agreement with Hell, meet with nothing but Perfidiousness,
when the overflowing Scourge approaches them, and the storm of Hail rends their
refuge of lies, Isa. 28.18. etc. If we were provided against all, but one
single Accident, even that may fall upon us with the ruin, that all the rest
could bring.

Let a Man examine, whether he can choose his Death, and design the
Circumstances of it, and place every thing just as he would have it, and
thereby afford himself the Season he thinks necessary for such a purpose. But
who is so foolish as to undertake this? He that builds upon Ground that is none
of his own, is like to have all his Frame overturned at the pleasure of
another: God derides this Folly, who has all things in his own hand, and
disposes them without our knowledge: Go too ye that say, Jam. 4.13.
To day or to morrow we will go to such a place, and buy, Psalm. 1^4.3.
and sell, and get gain: But oh miserable is he that thinks, as God, to lay the
Beams of his Chambers, that he builds for Eternal Rest in the Waters, the
flowing incertainty of future Time, where he has nothing to do: and oversees
the proper Rest appointed him by God* seeing both his Presumption, and his
profane Ne^ligence are likely to be punished tog^^^er. For indeed (...) that
is wickedly prodigal, of ^^^t Go^ aff^^ds him, as his, and is bold to e^t^^^c^
^p^^ the future which is Gods, when he co^^s to ^t, ^inds it full and possessed
already, w^^^ wha^ God ^^th provided for i^; so there is no roo^ for his
Project, but he perishes for ever in the Disappointment.

2. It is against our Duty, and all the Obligations, that lie on us; For it is
as if a Man should say to God, I know it is my Duty, and the end of my Life,
Odibile est apud Deum, quando homo sub fiducia poenitentiae in senectutem
reservatae liberius peceat. August. Sermon. 120.
and the Providence thou exercisest toward me, that I should now serve thee,
and give up my self to thee; But I beg of thee, that while I live, I may live
in my Lusts and Sensualities, and when I am to die and go out of the World, and
shall have no more time and leisure for any thing else, I shall then have
nothing to do, but to look toward thee, and beseech thy Favor, and leave my
Sins: I desire thee therefore to stay for my Repentance till then, and when I
can no longer enjoy the World, then to grant me a Kingdom with thy self, and
the Fruition of thy own Happiness: For though I shall dishonor thee in the
tract of my Life, yet I will retract it all in a Breath. How horribly
contemptuous of God does this appear, how Affronting and Blasphemous? and yet
this is the very sense of Deferring Repentance, till Death.

This is the greatest Immorality and Irreligion; for it destroys the reason of
our Being on Earth, which is to serve our Generation, or the course of our Life
according to the Will of God, Acts 13.36.
to glorify him here on Earth. John 17.4.
It destroys the Service, yet flies upon the Reward; as if God were bound to
make Men happy, because he had made them, and that he had made them, first to
take the Delights he most abhors, to dishonor him, by deforming his
Workmanship, and violating his Laws, and the good order he has set in the
World; and yet after all because he had made them, to give them a Blessedness
so insuperably great, that he could find no greater; and by no means to hurt or
punish them for Sin, though all the Justice, that ever was known to Man,
requires Punishment of Offenders, as much as the reward of Desert; else all
Government would be lost.

Thus therefore to imagine of God is to bring down in our own Thoughts those
great Attributes of Justice and Wisdom, into a foolish and unreasonable Pity,
and only for this end, that there may be a Licentiousness in Wickedness and
Impiety.

And seeing upon the same account, all the Men in the World may adjourn their
Love and Obedience to God to their going out of it; it might come to pass, that
this State should have been prepared only as a Stage for the Vices and
Exorbitancies of Men to have acted themselves upon, and then they to have
removed to Heaven; when as though these have large scope indeed now, as things
are, yet their Licentiousness is daily rebuked by the threats of the Gospel, by
the holy Conversations of those, that have left their Sins by Repentance, and
punished by an Eternal Judgment hereafter.

But who that considers the infinite Goodness and Greatness of God, that in his
hand is our life, and breath, and all our ways, can think it equal, that God
should have only the faint and feeble Services of a Deathbed, for all the
Preservation and Mercy vouchsafed through the course of our lives?

Or who can think it consistent with his Honor to give Men Laws, that point
upon the Government of themselves here, and that he should at so general a
rate, as the necessity of Men's manner of living requires, accept of such a
Commutation, or exchange for the Obedience due to them, as a Deathbed
Repentance?

Or least of all, who can believe? that Jesus Christ should come a Redeemer
into the World, a Redeemer from all Iniquity, a purchaser from a vain
Conversation, that he might have a peculiar People zealous of good works; Tit.
2.14.
who should look for the great day, Romans 2.7.
and his glorious appearance, by a patient expectation and continuance in
well-doing; to which he has also tied them by the most strict Obligations,
that created Nature is capable of, and yet that this in a manner should be
wholly frustrated, even in those supposed to be redeemed by him?

How shall such a Man then be able to look God or Jesus Christ the Savior in
the face, that has but just begun to acknowledge him by some weak Devotions to
him, extorted even of necessity, and given the bulk of his time to Sin; that
has sacrified the Male of his Flock to Lust, Mal. 1.14.
and even with impious design kept the corrupt thing for God?

3. If we truly understand the nature of Repentance, and that it is the Gift
and Grace of God: It is,

1. A great Presumption upon that Grace, to think we can call it down from
Heaven at our own need, who have offered so much Injury to the motions of it,
vouchsafed in the time of our Life; we do not consider, that this Grace designs
its own Glory, and teaches to live Godly, righteously, soberly, now in this
present World, and therein to wait for the Manifestation of everlasting Glory;
Tit. 2.13.
and thus we are seek for honor, Romans 2.7.
glory, and immortality.

Now that they that have bidden defiance to this Grace so long, should bring it
down from the Clouds in their Dying Moments, to convey them to Happiness,
(...). Phil. in Al^ego.
is to make so cheap of that infinitely precious Goodness, that whoever aright
considers the Case, must needs infinitely abhor the thoughts. Yet this is the
necessity of such Men's Condition, that they must either think themselves worthy
thus to becken the Grace of God, or they must perish for ever. They enter then
a contest of Precedence and Superiority with this Grace, and decide against it:
That it is fit for that to stoop and humble, yea to prostitute it self, rather
than they should be for ever Miserable: yea rather than they should have been
obliged to a Holy Life.

2. It is for a Man to desire God, to Mis-time his Grace, for the Season of it
is the present offer in the Gospel. Now is the time accepted, 2 Cor. 2.9.
now is the day of Salvation. It is to desire God to give him a Spring in
Autumn, or Winter; when the time of the Patience of God is over, to expect the
Salvation of God, now God who has with infinite Wisdom and Equality weighed
out Times and Seasons, Eccles. 3.11. and 9.12. Luke 19.42.
and made every thing beautiful in its time, does not reverse his own
Appointments to serve the Folly of Man, who have not known their times, and the
things of their peace in their day.

For can it seem reasonable, that Mountains should remove out of their places?
and Rocks wander from their Situation? That Man more unintelligent, than the
Swallow and Crane that observe their appointed times, Jer. 8.7.
might not be ensnared by the evil times that fall suddenly upon them: Eccles.
9.12.
He that trusts then to such a Repentance, does, as it were; resolve to be
saved by Miracle, or else perish.

3. Men do not consider the Jealousy of God, nor are afraid of his Oath
against them, that harden their Hearts and do not hear his voice to day; so
that some, Heb. 3.9, 10, 11.
who have trifled with the Grace of God, seek him early and do not find him.
The Israelites that said, Whither shall we go up, when they were commanded to
go up, and possess the land; Deuteronomy. 1.28.
when they would have gone up afterward and fought for it, were rejected by
God. So in Zechary, God gives account of that great Judgment of their
Captivity, concerning which, though Moses, Samuel and Job had interceded, he
would not have heard. As when I cried they would not hear, so it came to pass
that they cried, and I would not hear, Zech. 7.13.

Many fail of the Grace of God that profanely sell their Birthright for a
transitory Satisfaction, and find no place for their Repentance, Heb. 12.16, 17.
or of Gods Repentance in favor toward them, though they seek it carefully,
and with Tears. While Men are busy in fulfilling the corrupt Desires of their
sinful Flesh, and make slight of the Mercy, that so freely presents their
Souls; a silent Decree passes against them; that though it makes no noise in
their Ears, yet seals them in blindness, and hardness, so that their Souls are
for ever closed therein: For who can open what is shut by so powerful and awful
a Hand?

4. It is impossible to a Man to die with good composure of Mind, that trusts
to a Dying Repentance; for let the Case be thus stated, That Repentance, which
will not enable a Man to a holy Life, is not saving; suppose a Man then in a
Dying Sickness, making great acknowledgment of Sin, full of Resolutions of
leaving Sin, and this Man recovering and peforming nothing, but sliding back
into the former Wretchedness of Life; this Repentance however serious, and
earnest it seemed, would not have saved him, if he had died; he had perished in
his Sins, and his false Repentance together: For that his Repentance was truly
inferior to his Sins, appears, in that as soon as ever that is over, which gave
it a seeming Advantage, his Sins throw off that Repentance; Rev. 2.7, etc.
but true Repentance always overcomes; that Repentance therefore could not be
true.

And if Repentance be false and counterfeit, there is no amendment of it in
Eternity; when once the Master of the House is risen up, and has shut to the
Door, Luke 13.25.
there is no entrance: While the foolish Virgins too late understanding the
Error of Oil in their Lamps only, and not in their Vessels, Mat. 25.3, etc.
went to correct it, by buying Oil, They were shut out, and no knocking
powerful enough for their Admission.

Yea though a Man may seem to be well quieted, and comforted, and to have the
Testimony of the Spirit of God, yet all this may be but a Delusion, and Satan
in an Angel of light; for though they that have truly this Testimony, may be
supposed to know it is that true Spirit; yet they that have it not, 2 Cor.
11.14.
may have something, they so strongely imagine to be it, that thereby they may
be deceived. This Testimony therefore must be proportionable to the assurance,
this Dying Man had from Christ; else even a Man that dies safe, must die in
such an unexpressible Torment of Mind, that it had been much better he had
enjoyed no such seasons of Sin, than only endure that. And who can presume so
upon God, as to promise himself such a train of Miracles to carry him not only
to Heaven, but without those Agonies of Horror that are like Hell, after so
long Impenitency?

Thus on all sides it is most necessary for every one to Repent while he may
behold the Truth of his Repentance in the ordinary Fruits of a holy Life; and
see himself in all the Circumstances of Temptation, change of Condition,
Varieties, which Life and the Course of it carry along with it: For that is
often by length of time cast up, and appears upon the Surface, that lay
concealed at the bottom, till such a Concurrence of things gives it the
advantage to rise.

I understand nothing that can be objected to this last Argument I have used to
disable the Confidence of such a Repentance, except this.

It may be supposed, the Repentance that is full of passionate and affectionate
Motions toward God, though amidst the fears of Death, may be good, till it be
blotted out by returns to Sin, and therefore if it be taken in the just time,
while it is good; that is, if a Man dies before it be reversed, it may serve
the great purpose of Eternity.

This Supposition I must confess has a seeming Countenance from that
particular place, Ezekiel. 33.12. The righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgression; as for the wickedness of the
wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his
wickedness.

But if the scope of Scripture-Discourse in general, or the very sense of
Morality be taken in the Case, no Man may trust so great a weight here; For
Christ looks upon the stony ground with the same Eye, while it receives the
word with joy, Mat. 1.3.20, 21.
as when by and by it is offended; and it was therefore truly no better at
first than at last. Mat. 7.26.
The House that is not founded upon the Rock, is as ill founded in the Calm, as
in the Storm, only the Storm discovers what it was. Morality it self requires a
better rooting of virtuous Habits, than that they should be set only in loose
Ground, thrown up by Extremity of Condition, and not in the Soil it self.

That Repentance which will not bear the trial of time, will much less sustain
the Test of Eternity, wherein every thing that stands, must be solid and
substantial: Things that suffer the loss of themselves, when they are tried by
man's day, will suddenly be consumed by the hotter Beams of God. 1 Cor. 4.3.

That has need of good Founding, that must undergo an Eternity, and have all
advantage of Concoction, that must be laid up for ever; which the short Moments
of a Deathbed without a miraculous Assistance will not allow. The Fruit of it
generally, like that Hasty-ripe, perishes while it is in the Hand: Isai. 28.4.
This Repentance gives up the Ghost, as soon as it is born.

Now as for that place in Ezekiel, so much vexed with Controversy, I do not
think it convenient for me to entangle a Discourse intended wholly for practice
with the Perplexities of it.

Only I am concerned to show, that it does not afford the favor supposed to
this kind of Repentance. For first, We must not mistake the day it speaks of,
as if it signified so strait a compass of Time, as a Day; but that Season
wherein either the righteous Man wastes and destroys his Righteousness; or a
Sinner over comes his Vicious Customs and Inclinations, neither of which are
usually done on the sudden. Secondly, The turning from Wickedness intended is
certainly a sincere and impartial one, and not such as we have rendered this
Dying Repentance suspicious to be. Thirdly, It must be justified by a walking
in the Statutes and Judgments of God, and doing that is right; that is, by a
continued Reformation, which will least agree to this Repentance, and therefore
this place of Scripture will not protect this Supposition, but rather damns it.

Having now in the foregoing Discourse, in a practical and persuasive way,
endeavored to engage Men to a timely Repentance, by setting out the hazard of
a late one: I have thought it necessary, to make the state of the whole
Doctrine, as exact as I can, by considering whatever might with fair appearance
of Scripture-Reason call into question and scruple, what I have grounded my
Persuasions upon.

I will therefore, as a Supplement to all I have said, First recollect what I
have intended all along. And then cast all, I can possibly suppose against it,
into Objections and Answers, that by closer atention to the Case it self, every
one that will be at the cost to consider it, may be convinced to the main End,
viz. A present Religious Life.

1. First then I make it not the question, Whether a true Repentance, how late
soever, be a Repentance to Salvation?

2. Nor Secondly, Whether God has reserved it to the Prerogative of his Grace,
to give a true Repentance at last?

3. Nor Thirdly, Whether a Repentance that is true and sincere, though but in
the Seeds, being surprised with a Deathbed, may not then break out and show it
self more fully?

4. Nor Lastly, Whether a Man that has the light of the Gospel brought to him,
but just before his Dying Condition, may not expect the Grace of God working
with it then, even as in the freer times of Life?

All these I do with great Confidence acknowledge: The Substance of what I have
said against a Deathbed Repentance, will be comprised in these following
Assertions, which I restrain wholly to Men, that have lived under the Light,
and Exhortations, and Applications of the Word of God, with all usual Freedom;
and yet have not begun sincerely to Repent, till they come to die.

The First is, That a Deathbed Repentance how fair soever, it may appear, has
yet the greatest Doubt imaginable upon it, whether it be true.

The Second, There is greatest Reason of Fear, God will not give his Grace to
such a Dying Man, to Repent.

The Third, That a Repentance at Death is not that general Repentance, the
Scripture Discourses of, makes promises of Pardon upon, offers the Assistances
of the Spirit to, enjoins the Duty of, with so many pressing commands. For that
Repentance immediately to be begun is supposed to govern a following Life. It
must therefore be an extraordinary, and miraculous Repentance, if true.

Lastly, That it is therefore against all rules of Piety and Prudence, by
mispending Life to cast our selves upon the necessity of Repentance at Death.

This, I say, is the Substance of what I have designed all along, and which I
would now further clear, and vindicate from these following Objections.

Objection 1. Does not the Parable of calling some Laborers into the Vineyard
at the Eleventh Hour, imply, That God does in ordinary Convert some at the last
Hour, as well as sooner? Mat. 20. v. 1. etc.


Answer. The main scope of Parables is only argumentative, and so far as the
scope of that Parable relates to this Case: It is no more, than what I
acknowledge, That God gives Eternal Life to true Repentance, if true, at last,
even as to the first and earliest Repentance. The reward being to all of Grace,
and not of Debt. It is also to be considered, there remained an Hour of
working, representing rather old Age, than a Deathbed, if the colors of a
Parable prove any thing, and so are rather against this Repentance, than for it.

In the Second Objection, I suppose Men taking Sanctuary at infinite Mercy and
Power in this manner.

Although no thought of Man can reach the Mercy, that accepts or gives
Repentance at the last: yet Mercy being as much above our Thoughts, as the
Heaven above the Earth, what can we define concerning it? And though there are
so many Circumstances of Impossibility, according to our measure of things; Yet
the things that are impossible with Men, with God are possible; for with God
all things are possible: How can we then determine in this Case? Can we by
searching find out the Almighty in his Mercy and Power? Can we find him out to
perfection? It is high as Heaven, what can we do? It is deeper than Hell, what
can we know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the
Sea.

Answer. Now because in this Objection, the sinews of all Hope and Expectation
from this late Repentance meet; I will endeavor to give the most punctual
Answer to it. And though I know after all, that is, or can be said, Men will
not quit it: Yet I shall rest upon this Answer, as my last Resolution of this
Case; and by it raise the disswasions from a trust in such a Repentance to the
height; the greatness of the hazard appearing most fully from it.

In general therefore it has been noted, The question is not whether God
accepts a true Repentance, how late soever; but whether God will give a true
Repentance so late; and herein the question is not of the limits, the absolute
limits of infinite Mercy and Power; But what limits it has set to it self? and
what Seasons it has limited to us? and whether according to these a Deathbed
Repentance be not almost, if not altogether an Impossibility? I Will therefore
lay down several degrees of Impossibility, notwithstanding infinite Mercy and
Power, that must necessarily abate the Irregular Confidence of such a
Repentance, and under one of them I shall be bold to place it.

1. The highest degree of Impossibility is, of those things, that are utterly
and absolutely impossible with God, because they are irreconcilable with his
Nature, and such wherein if they were, he must deny himself, which he cannot
do. For though there is nothing above God, not so much as any Goodness, or
Righteousness abstracted from himself, that should give him Law; Yet he being
himself that supreme Goodness and Righteousness, He is a Law to himself; His
Nature is his supreme and inviolable Law; And his Will stands always even with
his Nature: For his Will is himself reciprocal with his Nature; And all his
Actions keep perfect Correspondence with his Will. Upon this immutable Reason
God cannot lie, he cannot do any thing weak, or that argues Imperfection: He
cannot but be righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Upon this
Reason also he cannot, he will not acquit the guilty. He cannot, he will not
save or make Men happy in their Sins. God himself speaks this Sense, Ezekiel.
18.31, 32. and c. 33.11. As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
Death of him that dies, why will ye die? Turn your selves and live ye. As if
he should say, except ye turn, all my Mercy can do you no good. For such a
Mercy as God the Father of Mercies, will not give, would not be a Mercy, but
either a foolish Softness, or loose Indulgence to Sin. Such a Power were not a
Power, but an Impotency, or turning all things to Confusion. These therefore
are as inconsistent with God, as Folly, Imperfection, Sin. The Gospel, the
highest display of Mercy rests upon this Principle, being not a Salvation of
Men in Sin, but a most effectual Redemption of Men from Sin. Of all that God
can be supposed to do for Men, there is nothing more impossible than this, more
repugnant to all the true Sense of Man, more overthrowing of the undertaking of
Christ, more contrary to the Nature of true Happiness. An Opinion of the damned
in Hell being annihilated, or recovered to Holiness and Happiness after some
Ages of Torment, were a high Probability compared with this. He that can tempt
himself to believe this, may believe any thing, and needs no Confutation, but
his own Unreasonableness. Against this I have been thus large, because it
secretly lurks in Men's Hearts, that God may save them without so much ado about
Faith and Repentance, though being afraid to speak a thing so monstrous, they
disguise it under the Pretense of a faint Repentance at last.

But from what I have said, It is plainly to be inferred, First, That some
things which God cannot, will not do, are not the reproach either of his Mercy
or Power, but the Glory and Greatness of both. And this, that He neither can,
or will save Men without sincere Faith and Repentance (that is without a
recovery to Holiness) is one of these things. The Deathbed Repentance then,
that is unto Salvation, must without all dispute be a sincere Change from Sin
to Holiness.

2. There is an Impossibility, that arises from the peremptory, and absolute,
and irrepealable determination of the Will and Council of God concerning any
thing. In this degree of things I account, I cannot acquiesce in the Exposition
of the Learned Dr. Hammond in his Annotations concerning these two Cases.
the unpardonableness of the Sin against the Divine Spirit. The unrenewableness
of total Apostates from Christianity to Repentance. The impossibility of
Repentance after this Life: Now though these carry not their own Evidence of
being inconsistent with the Divine Nature, as the former; yet the Declaration
of supreme pleasure against them is so effectual, that we must needs look upon
them, as impossible. And we may see a great consent, a high Congruity between
the things themselves, and the Determination of God concerning them, which
Reasons are yet clearer with God. For in the Sin against the Holy Ghost there
is so mature, so perfect, so concocted a Wickedness, so high a contumely
against the Godhead it self, that it is very irreconcilable with Repentance,
and so with Pardon. The total Apostasy from Christianity, and the Evidences of
it mentioned Heb. 6. from the very Nature of the Case appears irreparable,
because there is no other or higher Grace, than that of the Gospel, for the
Apostates to remove to; no more sacrifice for sin, nor are there any higher
Evidences of that Gospel, than those he is supposed to revolt from; and no more
perfect Acts of Contrariety to the Gospel, than the crucifying the Son of God
afresh and putting him to an open shame, the doing despite to the Spirit of
Grace, the treading under foot the Son of God, and counting the Blood of the
Covenant an unclean thing, in the Parallel place. Heb. 10.29.

Besides all other Reasons, the unchangeable State of Eternity is so
consolidate with, so fixed into our very Being, that the Perpetuity of it is
very accountable to our Reason; so that there can be no Change after this Life.

From hence then, we derive thus much farther against a Deathbed Repentance:
First that some things, wherein we cannot find an express Impossibility in
their Nature, are yet made so by Gods absolute Resolution concerning them; into
the Reason of which he also is pleased to give us some light: And that many
Expressions of Scripture (as, They shall seek me early but shall not find me,
the Parable of the foolish Virgins, with many others) make this Repentance very
dangerous, with which also the very Reason of the Case concurs; Yet not
amounting to this kind of Impossibility.

3. There are some things impossible according to the Rules, and general Laws
of the Creation, and Government of the World, which we call Nature, and which
Rules, infinite Wisdom and Power has so prescribed to it self, that he has
yet reserved to himself freedom to show himself above them, as Founder and Lord
of Nature.

Thus it is impossible for the Sun to stand still, to raise the Dead, that the
Fire should not burn: That is, It is impossible at all times, but when infinite
Power is pleased to be seen riding in the Heavens, far above all Nature, that
is, when he is pleased to work Miracles: suitable to these Laws of the first
Creation, there are also Laws of the new and second Creation, viz. the
Redemption of Christ.

It is true, the new Creation, compared with the old, is so far as it is new,
All Miracle. Such is Righteousness without Works, Regeneration; Romans 4.6.
Such is the Incarnation, the Resurrection. Even as the first Creation and
daily Preservation are Miracles compared with that nothing, out of which all
things were drawn, and are still upheld.

Yet this very miraculous Frame of the Gospel is bounded with certain Laws and
Rules, and when these are transcended, it is a Miracle in this miraculous state
of things.

Now all Instances of miraculous Power are rare and extraordinary, and the
Reasons of them, when they have been, have always been great and solemn; and
when they have been more plentiful in any Age, the Reasons have been great for
that also. And in Miracle it self, there has been always regard to the natural
state of things. Miracle has for the most part lifted up Nature only, wherein
it was either decayed, or not planted so high, as the very effect to be
wrought, and just then designed; not minding the flourish of it self, but the
main Intention only: We read of no other Circumstances but those of ordinary
Mortality, into which they that were raised from the Dead in Scripture were
exalted; only that they were raised to Life.

In the new Creation, so much of the old, as would serve in it, is generally
taken in; and the Constitutions that will agree with the design of Grace are
upheld for the most part; as were easy to manifest. Divine Inspiration did not
disannul the natural Temper of the Prophets or Apostles; but they are easily
observable in their Writings. Conversion does not destroy, but sanctify and
renew Nature. For what does all this serve, but to show, God does as little as
may be, decline from the first Model of things, His Wisdom so deeply contrived?

Further, the new Creation in all things excelling the old; as the whole State
of it is never antiquated by a higher Revelation, so the Laws of it are seldom
exceeded by any thing extraordinary; yet I acknowledge, Instances there are of
Extraordinaries, even here also.

The Apostleship was in a manner wholly miraculous, yet the calling of the
Apostle Paul was something higher than that; for whereas the Twelve were
trained, and educated in the Discipline and Conversation of Christ; and express
care in the Surrogation of one into the place of Judas, Acts 1.21, 22.
was had of such a Preparation, yet the Apostle Paul was suddenly born into
that high Function and Authority, into which they were gradually admitted. But
the reason also was very high, That there might be so great a Proof of the
Power of the Gospel, as a Persecutor and Blasphemer Preaching that Faith, Acts
9.20, 21, 22.31. Gal. 1.23, 24.
he had so notoriously persecuted; and on the sudden, that it might be without
the Suspicion of a Confederacy.

His very Conversion was a Superabundance of Abundant Grace: 1 Timothy 1.14. (...).
He was not only in a deep Humility of Expression, but in the thing it self,
one of the chiefest of Sinners saved by Christ: 1 Timothy 1.15. verse. 13.
His Sin had been the unpardonable Sin, had not Ignorance abated it.

But upon that solemn account he obtained mercy; That in Him Jesus Christ might
show forth a Pattern of all long-suffering, 1 Timothy 1. verse. 16.

This of the Dying Malefactor, I Esteem of the same kind, and the Reason was
extraordinary, as I have before observed.

I have now thus fully discoursed this Particular, because it brings me to the
ultimate Resolution, I can make of this Case; that is,

A Deathbed Repentance whenever it is true, is a Grace and Favor vouchsafed
to the Soul, in which it is found, above the ordinary and general Grace that
gives Repentance. For it is above these four great Rules of the Gospel, wherein
also the fundamental Nature of things much conspires.

1. That God is jealous of the Glory of his Grace, and gives it by the same
rule, he prescribes to us. To day, while it is called to day, hear his Voice.

2. God attempers his Grace to the state of Man's Soul, so as not to permit to
such a long hardening, and accustomedness in Sin, those whom he intends to
Convert.

3. The Ingenuity and Freedom of the Soul necessary to Repentance is not
ordinarily possible, amidst the Fears and Necessity of Death.

4. Fruits meet for Repentance, and amendment Life, and the glorifying God upon
Earth, by a holy Conversation are universally required. Such a Repentance then
must be proportionable to a Miracle, a Miracle in Grace. Now Miracles are
seldom, and not but upon such Reasons as exceed the value of those Rules (at
least) in that Case, wherein they are overruled; Reasons of greater Eminency
than what daily fall out; but it is a daily Reason, that Men must either Repent
or Perish. Such Repentances therefore are very rare, and doubtless when they
are, God gives a luster to the Reasons why they are; In such a measure, that
Men may say, Here is the finger of God, ingraving his Wisdom upon his Work. And
with such a Freedom as our Savior expresses, Luke 4.25, 26, 27.

The practical Conclusion then from hence is this, It is as presumptuous a
Boast for a Man to think, He shall Repent when he comes to die, Prove. 27.1.
because the Mercy and Power of God are infinite; as for him upon the same
accounts, to leap into Seas, or roll himself in Flames, without fear of danger.

Nay, It is such a kind of profane Insolency, as some Interpreters give that
of Lamech to be, Though I should slay a Man in my anger, or a Young Man in my
Sense of an Injury: Genesis 4.23. Paraeus in locum.
Yet if Cain notwithstanding his Murder, was secured by a sevenfold Vengeance
from God upon him, that should slay him, I shall be secured in mine, by a
Vengeance seventy sevenfold. Thus Men say, if ever any one for all an
irreligious Life, was preserved from Hell by a Repentance at last, I need not
fear, but I shall: Both agree in a bold claim of the Sovereign actings of God
for their own safety in Sin.

4. Below all these Impossibilities; as in Nature there are great difficulties,
that are not usually overcome, and yet in things possible without a Miracle; so
there are also in Grace. Our Savior tells us, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, Mat. 19.23, etc.
than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. His prejudices and
prepossessions are so many, his temptations and intanglements are so great. The
Prophet says, Can a Blackamore change his skin? Jer. 13.23.
or a Leopard his spots? then ye that are accustomed to do evil, may learn to
do well. All delayed Repentances are very uneasy; some Divines observing few
Conversions after the fortieth Year of Life. But of these, though all Men ought
to apprehend the danger; I should say, (that no Man might be ensnared) as our
Savior speaks in these Cases, The things impossible with Men, with God are
possible.

Objection 3. But according to this state of the Case, What should a Dying Man
do, that has not yet repented? Should he expect a Miracle, or do nothing
through despair?

Answer. Have ye not read, what David did when he was an hungry and had need?
He adventured over Laws, and was blameless: If any Man feel the necessities of
a Soul perishing, let him lay hold upon Mercy and Grace to help. There is a
Faith in this Case, like the Faith of Miracles, that removes Mountains, and
divides Seas. He that can receive it, let him receive it, Mat. 19.12. But let
every Man take heed how he falls into these Necessities; For multitudes not
having the right Faith, like the Egyptians, Essay this, and are drowned, Heb.
11.29.

It is a very hard thing to distinguish between mirum, and miraculum, a Wonder,
and a Miracle; so is it between a saving Faith, and Repentance that may have
wonderful effects, through the Conviction of a Deathbed, and this true saving
Faith, this Faith of Miracles; and for any thing I know, Eternity only can make
a Man safe concerning it, and sure that he had it. Doubtless many like Joab
perish, catching hold of the Horns of the Altar.

Objection 4. But what? If Men having made a Profession of Religion, have done
many things religiously and soberly, and yet through the prevalency of some
Lusts, it appears they have not truly repented? May not the Conversation they
have had with Religion, so prepare things, that their Repentance may be
dispatched in the Instants of Death?

Answer 1. It is dreadful to consider, how the unhappy pleas of some upon such
kind of accounts recited by Christ, are also rejected by him. Many shall say in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets? Luke 13.26, etc.
In thy Name have we cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful
Works. Mat. 7.22.
Yet he shall profess unto them, I never knew you, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity.

Besides all the Doubts already insisted upon, such Men have made a Custom of
deluding Religion, and have great cause to fear they should do so at last.

God also is so provoked by such, as have long tempted him, proved him, and
seen his works, and yet err from him in their hearts, and do not know his ways,
that he comes to his oath against them, Heb. 3.9, 10.

Answ. 2. But lest this should discourage and suffocate all motions after God,
either in Life or at Death; and they seem in as good condition, that never mind
Religion, as those that do: I add,

Any good thing found in Men, either in their Life or Death, though it have not
the worthiness of Repentance to Salvation, yet shall certainly have its reward
in mitigations of Punishment; which Consideration fully explained at the Day of
Judgment will assoyl many of this sort of Doubts concerning the ways of God. I
believe those very early seekings of God, notwithstanding which, he is said to
laugh at the Destruction of those, from whom they come, when they have first
served the gloryings of Justice, obtain lessenings of Pain: as conquered
Enemies, after they have been led in Triumph to wait on the Conqueror's Glory,
may have even that Service recompensed with a more compassionate Captivity.

Answer 3. If there have been solidity and sincerity in any religious Exercises
in the time of Life, whereby the Heart by the Grace of God is prepared for
further Grace; as very often Conversion is by degrees: It is hopeful God may
use Death, as a Season of completing his Work; yet this is to be registered
among the seldomer disposes of God, and both those Preparations, and the
Complement of them is under the caution of our Savior: Strive to enter in at
the strait gate, for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter, and shall not
be able, Luke 13.24.

Objection 5. Is it not at all times a great Folly, to promise a to morrow to
Repentance, how long soever we may live after that to morrow? because we daily
harden through the deceitfulness of sin. Is it not also always a curious Point,
and that requires a great jealousy over it, whether our Hearts are at any time
sincere in returns to God? Is it not lastly, always to be feared, lest our to
day, the time of Grace slip from us? Why then are the dangers placed so
industriously upon this Repentance at Death?

Answer 1. First as concerning the time of Repentance, It is to be
acknowledged; Every Man, that is come to the strength and fixedness of his
Understanding, to the poize and inclination of his Will and Affections, to the
habit and custom of his Life and Actions, and has not determined for God, has
great reason to fear; lest as there is a deep print of the high hand of Nature
upon his unconverted state, so there should be a Seal of Justice also, and this
Doubt increases every day.

Notwithstanding this; All Doubts and Scruples, that have an appearance of
insnaring and intangling the minds of Men with fears, they begin too late, are
to be avoided; if it be not so late, that it is just now dark, and their feet
stumbling upon the dark mountains; Jer. 13.16.
And these things being written especially for the living, Isa. 38.19.
who have in ordinary probability time to lose, the danger is best placed here,
where it takes them every way.

By the way of Encouragement; that the time is not yet past, while they have
the spaces of Life, and of the Patience of God; which is not a slackness of
Justice but a designed Salvation. By the way of Caution, because they know not
how soon they may be cast upon a Deathbed, and this Patience be at an end:
With Dying Men the case is otherwise, who are already in the thickest of the
Danger, and must work themselves out in that moment, or perish for ever;
without any Injury therefore to them, the living are thus to be warned. Isa.
38.19.

Further, It is evident, all delays of Repentance roll down hither, however Men
propose a stop; yet hither the generality come at last: So that in effect, it
is all one, whether Men are dissuaded from trusting to a Dying Repentance, or
from delaying their Repentance. For if they are given to delay; It comes to
this, They repent and die together. But if a Man be afraid to venture Eternity
upon his last Breath, he will repent presently.

2. For the difficulty of being sincere in Repentance, I place it here,
because, though every Man should by drawing the parallel lines of Delusion, and
mistake upon himself, try his Repentance when ever it is; yet these Errors fall
in greatest numbers upon that point of Extremity, and with least possibility of
rectifying them: But seeing there are at all times such deceits in this Case,
there is nothing so necessary, as to repent in a clear light, and full leisure.

3. For the severity of God in denying his Grace, though I acknowledge his
Indignation condemns many, who have dallied with him and their own Souls to be
sucked in again by the whir-pool of their Lusts, when they would have risen out
of them; yet this Indignation is never so certainly at the height, as when Men
have provoked it as long as they could: It is most miserable therefore to make
our last motions within the command of such a horrible Pit, lest they prove
only the struggles of sinking Men: yet this we must do, if we are not before
got out of it. There is much greater hope (how bad soever their Condition may
be) to them, who are yet in the hand of patience lifting and leading them to
Repentance, Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9.
and do not despise it, but account it Salvation.

Objection 6. This Doctrine does not savor enough of the Grace of the Gospel,
that would have all Men come to Repentance.

Answ. To discourse the Severities of the Gospel, to the ends of the Gospel, is
most Evangelical Discourse. For as the Gospel does with all clearness declare
its own Rigors, that Men might not mistake it, for a loose and careless
Doctrine, and so miss the Salvation of it; so have I discovered the great hazard
of a Dying Repentance, that Living Men might be persuaded not to cast
themselves upon it, and Dying Men excited to an Action suitable to the
extremity of their Case.

And this is indeed preaching the Gospel; and to be moved upon it with fear, to
prepare an Ark to the saving our Souls before the flood come, Heb. 11.7.
is as true an effect of Faith, as to be constrained by love to live to him, 2
Cor. 5.14.
that has died for us. I say as true, and gives us a Title to the Inheritance
of the Righteousness, which is by Faith, together with the other. For the
Prudence of Faith makes us apprehensive of the Reasons of Danger, and so to
Fear, even as the Gratitude of it ties us with the Obligations of Love. This is
not that Fear that Love casts out, but that it self quickens, and is also both
quickened and guarded by it: nor is it the bondage, but the wisdom of Fear. Romans
8.15. Job 28.28.

Objection 7. But is the general Judgment of Divines thus?

Answer. All judicious Divines are very tender of binding the Prerogative of
Grace, or clipping off the Action of Men toward God, even at this time; See,
besides the concurring Judgment of the Ancients, Bishop Andrews Sermons on
Repentance. Dr. Hammond and Dr. Tailor in their Treatises of this Point.
Bolton, Dyke, etc.
in Observation whereof I have desired to be cautious herein also: But in their
cautions against Presumption, their Expressions amount to the utmost I have
spoken.

Infer. 1. But setting aside the whole danger of a Deathbed Repentance, Let me
now lastly thus reason, and thus expostulate; Why should we desire to Repent so
late? It is good to be betimes doing that which is most comporting with our
truest Happiness; Reconciliation with God, return to Him, his Favor, to obey
Him; these are the truest Freedom and Peace of a Man at all times: Great Peace
have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. Psalm. 119.165.
He lives in the least pain, that lives holiest; I made haste therefore and
delayed not to keep thy Commandments; Psalm. 119.60.
I seized upon so great an Enjoyment, as soon as I could, afraid to be kept off
from it too long.

To fear God and keep his Commandments is the whole duty of Man, Eccles. 12.13.
When a Man considers Life, and that he has but a Moment of it, and that
therefore he would live that Moment, as much as may be he; shall find the
highest of Life, the top of Life to be Godliness, which has all the promises
of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

To pursue this World, and the Vanities of it is not only with greatest folly,
and impertinency to lanch our selves in a great Vessel, the Greatness of our
Affection; and with solemn Preparations, our strongest Action, into the low
water, the shallow of Life; which because it cannot carry so great a bulk,
increases the Toil and Vexation, as well as enhanses the Vanity and Folly of
doing nothing at so great an expense: But worse than this, it is the loading
our selves with guilt under a delusion of Pleasure; that gives us secret
disquiet and torment, while we are laying it on; and cannot be laid down as we
please; but with more sensible and industrious Anguish, than we heaped it upon
us, I mean, the sense of our misdoings, and Contrition for them, so necessary
to work Repentance.

To conclude, Seeing to die is the end of all Men, Eccles. 7.2. Repentance is
to be chosen while we live, that we may die with the greatest quiet; without
those Agonies of Conscience, those cold Sweats, those sinking Eyes, and
fainting Spirits; for he dies with most ease, that most surveys Death, and
looks into all the Retirements of it beforehand; that knows it perfectly, and
all its strength; such an one governs himself in it, as in a most important
Action with Decency and Freedom. He is not haled by Death, but received by it:
Into thy hands I commend my spirit; Luke 23.46.
he lays himself orderly into the shade of Death: Whereas so long adherence to
the Pleasures of Sin gives Death a Violence. It makes Men both unwilling, and
afraid to die. This night thy Soul shall be required. Luke 12.20.
Life is exacted of a Sensualist, and torn from him, that is resigned by a
Spiritual and Mortified Man; Good Men die in an active Sense, they know how to
die; others die passively, they are forced to die.

This great difference prefers to us Dying daily, before that forcible Dying at
once.

The wisdom of Dying was accounted by Heathens one of the worthy Businesses and
Employments of Life, and that required much study. Christianity gives us the
true Rules of it, and they lie in waiting till our change come; Time is short,
1 Cor. 7.29.
they therefore that use this World, should not use it down to the Bran,
sensually; but only take the advantages of it to a higher Life: Else being met
on the sudden by Death, they are like those that fall off from Life with
Violence, that is, Headlong; but they that live in the Sense of God, and an
Eternal Condition, alight with care and ease.

It is therefore not only greatest Safety, but truest Frugality and Improvement
of Life to Repent betimes; and when we come to die, the easiest and sweetest
way of dying. Not indeed a Dying, but a Translation into Immortality and
Blessedness.

Inference 2. Seeing the Wise, and their works are all in the hand of God; and
that he gives Wisdom to the Wise Man's Heart, to discern both Time and
Judgment; and not to be taken as Fishes in an evil Net, and as Birds in a
Snare, when it falls suddenly upon them, having not known their time; Let us
most humbly commit our selves to Him by earnest seeking his Grace in the
Redeemer, in whom all his Grace is Treasured up; Thus by the Efficacy of his
Spirit we shall know in our day, the things of our Peace, that they may not be
for ever hid from our Eyes; we shall seek the Lord, while he is to be found,
and call upon him while he is near: And so shall be secured from having the
Door shut upon us.

Infer. 4. This may be to us a close and determinative Test in this point of
Deathbed Repentance; If our Repentance be such, and so real; that it is not a
Lamp of Profession only, but Oil in the Vessel, that will bear up the going
forth to meet the Bridegroom; and that we are ready, and have not our Oil to
Buy, but can enter with Him into the Wedding, before the Door be shut; This,
how late soever it may seem, is Repentance to Salvation, and not to be Repented
of, and shall be with Christ in Paradise.

Such a Repentance, when the Spirit goes out of the Body, will be beforehand
entered into that within the Veil; whether the Forerunner being for us entered
Ministers in the Holy of Holies, not made with Hands; in that Sanctuary, which
the Lord has pitched, and not Man; in that more perfect Tabernacle; that is to
say, not of this Building; a High Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchisedec; a Savior to the utmost, or to All Perfection. He fills up with
the value of his own Sacrifice and Intercession, and by the Power of his
Endless Life, whatever is wanting in the Repentance, He has given; either in
regard of its Value as being so Late, and in the Refuse of Life; or of the deep
Rooting and Habituation, or of the abundant Fruits: and having Apprehended, the
Spirit He enables it in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, every way enables
it to Apprehend that state of Holiness, which agrees to the Resurrection of the
Dead; first in the Life of Spirits with Himself; then in the Raising the Body
Incorruptible. For this appertains to his Melchisedecian Priesthood, wherein
He is now; and wherein He is King of Righteousness, King of Peace, a Priest set
down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High.

If therefore the Repentance be such, as He, as this Great Prince has given;
There is in it a Coming to God by Him, and then his Salvation is to all
Perfection to it; For as going into the Heavens in his Spirit, He took in his
Passage this Prey, the Dying Malefactor out of the Mouth of the Lion; So as He
pleases, out of the same Power, the power of the Dog, He rescues those Souls
that he has made dear to Himself; for He living ever, quickens whom He will,
and He can by his Spirit seal this his Grace in a Moment.

For this Great High Priesthood, being the Eternal Priesthood of Christ;
whatever is said of Him, as a High Priest, must be said of Him; as this
High Priest, which He is always, or without least Intermission: And as such an
High Priest therefore it is, that He succors the Tempted, being in All things
Tempted, as we are, yet without Sin; now even as his Great Temptation was at
Death; yet without the Sin of having deferred his strong Cries, and
Supplications to Death, though then He was most Earnest: He can therefore
Succor, and be infinitely Compassionate, even to those who are Tempted, though
with, and in this Sin of having delayed Repentance to the last. They therefore,
whom He graciously moves to it, may come, even then, boldly to the Throne of
Grace, and obtain Mercy, and find Grace, even in this just Season, and as it
were indivisible Point of Time: These Things I write, that we may not Sin this
Great Sin of Delaying our Repentance to the last; But if any Man do so Sin, we
have this Great High Priest over the House of God; an Advocate, and a
Propitiation; and if such a one be under his Charge, and given to Him by God,
He is a Faithful and a Merciful High Priest: He is therefore Faithful, because
Merciful to make Reconciliation, and to Succor in so great a Temptation, as
even This is: This He can do, because He is a Fore runner within the Veil; and
by his Blood appears, as he that has obtained Eternal Redemption, a Redemption
always ready.

This is the great Security and Cordial against the Fear of Death in general,
to the Saints and Servants of Christ; and if by its Hyper-Pleonasm, its
exceeding Abundance, and Affluence, it may and does overflow to some, upon
whom the Grace of Christ Abounds, much more where Sin has so much Abounded:
How great is this Miracle of Grace! But who? How few are they who shall thus
Live? whom God and Christ will please to make thus to Live, When it is come to
this; for if they are Few that are Saved, how much Fewer are the Saved, at this
last Point. Strive then to enter betimes at the strait Gate; for many shall
then seek; at last of any Time; to enter in, and shall not be Able.

There is too much of (especially the Deathbed) Repentance, at is Repentance
of the Lamp only, that makes a show only; that is but only of this World, and
from beneath; which is able for once to give or yield a fair and lightsome
Flash at parting with the World: But because without a Treasure to Enter into
an Eternal Duration, That which is but a Lamp, fails in the very time of Trial,
and becomes a Lamp put out in obscure Darkness. Let your Lamps be always
Shining, and your Lights Burning, such as are Able to be always so, and so to
Shine even into Eternity.

Infer. 5. From what has been spoken concerning the Great Mourning and
Repentance, that shall be before the End of this state of the World; even
before the pouring out of the Vials, in that Miraculous state of Things, that
shall be after the Apostasy ended, and the Kingdom of Christ in Succession; I
conclude there shall be a Deathbed Repentance of the World, if I may so call
it; but after that, viz. in the time of the Vials we read of no Repenting, but
a Repenting not; no more than in the state of Everlasting Punishment, in our
general Apprehension of that State: even as He that is Righteous, shall be
Righteous still, that is, for ever Righteous, and in no possibility of for ever
Falling from it; any more than from the Glory, and Happiness of Eternity, in
our General Notion of that State.

And this strongly Argues to us the Possibilities of a Deathbed Repentance;
seeing all the Prejudices that lie upon and against a Death-Bed-Repentance now,
lie against that late Repentance of the World; but yet it limits and guards
against the Ordinariness and Easiness of a Deathbed Repentance in General; in
as much as this late Repentance is in a miraculous state of things, viz. of the
Spirit poured out; of such a Glorious Kingdom of Christ come into its
Succession; and at the time when our Lord shall immediately Come in his Kingdom.

But then at the same time is cut off all possibility of Repentance after this
Season of Repentance; For as soon as the time of the Vials enters, all
possibility of Repentance is fore-doom'd, as has been said.

Now this Late Repentance shall be excited and stirred up to by the Preaching
of the Everlasting Gospel; and of this there were two great Symbols or Figures
given in the very first Appearance of the Gospel, viz. the Apostleship of Paul,
who was, as has been observed, Born out of due Time into that High Mission;
agreeable to which is the Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel: and the
Repentance of the Dying Malefactor, just as Christ was entering into his
Kingdom; And they are each a Hypotyposis, or Pattern for them who shall
Hereafter Believe on Him to Life Everlasting; and Repent with the Repentance to
Salvation, never to be Repented of; and especially at that Great Futurity of
the Coming and Kingdom of Christ, or the Coming of Christ in his Kingdom.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by William Miller, at the Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen or others may be furnished with the best
Collections, either in whole or in part, taking all the State-Matters,
Church Government, Sermons, Divinity or Humanity.
In Folio.
ASSemblies Annotations, in two Vol. Ainsworth's Annotations. Book of Martyrs,
in three Vol. Ben. Johnson's Play, Bartholomeur-Fair. -- His Staple of News. --
Devil is an Ass. Boyle's Wall-Flower. Charlton's Phisiologia, or a Fabric of
Science, Natural upon the Hypothesis of Atoms. Downham of Justification.
Extravagant Shepherd, the Anti-Romance. Elton on the Colossians. Gusman's Life.
Goad's Aphorisms and Discourses of the Bodies Celestial. Spanish Baud.
Herbert's Travels. Heylin's Cosmography. Heywood of Angels. -- His Love and
Revenge, a Romance. Jones on the Hebrews. -- His Reports. Kellet's Miscellanies
of Divinity Lloyd's Memoirs. Orlando Furioso. Paraeus on the Revelations.
Pryn's History of King John. Ramsey's Astrology. Reconciler of the Bible.
Violet's Proposals. Venn's Military Discipline. Ward on Matthew. Bishop
Wilkins's Real Characters. Willet's Sinopsis Papismi, on Genesis and Exdous.
In Quarto.
Allin's Scripture Chronology. Arraignment of the whole Creature. Barclay's
Argenis, with the Cuts. Ball against Came of Separation. Bolton's Works.
Belmon's Pieces. Baxter's Works. Brisket's Discourse of a Civil Life. Blunt's
Voyage to the Levant. Lord Bacons Essays. Cradock's Knowledge and Practice.
Clark's Life of William the Conqueror. -- Black Prince. -- Sir Francis Drake.
Cooper's Heaven Opened, Romans 8. -- Life and Death. Carpenter's Pragmatical
Jesuit, a Comedy. Declaration of Nusances in Cities, Towns and Corporations, by
Four Famous Sages of the Common Law. Mounson, Plowden, Manwood; with the
Resolution of the Judges of Assize. Dod on the Commandments. -- On the
Sacrament. -- On the Lord's Prayer. Dike on the Heart. Digges Tectonicon, or
the Art of Measuring. Euphues Anatomy of Wit. English, Spanish, Pilgrim, by
Wadsworth. -- Second Part or further Observations. Essex's Ghost. English
Villain. Extravagant Shepherd, a Comedy. Gullimeas Midwifry. Ghost, or the Woman
wears the Breeches. Heywood's Life of Henry the Fourth. -- Life of Edward the
Sixth. Hooker's Souls Preparation for Christ. -- Souls Humiliation. -- Souls
Ingrafting in Christ. -- Souls Exaltation. History of King Arthur. History of
Precious Stones. Jackson's Concordance to the Bible. Killigrew's Conspiracy, a
Tragedy. Leigh's Saints Rest. Mereton's Sermon before the King. 76 Medice cura
teipsum, or the Apothecaries Plea against Dr. Christopher Merret. Du Moulin's
Moral Reflections on the Number of the Elect. -- Appeal. -- Conformity of the
Discipline and Government of Independents, to that of the Ancient Primitive
Christians. -- Account of the several Advances the Church of England has made
toward Rome. Papists Younger Brother, or the Vileness of Quakers detected.
Squier on the Thessalonians. Struther, on King David's Choice. Sibbs his
Fountain opened. Thomas of Reddings History. Tarlton's Jests. Fishing-Tables.
Sir Hen. Vane's Retired Man's Meditations. Voyage of the Wandering Knight. Weemes
Works. Webster, The Judgment Set, the Books Opened.
15795. A Collection of State-Matters, in all Volumes, as,
ACTS of Parliament. Answers for and against one another. Advices. Apologies.
Army for and against. Appeals. Animadversions. Articles of War and Peace.
Allarms. Accounts. Addresses. Agreements. Arguments. Almanacks.

Bishops for and against. Charges of High Treason. Considerations. Collections
of Papers. Characters. Conferences. Commissions. Cases. City Affairs.
Catalogues of all sorts. Decrees. Declarations. Desires. Discourses.
Discoverers. Dialogues. England, several sorts English. Fights, diverse. France.

Good Old Cause. Grand Cases. Great Britain. Hue and Cries. Histories.
Impeachments. Instructions. Ireland. Interest. Diverse Informations. Kings.
Knights. Lists. Levellers. Letters. Majesty's. Messages and Answers. Lilborne's
Tracts. Mercuries. Monarchy. Mysteries. Memorials. Murders. News of most sorts,
as also to supply Gentlemen that want any New Years Gifts. Needham's Tracts,
Narratives. New England, no Protestant Plot, all the Grants, Observations,
Orders, Ordinances.

Parliament, for and against. Proclamations. Plots. Protestations. Plain
English Proverbs. Problems. Politic Powers. Propositions. Pleas. Present
States. Proceedings. Papers. Petitions. Peace. Princes. Tracts. Questions.
Queries. Relations. Reply. Reasons. Representations. Royalists Defense.
Resolutions. Replications. Remonstrances.

Sedgwick. Strafford. States. Stubbs. Speeches. Trials. Travels and Voyages.
Treatises. Transactions. Triumphs. Treason. Tests for and against. Votes of
Parliament. Vox Populi, Coeli, Regis, Dei. Civitas Plebis Militis Clamantis.
Vindication. Victories. War. Warnings.

3578. Church Government and Divinity.
Articles of Religion. Visitation. Bagshaws. Burtons. Baxters. Bailey. Baptism
for and against it. Callings. Cotton. Craftons. Cannes. Confessions of Faith
several. Church Affairs. Cases. Discourses. Dialogues. Duties. Exhortations.
Ecclesiastical Discipline. Edward's Episcopacy.

Forms of Church Government. Forms of Prayer. Gallaspie. Gilbert. Gerre.
Gauden. Goodwins. Heylins. Hammonds. Hall. Independency. Indulgencies. King
James.

London Ministers, Liberty of Conscience. Liturges for and against. Mather.
Marten. Majesty's. Nonconformist. New England. Owen's Ordination, for and
against. Pearson. Pleas. Presbytery. Proposals. Pagitt. Penington. Injunctions.
Queries. Questions. Reformation. Reason. Replies. Synod of Dort. Articles.
Sacrament. Smectymnus. Smith. Sherlock. Sprat. Sufferage of the Divines of
Great Britain. Stewart. Scandalous Ministers, Saltmarsh. Sabbath, for and
against. Taylor's Testimonies, Toleration, Tithes for and against.
Vindications. Usher's. Vickers. Whitfield. Wickens. Warmstry. Wilkins. Webster.
Walker. Several Tracts.

3472. Sermons on most Occasions, as, Assizes, Artillery, Christmas, Passion,
Resurrection, Funerals, Feasts, Fifths of November, Consecration, Thirtieth of
January, Twenty ninth of May, Latin Visitation, Weddings, etc.
Ailsbury, Andrews, Abbot, Adams, Ash, Arrowsmith, Alestry, Annesley, Baxter,
Burnet, Buroughs, Bold, Beveridge, Burgess, Bond, Bridge, Byfield, Burton,
Barker, Brinsley, Bagnes, Bolton, Bagshaw, Benefield, Bowls, Bayley, Brockes,
Barnes.

Calamy, Cleynell, Cooper, Clarke, Caryl, Case, Cotton, Carter, Carpenter,
Coleman, Bishop of Chester, Cawdrys. Dod and Claver, Dells, Downame, Duglas,
Duppa, Done, Dike Durham. Estwicke, Edwards, Ellis, Elborrough, Bishops of
Ely, Exeter.

Fathers, Faircloth, Featly, Fuller, Fullwood, Ford, Fawkner, Farmer, Freeman,
Flower. Goodwins, Gatakers, Gouges, Gores, Gee, Glanvill, Gardener, Griffeth,
Gauden, Gell, Gregory, Geree, Gilbert, Good, Gillaspie. Homes, Holdsworth,
Hering, Hodges, Horns, Hickeringalls, Hesketh, Hughes, Dean Hardys, Henderson,
Herle, Horton, Bishop of Hereford.

Joins, Jackson, Jessop, Jenkins, Jacombs, Johnson, Jeanes, Knell, King,
Kentish, Kidder. Love, Lawrence, Laud, Loyd, Littleton, Lincoln, Locker,
Lyford, Bishop of London, Lightfoot. Marshall, Mede, Maynard, Mocket, Maine,
Meriton, Mason, Moore, Meggott, Newcomen, Nevill, Owen, Preston, Palmer,
Pierce, Poole, Patrick, Reynolds, Reading, Ramsey, Richardson, Randol,
Rutherford.

Sutton, Stoughton, Sterry, Scott, Spurslow, Bishop Stillingfleet, Strong,
Smith, Sibbs, Bishop Sheldons Sermons for Fire, and Ninth of September; Slator,
Staunton, Seaman. Tailor, Temple, Turner, A. Bishop Tillotson, Bishop Usher,
Valentine, Vinnes, Vennings Visitation. Wheatley, Whitaker, Watson, Wilkinson,
Woodcocks, Walker, Warren, Ward, White.

5693. Humanity of Several Sorts, as, Husbandry, Histories, Law, Lilly,
L'Estrang, Physic and Surgery, Plays, Poetry, Popery for and against,
Prophesies, Schools, Sea, Trade, Usury and Witchcraft Books, etc.

158. Catechisms of several Sorts.

Octavo Large and Small.
ARcana of Astrology. Archer's every Man his own Doct- A New Light to Alchymy.
Ball's Catechism. Burrough's Spots of the Godly and Wicked. Bernard's Seven
Golden Candlesticks. Boteler's Art of War. Bagshaw's Rights of the Crown.
Bunworth of the French Disease. Bradley's Grounds of Christian Religion.
Bramhall's Loyal Prophet. Buscon's Life. Basire of Sacrilege. Baxter's Cain and
Abel. Betto de Ortu and Natura Sanguinis. Beverly's Great Soul of Man. Countess
of Arundel's Secrets. Childrens Dictionary, Latin and English. Continuation of
Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia. Cotton on the Covenant. Bishop Downam's Abstract
on Command. Drake Revived. Dent on the Revelations. -- of Repentance. Drake's
Bar to Sacrament. Daphnis and Chloe, a Romance. Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural
and Historical. Enchiridion of Fortification. Epicurus's Morals. Elborow on the
Common Prayer. Fern on the Romans. Ferrarius's Epistles. Fort Royal of the
Scriptures. Franclin's Orthologia. Grace leading to Glory. Gouge's Word to
Sinners and to Saints. -- Catechism. Gundebert, a Poem. Government of the
Tongue. How Is Delighting in God. -- Blessedness of the Righteous. -- Marks of
Salvation. Hopton's Concordance of Years. Holyday's Satyr on Juvenal. Hooper on
the Commandments. Heywood's Dialogues and Dreams. Hill's Cateches or Principles
of Religion. History of the Great Mogul. Hippocrates Aphorisms. Herbert's
Childbearing Women. Hume's Steadfast Christian: Being a Persuasive to Constancy
in the True Protestant Religion, against all Objections, Temptations,
Oppositions and Solicitations to the contrary. Harrington's Art of Law-giving.
Heath's King Charles the Second's Glory. -- Loyal English Martyrs. History of
Daphnis and Chloe, Thorny. Juan de Luan, Spanish and English Grammar. Justini
Historia. Jewel's Golden Cabinet of Treasure. Idol of the Clowns: Or Wat the
Tyler. Janua Linguarum Reserata. Knolly's Rudiment of the Hebrew Grammar. --
Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven. Kerhuel Eloque Rhetoric. Lower de Cord.
Latin Apprentice made Freeman. Loves Dominion. Lucius Florus in English.
Lespines Three Treatises of Comfort to the Sick against the Fears, of Death, of
the Resurrection. Ladies Calling. Merry Drollery Complete: Or, a Collection of
Jovial Poems, Merry Songs and Witty Drolleries. Monarchy Asserted, in a
Conference at White Hall, with Oliver late Lord Protector, and a Commit of
Parliament. Moral Philosophy. Morison's Everlasting Gospel. Matthews's Missia
Magnified. Nomenclatura Grammar, Lat. and Engl. Natural and Artificial
Conclusions. Nasmith's Divine Poem. Ovidii Epistolae, Lat. -- Art of Love,
English. -- De Tristibus, English. Ramsey of Poison. Ransom of Time, being
Captive. Roxana Tragaedia. Solomon's Proverbs, Latin and English. Scudder's
Christians daily Walk in Holy Security and Peace. Smith's David's Blessed Man.
-- David's Repentance. School of Virtue. Shakespeer's Rape of Lucrece.
Shepheard's Office of Constable. Sharp's Art of Midwisery. Shelton's
Tachygraphy, Latin. Syntaxis Erasmiana. Touchstone of Truth. Tallei Rhetoric.
Times Silver Watch-Bell. Timme's Description of Jerusalem. Templum Musicum: Or
the Musical Synopsis. Ward of Wit, Wisdorn and Folly, describing the Nature,
Use and Abuse of the Tongue and Speech.
Twelves Large and Small.
ARistotle's Art of Rhetoric. Bishop Andrews's Pattern of Catechistica.
Doctrine. Abbot's Young Man's Warning-piece. Ars Aulica or Courtiers Art. Amesius
de Conscientia. -- Coronis. -- Medulla Theologia. -- Bellarmine's Enervatus.
Abernethie's Dignity and Duty of a Christian. Bolton's Prayers, -- Helps to
Humiliation. Bradshaw and Hildersham on the Sacrament. Barclaei Poemata. --
Euphorm -- Argems. Brinsley's Rule of Life. St. Bernard's Meditations. Lord
Bacon of Life and Death. Corbet's Self Employment. Corbyn's Call to the
Unconverted. Bishop Cooper's Two Treatises. -- Dialogues between the Lord and
the Soul. Carpenter's Wicked Politician. Cotton's None but Christ. Capel of
Temptations. Coral and Steel their Virtue. Cato Major of Old Age. Clark's
Looking-glass for Persecutors. -- Duty of every one that intends to be Saved.
-- Comfort. -- Life of Mrs. Clark. -- Phrases. -- Formulae Oratoriae. Combachii
Metaphysicorum. Dent's Pathway to Heaven. Doctrine of the Bible. English and
French Cook, Complete. -- Dictionary. Father's Blessing. -- Legacy.
Fettiplace's Christian Monitor. -- His holy Exercises of Heavenly Graces. --
Sinners Tears. Fuller's good Thoughts in bad Times. Granada of Prayer and
Meditation. Golden Mean. Garden of Spiritual Meditations, or Flowers Garbutt on
the Resurrection. Help to Prayer. Hinshaw's Meditations. Holy Sinner. History
of the Bible. Heavenly Academy. Herl's Wisdom's Tripos. Help to Prayer. T. V.
History of Thieves. Instructions for Noblemen. Jefferies New Years Gift
Ignoramus. Countess of Kent's Manual. King's Works in French. Leach's Grammar
Question. -- Grain of Salt. Lucius Servius's Serious Pastime. Lucius Florii
Stadii. Lessius's Right preserving Life and Health to Old Age. Martial's
Epigrams, Busbey. Mothers Blessing. -- Legacy. Midnight's Trance. Moral
Practice of the Jesuits. Meditations Divine and Moral. Tuck. Norden's Poorman's
Rest. Pensive Man's Practice. Oxford Jests. Owen's Epigrams. Practice of the
Faithful. Parr's Abba Father. Practice of Piety. Pink's Trial of a Christian
Growth. Preston on the Sacrament. -- Doctrine of Saints Infirmity. Pacii Logica
Rudimenta. Pelham's Meditations. Petter's Legacy to his Daughter. The Trial of
Sheriff Cornish, in Folio.
18936. Broad Sheets.
RIch's Pen's Dexterity in Short hand. Divine Examples of God's Severe
Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, in their Unlawful Sports: Collected out of
several Divine Subjects, viz. H.B. Mr. Beard, and the Practice of Piety. A fit
Monument for our present Times.

A Brief Remembrancer,: Or, The right Improvement of C^^ist's Birthday.

A Second Sheet of Old Mr. Dodd's Sayings: Or, Another Posie gathered out of
Mr. Dodd's Garden.

Hunting for Money, the First Part. -- Match For Money. The Second Part.

Vennings Allarm to Unconverted Sinners.

Muse's Fireworks upon the Fifth of November: Or, The Protestant Remembrance

Perkins's Whole Duty of Man.

Mr. Richard Baxter's Serious Sayings concerning the great duty of Charity.

Bishop Hall's Sayings concerning Travelers to prevent Popish and Debauched
Principles.

Bacchanalia Coelesta: A Poem in praise of Punch.

21459. Other Broad Sheets, and Sheets on several Subjects.

12796 -- As also in Half sheets.

FINIS.

