An Humble Remonstrance concerning some Additional Confirmations of the Kingdom
of Christ to be in its Succession 1697. rising from further Light in Prophecy.
THE Lord having made me a Watchman to this Nation, concerning the Approach of
his Kingdom, and the Great Change of the whole State of the Christian Churches,
and so of the World upon it, in 1697. I cannot but sound the Trumpet; For These
Things are not by way of Impression, or any private Inspiration, but by such
Great and Infallible Arguments, out of his Word, that all Judicious Christians
may, and ought to discern Truth by Them, and know, whether these Things are so,
or not? but especially the Ministers of his Word. And they are such as are most
Amazing, especially in these Two last Instances, of which I cannot but give
this Notice, like the sounding of the Trumpet louder and louder.

When I had settled that most Eminent part of the Line of Time, Given by God in
so Various Characters; viz. Time, Times, Half a Time, and Three Days and a Half
(although for very great Reasons Diverse from the other, yet of the very same
Import and Duration, as I have shown). These Times and Days are Four Times
Named; Forty Two Months Twice Named; and 1260 Days Twice Named expressly; and
Twice inclusively Named; viz. in the 1290. and 1335 Days, Dan. 12. And as in
Time, Times, Half a Time, Given with a Solemn Oath, Dan. 12. And at the
Entrance of Half Time, Embarrass'd with an Oath, that such Time should be no
more, Rev. 10. as I had also abundantly made out: when I had also to my Full
Assurance Established the Necessity from all manner of Concurrent Arguments;
That the Beginning of this Part of Time, made every way so illustrious by God,
must needs begin A. D. 437. and so End 1697. and that I had continually urged;
that the 42 Months of the Gentiles, and of the Beast, are prepared by the most
Wise Spirit of Prophecy, for the Adjusting the Time, between the Beasts not
being in his Succession so early as the 1260 Days began; and the Gentiles, as
his People, preparing for him at their Beginning 38 Years before. I had also
considered, That the Adjustment must needs be made by Equalling the Time of the
Sun and of the Moon one to another. I had observed also, That the 38 Years made
a Representation of Two Nineteens, or the Golden Number Twice Accounted.

When All was thus settled, What more Ravishing Assurance could be given, than
that Just now by looking more intimately into the Matter, I find, that That so
Wise and Mathematick Adequation of Time of the Sun and Moon, Approved by all
the World, is made use of by the Spirit of God in this Time: For as the
Lunations every Nineteen Years, are found to Return to the same Point of
Congress with the Sun, as at their first setting out together, it must needs
be, That what Time the Sun has spent more, and the Moon less in those Nineteen
Years, must needs also be the Just Proportion of Time between the Sun and Moon,
throughout all Time; and that being about Eleven Days, every Year, is Thirty
Eight Days in Three Years and a Half, and Thirty Eight Years in Three Years and
Half of Years. By a Natural Intercalation, the Moon adds about 217 Days, above
its own Years, every 19 Years, to meet the Sun in the same Point.
And this is the very Time found by All Accounts of Scripture- Prophecy and
History, between the 1260. beginning 437. and the Beast coming into his Months
476. And as in filling up the Moon's Time to Time of the Sun, there must be a
proportionable Intercalation; so here the Beast's Moons, wherein they are short
of the 1260 Days, are intercalated for by the Moons of the Gentiles: Who can
think this Frame of Things by Chance, as in the Annexed Discourse is described?

And as I was thus considering this Noblest and most Principal Part of the Line
of Time, in the Eye of Prophecy; it pleased God, by a very Judicious and
Honorable Hand, to send me this Observation upon the whole Prophetical Part of
my Line of Time; as I have stated it to begin from Solomon's Death, where the
Types of the Kingdom of Christ fell so low, and to reach to the Vision of
Ezekiel's Temple, c. 40. when the Visional Type of Christ's Kingdom is at the
Height, but Debarred from Coming into Effect, till the Fullness of All Time.
And it is Given in 390 Days of Ezekiel's Lying on his Side, c. 4. After which I
observed Forty Days of Bearing Judah's Sin, and 2300 Eves, Morns of Delay, e're
the Sanctuary Cleans'd, according to Ezekiel's Vision. All which put together,
make 2730 Years.

Now as that same Excellent Person has observed, God had settled a Standard of
Punishment, Levit. 26. That a Multiplication by Sevens should be the
Proportion; The first Time therefore he fixes this State of Punishment,
expressed in so Solemn Bearing Iniquity; it is in 390 Days of Years. Let this
then be multiplied by Seven, and it makes the Just Sum of 2730. which is made
up of 390. 40. 2300 Days of Years; and then according to the Sabbatick Seven,
and according to what God assures after the Sevens of Punishment, There shall
be a Restoration of All Israel, Lev. 26. v. 44.

Now I would Appeal to the Reason of all Mankind, seeing These Things are so
Mathematically Demonstrative; out of Words so undeniably written in Scripture;
whether it be not a Justification of my whole Prophetical Line of Time in its
Whole; and in its Parts I have also justified it Part by Part, and especially
in the principal part, the Times and Half Time. And it is the more Astonishing
to me, This Assurance of the whole Prophetical Line should be sent to me by
Another so Worthy Hand; else in all probability I had never Thought of it, and
upon his Survey of my whole Line of Time.

Now seeing, however it has pleased God to lay me in the most Abasive Outward
Circumstances, that I might not be exalted above measure by All this
Manifestation, yet He has Honored me, so unworthy, with so public a
Character, as to be the Herald of his Kingdom, at 1697. to these Nations, by so
many Infallible Proofs of the Time, that I can bid Defiance to the Greatest
Wit, Reason or Learning, that Allows Scripture to be the Word of God, to
Answer, or make them nothing worth; being such as even a Considering
Anti-Scripturist must be convinced by observing so much already fullfill'd,
according to such Rules.

I most humbly therefore beseech, That in regard of the Prodigious Aversations
of the Mind of even Those whose proper Sphere it is to consider of these
Labors, and to take care for the Honor of Those, who so Labor in this Word
and Doctrine, as I have done. If it shall yet please the Wise and Holy Disposer
of All Things, to humble my Outward Condition, to the Lowest Dungeon; both in
regard to the Punishment due to my Iniquities; in regard of the yet Low State
of the Kingdom of Christ, in Tribulation, and Patience; during which, the
Ministers of it must be Low also, and in Sackcloth: And, Lastly, As Things will
appear within Little Time, that it may Upbraid to Christians (even tho it was
their Office to do otherwise) their Low Regard to the Kingdom of Christ; In All
these Regards, Let No One be moved by my Afflictions, whatever they may be; but
consider the Vast Accounts of Scripture Truth, and Reason, and be Assured, the
Kingdom of God must needs be as close upon us, as I have Declared. For the Word
of God cannot be Broken: And it must have a Sense; and that Sense we may, by a
Deep Pondering, and a Diligent Compare, be as sure of in Prophetical, as other
Parts of it. I cannot therefore but earnestly beseech Consideration, whether
the Things I have offered, can be thought either Frivolous, or Forced; And
whether on such a Settlement as I have long a go made, what I now offer upon
it, be not even most Surprising and Wonderful in its Confirmation, neither
depending on Fantasy or Fiction, but most Substantial Scripture, History,
Nature, Reason.

Oh that then neither the Gallio-Spirit, of Caring for None of These Things,
nor the Unbelieving Spirit might prevail; That tho God should open the very
Windows of Heaven, They cannot be: For be Assured, That at the Seventh, or Last
Half Time Ending, from a Cloud as big as a Man's Hand, The Heavens shall be
overspread, and a mighty Rain of the Gospel Fall, according to that Type, 1
Kings 18.34.


