A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A LETTER SENT FROM VIENNA August the 23d 1683.
Declaring the rasing the SEIGE and the Total Overthrow of all the Turkish
Army, sent in a Letter from an Eminent English Officer under the Duke of
Lorraine, to his Father at White Hall.
Honored Sir,
AS I am in duty bound to give you Account of my being, as you are the Person
from whom I derive it, so I acknowledge my self obliged (next after God, from
whose infinite Mercies I do from the bottom of my Heart confess to receive my
preservation and well-being) to let you, and my Friends in England understand,
as well as of my self, the preservation of a great part of Christendom, from
the fury, rage and threatening Ruin, of that implacable and universal Enemy the
Turk, who under the Command of the Grand Vizier, with a very powerful Army,
consisting of near an Hundred and Fifty Thousand men, had a very considerable
time Beseiged the Imperial City of Vienna; for the relief of which the Emperor
had confederated all the Friends and Allies he could in all the adjacent
Territories, among which indeed I must say the chiefest was the King of Poland,
whose Conduct and Valor had been sufficiently proved against the Turks, by the
several considerable overthrows he has given them, in Defense of that small
Kingdom of Poland, and together with him the Dukes of Bavaria, Saxany, and
others of the Princes; of the Empire had joined as they were able to bring up
their Forces so that in effect, with the Duke of Lorraine, who Commanded as
General all the Imperial standing Forces, they had compacted a pretty
considerable Body with which it was advised they might, with the blessing of
God, relieve this miserably distressed City. And thus we marched on to try what
could be done, but the King of Poland desired First, that he might be a little
acquainted with the posture of the Enemy, and to that purpose drew out a
considerable party of Horse, and marched on till he came within view of their
Leaguer, the Army, especially of Horse, following after with all diligence and
Expedition, so that although the Turk, had by his Scout and Spies Intelligence,
that there was a powerful Army approaching him, yet he drew leisurely out of
his Trenches, not dreading, any great Opposition, especially because he was
informed of a strong body of the Bours of the Country, who had gathered to an
Head not far from him, Now indeed these poor people having been so long
oppressed, and driven from their Habitations by the Turks, ever since they came
before Vienna, hearing of the Conjunction of so many good Christian Princes,
drawing toward Vienna to relieve it, thought it was now time, not to hide
themselves any longer in Holes, and therefore addressing themselves to some old
Commanders, who were in an equal condition with themselves, they marched on a
little too hastily toward the Enemy, who supposing these the greatest Force
coming upon him, sent presently a party to dissolve them, which fell with such
Violence upon these poor Men, but half armed, and at the First worsted them,
and as is supposed destroyed above 1500 on the place; but just at the same
Instant the King of Poland assisted by the Emperor himself and the others,
with a full Body of resolute Horse, fell violently upon the Turks Army, who by
this time had clearly left their Trenches, and fell upon them with that
Conduct, valor and resolution, especially upon the Janisaries, that they were
soon disordered, and in a short time became a Prey to the Swo^d, by which means
the Turks main Strength and relyance was quite disa^^ed, and all the rest, who
were very numerous, being now bravely assaulted on all hands, (for by this time
the Bours, who had before suffered, some little discomfeiture, by the conduct
and advice of their Leaders had rallyed and made considerable Opposition)
submitted to a General defeat. Tho I mention only the conduct of that Heroic
King of Poland, whose Honor can never be enough applauded, yet his Imperial
Majesty was in person an Actor in this memorable Battle, as also several
Princes of the Empire, whose Catalogue would swell my Letter to an unpleasing
length. It is not computed to be a less Number of the Turks slain than 90 or
100000, amongst which is the Grand Vizier himself, and so many of the
Janisaries, that it is believed there will hardly escape Twenty of them to carry
the News to Constantinople, to comfort the Grand Signiour, the pursuit is so
violently Prosecuted, and all the passages so warily Guarded. I cannot descend
at present to any further particulars, taking advantage of this ^^ssenger,
whose have is such that I cannot more nicely inform my sel^ being in a great
Hurry, as most are at present here, but within few days you shall have a
further Satisfaction from,

Honored Sir, Your most obedient Son W. B.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have been so intent in relating the Proceedings of the Armies, that I had
quite omitted the condition in which we found Vienna, who the sufficiently
courageous, yet was in very great distress. The last Storm the ^nemy made upon
them was forced on with such Violence, that the account the people of the City
gave of it, seems, in their own words very proper as they render it, that they
came upon them like Mountains of Men, as they appeared, more then Armies, for
the Turk forced his men on so fast, that they run over one another and those
that were slain or beaten down, were but Footsteps and degrees of advantage, to
mount the successive Troop to that height, that they could in a manner overlook
the City-Walls, and in that manner came pouring on with such a desperation, it
was very hard to withstand them. Yet by the Blessing of God, and the weak
endeavors of the beseiged, they were repelled with a very great loss to the
Turks, and it is thought near 5000 of the Beseiged. Which caused the Governor
to send to the General, that he could not possibly withstand such another
Assault, which Intelligence hastened our Army to the relief of it, as you have
in this L^^ter.

LONDON, Printed by Geogre Croom at the Blew Ball in Tham^s street over against
Baynards Castle. 1683.


