Strange and wonderful News, from THE LORDS IN THE TOWER, OR A DIALOGUE Between
them, and my Lord Staffords Ghost.
Ghost. HEll! Are you playing still at the old Game? can neither Popish Plot,
Presbiterian Plot, nor all your Interest amongst Phanaticks, Quakers, and the
rest of the Enthusiastical Tribe, cut a Sham for your enlargement by Purgatory;
What would you give to be so active as I am, from my purgation Chambers to my
ancient Tower-Quarters, hence to my Ghostlike Father at Rome in the twinkling
of a star, here is Liberty without a Paradox.


Lord B. Let Us defer our Game till another time my Lord, pox on it we are turned
back to eighteen, but thank my Stars, we have the Tip and a Go for it; upon my
Honor here is Stafford the Proto-Martyr Lord.


Lord. P. Where? Where? Let me be gone by the Mass I cannot abide to see him
without his Head, no, though he glorioufly conferred Honor by it; It puts me
in mind of creating Squires too, Hell take such squires, I wish there never had
been, nor ever will be any more of them, such as holds your Honors in Capite
with the subject, as we do our Lands of the King, Alas! sick, I shall spue a
Plot out presently.


Lord A. Have Courage my Lord, do not let his Head stick in your Stomach, and
perhaps it were better there too, than upon his shoulders; it would not then be
so apt to tell Tales; bubble Divines, or confess the Plot to the House of
Commons, and after deny it briskly; but by St. Colly it was well he did the
latter, otherwise we might have all shit and spu'd Plots, and had never an one
to hold our Heads, like our infallible Master. at Rome, as is lively
represently by the Rusty, Musty, Tusty Monky Packet Scribler, in Copper Plates
Alamode Protestant, as the Godly Rout calls them.


Ghost. Hold a while my Lord, you named a hard word just now, which will cramp
all our Mediterranian Inhabitants, I will vanish to Rome, Presto, begone for a
Dispensation to have leave to enquire if there be any sort of those Cattle
amongst them, Hey Jingo I am here again! I will ^ow te^^ you as much Truth, as
a Children that is unborn, I will were those advantage I might take ^f this,
and the last Dispensation I had upon the Hill; I never heard of any there, but
Catholic Lords, Jesuits, Priests; and Secretaries, and may all have their
Habeas Animas of his Holiness when he pleases, only paying their Fees, we have
also Presbiter^ans, Quakers, and Dippers, but they pile them up as they do
Faggots, and dare not give them overmuch Rope, lest they Covenant to hang
themselves; Rebel, or some such pretty thing, and after sw^are, verily they
believe it to be all a Popish Plot, sometimes ^e make fine Diversion with them,
make them turn the Pig, and run round like a Cat with a Feather tied to her
Tail; thus they make them as serviceable there, as you do here; before I was
removed by an Habeas Carkas, I heard of naught but Protestant Petitioner: Pro.
Abhorror; there is also Pro. Mahumedans: Pro. Athiests, not forgetting the Pro.
Alias M. Horse, which two Epithets are Learnedly averred to be Termini
Convertibiles: Vide alsaps mischiefs of imposition; is it: of the first, the Pro.
Petitioners protests against Paraliament, who by the late Petitions dissolved
them; the Second protests against the former and are consequently for
Parliaments, not when they themselves, but when his Majesty shall think fit to
revoke them; Alias they are called Papists in Masquerade by the former, and are
out ball'd by them with their Iron Lungs and Throats of Brass; they look like a
Wench in Term time, with their Foreheads bound with black and white, the third
protests against the Doctrine of Christ, whose Vicegerent the first against
greater Light then ever Jews were Masters of a Traitorously, Maliciously, and
Fanatickly Murdered; the fourth protests against every thing, but pleasure;
these are the brood of the First, Imprimis, they learned to speak evil of
Dignities, Postea, to averr they are Politic Cheats; item, observing that the
long Cloaks and little Bands were divided amongst themselves, and were together
by the Ears, they began to form an Argument: of so great a variety of Religions
it is impossible they should be all true, therefore it is best to be of none at
all, because then it follows we cannot be of a false one.


Lord B. My Lord, you are mighty ingenious, your understanding seems to be
purged and refined, I suppose by your discourse you understand as well what is to
come, as what is past; and that not as we understand things successively and by
degrees, as the Learned say, but by one single Act of the Mind; therefore, what
do you think will be come of the Parliament, if they sit at Oxford, whether the
late Petition by our Peers to the contrary, be not an Abhorrence of his
Majesty's Royal Purposes, and Declaration, if so, whether it be more Criminal
to be an Abhorror of the Subjects Petitions, or his Majesty's Commands: Item,
whether Eliz. Freeman's Apparition was the spawn of a Presbyterian or a
Popish-Plot, Traitorously, Maliciously and Falsely, hatched and nursed and
designed for the subverting the Protestant Religion, and the convening the
Parliament at Oxford; if either of them, whether she or the said Apparition,
both, or either of them, may not upon the grant of a general Pardon, for all
Burglaries, Fellonies, and Out-lawries for Fellonies, give in the Depositions
upon Oath, and whether the said Depositions, let them be sense or nonsense,
will not be of as much force, as if the foresaid Eliz. Freeman, and her
Co-witness have or shall take their degrees at Salamanca, and did actually
obtain a Sallary never to be retrenched; Let us hear your resolves my Lord.
Hah! What is he vanished? Let us satisfy our selves, and retire to our
respective Lodgings till to morrow Morning; so good Night:


Exeunt W. E. London, Printed for T. B. 1681.


