A TRUE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM VIENNA, September the 2 d 1683. N. S.
By an Eminent English Officer under the Duke of Lorraine, to his Friend in
London, Declaring the rasing the SEIGE and the Total Overthrow of all the
Turkish Army.
Dear Friend,
I Cannot but think it will be grateful News to all Christendom to hear of the
Overthrow of the Turkish Army, therefore I make bold to send you this Letter to
let you, and my Friends in England understand, as well as of my self, the
preservation of a great part of Christendom, from the fury, rage and threatening
Ruin, of that implacable and universal Enemy the Turk, who under the Command
of the Grand Vizier, with a very powerful Army, consisting of near an Hundred
and Fifty Thousand men, had a very considerable time ^^seiged the Imperial City
of Vienna; for the relief of which the Emperor had confederated all the
Friends and Allies he could in all the adj^^^^^^ Territories, among which
indeed I must say the chiefest was the King of P^land, whose Conduct and Valor
had been sufficiently proved against the Turks, by the several considerable
overthrows he has given them, in Defense of that small Kingdom of Poland, and
together with him the Dukes of Bavaria, Saxony, and others of the Princes; of
the Empire had joined as they were able to bring up their Forces so that in
effect, they amounted 80000, Fighting men, the King of Poland commanded in
Chief, and the Duke of Lorrain with him led the main Body. The Elector of
Bavaria and Prince Waldecke Commanded the right Wing, and the Elector of Saxony
and Duke of Saxe Lawenburg the Left. And thus we marched on to try what could
be done, the King of Poland having desired First, that he might be a little
acquainted with the posture of the Enemy, to that purpose drew out a
considerable party of Horse, and marched on till he came within view of their
Leaguer, the Army, especially of Horse, follow after with all diligence and
Expedition, so that the Turk, having by his Scout and Spies Intelligence, that
there was a powerful Army approaching him, he made have out of his Trenches,
dreading, great Opposition, especially because he was informed of a strong body
of the Bours of the Country, who had gathered to an Head not far from him, Now
indeed these poor people having been so long oppressed, and driven from their
Habitations by the Turks, ever since they came before Vienna, hearing of the
Conjunction of so many good Christian Princes, drawing toward Vienna to
relieve it, thought it was now time, not to hide themselves any longer in
Holes, and therefore addressing themselves to some old Commanders, who were in
an equal condition with themselves, they joined themselves to the Forlorn-Hope
of the Christian Army, and so marched toward the Enemy, ^ho supposing these
the greatest Force coming upon him, sent presently a p^^^y to dissolve them,
which fell with such Violence upon these poor Men, but half armed, and at the
First worsted them, and as is supposed destroyed above 1500 on the place; but
just at the same Instant the King of Poland, and the others, with a full Body
of resolute Horse, fell violently upon the Turks Army, who by this time had
clearly left their Trenches, and fell upon them with that Conduct, valor and
resolution, especially upon the Janisaries, that they were soon disordered, and
in a short time became a Prey to the Sword, by which means the Turks main
Strength and relyance was quite disabled, and all the rest, who were very
numerous, being now bravely assaulted on all hands, (for by this time the
Bours, who had before suffered, some little discomfeiture, by the conduct and
advice of their Leaders had rallyed and made considerable Opposition) submitted
to a General defeat. Tho I mention only the conduct of that Heroic King of
Poland, whose Honor can never be enough applauded, yet famous was the valor
of the Duke of Lorrain, as also several Princes of the Empire, whose Catalogue
would swell my Letter to an unpleasing length. It is not computed to be a less
Number of the Turks slain than 100000, amongst which is the Grand Vizier
himself, and so many of the Janisaries, that it is believed there will hardly
escape an Hundred of them to carry the News to Constantinople, to comfort the
Grand Signiour, the pursuit is violently Prosecuted, and all the passages
warily Guarded. There are 700, of the Turks, Cannons and 60000, Tents taken and
inumerable taken Prisnors. In the Grand Visiers Camp was found 2 Millions of
Dollors, and his Tent computed to be worth 40000 l. The King of Poland had been
gone 7 hours in the pursuit of them, and not returned at the Writing this
Letter. The Christian Army has not lost as is computed above 3 or 4000, Men,
among whom is the Duke of Saxonys Brother and the Town is in an entire liberty.

This News arived by the French Post late on Saturday Night, and on Sunday
Morning two Mails arived from Flanders, in which the Letters Mension the Turks
have received a great Overthrow, and that Bonfires had been made and Public
Thanks offered in that Country, for the Vitory of the Christian Army against
the Turks before Vienna, it being most certain that all Letters agree the City
is Relieved and the Turks have quitted the Seige, being forced with
considerable loss so to do. Not without great loss on the Christians side of
which every Minnuit a more particular Account is expected.

Your most Loving Friend and Servant B. W.

LONDON, Printed for John Cox, at the Blew-Ball in Thames street over against
Baynards-Castle. 1683.


