News from COLCHESTER* In a Letter to a dear Friend (an honest WHIG) At LONDON.
Dear WHIG,
YOU cannot imagine, with what astonishment the Pople of Colchester were
struck, when they read the last Week, in Thompson's Weekly News, called the
Loyal Protestant, and true Domestic Intelligence, published August 9. 1681.
this Whisking Lie, in these very Words: namely, Colchester August 6. Mr.
Hickeringil, of late famous for his abuse of the Church, is now fallen under
the Common Law, which has convicted him of a certain Crime, called by the same
Law Perjury; Sir George Jefferies managing the Complaint at the Suit of the
King.

What Fury, what Madness possessed this Wretch! That for the Solace of a Lie for
one Week only, should thus ruin himself and his Family (for that will
certainly be the fatal Consequence) only in hope (and the only way in the
World) to wound Mr. Hickeringill's Reputation all England over, for a Week (I
say) or two? (for longer he could not expect such a groundless Lie should pass
current Incognito, and undiscovered.)

As for Sir George Jefferys (that the Fellow quotes) as the Manager of the
Complaint at the Suit of the King; His Majesty (I am sure) can give that good
Man no Privilege (under his Umbrage and Authority) to abuse his Subjects at the
Suit of the King, who is so good and just, that he had rather any of his
Subjects prosecuted in his Name (by Form of Law) should rather appear Innocent
upon Trial, than Guilty.

Indeed, Sir George Jefferys did use his Wits to make Mr. Hickeringill be
convict of Barretry (forsooth) when as much Folly as Malice appeared in the
Prosecution; yet the two Bum-Bayliffs, two of the Witnesses against Mr.
Hickeringill, did their part, and swore home, but that the disappointment was,
they swore too home, they had not con'd their Lesson well, they over-did their
Parts, they swore against Records then and there produced in Court, to their
Shame (if they had any.)

But to give Sir George J^ff^rys his due* his Heart is still good* and he did
his good Will (the last Assizes at Chelmsford, held for the County of Essex) in
persuading, exhorting, exciting, and stirring up a Man at Chelmsford to bring
an Information for Perjury against Mr. Hickeringill; which if he would, Sir
George Jefferys promised to manage it, and plead it, and he would not ask the
Man one Penny for a Fee; (how unusually kind some Men are to vend their Malice,
which always falls heavy upon their own Pates!)

Nay, It is well for Mr. Hickeringill, if Witnesses be not procured against
him, to swear Crimes of worse Consequence than Perjury; some such Design is now
in hatching, (since he published his Sermon of Man-catching) God bless us all
from the Brood of them! This Horse-Leach that for Blood does thirst,
Shall have his Belly full, and burst.


And yet Sir George Jefferys cannot but know that, for the King's Counsel to
maintain Suits to vex the King's Subjects, in the King's Name, and under color
of his Authority, is expressly against 1 Edw. 3. 14.-20 Edw. 3. 4. 5.-1 Rich. 2.
4. made purposely against the wicked Conspiracies of great Men, The King's
Councelors, Officers and Servants, expressly mentioned in those Statutes.

But what signifies a Cob-Web-Statute to Men of great Place and Power, whose
Faith and Hope is in a Noli Prosequi?

Good! very good! let them go on: All the Noli prosequi's in the World cannot
protect them against an Action of Slander, or Conspiracy at any private Man's
Suit. Let them beat their Heads together then, and give them Rope enough, they
shall need no worse Enemies, nor worse Counselors, than their own Malice;
'twill ruin them at long-run, let them be never so Cock-sure, and Cock-a-hoop.

For no Judge nor Justice in England can be safe in attesting the Affidavits
made before them, and attested and subscribed by the Man that makes the
Affidavit, (which is Mr. Hickeringill's very Case) if shabby Rascals shall
afterward deny upon Oath, what they formerly swore and attested under their
own hands, in presence of many credible Witnesses.

If such a Judge or Justice (when required legally) do not attest, that such
Affidavit, so subscribed, was made before him, he must be perjured; and if he
does, belike he shall be perjured too, if some Men have the Management, and the
Villain swear Counter afterward; especially if he get another Chapman or two
like himself, to back his Rancounter-Oath: Ne Hercules contra duos. Such
Rascals, that ordinarily swear an hundred Oaths a day for nothing, can surely
upon good encouragement outswear a Parson, and Mr. Hickeringil, who, it is
notoriously known to all that ever conversed with him, that he never swore a
rash Oath in his Life; but, like a Tortoise in his Shell, wraps himself safe in
his own Innocence, and defies the Malice of his Adversaries, that never yet got
any thing by their Stratagems against him, but Shame and Disaster to
themselves, and their Tribe.

And you will shortly hear, that he will take a speedy and severe Course with
these lying Libellers and News-mongers, that write for Bread; and when they
want true News, they invent Lies, a whole Sheet full, and then cry Peccavi the
next week; as this wretched Thompson does this week, for abusing the Lord
Rannelagh the week before: And if they be not punished, every Man's Reputation
lies at their mercy.

But he characterizes Mr. Hickeringill, as famous of late for his Abuse of the
Church. Sure he means some filthy Church, that thinks it an Abuse if a Man be
so charitable as to offer to sweep it; or some swinish Church, that loves to
wallow in its own Mire; or some waspish Church, that is good for nothing but to
buzze, sting, and fly about the Ears of all that come near them, good for
nothing but to eat up the Honey of the laborious Be; or some Dronish Church,
that licks up the Gains, whilst others take the Pains; or some Genteel Church,
that lives idly on the Sweat of other Men's Brows. I would fain know what Church
the Fellow-means, that ever Mr. Hickeringill did abuse, except to endeavor to
amend them be accounted an Abuse to them, and an Affront.

There was more subtle Head-Peices, more great Heads, more Logger-Heads (I Will
warrant) at the contriving and vending this lying Libel against Mr.
Hickeringill, than one silly Tory Thompson: Is not the Hand of -- with thee in
this? For Oh! the Consequence, the Consequence carries Meat in the very Mouth
of it? Who will be the Author of more Naked Truth's? or more Sermons against
Popish Sham-Plots, and Man-catching? (Ay, Ay, there is the Quarrel!) when a
conviction of Perjury is the Consequence; Perjury, Perjury shall be Trumpeted
in all the next Tory-Intelligences, and Weekly News -- Perjury, Perjury; and
Rogue, Rogue, Rogue -- (as that silly Heraclitus Ridens) that cannot have a
word to say for himself, why Sentence should not be given against him for his
lying Libel, because he rails without Wit, as well as without Manners, it is
downright Billingsgate, not a Grain of Salt to keep it from stinking, and
nauseating every ingenuous Reader: Oh! but of all the Tory's, Thompson has hit
it.

Nay, Nay; for a subtle Intrigue, a Sham-Plot, Man-catching, tearing and
swearing, nay swearing so home, that they will out swear and prove perjured all
that cannot swear so thorough-stich as themselves, for Lying and Slandering,
Whoring, Scoring and Roaring, commend me to Tory. What they cannot do with
their Hands, they can do with their Tongues, and Head-peices, (Oh! they have
pestilent Brains in Skull, none of their Brethren beyond Sea can out-match
them.) If they cannot fight, they can swagger, if they cannot stand to it, they
can roar and drink 'till they cannot stand; and cry -- Huzzah; If they cannot
Pray, they can Curse, and cry, God-damme; a Crew that will disgrace the
Gallows, the Curse of God follows all their Enterprises; They are enough to
bring Discredit and a Curse upon any Cause in the World, and upon all that
accompany or side with them: 'twas well for Lot that he got out of Sodom as he
did.

But not all the Toryes in England, English nor Welsh combined, tho they take
in the wild Irish-Tory to help; not all the Sham-Plotters, Jesuits, nor
Man-catchers; nor all the Noli's in the World, with all their Tricks (and they
have a great many) nor with all their Potency (and it is great) shall be able
to deliver this Lying Libelling Thompson out of the Hands and Clutches of the
Naked Truth; the Fellow does not know Mr. Hickeringill, but he will make him know
him better, if he do not abscond and fly for it; Is any Man so great as to be
above the Law and Truth? God forbid. Neminem oportet esse potentiorem Legibus
nec sapientiorem. If Mr. Hickeringill were given to any manner of Debauchery,
or irregular Conversation; if he were given to Swearing, Tearing, Drinking and
Whoring, as many Tantivy-Men in England, he might expect to 'scape as well (and
have Promotion too) as some of them that to my knowledge (besides other pregnant
ill Qualities) have had two Bastards apeice.

Oh! But this Truth, this Naked Truth is insufferable; These sharp Reflections
upon Sham-Plotters, Sham-Evidence and Man-Catchers, are enough to spoil a
well-laid Plot; all Heads and Hands to work: It is Decreed, Blacken him we must
with Lies, since his Innocent Conversation is irreproveable; it is hard to catch
a Fox, yet there is scarce a Tory in England, but catches one every Night before
he sleeps; We live in a brave Jolly Age: Oh! there is no Ho when Power makes
Court'sey to Re^enge, and joins Giblets together.

They have a Law to this Day in Spain, That his Testimony is for ever invalid,
who has once been convicted of Drunkenness.

But I entertain you too long with these Pamphleteers, the Cumber and Pest of
every Coffee-House, into which a Man is no sooner entered, but he may well (by
the crowd of idle Pamphlets presented upon the Tables to view) fancy himself in
a Market in France, where the most numerous Ware exposed to Sale is new and
fresh Trash, Froggs, and Mushrooms.

I am Your Servant, A. B.
Colchester, Aug. 17. 1681.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head Alley, in Paternoster Row,
1681.


