A Few words in true love written to the old long sitting PARLIAMENT, who Are
yet left alive, and do sit there now in the Parliament House at WESTMINSTER.
WHo would have thought such a thing that ever the long sitting Parliament of
England, who appeared once bold with open face, for God and his poor suffering
people, to remove oppression and injustice, should have had so much of Gods
countenance toward them, as to have full freedom to sit again to do the work
for God and his people that was so long neglected, that the Lord was wearied
with their long sitting to so little purpose, and so they were thrust out as a
stink in his nostrils, and a burden to the nation. Oh friends you may well
remember what a cry was heard at Westminster about the time of your first
sitting, for Justice, Justice, and how far the sense of this reached your
hearts, and how far in the sense of it you were vigorously carried on to
prosecute it by the same arm of power, that reached your hearts and gave you a
sense of it, to make you willing to set your shoulder to the work of God and
his people, to which end you were called thither, and therein the presence of
God was with you, as you may remember after a short time, eausing your enemies
to fly before you when none persued them, who were in enmity through oppression
and injustice against the God of justice, and his people that cried to him and
you for it, and herein as in truth of heart you appeared united with joint
consent to throw down and root out oppression and oppressors, surely it cannot
be forgotten by you; how often Gods powerful presence appeared for your
protection and preservation, and was a terror to the adversaries of Justice
and righteousness, and then it was in your hearts to act singly for the Lord
and the good of the Nation being touched with the sense of Gods dreadful
presence and his fear which moving in your hearts put you upon a desire then to
deny self, doubtless in the whole work, and to that end that the integrity of
your hearts might appear to all that feared the Lord, that their hands and
hearts might join with you and be strengthened against the common adversary of
Justice, a self denying Ordinance was put forth by you, that it might be
manifest your hearts were upright and not self seeking, which I did then
believe was real in your hearts, when you were low in the time of your straits,
and I remember it did refresh me to hear it, and it reached the hearts I
suppose of thousands to be knit to you, and join with you as on man, against
the known enemies of righteousness: But alas friends: when your straits were
over and the temptation appeared to draw you from the simplicity of truth and
righteousness, to rule in your own particulars, to deny self, as you had in the
time of your straits set forth, then you left looking to that which preserved
your hearts single to deny self, (Gods presence) and looked to the temptation,
and joined to self and went out from the presence of God, which formerly had
moved in your hearts to deny self, and so there you lost his presence, even
then when I heard that you had given gifts to one another, of that which was
the Kings, which was the peoples right, which in your Ordinance you had denied;
I was sadded at my heart, and I know it was an ill savor over all the Nation
and farther too, and here receiving gifts one of another, which you had no
right to give not receive, your eye came to be blinded that should have seen
the thing that was just to proceed to do it, and your hearts hardened from Gods
fear, and so the sense of oppression and in justice began to be lost, and then
how could you proceed to remove it from off the nation when you your selves
were gone into it? joined in doing the thing that was unjust, in one body that
did unjustly oppress before you, so here was no way for you to do good for the
Nation, in removing of oppression except you had returned to Gods presence,
that which gave you a sense of the oppression in others, adversaries to the
good Old Cause, to give you a sense of your own turning aside, from that which
was just in your own particulars, that so being sensible of your own evil in
giving and taking that which was not your right, but the poor Nations right, to
have had ease from oppression by: I say had you not shut your eye, and closed
your ears, that should have seen and heard the cry of oppression in your own
particulars, the weight of it might have been felt through the presence of God,
to have moved it in your own particulars, and then the same that gave you a
sense of the weight of the thing that is unjust in your selves, to remove it
might have carried you on, with your eye open and your ear open, to see and
here the cry of injustice through the Nation, having the fresh sense of it upon
your own hearts, where the cry was heard in your own particulars to have
removed it from off the Nation where ever, you had heard of it or seen it in
the Nation. Wherefore I charge and warn you in the dread of God, from a deep
sense of the evil you are fallen into, and brought upon the Nation, by your
turning aside and doing the thing that was just and right in the sight of God
(to deny self) there, I say I charge you in Gods dread begin to root out the
thing that is unjust in your own particulars, which you have given and taken,
which was and is the Nations right, and come to be lead by that righteous
Principle which once moved in you to deny self, wherein the presence of God
was, that it may rule in you to give up to the Nation that which you have
received, which is their right, and prove the Lord with this, if in the
simplicity of your hearts you shall be made willing tosu bject your selves to
his will, to deny your selves, wherein self stood up and bore rule in you to
take that to your selves which was not yours, but should have stood in the
counsel of God clear of it: I say if you give up this, prove if you ever find
straitness in Gods presence to be with you, when you are not straightened in your
own bowels, from doing the thing that is right in his sight, first in your own
particulars, and then as the Lord shall discover what is unjust and oppressive
th ough the Nation, then to root out and throw down, that likewise by the same
presence of Gods arm and power that has rooted up and thrown down the unjust
thing in your own particulars; here was the breach and the loss to you of the
presence of God, and as in truth of heart, you begin here you will feel the
healing of the breach, and his presence to bless guide and preserve you as in
the uprightness of your hearts you are willing to go on to ease the Nation of
oppression and injustice, which the cry of it is greater and much louder in the
ears of the Lord, then it was when you were first called to fit, to consider
how to case the people of this Nation from under the burden of it.

And now bear with me a little and I shall plainly tell you how the sense of
your evil doings came to be now at your first fitting fresh upon any heart,
and that it was plainly good in the sight of God, I should thus lay it before
you.

When the Wars began in this Nation, through the unwillingness of the Rulers
of it to be subject to equity and Justice, then I desired (my trade failing) to
be employed in some service for the Commonwealth, toward maintaining my self
and family, so for a season I was employed at the fortifications about the
City, my allowance as an Overseer of that work was three shillings a day, which
I was glad of and well content with; for sometime but being in company with
others, that would delight themselves to go and drink sometimes, with the
Workmen, more then was meet, which was other Overseers, which were corrupt, one
of the Workmen told me as I remember, that when they spent moneys so, the
Overseers he knew did not spend it upon their own charge, but upon the Common
wealths, I said how, said he, do not you know, they can sometimes set down a
man more then they employ, or at lest if that cannot so well be, to set down
for some two pence a day or so, more then I gave, so here by subtilty I was
betrayed, and my mind led out to desire more then my allowance which in that
service wherein I was unfaithful, as I remember it came to about six pound
that I took more then my allowance in the deceit of my heart. Now all the while
I was acting unrighteously, I had no peace with God, for his presence I went
from, which should have preserved me out of the thing that was evil in his
sight, and sometimes I had trouble in the thoughts of the evil I had proceeded
in, in being unfaithful to my trust, but I got over the trouble and went on in
the deceit of my heart to do evil, so that my eye was blinded that I did not
see the evil to be so great, and my heart hardened through custom of finning,
that I went on without much remorse, so that work seasing, being finished,
after obtained to be employed at the Custom house, for the excise aboard on
ships, which I was by oath bound to do service in faithfulness: now when I was
first passed on that service I had some dread of God upon me, and did proceed
in faithfulness, to discharge my trust, and as I stood in his dread I was
preserved from joining with those that were employed with me that were
unfaithful, knowing then that I reaped nothing but sadness of heart in my
former unfaithfullnesse in the other employment, so then as I stood in the
Counsel and dread of God, I stood firm as an Iron Pillar in the power of God,
which did preserve me out of temptations, that I could slight the bottles of
Wine was brought, and what was otherwise offered to ensnare my heart being
single, but by degrees being amongst the wicked, and going out from the
integrity which should have preserved me, turning from the simplicity and
looking to the subtilty of the Serpentine wisdom in others, which would use
arguments to persuade me, to do that for them wherein I should be false to my
trust, saying what was my oath, was it not to be faithful to the Common
Wealth in the du^y of Excise; and was not I one of the Common Wealth, that
deserved to have more allowed me then I had, and if I did take something and
let others have something in taking some monyes of them to let them have it,
what wrong did I to the Commonwealth, seeing we were Members our selves of it,
and had a right to it more then those that look more for less service, to
enrich themselves as the Custom and Excise, Commissioners for setting some of
them a few hours in a day had each of them many hundreds a year, not doing
such service as I did.

And their Masters, meaning you, could give so much to one, and so much to
another, which I appeal to your consciences, if it were not truth, so if I did
not take it and let others have a part, others with you, such as you would
dispose of what you pleased, to your own self ends, and where then was the
benefit of my trusty service to the Commonwealths good. So that through your
subt^l wisdom of the flesh, which is Earthly, my heart turned from its
integrity, and joined with the enemy of it, which did betray mere self joining
with the temptation, to gain something to it, I lost the wisdom which should
have lead me to deny self, wherein the true gain which is durable riches,
(Peace with God lost.) Thus through your evil example, the evil party in the
heart of flesh, going on in deceit, being through your evil doing encouraged,
led me astray from God, for I thought then, according to my vain imagination,
that if you could do such great things against your Trust and be guiltless,
that I might do smaller matters with freedom: and so went on in unfaithfulness
to my Trust, (and an unfruitful work of darkness) for which I tasted Gods sore
displeasure, for in his Eternal Love to me, he followed me close with plagues,
and his righteous judgments, whereby my hard heart might be broken, and I by
h^s judgments ^et up, in my heart might come to learn Righteousness, which th
ough the abundant Grace, Patience and long suffering of God, was effected in
me. But before I knew this, I went on long in impenitency, under plagues and
judgments, that I became even a ter^our to my self, and was full of trouble of
spirit, yet hid my iniquity in my bosom, the cause of my long trouble and
disquietness, and a small thing would then discontent me, and so grew very
peevish and froward, in so much, that when my dear wife sometimes spoke but
mildly to me, I should soon break forth into passion, she not knowing what
ailed me to be soon ang^y, which I then was ashamed to tell her, or any one,
but still covered my iniquity in my bosom, but the Lords Eye saw it, and his
hand and arm found it out, to plague me for it, so that I went a long season
under the heavy weight, and burden of his indignation: which was the Cup
given by his rightcous hand to me to drink, who had long drank of the* Cup of
Abomination, through my unfaithfulness, but since, I see the Lords Eternal
love was woe king toward me through all this, not suffering me to have ease
whilst I went on to dishonor him, by a Conversation full of worldly spots and
defilements, and once it was in my heart to have informed the Commissioners
with what I had done, inacting unfaithfully, and to cast my self at their feet,
to deal with me as they would. Another time it was in my heart, that it was
suitable to my unfaithfulness, to get the Pillory set before the Exchange, and
there stand voluntarily with the Money that I had taken unjusty, that I might
there have stood an example, to be a warning to others never to do the like
wickedness, another time it appeared good to me to have passed to the Custom
House at the 12th* hour, when many people would be there, and then declare to
them there the evil of my doings, and there to return the Money I had badly
received, that they all there might take Example my me. But after a long
season, I was wearied with my wickedness, and through judgments was broken off
from receiving moneys any longer, when any one offered it unto me, for the
space of about a year before I left that Employment. About the same time there
came to London some young Men out of the North, which were called Quakers, one
of my acquaintance asked me if I had heard them. I said I had heared them once,
yea but said he, hear them five or six times, and then judge whether it be not
truth that they declare. I said to him it is like I should, or to that effect.
So I passed to one meeting or two, but I had not received any thing that
reached my h art, but going to another meeting, at the Place called the Bull
and Mouth in Martius London. There were three of the Servants of the Lord,
Ministers of the Everlasting Gospel, George Fox, Francis Howgill, and Edward
Burrowghs; and one of them was speaking of the Cross of Christ, which
whosoever will be Christ's Disciple must deny himself, and take up daily; Said
one of them, that which crosses the Carnal mind is the Cross of Christ,
the Carnal mind said he, is Enmity against God, as any one comes to stand in
the Cross, which crosses the Carnal mind, which is the Power of God, the
partition Wall of Enmity comes to be broken down: and reconsiliation witnessed,
the Enmity being slain by the power of God, which is (said he that spoke) that
which crosses the carnal mind which the Light. Now I hearing these wo^ds
spoken, the Witness of God in my heart answered, that this was true, for
thought I in my self, the light which discovers sin and checks, for it, checks
for that which the Carnal mind would run into, now as the reproof of Wisdom
there is hearkened to, and turned at, which is the Light, which word is a
light to the feet of the soull* as it is taken heed to, to guide out of the
paths of Death, and Condemnation, which the Carnal mind, would go out from
God which is light into, to do the deeds of Darkness. I knew as the light which
is the Cross to the carnal mind, is taken heed to and stood in, the Death
must needs come upon the carnal mind, and the sin cease to be committed, and
so the partition wall of Enmity would be broken down by the Cross to the
carnal mind, so then, an entrance into Gods Kingdom was ministered to me, and
plainly discovered before me, and my eye was opened, to see the working of the
Mystery of Iniquity in me. My heart being in Measure turned to the Lord,
desires were raised up in me, to vvait upon the Lord, in the light, which I
knew then had often convinced me of sin: that I might feel the power, God
breaking down the Partition wall of Enmity in my own particular, which
through sin and transgression I saw, was standing in me. So the first great sin
mine Enlightened Eye fixed upon, was unfaithfulness to my Trust; And my trouble
began afresh, in remembrance of that, and Gods Witness arose in me to testify
aginst me, that the partition Wall of Enmity was not broken down in me in the
sin of unfaithfulness to my Trust, and that I was not clear in his sight, in
that particular: Though the Judgments and Terror of the Lord had rooted out,
and driven me from the Practice of such wickedness, yet somewhat did still
remain to be removed, in that particular, and it was made plain to me,
waiting in the light, that it would be good in the sight of God. To deny my
self, and to give up to the death of the Cross, the ground of the Partition
wall of Enmity, which was Covetousness in me, and to give in freely what I
had unjustly received, to the Commissioners of the Excise in Broadstreet, under
whom I had been employed at the Customehouse: that it might be given out by
them, with the rest of moneys that was there received for the service of the
Commonwealth, whose it was and not mine, so having much trouble upon me,
being loath to part with so much; which truly then, was near if not full
half I had in the Outvvard; having a wife, and five children, to provide for,
and not freedom to keep my Employment any longer, being convinced it was
oppression, the Excise then an no necessity of it; And that I ought not be a
servant to any in oppression. So the trial of my faithfulness to stand in the
Cross to my carnal mind, and deny self in this thing, was great and much
trouble I was under for some time, through my unvvillingness, to give up self,
to be slain on the Cross to my carnal mind, and then a servant of the Lord,
George Fox coming to my house, I told him in part how it was with me, and he
said to me, he that confesses and forsakes his sin shall find mercy, and I
saw his heart was lifted up to the Lord in prayer for me, which was heard, and
my groaning was not hid from him, so the Lord reached down hi^ right arm of
Power, and touched my heart with his grace, and long suffering, and made me
willing to submit to his will, deny my self, and give up to the Commissioners
for Excise the sum of money I received unjustly, which was made plain to me,
waiting in the light, to be near one hundred and fifty pound, but it lay on my
heart to restore more rather then less, and so I was made free by the power of
the Lord, and did give back, at the Excise Office London, one hundred and sixty
pound. So then I felt the Truth of the words George Fox spoke to me, he that
confesses and forsakes his sin shall find mercy. For much ease, peace, and
ref eshment I received into my soul from the Lord, in my obedience to the power
of his Grace, in the cross to my will in that thing: Giving praises to his pure
holy Name for evermore. Now knowing the terrors of the Lord for unfaithfulness
to my Trust, which let that of God in your consciences answer, if you many, or
all of you are not guilty, (if not in giving and taking that which was not
yours) yet in consenting with them in it which did, till you declare to the
Nation whom you wronged therein, your disprovement of their so doing, the sin
will lie at your door and be charged upon you, when God appears with his
terrible outstretched arm of judgment, to give unto each of you according to
the deeds done in the body, whether good or evil, which hastens a pace,
therefore read through your selves, with the Light which I have written, that
you may be converted and healed, that your sins may be blotted out, (confessing
and forsaking of them) and a time to you of refreshment may come from the
presence of the Lord, which would be more sweet to you to feel and enjoy, then
now you can be sensible of; And now I could even freely unbosome my heart to
you further, how the Lords presence has gone along with me since, even to this
present time: That you might see that the same grace of God which has appeared
unto all men, and Checks for sin, is sufficient to save from sin, as I being
brought by the power of it waiting in it, to deny self in that particular have
Experienced. For I being turned to it, it wrought in me an awe and dread of God
least at any time I should offend with my tongue or do any evil action, and so
thereby came under Gods displeasure, so reading some books of those peoples
putting forth, who are called Quakers, I could not find any thing in them
contrary to truth; so speaking with one that had heard those people, he asked
me what I thought of them, for his part he said, he did believe that what they
declared would stand, when all else would fall, and he asked me if I believed
that thee and thou to one particular Person was truth I said yea; said he then,
if I did not come into obedience to what I was convinced of to be Truth, I must
come under condemnation, I said it was truth: So then knowing a stay to my
mind, the Light it became a bridle to my tongue, and preserved me in the word,
Thou, in heart and tongue single to the Lord, and redeemed me out of the Worlds
words into Truths Word, which is and was from the beginning, Thou to one
particular person. Then loving the Light, bringing my deeds to it, to prove
them whether they were wrought in God or not. I saw that I was in respect of
Persons (Which whosoever does respect persons commits sin,) in that foolish
thing putting off the hat, to some, and not to others, according to a vain
custom of the World, which is evil in the sight of God. So then the same
Grace, taking heed to the Light which is the Grace. I knew the cross to my
carnal mind, to give me dominion over that evil, and to redeem me out of
that likewise: and this was the day of small things with me, which none is to
d^spise, for it was precious, then a strong Enemy appeared, which warred in my
members to bring forth fruit unto Death, and had been of long continuance in
me: which whilst I looked to the Light I had power over, but when a Temptation
to it appeared, I looking to the Temptation, that which my carnal mind led me
into, leaving the Light which should have preserved me single in the sight of
God, in the cross to my carnal mind, there I fell into Temptation, and then
the swift Witness of God in me, pursued me with Judgments, and the Lords
anger was kindled against me, so that I became again, a terror to my self; and
seeing what I had done, I said in my heart, in zeal for the Lord, whom I had
greatly displeased: Yea I said, cursed be that hand that lifts it self up
against the Reign of Christ in my soul, for loving the Light though it did
condemn me knowing that in it was my life, it discovered to me wherein my
heart was adulterated from the pure God, and Woe, there was my portion: and the
curse came on both my hands with which I had been in Rebellion, through
disobedience, as against the pure God of my life, but waiting in the Light, I
was born up in Patience to wait in the Light, to receive power to st^nd in the
hour of Temptation, against the Fiery Darts of the Adversary; then further I
saw into several things in my calling, in the outward, that I was not a servant
to the Lord Christ, in who had enlightened me with h^s true light, and that
improvision of Rings and toys to sell to proud and vain people, I was a
servant to the Devil, in the hearts of proud and vain people that came to my
shop to buy such things, which by the power of the same grace of God that
discovered them to be evil, and my service evil there in selling them; I say by
the sam-power I am ransomed and redeemed out of ^h^^ service, and this I have
been made free in, to relate to you, that you may come to own Christ Jesus the
Light of the World, through h^s Grace which has appeared to all men to be
taught to deny ungodliness, whereby each of you might come to witness in truth
redemption out of a vain conversation, having escaped the corruptions that are
in the World, through the knowledge of him, whom to know is life eternal. Ah
friends, when you went out from the truth, which would have made you and the
Nation free from guilt and condemnation, and preserved you free had you stood
in it, so that you might have felt the blessing and presence of God with you,
and so to have been a blessing and good savor to the Nation: whereas now the
ill savor that went from you, spread over the whole Nation, and many poor
Soldiers I heard sold their Debentures for six pence in the pound, some for one
shilling, some for two shillings in the pound; and some, with that money, by
the report doubling of the Debentures purch^sed Kings Lands, for what the wood
was worth upon the ground: and this surely should have been seen too better by
you, when this poor Nation groaned under such a weighty bu^then, and poor
soldiers defrauded of their right, for the eyes of sober people looks upon
these things, I mention it to provoke you to a deep sense of it, that your
hearts might be broken, and you might consider, for then when I heard it I
remember it was a great grief of heart to me, and as you may truly taste them
words true to you, that sin is a reproach to any people, so that now longing
desires might spring up in you to taste the other words true to you, that
righteousness exalts a Nation, by the Righteous working of Gods grace and
power in you, making you willing to deny self, and to stand in the daily Cross
to your carnal minds, that iniquity may be rooted out of you by it, and you
through it be guided into equity, whereby Gods presence you may come to feel in
the blessing of Peace to your own particulars, and may become a refreshment and
blessing to the Nation, which is the desire of him who in true love flowing
toward you, had it in his heart to write these lines unto you.

Humphery Bache.
Tower street London. 13. d. 3d. month. 1659.
London, Printed for M. W. 1659.


