December. 6. 1676.
I do allow the Printing of this Book.

Fra. North.

Advice to Grand Jurors IN Cases of Blood.

Asserting from LAW and REASON THAT At the King's Suit in all Cases (where a
person by Law is to be Indicted for killing of another Person) that the
Indictment ought to be drawn for Murder, and that the Grand Jury ought to find
it Murder, where their Evidence is that the Party intended to be Indicted had
his Hands in Blood, and did kill the other Person.

By ZACHARY BABINGTON Gent.

GENESIS IX. 6. Quicunque effuderit humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius; ad
imaginem quippe Dei creatus est homo. NUMBER. XXXV. 33. Nec aliter expiari potest,
nisi per ejus sanguinem qui alterius sanguinem effuderit. LONDON, Printed for
John Amery at the Peacock against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1677.

THE AUTHOR TO THE Reader.
HE that reads the ensuing Tract, will soon find that much of the beginning of
it is by way of Introduction to the Subject Matter of the Book, and might well
(if not better) have past under the Title of A Preface, and therefore might
have excused this: in which I shall endeavor to show the Grounds and Reasons
that put me upon this Argument; answering all Objections that may he made
against the Author, for being a Sanguinary Person, in treating so positively
upon this Subject; show the necessity of determining the Law herein, in point
of practice by Grand Jurors in Cases of Blood; give some satisfaction to such
as may object against the length of it, whereas the Question is so short;
explain the Grand Jurors Oath; and lastly, endeavor to remove all Difficulties
made by them upon the said Oath.

Two Reasons principally moved me to this Undertaking; The one was, The great
Contests and Differences I have too often observed between the Judges and Grand
Jurors about finding of Bills in Cases of Blood, whereby the whole matter of
Fact, with all its Circumstances, might receive its full disquisition in Court,
and not in a Grand Juries Chamber; the Grand Jurors (as if they were Judges
both of the Law and the Fact, which is sufficiently demonstrated in the ensuing
Discourse they are of neither) finding the Indictment sometimes Manslaughter,
when they should find it Murder, contrary to the sense and direction of the
Learned Judge, and of the King's Council, whereby a Murderer many times
escapes.

The second Reason was, That if the Law were not determined in this point,
betwixt the Judges and Grand Jurors, the Consequence must needs be, That Grand
Jurors (that hear but one side) would in the end take the matter of Fact from
the Second Jury, that are proper Judges of it, and should try it; and the
matter of Law from the Learned Judge, that should give the Judgment of Law upon
it; and this is so plainly proved in the ensuing Discourse, and has been so
often in practice, that I know nothing can be said against it.

Peradventure some may say, Sure he that wrote this Book is Vir Sanguinis, that
desires such severe Justice against every man that kills another man
unlawfully, that he must be Indicted of Murder. Certainly this is a very great
mistake, which a considerate Reader, or one that delights not in spilling of
Blood, cannot be guilty of; here is no more desired or intended, but that every
Person that has had his Hands in Innocent Blood, receive a full and a legal
Trial, according to the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of a Subject, to be
tried at the King's Suit. And I know no Kingdom or Nation in the World, whose
Subjects have a fairer, more impartial, and indifferent Trial in such Cases,
than the Subjects of England have; who, except (as I have showed) they become
their own Accusers, must be accused by a Grand Jury, and convicted or acquitted
by another; and afterward (if guilty) receive Judgment from a Learned and
Merciful Judge, according to the Law of the Land.

I know by the Law of God, amongst the Jews there was a certain Institution,
which we call Lex Talionis, An Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, Life for
Life; and that there were Modifications and Qualifications, to abate the
extremity of it, in several Cases to be considered, as I have showed there, is
by the Laws of England very parallel to them: This is so far from being
Sanguinary, that I conceive it would rather prove a Remedy, than a Mischief,
rather prevent shedding of Blood, than occasion it; rather be Lex Praeveniens,
than Puniens. And certainly, whoever opposes this Opinion, and proposes a
milder and lighter way of Trial against one that has had his Hands in the
Blood of his Fellow Creature, will hardly himself avoid the Imputation of a
Sanguinary Person. This way proposed, will prevent that evil practice (too much
used) of laboring and packing Grand Jurors, in point of favor, when they are
assured before, that all Accusations, by Grand Jurors, for the unlawful killing
of a Reasonable Creature, must be Murder. It would conduce very much to the
dispatch of the Business in Court, and be a great ease to Grand Jurors, that
now spend very much unnecessary time in Questions about the Law, in such Cases,
which were better spent in examining the Fact, and leaving the matter of Law to
the Court.

Concerning the necessity of this point to be determined, he is a Stranger to
the English Laws, and to the English Nation, that over-looks the just and
profitable Consequence thereof; there being nothing in this ensuing Tract
asserted, but what is agreeable (as I conceive) to the Statute, and Common Laws
of this Kingdom, the best allowed Practice, and the Opinions of all the Learned
Judges, (at whose Feet I have had the happiness to sit many years, both before
the late Civil Wars, and since the happy Restoration of our most Gracious
Sovereign) and agreeable to sound Reason, the fullest and best Disquisition
after Innocent Blood.

And who can but allow the necessity of it, as to the English Nation at
present, Duellum, quasi duorum bellum.
when Duels are so frequent in England; Done without Authority, is a war
against Authority.
it being made matter of Triumph for one Hector (as they call him) to kill
another, if it be but for not pledging a Health, or something that looks like
an Affront to his Miss, in placing her at a Ball, That which the Victor thinks
to be his honor, proves his dishonor. His Life, his Lands, and Goods, are by
Law forfeited, and his Blood corrupted.
in a Playhouse, the Tavern, or the like; and this must not only engage the two
differing Parties (although Persons of Quality) to sacrifice their own Lives,
Infoelix pugna, ubi majus periculum incumbit victori quam victo.
and sometimes two Seconds, or more, Persons of as equal quality, to lose their
Lives in the Conflict, or by the Law, (if Death ensue to any of them) in which
Contest they are no more concerned, than to second their Friend, and with their
own lives to justify the Quarrel between the two differing Parties, as if both
of them had a good Cause, and were in the right, when as sometimes the Occasion
is so trivial, not fit for two Boys to dispute.

As to what may be Objected to the length of this Tract, I have only this to
say, That it is no more than I have accused my self for, and did endeavor to
have abstracted and omitted much of it; but when I began to do it, I was
overcome by these Considerations, That it was the first Essay of this kind that
had been written as a Book; That it was not like to meet with all Readers of
like Capacities; some perhaps might gather much out of a little, whereas others
would gather but a little out of much, and the whole not of many hours reading,
which might be worse spent, and therefore was willing to leave it, as I had
first framed it, although I exposed my self to be censured for it.

And because Grand Jurors put so great an Obligation upon the Oath they take as
Grand Jurors, and from that (as they conceive) frame so strong an Objection,
That they are sworn to present all such things and matters as shall be given
them in charge; and that the Judges usually, in their charges, dilate and
declare the Law, as to all the several Species and Degrees of Murder,
Manslaughter, etc. what every unlawful killing of a man is in Law, according to
the several Circumstances of the Fact: and therefore they, as Grand Jurors, are
bound by their Oath to observe the Circumstances of every Fact before them,
what it is in Law as well as in Fact, and so present to the Court both the Law
and the Fact ( Judice inconsulto). This being the greatest Objection that I
have heard from any of them against what is here Asserted; although something
is said, as to this Objection, in the ensuing Discourse, I shall here add
something more, to clear the point, and answer fully that Objection, by setting
down the Oath of a Grand Juror, in terminis, as also the Oath of a Juror of
Life and Death, and explain them both: The Oath of a Grand Juror.
You shall diligently inquire, and true presentment make of all such things and
matters as shall be given you in charge, or shall come to your knowledge,
concerning this present Service. The King's Counsel, your Fellows, and your
own, you shall well and truly keep secret. You shall present nothing for
malice, or evil will you bear to any person; neither shall you leave any thing
unpresented for love, favor, affection, reward, or any hopes thereof; but in
all things that shall concern this present Service, you shall present the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing else but the truth: So help you God.

In the first place you see by the Oath, they are sworn to be diligent in their
Inquiry, not to be sloathful or negligent, being quickened by their Oath: this
diligence is to be exercised in an Inquiry, and this Inquiry is to be made
amongst themselves, in what they know of their own knowledge, or shall be
brought unto them by the Testimony of others. As to the matter of their
Inquiry, which next follows in the Oath, and from which they frame their main
Objection, ( viz.) all such things and matters as shall be given them in
charge: these words are general ( things and matters) and certainly, in the
clearest Understanding, are intended the general Heads of all Offenses by them
Inquirable; As all Murders, and that comprehends all manner of unlawful
killing: All Felonies, and that comprehends all manner of stealing; and so of
other general Heads of Offenses here Inquirable, as Perjuries, Forgeries,
Misdemeanors, etc. although the Learned Judge (where he has time and leisure)
does in his Charge, when he speaks of Murder, declare the several Species and
Differences in that Offense by Law; and so of Felony, the several manners of
Felonies, simple and compound. And so of other Offenses, the words of the Oath
so much insisted upon by them do no way oblige them by reason of such a Charge,
to determine (by their presentment) every nicety in Law, that may arise upon
every Fact before them, otherwise than in that form and matter (according to
the nature of the Case) the Court and the King's Council have framed and
presented it to their Inquiry, where the single Fact of unlawful killing
another, etc. by the hands of such a one, is proved unto them so far, as in
their Judgments it is fit matter of Accusation, to bring the whole matter of
Fact, and all that may depend upon it, to a farther and more full examination
(as is more fully manifested in the ensuing discourse) for should the Judge
only give them general heads of Offenses in charge (as he well may, and many
times does) without distinguishing the several kinds of them, the Grand Jurors
would then want a ground for this Objection; besides I have ever taken it, that
not only that which is orally delivered unto them by the Judge, but that also
that is delivered unto them from the Judge in writing, to be by them enquired
of, is part of their charge, and that is every Indictment that is presented
unto them, or other matter in Writing commended by the Court to their Enquiry.

The Justices in Air, that formerly were Itinerant over the Kingdom (in whose
rooms these Learned Judges succeed) ever giving their charge, and whatever was
enquirable by the Grand Jurors in writing; which if so understood (as I know
not how it will be avoided) they are then by their Oath, to present all such
things as shall be given them in charge, and so every Indictment of Murder
delivered by the Court unto them, is to be found by them, where (as has been
often said) the unlawful killing is so far proved unto them as to make up an
Accusation. Then it follows in the Oath [ The Kings Counsel, their Fellows, and
their own they shall keep secret;] By the Kings Counsel, is to be understood
any directions the Judge shall in Court give unto them in any matter before
them; as also the Evidence of Witnesses, that shall be produced to them on the
Kings behalf in any fact (for no other Witnesses must be heard by them) and
likewise such Counselors learned in the Law as shall manage the matter on the
Kings behalf (for no other Council is to be heard by them against the Bill)
none of this must be revealed or discovered by the Grand Jurors, but faithfully
kept secret according to their Oath from the party concerned, his friends, and
all others, except the Court demand any question from them upon their Evidence;
so likewise must they keep their Fellow Jurors Counsel, and their own, that is,
they are not to discover what any one of themselves have together counseled,
advised, or debated, in the business before them against such a person. They
are the Kings great Council upon this account, and all such great Councils
where the King is so much concerned, take an Oath of Secrecy, for otherwise by
revealing such Counsels, a Traitor, a Murderer, and the greatest Felon may
escape, to the endangering of King and Kingdom; and this offense in ancient
time was holden for Treason or Felony. In George's Case in Anno 27. Stamf. fol.
36. 27. lib. Ass.
lib. Ass. upon his Indictment was acquitted; but the Lo. Coke in his third
Institutes fol. 107. says, Certain it is, that such discovery is accompanied
with Perjury, and a great Misprision to be punished by Fine and Imprisonment.
And it is well provided by the Oath, that each Juror is sworn to keep his own
Counsel also; for he that will not keep his own secrets, will hardly keep
another.

So much for the matter of the Oath, what they are to do; It follows in the
Oath, with what Integrity they ought to do their duty, They are to present no
person for any offense, through any malice they have to the person, nor omit
any merely for any favor they have for the person: This is so plain, it needs
nothing but practice; these two seem very easy, but indeed are very difficult
to flesh and blood, Not to take revenge when one has power to do it, and not
to show favor when there is power and opportunity to express it; not but that
a Grand Juror may present another he is at difference withal, if there be a
real and true cause for it, but it must not be done from malice, and by way of
revenge, in presenting such a person, before another as guilty. Malice and
Favor (two great enemies to Justice) are to be excluded all Courts of Justice,
as too partial; and therefore the Oath well concludes, That they shall present
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth: all these three
expressions of truth have relation to the fact of Murder, or unlawful killing
(for I shall in this place apply it to that Offense) in a legal sense, as to
legal proceedings; The truth, that is, Truth sufficient to make an accusation
against a nocent person; The whole truth, not concealing any part of it
wilfully, but so presenting it, that the whole matter of fact concerning the
unlawful killing another may come in question to another Jury, which cannot be
unless it be found Murder; the Common Law accounting all felonious and
unlawful killing a reasonable Creature Murder, until the difference and
distinction appear upon the Verdict of another Jury, that are to try it, and
the Judgment of the Court in point of Law upon that Verdict. Observe the Note
in the Margent, Murdrum de caetero non adjudicetur coram Justiciar. ubi
infortunium tantummodo adjudicatum est, sed locum habeat Murdrum de interfectis
per feloniam tantum, and non aliter. Statut. de Marlebridge 52 H. 3. c. 26.
what that Statute says; adjudicetur coram Justiciar. It shall be adjudged by
the Judges or Justices (not the Grand Jury) what is Manslaughter per
Infortunium; and it can never be adjudged by the Judges, but when it is tried
before them, which cannot be upon an Indictment of per Infortunium only (as is
more fully observed in the following discourse;) Observe likewise what follows
in that Statute, Sed locum habeat Murdrum de interfectis per feloniam. So that
by this Statute, all felonious killing is Murder still, as it was at the
Common Law before, and that Statute is not to be repealed by Grand Jurors.

And as there must not be in the Grand Jury, Suppressio very, a suppression or
lessening of the truth; so there must not be Expressio falsi, a false
Accusation; both are to be avoided, and therefore it follows in the Oath, And
nothing but the truth, that is, no known falsity, no false Accusation against
any person must be presented, whereby to bring an Innocent person to trial,
where there is nothing of the fact to be proved against him, or any probable
Accusation; if these three Truths, in this Oath mentioned, are not to be
understood in this legal sense, and according to the common practice of legal
proceedings in these cases; I must confess I am to be instructed how any Grand
Juror (that hears but one side) can satisfy his Utramque partem, ni audias, ne
judices. Qui judicat aliquid (part inaudita altera) licet aequum judicaret
haud aequus est. Yet Grand Jurors take themselves to be Judges of the Fact.
Conscience, that in a plain literal and Grammatical sense, he can swear that
every Presentment and Indictment that comes from the Grand Jury* with a Billa
vera, contains in it, the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth;
and this is cleared by the last words of the Oath, [ According to their best
skill and knowledge] for this must be understood, skill and knowledge in the
Law and Fact, as to the practice and nature of the proceedings of the Law in
such cases, for it is rather discretio legis than hominis.

And thus have I, according to my best sense and understanding of the Oath,
explained it, and answered the common Objection to it, by making it appear,
that there is nothing in the Oath that any way obliges them against what I
have either here, or in the ensuing discourse, advised them unto. And that this
may yet be more evident (because I would make it as plain as I can, though with
too many Tautologies and Repetitions) I shall also in terminis set down the
Oath of the Jurors of Life and Death, by which it does appear, that they only
stand charged with the Prisoner (as it is expressed in the Oath) and the Grand
Jury only with the Accusation against him; [ You shall well and truly try, and
true deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at
the Bar (whom you shall have in Charge) and a true Verdict give according to
your Evidence; So help you God.] Which is to be formally and legally drawn up
in the nature of a Declaration at Law at the Kings suit, the King being
Plaintiff and the Prisoner Defendant, which the Prisoner upon his Arraignment
either confesses, and then he is convicted without hearing of any Evidence
against him, or otherwise pleads Not guilty to it, to which the King (by the
Clerk of the Crown) joins Issue by Cul prit, viz. that he is ready to prove him
guilty; and so the Issue being thus joined, Evidence for the King is given
against him upon Oath, to which he makes his defense in person, or by If he
have Council, he must pray it before he plead Not guilty, he cannot after. 3.
Inst. fol. 129.
Council (if any point of Law arise to which he desires Council, and the Court
approve of it, the Judge being as well of Council for the Prisoner as the King)
calls his Witnesses (if he have any) who speak upon their Credits, and not upon
their Oaths, which is much for the advantage of the Prisoner, the Law presuming
(in favor of life) the Affirmative proof to be so clear against the Prisoner,
that nothing in the And that is one reason why regularly he cannot have
Council. The second reason is, the Court ought to see the Indictment, Trial,
and other proceedings good in Law, lest by an erroneous Judgment they attaint
the Prisoner. 3. Inst. 137. fol. 29.
Negative can be proved (upon Oath) against it; and after a full trial of what
can be said and proved on both sides, and a convenient time taken by the Jury
to consider of it, they bring in their Verdict, either convict him or acquit
him; either find him guilty according to the Indictment found by the Grand Jury
by hearing of one side, or specially as they find the fact by hearing of both
sides; for they are not bound strictly to the matter and form of the
Indictment, as the Grand Jury have found it, for they may by Law extenuate it
to the least degree of offense, that can be in that kind, but they cannot
aggravate it, or exceed above what the Grand Jury have found; for if they might
do so, they would become Accusers as well as Tryers, which would be against the
Laws and liberty of the Subject: And therefore the Grand Jurors have the
greater reason, to enlarge in their Declaration or Accusation for the King (as
in all Declarations at Law is usual) as far as the Law will heighten all
offenses in Blood, Secta pacis is by Indictment, which is the King's Suit, and
as it were his Declaration. The King formerly did not pardon homicidium, but
Sectam pacis nostrae quae ad nos pertinet de homicidiis. 3. Inst. fol. 235.
since the other Jury have so much liberty to lessen the damages, and extenuate
the Crime, whatever the Accusation is.

Now upon what I have written in this Preface, and the Book, I am not ignorant
how much I have subjected my self ad captum Lectoris, to the various censures
of the several Readers, especially such as use to serve, or may serve on Grand
Juries, Gentlemen I know of the best quality next to the Peers of the Realm,
and in which Employment for their King and Country it is an honor to serve;
And I hope it will be no dishonor nor indignity to any of them to entertain,
or at least to peruse this Advice, how they may with the greatest prudence and
fidelity pass through an Enquiry after Innocent Bloodshed, when they are called
unto it, and leave nothing therein (of this Crying Sin) to be repented of, that
it was not fully Enquired of by them, that so their exact care and Justice may
keep themselves secure from the guilt of Innocent blood.

I doubt not but it will meet with some Readers so possessed with the contrary
Opinion, by an erroneous practice or misunderstanding of the Laws, and of the
Grand Jurors Oath, that so soon as they read the Title will cast away the Book
and cry, a Paradox; Others happily more unbiassed in their Opinions, and of
more moderation and ingenuity (if they dislike) will publicly confute it, with
stronger arguments and grounds of Law and Reason, and better experience in
point of practice, and so determine the point; and in that I shall have my end.

I am very certain, that I entered not upon this Subject with an offensive mind,
but cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, not with a direct design to kill any,
but rather to fright, weaken, and drive away that Demon of Passion in man to
commit Murder, and to give the best advice to Grand Jurors in Cases of Blood.
A small thing, often times, has the power to redress a great Inconvenience, yea,
to take up a cruel Feud; as Virgil says, of that of Bees when they are
actually engaged in battle, Hi motus animorum atque haec certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.


ADVICE TO Grand JURORS IN Cases of Blood.
IT is the great happiness, freedom, and liberty of the English Nation, that
(in all common and ordinary Trials) of offenses Criminal and Capital, as
Treasons, Murders, Felonies and Misdemeanors, each Freeman (and so are all the
people of England, as to this) shall receive his Trial per pares, by his
equals; which is well provided for by the great Charter of the Liberties of
England, in these words; No Freeman shall be taken, or Imprisoned, or disseised
of his Freehold, Liberties, or Free-customes, nor be Outlawed, banished, or in
any manner destroyed, etc. but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law
of the Land. This Chapter of Magna Charta is partly repeated in a later
Statute, 25 E. 3. 4. 5 E. 3. 9. 42 E. 3. 3. Vit. Abbot St. Alban. 143.
and there Law of the Land is expounded [ Indictment] process by Writ original,
and course of the Law: Another Statute recites it, and instead of the words Law
of the Land, puts in Process of the Law, as equivalent and Synonimous,
signifying the same thing. And again, a Statute of that King says, 37 E. 3. 18.
No man shall answer without Presentment before the Justices, or matter of
Record, or by due Process and Writ original, according to the old Law of the
Land, Cook 3. Inst. Tit. Indict. 136.
as it is well observed by the Lo. Cook (that Oracle of the Law) In pleas of
the Crown, and other Common offenses and Nusances, the King cannot (in an
ordinary way) put any man to answer; but he must be apprised by Indictment, or
other matter of Record. For, by the Law of the Land, a Felon or a Murderer
cannot be convicted Except by Utlawry.
or attainted (though he confess the Felony or Murder) until a grand Jury have
presented the offense; nor can any person (generally and ordinarily be
convicted or attainted, or have Judgment of life, or Member) upon any Criminal
accusation; but there must be two Juries pass upon him, at least 24 persons,
the one a Grand Jury ( ex part Regis) to present the offense fit for a trial;
the other a petit or lesser Jury, inter Regem, and personam accusat. to try the
truth of that Presentment No Peer, or Subject, can be Convicted by Verdict; but
the Offense must be found by twenty four.
. The Grand Jury coming from all parts of the County It is not sufficient, that
they dwell in the County, but they are to be of the Neighborhood; nay, le plus
procheines to the place of the fact; as by Artic. super cap. 9. it is
appointed, They must he most near, most sufficient, and least suspicious. ibid.
, the other Jury, of the very neighborhood de vicinetto, where the offense was
committed; for, vicini vicinorum facta optime praesumuntur scire; and so in
probability of Law, are presumed to know something experimentally (besides what
they have by Testimony) both of the quality of the person, truth, and nature of
the offense, with all its circumstances, and happily the credit of the Accuser
and his Witnesses. It is not sufficient that they dwell in the County, but they
are to be of the Neighborhood, nay, le plus procheins to the place of the
fact, as by Artic. super cap. 9. it is appointed; They must be most near, most
sufficient, and least suspicious, ibid. The first being called a Grand Jury, or
a Great Jury, either in respect of their number, being above twelve, (the
general certainty of all other Juries) and may be as many as the Court please,
but usually exceed not 23, and in good prudence (when there is much, or weighty
business) there ought not to be a lesser number, for if there be less or more,
they may be so divided, that there can be no verdict (as by experience has
been observed) for less than twelve agreeing, cannot make a Legal verdict: Or
they are called Grand in respect of the quality of their Persons, and greatness
of their Estates, ability of their Judgments (being of good Education) or
lastly (which I conceive the best reason) that, propter excellentiam, they are
styled The Kings Jury.
Juratores pro Domino Rege pro Corpore Com. Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the
King for the County of S. and as the Commons in Parliament are to the whole
Kingdom, they have an unlimited power to present all offenses committed in
their County, that are contra Pacem, Coronam, and dignitatem Regis, against the
Peace, the Crown, and dignity of the King, against either Statute or Common
Law, they being the great and grand Spring, or Primum mobile of the Court, that
gives motion to all the other wheels; their Presentment being the key, that
either opens or shuts the proceedings of the Court in every offense. And
therefore it is that the Law of England takes care, that as well the Grand
Jury, as the other Jury, consist of persons that are probi, and legales
homines, good and lawful men; each man must be probus, quasi probatus, an
approved honest man; vel a Graec. (...), and qui progredi possit praegredi
debet, he that will go on in virtue, certainly ought principally to be chosen
to attend the Courts of Justice. It is called, Justitia, quasi juris statio,
vel status, quod per Justitiam, jus stat, i. exercetur. Jus a Jovis nomine. Jus
qu. Jovis os; omne enim Jus and Justitia a Deo est.
It is called Justice because it is the Standard of Right, misera servitus ubi
Jus vagum. Justice being one of the Cardinal virtues ought to be attended by
none but the virtuoso, the most virtuous, pious, and ingenuous persons; probi
signifying, not only faithful, but skilful; none can be presumed to be faithful
in keeping an Oath, v. Statut. 3. Ed. 1. c. 11. Forasmuch as many being
indicted of Murder, and Culpable of the same, by favorable Inquests taken by
the Sheriff, and by the Kings Writ of Odio and Atia be replevied unto the
coming of the Justices in Air. It is provided such Inquests shall be taken by
lawful men chosen out by Oath (of whom two at the least shall be Knights)
which, by no affinity with the prisoner, or otherwise, are to be suspected.
that wants skill to know how to perform his duty; What expectation can there
be of a good Verdict, from a bad or ignorant man? Can he that is not capable to
understand a Cause, ever make a right Judgment of it? Will a Liar present a
truth; a Thief convict his fellow thief; a Man of blood a Murderer? or, Who
can expect Justice from him who neither to his God nor to himself is just, 5.
H. 7. fol. 5. Coke l. 9. f. 56. 9 H. 3. c. 26. 6 Ed. 1. c. 9. Regist. fol. 133.
or true? He that believes Judges are quasi Dei, Gods (as the Scripture calls
them) or that God sits amongst, and is present with Judges in Judgment (as in
the Scripture sense it is truth, and ought to be believed) cannot but apprehend
how unreasonable it is, to bring such a Jury before such a presence, to act in
a concernment of so high a nature, as the life of a Man; whose verdict ought to
be veredictum, a true saying, Juramentum quod mente Juratur.
quoddam Evangelium, as the Gospel they swear upon, dictum veritatis, the
saying of Truth it self (especially as it is the verdict of the Jury of life
and death) who have the advantage of hearing, not only the Accuser and his
Witnesses, but also the party accused, and his Witnesses face to face. They are
called, although a In respect of the Grand Jury.
Petty Jury, yet a Jury of life and death, which the Grand Jury are not;
although they enquire of the same offense, from the great power in their hands
to acquit or condemn the life of a man, according to their evidence. Upon whose
verdict, the Judge according to Law grounds the Judgment of life or death, of
acquittal or condemnation; and as a Jury may give a just verdict (as to
themselves) upon a false Testimony given to them, so may the Judge (as to
himself) give a just Judgment upon a false verdict given by the Jury. For as
the Jurors are excusable, that give their verdict, secundum allegata, and
probata, per sacrum Testimonium, by what is alleged and proved to them by the
Oaths of Witnesses, or confession of the party; even so that Judge is excusable
( in foro Conscientiae) that gives Judgment upon a verdict (though false) for
he does not therein Jus dare, but Jus dicere secundum veredict. Jur. upon the
verdict of the Perit Jury and presentment of a Grand Jury, and this is fully
verified in two remarkable Coke Instit. 3. fol. 232. Glouc. Assizes xiij. Car.
2. Regis (Harrison 's Case) Nimia praecipitatio and merosa cunctatio; two
dangerous extremes.
Cases noted in the Margent; a sufficient caution to all Judges, not to try any
for Murder, where they have not an infallible evidence of the death of the
party slain.

And as every Juror ought to be probus homo, an honest and a skilful man, so
ought every one to be legalis homo, a person so qualified that the Law allows
of; for a man may be an honest, prudent, and just man, and yet in the eye of
the Law not a lawful Jury-man; for in one sense he is not legalis homo, that is
not ligeus and subditus Dom. Regis Angliae, vi. Coke 3. Inst. fo. 32. tit.
Petit Treason.
for the Law provides that the Kings Liege people shall be tried per pares, by
their equals, their fellow Subjects: In a proper sense he is said, in Law, not
to be legalis homo, that is homo utlagatus, an outlawed person, one that is
extra legem positus; who is no better than one that is extraneus, an alien, a
stranger, one not only put out of the protection of the Law, but such a one as
the Law will have nothing to do with (as he so stands) in Courts of Justice, to
serve as a Juror; nay, such a person being a Juror, will make the verdict void,
and it is a good exception in arrest of Judgment, that any of the Jurors were
outlawed. But in a larger sense he is not legalis homo, such a legal and
indifferent person (as the Law requires) who is either in such a degree of
blood to the prisoner, as the Law presumes him partial, or in such an evil
reputation, He is liber and legalis homo, that is a man of fame and credit,
that does enjoy liberam legem. Coke 3. Inst. fol. 22. 11 H. 4. Coke 3. Inst.
fol. 32.
as the Law presumes him unjust; for as it is not fit for a Father to be of a
Jury to try his Son, or the Son the Father; Brothers, Uncles, or near Relations
to try one another, so it is not fit that he that is particeps criminis, or
indeed criminalis homo, a man that stands judicially accused, indicted,
convicted, or attainted for Felony, to try another for Felony (or indeed to be
a grand Juror to present it) the Law provides that each Juror ought to be a
person, rectus in Curia, that stands right in Court, above and against all
natural, rational, and legal exceptions. Qui accusat integrae famae sit and non
criminosus; for certainly, to clear the matter of fact (as a Juror of life and
death) and wisely to discern the Cause in question, upon a doubtful and
perplexed Evidence, many times, requires as great ability in the Jurors of life
and death, as in the Judge to examine the cause, and to give Judgment upon the
Verdict; there being much more of Black-art used to darken and obscure the
truth of the fact (in cases of Blood) amongst the Jurors (especially if either
a great Person, or rich, be concerned therein) than possibly can be, to prevent
or prevaricate a right Judgment, in the Judge; or by any dust of gold, power or
favor, to put out his eyes, or falsify his clear sight, who sits every way
above such a temptation.

The Jurors of England (especially in the Circuits) with their unequal
yoke-fellows the Talesmen, are (for the most part) the very scandal of the Laws
practical of England, who seldom serve, but to serve a turn It Is hard to get an
unbiassed Jury. Some serving, that had more need to be relieved by the 8 d.
than discretion to sift out the truth of the fact.
, to obey a Superior, pleasure a Friend, or to help away (in a hurry) a quick
dispatch of practice: This fault is not in the Laws of England, but the male
execution of them. The Statute of the 27 Eliz. c. 6. provides that each Juror
should have at least four pounds per annum in Lands, Tenements, or Rents; and
this must be their sufficiency, where the Coke 1. Inst. 272.
debt or damages (or both together) amount to forty marks. The general course
of the world being to esteem men according to their Estates, Quantum quisque
sua nummorum servat in arca, tantum habet and fidei. Jurors that have Estates
to lose, will be afraid to commit perjury. The best things abused, always
prove the worst; the sweetest Wine makes the sharpest Vinegar, not that the
fault is in the Wine, but in the use and abuse of it: were better care taken in
return of Jurors In ancient time the Jury, as well in Common Pleas as in Pleas
of the Crown, were twelve Knights. Glanvile lib. 2. c. 14. and Bract. fol. 116.
, I dare say, the trial by twelve would not be more ancient than excellent; the
Excellency of it appears, in the long, constant, and general use of it amongst
the people of England. This way of trial, to have all their Estates, Injuries,
and Lives tried by twelve men, and those Neighbors, of our own degree and
parity, and without exception (upon a lawful challenge) certainly nothing can
be said more for the commendation of it, than the constant practice, and
unanimous approbation of it in England, to this day, since the first beginning
of it: The trial by twelve being very ancient, though Mr. Daniel, and Polydor
Virgil deny it to be ancienter than the Norman Conquest. But Polydor (as says
the excellent Sr. H. Savil) was an Italian, and a stranger in our
Commonwealth, and so deceived! Lamb. in verbo Centur. D. Spelman in Jurat.
vide Consult. de Martic. Walliae v. 3.
It is of English Saxon descent, as by the Laws of King Etheldred, cap. 4.
thus; In all Hundreds let Assemblies be, and twelve Freemen of the most
ancient together shall swear, not to condemn the Innocent, nor absolve the
guilty. It was in use with the French, in the Age of Charlemaine. They that
would see more of this, let them read that learned and ancient Book written by
Judge Fortescue, in commendation of the Laws of England. I shall leave this
Subject, having briefly touched upon the happiness and liberty the Subjects of
England enjoy, to have their trials for their Estates and Lives, per pares, by
Juries of twelve men; what manner of persons Grand Jurors and those Jurors
ought to be, and of the excellency and antiquity of such trials; in the next
place (after I have showed the heynousness of Murder, both by the Laws of God,
and the Laws of this Land, and made some little parallel therein) I shall
briefly show, That it is the duty of all Grand Jurors, in all Cases of blood,
touching the death of any reasonable creature, by violence, or by the hand or
act of any other reasonable Creature, where the Bill of Indictment is brought
unto them for Murder, in case they find, upon the Evidence, any probability
that the person said to be killed in the Indictment, was slain by the person
charged to do it in the Indictment) to put Billa vera to that Indictment,
without foreclosing the Court, by judging amongst themselves the points of Law
that may arise in that case, as whether it be Murder, Manslaughter, at Common
Law, or upon the Statute Se def. per Infortunium, Justifiable, or otherwise;
none of these special matters being to be found by them that are but
Inquisitors and Accusers for the King; not tryers of the offense, hearing but
Witnesses on one side, and whose presentment, or verdict, is not final, but
must be put to Issue betwixt the King and the party to be tried by another
Jury, whether there be truth in it or no, whatever the practice of Grand Jurors
has been (of late) to the contrary; this being the chief aim and design of
this Tract.

I have not met with any amongst Christians, and I believe there is none
amongst Heathens, or rational Creatures, but believe, whatever their practices
are to the contrary, that the shedding of Innocent blood is a great offense, a
crying sin. To take away the life of a Plant, is but the vigor in the juice;
and the life of a Beast, is but the vigor in the blood; but the life of a Man
is a Genesis 9. 4.
spirit, and spiritual substance, the breath of God breathed into him, and not
to be extinguished unjustly by the hand of man. Certainly, vox sanguinis est
vox clamantis, it is one of the four sins Sunt vox clamorum, vox sanguinis and
Sodomorum, vox oppressorum, vierces detenta laborum.
that the Scripture calls, Clamantia Peccata, Crying Sins, that cry to God for
vengeance (even in this world) upon the Manslayer. Immediately after the Flood
God commanded, that blood unjustly shed should be required by the Magistrate of
the Manquiller. It is within the Magna Charta of God himself, and by an Act of
Parliament made in Heaven, never to be repealed, It is enacted, that he that
sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. At the hand of every man's
Brother will I require the life of man, says God himself Solus Deus qui vitam
dat vitae est Dominus; nec potest quisquam eam just auferre nisi Deus, vel
gerens authoritatem Dei, ut Judex. And this was the reason, that amongst
Christians it was not lawful for the Lord to kill his Villain.
. God many times allowed of Restitution, and other satisfactions in other
Felonies, but never in case of blood; for, who can make satisfaction for the
life of a Man?

The first Murderer that we read of was the Devil, who the Scripture says, was
a Murderer from the beginning; in quantum traxit in peccatum, in drawing our
First Parents into sin, and so to death. The next that we read of (for the
Devil would not be long before he had tempted more to his own sin) was Cain,
that killed his Brother Abel, and it seems very desperately shed much of his
blood in many parts of his body, for the word is in the Plural number, vox
Sanguinum, the voice of his Bloods; or, because the Bloods of the future
posterity of Abel (that he might have had) were shed in him, by the Murder of
Cain. It is true that Cain's blood was not shed by that Law, although he killed
his Brother, the World being not then peopled, nor that Law then so positively
given by God, and the example and terror to others could not then be so great
(which is often the great end of punishment, ut poena ad paucos metus ad omnes
perveniat;) and therefore Cain was to survive by God's special appointment, not
by any favor of God toward him, but that he might have Gods mark (as a
Murderer) upon him, to the Terror of all others that should see him. What
visible mark and distinction this was, is but conjectured at; some think it was
a horrible shaking over his whole body, as the Septuagint translate, who, for
Thou shall be a Vagabond and Runagate, read, He should Occultum flagellum. The
wound of Conscience.
sigh and tremble; or an exceeding shame and confusion, in that he ran from
place to place to hide himself; or some visible mark in his face, as Lyranus
thinks: Some Hebrews think it was a horn in his forehead; some, a letter;
some, that a Dog led him. The Scripture is plain, that for this Murder he was
to be a Fugitive, and a Vagabond upon the face of the Earth; one (as the Text
says) that went from the presence of the Lord, to whom the Earth was accursed;
and certainly the guilt and shame he carried about him, like the bloody Jews
that murdered Christ, and are to this day Vagabonds over the Earth; or those
bloody surviving Regicides, that murdered the best of Kings K. Charles the
First.
(yet live, with that black mark of King-killing upon them) was, and is, a
Judgment greater than death it self; as it is in the Psalms Psalm. 59. 11.
, Slay them not lest my people forget it: but scatter them abroad amongst the
people, and put them down, O Lord, our defense. And that was the Judgment of
Cain, who before his natural death (some say) was killed by Lamech, who shot in
a Bush at a Beast, and killed Cain Theod. quaest. 44. in Genesis
. And the Turks at this day believe, that at the Day of Judgment, when the
Grave and Hell shall deliver up their dead, Cain, that Fratricide and
murderer, shall lead, and be as it were the Captain of the damned in Hell.

Amongst all the Laws of God, which he himself appointed the Israelites (his
own People) when they were to inhabit Canaan, the Land of Promise, there was
not any mercy, or City of Refuge appointed for a Murderer or Manslayer, but
only where it was done unawares; as several clear Cases are put in Scripture to
make this plain, 35. Numb. 23.
35 Numb. 23. v. If one throw a Stone that a man die thereof (and saw him not)
but did it unawares. So the 19. Deuteronomy. 5. When a man goes to the wood with his
Neighbor (mark how strongly this Case is put, 19. Deuteronomy. 5.
with his Neighbor, his Friend, whom he had no unkindness for) to hew wood,
and as his hand fetches a stroke with the Axe to cut down the Tree, the head
slippeth of from the helve and smites his Neighbor that he die; in these, and
many such like cases there put, he shall flee to the City of Refuge, and stay
there until the Congregation shall judge betwixt the Manslayer, and the Avenger
of blood, whether he did it wittingly, or unawares. The Hebrews understand by
the Congregation, the Senators and Chief Judges of the City; and although it
were done unawares, and so adjudged by the Congregation, yet so heinous was the
offense of Blood before God (though nothing of man's will in it) that even such
Manslayer was never (during his life) afterward to depart from the City until
it was so adjudged by the Congregation, or until the death of the High Priest,
(who was a type of Christ that set us all free;) for if he did depart, then the
Avenger of blood, (who was next Kinsman to the party slain) might, if he met
him, justify the killing of him. So it is very apparent, that before these
Cities of Refuge were appointed for mercy to him that had killed another
unawares, such a Manslayer might have been killed by the Avenger of blood, as
well as he that had killed another wilfully: and after they were ordained, they
could not be intended to show Mercy, or to be an Asylum or Sanctuary for any
that had willingly, wilfully, or by a passionate assault killed another. If it
be objected (as what sin or offender is there that has not his Advocate) that
it is said in the 19. of Deuteronomy. 11. v. 19. Deuteronomy. 11.
But if any man hate his Neighbor, and lay await for him, and rise against him
and smite him that he die, and then fly to any of those Cities, he shall be
fetched thence, and delivered into the hands of the Avenger of blood, that he
may die. Thine eye (though the tenderest part thou have) shall not spare him
(how comely soever his person may seem) but thou shall put Innocent blood from
Israel, that it may go well with thee i. e. with the Magistrate and People.
. If it shall be inferred from hence, That the Cities of Refuge were ordained
for all sorts of Manslaughter, but where it was done of malice, forethought,
ancient hatred, or with a sedate and malicious mind; hereby implying, that he
that kills another upon a sudden quarrel, assault, or in heat of blood (as it
is termed) might fly to a City of Refuge, and find Sanctuary; It must needs be
upon a very great mistake. Nor can the Judicials of God herein (put into
several plain and illustrating Cases by God himself) be reconciled if it should
be so understood: It is said in the 31. Exodus 13. If a man lay not wait, but
God deliver him into his hands, then I will appoint thee a place whither he
shall fly. The meaning of the delivering him into his hands, must of necessity
be understood of such a providence that could not be foreseen, and so not
possible to be prevented by the Manslayer, wherein there could be nothing of
his will, but purely chance and unawares, as in the Cases put before of casting
the Stone, and killing one he saw not; cutting of the wood, and falling of the
helm of the Axe, or Bough from the Tree; where many such Examples might be
given, which the Law of England now sums up in one head or Reason, viz. Utrum
quis dederit operam rei licitae an illicitae. Stamf. lib. 1. fol. 12.
Where one is doing a lawful and justifiable act in his Trade, Calling, or
lawful Recreation, and by chance and unawares, another happens to be killed by
him, then he shall have a Pardon of course now instead of a City of Refuge (as
shall be hereafter showed) for it is very plain by express places of Scripture,
that all other voluntary killing of a man unlawfully, found no Mercy, no City
of Refuge, but there the Manslayer was to die by the hand of the Avenger of
blood (it appearing so before the Magistrate or Congregation:) As to instance
in some few Cases out of Scripture. 21. Exodus 12.
21. Exodus 12. He that smites a man that he die, shall be slain for it: if any
destruction follow, there he shall give life for life (except it be unawares.
31. Numb. 16, 17, 18.
) So in the 16, 17, 18. v. of the 31. of Numbers, If any man smite another with
an instrument of Iron that he die, then he is a murderer, and the Murderer
shall die for it. If he smite him by throwing a Stone that he die, he that
smote him is a Murderer, All these sudden Actions.
let the same murderer be slain; therefore the Avenger of blood himself shall
slay the Murderer. When he meets him he shall slay him (mark the
Ingemination,) he shall surely slay him, as it is in the 21. Exodus 12. He that
smites a man that he die, shall die the death; that is, shall surely die; for
this doubling of the word, importat majorem certitudinem, imports greater
certainty; and yet in all these Cases, not one word of malice, lying in wait,
or enmity. He that smites another that he die; sive intendat occidere, sive
non, shall die.
It is a general Law, He that kills should be killed again, and this Law is
grounded upon the Law of Nature; for like as it is agreeable to Nature, ut
putridum membrum abscindatur, ut reliqua conserventur, that a rotten member
should be cut off that the rest may be preserved; so a Murderer is to be
killed, ne plures occidantur, lest more should be killed. This Law is given
unto Noah, Genesis 9.
Genesis 9. when the World was restored; and here it is but repeated and renewed.
The Laws of other Nations herein consent with Moses: The Athenians did severely
punish Murder, expelling the Murderer from the Temple of the Gods, and from
all Society and Colloquy of Men, till he had his Judgment. And by the Law
Cornelia, among the Romans, He which had killed another with sword, or poison,
or by false Testimony, lost his head, if he were of the better sort; if of
meaner condition, he was hanged on the Cross, or cast unto Wild beasts, that
was himself like a Tiger amongst men; Simler. And the reason of the severity
was, because Murderers deface the Image of God in Man By Murder a reasonable
Creature is lost, which all the World cannot restore. Trees, though they be cut
down grow again, but a Man once slain can never be recovered. Pericl. apud
Plut. in ipsius vita. And for the most part, unless the Mercy of God be the
greater, the Soul is lost with the Body.
, and lay violent hands to take away his temporal life, for whom Christ died to
give eternal life. A King (an inferior god) would take it ill to have his
Image, his Picture, wilfully stabbed through and cut in pieces by any, because
it is his. It is very plain, by the Judicials of God, that where there was any
wilful smiting, or striking (though suddenly, and from a present passion,
occasioned by a sudden provocation) whereby death sollowed, in which the will,
fury (which is a temporary madness) assent, or assault of the Manslayer, might
appear, there was no City of Refuge, or Mercy, by Gods Law provided for it;
only what was done unawares, and unforeseen (as aforesaid) found a City of
Refuge, otherwise what can be meant by those words, unawares, and where he saw
him not: and in these very Cases of killing another, ex improviso, unawares, or
by misfortune, for whom there was a City of Refuge provided (by God himself)
yet there the Avenger of blood, if he overtook the Manslayer before he got to a
City of Refuge (and in some places it was many miles to one of them) he might
justify the killing of him.

During the Israelites sojourning in the Desert, the Tabernacle (where mention
is made of the Altar) was their Refuge in such a case; afterward in the Land
of Bezer of the Reubenites, Ramoth of Gilead of the Gadites, Golan in Bashan of
the Manassites; these three on this side Jordan, Deuteronomy. 4. 41, 43. these three
appointed by Moses.
Canaan there were six Cities of Refuge appointed, three beyond Jordan, and
three on this side. Three other Cadesh in Galilee in Mount Naphtali, Shechem in
Ephraim, and Kiriatharba which is in Hebron in the Mountain of Judah; these
three last were beyond Jordan, and appointed by Joshua: Josh. 20. 7. equally
distant one from another in Canaan. R. Salom. Jarchi, Deuteronomy. 19. 3.
Cities of like nature God promised the Israelites, upon condition of their
obedience, after their Coasts were enlarged; but it seems their disobedience
hindered the accomplishment thereof, for Scripture mentions not the fulfilling
of it. The manner of Examination of one that fled to the City of Refuge was
thus; The Consistory or Bench of Justices who lived in that quarter where the
Murder was committed, Paul. Fag. Numb. 36. 6.
placed the party, being brought back from the City of Refuge, in the Court or
Judgment Hall, and diligently enquired and examined the cause; who, if he were
found guilty of voluntary Murder, then was he punished with death; but if the
fact were found casual, then he was safely conducted back again to the City of
Refuge, where he enjoyed his liberty, not only within the Walls of the City,
but within certain Territories and bounds of the City, within such limits until
the death of the High Priest (that was in those days) after whose death he was
at liberty; 20. Joshua 6.
Josh. 20. 6. By this means the offender, though he was not punished with
death, yet he lived (for the time, although the offense was involuntary and
praeter intentionem) a kind of Exile for his own humiliation, and for the
abatement of his wrath who was the Avenger of blood. Masius in Josh. cap. 20.
The Areopagitae had a proceeding against casual Manslaughter, not much unlike,
punishing the offender (...), with a years banishment. It is not agreed amongst
Expositors, why the time of this Exilement was limited to the death of the
High Priest at that time: but probably thought, that the offender was therefore
confined within that City, as within a prison, during the Highpriests life,
because the offense did most directly strike against him, as being amongst men,
(...), ac Princeps Sanctitatis, The chief god on earth. These places of Refuge
appointed by God, differed from those of Hercules, and Romulus, and others,
Heathens, yea, and Christian Kings formerly of this Nation, because God allowed
safety only to those who were guiltless in respect of their intention: but the
others were common Sanctuaries Asylum Sanctuarium. In the time of King Henry 8.
these were places of Sanctuary; All Parish Churches, Cathedral and Collegiate
Chapels dedicated, and their Churchyards and Sanctuaries to them belonging;
and Wells, Westminster, Manchester, Northhampton, Norwich, Darby, and
Lancaster. Afterward, in the same Kings Reign, Manchester was determined and
Westchester appointed, Westchester discharged and Stafford appointed, by
Letters Pat. from the King. Stamf. fol. 116.
, as well for the guilty as the guiltless: If any man did fortuitously, or by
chance kill another man, in such a case, a Liberty was granted unto the
offender to fly, at first unto the Altar for Refuge, as is implied by that
Text of Scripture, If any man come presumptuously unto his Neighbor to slay
him with guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar. Exodus 21. 14. These places
of Sanctuary extended not to Treason, Wilful Murder, Rape, Burglary, Robbery,
Sacrilege, Burning of Houses and Barns with Corn, etc. 32 H. 8. 12. 33 H. 8.
15. It seems they did extend to all these offenses before these Statutes. All
Statutes made concerning Abjured persons and Sanctuaries, made before 35 Eliz.
were repealed by the 1. of King James c. 25. Clergy is since taken away by
several Statutes for those offenses aforesaid, for which Sanctuary by the
aforesaid Statutes was taken away.
.

And it is thought that Temples, as they were built, had the like privilege;
as, Joab fled to the Temple, and took hold of the horns of the Altar. The
Reasons why the Lord appointed Cities of Refuge are principally these; First,
lest that the Innocent party might be slain, by the Friends of him whom he had
killed, before his cause was heard, and the manner of the slaughter determined
by the Judges. Secondly, it was so appointed, that he might stay there to the
death of the High Priest, who was a type of our Blessed Savior, by whose
precious death we are all set free. Thirdly, this was done ut menti eorum (hac
ratione) medeatur, etc. to heal and allay the mind and fury of those which
otherwise would delight in murder; for by his absence and continuance of time,
the rage of those that sought his life would be qualified, and therefore God
provideth, that they should not still be provoked by the continual sight of
him. Fourthly, and further by this, that he that kills a man unwittingly is
appointed to fly, it is showed ( quod reus poenae efficitur) that yet he is
guilty of some punishment. So that involuntary killing was punished with a kind
of Banishment among the Israelites: So likewise amongst the Athenians, such
kind of Manslaughter was censured with one years Exile. And so among the
Israelites, he that escaped from the Avenger of blood for it was but an escape)
was not to go out of the limits and bounds of the City, if he did, it was
lawful for the kinsman of the man that was slain to kill him.

There is a manifest distinction of voluntary and involuntary Murder or
killing, grounded upon the Law of Moses: Involuntary killing is of two sorts,
there are (...), chances unlookt for and sudden events, as when one shoots an
Arrow (upon a lawful account, and kills one unawares, as Peleus killed his
Son, being in hunting with him. There are besides these, (...), errors and
oversights, as the Father beats his Child, purposing only to chastise him,
and do him good, and he dies of it. There are likewise two kinds of voluntary
or wilful Murder, ex proposito, of purpose, and ex impetu animi, in heat or
rage; these kind of Murders are called (...), Iniquities, one may be slain ex
proposito, purposely, per insidias, by lying in wait, when one watches for the
life of a man, and takes him at advantage, as Joab killed Abner, and
afterward fled to the Temple, and took hold of the Horns of the Altar, which
notwithstanding could not privilege him; and afterward killed Amasa, they
suspecting no such thing; so Ismael killed Gedoliah: or else per Industriam,
when one of set purpose picketh quarrels, and seeks occasions to provoke a
man that he may kill him. Both these kinds are touched here, Tostat. quaest.
16. Then one may be killed in heat and rage when there was no purpose before,
as Alexander the Great killed Clitus. This kind though not so grievous as the
other, yet is a kind of voluntary killing, for whom there was no mercy by Gods
Law, as it is in the Margent of the Great Bible, Wilful Murder cannot be
pardoned without Gods high displeasure. Nay, as it is more fully in the Text it
self, 19. Deuteronomy. 13.
Thine eye (though the most compassionate sense) shall not spare him, but thou,
whoever thou be, shall put away innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well
with thee. Now the putting away of Innocent blood is by revenging it on him
that spilt it, as it is in the 10. v. of the same Chapter, That Innocent blood
be not shed in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit, and so
blood come upon thee; that is, that the Blood of the party slain be not imputed
to thee: This Imputation of blood, which is of more weight than the Imputation
of all Adams sin, because the command is more immediate and legible to us; it
concerned all the Israelites in general, but more especially does it concern
those chosen by Law to make Inquisition after Polluitur and foedatur terra,
Numb. 35. 30. 33. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer
which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death; for ye shall not
pollute the Land wherein you are, for blood defiles the Land, and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it.
Innocent blood unlawfully and wilfully shed as principally Grand Jurors are;
for whose sakes, and that the following discourse may fix the better upon their
Judgments, and thereby make a right impression upon their Consciences to be
more circumspect and careful in their Presentiments in cases of Blood, I have
premised (as I conceive) what was the will and Law of God (as he himself has
declared it, and left it upon Record to us in his Judicials to his people
Israel) who received Laws and Judgments from God himself for their whole model
and system of Political Government; agreeable to which I might add the mind of
our Savior Christ under the Gospel (who is the best Interpreter of the Law) in
bidding Peter put up his Sword Matt. 26. 52.
, and his interpretation upon the sixth Command, He that is angry with his
Brother unadvisedly shall be culpable of Judgment Matt. 5. 22. Qui irascitur
sine causa, quantum ad voluntatem, homicidium fecit. Chrysostom. hom* in Matt.
Ira est appevitus ultionis.
. I shall in the next place endeavor to manifest, how parallel the Laws of
England have been, and are, to the Judicial Laws of God in the punishing of
Murder and shedding Innocent blood, and extending mercy where it is done
praeter intentionem, unawares and by misfortune, or in the necessary defense of
a man's own life or property, and what Asylum is provided for such; and how the
course and practice of the Laws of England ought to be, in presenting and
making Inquisition (by Grand Jurors) after the same.

Not to look so far back to find what the Laws were (in case of Felony and
Murder) as to the time of the Saxons Kent, South Saxons, West Saxons,
East Saxons, East Angles, Northumberland, Mercia.
Heptarchy in England, when the Monarchy had many heads, being Bellua multorum
Capitum; and so for the most part had so many several Laws, each Prince either
pleasing his own humor, or adapting his Laws to the condition and quality of
the people he had to govern, which as they differed in their qualities, and
constitutions, as much as the several Winds differ the several Climates from
whence they blow, out of the four Corners of the world, from whence many of
their Kingdoms were differenced and distinguished by names; so did they differ
in the nature and quality of their Laws: some of the Saxon Kings had excellent
Laws, as Ina, as says Venerable Bede L. 7. c. 16. and li 5. c. 4. p. 375.
, who flourished in that Kings time. The mulct or breach of Peace was forty
shillings in the Mercian Law. In the West Saxon Law, fifty shillings. The
punishment of a Freeman was pecuniary, and loss of liberty, of a slave by
whipping. Treason against the Lord was Capital, and could not be appeased with
money. Amongst the Laws of Canutus the King it is said, L. Canut. fol. 117. c.
56.
Si quis in Regia dimicaret, Capitale esto, nisi quidem Rex hoc illi crimen
condonarit. If any should quarrel or fight in the Kings Palace it was Capital,
except the King remitted the fault. They were unwilling to put any man to
death, because of lessening their strength, being so much divided that for the
most part there was an aestimatio capitis, a certain sum of money, or Corporal
punishment set upon every Murderer and Felon, respecting the quality of the
person killed, or he that killed him; yet amongst them there was strict inquiry
after Blood, by punishing the offender according to their Laws.

And to look for it amongst the Danes, and their Laws, would be to as little
purpose; for as it is well observed by Mr. Lambert Lambert L. Edw. Confess. c.
16. de Inventione Murdri.
, Temporibus vero Regum Danorum sepultum fuit Jus in regno, Leges and
Consuetudines, simul sopitae, temporibus eorum prava voluntas, vis, and
violentia magis regnabant quam Judicium in terra. In the time of the Danish
Kings, Right was buried, Laws and Customs were laid asleep together, the
depraved Will, Strength and Violence did reign and rule more than Judgment in
the land.

Yet to make some amends we have it by good Tradition, that good St. Edward the
Confessor, the last King of the Danes that was King of England) yet of Saxon
blood, Collected out of the Danish, Saxon, and Mercian Laws, an universal and
general Law (whence our Common Law is thought to have had its original) which
may be true of the Written Laws, Ranulph. Cestr. l. 1. c. 550. Hov. 600. L. Ed.
c. 35. in Hoved.
not of the Customary and unwritten Laws, these being certainly more ancient.
Some say, that Edward the Third, before the Conquest, Malmsb. de gest. reg. l.
2. c. 11.
set forth the Common Law, called the Laws of Edward to this day, which St.
Edward espoused as his Act, and falling last upon the work He carries the name.
One says King Canute composed our Common Law, which St. Edward the Confessor
observed. This King Edward the Confessor was in his life of that Holiness, that
he received power from above to cure many Diseases, amongst others the swelling
of the Throat (called by us) The Kings evil; a prerogative that continues
hereditary to his successors, Kings of England, to this day; the powerful
effect whereof has been most eminently manifested by the Touch of our most
gracious King that now is (since his happy Return into England) upon very many
thousands; K. CHARLES the Second.
some (to my knowledge) that formerly derided that occult personal Kingly
virtue, inherent to the Imperial Scepter of England, being of St. Thomas his
faith, that would not believe except they felt, now remaining fully satisfied
of the truth thereof from their own experience of the cure upon themselves.

The aforesaid St. Edward, for his holiness, charity, and good actions, was
Canonized for a Saint, having reigned over England twenty four years. The Kings
of England at this day, in their Coronation Oath taken at the high Altar, swear
especially to observe and keep the Laws of this St. Edward. These Laws so
collected by this holy King Edward, were by William the Conqueror (to whom he
had bequeathed this Kingdom of England by Will, though afterward he was forced
to get it by the Sword) confirmed in these words, An. Dom. 1087.
Hoc quoque praecipio ut omnes habeant and teneant legem Regis Edwardi in
omnibus rebus, as Mr. Lambert has it, inter leges Gulielmi. Notwithstanding he
informs us, that this King William (post acquisitionem Angliae) after he had
obtained and settled the Kingdom in peace, in the fourth year of his Reign,
Concilio Nobilium.
Baronum suorum, by the advice of his Nobility, he caused to be summoned
throughout England, the Nobles, Wisemen, and such as were skilful in the Laws,
Rights and Customs of England, and elected twelve Knights out of every County,
who were sworn before the King to make a true Collection of the said Laws and
Customs. Nihil praetermittentes, nil addentes, nil praevaricando mutantes.
Amongst these Laws we do not find Murder punished with death. It being so near
the time of the Danes and Saxons, it seems he made no violent alteration of
their Laws, but kept their custom of aestimatio Capitis, or Corporal
punishment. We find amongst his Laws these words, Lamb. inter Leges Gulielmi
Regis fol. 126.
Interdico etiam ne quis occidatur vel suspendatur pro aliqua culpa sed
eruantur oculi, and abscindantur testiculi vel pedes vel manus, itaquod truncus
vivus remaneat in signum proditionis and nequitiae suae By the ancient Law of
England, he that mahimed any Man whereby he lost any part of his body, the
Delinquent should lose the like part; as he that took away another man's life
should lose his own, Bract. lib. 3. numb. 4. So if the Defendant in an Appeal
of mahime should be found guilty, Judgment against the Defendant should have
been, That he should lose the like Member that the Plaintiff lost, by this
means, a hand for a hand, etc. 40* Ass. 9. Mirror c. 4. and 5.
. I command that none be killed or hanged for any offense, but that his eyes be
put out, and his Testicles, or feet, or hands be cut off, so that the Trunk of
his body may remain alive; in token of his Treason and wickedness: any
punishment then, but loss of life and banishment, for it is said amongst his
Laws, Prohibeo ut nullus vendat hominem extra patriam. I forbid that any person
be sold out of his Country.

Now although that these kinds of punishments are not commensurate to the
offense, or to the Law of God, or to the Laws of England, in cases of Murder,
there being not life for life; yet who is there almost amongst the Sons of men,
that would not rather choose to be hanged, than to have his eyes put out, his
Testicles, feet, and hands cut off, and to survive with such a brand of
Ignominy. Lamb. in leges Edvardi R. c. 15. Lex Murdrorum. v. Stamf. lib. 1.
fol. 17.
Amongst the Laws of the Conqueror, in the Title Lex Murdrorum, it is there
found; If any be found Murdered, the Village in whom he was so found, was
within eight days to deliver the Murderer; Justiciae Regis; if he were not
found within one Month and a day, the Village was to pay forty marks; if the
Village were not able, then the Hundred was to pay it, and this money was to be
sealed up, under the Seal of a Nobleman of the County, and sent into the
Exchequer, there to remain a year and a day, to the end, that if the Hundred or
Village could within a year and a day bring the body of the Murderer to
Justice, they should have their money again; if they could not within that time
take him, the Parents of him that was murdered should have six mark, and the
King the rest; if he had no Parents, then his Lord or Master should have it; if
no Lord or Master, then His Pledge or Surety.
Selagus ejus, i. e. fide cum eo ligatus, that is, his Pledge or Surety; if he
had none of these, then the King should have all the forty Marks (which was as
much then as five hundred pounds now) sub cujus protectione, and pace degunt
universi; If the Murderer were found, and would not defend his Innocence,
Judicio Dei, scilicet aqua, vel ferro, that is, stand in hot scalding-water, or
pass barefoot over hot-bars of Iron, fieret de eo Justitia, let Justice be
executed up on him; but what this Justice was, or what punishment he should
suffer, some doubt there is: That is, so much as one paid for the killing of a
man; by which it appears, that such Government was in those days, as
slaughters of men were most rarely committed, as Mr. Lambert collecteth. Lamb.
Expositio verb. Estimatio. Flet. lib. 1. c. 42. Hoved. fol. 344.
Some say it was ad voluntatem Regis, or the usual way of aestimatio Capitis,
or Corporal punishment, and not to suffer death, because (as before is
observed) there is found amongst those Laws, Ne quis occidatur, vel
suspendatur, pro aliqua Culpa; though others are of another Judgment, that it
was Capital if the King pleased, whatever the punishment was; you shall not
read of any Insurrection or Rebellion before the Conquest, when the view of
Frank-pledge, and other ancient Laws of this Realm were in their right use.

There are many that are full of Sr. Thomas Moore's kindness, and think it too
much that a man should lose his life for crimes under Murder, as for Theft,
etc. (but none so kind to a Murderer) for which anciently a loss of a Hand,
Eye, Leg, or other member was in use; yet the party taken in the manner, hand
habend. having the stolen thing in his hand, in his possession, might be killed
amongst the Saxons, he could not buy his Crime out; and the Spanish condemning
to the Galleys, is thought by some the only way. Mr. Daniel will have it, that
as yet (writing of King Henry the Second's time) they came not so far as Blood,
which is not so; for King Henry the First Hoveden saw. 471. in H. 1. Council.
Birghamstead. Council. 197. L. K. Canut. c. 61. L. K. Ina 5. 37. Aethelst.
(abrogating the were-gilde) by which a man might have bought out his offense,
made a Law, says Hoveden, Vt si quis in furto vel latrocinio deprehensus
fuisset suspenderetur; to hang the Thief: with whom Vigorniensis and Rad. Niger
agree. And the Lo. Coke observes in the third Institutes, that before the Reign
of King Henry the First the Judgment for Felony was not always the same, but
King Henry the First ordained by Parliament, that the Judgment for all manner
of Felonies should be, 9 H. 1.
that he should be hanged by the neck until he be dead: Matthew. Paris.
continuat. 1005.
After, in the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the Third, we find a Thief
who had stolen twelve Oxen beheaded. Capital punishments have not only been in
use against Homicides and Felonies, but other Transgressors also, and amongst
those who worshipped God rightly (as is well observed) we meet with no Divine
precept before Judah, which makes Whoredom worthy of death, yea, when he is
told, Tamar thy Daughter in law has played the Harlot, he answers, Bring her
forth and let her be burnt. Caesar's Comment. l. 6. ante Christum natum 1600
annis.
Amongst the Britains, if the Wife killed her Husband she was to be burnt; so
are the English Laws to this day. We may proceed (says Grotius) by conjecture
of the Divine will, with the help of Natural reason, from like to like, and
that which is a Law against Felonies and Murders, may be extended to others as
dangerously mischievous: It is a hard dispute, whether there be more mercy in
death, or putting out of Eyes, cutting off Legs, Arms, etc. or in the Galleys.
It is believed, that the boldness and number of Malefactors begot the Law of
death, and those whom Death with so much Infamy (so often reiterated before
their eyes) cannot fright, will never think any Torment whatsoever (where life
is left them, though with more misery than can be spoken) terrible.

It is well observed by the Lo. Coke, Coke 3. Instit. Epilog.
that, Videbis ea saepe committi, quae saepe vindicantur. Those offenses are
often committed, that are often punished; and he gives his Reason for it, That
the frequency of the punishment makes it so familiar, as it is not feared. For
Example (says he) what a lamentable case it is, to see so many Christian men
and women strangled on that cursed Tree of the Gallows, Sta. perlege plor.
insomuch, as if in a large field a man might see together all the Christians,
that but in one year, throughout England, come to that untimely and ignominious
death, if there were any spark of Grace, or Charity in him, it would make his
heart to bleed for pity and compassion. I my self have known at one Assizes in
the County of Monmouth, where one has had Judgment to die for stealing a
Horse, and Reprieved, in order to procure his Pardon; another narrowly
acquitted of a Felony, and made use of by the Jailer, to be the Common-Hangman
at the same Assizes; that both these persons (the one breaking the Goal, the
other having his liberty, as being acquitted) were both taken in one Felony and
Burglary before the next Assizes, committed to the Goal, and received Judgment
of death, and were both hanged together. So little does favor, terror, or
example work a Reformation upon those that are hardened in their sins, and want
grace to make good use of them.

But it is thought horrible and grievous, that a man's life (the life of a
Christian) or any of the Members of his body, should be taken away for so small
a value as thirteen pence (I take twelve pence to be but petit Larceny, for
which he shall be whipped) it is very plain that the Statute of 3 Ed. 1. c. 15. 3
Ed. 1. 15.
declaring what Prisoners are Mainprizable, or Barable, says amongst other
offenses ( viz.) or for Larceny, which amounts not above the value of twelve
pence: nay, for less. King Aethelstanes Laws begin with Thieves, and speak
thus; First, that a man spare no Thief who is in the manner, having in his
hands taken above eight pence (it seems eight pence then was in the nature of a
Petit Larceny;) a Ram in the Saxons time was worth but four pence: that which
was heretofore sold for twelve pence, would now be worth forty shillings.

In the Assize of Bread (long after the Saxons) in the 51th of H. 3. eight
Bushels of Wheat are valued but at twelve pence. In Edward the Third's time a
Bushel of Wheat was but ten pence; a Haymaker had but a penny a day, Reapers of
Corn two pence, an Acre to be mowed for five pence, Threshing a quarter of
Wheat or Rye but two pence, a Master-Carpenter three pence a day, and his man
two pence, a Free Mason four pence, others three pence, their Boys one penny,
Plaisterers and their Knaves (so named in the Act) the same manner, and to find
themselves meat and drink. 25 Ed. 3. c. 1, 3.
See the Statute 25 E. 3. c. 1, and 3. And by the Statute made the 6th of H. 8.
of much later time, the wages of a Bailiff of Husbandry was but sixteen
shillings eight pence, and for Clothing him five shillings with meat and
drink, a Chief Hind or Shepherd twenty shillings, and for his Clothing five
shillings, every Common Servant sixteen shillings eight pence, for Clothing
four shillings, no Woman Servant above ten shillings, her Clothing four
shillings, and no Master might have given more.

And although twelve pence keeps not the old Rate, but the Modern, yet things
are prized in trials of Life far below their worth, and no man loses his life
(in a single and simple Felony) but where the thing stolen rises to more than
many twelve pences (especially after the Old estimate) but indeed the quality
of the Offender, circumstances of the offense, and of the times, are mainly
considerable in our Law, where any man's life is taken away in such a Felony.

But to return to our proper Subject, and to manifest what the Laws of England
were (in Cases of blood) not long after the Conqueror, and how tender a regard
the Law of England (answerable to the Law of God) had of the Life of man.
Council. Saxon. 383.
By a Canon of our Old English Church, he that killed a Man in public war
(though justifiable) was enjoined a Penance of forty days. Misadventure at the
Common Law adjudged Murder, Stamf. fol. 16. c. 8.
By the Common Law killing by misadventure, unawares, or in a man's own defense
was Murder, founded upon the Judicial Law, before the Cities of Refuge; and
the forfeiture and punishment of both was, as in case of Murder, as appears
plainly by the Statutes of Marlebridge and Gloucester; the Forfeiture of Goods
and Chattels remains as yet: The words of the Statute of Marlebridge 52 H. 3.
52 H. 3.
are as follows, Murder from henceforth shall not be adjudged before our
Justices where it is found Misfortune only; which shows, before that Statute
though a man were killed by Misfortune, he had the same Judgment in Law as for
Murder: So that after the making of that Statute until the 6th of Edw. 1. 6
Ed. 1.
Writs were granted of course, where there was a surmise that the man was
killed by Misfortune, or, se defendendo, or in any other manner, where the
killing was not Felony, and thereupon a Pardon of course, or Grace, was granted
to the party, who only forfeited his Goods and Chattels, and by benefit of that
Pardon, had only his liberty out of prison, which without he could not have.

This way of Mercy it seems did stretch too far, and covered too many guilty
persons (as I fear yet it does) under her wings, when as their several Cases
were not judicially examined, indicted, and tried, before hand, by a Grand
Jury, and a Jury of Life and Death before a Learned Judge (as in ordinary
Trials of Criminals) whereby it came to pass that many Murders and
Manslaughters escaped under the favorable surmise of a per infortunium, or se
defendendo, as if it were done by misfortune, or in his own defense, and so
came off from a foul Murder by a Pardon of Course. Now for remedy in this case
came the Statute of Gloucester; the words of which Statute are as follows; 6
Ed. 1. c. 9.


The King commands, that no Writ shall be granted out of Chancery for the
death of a man, to enquire, whether a man did kill another by Misfortune, or in
his own defense, or in any other manner, without Felony; but he shall be put in
prison until the coming of the Justices in Air, or Justices assigned to the
Jail-deliver, and shall put himself upon the Country before them for good and
evil (that is, for life or death;) if in case it be found by the Country that
he did it in his defense, or by misfortune; Then by the Report of the Justices
to the King, the King shall take him to his Grace (if it please him.) The
Report to the King is, to Certify the Record into the Chancery, where the King
is always present; and therefore it is called a Pardon of Course, Stamf. fol.
15.
Stamford fo. 15. whereas the Kings own hand and fiat is to other Pardons. So
that here it is very plain, that he that will be acquitted and discharged out
of Prison for Manslaughter, per infortunium, or se defendendo (ex Gratia Regis)
must first put himself, super Patriam, upon the Country de bono and malo (the
very words of the Act) and that is upon a Jury of Life and Death; and this he
cannot do except the Grand Jury find the Bill of Indictment, Murder or
Manslaughter, let the matter of fact be what it will; for if the Grand Jury
shall but find the truth of the fact, as it appears in evidence to them, or
from their own knowledge (which is that which they now so much stand upon, that
is the very special matter that makes it Manslaughter, by misfortune or se
defendendo) the party can never come to be Arraigned upon such an Indictment,
for that is not Felony, and if he shall be charged with it (the Grand Jury
having only found the special matter in the Indictment or Inquisition) the
party must either plead guilty, or not guilty, either confess and justify the
Fact, or deny it; if he confess, he cannot Justify it, for men's lives are so
precious in the eye of the Law, that the death of a man cannot be Justified,
except in course of Justice, in a lawful War, or in a just defense of a man's
life and property, against such as would rob, or designedly murder him. The
Defendant in Appeal cannot Justify the death of a man at his own suit, Br.
Appeal 122.
se defendendo, but must plead not guilty. Nay, a Verdict of the Jury of Life
and Death, Coron. 302.
that A killed B se defendendo, or per Infortunium, 43. lib. Ass. p. 31.
is no good Verdict; the special matter must be set down in writing by them,
that the Court may judge the killing to be upon inevitable necessity; neither
Grand Jury that hears but one side, nor Jury of Life and Death (that hear both
sides) are Judges in this case. Stamf. lib. 3. c. 9. fol. 165.
For, upon the special matter found by the Jury of Life and Death, if the Court
shall not adjudge that special matter good in Law to acquit him of Murder or
Manslaughter, it may be either murder or manslaughter in him, and the party
may be hanged notwithstanding such Verdict of the Jury of Life and Death, how
can the Court be judge of the matter in Law, when they hear not the matter in
fact from the Witnesses on both sides, and the Parties defense for himself,
which they can never do, if the Grand Jury shall take upon them (as they
presume they may) to find the Special matter themselves, whereby the Party
cannot be Arraigned, that so he may put himself de bono and malo super patriam,
as the Statute of Gloucester beforementioned especially requires. If the Party
charged with such an Indictment from the Grand Jury (where they will find only
the Special matter) shall confess it, when he is charged with it (as sure he
may) then the Evidence can never be heard in Court, whereby the Judge may
determine the point in Law, whether the offense upon the whole matter be
Murder or Manslaughter, or as they find it, and that is mere matter of Law,
whether super totam materiam of the Evidence (and that must be Evidence on both
sides) it be murder, Manslaughter in general, Manslaughter upon the Statute
per Infortunium, se defendendo, justifiable as against a Thief, or in loco and
tempore belli; and how exceeding dangerous and inconvenient were it for Grand
Jurors, so far to anticipate the Judgment of the Court, and to take upon
themselves (upon the hearing only of Witnesses on one side, and perhaps not all
of them neither) the sole Judgment of Law in all these Cases, by not finding
the Indictment (which is but the Kings Declaration for the loss of his Subject,
in the same manner as it is advised by the Kings Council Engrossed, sworn in
Court, and delivered to them) especially (for that is always intended) where
they have probable Evidence (for they need no more) to prove such a person
killed by the hands of such a person, such a day, year, and place. Nay, by the
Statute of Gloucester, they must either find the Indictment in such a case
Murder, for all Indictments (about the killing of a man) were so before that
Statute, and no Law since to alter it, or the party can never have a Certiorari
out of Chancery for his Pardon of Course, whereby he may be discharged out of
Prison; for by the strictness of Law, he ought to remain in Prison without Bail
until his pardon be procured, which Pardon saves not his Goods or personal
Estate, but only pardons his Offense, his violation of the King's Peace (which
is violated in the loss of a Subject) according to the Statute of Gloucester,
and procures his liberty, and discharge out of Prison.

The words contained in the Writ of Certiorari out of Chancery, in order to the
obtaining of a Pardon of Grace, and removing the Record into Chancery, that
there the King may see by the Record the truth and nature of the offense,
according to the Statute of Gloucester, being well observed make it very plain,
that the Special matter of Fact must be found by the second Jury, the Jury of
Life and Death, and which is so suggested in Chancery before the Issuing forth
of such Writ, as by the Writ more fully appears, Certiorary out of Chancery.
viz. Quia ut accepimus, quod A. B. indictatus, and per Inquisitionem patriae
compert. extitisset, quod idem A interfecit praedict. C. se def. and non per
feloniam aut malitiam praecogitat. unde dictus A. Gaol. nostr. praedict.
remiss. est ad gratiam nostram jude expectand. nos ea de causa super tenor.
Record. and process. Inquisitionis praed. Certiorari volentes, vobis mandamus
quod si ita est, tunc tenor. Record. pro process. praedict. cum omnibus ea
tangent. in Cancel. nostram sub sigillis vestris distinct and aperte
mittatis. Observe how this ancient Writ complies with, and explains the Statute
of Glouc. in this case; here is in it Indictatus, that is, by the Grand Jury,
and per Inquisitionem patriae compert* ex^itisset, that is, the Jury of Life
and Death; for that is the only Trial in our Law, by the Country, per Patriam;
and whoever is tried by that Jury, posuit se de bono and malo super patriam,
which must be for Felony and Murder, the very words of the Statute; for this
Jury is to find, in their Writ, that it was se defendendo and non per felon.
aut malitiam praecogitat. as it is in the Verdict; and observe by the Writ, he
is not to be discharged out of Gaol before his pardon of Course procured, for
it is in the Writ, Gaol. nostrae praed. remiss. est (it seems he was there
before) ad gratiam nostr. inde expectand. etc. and further, observe the
Mandamus in this Writ ( si ita est) if it be so, that the Offense has received
such a trial by two Juries, then Certify the Record, otherwise not; and what
Judge that does not truly understand this ( si ita est) which he can never
truly do from a Grand Jury, will Certify such a Record in Chancery, to the
King himself, in Cases of Blood.

By this it may appear, to all that are rational and unprejudiced, that have
not formerly asserted the contrary Opinion, and therefore like the Opiniators
of this Age, will (for no other reason) maintain it, That Grand Jurors are not
lest so free herein, to find what they please, or as they would have it,
strictly according to their Evidence, as the Gentlemen of these latter times
have taken upon them to do, and even to stand upon it, against the Learned
Judges themselves, and their Directions and Advice. Besides, how greatly do
they injure the party accused; for if he be Guilty of no higher an Offense than
Manslaughter per Infortunium, or se Defendendo, and the Grand Jury will not
find it Murder, whereby he may put himself (as the Statute of Gloucester
directs, de bono and malo super patriam) he can never by a pardon of course,
receive a total and final discharge from the said Offense. For if he should be
Indicted at any time again of Murder for the death of that Party (as he may be
at any time after, during his life, notwithstanding such pardon, where it was
not found Murder or Manslaughter at the first) he can make no Plea to such
Indictment, in discharge of it: he cannot plead auter foits Acquit, or Convict,
or Attaint of the same Offense, because he never put himself de bono and malo
super patriam, upon his Country, his life was never in hazard for it: whereas,
if he have been once presented by the Grand Jury for Murder, and thereupon
Arraigned, received a full Trial, and according to the Statute of Gloucester,
had been acquitted of the Murder, and the special matter of per Infortunium, or
se Defendendo found in their Verdict (which by the Law ought to be so found by
the Jury of Life and Death) under their Hands, that the Judge (upon hearing the
whole matter) may be satisfied it is found according to Evidence given in
Court, and thereupon adjudge what that Offense is in Law* If in this case the
party that has received such a full Trial, and has sued out a Certiorari out
of Chancery; and upon the Return of that, has had the Special matter, the
whole Record of proceedings certified by the Judge, before whom the Record
remains, and thereupon has procured his pardon of course out of Chancery; such
person can never be called in question again for the same Offense, but he may
plead that Record and Verdict of Acquittal from the Murder or Manslaughter,
notwithstanding it might happen to be proved afterward either Murder or
Manslaughter, it shall discharge and acquit him for ever.

And if the Grand Jury (as in this case) ought to find every per Infortunium
Murder (notwithstanding by the Evidence it appear no more to them) a multo
fortiori, they ought to find every Offense (that appears to them upon Evidence
to be but Manslaughter) Murder. For the As in the two Houses of Parliament it
is but a Bill whilst in their hands, the Royal assent makes it an Act. So it is
but a Bill in the Grand Jury 's hand, the other Jury makes it an Act.
Bill of Indictment, as it comes from their hands, is but the Kings Declaration
of the matter of Fact, to which the Prisoner may plead, Not Guilty; and join
Issue with the King, and have it tried, Whether he be Guilty, or not? modo and
forma, as it is laid in the Indictment, or may confess and justify, as he
shall find cause. For this Indictment or Presentment of the Grand Jury in the
behalf of the King against the Prisoner, sets forth an Act done, Vi and Armis,
against the Kings Peace, his Crown, and Dignity, all which are violated,
dishonored, and weakened in the loss of a Subject, in the shedding of Innocent
Blood, by which his Land is defiled, and his Laws violated; and this according
to the Laws of God and Man ( prima facie) may be Murder, and therefore ought as
well (as all Declarations at Law) to be set forth in the fullest circumstances
of aggravation a Fact of Blood (which far exceeds all other Facts) will bear,
especially in laying the ground work and foundation of the Charge, because it
cannot heighten or increase, but may lessen and decrease, like the Moon in the
full, to its lowest wane, even to nothing, upon a full Examination and Debate
of the whole matter, by hearing of Parties and Witnesses on both sides, and
receiving in the face and audience of the Court such a scrutiny and narrow
search (as blood requires) into all circumstances and aggravations of the
Offense, that are laid in the Indictment, by the Learned Judge (who is of
Counsel as well for the Prisoner as the King, and must not let the Prisoner
suffer for want of Counsel in Law) that a Grand Jury cannot possibly do, they
hearing but only Witnesses on one side, and not the Prisoner; besides their
want of Judgment and Knowledge in the Law in all Cases of Blood: whereas, if
the Grand Jury shall take upon them (which they ought not to do) to put out of
the Indictment and Declaration of the King, the words Ex malitia praecogitata)
the only words that make it Murder, the Court can never Judicially examine the
malice, which is commonly a secret latent thing, carried on with a great
privacy and cunning, and appears not in all cases of Murder express, (and no
Evidence can prove further to a Grand Jury) whereas the Law in many cases
implies a malice to make it Murder (although the Parties never saw or heard of
each other before) which lies not in proof of Witnesses, but arises as a point
of Law upon the circumstances of the Fact, which, not a Grand Jury, but the
Court is Judge of, being matter of Law, which Judgment in Law is wholly
frustrated and taken from the Court, when the Grand Jurors put out these words,
Ex malitia praecogitata, which only make it Murder, out of the Indictment. And
by such favor, indulgence, or wilfulness in Grand Jurors, many times the
greatest Murder escapes by a per Infortunium, se Defendendo, or at least by a
Manslaughter. For if the Grand Jurors shall only find it Manslaughter, the
Prisoner upon his Arraignment, presently (if he can but read, get any one to
help him, or corrupt the Ordinary, no great difficulty to do) confesses the
Indictment, and prevents all further trial upon that Offense, and so neither
the Judge, nor Court, can ever come to understand (although there be twenty
Witnesses against the Prisoner) what Evidence the Grand Jury had to find it no
higher than Manslaughter; nor shall ever come judicially to examine the nature,
quality, or malice (if any be) circumstances, and truth of the Fact, although
in it self the foulest Murder that can be (as my own above Forty years
experience, attending the Crown Court in one Circuit under many Learned Judges,
has too often experienced) together with the common practice of laboring
Grand Jurors to such a Presentment, and contriving with the Prisoner to confess
the Manslaughter, lest the truth and foulness of the Murder should too clearly
manifest it self (as truth ever will) upon a Judicial, faithful, and careful
Examination of the Fact by the Learned Judge, upon hearing the Party, and
Evidence on both sides.

It is true (as appears by two several Acts of Parliament noted in the Margent)
that at the making of those Acts there was a complaint in Parliament, 4 H. 4.
2. 37 H. 8. 8.
That Indictments were stuffed with more words than the Offense required, and
that of purpose to aggravate the Offense more than it was grievous in it self.
For as it is well observed by Mr. Poulton, Poulton de Pace Regis and Regni,
fol. 167.
That the circumstances of every Offense do augment or diminish it according to
the qualities thereof. And by those two Acts of Parliament it may be observed
there was a reformation and redress made therein, by leaving out some formal
aggravating words (but then material) used in those times in all Indictments of
Felony and Murder, as by the Statute of the 4th of H. 4. 2. 4 H. 4. 2.
the words then constantly used in all Indictments of Felony (without which the
Indictments were not good) were [ Insidiatores viarum and depopulatores
agrorum) provides that those words should be left out in all such Indictments,
and yet the Indictments should be good without them: And well they might leave
them out; for how useless and impertinent (as to the Essence of the Indictment)
were those words, and yet the effect of them must be still observed. As also by
the Statute of the 37 H. 8. c. 8. 37 H. 8. c. 8.
the words, Vi and Armis, viz. cum baculis, cultellis, arcubus and sagittis, or
such other like words (before time commonly used and comprised in all
Indictments and Inquisitions of Treason, Murder, Felony, Trespass, and other
Criminal Offenses) shall not of necessity (for they were so before) be put or
comprised in any Inquisition or Indictment; but it shall be good only with
these words ( Vi and Armis, etc.) leaving out the other against any advantage
that may be taken (as formerly it was) by Writ of Error, Plea, or otherwise;
for these words were to very little purpose, to be of necessity used in every
Indictment: For as to some Indictments, there could be nothing of pertinency or
congruity to the Offense in them. And yet let it here be observed by the way,
That in those times, and before those Statutes formerly mentioned, continually
(in all Indictments) those words were used, and the Indictments found by the
Grand Jurors, without any proof made to them of such circumstances (then
essential) as [ Insidiatores viarum, depopulatores agrorum] liers in wait to
deceive upon the Highways, and destroyers of Husbandry; or, as in the other
Statute, Cum baculis, cultellis, arcubus and sagittis, viz. with Staves,
Knives, Bows and Arrows; when perhaps he that committed the Offense had not one
of these Weapons about him, or was guilty of the least of these circumstances
of Aggravation, which were then held necessary to every Indictment; which shows
how observable (at that time) Grand Jurors were to the directions of the Court,
and to the Kings Council, in drawing the Indictments and Circumstances of it,
Whether such Circumstances lay in proof, or no? But in neither of these
Statutes, nor any other Statute, is there any Exceptions made to these words,
in any Indictment for the killing of a man ( Ex malitia praecogitata) then used
in all Indictments for the killing of any person unlawfully, which (as is said
before) are of great consequence and use to be put into all Indictments against
any person that has shed innocent blood. For, as Mr. Poulton, in the very
Folio before quoted, says, Poulton de Pace, etc. fol. 167.
(writing upon the two former Statutes last mentioned;) If one be Indicted of
Murder or Manslaughter, there must be of necessity in the Indictment, a stroke
supposed, Poult. ut supra, 1. m. Dier. 59.
viz. tali die, and anno felonice, and ex malitia praecogitata interfecit and
murdravit. Here it is plain, that the Indictment of Manslaughter, as well as
Murder, must have these words, Ex malitia, etc. in it. Neither let any think
that it is pressed further, in foro legis, than it will bear in foro
conscientiae; or that by this means Grand Jurors are used but as Ciphers (like
the Ordinary at the Assizes) pro forma tantum, and that the Arguments of Law
and Reason here used, seemed to persuade them (like those of the Church of
Rome) to be of an implicit Faith, to believe as their Leaders would have them,
and to do as they require them, and yet to be under the Obligation of an Oath
to present the truth of the matter of Fact. It is far otherwise (being rightly
considered) they are not sworn to try the whole truth of the Offense, so as
nothing may be altered in what they find, for then there would be no need of
another Jury; they are neither to convict the Party, nor determine the Law,
Whether it be Murder or Manslaughter? or of what kind or Species it is, as it
appears to them upon the hearing of but one side, and that but of Witnesses,
not of the Party, that is left (as is said before) to the second Jury, who are
properly Tryers of the Offense de vicineto) of the very Neighborhood; not
Inquirers only (as Grand Jurors from every part of the County) where Parties,
and Witnesses, and Council, on both sides (if occasion be) may be lawfully
heard. Jurato creditur in Judicio. And to say the truth, says the Lord Coke,
we never read in any Act of Parliament, ancient Author, Book-case, or Record,
that in Criminal Cases, the party accused should not have Witnesses sworn for
him, and therefore there is not so much as Scintilla Juris against it. Cok. 3.
Inst. fol. 79.
The Grand Jury are only sworn to inquire, and true presentment make of all
such things and matters as shall be given them in charge, to present nothing
for malice, etc. nor leave any thing unpresented for favor, etc. From hence
often Grand Jurors frame an Argument to themselves, that it is part of their
Oath to present all such things as shall be given them in charge, that
generally the Judges in their charges dilate upon the several Species and
differences in Murder: As, what Offense the Law makes Murder? what
Manslaughter at Common Law? what upon the Statute? what per Infortunium? what
se Defendendo? what is malice expressed? and what is malice implied; and
therefore wherever they find these specifical differences by their Evidence,
they are so to present it, and not otherwise.

This is upon a great mistake, nor is it, or can it be so intended by the
Judges; for although it is true that the Judges (for the most part, not all of
them) in their charges to the Grand Jury (which I humbly conceive were better
omitted) do, usually mention and branch out the several specifical differences
and distinctions the Books of Law make in shedding of Blood, in Murder, and
Manslaughter, I conceive, more to inform the whole Country, and to show their
Learning, and the Law therein, than intentionally that the Grand Jury should
presently (some of them perhaps never serving before, uno intuitu) take it into
the consideration of their Oath, and make it the nice Duty of their Inquiry,
which indeed they can never attain unto, or determine the Law therein, by only
hearing of an Accusation of one side, from which they are only to prepare fit
matter for the Court to proceed further upon, and to make a more diligent
inquiry after. Such distinctions and directions from the Judge being much more
proper for a Jury of Life and Death, when any Question of Blood comes before
them to be considered of, and to be tried and determined, who have the only
means to do it, by hearing all Parties, all Evidence on both sides; as also the
directions of the Court, as to the quality and nature of the Offense, to give
them a true light to make a right distinction therein.

It is well said by a Learned Writer of the Law; Finch 25. Case of presentment
and Indictment.
An Indictment is an Inquiry finding some Offense against the King. It was the
Kings Action whereupon the Party shall be Arraigned, or put to Answer by the
King, and tried by another Jury. Every strong suspicion of such an Offense,
though it be in case of Felony appearing of Record, has the force of an
Indictment, as in an Action of Trespass for Goods carried away; if the
Defendant plead, Not Guilty, and be found Guilty, he is a Felon, etc. In
ancient time it was usual to Arraign one taken in the manner without any Appeal
or Indictment.
So in an Appeal of Murder, if the Plaintiff, after Declaration be Nonsuit,
the King shall proceed upon that Appeal, as upon an Indictment found: So He.
And as it is in Doctor and Student, lib. 2. cap. Abridgment.
Doctor and Student; The Grand Jury is only charged with the effect of the Bill
( viz.) whether he be guilty of the Felony or Murder in the Indictment, within
the Shire, and not whether he be guilty, modo and forma, as in the Bill is
specified. And so when they say Billa vera, they say truly (as they take the
effect of the Bill to be) so it is though the Bill vary from the day, year, and
place, so it vary not from the Shire; as if there were false Latin in the Bill
they might well say, Billa vera, for their Verdict stretches but to the
Felony, not to the truth of the Latin.

There is very much difference in Law betwixt an Inquiry and a Trial, betwixt a
Presentment and a Conviction; besides, the Judges do now give it in charge to
the Grand Jurors, and so part of their duty (if not of their Oath) that when
they have such an Indictment of Murder come to their hands, if they find upon
their Evidence, that the party said to be slain in the Indictment, by the
person there charged with it, with the time, and place, and manner how, they
are to enquire no farther into the nature of it (what offense this is in Law)
but to find it as it stands in the Indictment, which (for ought they know, upon
a further and more clear discussion of it in Court) may appear as full, as it
is laid in the Indictment; however it passes fairly out of their hands, they
may more clearly than Pilate wash their hands in Innocence from the Innocent
blood of such a person, and very well discharge their Oath, the Law, and a good
Conscience, letting it pass from them with the Indorsment of Billa vera, a Bill
that has truth in it, fit to be considered further by the Court and another
Jury.

And as Indictments at the Kings Suit do succeed Appeals, at the parties Suit,
so ought they to be drawn and presented as large and as full for the King, as
an Appeal of death for the party, which ever was for Murder (if the party
Appellant would so have it) and that may very reasonably be applied to
Indictments that the Statute of Gloucester directs in Appeals, viz. That no
Appeal shall be abated so soon, as they have been heretofore: But if the
Appellant in an Appeal do declare the Deed, 6 E. 1. 9.
the year, the day, the hour, the time of the King, and the Town where the Deed
was done, and with what weapon he was slain, the Appeal shall stand in effect.

Now so great an exactness of the year, day, and hour, is not required in an
Indictment, as in an Appeal (being the only violent prosecution of the party)
in favor of life, many Niceties were stood upon more than in other Actions.
And Mr. Justice Stamford says, A man is not of necessity compellable at Common
Law at this day, to put into his Declaration the hour; the day was necessary to
be put down in an Appeal; for if the Appellee can prove by certain
Demonstrations and Testimony of credible Witnesses, that he was the same day at
another place, at such a distance as it was not possible for him to be there
the day of the committing of the fact, or twenty miles off the same hour the
murder was committed, the Appeal shall abate. Yea, so many were the Niceties
of Appeals, which formerly were in use, not only in Murder, but in all cases
of Felony, and so full of Bribery and corruption in the easy composition of
all sorts of Murders and Felonies, and did so much delay the Kings prosecution
by Indictment (which was not to begin until the year and day past, after such
Felony and murder) in which time commonly the Appellant grew slow in his
prosecution, and was many times agreed with, and by the end of the year
Witnesses were dead and gone, all was cold and forgotten, as also that the
Appellant must sue in proper person, which suit was long and costly, and made
the party Appellant weary to sue.

For remedy whereof the Statute of the third of H. 7. 3 H. 7. c. 1.
was made, That the King shall not stay until the year and day were past, but
proceed at any time after the Murder committed; MURDER.
as also, that the Appellant shall proceed in his Appeal by Attorney; (all
helps the Law could devise to prevent delays in cases of Murder, and to find
out and punish the blood-guilty person) observe the penning of that Statute
(were there nothing else to be said in this Argument) how necessary it is that
all Indictments be made Murder, that are brought at the Kings suit within the
year and day (as the King by this Statute is enabled to do, 3 H. 7. c. 1.
the words whereof are as follows, And if it happen, that any person named as
principal, or accessory, be acquitted of any such Murder at the Kings suit
within the year and the day, that then the said Justices shall not suffer him
to go at large, but either remit to Gaol, or Bail him, at discretion, until the
year and day be past. And further in the said Statute it is said, If the
MURDERER escape the Town shall be amerced; as also, that the Coroners shall
return their Inquisitions before the Justices of Jail-deliver, and they shall
proceed against such Murderers; and as it is before in the said Statute, The
King shall not stay until the year and day were past, but proceed at any time
after the Murder committed: So that ( prima facie) the Statute looks upon all
Manslayers (unlawfully) to be guilty of Murder. And so the Indictment ought to
be drawn, or they cannot be continued in Gaol, nor Bailed by this Statute until
the year and day be out, nor the Town amerced for such escape, nor the offender
proceeded against by the King, within the year and day by Indictment.

Now generally (in these days) since the making of that Statute, all
proceedings in Murder and Felony are by Indictment at the Kings suit, not but
that the prosecution by Appeal is still in force, and the party has his
election which way he will proceed, either by Appeal at his own suit, or by
Indictment at the Kings suit; yea, even after the Trial had by the Kings suit
(in some cases) although at the Kings suit they have been acquitted of the
murder (but that the abuse of these and many other obsolete Laws) has taken
away the frequent use of them; except it be through the miscarriage of Grand
Jurors, and Jurors of life and death, in cases of murder, the one in not fully
presenting the murder, the other in not conscientiously giving a Verdict
according to their Evidence, and thereby provoking the party (whose Relation is
slain) to the nice and chargeable remedy of an Appeal; upon such Appeals
several have been executed after they have been acquitted by trial at the Kings
suit upon Indictment, one Woman in my time in Berkshire, for petty Treason for
killing her Husband, after she had been acquitted for the same fact at the
Kings suit by Indictment, was convicted upon the Appeal, and burnt at a stake.

Look how high the Appellant shall draw his Appeal against the Appellee or
Defendant, as if for Murder; in this case, if the Appellant shall surcease to
prosecute such Appeal, as by Nonsuit, Release, Retraxit, the Woman by marrying
a Husband, pendente lite, or by the Act of God, as if the Appellant die, or by
the Act of the Law, as if the Appellant take the privilege: Now in all the
former Cases, where the Appeal cease by the Act of the Appellant (that is, he
that prosecuteth the Appeal, after declaration in the Appeal) the Defendant
shall not go at liberty, but shall be Arraigned upon the same Declaration at
the Kings suit, for that it does appear by the Declaration there is a Murder
committed, and the year, day, and place, when, and where the same was
committed, and the same is not tried; and the Law will not allow such great
Offenses whereof it takes notice) to be concealed and remain unpunished,
neither will the King at his suit suffer it to be extenuated into a lesser
degree of Murder, than the Appellant did: so careful have the Laws ever been
in punishing of Murder, and revenging Innocent blood, which it seems (and as
before is observed) whilst Appeals were in use, and the Kings suit must stay
until the year and day were past, many Murderers escaped unpunished, and the
killing of men was made (as now it is) a trick of Youth, Valor, Hectoring, and
Jest, in regard of so great impunity it found, by frequent Pardons, Indulgence
of Grand Jurors, and others.

And truly, it is much with us in this Age, as it was in those days when
Appeals were in use, and had the pre-eminence of the Kings suit; Never more
killing of men by Duels, Tavern, and Game-house Quarrels, and yet never more
impunity to such Mankillers, such valiant murderers of their fellow
Christians, especially if the Mankiller have either a fame for Honor or
Valor, Money, or Interest of Friends, to procure pity, or pardon and compassion
from the Grand Jury, to find it Manslaughter (if they will go so high) where it
is Murder, and then (through that false glass) to represent it to a most
Merciful King, and thereby obtain a Pardon for the whole offense; or else, upon
his Arraignment shall confess the Manslaughter, and procure a respect of his
burning in the hand (because a Gent-hand killed the man) and afterward procure
a Pardon for that burning in the Hand, which the King may grant, it being no
part of the Judgment, but a notifying the Person, that by that Mark he may be
known again, once to have had his Clergy, that he may not have it a second time.

Many Recent, and fresh Instances (in particular Cases of blood) might be given
(were it safe or seasonable to make reflections) of diverse Murders, that have
too easily slipped through the hands of Justice, by the aversness, ignorance, or
partiality of Grand Jurors in not observing the direction of the Judges in this
particular of finding Bills Murder, instead of Manslaughter, yea, and that
many times upon directions given in Court, after open Evidence, which open
Evidence to a Grand Jury (especially in Cases of blood) ought to be avoided as
much as may be, in regard it does too much lay open and betray the Kings
Evidence, to standers by, it may be Friends of the Prisoner, that may make too
much use of it for the benefit of the Prisoner, and prejudice of truth;
besides, many Witnesses, although upon their Oath) will not speak so fully in
Court before the Bill found, and happily in the presence of the Party, or his
Friends, as in a Grand Juries Chamber; more private besides, where it is
beforehand known, what witness-pinching endeavors will be used to keep him
off, or by some sinister way to be complied with to lessen or hinder his
Testimony to the second Jury (if there be occasion) besides, the Kings Evidence
(before Issue joined betwixt the King and the Prisoner) is always to be
secret, only open to the Grand Jurors, who are always styled, Juratores pro
domino Rege, the Kings Jury, and are sworn to keep the Kings Counsel, their
Felons, and their own: now the Witnesses for the King are said to be of the
Kings Council, which would abate much of their Oath, if Evidence, and the Kings
Informations (in Cases of Blood) should be open and common.

And as you have heard, what great Inconveniences were in the use and abuse of
Appeals in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, so indeed as many (if not more
Instances of mischief and inconvenience might be given of Grand Jurors in this
Age (the best things corrupted proving the worst) you may conceive what great
complaints have formerly been made against Grand Jurors in Parliament in erring
upon both hands, by taking too much liberty to themselves, and not observing
the directions of the Court, that there was a necessity of making an Act of
Parliament, 3 H. 8.
in the 3 H. 8. (immediately after Appeals began to fall off) as you may read
in that Act of Parliament made to reform them, and to reform the Sheriffs power
in retorning them; the whole Authority of retorning Inquests (to take
Indictments) being by force of the Statute of the 11 H. 4. in Sheriffs and
Bailiffs of Franchises. It is observed by the Statute of the 3 of H. 8. that by
reason of Bribing of Sheriffs, and their Bailiffs and Officers, many true and
substantial persons were diverse times wrongfully indicted of Murder, Felonies,
and other Misdemeanors, to the utter loss of their Lives, Goods, and Lands.
And sometimes also great Felonies and Murders were concealed, and not
presented by the Grand Jurors, partially returned by the Sheriffs or their
Ministers; for the prevention whereof, it was established by the said Act of
the 3 H. 8. That all Pannels of Grand Jurors, put in by any Sheriff before any
Justice of Jail-delivery, and Justices of Peace, one being of the Quorum, in
the open Sessions to enquire for the King, shall be reformed, by putting to,
and taking off the Names of the persons which so be impannelled by every
Sheriff, at the discretion of the said Justices, before whom such Panel shall
be returned, and the Sheriff upon pain of twenty pound shall allow of such
Panel, so reformed and returned by the Justices, the one half to the King, the
other to him that will sue for the same, and the Kings Pardon shall not be a
bar to his part that so sues. So careful were the Lawmakers to have faithful
Jurors, that should neither accuse the Innocent, nor excuse the Nocent, and
that especially (in Cases of Blood) should make no concealment.

And lest all this care and reformation of Grand Jurors should do no good, but
that they should still espouse their own opinions, and make head against the
Court, and wilfully conceal Offenses they were charged to enquire of, 3 H. 7.
there is a Statute yet in force, 3 H. 7. in which it is ordained, That the
Justices of Peace may (in their discretions) cause an Inquest to be
Impannelled, to enquire of the concealments of other Inquests taken before
them, of such matters and offenses as are to be enquired and presented before
Justices of Peace, whereof complaint shall be made. And if any concealment
shall be found by any Inquest, within one year after the said concealment,
every person of the said Inquest, that made such concealment, shall be amerced
or fined at the discretion of such Justices of Peace, the said Amerciaments so
assessed in plain Sessions. And these Amerciaments or Fines may be very high,
according to the nature of the Concealment and quality of the person. This
Statute only concerns and remedies Concealments by Grand Jurors, before
Justices of the Peace, at the Sessions of the Peace, as conceiving Grand Jurors
would be bolder there, and take more liberty in their Presentiments than they
durst before Justices of Assize, Oyer, and Terminer, or Jail-delivery; as also,
that such Justices and Judges knew better how to deal with them, if they made
any such concealments or misprision before them: For the Grand Jurors being
immediate and subordinate Ministers and Officers in, and to the Court, and
answerable for their Duty there, as Coroners, Constables, and other Ministers
of the Court, they may and must stand to the Judgment of the Court; and in case
of any wilful contempt, misdemeanor, and concealment, may, without Indictment,
(for how can they be indicted at the same time by themselves) be fined by the
Court, as any other Officer and Minister of the Court.

And let Grand Jurors take heed, lest by their remisness and peevishness, they
give not occasion to the making of the like Statute as was made in the 11. 11
H. 7. c. 3.
of H. 7. c. 3. upon the surmise in the Statute, That whereas many great
Offenses, as Riots, unlawful Assemblies, Extortions, Maintenances, Imbraceries,
and other Offenses, could not be duly punished by the due Order of the Law,
except it were first found and presented by the Verdict of Twelve men thereto
duly sworn, which will not find, nor yet present the Truth (observe here what
occasions Grand Jurors had then given through their neglect) It was therefore
provided and enacted by this Statute, That Justices of Assize, and Justices of
Peace, upon Information for the King (that is merely upon the Testimony of
Witnesses, without Indictment, or use of Grand Jurors) should proceed to make
out Process, Punish and Condemn Offenders by their Discretion, as if it were
upon Indictments found by Grand Jurors. Which Statute was a great Infringment
of the Common Law, and the Liberty of the Subject of England, who ought not by
Magna Charta, and the Law of this Land, to be proceeded against, or condemned
in their Persons or Estates (in Criminals) but by Indictment first had and
found against them by Grand Jurors. It is true, that Treasons, Murders, and
Felonies, and such Offenses (for which life and member should be lost) are
excepted out of this Act (although they stand upon the same Reasons as the
other Offenses named in the Act). For by this Act and new Law, the Subject
might lose his Liberty, suffer Ransom, Stigmatizing, Pillory, Imprisonment,
loss of Lands and Estate (things very near to Life and Member). And the Lord
Coke tells us, That Empson and Dudley ( two Judges (by reason of this Act)
committed upon the Subjects insufferable Oppressions: and therefore this
Statute was justly Repealed after the Decease of H. 7. by the Statute of the 1.
of H. 8. c. 6. A good Caveat to Parliaments (says the Lord Coke) to leave all
Causes to be measured by the Golden and straight Metewand of the Law, and not
to the uncertain and crooked Cord of Discretion. And as good a Caveat it is to
Grand Jurors in cases of Blood, not so much to be led by the crooked Cord of
Discretion, as the straight Rule of the Law, and Directions of the learned
Judges, who should best know the Law, and the truest measure thereof: For if
the Rule be true (as indeed it is) Quod nihil relictum est arbitrio Judicis)
that nothing is left to the Will of the Judge, much less, arbitrio Juratorum,
to the will of Grand Jurors, they having been (through too much connivance) by
an evil practice, corrupted herein. But errores ad sua principia refer, est
refellere, To bring Errors to their beginning, is to see their last.

Now, happily Grand Jurors may conceive, and argue thus; That to extenuate an
Offense, is not to conceal it, if they find it not Murder, yet they find it in
some degree of Manslaughter, etc. Besides, if the Kings Council will put into
the Indictment the words ( Ex malitia praecogitata, etc.) which only make it
Murder, and which is matter of Fact, they must make it out to us, that there
was malice, either from our own knowledge of it, or that it is clearly proved
to us from words or deeds express, by such an act, that lies in proof, or we
are not bound to find those words, but must strike them out of the Indictment,
or find an Ignoramus: Or if the Witnesses themselves shall inform us, that it
was a sudden falling out, or done by misfortune, Se defendendo, in his own
defense, or to defend himself against one that would have robbed him, in his
House, or upon the Highway; or that he that did it was a Watchman, a Constable,
or lawful Officer, or Keeper of a Park or Warren, and in doing his Duty; or
that he that did it was a natural Fool, one not Compos mentis, a Madman, or a
young Child that did it, and by his young and tender years not capable of
malice, and so could not be guilty of Murder; or if there had been former
fallings out and differences betwixt them, yet all was reconciled, and they
good friends again, and this only a casual and sudden difference betwixt them
upon a new occasion, and exceedingly provoked unto it by him that was slain, so
that we cannot be satisfied to find it Murder in any of these cases, being
upon our Oaths to make true Inquiry, and if we find not the malice (being
matter of Fact) another Jury cannot try it. Besides, we have former practice of
our side, other Grand Jurors have had, and taken the same Liberty, and why
should not we? The Judges likewise in their Charges inform us of all the
specifical differences in Manslaughter, which we conceive they intend we should
take notice of, as it comes in proof before us, in our Inquiry. This, I
conceive, is as much as Grand Jurors have said, or can allege for themselves
(where they are not positively partial, and go clearly against their Evidence)
why they do not, or will not (for such is some of their Language) find it
Murder in all Cases, as the Court directs, and as the Bill of Indictment is
drawn and sent to them as the King's Declaration.

To satisfy these reasonings and mistakes (though sufficient has been said
already to satisfy a wise and sober Grand Jury-man, especially in a Case of
Blood, which can never receive too strict an Inquisition by a Grand Jury, the
first Inquisitors of it in Court) let them observe, that neither themselves,
nor the party accused, can be prejudiced by what they shall so find, be it
never so high: First, not themselves; they do but present a probable Accusation
(no Conviction) against such a person that has had his hands in Blood, has
killed a man, is Vir sanguinis: And here certainly it will be the best
satisfaction to Conscience (and that is the best Friend we can satisfy) to
have all the Circumstances of the Fact (as they are laid in the Indictment) to
be more judicially and circumspectly examined, sifted, and tried out, by
another Jury, by a Learned Judge, in a public Court, to the parties face,
where the King's Witnesses, and the party himself, and his Witnesses, may be
fully heard, and the whole matter fully tried and debated, which cannot be done
in a Grand Juries Chamber, but is altogether stifled and obstructed, if the
Grand Jurors suffer it not to come to this Judicial Test and Trial, but shall
put out the words, Ex malitia praecogitata, or otherwise alter the King's
Declaration and Indictment, which already has had proceedings in it, and that
in Court of Record, where it has been advised by the Kings Council upon
perusal of Informations and Examinations from Justices of Peace or Coroner, in
that Case certified to the Court, and upon hearing the Prosecutor and his
Witnesses, and so drawn and presented to the Court, Witnesses sworn to it, and
Indorsed, Jurat. in Curia, sworn in Court, and so become something more than an
ordinary Declaration or Writing in Parchment, to be altered by any, without
advice or direction of the Court; for if it might be so, the King's Council and
their Advice (together with the Judges in such Cases) would signify very
little in drawing or advising any Indictment of Murder, if Grand Jurors in
their Chamber may (from their own advice) alter it as they please, the Judges
themselves being as well concerned, in Conscience, to do right to the Prisoner
and Party accused, as Grand Jurors can be. And also admit that the Witnesses
shall inform the Grand Jury that it was a passionate and sudden falling out, or
that it was done unawares, or in his own defense, it is but what they apprehend
it to be; they can inform but what they saw, or heard, or believe; they are in
the Affirmative only, and can prove but for that instant the Fact was done;
they dare not swear that there had been no falling out before: and as they
cannot, or happily will not, prove an express malice, so neither can they swear
that there was none at all, or not such a malice as the Law implies; neither
can the Witnesses judge in all Cases, what is Manslaughter at Common Law, what
upon the Statute, what per Infortunium, what se Defendendo, what is
Justifiable, or what is Murder: neither indeed in all these Cases, can the
Grand Jurors, nor is it convenient for them to judge of all the specifical
differences, each Circumstance may so much alter a Case; and will they then, by
their uncertain Judgments, in case of Murder, conclude and preclose the Court,
and determine the Law, that this Fact of Blood shall go no higher than they
please to adjudge it; as in the case put of a Child that kills another, not the
Grand Jury (who see not the Child) but the Court, and the other Jury shall
inspect the Child, shall judge whether the Child could do such an Act, felleo
animo, ex malitia praecogitata, and so be guilty of Malice and Murder; the
Court, and not the Grand Jury, being to judge, an malitia supplebit aetatem,
whether upon hearing him speak, he may be thought capable of malice (as some at
more tender years are than others) so in the case of a Fool, or a Lunatic, a
Dumb or Deaf person; so in the case of a Reconcilement after a falling out, and
then a killing; can either Jurors or Witnesses, or any that hears but one side,
state the case aright, or judge whether the Reconciliation were perfect or not,
so as to take away all the seeds of malice, revenge, or discontent? And Mr.
Justice Stamford says, That those that are Dumb and Mute, and Infants, shall
be discharged upon Arraignment. Which shows that they are to be Indicted of
Murder: But how shall they be Arraigned, when they cannot hear, or speak, and
plead? I conceive by the Inspection and Judgment of the Court upon their
Arraignment, I mean, upon the Indictment found by the Grand Jury; which plainly
shows that the Judges (not the Grand Jurors) are Judges of the Law, and of what
shall be Murder. So in the case of killing a Thief that attempts to Rob or
commit Murder, (which is justifiable) this must judiciously and certainly
appear so upon the Trial, that the Court may judge whether there were an
intention to Steal, or to commit Murder, or Rape; and not let such a Surmise
only, That there was no such intention, lead the Grand Jury to acquit him, when
happily there was such intention. And the Statute of the 24. of H. 8. says, That
the Party so Indicted or Appealed of such Offense for killing a Thief, or one
that intended to Murder (by Verdict so found and tried) shall not lose or
forfeit Lands or Goods, but shall be discharged as one acquit of Felony; and
none can be acquit of Felony that is not tried for it; the doubt being before
this Statute, Whether he should forfeit his Goods and Chattels as one that
killed another by Chancemedley? So that there was no doubt but such a one was
Indicted of Murder before this Act, as one that had killed another by
Chance-medly must, and yet is to be Indicted; Chance-medly being Manslaughter
at Common Law.

Sure in all these cases, and all other the like cases of Blood, it is most
prudent and safe for every wise and conscientious Grand Jury-man (that is
satisfied there is Blood spilt, and the life of a reasonable Creature unjustly
taken away by such a person charged in the Indictment) rather to presume it
probable, all other Circumstances may be true, as they are laid in the
Indictment (so far as to make an Accusation against a guilty person) then that
they are not, and so to leave it fairly to the Court to judge thereof, and
themselves free from the imputation of Blood by concealment; and thereby put
the whole matter, with all its circumstances, upon a most legal and impartial
Trial, many times that appearing upon Trial that appeared not before.

And the reason why a Petit Jury, or Jury of Life and Death, may extenuate an
Offense, and make it less than the Grand Jury, is because (hearing of both
sides) they may inquire of Circumstances which a Grand Jury cannot. Besides as
the Coke 3. Inst. fol. 26. 1. Inst. Sect. 194. Fortescue c. 26. 72. Stamford l.
2. fol. 90.
Lord Coke informs (that Oracle of the Law) An Indictment is no part of the
Trial, but an Information or Declaration for the King; and the Evidence of
Witnesses to a Grand Jury, is no part of the Trial: For by Law the Trial in
that case is not by Witnesses, but by the Verdict of Twelve men, and so a
manifest diversity between the Evidence to a Jury, and a Trial by a Jury. If
the Indictment were part of the Trial, then ought he that is a Nobleman and
Lord of Parliament, to be Indicted by his Peers, for the Trial of him ought to
be by his Peers; but the Indictment against a Peer of the Realm is always found
by Freeholders, and not by Peers.

The French word Enditer signifies in Law, an Accusation found by an Inquest of
Twelve, or more, upon their Oath; and the Accusation is called Indictamentum.
And as the Appeal is ever the Suit of the party, so the Indictment is always
the Suit of the King, and as it were his Declaration, as the Appeal is the
Declaration of the party. Some derive it from the Greek word (...), to accuse,
and as properly may it be called Indictamentum ab indidicando, quia aliquid
notum facit dicendo, he that Accuses or Appealeth another man, or brings his
Crime into question, indictatus, quasi indicatus, one that has his cause
showed out in public; ( defer nomen alicujus, judicare) to Indict, is to
Accuse or Impeach. It signifies in our Common Law as much as accusatio in the
Civil Law, though it have not the like effect: Accusabilis, i. e. accusatione,
aut reprehensione dignus, one worthy of Reprehension. An Indictment being like
the precious Stone of India, called Indica, which (as Pliny notes) in rubbing
it breaks forth into a purple sweat; So does an Indictment of Murder, which
though it seem white and pale in the Grand Jurors hands, afterward by rubbing
and pressing hard in Court, breaks out into a purple or bloody sweat (as my
self have very often seen experienced, when Grand Jurors have many times made
great scruple even to find the Indictment at all) what comes from the Grand
Jury is more properly called a Presentment. For the constant form and words in
all Bills are, Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum praesentant;
observe, they are styled Juratores pro Domino Rege only; nor can they be
otherwise: for they are to hear none but the Kings Evidence, upon his own
Declaration: And whoever is to advance (as the Grand Jurors are) but the
Interest of one side, ought as rationally to be permitted, to raise and advance
it to the highest pitch (that by any reasonable presumption it will bear) as
the other side have liberty to extenuate it to the lowest degree and mean that
art and cunning (which in these cases of Blood are seldom wanting) can bring it
unto; the one being upon an Accusation against a criminous person, who has had
his hands in Blood, and is certainly guilty in truth of something in the crime
he is accused of: The other only upon his own excuse, who can never (upon the
whole matter) excuse himself, a toto, from the whole Crime of Blood. If they
are satisfied that it is an Offense against the King's Peace, his Crown and
Dignity, and the life of another person; it is enough for them to present the
whole matter to the Court, as the Court has directed and advised the Bill to
them: For every Bill of Indictment, that is formally and legally drawn up, is
presumed to have been seen, advised, and directed (as before is said) by the
Court and the King's Counsel, upon an Information of the Fact taken by them The
Judges did advise in drawing the Indictment against Leak, 4 Jac. Coke 3. Inst.
Tit. Treason, fol. 16.
, (as for the substance of it, is meet and fit to be put into such formal and
legal terms for the King) as it is by the Judges sent out of Court to the Grand
Jurors; it being a common practice for the Judges (according to the matter of
Fact) to direct upon what Statute and Law, and in what manner and form the
Indictment shall be drawn and sent to the Grand Jury, that if they find only
probable matter contained in it of accusation in any kind, they may so present
it to the Court, as their Presentment or Accusation; the word Presentment
coming from the Latin word Praesentio, to smell or scent before, praesentire in
posterum, to have a sense of that which is to come: so if they have any sense
or smell of Blood in the Indictment, it is enough for them to leave it to a
further quest of what shall come after: the Grand Jurors being like the good
Huntsman, that observing where the Hare has lately pricked, or the Deer lately
struck, or has dropped blood, lays in his Hounds, and leaves them to make the
discovery: so indeed should the Grand Jurors do the Jury of Life and Death, in
Cases of Blood, and that the Blood of their fellow Christians. And thence
likewise the Grand Jurors Presentment is called an Inquisition, and themselves
Inquisitors, from the Latin word Inquiro, inquirere, quod vulgo dicitur facere
Informationem, for every Inquisitor is as an Informer, a promoter of the
Accusation to the Court, in the behalf of the King, that it may be more
judicially enquired into and determined, which is much like a Citation of a
person into the Ecclesiastical Courts for a public fame, which is either fit
to be enquired further into and punished, or the party purged or pronounced
Innocent: or like the Masters of Requests to the King (Honorable persons) that
view all Petitions and Complaints before they be presented to the King, and
determine what are fit to be presented unto the King, and what are fit to be
rejected.

A strong Suspicion, and the Fame of the Country may (in many cases) be
Evidence sufficient for a Grand Jury to find a Bill; and here I will leave to
the observation of Grand Jurors, what I find in Mr. Justice Stamfords Pleas of
the Crown, and which he himself observes out of Bracton, a very ancient and
learned Lawyer, as Bracton's order in Cases of Suspicion upon Indictments of
Felons Bracton 's Order in le Suspicion ou Endictments del Felons, lib. 3. cap.
22. paragr. 1. fol. 143. Stamf. fol. 97.
de secta Regum. The words are these, Nunc autem dicendum est de Indictamentis
per famam Patriae, quum praesumptionem inducunt, and cui standum est donec
indictatus se a tali Suspicione purgaverit; ex fama quidem oritur suspicio, and
ex fama and Suspicione oritur gravis praesumptio. Tamen probationem admittit in
contrarium sive purgationem, Suspicio quidem multiplex esse potest, primo, si
fama oritur apud bonos and graves. Item ex facto praecedenti oriatur suspicio
cui etiam standum est donec probetur in contrarium, etc. and so goes on, to let
us know the several badges and marks of Suspicion, advising, that those that
will take Public fame for an Evidence, take it from those that are of good
Fame, and not of evil persons; as he goes on, Non de malevolis and maledicis,
sed providis and fide dignis personis, non semel sed saepius, quia clamor
innuit, and defamatio manifestat; Tumultus enim and clamor populi, quandoque
fiunt de multis quae super veritatem non fundantur. Ideo vanae voces populi non
sunt audiendae, ut ne dicatur Jesus crucifigitur, Barabas autem liberatur. The
whole Chapter is well worth the reading.

And it may not be amiss to observe, that the ancient forms of Indictments or
Bills began thus, Inquiratur pro domino Rege, Let it be enquired of for our
Sovereign Lord the King, as the offense is laid in the Indictment, whether the
offense be so (as is there supposed) which is as much as if the Grand Jury
should say, We judge it fit that it be farther enquired of, whether it be truly
so indeed, as it is here supposed; for the Offense, as it is laid in the
Indictment, as it comes from the Grand Jury (before it receive a farther trial
and enquiry of another Jury) is no more but Crimen suppositum and impositum, an
offense supposed and laid to ones charge to answer; and this clearly appears by
the Record of every Acquittal or Conviction of any that is tried upon an
Indictment; for the words of the Acquittal or Conviction (as they are drawn up
in the Record) are these, viz. Juratores (that is to say, the Jury of Life and
Death) dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod praedictus A.B. non est (vel est)
Culpabilis de Felonia and Murdro praedict. in Indictamento praed. specificat.
ei superius imponit. modo and forma prout per Indictamentum praed. superius
versus cum supponitur: so that supponitur and imponitur, supposed and imposed,
is all that can be inferred from the Indictment; the Grand Juries Presentment
(upon hearing of one side) being the Supposition, and the other Jury (upon
hearing of both sides) the Imposition; or Supponitur, and that relates to the
substance of the Indictment, as the Grand Jury suppose it to be; the Imponitur,
and that relates to the modo and forma of the Offense, and the circumstances of
it, as it is laid in the Indictment, as it is found by the Jury of Life and
Death; and these Circumstances indeed are the proper enquiry of the Jury of
Life and Death, upon the hearing of Evidence on both sides, as appears clearly
by the penning and drawing up of these Records, and all this is no more than in
every common Declaration at the suit of the Party, only this Indictment is as a
Declaration upon Oath, and must therefore (for the satisfaction of those that
are sworn) contain, that which for substance seems to them ( prima facie) to be
a probable truth, and a transgression of a Law, not strictly looking into the
matter and form, aggravations and circumstances of the Fact (as it is laid in
the Indictment) for those do but attend and usher in the Fact; but Grand Jurors
are principally to eye and look upon the single Fact and act it self, and
finding one that has had his hands in blood, and that probably (upon a farther
Enquiry) may become, reus, a guilty person, by killing of another person, they
are to put their Billa vera unto it, although they have no proof at all of the
Aggravations and Circumstances that attend the Fact (Evidence many times
arising out of the parties own mouth (against himself, upon a strict
examination in Court) more than the Witnesses against him have proved.) And it
is well observed in the Book called, The Terms of the Law, upon these two
words, Billa vera, where it is said, that Billa vera is the Indorsment of the
Grand Jury upon any Presentment or Indictment, which they find to be probably
true, (mark these words) probably true; nor do I take the Adjective Vera in
this place to signify True, but meet, reason, or fit, and so it is often used
in Terence, and by the Grammarians, Verum est, it is fit: so that Billa vera
upon the Bill does not signify, a true Bill, that has nothing but truth in
it, but a meet, or fit Bill for the further enquiry of another Jury, which ever
succeeds such an Indorsment of Billa vera by a Grand Jury; certainly it is upon
a great mistake (although I confess it is often used in Law Books, and by wise
men) to call the Presentment of a Grand Jury a Verdict, to say that their
Indorsing Billa vera, or Ignoramus (which is all they do) is their Verdict,
there being a great difference between Billa vera and Veredictum, which
signifies dictum veritatis, and even induces a Conviction; for nothing can
properly be called a Verdict, but where it is given by a Jury; after an Issue
joined, upon hearing of both sides, Veredictum, is, as it were, quoddam
Evangelium, like a little Gospel of Truth, for indeed every Verdict (which
convicts a man to the loss of Life or Estate) ought to be as true as the Gospel
the Jurors swear upon; for upon the Issue of a Verdict, the Lives and Estates
of all persons depend: And therefore an Attaint lies in Law against those
Jurors that give a false Verdict, contrary to the truth of their Evidence,
which is a Villainous Judgment, a very great Judgment in Law. And this Attaint
did never by Law, lie, or was brought against Grand Jurors for any false
Presentment, for they do but barely present an offense, upon hearing of one
side, and therefore can be no Verdict (as from them) the Grand Jury being for
number indefinite, that being properly called a Verdict from such a Jury, where
the Law makes a determinate number of twelve, or twenty four, and no more:
Besides, it is always said in the Record, where such a Jury finds a Verdict,
Juratores super Sacramentum suum dicunt, etc. But where the Grand Jury present,
Juratores super Sacramentum suum praesentant (not dicunt) there being as much
difference between praesentant and dicunt, as betwixt a known truth, and the
report and fame of a fact done.

And this will the better appear, if it be well observed what Grand Jurors
write or Indorse upon the back of those Bills they find; for though they
Indorse such Bills ( Billa vera) yet they never Indorse upon those Bills they
do not find ( Billa falsa) as if one were true, and the other false, for should
they do so, it would be like an Accusation against the Prosecutor that prefers
the Bill, and a great discouragement to the Kings Evidence; but they modestly
write ( Ignoramus) which signifies to the Court, they are ignorant of the
matter in the Bill, and that they find no cause, either from what they have
heard from the Witnesses, or know of their own knowledge, to commend it to a
farther Enquiry: the Verb Ignoro, coming from Ignarus, not to know, to be
ignorant. And this does further evince, that the Grand Jurors Presentment
cannot properly be called a Verdict; because a Verdict does in Law either
convict or acquit, which neither their Billa vera, nor Ignoramus does; the
first is always put to a farther enquiry, the last is no acquittal to the
party; for although there be many Ignoramus's against any person, yet may more
Bills be preferred against the same person for the same offense; for it may be
they did not find the Bill, in regard some Witnesses were absent or corrupted,
or the matter in the Bill mistaken; happily it may be no Felony, but something
done in jest, or in the nature of a Trespass, or a Natural death instead of a
Murder, or the Witnesses of no Credit, or the like. But if there be any thing
of Truth in the Bill proved to them to make a Crime, although not so fully as
is laid in the Bill, they must not in such case write ( Ignoramus) as if they
knew nothing of a Crime; as if it be a Murder in the Bill, and the Proof
reaches but to an Infortunium, or se defendendo, or to any degree of unlawful
killing, they must not write Ignoramus upon the Bill; or if Burglary, and the
Proof makes it but a single Felony, and no Burglary, they must not Indorse it (
Ignoramus) but in all such cases, where they are in any doubt, the best way for
them will be to advise with the Learned Judge, to move the Court for directions
therein. It is too great a Scandal to a Grand Jury (Persons in that quality
highly to be esteemed) to say, that their Ignoramus (that is, their Ignorance)
is their Verdict. It is very safe for Grand Jurors, before they find an
Ignoramus, to examine every Witness produced; but if they have many Witnesses
in Murder or Felony, if any one Witness induce a strong and pregnant
Presumption it is enough, without perplexing themselves, in have of business,
they need not examine any more, but put Billa vera unto it.

If a Grand Jury find, upon an Indictment of Murder, that A. killed B. what is
it to them (as has been said before) whether it be Murder or Manslaughter,
whether it were done, Ex malitia praecogitata, per Infortunium, se defendendo,
in loco and tempore belli, or otherwise, this is Special matter, and Special
matter ought to be found when it is at Issue by another Jury, and must arise (I
mean the truth of it) super totam materiam of the Evidence, or proof on both
sides; which can never be found and determined by a Grand Jury, that hear but
one side, for very seldom is matter of Fact truly stated in a matter of
difficulty, by one side, and therefore (as before is said) the Statute of
Gloucester provides, that every Manslaughter, per Infortunium or se
defendendo, shall be found per Patriam after the Prisoner has joined Issue
with the King, and put himself de bono and malo, of good or evil, that is,
either for his Acquittal or Conviction, super Patriam, to be tried by his
Country.

And the Jurors of Life and Death themselves are not tied, as not strictly to
the form of an Indictment, so not to the whole matter of it; not to the form,
as it was well urged by Sergeant Montague Reader at the Arraignment of the Earl
of Somerset, for Murder, by poisoning of Sr. Thomas Overbury in the Tower, who
told the Jury, That they must not expect visible Proofs in a work of darkness;
that many things were laid in an Indictment only for form; that they must not
look that the proof should follow that, but only that which is substantial, and
the substance (in that Case) must be this, Whether my Lord of Somerset
procured, or caused the poisoning of Sr. Thomas Overbury, or not. The Lord Coke
(then Chief Justice) and other Judges present at the Trial, stood up and said,
The Law is clear in this point, that the Proofs must follow the Substance, not
the Form, that the Law gives forms in Indictments, but substance in proofs. And
yet this was spoken to a Jury of Life and Death, who are more carefully to look
into Circumstances and Forms (because their error is incurable, if they Convict
a man to lose his life wrongfully) than Grand Jurors are. And I cannot but
further observe (in this Case of Sr. Thomas Overbury) that which I would have
all Grand Jurors, and Jurors of Life and Death, observe, as an Instance to
guide them in other Cases of like nature, that although it was laid in the
Indictment, That the ninth of May, Anno 11 Jac. Regis, Richard Weston ( who was
procured by the Earl of Somerset) gave to the said Sr. Thomas Overbury a poison
of green and yellow color, called Rosacre, in Broth; and the first of June,
Anno 11 Jac. Regis supradict. gave him another poison, called white Arsenick,
and that the tenth of June Anno 11. supradict. gave to him a poison called
Mercury, sublimate in Tarts, and the fourteenth day of September, Anno 11.
supradict. gave him a Glister mixed with poison called Mercury sublimate; ( Vt
praedict. Thomam Overbury magis celeriter interficeret, and murdraret.) Et
praedictus Thomas Overbury de separalibus venenis praedictis, and operationibus
inde a praedictis separalibus temporibus, etc. graviter languebat, usque ad 15.
diem Decembris Anno 11. supradict. quo die dict. Thomas de praedict.
separalibus venenis obiit venenatus, etc. And albeit it did not appear, or
could appear, of which of the said poisons he died, yet it was Resolved by all
the Judges of the Kings Bench, that the Indictment was good; for the substance
of the Indictment was, whether he was poisoned, or not; and it appeared that
Weston within that time aforesaid, had given unto Sr. Thomas Overbury diverse
other poisons, as namely the powder of Diamonds, Cantharides, Lapis Causticus,
and powder of Spiders and Aquafortis in a Glyster. And it was resolved by all
the said Judges, that albeit all the said poisons were not contained in the
Indictment, yet the Evidence of giving them was sufficient to maintain the
Indictment, for the substance of the Indictment was (as before is said) Whether
he were poisoned, or not. And when the cause of the Murder is laid in the
Indictment to be poison, no Evidence can be given of another cause, because
they be distinct and other causes: So if the Murder be laid by one kind of
Weapon, as by a Sword, Dagger, Stilletto, Stick, Tobacco-pipe, Knife, Sheers,
or other like Weapon, it makes no difference, the Evidence will be sufficient,
if the party be slain by any of these, because they are all under one Classis
or cause. v. Mackally's Case, li. 9. fo. 67.


And afterward, Anne Turner, Sr. Gervase Elwys, and Richard Francklyn a
Physician (Purveyor of the Poisons) were Indicted as Accessaries before the
fact done: And it was Resolved by all the said Judges, that either the proofs
of the poison contained in the Indictment, or of any other poison (although it
were out of the Indictment) were sufficient to prove them Accessaries; for the
substance of the Indictment against them as Accessaries, was, Whether they did
procure Weston to poison Sr. Thomas Overbury, or no? So that it may be observed
here, what in the Case above was observed by the Lo. Coke, that Jurors were not
to expect a direct and precise Proof in every point laid in the Indictment;
showing, how impossible it were to Convict a Poysoner, who uses not to take
any Witnesses to the composing of his slibber-sawces; neither do other
Murderers, to the contriving of their malice, and manner of killing another,
but keep the fire burning in their own bosoms until it break out.

Nor in all Cases of Murder is it material, that express Malice be proved to
the Jury of Life and Death, though they be to Convict the Prisoner, much less
(or not at all) is it material to prove it to the Grand Jury, who are but to
present it, not to the Jury of Life and death in any case where the Law only
implies it, for such proof is in the Judgment of the Court and not in the Jury,
which the Jury must submit unto and be overruled in; much less is this implied
Malice to be proved to the Grand Jury, for it lies not in the proof of
Witnesses, but in the construction of the Law (as is said before;) and yet the
Grand Jury must find those words, Ex malitia praecogitata, etc. as if they were
proved expressly unto them by Witnesses, or otherwise the Jurors of Life and
Death cannot enquire of the offense (as Murder is a wilful killing of a man
upon malice, forethought (but this must either be expressed in proof, or
implied by Law) it seems to come of the Saxon word, Mordren, which so
signifies; and Mordridus is, the Murderer, even to this day amongst them in
Saxony, from whence we have most of our words: Or it may be derived of Mort est
dire, as Mors dira, Terms of the Law, title Murder, fol. 207.
Murder:) And the Jury of Life and Death (in such a Case) must find those
words expressly, although they cannot be proved unto them, but are only implied
and supplied by Law, or else the party accused can never be Convicted of
Murder, as might be instanced in very many cases, take some for all ( viz.)
One in prison kills his Keeper, and makes an escape, where no malice or falling
out can be proved; a stranger, or other person kills a Watchman, Constable, or
other Officer, that has good warrant to stay him, though happily there be no
cause for his stay, being an Innocent person, or another person, and not the
same they intended; here is no Malice, yet this is Murder ex malitia
praecogitata, etc. One goes into the Street, or Highway, and kills the first
man he meets, although he did never see him before; The Father or Mother takes
their sucking Child, and dasheth out the Brains of it against the wall; Two
persons are fighting a Duel together upon cool blood, upon premeditate malice,
and a third person comes to part them, and is killed by one of them, this is
Murder ex malitia praecogitata, in him that killed him (if not in both)
although neither of them ever saw him before, and yet no malice to this man: Si
sit aliquis qui mulitrem pregnantem percusserit si puerperium non formatum, vil
animatum fuerit and maxim si animatum, fecit homicid: Stamf. fol. 12. In this
fol. you shall find Justice Stamford using the words homicid. and murdrum, as
signifying the same. v. Stamf. fol. 21. c. 13.
One wilfully kicks or wounds a Woman great with Child, whereby the Child is
wounded in her, she is afterward safely delivered of the Child (the Child
alive) the wound or bruise by the kick or blow appearing upon the Child
mortally, whereof afterward it dies, this is Murder ex malit. praecog. and
yet what malice had this man to the Child he never did see? Diverse persons are
unlawfully hunting in a Park, one of them kills the Keeper (after the Keeper
had duly, according to his Office, admonished him to stand) all the rest of the
Company (although a mile off in the said Park, and out of sight) are guilty of
wilful Murder of the Keeper, and yet nothing of malice can be expressly proved.
One is shooting at a Cock or a Hen, and kills another person, this is Murder,
his act was unlawful. One finding a Gun or Pistol charged, lying upon a Table,
or other place, takes it up into his hands, draws up the Cock (not thinking it
to be charged) and in a jesting way gives fire at one in the Room, the Gun goes
off and kills him; this is Murder, he had nothing to do to meddle with the
Gun, it was out of his Calling, and none of his, he must Jest at his peril. A
Drunken-man gets upon a Horse (which a sober person might ride quietly) and in
a Fair or Market occasions the Horse to run over another person, and kills him;
this is Murder. A gives B the lie, with many other provoking words, as Coward,
Thief, Murderer, whereupon B strikes A, and kills him; this is Murder ex
malitia, etc. words are not a sufficient provocation for one man to kill
another. If one kills another without any provocation (actual) of the part of
him that is slain; Coke li. 9. fo. 67. 6. in Mackally's Case.
this is Murder, the Law implies Malice. If a man knowing that many People
are coming along the Street from a Sermon, 3. Inst. fol. 57.
throw a Stone over a wall or house, intending only thereby to fear them, and
thereupon one is killed with the Stone; this is Murder, although he knew not
the party slain. If A assault B to rob him, and in resisting A kills B; this
is Murder by malice implied, although he never knew him.

If one meaning to steal a Deer in a Park, 3 Inst. fol. 56.
shoots at the Deer, and by glance of the Arrow kills a Boy that is hidden
in a Bush; this is Murder, the Act being unlawful, though here was no intent
to hurt the Boy, knowing nothing of his being there.

If a Woman being quick with Child, 22 Ed. 3. Coron. 263.
do wilfully with a potion, or otherwise, intend the destruction of the Child
in her womb, the Child being born alive, dies of the potion, battery, or other
cause; this is Murder.

If one keep a Mastiff-dog, that is used to bite people, near the Common
Highway, or a Bull or Beast, that has hurt any one (after notice) they kill
any one, it will be Murder in the Owner, although not present when the fact
was done; and yet in this, and the other precedent Cases, here is no express
Malice to be proved, but what the Law construes to be so, which can in no sense
be left to the Murder is interpretative in the Law, and not to be left to
Grand Jurors opinions.
Grand Jury to be judge of. But in all these Cases, and many more, must be
ruled and overruled by the Judgment of the Court, in point of Law.

Although no Malice in these Cases can be proved to the Grand Jury or petit
Jury, Aliquando vero clanculum and nemine vidente, ita ut sciri non possit quid
sit actum, hujusmodi homicidium dici poterit Murdrum. Stamf. 6. 1. fol. 12.
Hales and Petty Case in his Comment.
yet the Indictment must be expressly drawn, and so found by the Grand Jury,
with these words to make it Murder, Ex malitia sua praecogitata, etc. that is,
that he killed him out of his malice, forethought; not that these words make a
new offense of Felony and Murder, that was not Felony and Murder before, and
so esteemed in all Cases where it was done voluntarily and by assault; and this
appears plainly by the Statute of Marlebridge (formerly mentioned) 35 H. 3.
where it is said, Murder from henceforth shall not be adjudged, before our
Justices, where it is found by Misfortune only, but it shall take place in such
as are slain by Felony, and not otherwise. By this Statute it is plain, that
killing one unawares, by misfortune, was Murder before this Statute, and that
after this Statute, all other killing, where it is Felony, shall be Murder, as
before this Statute, Felony is a general term, Terms of the Law, Felony 160.
fol.
which comprehends diverse heinous offenses, for which the Offender ought to
suffer death, and lose their Goods and Lands. They are called Felonies of the
Latin word Fell, which is in English Gall, in French Feil, or of the ancient
English word Fell or Fierce, or because they are intended to be done with a
cruel, bitter, fell, fierce or mischievous mind.

So the Statute de Officio Coronatoris, made 4 Ed. 4 Ed. 1.
1. (where the Coroner is well directed his duty) where any person is slain, or
suddenly dead, how he should behave himself, which is worth his reading. It
follows in the said Act in these words, And if any* be found Culpable of the
Murder, the Coroner shall immediately go to his house, and Inventory his
Goods, Chattels, Lands, etc. (as in that Act is further directed) I only
mention it to show, that all that were found so slain, the Coroner was to
enquire of it, as Murder, or otherwise there could be no Inventorying of
Goods, valuing, or seizing of Lands, etc. or committing the Offender to the
Goal by the Coroner, as plainly does appear by that Act.

So the Statute of the second of Ed. 2 Ed. 6. c. 24.
6. where one is stricken in one County, and dies in another (it being doubtful
before where the Trial should be) gives power to the party concerned, to bring
an Appeal (who had not power to Appeal in that case before) of Murder only in
the County where the party dies, and in that case can bring no Appeal of
Manslaughter (as in the straightened sense some would take the word
Manslaughter) by this Statute is declared, That where any Murder or Felony
(which word Felony here cannot comprehend Manslaughter) shall be committed in
one County, and there be Accessaries to the same in another County, upon an
Indictment found in the County where such Accessaries are guilty, the
Certificate of the Conviction or attainder of the Principal shall be good, to
proceed against such Accessaries: So that if the Principal be not Indicted of
Murder, I conceive it is doubtful upon this Statute, to proceed to the
Condemnation and Judgment of the Accessory in another County, for by no
congruity can the words or Felony comprehend Manslaughter. A Pardon of all
Felonies will hardly pardon Manslaughter, or be allowed of.

So in the 4th of H. 4 H. 7. c. 13.
7. cap. 13. there are these words in the Statute, Whereas upon trust of the
privilege of the Church, diverse persons have been the more bold to commit
Murder, etc. because they have been continually admitted to the benefit of the
Clergy as often as they offended; It is enacted, That every one being once
admitted to have the benefit of his When Clergy began appears not by any Common
Law book, it takes its root from a Constitution of the Pope, that the Priests
should not be accused before a Secular Judge. Co. Magna Charta 636. It has
been confirmed by diverse Parliaments, and so favorably used by the temporal
Judges, that it has been allowed to all Laymen that could read, which is more
than the Common Law requires. Stamford fol. 123. The first that mentions this
Privilege at Common Law is Bracton, that wrote in the time of King Henry the
Third. Bracton lib. 3. fol. 123. The next is the Statute of Westminster. 3 Ed. 1. c.
2. By the Popes Constitutions the Privilege of Clergy extended to all Offenses
whatsoever; and the Prelates of England, by Color thereof, did claim the same
as generally. vide 9 Ed. 2. Articuli Cleri. Yet within this Kingdom Clergy was
allowed only in Cases of Murder, petty Treason, and Felony, not in Treason
against the King himself.
Clergy (if not within Holy Orders) shall not a second time be admitted for
such an offense. And that every person so Convicted for Murder, to be marked
with an M upon the brawn of the left Thumb, and for another Felony with a T.
Here it is plain that the word Murder comprehend all manner of Manslaughter,
all manner of Felonious killing, every Murder being Manslaughter, and every
Manslaughter then as Murder, they being Termini convertibiles, equally
signifying the Genus of Man-killing, you may perceive by what has been said
before, that Felony cannot comprehend Manslaughter or Murder, for here the one
is to be burnt with an M for Murder, the Felon with a T for Theft, both which
marks, upon the respective Convictions, are (as I conceive in those Cases) by
virtue of this Statute, observed to this day, although we now apply the Letter
M to such, as the Jury of Life and Death, upon an Indictment of Murder from
the Grand Jury, shall Convict of Manslaughter, that is, upon the point shall
find this Special matter, that is to say, that there was no Malice, express or
implied, in him that killed the other; but in a sudden heat of blood,
occasioned by an actual (not verbal) provocation in him that was killed. This
contradistinction betwixt the two words, Murder and Manslaughter (as I
conceive) came into our Laws only since the Statute of the 23 H. 8. c. 1. that
takes away Clergy, that is, will not accept of them to be Clerks that kill
another maliciously. I find not this distinction before, either in the
Levitical Laws (the Laws of God) or the Laws of England: No Sanctuary or place
of Refuge (as is said before) by the Law of God, being allowed for such a
distinction, but both should have been plucked from the Horns of the Altar; and
by our Law, in both cases (notwithstanding this Novel distinction) they were
equally admitted to Clergies, I mean by the Common Law.

The said Statute of the 4 H. 7. c. 13. being the first Statute (that I find)
that appoints burning in the Hand for Murder and Felony, and takes away Clergy
for the Second offense of the same kind, where Clergy has been allowed before;
and it is observable, that in this Statute it is called Murder, with, or
without the words Ex malitia praecogitata, not having respect to our Modern
distinction, which holds only (as is said) in the enquiry of the Jury of Life
and Death, who have the whole matter of Fact before them, with all the
circumstances thereof as it arises from both sides, which the Grand Jurors
neither have, nor ought to have.

Then comes the Statute of the 23 H. 23 H. 8. c. 1.
8. (formerly mentioned) being the first Statute that takes away Clergy for the
first offense of Murder, called in this Statute Wilful Murder That is,
voluntary and of set purpose, though it be done upon a sudden occasion; for if
it be voluntary, the Law implies Malice. Coke 3. Inst. fol. 62.
, of Malice prepensed; this Statute being made to rectify the great abuse in
Ordinaries, in suffering notorious Thieves and Murderers to make purgation,
and provides, That no person which hereafter shall be found guilty (after the
Laws of this Land) of any petit Treason, or for any Wilful Murder of Malice
prepensed, Robbing of Churches, Robbing of Persons in their houses, or upon the
Highway, wilful burning of Houses, or Barns with Corn, or Accessaries before
the same, shall be from henceforth admitted to the benefit of their Clergy, but
suffer death as if they had been no Clerks; it seems all that were, that is, as
many as the Ordinary then esteemed so, Clerks, although they were guilty of
Murder, petty Treason, and Felony, suffered not death, (so great favor and
immunity had they in those times for such bloody and crying sins) so prevalent
were the Clergy, and those within Holy Orders, in those days, that this very
Act of Parliament, that takes away Clergy from others, that commit Murder,
Burglary, and Robbery, and other Offenses before-named, excepts all within Holy
Orders Within five years of the time of King Henry the Second, there were above
a 100 Murders by Priests and men within Holy Orders.
, from the same pains and dangers other persons must suffer for the same
Offenses; which freedom and Indulgence continued to them in Holy Orders (as
they call it) until the 28 H. 8. c. 1. which provides, That they within Holy
Orders, as to such and other Offenses, The Exemption of the Clergy taken away
by the Laws of Clarendon, Graft. 1187.
shall be under the same pains and dangers that others be. Now this Statute
makes none of the former offenses Felony or Murder, that was not so before the
making of this Statute, but only takes from them (that commit any of these
offenses) the benefit of their Clergy; certainly there wanted not those that
committed wilful Murder of Malice prepensed (as we now distinguish it) before
the making of this Statute; as those that committed Sacrilege, robbed persons
in their Houses, and upon the Highway, wilfully fired Houses, and Barns with
Corn, and were Abettors to the said Offenses: so it is very plain, that this
Statute makes no alteration as to the drawing and penning of Indictments of
Murder, Sacrilege, Robbery, Burglary, etc. but only takes away Clergy from
every person, who after the making of that Statute should be found guilty (as
the words of the Act are, after the Laws of this Land) for any of the aforesaid
Offenses. So that according as the Indictment of Murder was, by the Laws of
this Land, before the making of this Act, so must it be after the making of
this Act wilful Murder, in the Statute 32 H. 8. c. 12. and this Statute of the
23. of the same King, comprehends as well that which we call Manslaughter, and
every killing where the will of man is freely engaged, as it does wilful
Murder of Malice prepensed; compare them together, in the one you will find
Clergy taken away for wilful Murder of malice prepensed, and Sanctuary from
wilful Murder, and generally such Offenses as were prohibited Sanctuary by
former Statutes are now prohibited Clergy by later Statutes. The words Ex
malitia praecogitata, and murdravit (which now make all this contest) before
the making of this Statute in any case of Murder, neither aggravated nor
extenuated the Offense, made it neither more nor less penal. But since the
making of this Act, those words are made necessary in all Indictments and
Convictions of Murder, and principally and only (in cases of wilful Murder)
to be considered and weighed by the Court and Jury of Life and Death, upon
hearing and debating the matter, with all its circumstances (as has been said
before) on both sides; those words being matter of Law, mixed with matter of
Fact, and are not to be expunged by a Grand Jury, because they cannot
afterward be supplied nor employed by the Court, and Jury of Life and Death
after the Arraignment of the Prisoner, should there appear upon Trial never so
great cause, yet Felonice and some other words (though material) may be
supplied in a Special Verdict. If upon an Indictment of Murder, quod Felonice
percussit, etc. the Jury find percussit tantum, yet the Verdict is good; for
the Judges of the Court are to resolve upon the special matter, whether it was
Felonice, Cok. lib. 9. 69.
etc. or not? Coke lib. 9. 69. And if the Court adjudge it Murder, then the
Jurors, in the conclusion of their Verdict, find him guilty of the Murder
contained in the Indictment, and to show the power of a Jury of Life and Death
(who indeed should have the fullest and highest Charge can be laid against the
prisoner, for the Offense he is to be tried). If A. be Appealed or Indicted of
Murder, viz. that he of malice prepensed killed B. A pleads that he is not
guilty modo and forma, yet the Jury may find A guilty of Manslaughter, without
malice prepensed; because the killing of A. is the matter, and malice prepensed
is but a circumstance, Plow. Com. 101
Plow. Com. 101. And generally where modo and forma, are not of the substance
of the Issue, but words of form there, it suffices, although the Verdict does
not find the precise Issue, 22 H. 8. c. 19. 22 H. 8. c. 19.


The first Statute that I find these words mentioned in of malice prepensed, 22
H. 8. c. 14.
is the 22 H. 8. c. 14. where it is said, If any person, for any petty Treason,
Murder, or Felony, have obtained the King's Pardon, or is otherwise discharged
out of Sanctuary, and afterward commit another petty Treason, Felony, or
Manslaughter by Chance-medly (and not Murder of malice prepensed) and
afterward take Sanctuary again for any such petty Treason, Felony, or
Manslaughter by Chance-medly, the same person shall enjoy a second privilege
of Sanctuary: So that he that committed Murder of malice prepensed, could not
enjoy the benefit of Sanctuary a second time.

Then comes the Statute of the 25* H. 8. c. 3. 25 H. 8. c. 3.
and remedies diverse defects that were in the said Statute of the 23 H. 8.
Forasmuch as the said Act extended only to such persons as were found guilty,
after the due course of the Laws of this Land, diverse and great Robbers,
Murderers, Burglars, and Felons, did commit those Offenses, perceiving, and
clearly understanding (by the words of the said Statute) that they should not
lose the benefit of Clergy, unless they be found guilty, after the due course
of the Law, upon their Arraignment of, and upon the said Murders and Felonies
so by them done and committed, by reason whereof diverse of the said persons,
upon their Arraignment of the said Offenses and Felonies upon their Indictments
against them, would stand mute, and sometimes challenge peremptorily over the
number of Twenty, or else would not answer directly to the same Indictments
whereupon they were Arraigned according to Law; It was therefore provided by
this Statute, That every person that hereafter should he Indicted of petty
Treason, wilful burning of Houses, Murder, Robbery, or Burglary, or other
Felony, according to the tenor or meaning of the said Statute of the 23 H. 8.
and thereupon Arraigned, and do stand mute of malice, or froward mind, or
challenge peremptorily above the number of Twenty, or else will not, or do not
answer directly to the same Indictment and Felony whereupon he is so Arraigned,
shall lose the benefit of Clergy, in like manner and form as if he had directly
pleaded to the same petty Treason, Murder, Robbery, or other Felony whereupon
he is so Arraigned, (not guilty) and thereupon had been found guilty after the
Laws of the Land. Upon the penning of this Act it seems clear that all
Indictments for the unlawful or wilful killing of any person, ought to be made
Murder as they were formerly before this Act. For if the Prisoner should be
Arraigned upon an Indictment only of Manslaughter (according to the now
distinction of Manslaughter) and upon his Arraignment should stand mute, not
Answer directly, or challenge peremptorily, whereby he could have no Trial, it
would be a great question, Whether he could have Judgment upon this Act? The
words are, petty Treason, wilful burning of Houses, Murder, Robbery, Burglary,
or other Felonies; For as it is not named here by the term Manslaughter, so it
cannot (with any congruity) be comprehended under any of those Heads: Not under
the general Head of other Felonies, after the commemoration of so many several
Felonies next before, as Burning of Houses, Robbery, Burglary, and other
Felonies, must needs be intended of such like Felonies or Thefts. And what
Judge (in case of Life and Death) will proceed upon such a moot point (or
rather a clear Case to the contrary) to give Judgment and Sentence of Death
upon any by this Act of Parliament.

Then comes the Statute made in the 28 H. 8. c. 1. 28 H. 8. c. 1.
and rehearses all these former Statutes, viz. 22 H. 8. 23 H. 8. and the 25 H.
8. and continues them all until the next Parliament; and provides further, That
such as be within Holy Orders, shall be under the same pains and dangers that
others be; (all within Holy Orders being by the 23 H. 8. excepted in Cases of
Murder, petty Treason, and Felony, from the pains and dangers that Lay persons
suffered for such offenses). It seems those in Holy Orders then began to lose
their esteem, as appears more fully in the ensuing Act, which perpetuates the
former Acts.

Then comes the Statute made in 32 H. 8. c. 3. 32 H. 8. c. 3.
and rehearses the same Acts again, and makes them perpetual; and Enacts, That
all persons within Holy Orders, which by the Laws of this Realm ought, or may
have their Clergy for any Felonies, and shall be admitted to the same, shall be
burnt in the hand, in like manner as Lay Clerks in such Cases, and shall suffer
all such pains, dangers, and forfeitures as Lay persons in like Cases.

Then comes the Statute of the 1 Ed. 6. 1 Ed. 6. c. 12.
and after it has declared what Acts shall be Treason; declares what Offenses
shall be outed of Clergy, viz. Such persons, as in due form of the Laws, shall
be attainted or convicted of Murder of malice prepensed, of poisoning of
malice prepensed, of breaking of any House by day or by night (any person being
put in fear) robbing any person in or near the Highway, felonious stealing of
Horses, Geldings, or Mares, or for felonious taking of any Goods out of any
Parish Church, or other Church or Chapel; all Offenders in any of these Cases
shall be excluded of the benefit of Clergy, whether they be convicted by
Verdict, Confession, or stand Mute, etc. and that in all other Cases of Felony,
Clergy may be allowed. Here is no mention of petty Treason, burning of Houses
and Barns with Corn, and Accessaries before, to be outed of Clergy, as is in
the 23 H. 8. c. 1. So that it seems after the making of this Act, they might
have had their Clergy; the new Offenses added to this Act to be outed of Clergy
(that were not in that Act of 23 H. 8. are only stealing of Horses, Geldings,
and Mares: And by this Act Poisoning is made Murder, Poisoning murder,
although no malice be proved.
although no malice be proved, and Clergy taken away.

Then comes the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. 2 Ed. 6. c. 24.
and this Statute gives remedy in several Cases of Murder and Felony (where
there was none before at Common Law). As first, where one is feloniously
stricken in one County, and dies thereof in another. Secondly, where one is
Accessory in one County to a Murder, or Felony in another County; before this
Statute, no sufficient Indictment in any of these Cases, could be taken in
either of the said Counties; for that by the custom of the Realm, the Jurors
of the County where such party died of such stroke, would take no knowledge of
the said stroke (being matter of Fact) in a foreign County, although the said
Counties and Places adjoined very near together; nor the Jurors of the County
where the stroke was given, could take knowledge of the death in another
County, although such death most apparently came of such stroke; so that such
Offense (and the other Offenses before mentioned) for the like reason remained
unpunished; and such Murder could not be proceeded against, either by way of
Indictment or Appeal: Now this Statute provides, That an Indictment found by
the Jurors of the County where the death shall happen, whether it be found
before the Coroner, upon sight of the dead Body, or other Justices that shall
have power to inquire of such Offenses, shall be as good and effectual in Law,
as if the stroke and poisoning had been committed and done in the same County
where the party shall dye, or where such Indictment shall be found.

And likewise provides, That such Party, to whom Appeal of Murder shall be
given by the Law, may commence, take, and sue Appeal of Murder in the same
County, where the same person so feloniously stricken or poisoned shall dye, as
well against the Principals, as against every Accessory to the same Offenses,
in whatsoever County or Place the Accessory or Accessaries shall be guilty of
the same. And does further provide, That where any Murder or Felony shall be
done in one County, and another person, or more, shall be Accessory, or
Accessaries, in any manner of wise to any such Murder or Felony in any other
County, that then an Indictment found or taken against such Accessory, or
Accessaries (upon the Circumstances of such matter before the Justices, etc.)
where such Offense of Accessory shall be committed, shall be as good in Law, as
if the principal Offense had been committed in the same County where the same
Indictment against such Accessory shall be found. Cok. l. 9. f. 117.


Here it may be observed, That the Appeal given by this Statute to the party,
where one is wounded or poisoned in one County, and dies thereof in another,
must be an Appeal of Murder, otherwise it will not lie either against
Principal or Accessory by the words of this Statute. So in case of an
Indictment (where it is said in this Statute, where any Murder or Felony shall
be committed in one County, and the Accessory be in another County) here the
word Murder must be one Species, and Felony, that is Thest, another; viz.
carrying of stolen Goods into another County: So that the Indictment in this
case against the Principal must be Murder, or the Accessory thereto is not
tryable in another County; and there must be a Certificate of such Conviction
or Attainder of the Principal under the Seals of the Justices before whom such
Principal was Convicted or Attainted, before such Accessory can be tried; and
that shall be sufficient to enable the Justices to try the Accessory in Murder
or Felony in another County. And although the word Manslaughter be mentioned in
this Statute (as thus, within the year and day after such Murder and
Manslaughter committed) it is not here mentioned, as any Species of Murder,
but only as the Genus called in this place only Murder and Manslaughter.

Then comes the Statute of the 5 Ed. 6. 5 Ed. 6. c. 9.
and Resolves three several Doubts or Questions moved upon the Statute of the
23 H. 8. c. 1. This is not much pertinent to this purpose, but that it takes
away Clergy, and relates to several Statutes before mentioned concerning
murder.
The first Doubt was, Whether Clergy were taken away by that Statute, unless
the very Felony and Robbery were committed in the very Chamber or Place where
the Owner, Dweller, his Children, or Servants should happen to be (although
they were in some other part of the House). The second Doubt was, If it were
done in the Chamber, and the parties there asleep, and so not put in fear. The
third Doubt was, Where such Robberies or Felonies are committed in a Booth or
Tent in any Fair or Market, the Owner, Children, or Servants being then put in
fear, whether Clergy should be taken away by that Statute in any of these Cases.

For the clearing of these three Doubts it was Enacted, That if any person be
convicted for robbing any in any part of their dwelling House, or dwelling
Places (the Owner, his Children, or Servants being in any part of the said
House or Precincts thereof) whether sleeping or waking, such Offender shall not
be admitted to his Clergy. And so he that robs any Tent or Booth, in Fair or
Market, whether the Owner, his Wife, Children, or Servants be sleeping or
waking in the same, shall lose his Clergy.

Then comes the Statute made in the 5. 5 Ed. 6.
of Ed. 6. and takes away Clergy from those, That commit Burglary or Robbery in
one County, and carry the Goods into another County, and are there legally
convicted.

This Statute likewise declares the Statute made the 25 H. 8. c. 3. 25 H. 8. c.
3.
shall stand in force, notwithstanding a Clause comprised in the Statute of the
1 Ed. 6. c. 12. 1 Ed. 6. c. 12.
which makes void a Clause in the said Statute, and takes away the force of it
in taking away Clergy from such as commit Robberies and Burglaries in one
County, and are convicted of the Felony for bringing the stolen Goods into
another County. For whereas the said Statute of the 1 Ed. 6. c. 12. declares,
That such as are convicted or attainted of Murder of malice prepensed, or of
poisoning of malice prepensed, or of breaking any Houses by day or by night,
(any person there being put in fear) or robbing any person in or near the
Highway, or for stealing Horses, Geldings, or Mares, or Felonious taking any
Goods out of any Parish Church, or other Church or Chapel, should not have the
benefit of Clergy. And that in all other Cases of Felony (other than such as
before are mentioned) Clergy should be allowed in like manner as it might have
been before the 29 day of April, in the first year of King Henry the Eighth, by
reason of which Article or Clause the said Statute, made in the 25 H. 8. which
did put such Felons and Burglarors from their Clergy, that do such Offense in
one County, and after are taken with the Goods stolen in another County, and
there Arraigned and found Guilty, was made void, to the great boldning and
comfort of such Offenders: It is by this Act Enacted, That the said Act made in
the said 25th year, touching the putting of such Offenders from their Clergy,
Cok. l. 11. f. 31.
and every Article, Clause, and Sentence contained in the same touching Clergy,
shall from thenceforth (touching such Offenses) stand and be in force.

Then the Statute of 2 and 3 of P. Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 17.
and M. c. 17. takes away the benefit of Clergy only from Bennet Smith, for
being Accessory to the Murder of Giles Rufford before the Murder committed,
and for procuring of the same.

Afterward the Statute of the 4 and 5 of P. Stat. 4 and 5 P. and M. c. 4.
and M. c. 4. takes away Clergy from every person, That shall maliciously
command, hire, or counsel any person or persons to commit any petty Treason,
wilful Murder, Robbery in any dwelling House or Houses, Dier f. 183, 186. Cok.
I. 11. f. 35.
Robbery in or near the Highway, or wilfully to burn any dwelling House, or
any part thereof, or any Barn having Corn or Grain in the same.

Here I had thought to have proceeded, and to have mentioned (in order of time)
all such Statutes as were made in any King's Reign, to take away Clergy in any
Case of Felony, but that would be too much to assume another Subject, than what
principally is here intended, having made too great a digression already, yet
not altogether unuseful herein.

Then the Statute made 1 Jac. c. 8. 1 Jac. c. 8.
takes away Clergy from him that shall stab another, that has not first
stricken, nor has a weapon drawn (if he dye thereof in six months, although no
malice can be proved) except it be done se Defendendo, or by misfortune, in
keeping the peace, or correcting his Servant or Child. This without all
question was Murder (by malice employed) before the making of this Statute; and
such a kind of killing is adjudged Murder at this day, that is, where one
shall wilfully kill another (by any weapon) without provocation from him in
deeds; for no provocation in words [only] will make it Manslaughter, or less
than Murder. And (in my judgment) it is an Error in practice of this
Indictment upon the Statute of Stabbing, to leave out the words ( ex malitia
praecogitata) in the Indictment: For the words of the Statute are ( although no
malice can be proved) then sure the meaning of the Statute is (as in other
cases) it shall be employed: And in all Indictments, where malice is only
employed, and cannot expressly be proved, those words ex malitia, etc. must be
put into the Indictment, to make it Murder, and to take away Clergy, and by
such words the Indictment will be good, both upon the Statute, and at Common
Law.

And so are the Indictments made against lewd Women that kill their bastard
children, upon the 21 Jac. cap. 27. 21 Jac. c. 27.
although the special matter of the Statute be put into the Indictment, viz.
That it is a bastard Child, and born of her body alive, yet the words, ex
malitia praecogitata, are always put into the Indictment; which malice the Law
implies, although none can prove the child born alive, and none can be presumed
to bear malice to a dead child: And happily it might be born dead, or dye after
it was born, against the will of the Mother, of her Throws and Strivings, to
be delivered without help. It is not the burying of the Child, or hiding of it,
that makes it Murder upon the Statute (as some have conceived) for if the
Child be found dead in Bed by her side, or in her bosom, yet it is Murder;
for the word [ conceal] in the Statute, relates not to the Body of the Infant,
but the death of it; the words being these, Shall so conceal the death thereof,
that it may not come to light (that is, to the knowledge of one Witness at
least) whether it were born alive or not, but be concealed, she shall suffer
death as in case of Murder: If she can prove by one Witness it was born dead,
then her hiding or burying it afterward will not be Evidence against her to
take away her Life upon that Statute.

These two Statutes create no new Offense that was not Felony and Murder
before, 1 Jac. c. 8. 21 Jac. c. 27.
but only take away Clergy in those two cases, the one of sudden and desperate
stabbing (then frequently in use) the other of lewd Whores, who having
committed one sin, to avoid their shame, and the charge of a Bastard, would
commit a greater, by trusting to their own strength in their Delivery, that
they might more privately destroy the Infant, and yet avoid the danger of the
Law, because in that case, none for the King could prove the Child born alive,
and therefore it was impossible to Indict and Convict her at the common Law for
Murder, although really and in truth it were so. This Statute makes the
Supposition good for the King to the Grand Jury, and Jury of Life and Death,
and to the Judgment of the Judge in point of Law, that the Child (supposed to
be murdered) was born Note this here, the Grand Jury find as it is laid in the
Indictment by the Kings Counsel, that the Child was born alive, although they
have not the least Evidence for it, and yet I trust they are not forsworn.
alive, and by her murdered, in regard she being a lewd woman, and contrary to
the Custom of honest and innocent women (who always desire help in their
Labor) chooses to be delivered alone, this Statute puts the proof upon her (if
she will avoid so strong a presumption of Murder) to be sure to have one
Witness to prove the Child was born dead. It being likewise strongly presumed,
that a woman (without help of some other) cannot be delivered of a Child at
full growth dead in the Womb.

Two remarkable Cases I have known in my time upon the said Statute of 1 Jac.
in Oxfordshire Circuit; the one in Mr. Justice Jones his time (a Learned Judge
that went Sixteen years together that Circuit) where the Case was; A cunning
desperate Fellow, having an intention to stab another person, and yet to avoid
coming within the danger of that Statute, had (to that purpose) provided
himself of a Dagger naked in his Pocket (he being never known to wear any
before) came into an Alehouse where the party was he intended to stab, and at
first coming used very friendly Language unto him, but afterward all the
provoking Language he could, to make the other strike him; which the other no
sooner held up his stick to have done, but he stabbed him into the Body with
his Dagger, whereof he dyed: No malice could be proved, yet so much of his
intention by his preparation and circumstances appearing to design the stabbing
of the other, that it was adjudged to be within the meaning, though not within
the Letter of the Statute, the Lord Chief Baron Davenport being the other Judge
of that Circuit) and he was denied his Clergy, and after Judgment was Executed.
It being then observed by the Judges, That immediately after the making of that
Statute, many desperate Fellows (that could read as Clarks) to those they had a
mind to quarrel withal) would use all means to make them strike first, and then
suddenly stab them; and by this way avoid the said Statute, and become guilty
only of a Manslaughter at Common Law, and so receive the benefit of Clergy,
which the Statute takes away. The other Case was in the same Circuit, very
lately, before Mr. Justice Sir Wadham Windham, Knight. one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas.
Windham, at the Assizes at Worcester, a little before his death, Where a
Father correcting his Son, for some undutifulness he conceived in him (having a
Knife in his hand, being eating his dinner) struck his Son over the back with
his knife, and gave him a stab whereof he died: The Judge apprehended this
Offense to be within the Statute, notwithstanding that Exception in the
Statute, of a Father correcting or chastising his Child or Servant, in regard
it was an unreasonable way and means of correction: whereupon he reprieved the
Father for some short time, and advised with the rest of the Judges at
Sergeants Inn, and after he had their Opinions that it was within the Statute,
he forthwith sent down a Warrant to the Sheriff to do Execution, having
received Judgment of Death at the Assizes; and yet the words of the said Act of
Parliament are ( although his Son, or Servant, dye of such correction, he shall
not be within the said Act).

Observe here how necessary it is, That all the circumstances that can be in an
offense of blood, be put into an Indictment, and be so found by the Grand Jury
(as it is advised by the King's Counsel) where there is innocent blood shed by
the party indicted, that every part and circumstance of the Fact, with all its
aggravations, may come to be considered and weighed by the Court, which
otherwise cannot be; as in this Case of the Father killing his Son, if the
Indictment had not been drawn upon the Statute, but at Common Law, in regard of
that Exception in the Statute (as the Grand Jury then would have had it) the
party had been capable of Clergy, and so might have escaped that Judgment of
Death. If such difficulties appear to the Learned Judges, upon due
consideration of the Law, and of all circumstances in cases of blood, how much
more will it prove difficult to Grand Jurors? and how little reason have they
to expunge, alter, and obliterate circumstances of aggravation in such an
Indictment, upon hearing only of one side, as they please, and so prevent the
Judgment of the Court therein, taking from them the power, even to examine such
a circumstance, as may (if truly stated and examined) rule the whole Case, as
before is observed.

In all the Offenses formerly mentioned, where Clergy is taken away by those
Statutes, there is no new offense of Felony or Murder made, that was not so
before the making of those Laws, as might be instanced in Murder, Robbery,
Burglary, Sacrilege, Cutting of Purses, Stealing of Horses, Rape, and the
like; but only Clergy taken away from the Offender (which is no more but the
abusive bloody liberty of Clerks in those times restrained) as wilful Murder
where malice appeared, and other mixed and simple Felonies, which were then most
raging and reigning Offenses in the Kingdom, and cried out for a greater
Remedy, a stricter Law to be made against them (as appears by the Preambles of
those Statutes that take away Clergy in those Special Cases) that were Murder
and Felony at the Common Law before; from whence I conclude, that the Forms of
Indictments of Felony or The name of Murder was not changed, but the Law
retains it continually for the heinousness of the Crime. Stamford fol. 19. If
not the name, then not the words that make it so.
Murder, are no way directed to be altered by those Statutes that take away
Clergy, but are to continue in the same form as they did before at the Common
Law. And I am not of their Opinion, That the words ( ex malitia praecogitata)
came into Indictments immediately after the aforesaid Statute of 23 H. 8. 23 H.
8.
Certainly there were Murders committed, and that frequently, of malice
forethought, before the making of that Statute, and those Murderers had their
Clergy also; otherwise that Statute had never been made to take it away. If the
Grand Jurors shall say, They will not find those words, Ex malitia
praecogitata, put into the Indictment, except the malice be plainly proved to
them; then farewell that distinction and inference of implied malice, which the
Law makes, in many Cases, and which otherwise cannot be made; they may as well
say, That they will not find such words Treason, that are Treasonable, because
no Act of Parliament, or express Case at Common Law, says those particular
words are Treason; or that they will find no Indictment of Burglary, although
the Goods stolen be found with the Thief, and the dwelling House broke, because
no Witness stood by to see the breaking of the House, entering into it, and
stealing thence the Goods: Or against a Cutpurse, though the Purse or Money be
found in his hand, or because none see him take it forth of his Pocket; or to
find the Indictment, because it is laid to be done Vi and armis, with force and
arms, and yet said to be done (in the same Indictment, clam and secret, and
sine notitia) privily, secretly, and without notice of the party, which (in
Fact) could not be done if it were done by force or arms: Or to find an
Indictment of Robbery done upon the Highway, against those that rob in
Vizards, notwithstanding the money be owned, and found about them, because the
party cannot swear he saw their faces, and that these were the men: Or that
such a one killed a man, that comes out last from him with a bloody Sword in
his hand, and no person besides with him. In all these Cases it is possible,
the Parties accused might find the Goods stolen; and so might the bloody Sword
be sound, and another do the Fact; but sure here is great and violent
presumption (sufficient for an Accusation) for a Grand Jury to find an
Indictment (which is but an Accusation upon Record) to bring the Delinquent, or
Party so strongly suspected, to a Judicial Trial; and as well may it be
presumed, when one Christian is killed by another, it may be Murder, that
there may be a seed of malice in the will of him that did it, by a voluntary
and spontaneous motion in that act, that may (upon a greater Debate) contain
some circumstance in it, that by some reason in Law (better known to the
Learned Judge, than the Grand Jurors) that may in Law prove malice expressed or
employed in the criminous Person.

And if it be so difficult in cases of blood for Grand Jurors to determine what
is Murder, and what is not, let them consider how dangerous a thing it is for
them to miscarry in their Presentment in cases of blood, of innocent blood (as
is before manifested) and so acquit the Murderer, and take the imputation of
blood-guiltiness with them, from the Assizes to their respective Families,
where it may and will cry against them and the whole Kingdom for vengeance: I
do therefore submit it to their serious consideration, upon what has been
said, Whether it be not much better, and a safer way for them, to submit their
Judgments herein to the Rule of Law, and the Resolutions of the Learned Judges,
than by their extenuating presentment (for the Court can go no higher than they
present) to stifle Justice in the birth, and to acquit a Murderer: For the
Indictment, although no part of the Trial, yet is the very Basis and Foundation
of all the other Proceedings. And let them consider how strict (formerly) the
very Law of England was in King Edward the Second's time in cases of blood,
where the very will and intent to kill a man (although it was not executed) was
punished for the Deed) although the party wounded recovered of his wounds.

A memorable Case there was in that King's Reign, Stamf. fol. 17. Pl. Coron.
Tit. Coron. Fitz. V. 15 Ed. 2. p. 383.
cited by Justice Stamford, where one compassed the death of another, and did
so grievously wound him, that he left him for dead, but afterward the party
recovered; this was then adjudged Murder, because his will appeared so plainly
to have killed him. For, as Bracton says, In maleficiis spectatur voluntas, and
non exitus, then was the Will by our Law (as it is yet before God) reputed for
the Deed: But now our Law couples the Will and the Act together in cases of
blood; but looks more upon the Act than the Will: For though the Will do
neither intend the Act (as it is done) nor approve of it (after it is done) yet
if the Will in any part of the Act be criminous, it makes the Offender (in our
Law) in cases of blood, guilty of the whole Fact, with all the obliquity and
evil in it. As if a man intend only to beat another, Vid. Tit. Memorat. p. 331,
350.
to strike him, but not to kill him, and the party die of the stroke, it may be
murder in him that gave the stroke. Hales and Petit Case le Com. 261. a.
So if three men come to make a Disseisin, and one of the three kill a man, the
other two persons are guilty, as principals in the murder, although they
neither consent to it, will it, or strike the Party, nor came with that intent,
but only were in company to have done another Act. So if one, 18 El. Pl. 474.
to kill his Wife, give her (lying sick) Poison in a roasted Apple, and she
eating a little of it, give the rest to a little Child of theirs, which the
Husband (lest he should be suspected) suffers the Child to eat, who dies of
the same poison, this is murder though the Wife recover; for the Poison
ministered upon malice prepensed to one, which by a contingency procures the
death of another whom he meant not to kill, nor bear any malice to, shall be as
great an Offense as if it had taken the effect which he meant, proceeding from
a naughty and malicious intent. So where two men combat together, upon the evil
and provoking words of a woman, and the one kills the other, the woman in
this case was Arraigned of the death of him that was killed; and in this Case
the Grand Jurors found it murder. So if an ignorant person take upon him to
give Physic to one that is not well, and through his ignorance administreth
that unto him that (apparently) kills him, this is murder. And so it might be
instanced in many similar Cases, which are not to be disputed by Grand Jurors,
but presented by them in re. forma, as the Indictment is advised by the King's
Council, and comes to their hands, where they find (as before is said) a
criminous Party in the Indictment, and a Body (found) of a reasonable Creature,
certainly, or probably killed by him, although the Evidence be not express to
every circumstance of aggravation, as it is laid down in the Indictment,
whereby to bring the Party and his Offense of Blood to a full Trial by a second
Jury, which otherwise can never be done, neither the Law therein known from the
Court in such a Case.

Besides, many other Inconveniences and doubts may arise where the Grand Jury
find the Bill of Indictment only Manslaughter, which by finding of it Murder
would be prevented, as in challenging upon his trial above the number of twenty
Jurors; the Statute of the 22 H. 22 H. 8. c. 14. made perpetual by 32 H. 8. 3.
Brook Challenge 217.
8. c. 14. reduces peremptory challenge upon an Indictment or Appeal, which at
the Common Law was allowed to the Prisoner, to challenge thirty five Jurors
(which is under the number of three Jurors;) this Statute so provides, That a
Prisoner shall not now in Petit Treason, Murder and Felony, challenge above
twenty Jurors, without showing cause: And in case of Treason, and misprision of
high Treason, it was taken away by the Statute of 33 H. 33 H. 8. 1, 2 Ph. and
Mar.
8. but now by the Statute of 1, and 2 Phil. and Mar. the Common Law is
revived, for any Treason the Prisoner shall have his challenge to the number of
35; and so it was resolved by all the Justices upon conference between them in
the Case of Sir Walter Rawleigh and Geo. Hill. Ja. R.
Brooks: By this Statute it is plain, that if one be Indicted or Appealed for
Murder, and challenge above the number of twenty Jurors peremptorily (without
showing cause) it shall be a Conviction of the offense and Capital; but it is a
great quaere, whether he that is Indicted or Appealed only for Manslaughter
(which is not named in this Act, nor can be rationally comprehended in the word
Felony more than Murder might have been) may not challenge thirty five Jurors,
as at Common Law? so it may be a quaere, where the Prisoner Indicted only of
Manslaughter, shall stand mute, or will not answer directly to the Indictment,
whether notwithstanding he shall not have his Clergy? for the Statute of the 1
of Ed. 6. c. 12. and other Statutes that take away Clergy from such offenses
and Offenders (as are therein mentioned) take it away as well from such as
stand mute, answer indirectly or challenge peremptorily above the number of
twenty, as from those that are convicted by Verdict, or Confession upon their
Arraignment; otherwise such as stand Mute, answer indirectly, or challenge
peremptorily, might have had their Clergy (as the Act seems to imply) otherwise
it had not taken Clergy away in those cases.

The Judgment of Pain fort and dure, that is, Pain grievous and durable, was
not at the Common Law, but ordained by the Statute of West. 1. made Anno 3 Ed.
1. whereby it was enacted, That notorious Felons, openly known of evil name,
who will not put themselves upon Enquests of Felonies, which men do prosecute
at the Kings suit, shall be put in hard and strong Prison, as they which refuse
to be tried by the Law of the Realm; but this is not to be intended of
Prisoners which be taken of light Suspicion. By which Statute it does appear,
that none shall be judged to this pain, if there be not evident or probable
matter to convince him of the offense whereof he is arraigned, or otherwise,
Stamford lib. 2. fol. 149. Poulton De Pace, fol. 211.
that he is a notable Thief, or openly known to be of Evil name; which the
Judge ought strictly to examine before he proceed to this Judgment against him,
it would be very hard (which the Law is never in favorem vitae) to extend this
Statute to Manslaughter, which may be suddenly committed by one of good name
and fame, and not a notorious Thief (as this Act mentions) and yet may have an
obstinate humor to refuse Trial, challenge peremptorily, and make indirect
Pleas.

It is the severest Judgment (that I know) the Law passes upon any Offender,
and therefore not to be extended further than the plain understanding of the
words of the Act, a Sentence so severe, that (I think) never English man as yet
(though many have been Pressed to death) had the heart to execute it according to
the letter, which Sentence is as follows, That the Prisoner shall be sent to
the Prison from whence he came, 4 Ed. 4. 11. 14 Ed. 4. 7. 6 H. 4. 2.
and put into a Mean house, stopped from light, and there shall be laid upon
the bare ground, without any Litter, Straw, or other covering, and without any
Garment about him, saving something to cover his Privy members, and that he
shall lie upon his back, and his head shall be covered, and his feet bare, and
that one of his Arms shall be drawn with a Cord to one side of the house, and
the other Arm to the other side, and that his Legs shall be used in the same
manner, and that upon his Body shall be laid so much Iron and Stone as he can
bear, and more, and that the first day after he shall have three morsels of
Barley-bread, No Forfeiture but of Goods. Fit. Esch. 19.
without any Drink, and the second day he shall drink so much as he can, three
times, of the Water which is next the Prison-door, saving Running-water,
without any Bread; and this shall be his Diet until he die.

Another inconvenience may arise, where the party Indicted and Arraigned only
of Manslaughter shall plead a Foreign plea of something done in another County,
to the delay of Justice; the Statute of the 22 H. 8. c. 14. only providing, in
cases of Petit Treason, Murder, or Felony, that Foreign pleas in those Cases
shall be tried before the same Justices before whom such persons shall be
Arraigned, and by the same Jurors of the same County that shall try the petit
Treason, Murder, or Felony. Coke 3 Inst. fol. 27.
If a man be Indicted of Treason he may plead a Foreign plea, which shall be
tried in another County, otherwise in cases of Murder, Petit Treason, and
Felony.

Another inconvenience may be upon the Statute of the 6 H. 6 H. 8. c. 6.
8. c. 6. By that Statute, the Justices of the Kings Bench are empowered to
remit the bodies of Felons and Murderers removed thither to be tried in the
County, and their Indictments removed into that Court, which before they could
not do by the Common Law; because a Record that is once brought into the
highest Court, could not be remanded to an Inferior, Stamf. fol. 157.
Stamf. fol. 157. this Statute only provides in case of Felony and Murder, not
Manslaughter.

The last Inconvenience I shall mention (though I could many more) by reason of
Indictments of Manslaughter, will be in Cities, and Buroughs, and
Corporations, that have power to try Murders and Felonies; the Statute of the
23 H. 23 H. 8. c. 13.
8. c. 13. provides, That in Trials of Murders and Felonies there proceedings
shall not stay as formerly, or be delaied by reason of challenge of such
Offenders, for lack of sufficiency of Freehold, to the great hindrance of
Justice; but that if the Jurors be worth in Moneys and personal Estate Forty
pounds, they shall not be challenged, but admitted. It will be a very extorted
construction that upon this Statute, and the others before shall bring in
Manslaughters under the word Felonies, Every Manslaughter is Felony, but not e
converso.
whatever practice is, or has been used to the contrary. I conceive it fit to
be better considered, for it is not sufficient (in all Cases, much less in
this) without, or against a Rule and Act of Parliament, to justify practice by
practice; this happily in the end might prove a Common Thief to be an honest
man.

Besides, observe the penning of other Statutes, and that will give a clearer
light to the understanding of these; by the Statute made in the 27 of H. 27 H.
8. c. 25.
8. c. 25. it was enacted, That no person or persons, of what estate or degree
soever, shall have power or authority to pardon or remit any Treasons,
Murders, Manslaughters, or Felonies, whatsoever they be, etc. Here you see the
Makers of this Law mention the word and offense of Manslaughter, in terminis,
and not leave it to be understood, or to be comprehended in the word other
Felonies, though it is most comprehensively said, or Felonies whatsoever they
be.

So the Statute made in the first and second Ph. 1, 2 Ph. and Mar. c. 13.
and Mar. c. 13. That the Justices of the Peace (one being of the Quorum) when
any Prisoner is brought before them for any Manslaughter or Felony, before any
Bailment or Mainprise, shall take the examination of the Prisoner, and
Information of the Accuser, and certify it at the next Jail-delivery, etc.
Here you see Manslaughter and Felony both expressed, as necessary, several times
in the Act.

So the Statute of the 23 H. 23 H. 8. c. 12.
8. c. 12. that directs the manner of punishing of offenses in the Kings Palace
or House, says, All Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters,
and other malicious Strikings, etc. and so diverse other Acts of Parliament (as
might be showed) that make or intend any provision against Manslaughters, do
particularly name the word Manslaughter, and never leave it to be intended or
included in the word Felony. Kel. fol. 98.
It is true, that by a Commission granted to certain persons to enquire of all
Felonies, they may thereby take Indictments of Murder; though a Pardon of all
Felonies will not avail him who has committed Murder, in regard of the
Statute made 13 R. 2. 1.

And the Commission of Oyer and Terminer, made to the Judges every Assizes,
that enables them to enquire of all Offenses, has these express words in it,
And of whatsoever Murders, Felonies, Manslaughters, Killings; not leaving
Manslaughters to be intended by the general words of Felonies or Killings.

Many more Inconveniences might be showed, but these (with what has been
before showed) may be sufficient, until better reasons appear to satisfy any
understanding Grand Juror, to esteem it much the better way to find such Bills
Murder, rather than Manslaughter, there being every way less inconvenience in
it, in relation to the Laws of the Land (until by the wisdom of a Parliament
they are altered) and much more of satisfaction and safety to their own private
Consciences, that stand so deeply engaged to discover Blood-guilty persons, and
to suppress and silence the cries of Innocent blood, that by our Laws (in the
first place) cries to Grand Jurors for Vengeance against the Murderer and
Manslayer.

It now remains that two Objections be answered, that happily to such as do not
well weigh and consider them may seem to be of some force against what has
been herein said to the contrary; the one is, The general liberty, and constant
practice Grand Jurors have taken ever since the making of the said Statute of
the 23 H. 23 H. 8. c. 1.
8. c. 1. to find, as they please, either Murder or Manslaughter; not as the
Indictment comes to their hands from the Kings Council, but as they apprehend
the Evidence that is brought to them, taking upon themselves not only the sole
Judgment of the Fact, and what the Law is that arises upon the said Fact,
taking the Judgment of the Law therein from the Court (although they hear but
one side) and putting in and putting out what they please in such Indictments,
notwithstanding it appears to them the party Indicted is guilty of shedding
Innocent blood, varying the species of Murder and Manslaughter as they please,
until after Arraignment of the Prisoner it be too late to amend it, as I have
often known.

The other Objection is (and this seems to be of some weight and authority in
Law against what has been said) That Mr. Justice Stamford, in his book of The
Pleas of the Crown, is of another opinion, viz. That a Grand Jury may find the
Special matter in the Indictment; that is to say, that the Prisoner killed the
other se defendendo, or per Infortunium, etc. which the party upon his
Arraignment may either confess, or estrange himself from the fact, and plead,
Not guilty.

To the first Objection, as to the liberty and practice of Grand Jurors to the
contrary so long used, I Answer, It has been before in this Treatise
sufficiently made out, the great Inconvenience and mischief, in Cases of Blood,
that is the consequence of such practice, and that being granted (as it cannot
be denied) I suppose no wise man will think, that the long practice of such an
Error will justify it, or encourage the longer continuance of it, in the
highest Courts of Law and Justice, and in so high and tender an Offense as the
disquisition of Blood is, although in Inferior County Courts, where (many
times) are ignorant Judges, and mean Clerks; and in ordinary Offenses this
Maxim may hold good, that Communis Error facit Jus, that the common practice
of an Error makes it the Law of the Court, and not convenient to be altered;
yet I have never observed that Maxim to take place in the highest Courts of
Justice in this Kingdom, before the Judges of the Courts at Westminster,
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Jail-delivery, and Justices of
Assize, who sit not to practice, but to correct and destroy Errors of all
kinds, especially in Trials of men's Lives, in Cases of Blood, and whoever shall
urge that Maxim against what I have here said, does by that sufficiently
grant, what I have here endeavored to prove, viz. the error and inconvenience
of such practice, which ought no more to be continued, than a long custom,
when it is found to be unreasonable; but I shall never allow (neither can it be
proved) that there has been in this Kingdom such liberty and practice, allowed
and indulged by the Reverend and Learned Judges to Grand Jurors, to find and
alter Indictments brought unto them in cases of Blood, as they themselves
please and judge convenient; they being (as has been said before) not the
Judges, nor the Triers, but Presenters of a fact of Blood, fit for the Judgment
of the Jury of Life and Death, who only are the proper Judges of the Fact; for
none can be said to be proper Judges of any Fact in Controversy that hear but
one side, for Grand Jurors hear no more, and therefore ought in Law, Reason,
and Conscience (where they find a guilty person that has had his hands in
Blood, and unjustly taken away the Life of another person) to leave it (as an
entire fact of Murder) to the Trial and Verdict of the second Jury to find the
truth of the Fact (upon hearing of both sides, and receiving the Judgment of
the Court) in what species or degree of Murder it is, which likewise if any
doubt or point of Law arise in the Case (as many times it does) they may find
it specially (which a Grand Jury cannot) and thereupon receive the opinion of
all the Judges of England (Murder being the Genus of the several Species) and
in common acceptance, he is accounted a Murderer that kills any man, or
reasonable Creature unlawfully; and the Commandment is, Thou shall do no
Murder, which certainly comprehends all unlawful killing, otherwise that
command is not well translated from the Text, Non Occides, Thou shall not Kill;
and in my own experience, for above forty and five years in one Circuit, I have
very often known many Learned Judges, such as Mr. Justice Doderidge, the Lord
Chief Baron Davenport, Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Whitlock, and many
others, often rebuke and reject the Presentiments of Grand Jurors, in Cases of
Blood, and other Felonies, where they have either varied from their Evidence,
or from the Law, the Judges before hand having received some light of the
nature and testimony of the Fact, from the Informations and Examinations
therein delivered into the Court by the Justices of the Peace and Coroners (a
very good Rule for Judges to observe) and often either put it upon an open
Evidence in Court (which is very inconvenient) or discharged them of such a
Bill, and bound the Witnesses over to the next Assizes (which is also very
inconvenient) in regard Witnesses may die, or the Prisoner may die, and so the
Forfeiture is lost, and the offense unpunished; and in Cases of Blood there
will be too much opportunity given for compounding and making an Interest with
the Prosecuter and Witnesses; and in these modern times, since the happy return
of our most gracious Sovereign, King CHARLES the second, I have known several
learned and pious Judges, some since dead, others yet living, and eminent upon
the Bench in Oxfordshire Circuit, Fine and Imprison several Grand Jurors for
their miscarriage and misdemeanour in delivering in Bills of Manslaughter
instead of Bills of Murder, against the clear and positive directions of the
Court. And this may serve for answer to the first Objection, from the liberty
and affected practice of Grand Jurors (in finding of Bills in Cases of Blood)
according to their own humor and apprehension to introduce a Law, that
therefore they may find them as they please, notwithstanding that the Court
advises and directs the drawing of them MURDER.

To the second Objection of Mr. Justice Stamford (in the place before cited)
where he says, that whereas the Statute of Glouc. c. 9. says, That he ought
to put himself in an Inquest de bono and malo, this is only intended (says he)
when he is Indicted of Murder or Manslaughter, and not where in the body of
the Indictment, the Special matter is found (as if the Grand Jury may find
especial Verdict) of per Infortunium, or se defendendo, etc. I answer to this
Objection, Certainly Mr. Justice Stamford (though a very Learned man) did well
consider this matter, and his Opinion therein, when he set it down; for he
informs you not what shall become of such an Indictment, where only the Special
matter is found by the Grand Jury, whether the party may Traverse it (for it is
but a Trespass) or confess it, and so have his Pardon of Course upon such
confession, and then the Judges that are to make the Report or Certificate of
the nature of the fact to the King in Chancery, must Certify like blind and
deaf men, that never saw or heard any thing of the merit of the cause, nor
understand any thing by evidence of the nature and circumstance of the Fact;
like the Lay-zealot, must believe as the Priest believes, preferring Obedience
before Truth; but sure no prudent and pious Judge will make such a blind
Certificate, in case of Blood.

Besides, whoever shall judiciously and impartially compare and weigh the
Statute of Marlebridge and the Statute of Gloucester together, and the reasons
of the Statute of Gloucester, what mischief it was made to prevent, and
consider but the nature of the thing, will never be of his Opinion in this
particular, there is so little of reason or true meaning of either of those
Statutes in it. The words of the Statute of Marlebr. are these, Murder from
henceforth shall not be judged before our Justices, where it is found
Misfortune. In the time of this Statute, it seems, there were two Juries, the
Grand Jury, and the Jury of Life and Death, to present and try the Offenses of
Murder, otherwise the Justices could not judge of it, they never passing
Judgment upon a Grand Juries presentment; which, by the way, shows, that it is
left to the Judges (not the Grand Jury) upon the examination of the cause in
trial by the Jury of Life and Death, to judge of the nature and circumstances
of Murder, and of what species or degree it is. This Statute of Marlebridge
did only declare a new Law, that where it was found per Infortunium, or se
defendendo, it should not be Felony and Murder as it was before that Statute;
but that the party in such case should have (upon Certificate of the Justices
before whom he was tried) his Pardon of course; happily then, upon the
Presentment of the Grand Jury; which might be the occasion of this erroneous
Opinion of this Learned Judge.

Then comes the Statute of Gloucester, as if the other had not been truly
understood, or at least had not sufficiently provided for offenses of Blood,
and in plain words (as before is mentioned) commands, That he that kills a man
by misfortune, or in his own defense, or in any other manner without Felony,
shall be put in Prison until the coming of the Justices in Air, or Justices of
Jail-delivery, and shall put himself upon the Country for good and evil, that
is, for life and death, which cannot possibly be understood where the Grand
Jury find it but per Infortunium, or se defendendo, etc. for that is not
Felony, and so cannot be Arraigned thereupon, whereby to put himself de bono
and malo, so as to bring the matter to Issue between him and the King; nor can
the Judge in that case (as is said before) make a true and right Certificate of
the offense and matter of fact, which must be specially and truly certified
according to Law, whereby to procure a pardon, as that Statute expressly
requires. And if the party shall plead Not guilty to that Special matter found
by the Grand Jury, what can that signify (as before has been showed) for the
Jury that is charged with such Indictment, must either find the party guilty in
Special manner, as it was found before by the Grand Jury (and that makes too
specially Verdicts;) or else generally Not guilty; if they find him guilty of
the Special matter (as the Grand Jury found before them) and the Judge and
Court shall afterward adjudge (as they may, having heard the Evidence) that
super totam materiam, it is either Murder or Manslaughter; then no Judgment of
Death or Clergy can be given upon that Indictment or Verdict, but all must be
tried over again, and a new Circuit of business upon a second Indictment of
Murder or Manslaughter; and how dilatory and idle would this be at an Assizes,
in course of Justice, and in case of Blood.

If Judge Stamford were alive again (although a person of great Learning and
Judgment) he would surely (with some other Errors in that book) recant this;
neither is it of any advantage to the Prisoner, to have it found Specially by
the Grand Jury, for he can never plead either such an Acquittal or Conviction
in Bar to an Indictment of Murder or Manslaughter in the same case (as before
is showed;) and whoever shall read and well consider this seventh Chapter,
written by Judge Stamford, in The Pleas of the Crown, wherein this Opinion is,
especially toward the end of it, when he comes to observe the Letter of the
Statute of Gloucester, and how the Certificate of such a Pardon of course shall
be obtained, must of necessity hold his first Opinion in that Chapter (for the
Special matter to be found in the Indictment) to be very inconsiderately
expressed for the reasons aforesaid. And why may not this Learned Judge (for
humanum est Errare) mistake in this, as in some other Opinions in that Book of
his styled, The Pleas of the Crown? for which he is detected by the Lo. Coke,
and others that followed him, who standing upon his shoulders must needs see
farther, than he did or could; As to instance in some few:

As first, Stamf. fol. ult. 6.
that Respit of Execution (where a Woman is priviment enfent) where a Woman
after Judgment pleads her Belly, shall be granted only ( says he) in Felony:
whereas it is grantable both in high Treason and petit Treason. Coke 3 Inst.
fol. 18.


A second is, Stamf. Pl. Cor. 63. 26 Ass. p. 52.
That the year and the day after the Murder and Homicide committed, shall be
accounted after the blow given, or poison administered: whereas it ought to be
accounted after the death, Coke 3 Inst. fol. 53.
for then the party was murdered, and not after the stroke or poison given;
Coke lib. 4. fol. 41, 42. in Heydon's Case.

A third observed by the Lord Coke (writing upon the Statute 8 H. 6. c. 12.
which makes it Felony to steal away Records) upon these words in the said
Statute, Their Procurers, Counselors and Abettors, says this Act, expressly
extends to Accessaries before, and leaves Accessaries after to the
construction of Law; v. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. Justice Dalison 's Rep.
yet there may be Accessaries after the Fact, for whenever an offense is made
a Felony by Act of Parliament, there shall be Accessaries to it, both before
and after, as if it had been a Felony by the Common Law: And therefore, though
this Act expresses only Accessaries before, yet it takes not away Accessaries
after, but leaves them to the Law, contrary to the Opinion of Mr. Stamf. Pl.
Cor. 160.
Justice Stamford.

And again, by the Statute of the 8 H. 8 H. 6. c. 29.
6. c. 29. Insufficiency or want of Freehold, is no cause of Challenge to
Aliens who are Impanelled with Aliens, notwithstanding Mr. Stamf. Pl. Cor. 160.
Justice Stamford's Opinion, Pl. Coron. 160. for this Statute says, That the
Statute 2 H. 2 H. 5. c. 3.
5. c. 3. shall extend only to Enquests betwixt Denizen and Denizen.

But enough (and perhaps too much) has been said in mentioning the mistakes of
that Reverend and Learned Judge Sr. Sr. W. Stamford, Knight. one of the Justices of
the Common Pleas.
William Stamford, in that Book of his termed Placita Coronae, Pleas of the
Crown, which it seems by the Title of it has been corrected, amended, and
enlarged, since the first Impression of it; which I have not urged in the least
to detract from the Learning and Honor of that great and learned Judge, or
from the value of that Book, which notwithstanding there may be a few mistakes
found in it, yet is of as high esteem as any Book of the Law, extant upon that
Subject; but principally to show, that he may as well err in his Opinion
concerning Grand Jurors finding the Special matter, as in those mentioned; and
that no human Author, in the Law, or any other Science, is infallible; and that
we must be very careful how we ground any Law upon the bare Opinion of any one,
or two persons (though of never so great parts or esteem) whereby to justify
or maintain a great Inconvenience in practice, especially in Cases of Blood, as
before has been shown.

FINIS.

