The Voice of Thunder, OR The Sound of a Trumpet giving a certain sound,
Saying, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment, the Light, to guide you to judge
out the evil, that Righteousness you may learn, and so come to have a true
descerning betwixt the precious and the vile, betwixt those that in Truth serve
the Lord, and those that pretend to worship him, a day, when in truth they
serve him not, but grieve his Spirit.

With a few words to them whose faces are Sion-ward, traveling to the good
Land of Rest, whereinto those that believe not in the Light cannot enter.

With a dear, tender Visitation to the holy, meek, suffering Seed, which is
already entered and entering in, where none can make afraid.

By Humphery Bache.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

The Voice of Thunder, etc.
O Earth, earth, earth, Tremble, tremble, tremble before the pure, Eternal Lord
God of unlimmited power, which is risen in Majesty, to shake terribly the
earth, and to do such things at which the ears of them that hear it shall
tingle, and all faces shall gather paleness, who in this day of his power, are
found out of his fear, working the works of unrighteousness, when Gods
unchangeable witness the light in their consciences arises to plead with all
flesh, for by fire and sword is the Lord God come and coming to plead with all
flesh: And woe, woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth; for it is
plainly so in the sight of the Lord and those that fear before him, that the
Devil is come down amongst you, and has great rage because his time is but
short.

Witness the last first days work in Tower-street, and other places wherein
he was working in the hearts of the children of disobedience, against the
obedient children of the Lord, who stand in his Counsel, and walk in his fear
from day to day, and do violence to no man; yet these harmless Lambs of
Christ, the Lamb of God, because they have not fellowship with the World in
their unfruitful works of darkness, but rather stands faithful witnesses for
the Lord, in opening their shops in obedience to the Lord, least they should
partake of their plagues, who are mockers of God, and pretend to worship him
that day (which they falsely call the Sabbath;) whilst pride, fullness of
bread, and idleness, Sodoms sins appears in the Devils rule in and over them
therein, that day more then any other; and so the earth is full of violence; as
any are purely moved of the Lord to witness against this their evil practice,
then the Devils kingdom (who is king over all the children of pride) being
struck at, by any that fear before the Lord, and do not conform therein, with
the World that lies in wickedness. Then the Devil rages, and his instruments
bestir themselves, some with throwing stones and dirt in their faces, others
pulling and haling the Friends of those their enmity rises up against, though
they meddle not with them in word or deed, but are peaceably coming to a
meeting of the Lords people, some spiting in our faces, others uttering forth
vile unsavory Language, being in the nature of dogs, and wolves, and bears,
greedily and unnaturally foaming out their shame, in rending, and rearing, and
pulling, and haling those whose natures are changed from such, and is of, and
in the Lambs nature, whom they follow and obey in witnessing against the World,
that the deeds of it are evil, who though they are reviled, revile not again,
if persecuted they suffer it, committing themselves to him that judges
righteously, who will give to them which patiently continue in well doing;
glory, honor, Immortality, eternal life, whilst they that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, Christ the Light of the World in them, to such
Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish is their portion who do evil,
not dealing as they would be dealt withal, but doing violence to a peaceable
quiet people, who harm no man; But the Disciple is not greater then his Lord,
who said, If they persecute me, they will also persecute you; and he said, if
you, were of the world, the world would love its own, but because you are
gathered out of the world, therefore does the world hate you; but said he, it
hated me before it hated you, and it hated me, because I testified of it, that
the deeds thereof are evil.

Now all ye who gaze on us, we being as Monsters unto many consider who they
are, that are of the Army of the Lamb Christ Jesus, who gave his back to the
smiters, and his cheek to them who plucked off the hair, and withheld not his
face from shame and spitting; and ponder in your hearts, whether it be not the
better choice of us to suffer all things, and reign with him over the world,
then to conform to the world, in their worship and imagery, which they are in
that imagine, that whilst they live in pride, in envy, in lust, in
covetousness, in wildeness and wantonness, out of Gods fear and dread, which
should keep their hearts clean from such evils, yet if that they forbear their
outward labor, and pass to a place which they falsely call a Church; but there
is but one true Church, and that is in God, the pillar and ground of truth,
made up of living stones, elect and precious, gathered together by the grace of
God, out of the world, which has and does teach them to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly and godly; which Church, they
that call the Steeple house a Church are ignorant of, yet notwithstanding,
though you are ignorant, you will seem to strive and plead for a day which God
never commanded in Scripture to be observed without working, for it is the
first day of the week, of the six days, wherein God commanded men should
labor; and now, men stand up and command the contrary to what God commanded,
and say, that men on the first day of the week whereon God commanded men should
labor, they say, men shall not open their shops to labor; But what would such
have said, had they lived in the days of Isaiah the Prophet of the Lord, who
said to a rebellious people that walked in disobedience to the Law of the Lord
which is Light, To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me,
says the Lord, I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed
beasts, and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of
hee-goats, bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me,
the new Moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it
is iniquity, even your solemn meetings; Why did the Prophet say this, might the
wicked men say then, who were then worshipping him, as the world is now, out of
his fear? did not God Command to offer sacrifice? did not God Command the
observing the new Moons and Sabbaths, and does he now cry them down, that which
God commanded? Yet herein the Prophet was obedient to the Lord God; and
further, yea rather said, wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, if ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land; and obedience said
another is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams;
Therefore consider of it, you that cry out against any now, who in obedience to
the Lord, walk contrary to the world in opening their shops, whether they are
the cause of the wickedness of the wicked, in standing witnesses against the
wicked, in observing a day in their wills, which God never commanded them any
more then Isaiah was, if any were wicked and did wickedly, because he stood
witness against, and cried down those things which God had commanded, when they
that observed them were out of his Fear and Counsel, and did not cease from the
evil of their doings; Nay, the Lord God is come to spread dung upon your faces,
even the dung of your days and worships, which is out of his fear observed by
you, all you who live in pride, and are vain and light, and wild, and wanton,
living in pleasure on earth, which who do are dead while they live

And all you earthly Rulers and Magistrates, tremble, tremble, before the
powerful dreadful God, and take heed to your selves in this day of his power,
wherein the Heathen rage, and many Rulers have and may take Counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed ones, and are still ready to say in
their hearts. Let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their cords
from us, and reject the yoke of Christ; I say, take heed to your selves, how
you strive against your Maker, and consider how many already as a potters
vessel have been broken to shivers, that have stood up and would have limited
the Spirit of the holy One, in the servants of the Lord, to their time, and
place, and wills, least you partaking with them in their sins ye partake of
their plagues, and the Iron rod you feel, which must rule all Nations, which
will not take up Christ's yoke, nor bow to his Scepter of righteousness, to rule
in their hearts in the Light of his Son, and eternal power of his Spirit;
Therefore consider, whether will be most sound and savoury in the ears of the
Lord, and of those that fear before the Lord at the last day, when an account
you must give unto the Lord of all the deeds you do in the body; all you, that
have those harmless people brought before you, called Quakers, for to answer to
any thing, they, in obedience to the Lord in the exercise of their pure
Conscience have been, or may be exercised in, whether in your saying, if they
will not respect your persons, and put off the hat, nor will not be subject to
man's Law, made to observe a day, though God in the Scriptures did not Command
it; yet, though in Conscience they cannot do it, we will imprison them,
threaten them, and prosecute the Law, and in our wills go beyond that too
against them, though many give testimony of them, that they are humble, sober,
temperate, just, harmless people; or would it not be better for you to say
within your selves, this people, who are thus temperate in all things, surely,
they are running the race, at the end whereof, the Crown is, doubtless what
they do (though contrary to us) is in obedience to the Lord, and not in their
own self wilis; For what do they receive from the world but reproach, and hard
usage? they are a harmless people. Let us therefore turn the sword, which is to
be a terror to evil doers, to defend the harmless against the evil doers, them
that do harm the harmless; yea, for if this that these people do be of God, as
they say it is in obedience to the pure movings of his Spirit in their hearts,
it must stand, least peradventure we our selves be found to join with the rude
multitude, even to fight against God, and so partake with the rude multitude in
the plagues and Judgments of God upon our heads also. Oh! you Rulers, be wise,
be learned, stand in aw, and sin not, commune with your own hearts, and be
still, and know, that the Lord is coming to Judge himself, for the meek on the
earth, and to debase the proud, and to bow down the haughty, and to claim his
right, whose right it is in the hearts of all to rule; Therefore how, bow
before him, stoop to his righteous Scepter, come under his dominion who is to
Rule in all, over all, God blessed for evermore; then when your own hearts be
bowed, you will come to discern between the precious and the vile, betwixt
those that pretend to serve him and those that worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, and be able to Judge, not according to outward appearance, but righteous
Judgment.

And now consider what you are doing, who are crying out for a day to be kept
holy; Whose is every day, but his that made them? and what is every ones work
every day, but to be holy as God is holy in all manner of conversation? that
whether we observe a day or not observe a day, whether we open shop and work,
or not open shop to work, whether we eat or drink, or abstain from eating or
drinking, or what ever we do, doing it in obedience to the pure moving of the
Spirit of the Lord, God in all things may be glorified; then if any one, any
day of the week be moved of the Lord, to pass to a meeting among the people of
the Lord, who fear before the Lord, to wait upon him to know his Counsel, that
they may do his will on earth as it is in Heaven, where two or three are met
together in his Name, there is he in the midst of them on any day, with his
unlimitted power to break the bonds of iniquity, to draw the mind from pride,
lightness, wildeness, wantonness and vanity, and whatsoever is evil, into his
pure fear wherein the blessing is, even to him who fears always, whose Soul
comes then to dwell at ease, then, though all the world condemn him for an evil
doer (Christ was numbered with transgressors by the world (and the Disciple is
not greater then his Lord) yet walking in obedience to the Lord, he is near
that with his pure witness Justifies, then what matters it who Condemns.

And it was so, that on the second of the eighth month being the first day of
the week, that a poor sober moderare man, came amongst the rude multitude that
did throw dirt at me, and spite upon me, and pulled and tore part of my
clothes, be said to them, hear me a little, said he, I am a stranger to you,
said he, and a stranger to this man that has opened his shop, said he, You all
have your Liberty to go to Church where you will, and to shut your shops, and I
see no reason said he, you should desire, or go about to take away another
Liberty, that cannot go with you, to where your worship is, yea said he, in
matter of conscience, I know not why the Papist, or any other should be denied
their Liberty, any more then you your selves. should he denied your Liberty;
And these words somewhat appeased and silenced the rude multitude, and though
the Magistrate past by, and saw, or might see them rude, he spoke not at all to
them, nay not so much as this stranger, yet his dwelling was near, though it
were his office to keep the peace, and though I did what I did in opening my
shop in obedience to the Lord, yet the Magistrate is so blind, and dark, as
that he calls good evil, and evil good, and said I was the cause of the tumult
and disturbance in the street, though I remained peaceable and quiet in my
shop, and had much abuse by dirt and spitting, and rudeness done to me, by the
rude people; so that they are rather countenanced by the Magistrate, then that
he is any way a terror to them. But this I know assuredly if the rude
multitude should proceed to harm any, the Magistrate dwelling so near knowing
of it, and not regarding to suppress the heady, violent, and wicked practices
of wicked people, who are out of Gods fear; the Magistrate at the day of
account will feel and find, that the evil done will lie at his door, and be
charged upon him, if he neglect to rescue and preserve the peaceable quiet man,
or woman, out of the hands of fierce and violent people, who may think if they
kill a man they do God good service.

O ye Magistrates and all people, dread, dread the Lord, and love the light
that shines in your hearts, that being guided by it, your consciences may be
purged with it, from dead works to serve the living God, not in the oldness of
the Letter, or by tradition but in the newness of the Spirit, in which, God,
who is a spirit, will be worshipped, and may come to have the eye opened, that
the God of the world has blinded, and so may see your souls lie weltting in
their blood, and may come into a true sencibleness of your present condition,
that so your selves might come to groan to the Lord for deliverance from the
bondage of corruption, and may be made willing, in this Gods powerful day to
wait in the light therein to receive power in the teachings of it, to break the
bonds of iniquity, to turn from pride, bitterness, fierceness, envy, wildness,
wanttonness, and all unrighteousness, which the hearts of people, whilst
carnally minded take pleasure in, and many plead for as their Liberty, to live
in that which pleases the carnal mind, against which Gods displeasure will
appear, as the light arises in your hearts to judge you, according to the
deeds done in the body.

Therefore now all of you strive to enter in at the strait gate of
self-denial, in denying your selves of whatsoever the carnal mind would lead
you into, wherein the death of the soul is, and know, that this cross to the
carnal mind is to be taken up daily, when Christ's discipline is received, that
the partition wall of enmity may be broken down by the power of Gods grace in
the heart, teaching to deny the carnal will, in which the wages is death; and
to bring forth fruit unto holiness, the end whereof is everlasting life.

So dear people, all refuse the evil, and choose the good, and live for evermore.

This is written to you, by a lover of all your Souls, from the breathings of
the pure love of the Lord God, who would not any of you should perish, but that
all should come to repentance.
Tower-street London the 5th day of the 8th month, 1659. H. B.

THe unbelieving, despisers, adulterous and gainsaying generation, must have
signs, and wonders showed to them, as in the days of old; and notwithstanding
these things, was and is showed and held forth unto them, yet will they not
believe, and they that held forth the signs, and types, and figures, and
shadows of good things to come, which is come, and coming (in the midst of us)
were in the life and power of him who was in the Church, in the wilderness, who
said, six days shall thou labor, etc. and the first day is one of the six,
and is not the true Christians or Israelites holy sabbath which they keep,
whose dwelling place is in the end of all signs, and likenesses, Christ Jesus,
the Lord and King of righteousness, the Prince of life and Peace, the light of
the world, the Lord of the Sabbath, the day which the everlasting God has
blessed is the rest, the quiet, holy habitation, into which the Lord the King
of glory is entered and come in, and has taken up his abode in the midst of
Sion the holy, beloved City of our solemnity; O ye virgins, daughters of Sion,
many are those that seek to enter, to devour, defile, and destroy, and make a
prey upon the hidden precious treasure, (that's hid, and laid up for the Babes,
Lambs, and tender little little ones) but they shall not be able, whilst the
good watchman, with his bright eye, (the Armor) stands upon his guard in the
watch Tower, or in the gate of the City, to espy out his enemies, and salute
his friends, who enter in the walls of Salvation, where the valiant young men
are walking in the greatness of their strength, and their resting place is very
glorious.

Wherefore, O you Babes, and faithful followers of the Lamb in the fellowship
of his sufferings, be valiant, and faithful, and keep your resting place, holy,
pure, and clean, watch, and let nothing enter, that would hurt or defile, the
rest; keep it holy, the Sabhath day, the Lord is come, his Threne is set in the
midst, who had a body prepared him, that suffered without the gate; come, let
us go forth, proclaiming his Name (among the heathen) that is very glorious in
the midst of his holy Temples, bearing his reproaches, having the same mind
that was, and is, the same in him who is the Lord, the end of all signs,
types, figures, shadows, ceremonies, ordinances, immitations, remembrances,
likenesses, the substance, Christ, the rest, (within the vail) in us the hope,
and Life, and Crown, and joy of our strength, and glory; so run, that ye may
obtain, Remember that ye keep holy the Sabbath, the rest, into which you are
entered, and entering, O ye children, and Babes of the light of the world, So
farewell.

D. B.

THE END.

