A PARAPHRASE ON THE Book of JOB:

As likewise on the SONGS of MOSES, DEBORAH, DAVID:

On Four Select PSALMS: SOME Chapters of ISAIAH, AND THE Third Chapter of
HABAKKUK.

By Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE, Knight. M. D. One of His Majesty's Physicians in
Ordinary, and Fellow of the College of Physicians in London.

Vt si occupati profuimus aliquid civibus nostris, prosimus etiam, si possumus,
otiosi. Cic. Tuscul. Quaest. LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at
the Black Swan in Paternoster Row. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE great Mischiefs which we already feel, and the far greater yet, we justly
fear from the Universal Depravation of our Manners, and horrible Contempt of
Sacred and Divine Things, have with good reason alarmed all the Wiser part of
the Nation, who have a due Concern for the Interests of Religion, or the Good
of their Country. Considering Men in all places express their Melancholy
Apprehensions, that if Vice and Profaneness should without control spread their
Infection much farther, the Consequences would be fatal; and that
notwithstanding we have by His Majesty's unrivaled Courage, and most prudent
Conduct, surmounted our fears of Foreign Enemies, the Nation is still in
greater Danger from our Vices and Immoralities, our more formidable ones at
Home. His Majesty therefore, to put a stop to the progress of this dreadful
Evil, and after he has saved us from our Enemies, to deliver us from our
Selves, (his last and hardest Task) has been pleased to recommend from the
Throne the Suppressing of Vice and Irreligion; and our Honorable
Representatives, in nothing more honorable than in this, have expressed a
ready and becoming Zeal for the accomplishing this Great and Good Design.

To think of extirpating Vice would be indeed a vain Imagination; to suppress
its growth, and reduce its Power and Interest, is not impossible. And though it
must be granted, that even this is hard to be effected, yet when a Work is
necessary, the Difficulty should only whet the Courage, and provoke the Zeal of
the Undertakers. And when our Government shall endeavor to stop the various
Sources of this Mischief, when it shall attack with vigor the many monstrous
Heads of this Hydra, that terrible one that poisons the Stage, and from thence
conveys a deadly Contagion through the Kingdom, may, perhaps, receive a
mortifying stroke. It must be confessed, but not to the Honor of a Christian
Nation, that Poetry was never in the worst of Times, or among the worst of Men,
employed to more detestable ^urposes than it has been by the Writers of this
Age. This Weapon which might have been managed with great advantage against
Vice and Profaneness, they have made an Instrument of Destruction, and plunged
it into the Bowels of their Native Country. I will not ^ay that the worst of
our Poets, no not he who in the late loose Reigns introduced and established
that pernicious way of Writing, which corrupted the Stage, and depraved our
Manners, had this effect in view, and really designed the fatal Consequences
that attended their performances. It Is hard to imagine that any Men should be
so intellectually Wicked, as to promote Immorality and Irreligion, merely for
the sake of doing so; but this has been, and is still my complaint, that it is
eventually true, that the Loose and Profane Writings of our Poets, whatever
they designed, have greatly contributed to that decay of Virtue, and corruption
of Manners, which threaten the Nation with such dangerous Consequences.

The Regard I have for the Interests of Religion, and my Zeal for the Safety
and Happiness of my Country, have extorted these Complaints from me: And though
I know it is impossible to escape the Reproaches of those who will think
themselves either unjustly, or too severely censured in this Matter; yet that
is no discouragement to me. If I can escape the Defamation of their
Panegyricks, I think my self very safe. I have no Personal Quarrel with any of
the Writers I have censured; and if they think fit to expose my Name for
asserting the Cause of Virtue and Religion, I have no reason to be displeased
with them for doing me so great an Honor. If it be not possible to regulate
this Grievance, and reform this evil Manner of Writing, at least I am willing
that Posterity should know, if my Writings should continue so long, that the
Interests of Religion and Virtue, I mean as far as Poetry ^s concerned in them,
were not given up without Opposition, or any Protestations entered against it.

One of the most Famous Poets of the Stage has at last expressly owned, that the
Charge brought against him is too just. He has done it in two Lines; the two
best he ever writ, and by which, in my Opinion, he has acquired more true
Honor than by all the Volumes he has published. The two Lines are these: What
I have loosely, or profanely writ,
Let them to Fires, (their due Desert) commit.
Verses before Beauty in Distress.


Though particular Persons endeavor to vindicate themselves, yet in the
general it is allowed that the Stage requires a Reformation. The chief things
that are said in the defense of our Modern Plays, are these; that they are an
agreeable Diversion, and that they mightily polish and improve our Language.
But of what Persons must that Audience he composed, who shall call that an
agreeable Diversion, where Profaneness and Immorality are kindly treated and
encouraged, and Virtue and Wisdom exposed and put out of Countenance? Was it
not an Argument of the great Degeneracy of the Romans, when they became
delighted with the bloody ^ntertainments of the Amphitheatre, where the
Gladi^to^s mangled and killed one another for the Sport and Pastime of the
cruel Spectators? But it is infinitely more pardonable to be thus diverted, than
to make Sport with the Tragical Performances of the English Theater. It Is sad
indeed that Humane Nature should at any time be so ^ar divested of all tender
Passions, as that it should be de^ighted with the Torments and dying Agonies
though of condemned Criminals; but for any People to make it a Diversion to see
their Religion in^ulted, hurt, and wounded, to see Virtue it self receive such
cuts and deep gashes, is a certain mark of the most deplorable Corruption.

As to what is said of the Improvement of our ^anguage by the Writers for the
Stage, I believe ^is in part true; though it must be owned at the same time
that our most famous Masters, and most correct Writers of English, are either
of the Clergy, or else are Gentlemen whose Style seems to have nothing of the
Air of the Theater in it. But suppose it were indeed true, that we owe all the
Refinements of our Language to the Stage, will that make amends for the
Mischiefs which are universally laid to its Charge? Does the Honor and
Happiness of a People depend upon the Politeness of their Language, or the
Purity of their Manners? let these Gentlemen restore the old English Virtue,
but so far as it is impaired by them, and we'll be contented to take our old
Language in the Condition they found it.

There is a degree of Virtue necessary to the support of every Civil Society,
without which the wisest Laws, and the most prudent Provisions will be in vain.
Not many Princes have Virtue enough for themselves, but none, no not the Best,
not our Great King himself, who has enough for many Kings, has enough for
himself, and his People too. For if the Corruption of any Nation should
increase to that degree, that there should not be Men of Virtue le^t to put the
Laws in Execution; if the Numbers and Confidence of the Criminals become so
great, that they stand upon their defense, despise the Authority, and defy the
Power of the Magistrate; that Nation for want of Virtue, let the Magistrate and
Laws be never so good, must be certainly undone. Whoever therefore, as the
Poets of the Stage have done, shall by any means sink the Virtue, and corrupt
the Manners of the People, do effectually undermine the Foundations, and
subvert the Pillars of the Government; for a profligate and flagitious People
will destroy themselves in spite of the best Laws and the wisest Ministers in
the World.

This is the ground of my Controversy with the Stage. If a Foreign Enemy
should invade the Nation, every Englishman should take the alarm, although he
has received from them no personal Provocation. The same Reason will justify
the Opposition I have made to those Poets I have at any time condemned, and
will plainly show that I did not do it unprovoked. Whoever undermines the
Government, provokes every Man that loves It, to resist him.

It Is a great damage also to the Nation, that so much of its finest Spirit is
thus wasted, or employed to very bad Ends. It Is plain that many of a Poetical
Genius are likewise fit for the greatest and highest Employments both in Church
and State; and there are but very few, that are such mere Poets, as only to be
capable of being Turners of Verses. If therefore our Youth who are Poetically
inclined, would consider the Matter, and thereupon apply themselves to
Business, or severer Studies, many of them might arise to eminent Stations, and
at the same time advance themselves, and become very serviceable to their
Country; and by this means they would acquire greater Honor and Reputation,
than ever they will do by their Rhimes and Plays: For if they would reflect,
they would soon be convinced, that though Poetry is indeed an Ornament to those
that have more noble and more useful Qualities, yet when it becomes a
Profession, it is one of the meanest and lowest sort: It Is like Dancing and
Music which we value in a Gentleman, when a Musician or a Dancing Master make
no considerable Figure: So greatly different are the degrees of Esteem, which
all Men pay, and not without good reason, to the same Attainment, when it is in
one an Accomplishment, in another, a Trade.

And that I may not only censure the Performances of others, but likewise give
a fresh Example of a Writing that may both entertain and instruct the Reader, I
have made a third, which I intend as my last Attempt in Poetry.

It has been observed by great Judges, Parrhasia^^.
and I find Mr. Le Clerk of the same Opinion, that the Moderns have wholly
formed themselves on the Models of the Ancients, and that we have scarce any
thing but the Greek and Latin Poetry in the World. We have no Originals, but
all Copiers and Transcribers of Homer, Pindar, and Theocritus, Virgil, Horace,
and Ovid. Their Design, their Phrase, their Manner, and even their Heathen
Theology, appear in all the Poems that have since their Time been published to
the World, especially in the Learned Languages. It Is therefore to be wished
that some good Genius, qualified for such an Undertaking, would break the Ice,
assert the Liberty of Poetry, and set up for an Original in Writing in a way
accommodated to the Religion, Manners, and other Circumstances we are now
under. But however we write, I think it is high time to leave out our Allusions
to the Pagan Divinity; for how beautiful soever they might be in in the Pagan
Authors, who wrote to a People that believed in those Deities, it is the most
ridiculous and senseless thing in the World for a Christian Poet to bring in
upon all Occasions the Rabble and Riffraffe of Heathenish Gods; and yet if we
reflect on our Modern Poems one would think we were all Pagans to this day.
What have we to do with Jupiter and Juno, Mars and Venus, and the rest? We know
they are a Jest, and yet they are brought into all our most grave and chastest
Poems. Solemn Prayers are made to them by Christian Writers, than which there
cannot be a more intolerable Absurdity. I know it is said, as I have elsewhere
ob^erv'd, that the Christian Scheme of Religion is not so well accommodated to
P^etical Writings, and therefore our Poets are obliged to embelish their Works
with the Pagan Theology: A wretched Apology! Are our Poets then so dry and
barren, have they so little Learning, and so poor a stock of Images, that they
are not able to furnish themselves with proper Allusions, surprising Metaphors,
and beautiful Similes, without reviving the old exploded Idolatry of the
Heathens? As in this Book of Job, they will find a Poem that is indeed an
Original, and not beholding to the Greek and Latin Springs; so they will find,
if it be not depressed by the Paraphrase, a sublime Style, elevated Thoughts,
magnificent Expressions where the Subject requires them, and great richness and
abundance throughout the whole, without the Aids of the Pagan System of
Divinity.

It has been generally allowed that almost all the Book of Job is writ in
Meter; though a very learned Person, famous for his Skill in these Matters, has
assured me that this is a mistake: However that be, it is universally agreed
that the Subject of it is treated in a Poetical manner; that is, the Narration,
the Allusions, the Similes, and the Diction, are such as are proper only to
Poems. But it is a Controversy among learned Men what kind of Poem it is: Some
are of Opinion that there never was any such Man in Being as Job, but that the
Person is feigned, and all the Sacred Story concerning him is made up of
Allegories and Fables, composed for the Instruction of Mankind, like the
Parabolical Relations in the New Testament; and of this Opinion were many of
the Ancient Jews. Others believe that this Book contains a relation of nothing
but real Facts, without feigned Incidents or Episodes; and that therefore it is
an Historical Poem, like that of Lucan, which contains the Narration of a
Series of real Actions in a poetical way without interposing any feigned
Stories. Most of the Commentators and Critics that have writ on this Book, if
not all, are of one of these two Opinions. But I have in Conversation met with
learned Men that are of a middle Opinion; that is, that this is a Poem founded
on a true History, as those of Homer probably were: But then they say the
Conduct, the Method, the Machines, the Incidents, and the Episodes, which make
up a great part of the Poem, were formed in the Poet's Imagination, and that
therefore this Poem is of the Epick kind. As to the first Opinion, I think the
Scriptures fully confute it, by asserting the Person and Patience of Job so
plainly, that it leaves no room for any tolerable Evasion. As to the two last,
many things of Weight and Importance may be urged on either side; and therefore
I shall not undertake to decide the Controversy, but content my self in giving
the Reasons that I have read or heard offered to support each Assertion.

Those of the last Opinion in the defense of it allege, that the Frame of the
whole Book shows it to be the Work of Imagination and Contrivance, and not a
relation of a Series of real Actions. No Body can believe, say they, that Satan
did really appear before God, and that the Discourse recited in the Book was
indeed held between them in the Presence of the Holy Angels: It Is not credible
that the Messengers that brought an account to Job of so many Sufferings that
befell him, did really come upon the heels of one another so fast, and in such a
manner as is there related. They think it is improbable that Job should sit so
long upon a Dunghill, and that his Acquaintance should wait seven days and
nights together without speaking a word to their sorrowful Friend. They look on
this to be a Poetical way of representing the vast Distress that overwhelmed
the patient Sufferer. They say, it is incredible that all those prolix
Discourses should be actually held between Job and his Friends: and that a Man
in such sad Circumstances, as Job is supposed to be, should speak so very long,
and use so many Poetical Similes, Metaphors, and beautiful Descriptions as are
found in his several Speeches. They urge also that it has an Air of Contrivance
to sink a Man so suddenly from the most prosperous Condition, and to lay him
under such grievous Sufferings, and the very extremity of Misery, and then by a
no less sudden and surprising Revolution, in so short a space of time, to make
him again the most happy Man in the World. They urge that in the Catastrophe,
when this patient Man is rewarded for his inflexible Perseverance, the
allotting him just the same number of Children as he had lost, and just a
double quantity of Riches as he enjoyed before, seems too nice to be a real
Fact. The Men of this Opinion do not dispute the reality of the Person of Job:
They allow there was a Person of that Name, eminent for his Righteousness, and
famous for his Patience; for this the Scriptures expressly affirm; and they
suppose some great Poet, under the Guidance and Assistance of Divine
Inspiration, did for the Instruction of Mankind choose this Subject, and
contrive the Poem upon it of which we are now discoursing. They affirm that
this Poem of Job is of the Epick kind, here being found all the essential parts
required in the Constitution of such a Poem. They add farther as a confirmation
of their Opinion, that though Machines, that is, the introducing of Invisible
Superior Beings, and the interesting of them in the Business of the Poem, are
not necessary to an Epick Poem; yet as it does greatly heighten and embelish
the Narration, they cannot but take notice that this Conduct is observed here;
for the chief Apostate Angel, and even the Divine Being himself, are both
introduced in the most proper manner that can be; and as this perhaps is the
Original of that sort of Writing, so it does thereby discover a great Air of
the Allegorial Epick Poetry.

Those on the other side argue thus: As according to a settled Maxim of
Interpreting the Scriptures, we should not without apparent Necessity quit the
plain and literal Sense, and embrace a foreign, more strained and less obvious
Meaning: so without the same necessity we should not turn the Relation of any
Fact into Invention and Allegory. And to make it appear that there is no such
reason in this Case, they allege that there is nothing related in this Book,
but what may well be supposed to have actually happened; that though many
things appear improbable and hardly credible to the Reader, this is no
convincing proof that they were not real Facts. For all Men that are are verst
in History will meet with many wonderful and improbable Occurrences, which
notwithstanding upon sufficient Evidence they are forced to believe; and they
say that for that reason, because the Facts were so extraordinary and
surprising, they were recorded in this Book for our Admiration and Instruction.
They had rather give their Assent to some things that sound only harsh and
improbable, for many such Relations are undoubtedly true, than by departing
from the literal Sense encourage and embolden uncautious and wanton Wits to
break in upon the Scriptures, and turn the History of the Bible into Parables
and Allegories; for the Consequence of such a licentious way of interpreting
the Scriptures they look on as very mischievous. They think that the
unnecessary Concessions of some Divines in these Points tend mightily to
unsettle Men in the Principles of their Religion, and weaken their Reverence of
Divine Revelation.

They do indeed al^ow the appearance of Satan before the Throne of God, and the
Discourse on that Occasion to be an Allegory, for there are cogent Reasons for
it; but for the rest of the relations in the Book they see no necessity of
making them Allegorical also. There is the like Allegory used in the History of
Ahab, where it is said a Spirit appeared before the Throne of God, and offered
to be a lying Spirit in the Mouths of Ahab's Prophets to persuade their Master
to go down to War to R^amath Gilead, and he had leave given him to do so: But
though this be an Allegory, yet without doubt all the rest of the Story about
this Expedition of Ahab against the King of Syria was real. And to be more
particular, that Almighty God should permit the great Enemy of Mankind to
afflict and persecute a great and a good Man for the proof of his Constancy and
Uprightness; and to make his Virtues more conspicuous and exemplary, that he
should leave him for a time under this sharp and severe Trial, and at last
deliver the patient Sufferer, and restore him to his former flourishing
Condition: This has nothing in it but what is very agreeable to the Course of
Divine Providence; and if there be any Facts in the Book, that seem improbable,
it is owing to the Poetical manner of representing them, in which perhaps the
Time, Order, Place, and other Circumstances, are not so nicely observed.

But whether this be an Epick, or barely an Historical Poem, which I leave
undecided, the Character of Job may in my Opinion be every way proper for the
first. The Hero is indeed a passive one, and this perhaps will be made a great
Objection against this Assertion; because Homer's and Virgil's Heroes are very
active ^ersons. For the Critics forming their Model of an Heroic Poem
entirely upon the Example of these two famous Writers, make great and
illustrious Actions necessary to the Hero of the Poem, which con^orming my self
to their Precepts, I have formerly asserted. But upon what Authority is this
imposed on the World? What Commission had these two Poets to settle the limits
and extent of Epick Poetry, or who can prove they ever intended to do so? They
wrote according to their own Notions and Measures; and must all future Ages be
bound up to follow their Examples, without producing any other Reason? Yet this
Opinion, how groundless and absurd soever it appears, some imagine, has been
the great obstruction to the Improvement of Poetry among the Moderns. But it
may be urged that the Book of Job was written before Homer and Virgil, and the
World has as much reason to be governed by this Example, as by that of the
Pagan Writers. And if we look into the Reason of the Matter, and reflect on the
End and Design of an Epick ^oem, which is to instruct the World in some
important Moral Truth, by the Narration of some great and illustrious
Subject Matter, there is no question but the relation of the Sufferings, as
well as the Actions of great Persons, are very conducive to that end; and
indeed what else is the Subject of the Odysses? It Is true, the Iliad is all
active, and a very fighting Poem; but if the Odysses be considered, it is of
another nature, there is more a great deal of the Heroes Sufferings not evaded
by Arms, but by little Tricks and Subtilties, than there is of Action; and yet
Mr. Rapin accounts this the more perfect Poem. In short, it is hard to offer any
Reason why the Hero of the Poem may not be as well active as passive. If it be
said, the Authority of Homer is against it (for as for Virgil he is but a
Copier of Homer's Model) the answer is, that the Authority of the Book of Job
is for it; and moreover that Homer is of this Opinion in his second, the
against it in his first Poem. If it be said that Reason is against it, let that
Reason be produced; let it be shown that the Sufferings of a great Man managed
with equal Skill, will not equally serve the Ends of Epick Poetry. As for what
the Critics say on this Point, it is plain that Homer has been the great
Lawgiver to those Men; they have done little but turned his Examples into
Precepts; and bringing no Reasons to support what they assert, they are of no
weight in this Matter. Job then is a Hero proper for an Epick Poem, an
Illustrious Person fit to support the Dignity of that Character: He is by the
Instigation of Satan brought into miserable Streights and unparalleled
Sufferings, to try his Constancy and Integrity. He appears brave in Distress,
and valiant in Affliction, maintains his Virtue, and with that his Character,
under the most powerful Temptations, and exasperating Provocations that the
Malice of Hell could invent, and thereby gives a most noble Example of passive
Fortitude, a Character no way inferior to that of the active Hero. When the
various Efforts to break this mighty Man's Invincible Constancy proved
ineffectual, he is at the latter end of the Poem acquitted by God Himself, and
rewarded highly for his Patience and Perseverance; whereby the Justice of
Divine Providence is asserted, and Mankind encouraged to be steadfast in their
Religion and Integrity, upon a sure Belief that Virtue will not always be
neglected, but will at last receive a suitable Reward.

Whatever others assert, in my Judgment the Hero of the Poem ought not to be
drawn without some defects; for as the representing of a perfect Idea of
Virtue, which is never to be found in any mere Man, offends against the
Established Rule in Epick Writings, which excludes all things improbable, so
instead of promoting, it rather obstructs the End of that Poetry: For a perfect
Idea of Virtue and Excellency may amaze and dazzle us; but when propounded for
our Imitation, it will rather discourage, than excite us: But when the Examples
of Virtue that are set before us, are discerned to have a mixture of
Imperfection, we are provoked and emboldened to form our selves according to
such a Pattern, where there appears no Impossibility, as there does in the
other, ^f becoming like it.

This Poem seems to me to abound in all kinds of Beauties, which are admired in
Poetical Writings. What noble strains of Eloquence occurr in every place where
they ought to appear, especially in the latter part of this Book? How tender
and moving are the Thoughts in the Passionate, how proper, just and instructive
in the Moral, how sublime, admirable and majestic in the other Parts? What
Variety is there of elegant Expression, beautiful Similitudes, bold and
surprising Metaphors, natural, strong, and lively Images and Descriptions
throughout the whole? In many of these it exceeds, and in all of them it equals
the most Celebrated Writings of the Greeks and Romans. And if it should
hereafter happen, that Homer or Virgil should be well Translated into the
English Language, I am very confident that this Book, were it Translated or
Paraphrased with equal Skill, would outshine them in all sorts of Perfection.
But as to the chief End and Design of an Epick Poem, the giving a noble and
true Idea of the Divine Being, the Justification of his Providence, the
Instruction of Mankind in Moral Duties, and animating the Reader from proper
Motives to imitate the Illustrious Examples of Piety and Virtue set before
them, in this respect, which is infinitely the most considerable, this of Job
put all the Poems of the Heathen World out of Countenance. How will Homer's
wretched Tribe of Gods and Goddesses, introduced with all the Follies and Vices
too of corrupt Mankind appear to the World as now instructed and inlighten'd
with the Christian Revelation? And though Virgil is in that, as in other things,
more judicious and cautious than the Greek Poet, yet his Theology must be very
odious to a Christian Reader; and if the Machines of these Poets in which so
much of the Beauty of their Poems consists are so contemptible and ridiculous,
a great part of their Excellency is gone.

There are indeed some few Moral Sentences interspersed in these Poets; but as
they seem inserted only as Embellishments of the Writing, so the Body of the
Poem carries little Instruction in it. For my part, when I consider these
Poems, I am of Mr. L^ Clerk's Opinion, that the Authors had nothing else in
their view than to entertain and please the Reader, Ubi supra.
and that all the Materials and Contrivance were accommodated to that End. It Is
true, Critics in after-Ages, a sort of Men who are very apt to discover in
Writings many notable things that never entered into the Author's Thoughts,
have found out wise and instructive Morals in the Poems beforementioned; yet
this seems an Invention of their own. For as the Learned Man beforementioned
observes, it is scarce possible to relate any wonderful Action of a Great
Person, or any considerable Occurrence, but 'twill be very easy to draw some
Moral Inference from it, though the Writer never had it in his Imagination. And
the very same Person has with as great grounds of Probability drawn from the
Iliad and the Aencis, Morals very different from those that are commonly
mentioned, and has offered sufficient Reasons to make us doubtful whether the
Morals attributed to these Poems were ever intended by the Authors. And if this
be true of these two famous Writers, that only the pleasing and amusing, not
the instructing of Mankind was their Design, it is more apparently true of the
greatest part of the Moderns, especially the Dramatick Poets.

Since this Book of Job, and other Poetical parts of the Scripture, some of
which I have likewise undertaken to paraphrase, does at least equal the chief
Beauties of the Heathens, and by their Usefulness in their excellent
Instructions infinitely excel them, it is a Matter of Admiration that the
Christian Poets should be so far enamored with the Pagan Writings, as to form
themselves entirely by their Patterns, to be taken up with the Study of them to
the total neglect of these inspired Writings. What pains and labor have our
Men been at, how great a part of their short Lives have they spent, what a
multitude of Volumes have they published to illustrate the Meaning and discover
the Excellencies of Greek and Latin Poets, and to translate them into their own
Languages? If this were the Work of Gentlemen, that had nothing else to employ
themselves about, and had no other Capacity of being useful to Mankind, it
might perhaps pass for an inoffensive Amusement, and a pardonable ^ort of
Idleness. But it is indeed wonderful that to give a new Sense to an Expression
in an ancient Poet, to slop a Period more exactly, to rectify a Word, to give
a truer Spelling to a Man's Name, or to restore a corrupt Sentence, should be
looked on as such a Perfection, as sets a Man in the first Rank of Learned Men;
and that a kind of Knowledge which does not make Mankind any ways wiser or
better, should procure a mighty Reputation, and dignifie the Owners of it with
the honorable Titles of great Critics, and Masters of polite Learning.

I would not derogate from the true value of Classical Knowledge. The Greek and
Latin Poets should be studied, that we may understand those Languages of which
there is such a manifest Necessity: But it is most evident, that for the Sense,
for the noble and sublime Thoughts, and what is more than all other
Considerations, for the forming a Man's Mind according to the justest Ideas of
Virtue and true Wisdom, and thereby promoting his Honor and his Happiness, the
Poetical parts of the Scripture have, as before suggested, an infinite
advantage above all others put together, and therefore one would think should
not be less worthy of a Christian's Study and Application, than Homer and his
Followers.

The Language in which this Book was written is Hebrew; and considering the
very great difference there is between the Stil^ or manner of Expression in the
Eastern and Western part of the World, their Eloquence, as well as their
Customs and Habits, being of another kind than ours, it is very strange that a
literal Translation of this Book as it is now found in the Bible, especially
considering how long time since it was written, how little the Language is
understood, and how much the Idiom of it is lost, should not sound much more
harsh, and be less capable of being understood than it is. I am confident that
if several of the Greek Poets should be verbally translated, they would be more
obscure, if not altogether unintelligible. And if in a literal Translation the
Book of Job written in an Eastern Language does so much affect us, and raises
in our Minds such an Admiration of its Beauty and Majesty, what a wonderful and
inimitable kind of Eloquence must be supposed in the Original, when we cannot
translate verbatim a good Poem from one Modern Language into another, though it
be done by the nearest Neighbors, without a mighty diminution of its
Excellence?

As to the Time when Job lived, it is highly probable that he was Moses's
Predecessor, or at least his Contemporary; and that for these Reasons. This
righteous and devout Man was allowed to offer Sacrifices to God, which only the
Priests under the Mosaical Dispensation had Authority to do, and that only
before the Tabernacle or Temple. This devout Person seems entirely ignorant of
the Modes of the Jewish Religion, and of their manner of asking Counsel of God
either by Urim and Thummim, or by the Prophets; and therefore it is evident the
Mosaical Scheme of Religion was not yet instituted. In the whole Book of Job
there is no mention made of the Law and the Prophets, nor of the many Miracles
wrought either in Egypt, or in the Passage of the Children of Israel to Canaan,
though nothing could have been more pertinent and suitable to the Design of the
Author of this Book, had Job lived after that wonderful Deliverance; and there
is scarce any Writer that followed that Time, that does not mention or allude
to that famous History. And this is yet farther confirmed by the long Life of
Job, which was protracted to two hundred Years, which agrees to the Times of
the Old Patriarchs.

As to the Land of Utz, the Country in which this great Man lived, there are
different Opinions, occasioned chiefly by the uncertainty which Utz it was (for
three are mentioned) from whom it received its Name. The first Utz the Son of
Aram is mentioned, Genesis 10. 23. who is reported to be the Founder of Damascus
and Trachonitis; and many Writers, for this reason, conclude the Seat of Job to
have been in the Plain of Jordan in the Region of Trachonitis, where the Tomb
of Job is shown to Strangers at this day: Others place it in the Famous Valley
of Damascus.

A second Utz, the Son of Nachor is mentioned, Genesis 22. 21. from him the
Country where he lived is called Usitis or Ausitis, which by Ptolemy is placed
near Euphrates, and the City Babylon; and therefore many Authors believe Job
had his Habitation in that part of Arabia.

A third Utz, who, as Spanh^mius observes, was a Horite of the Posterity of
Sehir, and not as commonly accounted of the Race of Esau, is mentioned, Genesis
36. 28. the Horites being driven out by the Edomites, their Country was after
that called Idumea, which has for its bounds Arabia, Canaan, and the Red Sea,
and in this Country many believe was the Habitation of Job.

But if a Man could remove the Obstructions of great Learning and Critical
Remarks, methinks it should be a very easy matter to settle this controverted
Point. `Tis allowed by all, that Utz the Country of Job was exposed to the
Incursions and Depredations of the Chaldeans; and it is allowed likewise that
Chaldea was Eastward of Arabia. Now suppose that in our English History there
had been mentioned a great Man, that had in ancient Times been plundered by a
Band of Scotch-men; and the Habitation or Country of this unfortunate Man being
mentioned by an obscure or obsolete Word, a Controversy should arise in what
part of England this Man lived; would not any Man that was derivered from the
encumbrance of great Reading and learned Observations, presently conclude, that
he lived in the North part of England not far from the Borders of Scotland? And
must it not have been a Critic of extraordinary Sagacity that should have
found out his Seat in Middlesex, or at the Land's End? And yet those that place
the Country of Job in Idumea, or near Damascus, remove it farther from Chaldea
than those two Places before-named are from Scotland. It Is not therefore to be
doubted but that the Country of Job was in the Eastern part of Arabia, and it is
probable 'twas near the River Euphrates, and that he was of the Posterity of
Nachor. The* Stories therefore of Job's Well near Jerusalem, of his Scpulchre
in the Plain of Jordan, and of the Region in the North of Syria, which the
Inhabitants show to Travelers for the Seat of Job, are all Modern Fables, and
not to be regarded. But much more ridiculous is the ^^rror of those
Commentat^rs, who make Constantinople to have been the Seat of Job: The
Scpulchre of Job in Armenia that favors this Opinion, it is very probable
according to the Conjecture of several learned Men, was erected in honor of
some Captain of the Turks of that Name.

As to the Time when the Author of this Book liv'^* there are many different
Opinions. Some believe (...) this Book was wrote in the Time when the
Israelites were under the Egyptian Bondage, and that it was composed to
encourage them to a patient suffering of their Afflictions, and to confirm them
in their dependence upon God for Deliverance. And those of this Opinion
believe, that either Moses himself was the Author, or at least the Translator
of it; and that this was a Tradition among the ancient Jews several Authors
testify. Others are of Opinion, that the Writing was of much later date, and
give these Reasons for it. They allege that there are many Syriack and Arabic
Words, and Forms of Expression that were not in use among the ancient Hebrew
Writers, the Interpretation of which must be fetched from the Rabbis; that
there are many Elegancies relating to the Constellations, and several Fish and
Birds which show it to be of a Modern Date, and from hence they conclude that
it was then wrote when these Foreign words and manners of Expression were
introduced into the Hebrew Language. They believe therefore that the Author
lived after David and Solomon, and before Ezekiel, because he is mentioned by
that Prophet.

Some believe that Isaiah himself was the Author, the time when he lived being
very suitable to this Conjecture, besides the Majesty and Sublimity of his
Style, his singular Erudition, the similitude of Character, and many Words, and
Forms of speaking common to them both. Grotius imagines the Author to be an
Hebrew, because after the Custom of that Nation, he calls Arabia the East, though
others suppose he was an Idumean, because he abounds with Syriack and Arabic
Words: Whether he was the one or the other, it is plain the Author was well
versed in the Hebrew Language and those of the Neighboring Countries: And that
in the Writing of this Book he was under the direction and guidance of Divine
Inspiration, has been universally acknowledged by the Jews and Christians in
all Ages.

But one single Reflection prevails with me to believe that the Author was of
the oldest date; and that is, that I cannot imagine that if he had lived after
the Deliverance of the Children of Israel from their Egyptian Bondage, and
after the Institution of the Mosaical Scheme of Religion, he could have been so
perfectly silent as to both. It Is hardly to be imagined that if he had lived
after Moses he should ever have designed to be so accurate and nice in relation
to Time, as not to say any thing in the whole Book but what might be well
supposed to have been said by one who lived before Moses. This exact Care seems
not agreeable to the Writers of that Age. And if it should be supposed, that an
Author, that many years after took this Subject of Job to write upon, should
resolve to say nothing but what might be fit to be said in that time when Job
lived; yet it is a great difficulty to believe that he should be so successful,
as not in any one Place, or in any one Expression, to drop any thing that
should mention or allude to some Matters of Fact that happened after;
especially such famous ones, as the Miracles wrought when the Israelites were
brought out of Egypt, their Settlement in the Land of Canaan, and the Rites of
the Mosaical Religion. The same Reasons therefore that convince me that Job
himself lived before, or in the Time of Moses, persuade me to think the Author
of this Poem, whoever he was, did so too; and therefore it is very probable that
this of Job is the oldest Book in the World.

The Argument of the Poem is this: Job, a Prince in his Country, of
distinguished Piety and eminent Justice, at the Entrance of the Narration, is
represented as happy as the favor of Heaven, and the affluence of all Earthly
Possessions can make him. From this present State of Prosperity he is all on a
sudden, by the permission of Providence, for the trial of his Integrity,
deprived of his Estate, his Children, his Friends and Health, and reduced to a
Condition as perfectly miserable, as his former had been happy. After this
surprising change of his Fortune, to exasperate the bitterness and anguish of
his Soul, his Wife, in a most profane manner, provokes and tempts him to quit
all his Pretensions to Piety, and desperately to renounce all his dependence
upon God, and all expectations of Deliverance from him. In this, she is
imitated by the Egyptians and old Grecians, as well as other Idolatrous
Countries, who used under any great Calamities to rail bitterly at their Gods,
to pull down their Images, and drag them about the Streets, to be revenged on
them for not preventing their misfortunes. After this three Persons, eminent
for their Birth, Virtue and Wisdom, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar (perhaps Elihu
was with Job before) went to comfort their distressed Friend. Their Design was
good, and they considering that Wickedness was the meritorious Cause of
Suffering, and that Divine Justice was not to be cleared, if proffligate and
impious Men should go unpunished; and having themselves often seen as well as
heard by Tradition from their Forefathers, that wicked Nations and Families had
frequently, by the just Judgment of God, been utterly destroyed, concluded
that, Job notwithstanding the outward Figure he made of a very upright and
religious Person, must needs be guilty of some great, though secret Crimes:
Otherwise they could not conceive how it was consistent with Divine Justice and
Mercy to suffer him to be so very miserable. Their Opinion was, that a good
Man, such as Job was supposed to be, could never be so far forsaken of God, and
abandoned to such prodigious Sufferings. This is the Point they labor to
prove. They press this very hard on their afflicted Friend, hoping thereby to
bring him to a Confession of his Sins, and a suitable Repentance, upon which
they believed, as they often assured him, God would withdraw his afflicting
hand, ease his Complaints, and restore him to his former Prosperity. On the
other hand, Job, who was sure he was no Hypocrite, but that he was in good
earnest a Lover of God and of his Neighbor, and was not conscious of any such
concealed and secret Guilt, as his Friends reproached him with, asserts in his
defense, that his Friends proceeded in their Debates on erroneous grounds: That
they mistook his Case, and the Methods of relieving him. He affirms that
neither their Notions, nor their Observations were true. For though they asserted
the contrary, he was fully assured that God did often afflict even with the
greatest Severity many just and upright Men, and suffered in the mean time the
Enemies of God and Man to live in the most flourishing Condition; and that
therefore there could be no Argument drawnfrom (...) Man's Sufferings that he
was a wicked and unrighteous Person. In some of his Debates on this Head, he is
so far transported as to censure rashly the Divine Administration, as if God
had too little regard to the Piety and Righteousness of good Men, whom he
punished with so severe a hand, whilst he favored the Wicked, and prosper'd
their Undertakings; or at least that he made not that distinction between them
that the Justice of Righteous Government requires. But as to himself his
Anguish and Impatience rose to such a degree, as vented themselves in many
Expressions relating to God's Severity to him, unbecoming an humble and patient
Sufferer, which made a learned Critic say, that Job who had a good Cause,
discomposed by his Impatience managed it ill, as his Friends had a bad one, but
managed it well. Their Debates being ended, Elihu a wise young Man that had
heard the Arguments on either side, undertakes as Moderator to compose the
Controversy, and set them both right. He agrees with Eliphaz, and his two
Companions, that God was a Hater of Wickedness and Irreligion, and that he
often punished those that were guilty of them; but then he will not allow that
Job may from thence be justly condemned as a wicked Man, because a good Man may
often be afflicted by God for great and wise Ends. On the other side, though he
does not censure Job for his Hypocrisy, or any concealed or secret Guilt, yet
he condemns him for the Impatience he expressed in his Sufferings, and for his
bold and rash Expressions that seemed to charge God with Injustice. After this
God himself condescends to speak and put an end to their long Debate. He
condemns Eliphaz, and his two Friends, for their unjust Censures of Job, and
Job for his unjust Censures of Divine Providence; but on the comparison
declares that Job had the better Cause, and had spoken better of him than his
Friends had done; perhaps that Expression of Job's is alluded to, The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Then he
delivers him from his great Afflictions and restores him to his former happy
Condition.

It Is evident that the Design of the Book is to show that the Providence of God
does not only guide and overruled the highest and most important Affairs, The
Enterprises of aspiring Princes, and the Rise and Fall of States and Empires,
but that it inter^sts and mingles it self with all the Concerns of Humane Life,
and thereby prepares the Mind of the Reader to acknowledge him as the great
Moderator of the World, the Director of all our Actions, and Disposer of all
the Events that happen to Mankind. By which Impression he is disposed to submit
himself and all his Concernments with humble Resignation to the Almighty's
Righteous and Unerring Conduct.

And more particularly, the Design is to justify the Divine Providence in
suffering impious and flagitious Men to live in the undisturbed Enjoyment of
all the Power and Plenty their Hearts can desire, while good and upright Men
are often overwhelmed with Poverty and Distress, and exposed to the scorn and
outrage of their insulting Enemies. The solving of this difficulty, which has
so often puzzled the Understanding, and discomposed the Temper of the Wisest and
Best of Men, seems to be chiefly aimed at in this Writing. And it is observable
that in the Debates between Job and his Friends, when they are pressed with any
difficulty concerning the Divine Administration of Affairs, and are at a loss
how to reconcile Occurrences with their own Notions of Justice and Goodness,
they fly to God's Infinite Greatness, and seem to resolve the Controversy into
his absolute Sovereignty, and uncontrollable Power, which occasions many
wonderful Descriptions of God's Majesty and Omnip^tence. They seem to think
that when we are puzzled and confounded, and after all our Attempts can by no
means account for the Proceedings of Divine Providence, that directly thwart
our Opinions of Wisdom and Justice, we should enter upon the Contemplation of
the Glorious Attributes of God, and consider they so far transcend all the low
created Perfections in Man, that ours are by no means to be a measure of his.
They may and do assist us in many Instances, as faint Representations of the
Divine Excellency; but whenever we see any Conduct of Divine Providence that we
cannot reduce to our ways of Reasoning, we should humbly adore and not dispute.
We should fetch a Solution from the Sovereignty and boundless Perfections in
God, who is always Good, and Just, and Wise, even when in his Administration he
seems to be most the contrary. And it is very plain that when God bespeaks them
in the latter end of the Book, he insists on no other Justification of his
Proceedings with Men, than his Dominion and Property, his absolute Sovereignty,
and transcendent Greatness, that render him unaccountable able to his Creatures
for all his Actions. And therefore in the sharpest and severest Trials, when
Providence seems vigilant and industrious, as Job expresses it, to find
occasions of afflicting, when it runs counter to all our Desires, defeats our
Hopes, and disappoints all our Designs; in such a hard Case we are to moderate
our Passions, submit our Wills and our Reason too, and acquiesce in this
Belief, that nothing is more certain than that God can do his Creature no
wrong, and that in all his Dispensations he has both wise and gracious Designs,
though our shallow and incompetent Reason is not able to discern them.

It Is probable that one Reason why we are apt to censure God's Proceedings is,
that we take his Idea too nicely from our selves. For though we must form our
Idea of him from the Contemplation of our selves, yet this must not be too
strict, nor extended too far. For it is plain that God's Knowledge is another
thing from ours; he knows by one single Act of Intuition, we know by Reasoning,
that is by deducing one Proposition from two others, and by forming in a
tedious way, a long depending Chain of Consequences, which are for that reason
apt to create a distrust. Now as our inferior kind of Knowledge is by no means
a measure of that most perfect kind in the Divine Understanding, so the
Justice, Mercy and Goodness, which are the Perfections of a Creature's, may be
of a lower kind, and therefore an unfit measure of those Perfections in the
Divine Will. It Is probable that for this reason the Disputants in this Poem,
for the clearing of God's Justice and Goodness, betake themselves so often to
the transcendent Greatness and Excellency of the Divine Nature, whereby they
plainly intimate that we are by no means competent Judges of his Actions.

Another means to quiet Men's Minds concerning the Wisdom and Justice of God's
Dispensations in those Instances that are the ^arshest and most unaccountable
to us, is to reflect on the narrow and broken, as well as obscure Prospect
which we have of the wide Sphere of his Providence. Did we clearly and fully
understand how we are related to all the Parts of Mankind, both to our
Contemporaries, and to those who have lived in the past, or shall live in the
future Ages of the World; had we besides a clear Knowledge of our relation to
other Reasonable, but Superior Creatures, I mean the Angels that inhabit the
Immense and Glorious Regions above us, and to those that ^ill the Stars and
Planets; (for it is improbable this Ball of Earth, the Dregs and Sediment of the
World should be so full of Reasonable Beings, and the nobler Parts of the
Creation should not be peopled with suitable Inhabitants) Had we a perfect and
comprehensive View of the whole Scheme of the Divine Economy in relation to
all these Parts of his Government, and how in his Administration in the
different Parts of it he promoted the great and glorious Design of the whole,
we should have quite another Apprehension of God's Wisdom and Justice. He that
contemplates a Leg or an Arm with its relation to a Humane Body, of which they
are Parts, has a very different Notion of them from him, who considers them
divided, without any dependence on, or connection with the Whole. It is not in
our Power to make any but partial and very lame Observations of God's
Government of his Creatures, and upon such imperfect Views, it is no wonder if
our Constructions and Conclusions are often erroneous, and this, it may be, is
another Reason why these Wise Men that manage the Debate about Providence in
this Book, lead us so often to contemplate the Works of God's Creation, of
which our selves are so small a Part.

Besides this Principal and most Conspicuous Design, other Useful and Excellent
Ends are pursued in this Poem: One of which is to enlarge and raise our
Conceptions of the Divine Being, to give us worthy and honorable Thoughts of
his Infinite Perfections, and form in our Minds a suitable Idea of his
Greatness. The Representations of God's Transcendent Excellencies, of his
Independent, Sovereign and Irresistible Power, as well as of his Purity,
Wisdom, Justice and Beneficence, are in many Parts of this Book so noble, so
lively and admirable, that they are very capable of leaving in our Thoughts
very deep and lasting Impressions: And to give us right and just Conceptions of
the Divine Nature, on which our Notions of Religion, the Conduct of our Lives,
our Honor and our Happiness depend, is to do one of the greatest Services that
can be done to Mankind.

Another great End is to set before us for our Imitation an Illustrious Example
of Piety, and all kinds of Virtue, in the most contrary Circumstances of Life
that can be, the most Flourishing, and the most Miserable. And this is done in
the Character of Job: While he possessed a greater Substance than any Man in
the Country where he lived, and was blessed with a complete Collection of all
those Enjoyments, that are supposed to make a Man happy in this World, he
maintained his Religion and Integrity inviolable, he was no less eminent for
his Piety, than for his Power and Abundance. He strictly preserved his
Moderation and Humility, his Temperance and Justice, his Continence, his
Compassion, and his great Love to Mankind; as appears by the first, and Thirty
first Chapters of this Book. And when by a strange and surprising Revolution
the Scene was changed, and this Righteous Person being deprived of his Children
and Possessions, and afflicted with grievous Pain and Sickness, became the most
wretched and unhappy Man that can be imagined, he then by the Exercise of other
rare Virtues, maintains as great a Character in his Sufferings: He shows an
admirable Instance of Patience and Resignation, of Constancy and Perseverance,
holds fast his Religion, and still expresses his unalterable Dependence on his
God. In short, his Mind was neither elated, nor softened by the greatest
Prosperity, nor sowr'd or broken by the greatest Adversity. It Is true indeed
that he vented several passionate, rash, and unbecoming Expressions; but when
we consider the Anguish of his Soul under such prodigious Sufferings, the
profane Provocations of his Wife, the exasperating Reproaches of his mistaken
Friends, who after all his heavy Losses would have robbed him too of his
Integrity, it will not be hard to excuse those Expressions: And no more can be
concluded from them than this, that though he was an Excellent, he was not a
Faultless Man. Moses, who was honored with the Character of the meekest Man on
Earth, did on some provoking Occasions lose his Temper; and Job may be allowed
to be the most patient Person in the World, though in such Streights and
Distress, and urged with such Provocations, some impatient Speeches might be
extorted from him.

I cannot but observe in this place, that Job a Person of such Piety, and so
many rare and admirable Virtues, had no Advantages from the Divine Revelations
made to Moses and the Jewish Prophets. He was a Stranger to their Law and their
System of Religion. The Light that directed him must be only that of Natural
Reason and Conscience, assisted by some Oral Traditions from Adam and Noah, and
by what God was pleased sometimes to communicate by Dreams and Visions in those
darker Ages of the World. By this it appears, that great Advances may be made
in Virtue by a diligent attendance to the Dictates of our Natural Light. Would
Men but improve their Reason, reverence their Consciences, and stand in awe of
themselves, they would become Worshippers of God, as well as Sober and
Righteous in an eminent degree. I refer this to the Consideration of those
Gentlemen that do not acknowledge the Divine Authority, either of the Mosaic,
or of the Christian Institution.

Another and, and a very useful one too, is by the Example of Job to con^ince
the Reader of the Instability of a prosperous Condition, and the great
Vicissitude of Humane Affairs, whereby his Mind may be disposed to Moderation,
Humility, Temperance, Compassion and Charity, and preserved from that Pride and
Contempt of others, from that arrogant, cruel and haughty Temper, which great
Riches and high Stations are too apt to produce, especially in Men of a mean
and low Spirit.

I have not attempted a close Translation of this Sacred Book, but a
Paraphrase. For the Original being written in an Eastern Language, their Manner
and Turns of Expression are, as beforementioned, so very different from ours,
that I thought a Paraphrase more proper and advantageous for a Modern European
Language. But as I judged it would not bear a strict Translation, so on the
other hand I have endeavored, that the Paraphrase should not be too loose and
wide, but that the Reader may all along carry with him the Sense of the
Original. I have often diffused the Sense in other Expression. I have amplify'd
the Text in many Places that appeared more Poetical, and from General Heads I
have descended sometimes to Particulars, the Enumeration of which, I believed,
would illustrate and enliven the Original. I have avoided the immediate
Repetition of the same Thought in Words little different from the first, which
is so very common in this Book, as well as in that of the Psalms, and other
Poetical Places of the Scripture. For though this was no doubt accounted in the
Eastern Countries at that time a great Beauty and Ornament to the Writing, yet
we have quite another Taste of Eloquence, and therefore I have thought it best
to accommodate that Matter to the Modern way of Writing. The Method of Writing
in the Eastern Countries is what the Europeans think irregular; the same Matter
treated on before frequently recurs, and the Connection is sometimes broken, and
often obscure. The Transitions are sometimes neglected, and a new Subject
entered upon without the preparation for it which we expect should be made. We
censure these Modes and Customs in Writings as defects, and no doubt they would
censure ours as much. I would not peremptorily condemn their Taste, for the
Opinion of Beauty and Ornament seems not to be capable of being determined by
any fixed and unalterable Rule. Truth and good Sense are settled upon Eternal and
unchangeable Grounds and Reasons; but the manner of Expression, and the method
of conveying them, and what concerns the Dress, the Pomp and Ornament of them,
these are perhaps indifferent Ceremonies, and every Nation may have Authority
to establish which they please. It Is plain the Eastern World have not the same
Apprehensions of Beauty and Ornament that we have: They believe there is a
great Beauty in the neglect of what we call Order and Regularity, as is evident
in their Gardens and Buildings. What we censure as careless, wild and
extravagant, strikes them with more Admiration, and gives them greater
Pleasure, than all our elaborate and orderly Contrivances. All that can be said
is, that our Tastes are different, and if they are barbarous to us, we are so to
them, some of which especially the Chinese are, or at least have been very Wise
and Polite Nations.

We in this part of the World are all so full of Homer and Virgil, and are so
bigoted to the Greek and Latin Sects, that we are ready to account all Authors
Heretical that are without the Pale of the Classicks. This seems to me to be a
narrow Sectarian Spirit, that prompts Men to impose their Fancies and Opinions
on all the World besides. Whatever high Opinion we have of our own Seize,
we should have that Temper and Moderation, that might preserve a due regard for
the Wisdom and Judgment of other Nations; and not with the haughty Air of a
Supercilious Critic, censure and condemn every thing that deviates from the
Examples of the Greek and Latin Authors.

I have therefore in this Paraphrase proceeded all along from Chapter to
Chapter, and Verse to Verse, in the Order they are set down, excepting some
very few inconsiderable Transpositions: So that I have by no means altered the
Method and Order of the Narration, or any way changed the Model. And 'twill be
hard to give a Reason why the Author of this Book has not as great a Right to
be made the Standard whereby to try Homer and Virgil, as those two Authors have
to bring this to their Tribunal. If the Knowledge of the Hebrew Language had
been looked on in Europe to have been as necessary as the Greek and Latin; had
it been as great an Honor and Accomplishment for a Man to understand the first
as the last; and had there been as great a variety of Authors of all sorts of
Learning left in the Language, that there might have been an equal Inducement
to have studied and taught it universally in the Schools, I say had this been,
the Grammarians and Critics might perhaps have ^ixt on this as the best Model
of Poetical Writings, and have drawn their Rules and Remarks from the Example
they found here: For it is plain all their Precepts are founded on Examples, and
on those Examples with which they were most conversant, and in such Languages
as were most in vogue, and which most of them were obliged to profess and teach.

I have indeed supplied in some Places the Transitions and other Connexions,
which according to their manner of Writing are omitted in the Original, that
the Reader of the Paraphrase, who is unaccustomed to that way, may not be
embarrass'd or interrupted. There are many hard and obscure Places, about the
meaning of which I have consulted the ablest and most famous Writers, and have
taken that Sense which I looked on as most natural, and supported by the best
Reasons: And in this I have chiefly been obliged to the Excellent Paraphrase of
the Learned Bishop of Ely, and the Collection of the Critici.

I have added a Paraphrase upon several other Poetical Parts of the Bible;
which, in my Opinion, are nobler Examples of the true sublime Style, than any
can be sound in the Pagan Writers. The Images are so strong, the Thoughts so
great, the Expressions so divine, and the Figures so admirable, bold and
moving, that the wonderful manner of these Writers is quite inimitable. One
thing I must advertise the Reader of, that in the Prophets it is common with
them, that they may represent the Certainty of their Predictions with the
greater Advantage, to use the past for the future Tense, that is, to speak of
Things to come, as already done; so that their Prophecies often seem Historical
Narrations of Matters already transacted: Therefore the Reader is not to be
surpised, when in the second Song of Moses he finds that great Prophet
speaking of what befell the Children of Israel in Canaan, as things past in his
own Time, which did not happen till long after his Death. I am of Mr. Cowley's
Judgment, who in his Preface declares that there are no more noble Subjects of
Poetry to be found than those the Scriptures furnish us withal, and therefore I
have made this Attempt. It Is true, Mr. Sandys, a Gentleman of great Merit, has
done this before; but that I did not know till after I had begun this Work, and
made some Progress in it; and when I had perused part of his Paraphrase, I
thought I might be able to supply some Defects, especially in relation to
Perspicuity and Coherence.

As to the Leviathan and Behemoth, mentioned in the latter Part of this Book, I
have appropriated the Character of the first to the Crocodile, and of the last
to the Elephant. I believe the Marks enumerated by the Learned Bochart, do
justly determine the Description of the Leviathan to the Crocodile; but I cannot
see any necessity from what he urges, to conclude Behemoth to be the
Hippopotamus, or River-Horse. The Character given in Job is, in my Opinion,
more suitable to the Elephant. The Reasons alleged on both sides may be seen in
the Critici before-cited; and whether the one or the other be true, is not a
Matter of that Importance as should oblige me to transcribe the Arguments in
this Place. Persuaded by the Reasons of some Learned Commentators, I have taken
the Unicorn for the Uri or wild Bull, and not the Oryx, or wild Goat, according
to Boshart, or the Rhinoceros, according to others. I impose not my Opinion on
others: These are Matters of small Moment, and every Man is at liberty to think
as he pleases.

A PARAPHRASE UPON THE Book of JOB.
CHAP. I.
IN ancient Times, ever Moses Wonders wrought,
And murmuring Israel back from Egypt brought,
A Prince of great Renown, and wide Command,
Whose name was Job, dwelt in Arabia's Land.
He in the Heavenly Paths of Virtue trod,
And feared to Sin, because he feared his God.
Sev'n goodly Sons that Admiration bred,
And Three Fair Daughters crowned his Nuptial Bed
With gracious Heaven's peculiar Favor blessed,
The prosperous Man unmeasured Wealth possessed.
His Fleecy Flocks over all the Hills were spread,
And in his Stalls a Thousand Oxen fed.
When he decamped to find a new Abode,
Three Thousand Camels bore along the Road
His precious Goods, and groaned beneath the Load.
No Lord was found through all the Spicy East,
Whose Herds and Stores so vastly were increast.
His Sons to Feast each other did prepare
By turns, rich Liquors and delicious Fare.
And to their Treats their Sisters they invite,
To pass the ^lowing hours in soft delight;
While Charming Music, Dances, Sports and Play,
Gave swifter Wings to Time to fly away,
Beguiled the Night, and hurried on the Day.
Conscious that Sin does often such Mirth attend,
The Father feared his Sons might Heaven offend.
For he with mournful Eyes had often spied,
Scattered on Pleasure's smooth, but treacherous Tide.
The Spoils of Virtue overpowered by Sense,
And floating Wrecks of ruined Innocence.
He therefore for his So^s to Heaven conveyed
His Supplications, and Atonement made;
And while they Feasted, he devoutly prayed.
There was a Time when all the Sons of God
Came to the Allmighty's bright and blessed Abode,
To pay their Adoration at his Throne,
Which high on Adamantine Pillars shone.
Around in Throngs the prostrate Seraphs lay
Absorpt in Glory, and Excess of Day.
'Midst the bright Cherubs haughty Lucifer,
By marks of Guilt distinguished, did appear.
To whom the Eternal thus. Apostate, whence
Come thou to these blessed Seats of Innocence.
The Apostate said. I Lands and Seas have crossed,
And past from Clime to Clime, from Coast to Coast,
Till I the Tour of yon low World had made,
And all its Empires and its States surveyed.
My Course completed to these Seats of Light,
Mounting the Aerial Void I winged my Flight.
The Allmighty then demanded. In thy Way
And toilsome Course, Ambitious Spirit, say,
Have thou observed good Job, my Servant, one
In Righteousness and Piety, by none
Through all the wide Terrestrial World outdone?
Whose perfect Virtue Admiration draws
From Men on Earth, and finds in Heaven Applause.
I Have long observed, replied false Lucifer,
Thy Favorite, and watched his Steps with Care.
Without, the Saint is in Perfection seen,
But is the Saint without, a Saint within?
He serves his God, but does he serve for naught?
Does he thy Glory, or his own promote?
Does he Religion for it is Self regard;
And Virtue Court, not Virtue's bright Reward?
Is it his Honor to Revere his God,
Who has his Smiles, but never feels his Rod?
Have thou not crowned the Labor of his Hand,
Increased his Stores, extended his Command?
He cannot complain unless with Wealth oppressed,
With Favors over-laden, over-blest.
Entrenched within the impenetrable Fence,
Within the Works and Lines of Providence,
He can defy the most impetuous Shock;
And all the Assaults of Hostile Forces mock.
With such Abundance blessed, with Honor Crowned,
The Weakest Virtue may maintain its ground.
But let this Prosperous, Wealthy Saint be tried;
Let this pretended Gold the Test abide;
Change but the Scene, and let thy Frowning Brow,
The marks of Anger and Displeasure show;
Extend thy Hand, and touch his tender Part;
Thou Wilt find his Power and Substance next his Heart:
Despoiled of these, he will Curse thee to thy Face,
And naked Virtue will no more embrace.
The Eternal to the Apostate thus replied,
Let him Affliction's sharpest Edge abide.
The Fence I raised around him I remove:
Go, let thy Malice try his Truth and Love.
Let Righteous Job thy fiery Tests endure,
But let his Person be from Pain secure.
He said. The Apostate from his Presence went,
And on his fierce, malicious purpose bent,
He on Arabia made a swift Descent.
Mean time it happened at a splendid Feast,
Job's Eldest Son in turn received the rest.
The Sisters with their Brothers Drank and Eat,
All the delightful kinds of Wine and Meat.
When at Job's House a Courier did arrive,
Sweating with Speed, Panting, and scarce alive.
Horror and Wildness in his Aspect, bred
Just Fears of dismal News, and thus he said.
Invading Robbers from Sabea, warmed
With hopes of Booty, and with Lances armed,
An Inroad made; and first the Men destroyed
Who kept thy Herds, and then the Spoil enjoyed.
I am alone by favorable Fate
Escaped, the unwelcome Tidings to relate.
While he was speaking, with as swift a pace
Another came, and with as sad a Face:
And thus he said: O Job, a sudden Storm,
And lowering Clouds did all the Sky deform.
The bellowing Engines did all Nature scare,
Spouting their ruddy Vomit through the Air.
Tempests of Fire, like that which burns in Hell,
And blew Cascades of flaming Sulphur fell,
Dreadful to Sight, and deadly to the Smell.
The rav'ning Flames were on the Mountains poured,
And all thy Shepherds, with their Flocks, devoured.
I only am escaped, to let thee know
Thy heavy Loss, and this sad Scene of Woe.
Scarce had he ended, when another came,
His Horror was alike, his haste the same.
And thus he said: The fierce Chaldeans made
Three chosen Bands, thy Camels to invade:
Thy Servants by surprise they have overcome;
And with their Spoil they marched in Triumph home.
Mean time another entered, who in Speed
And Consternation, did the rest exceed.
And thus he spoke. Job, At a splendid Treat
Thy Sons and Daughters were together met,
Within their Eldest Brother's pleasant Seat:
When rising from the Salvage Wilderness,
A howling, hollow Wind, with such a Stress
Bore on the House, that the high Roof and Wall
Disjoynted cracked, and fell; and with the Fall
Crushed, and interred at once the assembled Youth.
I only escaped to tell so sad a Truth.
Then Job his Garment rent, and shaved his Head,
And on the Ground adoring fell, and said:
Naked at first I left my Mother's Womb,
And shall return as Naked to my Tomb.
The Lord has given, and taken back again:
Because he takes his Own, shall I complain?
Though now he Frowns, I Will praise the Allmighty's Name,
And bless the Spring whence past Enjoyments came.
CHAP. II.
The glorious Sons of God, a second time
Adoring stood, around his Throne sublime.
A second time ambitious Lucifer,
Amidst the happy Seraphs did appear.
To whom the Eternal thus. Apostate, whence
Come thou to these blessed Seats of Innocence?
The Apostate said. I Lands and Seas have crossed,
And past from Clime to Clime, from Coast to Coast,
Till the Tour of yon low World had made,
And all its Empires, and its States surveyed.
And now am hither come. In all thy way,
The Allmighty said, Ambitious Spirit, say,
Have thou observed good Job, my Servant, one
In Righteousness and Piety, by none
Through all the wide Terrestrial World outdone?
How 'midst his Sufferings he asserts my Cause,
Defends my Justice, and Obeys my Laws.
He perseveres unchanged, and still holds fast
The Integrity which he has long embraced.
Thou mov'st me to afflict his Soul in vain,
He still his generous Virtue does retain.
Shocked with this Storm, he still takes deeper root,
Nor is he less adorned with Noble Fruit.
The Constancy the unshaken Man has showed,
Does thy malicious Policy Elude.
Still against Sin he makes a brave defense,
Despoiled of all things, but his Innocence.
The Apostate then replied. Mankind, it is known,
Will give their Childrens Skins, to save their own.
To save their Lives, their Treasures they produce;
Rather than Death, a naked Being choose.
But now extend thy Hand, and let the smart
Of some Disease, afflict him to the Heart;
And thou will find my Accusation true,
That he with Curses will his God pursue.
Then said the Allmighty, Job is in thy power,
Afflict his Flesh, but be his Life secure.
In haste the Apostate on this Errand went,
Pleased with a Power to vex the Innocent.
He soon collected through the Atmosphere,
Crude Exhalations, and corrupted Air.
He fetched raw Vapors, and unwholsom Damps
From standing Lakes, low Caves, and marshy Swamps.
Then finding Job, he secretly conveyed
Through all his winding Veins, the infectious Seed.
The poisoned Blood with Pestilential Boyls,
From Head to Foot the guiltless Man defiles.
In Ashes humbly silent, down he sat;
With Groans bewailing his unhappy Fate.
To clean his Skin, he with a Potsherd took
The Filth away, that from his Ulcers broke.
Then thus his Wife the Constant Man addressed.
How much thy pious dullness I detest!
Do thou not see that thy Devotion's vain;
What have thy Prayers procured but Woe and Pain?
To suffering Virtue will thou still adhere,
And hardened in Religion persevere?
Will thou retain thy Praying, Whining Cant?
And bless thy God; for what? for Plagues and Want?
Have thou not yet thy Interest understood,
Perversely Righteous, and absurdly Good?
These painful Sores, and all thy Losses show,
How Heaven regards the foolish Saint below.
Incorrigibly Pious, cannot thy God
Reform thy stupid Virtue with his Rod?
Since only Woe attends thy Piety,
Be Wise and Brave for once, Curse God, and Dye.
Provoke the Allmighty thus to be thy Friend,
To take thy Life, and so thy Sufferings end.
Then Job replied. Thou speak as the Weak,
As the Profane, Flagitious Women speak.
What! shall a Man, a Worm with God contend?
Dispute his Will, his Rule of Justice mend?
He once enriched, and made us to abound,
Filled us with Goodness, and our Wishes crowned:
Shall we receive his Blessings, but complain
When his afflicting Hand Creates our Pain?
We should our Patience in our Sufferings show;
Blessings are not, but Sufferings are our Due.
When Bildad, Zophar, and Wise Eliphaz,
Revered for Knowledge, and their Noble Race,
All three to Job by Friendship long endeared,
The News of his Calamitys had heard;
They left their Seats, and meeting on the Day
And Place of Rendezvous, they took their way
To Mourn with Job, to share his mighty Grief,
And by their Councels to afford Relief.
His Pain in part, by Kindness to remove,
And sooth his Anguish by condoling Love.
Then from afar they lifted up their Eyes,
Directed by his Moans, and woeful Cries,
And spied the afflicted Job upon the Sand,
In Ashes laid, his Potsherd in his Hand.
Consummate Sorrow in his Eyes appeared,
And Tears and Dust his meagre Cheeks besmeared.
Deformed he lay, Disfigured, Covered over
With running Boyls, and undigested Gore.
They sought him in himself, and scarce did know
Their ancient Friend, disguised with so much Woe.
At last convinced, they whispered, sure it is he;
But, O, how changed with Pain and Poverty?
What wondrous Turn of Providence is this,
And how precarious is Terrestrial Bliss?
Amazing Change! how soon, O Righteous God,
Man's Glory sades beneath thy blasting Rod?
To see a Righteous Friend so much distressed,
Awakened various Passions in their Breast:
Grief, Pity, Wonder in their Bosoms pent;
Pressed with like force, and strove at once for Vent.
They tore their Vests, like Men in deep Despair,
And scattered Clouds of Ashes through the Air;
Which thence descending, on their Heads did rest,
Their inward Grief and Trouble to attest.
Not to molest a Sorrow so profound,
Sev'n Nights and Days they Silent sat around.
So long a Time they held their Peace, to show
A Reverence due to such prodigious Woe.
CHAP. III.
And then afflicted Job first Silence broke.
His Friends attentive sat, while thus he spoke.
Cursed be the fatal Day that cheered my Sight,
With the first Beam of Inauspicious Light.
Cursed be the luckless Night, be Cursed the Morn,
When first they said an Infant Man was born.
Perish that Day, let it no more appear,
Cut off from all Connection with the Year.
O'ercharg'd with Sorrow, let it move so slow,
That all Times swift-Wing'd Race may still out-go
That lagging Day, still let it pant behind,
And never more its Place and Order find.
May it be banished from its Month, and may
No ill-designing Mortal ever Pray,
To see again this Abdicated Day.
May it its Course and Turn for ever miss,
Ingulph'd, absorpt, and lost in Time's Abyss.
As for the Night, let Darkness to be felt,
Impenetrable Darkness, such as dwelt
On the Dun Visage of Primeval Night,
Shut every Starbeam out from Mortals Sight,
And close up every Pass and Road of Light.
Let not the cheerful Face of Joy appear;
Let no harmonious Sound delight the Ear.
O let no other Accents fill the Air,
But strains of raging Grief, and Yellings of Despair*
Ye Mourners, all ye wretched Sons of Woe,
Who on your Birthday dreadful Curses throw,
Some Execrations on this Night bestow.
Ye Stars withdraw your Light, let not a Ray
Be suffered over the gloomy Air to stray,
Let Men in vain expect the dawning Day.
Because it did not shut the Womb, and keep
Me from my Sorrows in Eternal Sleep.
Why did a false Conception not elude
My Parents hopes, and Life from me exclude?
Why was I shaped and fashioned as a Man?
Why Life not stifled when it first began?
O, that a quick Abortion had suppressed
The vital Flame, when first it warmed my Breast.
Why did I not continue still too weak,
And destitute of Force enough to break
The Bands which first did me an Embryo hold,
And in the Womb my tender Limbs enfold.
Why did the Womb give me a passage forth?
Or why did I survive the unhappy Birth?
Why did my Mother's Knee and Nurse's Breast,
Preserve my Being, and prevent my Rest?
Had they in Mercy suffered me to lie
Without their help, and kindly let me dye;
I then had early met as good a Fate,
As Princes, Kings, and Counselors of State,
Who lie in Stately Sepulchers Interred,
Which by themselves at vast Expense were reer'd:
Who once with Gold and Silver did abound,
But now as Poor as Common Men are found.
I had like Infants stifled in the Womb,
Slept undisturbed, laid in the quiet Tomb.
The Wicked there no more the Just molest,
And there the weary are dissolved in Rest.
There near the Oppressor lies the Oppressed in Peace,
And there the Prisoners Cries for ever cease.
Levelled by Death the Conqueror and the Slave,
The Wise and Foolish, Cowards and the Brave,
Lie mixed, and undistinguished in the Grave.
Why is that Peaceful Place, that soft repose
Denied to vast unsufferable Woes?
Why does the Man that drags in Sweat and Pain,
His Chain of Life demand to dye in vain?
Why is he not allowed to yield his Breath,
TO enjoy the cool, refreshing Shades of Death?
Why does the courted Blessing still elude
His eager Arms, and fly him when pursued?
Relentless Death! Inexorable Grave!
Why will you not your wretched Vot'rys Save?
Who to enjoy you more desire and strive,
Than ever two happy Lovers did to Live?
Why strikes not Death the Man who meets her Dart
With an expanded Breast and leaping Heart?
Why cannot he taste her blessed Ambrosial Bowl,
To ease the bitter Anguish of his Soul?
When a poor Wretch consumed with raving Grief,
And sunk in deep Despair, to find relief
Shall dig with eager Labor to explore
Death's Leaden Vein, as if 'twas Silver Oar:
Why does he not so cheap a Treasure find?
By envious Life why is he countermin'd?
Why must he live, who begs and prays to dye,
It Is Cruelty this Refuge to deny
To one who knows not whither else to fly?
This is my Case. For when I sit to Eat,
Tears are my Wine, and Trouble is my Meat.
My Grief Tempestuous, and unruly grows,
And as a roaring Flood my raging Sorrow flows.
For now I groan beneath those ills oppressed,
Which my ill-boding Mind did still suggest.
When I possessed the softest hours of Ease,
My ill presaging Thoughts disturbed my Peace.
My anxious Fears did my Enjoyments Awe,
And now I feel what from afar I saw.
CHAP. IV.
Then Eliphaz replied. To mourn thy Fate,
And with soft Words thy Sorrow to abate
We came, but such Impatience thou have shown,
And have on Heaven such bold Reproaches thrown,
That now instead of yielding kind Relief,
My Language may exasperate thy Grief.
Such is thy Wound, Balm will be used in vain;
And if I Lance it, I increase the Pain.
Yet who can hold from speaking to defend
Justice Divine, and guide an Erring Friend?
Often have thy Words and Wise Instructions made
The Feeble Strong, and given the Afflicted Aid.
The Unfortunate and Wretched taught by Thee,
Reviving, have forgot their Misery.
The Mourners and the Comfortless have found
Thy Words like healing Balsom, ease their Wound.
The most perverse, inexorable Woe,
And sullen Grief thy charming Voice did know.
Drooping Despondency, and deep Despair
Listened to Thee, and would thy Councels hear.
But since it is thy Turn to undergo
The Suff'rers Part, ungoverned Passions show,
How much a lighter Task it is to give
Council and wise Advice, than to receive.
How easy it is to praise, how hard to bear
The afflicting Rod, thy wild Complaints declare.
Impatience under Pain the Spring betrays
Of thy Devotion and Religious Ways.
Affliction has detected thee, and shown
Thou did not seek Heaven's Interest, but thy own;
For with thy Wealth, thy Piety is gone.
None whose Religion's Pure, and Mind Sincere,
Did ever such Marks of Heaven's Displeasure bear.
Heaven will not let the Righteous sink so low,
In such a vast profound Abyss of Woe.
They are by adverse Providence annoyed,
Kindly Corrected often, but not destroyed.
They bear the Frowns, but not the Wrath of God,
Nor Feel his Vengeance, though they do his Rod.
A ruined Upright Man was never known,
Never as thou art, perfectly Undone.
He that delights to sow Iniquity,
Shall a sad Harvest of Destruction see.
The Breath of God, like Pestilential Air
Shall blast, and leave him withering in Despair.
So a fierce Lion long inured to Spoil,
Shall roar entangled in the Hunter's Toil:
Or else the Bloody Ravager o'erpowr'd
When Old, by Famine's Teeth shall be devoured.
His rav'ning Whelps shall over the Mountains stray,
And perish on the Sands for want of Prey.
I should be impious, vain and arrogant,
Should I of Heavenly Correspondence vaunt:
Yet to convince thee of thy Error, hear
The Language of a Heavenly Messenger.
When Night in Sable Clouds had Nature dressed,
And weary Lab'rers sought refreshing Rest;
I had a Vision, which a Sacred Dread
And Reverential Horror in me bred.
The awful Object clothed in glorious Air,
Struck through my trembling Joints resistless Fear.
A Heavenly Spirit passed before my Sight;
My Hair with Terror stiffen'd, stood Upright.
Approaching me, the bright Appearance stood,
And I a plain Corporeal Glory viewed:
But in so great Confusion, so much Awe,
That I no Form or Shape distinctly saw.
Then thus the immortal Stranger silence broke,
And with a still Celestial Accent spoke.
Shall mortal Man than God more Righteous be?
Shall Man's outdo his Maker's Purity?
Full Confidence even in the Godlike Race
Of Seraphims the Almighty cannot place.
He does Archangels for their Folly blame,
Who bow their conscious Heads, and blush for shame.
And shall a Man his Innocence defend?
With his great Maker shall a Man contend?
A worthless Wight that triumphs for a Day,
Wh^^^ Habitation is a House of Clay.
(...) Fort of Life is founded in the Dust
Which quickly falls, and disappoints his Trust,
Though but a gnawing Worm the Work assails,
Or but a silly Moth the Fabric scales.
Each hour the sap'd Foundation feels decay,
And Life even in its blooming fades away,
Made to its own devouring Flame a Prey.
So fast Men perish, that the common sight
No more does wonder, or regard excite.
On Power and Wealth in vain for aid they cry,
For as they lived, they in their Folly dye.
Therefore, O Job, thy rash Discourse correct,
No more, poor Mortal, on thy God reflect.
CHAP. V.
Perhaps the Foolish may thy Conduct praise
And against Heaven may bold Objections raise.
But try the Wise and Upright, call and see
Which Saint of all the sacred Hierarchy
Will thy rash Words applaud, thy Cause maintain,
And with audacious Charges Heaven arraign?
Why do thou, Job, thy Discontent express
That wicked Men do Power and Wealth possess?
That Power and Wealth they will not long enjoy,
For wrath Divine will the vile Race destroy.
I have with wonder seen the Wicked shoot
Deep in a fertile soil his thriving Root:
But soon assaulted with a sudden storm,
His ^hastly Ruin did the Ground deform.
His ^imbs and Leaves and withered Fruit were spread
Round his dismembered Trunk, and blasted head.
His hated Sons impleaded by the Poor,
Their Wealth by Rapine gotten did restore.
Inextricable Troubles, vast Distress
Did this accurs't, despairing Race oppress.
The Hungry did their thorny Fences leap,
Enjoy their Labor, and their Harvest reap.
Robbers did Inroades make in furious Bands,
Their Houses risle, and lay wast their Lands.
What means these Cries? why this Impatience shown?
Is Trouble rare? are Woes uncommon grown?
It Is true, Affliction springs not from the Earth,
Nor to the Ground owes a spontaneous Birth;
Yet Men to Woe as to their Center tend,
As Streams to Seas, and Flames to Heaven ascend.
This is the sad Inheritance conveyed
From Man to Man since Adam disobeyed.
This is the Lot which God does Man assign;
Wherefore, O Job, were thy Affliction mine,
I would to Heaven's dread Majesty submit;
All my own Ways Arraign, but his Acquit.
I would his Justice and his Truth adore,
Revere his Greatness, but my self abhor.
By humble Resignation I would ly
Beneath his Feet, and for his Mercy cry.
His Deeds are great, unsearchable his Ways,
Which in observing Minds Amazement raise.
His Providence when least it is understood,
Is always Just, and Merciful and Good.
The Wonders of this dark, unfathomed Deep,
Our Thoughts in endless Admiration keep.
He hangs his Clouds, amazing to behold,
And shapes his Rain-drops in an unknown Mould.
Then he his Waters on the Mountains pours,
And on the Vallys his Prolific Showers.
He sets the Servant in the Master's place,
And wipes the Tears off from the Mourner's Face.
The crafty he Entangles, Countermines
The Councellor, and blasts his Wise designs.
He turns against himself the Statesman's Art,
And does the Politician's Hopes subvert.
By interposing Mists, the clearest Sight
He often obstructs, and intercepts the Light.
Involved in thickened Shades they lose their way,
Believe it is Night, and seek at Noon the Day.
He from the Oppressor does Protect the Poor,
And from his Mighty Foe the Weak secure:
So to the Poor he gives reviving Hopes,
And the black Mouth of proud Injustice stops.
Thrice happy is the Man, who feels the smart
Which kindly God's correcting Strokes impart.
When chasten'd, think, thou art with Favors crowned;
Let no desponding Thoughts thy Hopes confound,
The Hand that made, will likewise heal thy Wound.
He Will from thy various Troubles set thee free,
And change to Joy this Scene of Misery.
His powerful Word shall call the smiling Light
From this wild Chaos, and this sullen Night.
He shall protect thee with a tender Care
From the fierce Jaws of Famine and of War.
The poisonous Arrows of the Sland'ring Tongue,
Shall neither gall thy Fame, or Honor wrong.
When grim Destruction with her horrid Train
And dire Attendants, Anguish, Woe and Pain
Advances, shaking her tremendous Spear,
Her Threats shall move thy Laughter, not thy Fear.
All Nature reconciled shall give thee Peace,
If thy just Ways the Lord of Nature please.
The Stones and all the Elements with thee,
Shall ratify a strict Confed'racy.
Wild Beasts their salvage Nature shall forget,
And for a firm Alliance with thee treat.
The Finny Tyrants of the spacious Seas,
Shall send a Scaly Embassy for Peace.
His plighted Faith the Crocodile shall keep,
And seeing thee, for Joy sincerely Weep.
Dragons shall thee with friendly Hissings greet,
And wanton Serpents roll, and lick thy Feet.
The fawning Lion shall thy Friendship Court,
And gentle Tigers shall around thee sport.
These awkard Sycophants shall thee address,
And unaccustomed Flattery express.
Thy Habitation shall be ever blessed
With undisturbed Tranquillity and Rest.
Thy House in Numbers shall surpass the Sand,
And as the Rocks around, unshaken stand.
When watchful Death shall on her Harvest look,
And see thee ripe with Age invite the Hook,
She Will gently cut thy bending Stalk, and thee
Lay kindly in the Grave her Granary.
Weigh these undoubted Truths, and thou will find
Great Consolation to thy wounded Mind.
CHAP. VI.
He ceased, and Job in Pain and Anguish said,
O, that my Grief was in a Balance laid,
And all my Sufferings were against it weighed!
Then let an equal Judge decide my Case,
Whether my Grief my Sufferings does surpass.
My massy Burden and my pondrous Woe,
In weight the Sand around the Sea outdo.
Unutterable Groans my Soul oppress,
Nor have I words to show my deep Distress.
The Allmighty's Arrows stick within my Heart,
And every fest'ring Wound gives deadly smart.
Arrows whose heads, like pointed Lightning, shine,
Steeped in the strongest Lees of Wrath Divine.
Their raging Poison spreds without control,
Drinks up my Life, and Eats my very Soul.
The Allmighty's Terrors drawn out in Array
Surround me, and invade me every Way.
You that can triumph free from Care and Pain
In Peace and Plenty, never need Complain;
Is the Wild Ass in grassy Fields diseased?
Or over his Fodder lows the Ox displeased.
But did you my Affliction undergo,
Your groans with mine would some proportion show,
And to as high a Tide your swelling Sorrows grow.
Who in unsavory Meats can take delight?
What Taste is in an Egg's insipid White?
Then noxious Food, such as my Sorrows are,
It Is madness to commend, as wholesome Fare.
I Am now compelled, my Poverty is such,
To feed on Meats which I abhorred to touch.
My Troubles rise to such amazing height,
Such is my Grief's unsufferable Weight;
My Soul to such extremity is driven,
That I must still implore the God of Heaven
That I may find the Blessing I require,
That he would grant my passionate desire;
That he my Life in Mercy would destroy,
And let me Death, for which I long, enjoy.
That he would bowels of Compassion show,
And loose his Hand to give the fatal blow.
To welcome Death I would my Arms extend,
Embrace and hug my Dear, though ghastly Friend.
Did I but see the kind Deliverer near,
Did from the Grave some dawning hope appear,
This Anodyne my Anguish would appease,
That with my Life my Grief would quickly cease.
I Would then a firm, unshaken Courage show,
Hardened in Grief, and strengthened by my Woe.
I hate to live, of Death I Am not afraid,
Conscious that Heaven I strictly have obeyed.
What is my Strength? how weak, and how absurd
Is it to hope it er'e shall be restored?
What is my End? where is my Period set
When I no more shall my sad moans repeat?
Wasted and worn I linger and complain,
And by prolonging Life prolong my Pain.
I from your Love and Council hoped Relief,
Thought your Discourses would abate my Grief;
But your perverse, unskilful ways confess
You know not how to treat your Friend's distress.
Mistaking my Distemper you enrage
The sharp Disease, but not the Pain assuage.
Am I a Marble Rock that cannot feel?
Are all my Muscles Brass, my Sinews Steel?
That I this mighty Load of Grief must bear,
While Death which I invoke neglects my Prayer,
And at a distance keeps, deriding my Despair.
O ^lip^az, was I desponding left,
Of help without, and sense within bereft,
Yet still a Friend Compassion should express
To one in such Affliction, and Distress.
As when with burning heat a Trav'ller ^ry'd
Finds out the Brook, but sees the Channel dried,
Where he expected cooling Streams should flow,
Sin^^ 'twas in Winter filled with Ice and Snow;
But when the Waters felt a warmer heat,
They rose in Vapors, and forsook their Seat:
Won by the Summer's importuning Ray,
The eloping Flood did from its Channel stray,
And with enticing Sunbeams stole away:
The Trav'ller casting down a troubled look,
Sighs and upbraids the false deceitful Brook.
Fair Sheba's Convoys and the thirsty Troops
Of Tema mourn their disappointed Hopes.
Con^ounded they express their Grief and Shame,
To find the Banks without the expected Stream.
No less am I amazed, no less I grieve
That you my bosom Friends my hopes deceive.
You are unable to afford me Aid,
Seeing my Grief you start and are afraid.
Do my prodigious Woes my Friends amaze?
Why do you wildly stare, and at a distance gaze?
Has my Disease this Consternation bred?
Do You fear my Ulcers will Infection spread?
Do You fear your Friend now Poor, will craving grow,
And beg Supplies of you to ease his Woe?
Did I ever importune my Friends to grant
Part of their Substance to relieve my want?
Did ever Job at your Expense demand
To be delivered from the Oppressor's hand?
If your Instructions can my Ways correct,
Thankful I Will hold my Peace, and not reject
The Heavenly Light, that will my Crime detect.
Right Reason's Beams a quick admission find,
And breaking all Obstructions force the Mind:
But whom can your Weak Arguments confute?
Short, or beside the Mark you ever shoot.
Will you your Ignominious Slanders throw,
And though I am your Friend, insult my Woe?
Almost bereft of sense yet I can find
Your Words are vain and empty, as the Wind.
Your Indiscretion far from your Intent,
With cruel Comforts does my Grief augment.
You sink me down too low before deprest,
And in your subtle Snares your Friend Arrest.
And now if you my Troubles would survey,
And with deliberate Thoughts my Sorrow weigh,
You would pronounce I justly did Complain,
Acquit my Speeches, and your own Arraign.
Return I pray, to Reason's Paths return,
You Will then assert my Cause, my Sufferings mourn.
You will de^end my Righteousness, and all
Your rash and unconsider'd Words recall.
I do not find my Reason so debased,
Nor yet so undistinguishing my Taste,
But I can see your words are misapplied;
They cannot Truth's Impartial Test abide.
CHAP. VII.
The Life of Man has a determined date
Fixed by Divine, Irrevocable Fate.
His Days will at a certain time expire,
As his, who lets his Labor out for Hire.
The Weary Slave does for the Evening pray,
Knowing his Labor ceases with the Day.
Then why should I with toilsom Life oppressed,
Not be allowed to pray for Death and Rest?
The uneasy Day in lingering Pain I spend,
And think the tedious Night will never end.
By Night when Men their anxious Thoughts disband,
And gently strok'd by Slumber's downy hand;
Reluctant Cares at last from raging cease,
And Sleep till Morn, to give the Wretched Peace.
Even then my restless Thoughts to vex my Soul,
In everlasting Agitations roll.
My salvage Grief let loose, like Beasts of Prey,
By Night grows more outrageous, than by Day.
My swelling Sorrows never will subside,
But higher rise in their Nocturnal Tide.
A thousand times I turn, but turn in vain,
I change my Side, but always keep my Pain.
With longing Eyes I seek the dawning Light,
But Woe succeeds, as Day succeeds the Night.
My Ulcerated Flesh is clothed with Worms,
And Putrefaction every Limb deforms.
My Days in quick Succession go and come,
As the swift Shuttle traverses the Loom.
Lord, in Compassion to me, call to mind,
That swift-wing'd Life out-flys the fleetest Wind.
No grateful Object more shall please my Sight,
No more Harmonious Sounds my Ear delight.
I must for ever my Abode forsake,
For ever of my Friends my Farewell take.
Should thou displeased give me a frowning Look,
I sink, I die, as if with Lightning struck.
As ruined Clouds dissolve, and flow in Air,
And never their lost Connection can repair:
So he that once descends into the Tomb,
Before the great and Universal Doom,
No more his Form and Vigor will resume.
He Will never break the Leaden Chains of Death,
Nor more by turns exclude and draw his Breath.
He shall no more enjoy his former home,
Nor from the Grave to his dear Neighbors come.
Since Life by Common Fate must quickly cease,
And griping Death will never her Prey release;
I Will not refrain, but for Compassion Cry,
For some repose and Ease, or else to Dye.
I Will speak, for Grief is bold and eloquent,
My Prayers and Cries shall give my Sorrow vent.
Expostulations and Complaints shall ease
My tortured Soul, and the sharp Pain appease.
Am I a vast, a wild, Impetuous Deep,
That thou art forced to set thy Watch, and keep
Me thus in Bounds? Can I ever dangerous grow,
Ever pass my Banks, and over the Region flow?
Am I a furious Monster of the Main,
That thou in Fetters do my Rage restrain?
No. I extended lie upon my Bed,
And on my Couch repose my restless Head:
But then if Sleep around me nodding flies
With flaggy Wings, and lights upon my Eyes;
Visions and Dreams composed of frightful Air,
The drowsy Stranger from my Eyelids scare.
Therefore my Soul does quick Deliverance ask
From tedious Life's unsufferable Task:
Life I abhor; let me alone to Dye;
Why should I still in lingering Torments lie?
Why does Coy Death from my Embraces fly?
Why should I Live? Was I from Pain releast,
Life's but a vain and empty Name at best.
O, what is Man? What is the Hope and Trust
Of a poor piece of ill-cemented Dust?
What is the Wight, that God should condescend
To try his Strength, and with him should contend?
Will thou such Honor on a Wretch bestow,
Is he or worth thy Notice, or thy Blow?
Will thou thy Power against a Worm engage,
Is Man a proper Object of thy Rage?
But if thou scourgest with a kind Intent,
And thy sharp Strokes are for Correction meant
To make the Suff'rer thy just Laws obey,
And to reduce the Wanderer to his way,
Still what is Man, that every Day his God
Should both Chastise, and Guide him with his Rod?
That he should Wound his Flesh to heal his Mind,
Beneficent in Wrath, and in Displeasure Kind?
Lord, spare a Wretch that has not long to live,
Some easy Minutes, some short respite give.
I own my Guilt, and my Offenses blame,
Deluged in Tears, and overwhelmed with Shame.
What shall I do thy Favor to regain?
Can I implore the Allmighty's Aid in vain,
Whose gracious Power does all Mankind sustain?
In deeds of Kindness thou do most rejoice,
Chast'ning is forced, but Mercy is thy choice.
Why have thou set me as a Mark, to stand
Against the Darts of thy resistless Hand,
Which so much gaul my fest'ring Flesh, that I
Would lay my Life, my Burden down, and dye?
Forgive of all my Guilt the mighty Debt,
Remember Mercy, and my Sin forget.
CHAP. VIII.
Then Bildad:
How long will thou the Bounds of Patience break?
And thus absurdly and perversely speak?
How long shall thy Reproaches Heaven Arraign?
Does the least Spot Eternal Justice stain?
Why does thy Passion's Tide its Bank overflow?
Why dothy Words, like Winds, Tempestuous grow?
Does God Deceit to Sacred Truth prefer?
Rather than Job, must God be thought to err?
I^ thy Rebellious Children did provoke
The Allmighty's Wrath, and felt his Vengeful stroke,
I^ thou his Perfect Justice would adore,
I^ thou his Mercy humbly would implore;
And to thy Prayer join Purity of Heart,
For thy Support he would his Power exert.
His Blessings yet would Crown thy righteous Ways,
And thou in Peace might pass thy prosperous Days.
Though thou art Poor and despicably low,
Thy Substance should increase and vastly grow,
And Wealth around thee would profusely ^low.
Consult thy Fathers, look on Ages back,
Turn over the Rolls of Time, and strict enquiry make.
We are of no Experience, no regard
When with our long-lived Ancestors compared:
Those Venerable Heads will give thee Light
In this Debate, and set thy Judgment right.
They Will from repeated Observation show,
That all the Maxims we advance, are true.
Even as a Rush that in a Watery Mead
With hasty growth reers its presumptuous Head;
In its chief Verdure withering away,
Prevents the Mower by a swift decay.
The Plants that once with Envy on him gazed,
Stand at this unexpected Change amazed.
So shall the Beauty of the Wicked fade,
Who to endure has no Foundation laid.
His swelling Hopes in their high Tide shall ebb;
His Trust is weaker than a Spider's Web.
He on his House shall lean, a fruitless Prop,
His House will sink, and disappoint his Hope.
Will he on Servants and his Wealth depend,
Servants and Wealth their Lord shall not defend.
Though he to Heaven should raise his shady head,
And his thick Branches over the Garden spread;
Should he beneath the Summer's burning Ray
Continue Green, which makes the Rush decay;
Should all his interweaving Roots around,
Embrace the Stones in firm and solid ground;
Could he deride the Winds that him invade,
And Tempests with their Impotence upbraid;
Did he thus stand secure from Storms and Heat,
Proud of the Strength and Beauty of his Seat;
He shall his sudden Extirpation Mourn,
Felled by the Axe, or else by Thunder torn.
Complete Destruction shall all marks efface,
And all Remains, that might confess his place.
The ground shall no discov'ring Footsteps show,
Nor neighboring Trees remember, where he grew.
No other milder Fate or happier End,
Shall all his Pomp and prosperous Pride attend.
He shall be rooted up, and in his Ground
No fruitful Plant shall be hereafter found,
But neighboring Trees shall thrive, that stand around.
His God will never the Perfect Man reject,
Nor may the Wicked ever his Aid expect.
Hence, Job, thy want of Virtue does appear,
That God abandons thee to thy Despair.
But this is certain, if thou will not mourn
Offenses past, and to thy God return,
Utter Destruction shall thy Ways attend;
But if convinced thou will thy Errors mend,
He shall thy former Joy and Power restore,
Increase thy Friends, and multiply thy Store;
Till Songs and Shouts thy great Delight attest,
And mighty Joy extends thy laboring Breast.
Those who reviled thee, and thy Dwelling cursed,
Shall blush with Shame, with Indignation burst;
When they shall see thy Happy Days restored,
And greater Wealth and Honor on thee poured.
Mean time resistless Ruin shall efface
The Wicked Man, and all his impious Race.
CHAP. IX.
Then answered Job. This Sacred Truth I own,
That God has still unblemished Justice shown.
Nor can a Man his Innocence defend,
If with him God should in Debate contend.
What Reasonings ever he offers in dispute,
Man of a thousand could not one Confute.
He Is Wife in Heart, and guides all Nature's Ways,
And at a View the Universe surveys.
The Heart he searches with his piercing Eye,
And bubbling Thoughts does in their Spring descry*
Unfinished Notions in the Mind he sees,
And the rude Lines of half-drawn Images.
He views the Spark that first our Bosom fires,
And the first struggling of unborn Desires.
He from the Hills of Time looks down, to see
The boundless Vale of dark Futurity.
He sees all Ages from Duration's Deep
Come rolling on, and how they Order keep.
All things he sees in Time's Capacious Womb,
And turns the Annals over of Years to come.
He sees each Chance, and every future Turn,
And reads the Lives of Monarchs yet unborn.
He views Events that in their Causes lie,
And sees Effects in Nature's Energy.
He minds our Ways, and to his clearer Sight
Those Paths are crooked, which we thought were right.
His Strength proportion with his Wisdom shows,
Fit to Protect his Friends, and Crush his Foes;
Who with Success did ever his Arm oppose?
Hills with their Woods, when his fierce Anger burns,
He from their Seat amidst the Valley spurns.
He turns up Mountains Roots against the Sky,
And from his Wrath the Rocks find Wings to fly.
He makes the Earth with strong Convulsions shake,
Her Pillars start, and their old Base forsake.
Vast, gaping Chasms, amazing to the Sight,
Mingle the Day with Subterranean Night.
The inclining Poles as wrench'd aside appear,
And diving Isles conceal themselves for fear.
At his Command the rising Sun will stay,
And from the World keep back the lingering Day.
His marshaled Clouds to intercept the Light,
Seal up the Stars the twinkling Eyes of Night.
The spreading Heaven's he as a Curtain draws,
Treads down aspiring Waves, and gives the Ocean Laws.
With Orbs of Light he inlays all the Spears,
And studs the Sable Night with Silver Stars.
He all the Constellations hangs on high,
And bids the Planets wander through the Sky.
Stormy Areturus round the Northern Pole
By his direction does unwearied roll.
Orion and the Pleiades dispense,
At his Command, their Rays and Influence.
His skillful hand on Airy Pillars reers
The Vaulted Chambers of the Southern Spheres.
The long Succession of his Mighty Deeds,
Our everlasting Admiration feeds.
Behind a black impenetrable Screen
Of Pitchy Clouds, the Allmighty walks unseen.
He that to follow in his Steps essays,
Through all his craggy, dark, perplexing Ways,
Scared by the sacred Horrors of the Place,
Will own, the Maze Divine he cannot trace,
Nor the black Gulf, and trackless Mountains pass.
He Will stand astonished, and bereft of Sense,
Lost in the awful Wilds of Providence.
If he his settled Purpose has expressed,
A Man of Wealth and Honor to divest,
What hardy Mortal will his Power withstand,
Or dares a reason why it is done, demand?
Till God withdraws the heavy, galling Yoke,
And reconciled, forbears the afflicting Stroke:
Those who would rescue, may their Pride express,
But by their fall their weakness shall confess.
Since none a Match in Power with God contends,
And none his Ways and Counsels comprehends,
Can I pretend to speak, my Case to state,
And grapple with the Allmighty in debate?
Can I his Ear with chosen Language charm,
And God of all his Arguments disarm?
Though I believed my Cause most Right and Just,
I would my doubtful Innocence distrust.
I would not plead with God, but only pray
That Justice he with Mercy would allay.
Though he should kindly grant me my Request,
Yet I so much despond, am so Distressed,
That I the amazing Truth should never believe,
But, as a gaudy Dream the joyful News receive.
Both sharp and lasting Sufferings I have born,
With Wrath Divine, as with a Tempest torn;
He perseveres and multiplies his Strokes,
Though no uncommon Guilt his Wrath provokes.
So fast his fierce, redoubled Blows descend,
That I can scarce to all my Wounds attend.
No breathing Time is given, no short Relief
From exquisite and never-ceasing Grief.
Should I his Throne with all my force Assail,
Against Allmighty Strength can I prevail?
If I Appeal to Judges and to Laws,
What higher Court can Sit to hear my Cause?
If I my Righteousness before him plead,
Will not my Words to my Conviction lead?
Will he not thence my Condemnation draw,
And in my purest Virtue find a flaw?
Should God pronounce me just, yet I Would refuse
Uneasy Life, and Death's Embraces choose.
To all things you advance, to represent
God's Power and Justice fully, I assent.
But then you err, when you assert that God
Exempts the Righteous from his scourging Rod.
No Favorite Son is from his Frown secure,
But in his Turn does his sharp Stripes endure.
The Foolish from the Wise you cannot know
By the false marks of Happiness, or Woe.
'Twixt Good and Bad there is no distinction made,
Unless more frequent Darts the Good invade.
Against the Just the Allmighty's Arrows fly,
For he delights the Innocent to try.
To show their Constant and their God-like Mind,
Not by Afflictions broken, but refined.
He to the Wicked gives the Earth away,
And raises Monsters to Imperial Sway.
He makes them Peace and Plenty to possess,
And crowns their Undertakings with Success.
While Men for Empire fit, and Public Trust,
Quick in discerning, in deciding Just,
Worthy of Thrones, Men of unblemished Fame,
Are often exposed to Misery and Shame.
This is the Allmighty's Deed, if not, declare
Its genuine Authors, who, and where they are.
My Life consumes in never-ceasing Woe,
My rolling Days uninterrupted flow,
To disembogue their Flood within the Deep,
Where all the Streams of Time collected Sleep.
No eager Couriers in their greatest haste,
Nor Ship before the Wind advance so fast.
The Eagle from the Mountains Airy top,
To strike his Prey, does never so swiftly stoop.
If I resolve my Sorrow to forget,
That I Will no more my rash Complaints repeat,
That my unbridled Passion I Will restrain;
This humble Resignation is in vain.
For God will never my Distress relieve,
He Will punish on, and tempt Men to believe.
That Job by some unusual, black Offense,
Has Heaven provoked such Judgments to dispense.
In vain I strive my Innocence to clear,
Since I must still these grievous Sufferings bear,
Still the sad marks of Heaven's displeasure wear.
If by my Vindication I should grow
As clean and spotless, as the Fleecy Snow,
When God replies, my Stains before concealed
To my Confusion would be all revealed.
My Foulness he will detect, that I no more
Should boast my Cleanness, but my self abhor.
He Is not a Man, my equal in dispute,
That I should hope his Reasons to refute.
Can I in Courts of Judgment take my place,
And plead against the Allmighty Face to Face?
In this Debate what Umpire shall preside,
Hear all our Arguings, and the Cause decide?
Let him his Terrors, and his Rod withdraw,
And let his Mercy mitigate his Law;
For humane Frailty due Allowance make,
And I with Courage will my Trial take.
I then will boldly speak, and free from fear
I Will quickly make my Innocence appear.
But this request the Allmighty does refuse;
He does the Rigor of his Justice use.
His awful Terrors which my Soul surround,
Drink up my Spirits, and my Hope confound.
As I have done, I therefore will complain,
This only way is left to sooth my Pain.
CHAP. X.
My constant Woes, such constant Groans create,
That Life's a black, uncomfortable State.
My Soul abhors this loathsome Lump of Clay,
Longs to be free, to wing to Heaven its way.
I Will make my moan to give its Sorrow vent,
Else will my Breast be with its Tempest rent.
I cannot smother such Gigantick Woe,
Nor on my raging Grief a Muzzle throw.
I cannot forbear, to God I Will thus complain,
As one that is Wicked, do not me Arraign.
Why do thou let me thus in torment lie,
And thus in vain for Heaven's Compassion Cry?
Do not thy Servant by uncommon Woes,
To Public Censure and Reproach expose.
Mankind will Me Condemn, and cry, we know
His Crime's enormous, since his Pain is so.
Can God Complacence in Oppression take,
And vex his Creatures for the Pleasure's sake?
O, can a God of Mercy cruel grow,
No Pity feel, no tender Passion show?
Can God my Father ever Unnatural prove,
Shut up his Bowels, and forget to love?
Will he with hostile Force his Sons invade,
Pleased to destroy the Works his hands have made?
While he mean time with more auspicious Rays
Shines on the Wicked, and approves their Ways?
Has God an Eye of Flesh, that needs the Light?
Has he, like Man, a Weak imperfect Sight,
That he is so curious in his search, and makes
Such strict enquiry after my Mistakes?
Or are the Allmighty's days like those of Man,
That in extension scarce exceed a Span?
That he makes haste to punish, on pretense
That Death may interpose for my Defense.
By blacker Crimes than others, thou do know
I Am not distinguished, tho I am by Woe.
Thou know that none thy Vengeance can withstand,
Or rescue me from thy Afflicting Hand.
Should thou deny me Aid, I am bereft
Of all Assistance, and am hopeless left.
Thy hands have wrought and fashioned every Part
Of thi^ weak Fabric with amazing Art:
And now, as if thou did thy Labor blame,
Will thou in pieces dash the curious Frame?
O let but God remember how at first
He formed my Limbs, and raised me out of Dust.
How with stupendous Skill he did convey
My Flame of Life through crooked Tubes of Clay.
What need he crush me then with mighty Pain,
When of my self I turn to Dust again?
To him my Parent, I my Being owe,
The Fountain whence precarious Beings flow.
He the prolific Principles infused,
From whence the crude Conception was produced.
He formed me when an Embryo in the Womb,
And made my Limbs their proper Shape assume.
He warmed the heaving Mass with Vital Heat,
Hung in the Breast my Heart, and bid it beat.
He of connected Bones a Bullwark made,
Against the Ills which every way invade.
About the Bones he the strong Sinews wound,
And fenced the tender Plant of Life around.
He taught my breathing Lungs to draw the Air,
Which might the Vital Flame within repair.
He made the Veins over all the Body stray,
Which Purple Life in winding Streams convey.
He spun the various threads with Art Divine,
Wherewith he weaved my Flesh, and curious Skin.
He did not only make me Life possess,
But did my Life with sweet Enjoyments bless.
I was with Peace, and with abundance cloyed,
And long a true Terrestrial Heaven enjoyed.
At first he kindled, and he still maintains
The Flame of Life which wanders through my Veins.
Sure God remembers, how he has been kind,
And treasures up these Favors in his Mind.
And on his former Love can he reflect,
And me at last, though unprovoked, reject?
If I am Wicked I thy Vengeance bear,
And if I Am Righteous, still thy Frowns I fear.
Confusion and Despair my Soul Oppress,
Lord, see my Woe, and pity my Distress.
My sad Complaints increase, my Sufferings grow,
And every Moment propagates my Woe.
As a fierce Lion over the grassy Lawn,
With Hunger urged, pursues the flying Fawn;
So do thou hunt me down by Night and Day,
So do thou seize, and tear the trembling Prey.
Thou do my Spirits and my Strength devour,
And mark me out to Celebrate thy Power.
Thou do thy Judgments and thy Strokes renew,
And my vexed Soul with hotter Wrath pursue.
Thou still reviv'st the War, and do employ
All Arts and Arms thy Creature to annoy.
Did I for this amidst the Living come?
Did thou for this release me from the Womb?
Oh! that from thence I never had broke away,
Or had expired, when first I saw the Day!
For then had I been carried from the Womb,
And laid to Sleep within the silent Tomb.
My Minutes fly, my Days roll on apace,
And hasty Life will soon complete its Race.
Some Comfort therefore, some short respite give,
And spare a Wretch that soon must cease to Live.
Some hours of Rest, some Intervals bestow,
And for a Moment interrupt my Woe;
Before I Am carried to the Grave beneath,
The Land of Darkness and the Shades of Death:
A Region undiscovered to the Light,
The Imperial Seat of unmolested Night:
A Place secured with such a gloomy Mound,
So fenced with Walls of solid Darkness round,
That not a streak of Light, no wandering Ray
Ever came to view it, or explored the Way
To introduce the Foreign Power of Day.
Then Zophar did his Speech to Job direct:
Thou do Prolix Discourses much affect.
Thy Words abound, and roll in Floods along
With mighty noise, but are they therefore Strong?
Shall thy loud Deluge sober Reason drown,
And bear thy Friends, thy kind Instructers down?
Shall thy Devices make us hold our Peace?
Must we not answer, lest we should displease?
Shall thou with such unsufferable Pride,
Despise thy Brethren, and thy God deride,
And yet, must no Man undertake to blame
Thy faulty Conduct, and expose thy Shame?
For thou have said, that in the Allmighty's Sight
Thy Hands are clean, and thy Opinions right.
Would God would interpose, and undertake
This Argument for thy Conviction's sake!
His All-discerning Eye would quickly find
Stains in thy hands; and Errors in thy mind.
If he would Wisdom's hidden Stores expose,
Its awful Depths and Wonders would disclose.
Wonders and Depths of Wisdom yet concealed,
Surpassing all which he has ever revealed.
Thou would adore his methods, and declare
How much above thy reach his Councels are.
Thou would no more thy rash expressions use,
No more the Allmighty's Providence accuse.
For of thy Sin he has forgiven part,
Exacting less by far than thy desert.
Why does thy peevish Folly God Arraign?
Why would thou fix on Providence a Stain?
Can humane Reason such wide Arms extend,
As shall the Allmighty's Wisdom comprehend?
Let down thy Understanding, try to sound
And search a Deep so vast, and so profound.
Can thou the Reasons of his Conduct find,
And view the secret Council of his Mind?
It is as Heaven insuperably Steep,
Wide as the boundless Ocean, and as deep;
What can thou do but awful distance keep?
If God from off the Earth a Nation cuts,
If wretched Captives he in Prison shuts;
If he shall give a harrass'd Kingdom ease,
And from his Chains the squallid Slave release,
Who can against him such Objections raise,
As shall detect Injustice in his Ways?
Though Man so little knows, is so unf^t
In Judgment on his Maker's Ways to sit;
Yet God our Folly and our Rashness knows,
And can our secret Wickedness expose.
He can discover all our guilty Thoughts,
And though we hide them, will reveal our Faults.
Though thou do vaunt that thou art free from Sin,
He may discern Hypocrisy within.
Nor stands he unconcerned, but will chastise
The Wickedness, which he in Man descrys.
And yet this vain, this despicable Wight,
This foolish Creature Man, takes great delight
In being thought divinely Wise, and fit
The Allmighty's Deeds to censure or acquit:
Though as to things Divine, which most advance
Man's Happy State, he does in Ignorance,
In Headiness and Dullness far surpass
The stupid Offsrping of the wildest Ass.
If Penitential Groans prepare thy way,
And thou shall humbly to the Allmighty pray;
If thou his Lands and Treasure do restore
(If thou detainest any) to the Poor;
If thou the Cause of Sin wilt not espouse,
But chase it from thy Heart, and from thy House;
Thou shall to Heaven thy cheerful Face erect,
To Heaven that does the Innocent Protect.
On strong Foundations steadfast thou shall stand,
Danger deride, and all thy Fears disband.
As Summer Floods which over the Meadows flow
With equal Speed back to their Channel go:
So thy subsiding Sorrows shall retreat,
And thou shall all thy Misery forget.
Thou shall dispel with thy prevailing Light,
The Shades and gloomy Horrors of the Night.
Thou shall emerge from Woe and deep Despair,
Bright as Noonday, and as the Morning fair.
Thou shall in Peace thy Fields and Herds survey,
Secure as well from Beasts, as Men of Prey.
Surrounding Bulwarks shall thy Dwelling fence,
Against all hostile Rage and Violence.
When thou shall lay thy weary Limbs to rest,
No sudden Dangers shall thy Sleep molest.
To thee thy Neighbors shall in Throngs resort
To see thy Splendour, and thy Friendship Court,
And from thy Power shall humbly ask Support.
But mighty Woes the Wicked shall Assail,
In looking after Help their Eyes shall fail:
Their Hope shall vanish as a blast of Air;
How shall they escape, it is God denounces War?
CHAP. XII.
Then Job replied. No doubt but you are Wise,
And may the barbarous, senseless World despise.
You Have all the Wisdom of Mankind engrost,
Can more than Humane Understanding boast.
If you should dye, the Grave and endless Night
Would overwhelm all Intellectual Light.
Blind Ignorance would unmolested reign,
And Folly Universal Empire gain.
But know, since you your Friend so hardly press,
As well as you, some Reason I possess,
Nor is its Light more dim, or Vigor less.
Yet you and I in this debate must own,
We Have no great Flights of Wit, or Depths of Wisdom shown.
That God is Wise, and still does Right decree,
All other Nations grant, as well as we.
But you perversely manage the Debate,
And the true Question never justly State.
You ought to prove, that some enormous fault
Has on my Head this sore Affliction brought.
You should my close Hypocrisy detect,
Which makes the Allmighty my Complaint reject.
Instead of this you with unnatural Pride
Your suffering Friend insultingly deride.
Because the Allmighty does his Ear incline
To hear your Prayer, while he is deaf to mine;
Because your Days are prosperous, you despise
And mock your Neighbor that in Torment lies.
Contempt the afflicted Righteous Man attends,
And Scorn, instead of Pity, from his Friends.
A Man reduced to Misery and Want,
Who once could Honor and Abundance vaunt,
In his successful, thriving Neighbor's Sight,
Though like a Lamp esteemed when fresh and bright,
Is scorned, when glimmering with expiring Light.
Yet of the Just this is the Common Fate,
While Wicked Men enjoy a prosperous State.
Robbers and Spoilers see their Wealth endure,
And those, who God provoke, live most secure.
With lavish hand he does his Favors throw,
And undeserved Rewards on these bestow.
Ask of the Beasts, the Beasts will strait return,
That they the same sad Circumstances mourn.
They Will cry, the tawny Tyrants that possess
The lawless Empire of the Wilderness,
The stripped and spotted Monsters of the Wood,
The Bears and Wolves inured to Spoil and Blood,
These fat with Rapine, Peace and Power enjoy,
Yet persevere to ravage and destroy:
Mean time the harmless Flock and useful Herd,
By the Destroyer's Hand are never spared.
They fall, unhappy Creatures! either way,
To Men their Friends, or Beasts their Foes a Prey.
Ask all the Feathered Nations of the Air,
They Will all with one Confed'rate Voice declare,
That the voracious Vulture and the Kite,
The Hawk and Eagle that in Blood delight,
With all the long-wing'd Rovers of the Skies,
Which Cruize among the Clouds to ken a Prize,
They Will say this rav'ning Race is most secure,
Whilst the meek Dove, and harmless Fowls endure
A thousand Mischiefs from the Invader's Power.
Then on the Ocean's oazy Margin stand,
And of the sinned Inhabitants demand
How it is with them; they will all, as one, complain
The same unequal Fate attends the Main.
They Will cry the vast Leviathan that moves
The Deep around, and Seas before him Shoves,
With all the Spoilers, and the murdering Race
Of scaly Ravagers that vex the Place;
In Peace possess the Empire of the Flood,
And undisturbed, regale themselves with Blood.
Unweildy with their Fat, without control,
The lazy Tyrants on the Billows roll:
Pampered with Spoil, the wanton Monsters Sleep
Along the Shore, or Sport within the Deep.
While their Luxurious Bellies to supply
Whole Shoals of inoffensive Fishes Die.
But whoever entertained a doubtful Thought
If God this State of Things ordained, or not?
Who by his Power all Beings did produce,
And by his Wisdom fixed their end and use:
He may, his Creatures lives at Pleasure take,
They are his own, who can Objections make?
God's Sovereign Right of Empire I respect,
But this Concession cannot my Cause affect.
Can you some monstrous Guilt or Error show,
Commensurate to my stupendous Woe?
Have Patience then, with an attentive Ear
My just Defense and Allegations hear.
Use a Judicious and Impartial taste,
And you will no more unjust Reproaches cast.
You Will see with what Integrity I act,
And all your Censures rashly made, retract.
Bildad the Cause between us would refer
To ancient Fathers, as less apt to err.
Wisdom I grant in Hoary Heads appears,
And Understanding is matur'd by Years;
Rarely a Beardless Oracle we know,
Judgment by Age does to Perfection grow.
But when we most our Ancestors commend,
Their greatest Wisdom cannot with God's contend.
Antiquity's Traditions cannot decide
Against a Rule Divine, our certain Guide.
We cannot in any but the Eternal Mind,
Council and Knowledge in Perfection find.
God is a Mind all Intellectual Light,
Clear without Mist, without a Blemish bright.
From him the Spring those streams of Wisdom flow,
That feed the thinking, reas^ning World below.
The Wise on Earth who most deserve our Praise,
Shine but with dim and delegated Rays.
We should with equal Reverence adore
The Wonders of his Wisdom and his Power.
He levels with the Dust the proudest Town,
O'erthrows her Forts, and breaks her Bullwarks down.
Her gilded Palaces he overturns,
And her high Towers amidst the Rubbish spurns.
Her Rooms of State, and Roofs of Cedar meet,
Huddled in Ruin in the embarrast Street.
Though all bewail her miserable Fall,
None dares attempt to build again her Wall.
If wretched Slaves in Prison he restrains,
Who shall release them from their ponderous Chains?
He ties the Clouds the Bottles of the Skies,
And to the Earth his Heavenly Dew denies.
Then cleaving Drought the Sunburnt Mountains chap,
And for the Rain the thirsty Meadows gape.
Anon the Rivers swell at his Command,
Overflow their Banks, and kindly drown the Land.
Wisdom and Strength are his, it is he imparts
To all the Crafty their successful Arts.
He shows them how to lay a wise Design,
How to Attack, and how to Countermine.
Mean time their Neighbors he of Sense bereaves,
Whom he a Prey to the Deceiver leaves.
He puzzles famous Sages in Debate,
And leads in Triumph Counselors of State.
From learned Judges Wisdom he withdraws,
And they are left, as Fools without Applause.
He haughty Monarchs Bonds and torturing Racks,
And all their Engines of Destruction breaks.
He Rifles all their Stores of Death and Pain,
And binds the Tyrant with the Captive's Chain.
He over-turns the Mighty in their Pride,
And makes Men, those they dreaded once, deride.
Warriors with spreading Laurels often crowned,
Part of the Almighty's Triumph shall be found,
Dragged at his Chariot Wheels a Captive Throng
Of Monarch's choked with Dust shall pant along.
Tyrants despoiled shall rave at their defeat,
And mixed with vulgar Slaves shall Curse and Sweat:
Princes in Chains shall in his Train appear,
And weary Kings come lagging in the Rear.
He takes their Understanding from the Wise,
And makes their Friends their Oracles despise.
He pours Contempt on Princes of the Land,
And wrests their awful Scepter from their Hand.
He sinks the mighty Warriour's Martial Fame,
And covers his once glorious Head with Shame.
The Almighty's bright all-penetrating Eye,
Does Councels deep and dark as Hell descry:
He sees their secret Works, and Countermines
Mysterious Statesmen's most profound Designs.
Plots wrapped in Clouds, and Death like Shades of Night,
To him lie all exposed, as Noonday Light.
He gives a City wide Imperial Sway,
And does her Yoke on vanquished Nations lay.
She on the Necks of Captive Princes treads,
When he her Armies forth to Conquest leads;
She does with unexhausted Wealth abound,
And as a Mistress awes the World around.
Then on a sudden he corrects her Pride,
And to her Banks drives back her ebbing Tide.
He breaks her Yoke, and rescues from her hand
The Realms he subject made to her Command.
He through her Streets does Desolation spread,
And casts down from the Clouds her towering Head.
Great Chiefs, when he rebukes them, Cowards grow,
And all the marks of Consternation show;
His Terrors pierce their Breasts, like poisoned Darts,
Enfeeble and dismay the proudest Hearts.
For Hills and Mountains they will forsake their Home,
And through the trackless Woods despairing Roam:
They Will seek the lonesom, salvage Wilderness,
There to conceal their vagabond Distress.
They and the Beasts each other shall affright,
At distance gaze, then fly each other's sight.
They never shall see a Beam of dawning Hope,
But for their way involved in Darkness grope.
With Wrath Divine intoxicated they,
Like Drunken Men, shall Reel and lose their way.
CHAP. XIII.
Since you are pleased often to enumerate
God's Wise and mighty Works in this debate,
I the same Method have observed, to show
That I his Wonders know, no less than you.
I do not then your long Discourses want,
To prove those Truths Divine, I freely grant.
I to the Almighty my Defense would make,
And not to you, who still my Case mistake.
He does my Heart, and pure Intention know,
And would some Mercy, some Compassion show,
Which my relentless Friends will never do.
Perversely in the Wrong you persevere,
And to erroneous Doctrines still adhere.
You still your Thoughts with Confidence express,
That mighty Sufferings mighty Guilt confess.
That great Afflictions and uncommon Woe,
Are marks the Wicked from the Just to know.
But you unskilful vain Physicians are,
Who know not how your Medicine to prepare.
If the Disease by Chance be understood,
Ill Drugs you give, or misapply the Good.
Your Silence would your Wisdom best have shown,
That still had kept your Ignorance unknown.
Will you for God sophistically plead?
Does he deceitful ways of arguing need?
Will you pretend to manage his Defense,
By false Constructions of his Providence?
Will he in this your forward Zeal applaud?
And with Rewards approve your pious Fraud?
Will you the Person Try, and not the Cause,
And like corrupted Judges wrest the Laws?
Will you believe your Arguments are strong,
Because you hang upon a Cause so long?
Will your contentious Wrangling never end?
Will peevish Cavils at your injured Friend,
You to the Almighty's Favor recommend?
Would it your Honor or your Peace promote,
If God your Speeches tried, who knows your Thought?
Why will you Mock your Maker? cannot his Eye
Your Pride and want of Charity descry,
Though covered with affected Piety?
If you will Right pervert and Judgment wrest,
Though this your Guilt lies hid within your Breast,
God will expose your Crime, and in the end
His vengeful Blow shall on your Heads descend.
His high Perfections should in you have bred,
A sacred Awe and Reverential Dread:
Should not his Power, and Truth that cannot err,
From rash Determinations you deter?
I all your Councels vain and fruitless find,
Like Dust, that flies before the driving Wind.
Your high Discourses weak and tottering stand,
Like heaps of Clay, or uncemented Sand.
Hold then your Peace, and let your Friend alone
To ease his Grief, and freely make his moan.
I will my Bosom of its Burden free
By sad Complaints, whatever the Issue be.
Will God pronounce my Failing mortal Sin,
When he discerns an upright Heart within?
For Liberty of Speech so much I long,
To vent my Woe, my Passion is so strong;
That if denied, I must in deep Despair,
Despise my Life, my Flesh in pieces tear.
Though God yet hotter Anger should express,
And with redoubled strokes my Pains increase;
Though he advances with his glittering Dart,
And over me stands to strike me to the Heart;
I on his Truth and Justice would rely,
And with strong Faith would to his Mercy fly.
The Almighty knows my Virtue is sincere,
I Am not flagitious, though I often err.
The Faithful God the Faithful will protect,
Scourge them he may, but cannot the Just reject.
I Will undertake with humble Confidence,
Before his Bar to manage my Defense.
Whatever Blots my Conversation stain,
I still can my Integrity maintain.
I Am sure the God whose Mercy I implore,
My Peace and Comforts will at last restore:
By Methods and by Ways which please him best,
My Burden he will remove, and give me rest.
My Declaration with Attention hear,
My Words shall make my Righteousness appear.
The Method I have fixed for my Defense,
I do not doubt will clear my Innocence.
Who Will with me plead? Oh! that it was my Fate
That God would please to manage this debate.
For if in such a strait I should not speak,
My Heart distended with my Grief would break.
My Friends Reproaches, and the Almighty's Hand
Which lies so heavy, my Complaints demand.
Let but the Almighty grant my double Prayer,
And I Will with Courage stand before his Bar:
Let him withdraw his Hand, my Pains suspend,
And give me ease my Trial to attend;
In Power and Glory let him not appear,
But my Defense with gracious Meekness hear;
Then let the Almighty me arraign at large,
And I Will defend my self against the Charge*
Or I will argue, and let him declare
The reason why his Hand is thus severe.
I Am not so vain and wicked to pretend,
That I the Almighty's Laws did never offend;
But that my Crimes are of so deep a die,
As you my Friends suggest, I must deny.
Detect these Crimes that are to me unknown,
And I Will the Guilt with Shame and Sorrow own.
Why in Displeasure do thou shun my Sight,
And of thy gracious Eyes withdraw the Light?
Why hangs this Cloud upon thy frowning Brow?
Why treatest thou thy Servant, as thy Foe?
Will thou to crush me needless Power engage,
Lavish of Vengeance, and profuse of Rage?
Will thou thy keen Immortal Arms employ,
A poor and helpless Mortal to destroy?
Will thou involved in rolling Clouds descend,
And armed with Thunder with a Worm contend?
Should Storms arise a sapless Leaf to tear
The sport of every Wind and blast of Air?
Must Tempests rage, and pointed Lightning fly,
And dreadful War infest the troubled Sky,
Only to chase the empty Straw away,
To every Spark of Fire an easy Prey?
Me, as a Malefactor God indicts,
And terrible Decrees against me writes.
Stern Justice gripes me in her rigid Arms,
And youthful Guilt afresh my Soul alarms.
Thou do my fettered Limbs in Prison lay,
And then with Care do all my Paths survey;
Do closely at my very Heels pursue,
And with a searching Eye my Footsteps view.
To mark some great Transgression of thy Laws,
And for my Condemnation find a Cause:
Then Putrefaction executes the Doom,
And does my Flesh, as Moths a Vest, consume.
CHAP. XIV.
Unhappy Man as soon as Born decays,
He numbers few, and those uneasy Days.
As in a verdant Mead a blowing Flower,
The sudden Offspring of a Summer Shower,
Unfolds its Beauty to the Morning Ray,
But is ever Evening Cut, or fades away:
So Man a while displays his gaudy Bloom,
But Death her crooked Scyth does soon assume,
Mows down, and bears her Harvest to the Tomb.
He, as a Shadow, or a Shape of Air,
Does suddenly dissolve and disappear.
The Flame of Life does, as a Lambent ^ire,
Or Evening Meteor Shine, and strait expire.
And will thou Man regard, and condescend
With such a Wretch in Judgment to contend?
I am derived from Man's infected Race,
A piece extracted from the tainted Mass.
Man propagates the Hereditary Crime,
Nor does the Stain wear out by length of time.
From a base Stock can Noble Branches grow,
Or Crystal Streams from muddy Fountains flow?
I therefore cannot a faultless Life protest,
I own Offenses common to the best;
Unclean I am, but not above the Rest.
This is the thing I humbly would demand,
Why I am singled out, and made to stand
The chiefest Mark of God's avenging hand.
Since thou do know Man's Days, and can relate
Their number written in the Rolls of Fate,
And have determined Life's laborious Race,
And set the Bounds over which it cannot pass;
Since his few fleeting Hours are quickly spent,
And painful Life is its own Punishment;
Let this su^^ice, and do not on him throw
A crushing weight of superadded Woe.
Grant him the Rest his Torments make him ask;
And let him finish Life's appointed Task.
For if a Swain with mercenary toil
Cuts down a Tree, and draws away the Spoil;
Still there is hope that Tree again may sprout,
And from its Stock thrust tender-Branches out.
For though the Root defrauded of Supply,
Appears to Wither in the Ground, and Die;
Yet when it feels the fresh prolific Flood,
It will again with youthful Vigor bud.
But when a dying Man resigns his Breath,
He never returns from the dark Shades of Death.
The Sea may suffer by deserting Waves
That steal through secret subterranean Caves,
Or by the lighter Steams which fly away,
Drawn by the Sun's attenuating Ray;
But Heaven and Earth in Rivers and in Rain
Restore their Spoils, and reimburse the Main.
A flowing River, or a standing Lake,
May their dry Banks and naked Shores forsake;
Their Waters may exhale, and upwards move,
Their Channel leave to roll in Clouds above;
But the returning Winter will restore,
What in the Summer they had lost before:
The Snow and Rain, and Torrents, will repay
What the warm Sun stole with his plund'ring Ray,
And by his Summer Inroads bore away.
But if, O Man, thy vital Streams desert
Their Purple Channels, and defraud the Heart,
With fresh Recruits they never will be supplied,
Nor feel their leaping Life's returning Tide.
When once the breathless Man has closed his Eyes,
And in the silent Grave extended lies;
In Death's close Prison he shall still remain,
He n^'er shall break from the rough Tyrant's Chain.
When the last stroke of Fate is once received,
This mortal Life can never be retrieved.
Would God would hide me in some hollow Cave,
Some place as safe, and silent, as the Grave;
Till these black Storms of Wrath which overcast,
The lowering Heaven's around my Head are past.
As he has done to Life, so let him set
Bounds to my Grief, and not those Bounds forget.
Since none who enter once the darksome Tomb,
This mortal Life can afterward resume;
It Is best for me with patient Hope to wait,
Till God is pleased to change this mournful State.
Till he is pleased his Blessings to restore,
Those sweet Enjoyments I possessed before.
Then shall he call, and with a gracious Ear
He Will my Defense and Supplications hear.
Then to his Creature he will Kindness show,
Revive my Comforts, and remove my Woe.
But oh! how different is my present Fate;
For now the Allmighty loves to lie in wait
To take me halting, what a watchful Eye
Does he employ my Errors to descry?
This search he makes, as if he Pleasure took,
To find fresh Reasons to repeat his Stroke.
He in a strong and secret place has stored
My Sins; as wealthy Men their Treasures hoard.
He Seals up my Transgressions, not a fault
Is ever left out, not an ill Word or Thought;
Nor is the impending Punishment forgot.
As a high Hill with stormy Weather worn,
With inbred Tempests, or with Thunder torn,
Does with its Ruins all the Valley spread,
But can no more erect his lofty Head:
Moulder'd to Dust, it hopes no more to break
The Clouds long Order with its snowy Peak.
As a vast Rock by Earthquakes once removed,
And from its Base amidst the Ocean should;
It Is shattered Pillars never after reers,
Nor thrusts his towering Top amidst the Stars.
As Stones which ever-flowing Waters wear,
When once dissolved, their Ruins never repair.
As sweeping Inundations often convey
Towns, Herds, and Forests floating to the Sea,
Whence to return they never find a way.
So when thy fatal Darts a Man destroy,
The World's Delights he shall no more enjoy.
He never from the Sepulcher shall rise,
No more revive to see the lightsome Skies.
He leaves his Honor and his Wealth behind,
And quite another Face of things will find.
He Is unconcerned at what is transacted here;
For if his Sons shine in a noble Sphere,
He Will not rejoice, nor will he ever complain
If they are crushed, and drag the Prisoners Chain.
Hard Fate of Man, who either, if he dies
Hopeless of ever reviving, mouldering lies;
Or if he lives, must still expect to find
Pain in his Flesh, and Anguish in his Mind.
CHAP. XV.
Then Eliphaz.
Should a Wise Man, and such thou would appear,
Make us such fruitless, frothy Language hear?
Much less with Tempests should we be addressed,
Words fierce and stormy, as the Wind at East.
Of Idle Words why this Eternal Flood?
Can these vain Speeches ever promote thy Good?
True Piety, which should thy Mind adorn,
Thou (...) ^xpos'd to universal scorn.
All Reverence to pure Religion due,
Will soon be lost, if thy Assertion's true.
If God's afflicting Strokes Mankind invade,
Without distinguishing the Good and Bad,
Who at his Throne will Adoration pay?
Who will to Heaven their Songs of Praise convey?
Thy Irreligious Maxims will restrain
All future Prayer, for Prayer will be in vain.
Thy bold irreverent Speeches have expressed
The Impiety which has thy Mind possessed.
The Poison which thy Lips discharge, is part
Of the malignant Treasure in thy Heart.
Yet thou, unwary Judges to escape,
Beneath Divine Religion's lovely shape,
Have all thy black Hypocrisy concealed,
Which thy uncautious Tongue has now revealed.
Thou by thy own Defense art clearly cast,
And thy own Mouth has Sentence on thee past.
Art thou the Man that God did first Create?
And has thy Birth with Time an equal date?
What did thou live before the imprisoned Light,
At God's Command sprang from the Womb of Night?
Before aspiring Hills the Plains surveyed,
Or verdant Meads their flowery Laps displayed;
Before the Rocks their Craggy Ridges reer'd,
Or bounding Billows in the Deep appeared;
That by unnumber'd Observations made,
Thou have a perfect Scheme of Knowledge laid?
Do thou the long, uninterrupted Chain
Of Causes and Effects so well retain,
That thou can reason right, and clearly see
From what is past, what shall hereafter be?
Have thy Enquiries and Experience, run
Through all the years rolled up, since Time begun,
That thou art full of Science, richer far
In wise Remarks, than we thy Brethren are?
Do thou with God in secret Council sit?
To his Debates does he wise Job admit?
Does Wisdom with her Favorite Job abide,
Despising all the foolish Race beside?
On what new Worlds of Light have thou been thrown?
What Mines of Knowledge found, to us unknown?
If years, of Wisdom were a certain sign,
Our years are not inferior found to thine.
With us is seen the experienced, hoary Head,
Who does in Age thy Father far exceed.
Why as a worthless thing do thou regard
The Joy, the Comfort, and the blessed Reward
Which we have offered thee with Heaven's assent,
If of thy wicked Deeds thou shall Repent?
Have thou (we ask thee) some peculiar ground,
Some secret way of Consolation found?
Should thou to such Discov'rys make pretense,
Thou would expose thy wondrous Impudence:
And yet without uncommon grounds of Hope,
Nothing but stubborn Pride can underprop
Thy Confidence, and our Proposals stop.
Will thou dishonor with unworthy Speech
Thy Maker, and his Providence impeach?
What does this Conduct mean? with what intent
Against thy God are thy Reproaches sent?
What is the mark at which thou take aim,
When thou do boldly War with Heaven proclaim?
From such a War what benefit can flow?
What can thou gain by Force from such a Foe?
Ah! what is wretched Man, that he should seem
All pure, and guiltless in his own esteem?
Blessed Seraphs cannot his piercing Eye endure;
Before him bright Archangels are impure.
Those Heavenly Orders who were clean esteemed,
And all refined and spotless Glory seemed,
When they appear within the Almighty's sight,
Overwhelmed with splendour, and all-searching Light,
They blush to see their secret Stains revealed,
And Specks and Flaws which lay before concealed.
Then what an odious, loathsome, monstrous Thing
Must Man appear before the Eternal King?
Who by impure Traduction is unclean,
And does to Vice with a strong Bias lean.
Who with vast Draughts of Sin himself extends,
And with Hydropic Thirst for more contends.
To my Discourse attentively advert,
I Will only what my Eyes have seen assert:
That is, that wicked Men, and those alone
Beneath such great, uncommon Sufferings groan.
Wise Men this Observation made of Old,
Their Fathers them, and they their Children told.
Thus has Tradition down from Ages past
Conveyed this Truth, which is by us embraced.
Job has affirmed, that God the Earth bestows
On the vile Race of his invet'rate Foes:
But to our Fathers Judgment have respect,
And they this groundless Error will detect.
Wealth and Dominion was on them conferred,
Their Piety and Virtue to reward.
They did in Peace command the Towns around,
And undisturbed with Inroads, tilled the ground.
No armed Chaldeans did their Herds invade,
Or to a Land remote their Wealth conveyed.
While they obeyed his Laws, the Almighty's Hand
Was still extended to protect their Land.
To Leagues of Peace their Neighbors did agree,
And to maintain them, God was Guarantee.
On the other hand, it is by experience plain,
That wicked Men consume their Days in pain.
The Oppressor still is gripped with inward Fears,
Nor shall complete the number of his years.
When no invading Foe appears in Arms,
His secret Guilt the trembling Wretch alarms.
He in his prosperous State is unsecure,
Nor can his guilty Triumphs long endure.
When in his Sphere he shines serenely bright,
And not a Cloud disturbs his beaming Light,
Then shall a Tempest of Affliction rise,
And with a sudden Darkness spread the Skies.
Neighbors to Rapine bred shall from afar,
As late on thee, advance destructive War.
The bloody Spoilers shall his Servants slay,
Ravage his Lands, and make his Herds a Prey.
Like Job in trouble, they will despairing ly,
And Consolation from their Friends deny.
They cannot believe these Clouds will disappear,
Great Ills they suffer, and they greater fear.
Despair attended with her ghastly Train
Anguish, Confusion, Sorrow, howling Pain
Shall at her hideous Army's Head advance,
And shake against his Breast her bloody Lance.
She Will draw her Troops of Terrors in array,
Muster her Griefs, and horrid War display.
As Kings for Fight their Warlike Ranks dispose,
So shall she range her thick, embattled Woes.
The Victor thus the Wicked shall assail,
And over the proud Oppressor's Hopes prevail.
This is his End, for that with Hellish Rage,
The ^^^acious Wretch would against Heaven engage.
(...) Almighty's Host he takes the Field,
And runs upon his Spear and dreadful Shield.
He does de^^ance of his God express,
Deride his fiery Darts, and on his Thunder press.
Pampered with Spoil of ruined Neighbors round,
Sleek with his Fat, and with Dominion crowned;
Luxurious, Haughty, and Presumptuous grown,
He spurns at Heaven, and mocks the Almighty's Throne.
His Cruelty has laid his Country wast,
And Cities full of Men and Wealth defaced.
Those who survive in secret Corners weep,
Or through the grassy Streets desponding creep.
The empty Dwellings mossy Heaps appear,
And all the Signs of sudden Ruin wear.
But God will soon despoil him of his Power,
Nor shall his Wealth and Greatness long endure.
Black Seas of stagnant Darkness round him spread,
And Night Eternal shall involve his Head.
The Almighty's Lightnings shall destroy his Fruit,
Blast his green Leaves, and kill his spreading Root.
His angry Breath shall as a Tempest tare
His Branches off, and drive them through the Air.
Let therefore none on Power and Wealth depend,
These from approaching Evils cannot defend,
Their Promises are vain, and vanity their end.
Whoever in these deceitful Friends conside,
Untimely Ruin shall correct their Pride.
Sudden Destruction shall their Heads invade,
And all their Fruit and verdant Pomp shall fade.
As when a rough East Wind, or Storm of Hail
The fruitful Olive, or the Vine assail,
Their flowery Pride the Olive Branches shed,
And unripe Grapes shook off, the Vineyard spread:
So shall the Oppressors gaudy Pomp decay,
So his fair Limbs and Beauty fade away.
His Sons and Friends shall meet as sad a Doom,
And vengeful Fire their Dwellings shall consume.
His laboring Brain dire Mischief does contrive,
And black Deceit his teeming Heart conceive.
But he shall bring his own Destruction forth,
As Vipers dye to give their Offspring Birth.
CHAP. XVI.
Then Job replied, Often has my suffering Ear,
Such vain Discourses been compelled to hear.
You, cruel Comforters! enrage my Woe,
You neither Skill, nor yet Compassion show.
With tedious Repetitions you abound,
Keep your old Track, and argue in a Round.
But will your empty Speeches never end,
Disarmed and vanquished, will you still contend?
What has emboldened thee, O Eliphaz,
Still to reply, though never to my Case?
Were my Afflictions yours, with how much ease
Could I such Language find, such Words as these?
Uncharitably Pious I could grow,
Like pointed Arrows sharp Reproaches throw,
And with as good a Grace deride your Woe.
But my Compassion would my Lips restrain
From galling Words, that might increase your Pain.
I to support you would extend my Arms,
And sooth your Anguish with the softest Charms.
My tender Accents should your Fate condole,
And balmy Language ease your tortured Soul.
Why should not you with equal Zeal engage
Your utmost Skill, my Anguish to assuage?
How sad a Fate is mine, if I complain
To God or Man, I make my Moan in vain.
If by forbearing I expect Relief,
And stop the stream of my complaining Grief,
Its Flood increases when forbid to flow,
And the rough Waves more formidable grow.
In higher Seas collected Sorrows roll,
And whelm their Deluge over my sinking Soul.
Oppressed beneath the ponderous load I lie,
Weary of living, yet denied to dye.
My Sons, my Servants, and my Substance gone,
I am deserted, desolate, undone.
Though you produce my Sores and wrinkled Skin
As Witnesses of some enormous Sin,
Yet they can only testify the weight
Of those vast Woes, which my Complaints create.
God, as a fierce, relentless Foe appears,
And in his Fury me in pieces tears.
He grinds his raging Teeth, and from his Eyes
A Flame against me keen, as Lightning flies.
My Friends elated with prodigious Pride,
Stand gaping on me, and my Grief deride.
From distant parts they come, not to assuage
My Anguish, but my Sufferings to enrage.
God has exposed me likewise to the Bands
Of fierce invaders from the neighboring Lands,
And given me up a Prey to impious hands.
My Dwelling flourished, and I lived at ease,
With Plenty blessed, and the soft Joys of Peace;
When God denounced his unexpected War,
And with his Darts did me asunder tare.
Me in his griping Arms the Almighty took,
And with such mighty force my body shook,
That all my Members were in pieces broke.
He sets me as a mark on rising ground,
And his fierce Archers compass me around.
In Showers of singing Death their Arrows fly,
And in my tortured Entrails buried ly.
My Gall, so deep, so mortal is the Wound,
As well as Blood, flows out and stains the Ground.
Black throngs of Woes invade my frighted Soul,
As crowding Billows on each other roll.
The Almighty runs upon me in his rage,
As a fierce Giant eager to engage.
Sackcloth I wear, of Ornaments despoiled,
And in the Dust my Glory lies defiled.
My Cheeks with Everlasting Weeping fade,
And on my Eyelids hangs a dismal shade.
Yet no Injustice does in Job appear,
As you my Friends unkindly would infer,
Pure is my Prayer, my Heart within sincere.
If ever a Man by my flagitious hand
Vexed and Oppressed, has perished from the Land,
Let not thy Womb, O Earth, his Blood conceal,
But to the Light my black Offense reveal;
That public Shame and Pains may be my Fate,
Which on the heinous Malefactor wait.
Let God and Man their Bowels shut, when I
In deadly Torment for Compassion cry.
Conscience alone, my awful Judge within,
Does not acquit me of enormous Sin,
But God and all his sacred Angels, bear
Witness to this, and will my Justice clear.
From you my Friends, who my Distress deride,
I turn to Heaven, let Heaven my Cause decide.
If God his just Tribunal would ascend,
To hear how you accuse, and I defend;
If he, as Arbitrator, would preside,
And weigh the Reasons urged on either side;
From your Indictment he would me release,
And I, my Virtue cleared, should dye in Peace.
And, O, that God would soon my Trial hear,
And Judgment give before I disappear.
For when a few more fleeting days are past,
I in the Arms of Death shall lie embraced.
CHAPTER XVII.
Corruption my consuming Flesh devours,
And Time has almost paid my numbered hours.
The opening Grave invites me to her Womb,
And in the Dust prepares to give me Room.
But clear, before I dye, just God, my Fame,
And cover my perfidious Friends with Shame:
For do not pious Scoffers here abide,
Who mock for God, and all my Groans deride?
Their sharp Reproaches vex my Soul by Day,
And chase by Night my wished for Sleep away.
Would God on high would suffer me to state
My Case aright, and hear the whole Debate.
For these my Friends against the Assaults of Sense
Have raised a strong impenetrable Fence.
Such Gates of Darkness never to be unbarr'd,
Such Forts of gloomy Shades the Passes guard,
That Reason's strongest Forces they repel,
Entrenched in Errors inaccessible.
But sure the Righteous God will never permit,
That Men so blinded should to Judge me sit.
Those, who to flatter Heaven their Neighbor wrong,
Shall not their Power and prosperous days prolong.
Destructive Sufferings shall their Sons assail,
Whose Eyes in looking after Aid shall fail.
I was the People's Darling and Delight
In former times; for when I came in sight,
Through crowded Streets loud Acclamations rung,
They to the Tabret my loud Praises sung;
And on my Chariot Wheels transported hung.
A waving Sea of Heads was round me spread,
And still fresh Streams the gazing Deluge fed.
As I advanced, the eager, wondering Throng
Their Eye Balls strained, to see me pass along;
They feasted on me with their greedy Eyes,
And with Applauses filled the ecchoing Skies.
Now, for as sad an Object I am shown;
My wondrous Troubles are Proverbial grown.
The Men who curse their Foes with deadly spite,
Wish Job's Affliction on their heads may light.
My Neighbors cry, when they my Sufferings see,
Is Job thus changed? Good Heaven's! it cannot be.
My Eyes with Sorrow sunk within my Head,
Of Light defrauded, seem already dead.
So much my Flesh and Vigor I have lost,
I seem an empty Shade, or groaning Ghost.
But the Good Man will pity, not arraign
Afflicted Job, to aggravate his Pain.
He will revere this Providential Turn,
Not judge my Person, but my Sufferings mourn.
Though he with wonder shall observe the Just,
Are by the Almighty trodden in the Dust,
Yet he with sacred Indignation pressed,
Shall shun the Wicked, and his way detest.
He for afflicted Virtue shall declare,
And Innocence to prosperous Sin prefer.
He shall the Heavenly Path of Justice keep,
However rough, embarast, dark and steep.
Let him by bloody Outlaws be oppressed,
And Robbers, who the Way to Heaven infest;
Let Persecution's blackest Storm arise,
And with a dismal Night deform the Skies;
Let stern Affliction muster in the Air
Her fiercest Troops, to drive him to despair;
Let bitter Tongues their sharp Reproaches spend,
And impious Scoffers galling Arrows send;
The God-like Trav'ller shall his Path pursue,
Whose very Sufferings shall his Hopes renew.
He Will with undaunted Courage make his way;
Danger his Heart shall strengthen, not dismay.
But you my Friends, to my Discourse attend,
And weigh my Words your Errors to amend.
For hitherto I cannot among you find,
One of a clear, judicious, equal Mind.
You would in vain my Expectations raise,
(If I Repent) of future prosperous Days.
For my appointed Hours are almost past,
My Hopes and Projects Death will quickly blast.
The Lamp of Life burns dimly in my Breast,
Soon from its beating toil my weary Heart will rest.
If for a happy Change you lay a Scheme,
You but amuse me with an empty Dream,
Terrestrial Joys are but an idle Theme.
With my Designs and anxious Thoughts I part,
Farewell ye Cares, that once possessed my Heart.
I to my Sorrows only can attend,
In groans the Day, in groans the Night I spend.
If Grief and Woe denominate the Night,
I never enjoy the Day, or see the Light.
The gloomy Terrors that my Soul surround,
Efface its marks, and Day with Night confound.
Alas it is madness to expect that Rest
And Restoration, which my Friends suggest;
For by a fixed, irrevocable Doom,
My Grave's prepared, my everlasting Home:
Where friendly Death has laid my easy Bed,
With Dust beneath, around with Darkness spread.
I to the Grave have said, O Parent Grave,
Me of thy Dust, a wretched Offspring save.
To take me in, thy gloomy Arms extend,
Thou art my Father, O be now my Friend;
And me from hostile Life and Light defend.
I to the Worm have said, my Brother Worm,
From whom I differ but in Shape and Form;
Submitted to thy Power, I soon must lay
This loathsome Heap of putrefying Clay.
Where Is then the Hope which you pretend to give,
That I may yet in Peace and Pleasure live,
If I Repent, to see it you must go
Down to the Grave, and the Cold Shades below.
There you may see how all my Hopes and I,
In the same Grave together buried lie.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Then Bil^ad thus:
When will thou finish thy prolix Discourse,
Sounding indeed enough, but void of Force?
Consider what shall be alleged, and then
To thy Objections we'll reply again.
What does thy wondrous Arrogance create?
What self-sufficient Fullness thee elate?
What secret Stores of Wisdom have thou found,
And what new Lights have thy Enquiries crowned?
That we such vile and senseless Creatures seem,
And are but stupid Beasts in thy esteem?
Impatience and ungovernable Rage,
Thy furious Hands against thy Self engage.
Thy wild Discourses from Distraction flow,
And not Repentance, but Rebellion show.
What to appease thy peevish Discontent,
Shall God new Forms of Government invent?
Shall Providence new ways and measures take,
And steady Nature her old Course forsake?
Shall Rocks and Mountains from their Pillars leap,
Sink down, and humble their aspiring Heap?
Shall Floods and rapid Rivers sullen grow,
Bind up their Waters, and refuse to flow?
Shall God his Truth and Justice disregard,
Neglect the Righteous, and the unjust reward?
Shall he subvert all Order, with intent
Thy vain Complaints and Clamours to prevent?
O Job, in spite of thy Objections, take
This Rule as sure, that God will ever make
A due distinction of the Good and Bad,
And sparing those, his Wrath shall these invade.
The Splendour of the Wicked shall decay,
And rising Fogs shall choke his glorious Day.
His brightest Beams, like short-lived Sparks of Fire,
Or Flashing Lightning shine, and strait expire.
Thick Darkness equal to the Shades of Hell,
Shall on his dismal Habitation dwell.
Never from without shall one kind Ray of Light,
Or cheerful Lamp within dispel the Night.
He in his wisest steps shall unawares,
Be fettered with inextricable Snares;
He Will live in Trouble and perplexing Cares.
By his Projections and his deep Designs,
He his own Peace and Safety undermines.
Into the Net himself has spread he will run,
Wisely destroyed, and prudently undone.
His Feet shall be entangled in the toil,
And shouting Hunters seize him as their spoil.
Let him over Plains, or Hills, or Forests stray,
Inevitable Gins obstruct his way,
Which shall entrap this roaming Beast of Prey.
Invading Terrors shall his Soul affright,
The Wretch shall fly, but perish in his Flight.
His Bones the Pillars of his Fabric crack,
His Joints grow feeble, and his Sinews slack.
Fierce rav'ning Woes his Flesh and Strength consume,
And Desolation in his heavy Doom.
Death and Destruction over his head impend;
All his soft Pleasures shall in Torment end.
The Pillars which his Cofidence did prop,
Shall let the high presumptuous Structure drop,
And in the Ruins bury all his Hope.
The King of Terrors with his bloody Dart,
Shall strike the pale Oppressor to the Heart;
Then at his gloomy Wheels shall drag the Slave,
In triumph to his subterranean Cave.
Torments, destructive Plagues, and raging Pain,
Shall horrid Inmates in his House remain.
Triumphant Woe with hideous Terrors crowned,
Anguish with all her Agonies around,
Wild Consternation with erected Hair,
Yellings, Distress, and sullen mute Despair,
The Apartments of his Dwelling shall divide,
And dire Companions with him shall reside.
Because his rich Possessions and Abode,
By Violence were gotten, or by Fraud.
When falling Floods of Fire, and Sulphur Showers,
O'erturn'd high Sodom's and Gomorrah's Towers,
The flaming Inundation from the place,
Swept off their Dwellings, and the impious Race.
So shall the proud Oppressor be devoured,
Such Fire and Brimstone on his Palace poured;
Which shall all Marks and Monuments destroy,
Of the vile Wretch, that did the Seat enjoy.
His Roots grown dry, shall perish in the ground,
His Head and Limbs cut off shall lie around.
In aftertimes he will be unknown to Fame,
Or mentioned only with Reproach and Shame.
From off the Earth God's vengeful Darts shall chase
The wicked Man, and all his hateful Race.
No Offspring in his Dwelling shall remain,
His Family and Honor to sustain.
Ages to come with Horror shall relate
His sudden Ruin, and his dismal Fate;
As that he lived in, was amazed to see
So strange a Turn, such Woe and Misery.
So shall the Hopes of all the wicked end,
Such Desolation does their House attend.
CHAPTER XIX.
Then Job replied:
How long will you my righteous Cause perplex?
How long my Ears with idle Speeches vex?
Must Answers void of Sense and Argument,
And grave Impertinence my Soul torment?
You wound me with your contumelious words,
And slanders sharper than the keenest Swords.
Job in Affliction you refuse to know,
And a shy Stranger's unconcernness show.
Grant I have sinned, yet in my Flesh I bear
Strokes of vindictive Justice so severe,
That I with Reason might from Friends expect
Commiseration, not such proud neglect.
If you with such censorious Arrogance,
And haughty words against me will advance;
If you will still such black Indictments read,
If you will still my Innocence implead,
Consider coolly my afflicted State;
Should your imperious scorn new Grief create,
And to the unequal load add greater weight?
I by the Almighty's Arm am overthrown,
And pressed beneath his heavy Vengeance groan.
Inevitable Snares his hand has set,
And drawn around me his destructive Net.
To Heaven with fruitless Accents I complain
Of this hard measure, this excess of Pain,
And Cry to be redressed, but Cry in vain.
By Heaven forsaken, I am left a Prey
To Woes, that me encompass every way.
Inexorably Deaf the Almighty stands,
Rejects my Prayer, and minds not my Demands.
He in my Paths has such Obstructions laid,
And fenced me in with such a close Blockade;
That I must ever lie without Relief
In this dark Prison, this Strong-hold of Grief.
No golden thread of Light the way will show,
And let me through this Labyrinth of Woe.
Of all my Glory I am stripped, the Crown
From my dishonored Head is fallen down;
I Have lost my Power, my Children, my Renown.
I Am perfectly destroyed, I Am lost, undone
And never to return, my Hope is gone.
A miserable Object here I lie,
A Wretch that would not live, and cannot dye.
His Fury kindles of its own accord,
And unprovoked, he waves his glittering Sword;
Against me as his Foe, he throws his Dart,
And yet he knows my Zeal, and upright Heart.
Black Troops of Sufferings, Regimented Woes
In Battle drawn, their swarming Throngs disclose;
On me they come, and marking out the Ground,
The Infernal Legions lie encamped around.
Brethren and Kindred treat me as unknown,
Break Nature's Bonds, and their own Blood disown.
Familiar Friends, who kindly me embraced,
Forget me now, and all our Friendship past.
Those of my Household in Rebellion rise,
Mock me their Lord, and my Commands despise.
I to my Servant for Assistance cry,
He minds me not, but Scoffing passes by,
And lets me helpless and neglected lie.
My sore Disease does from my Presence fright
My Wife, and makes her to abhor my sight.
Though I my earnest Supplication make,
And beg and pray for our dear Childrens sake,
Those tender Pledges of our mutual Love,
Yet no entreaties her Compassion move.
She will not stay to help me in distress,
And by condoling words her Love express.
Disdainful Youth and Children me despise,
Though to salute them, from my Seat I rise.
My bosom Friends, whom chiefly I before
Esteemed and loved, now chiefly me abhor.
My Skin and Flesh are perished from the Bone,
The Boils have spared my Mouth and Lips alone,
To let me make my lamentable moan.
Some Pity, O my Friends, some Pity take
On my distress, for ancient Friendship's sake.
I am abandoned, and despairing left,
Of Riches, Honor, Children, Friends bereft.
Remark the grievous Wounds my sore Disease
Has made through all my Flesh, but what are these
Compared with those, which in my Soul I feel,
Inflicted by the Almighty's fatal Steel?
O, then in soft Compassion's Arms relent,
Retract your Speeches, and my Fate lament.
Will you assume the Privilege of God,
And when you please, afflict me with your Rod?
Inhumane Friends! say, does it not suffice,
That all consumed with pain my Body lies;
But you my Soul with ill Discourses wound,
Empty of Sense, though they with Gall abound.
O, that my Speech was written, that my Words
Were Registered, and kept in safe Records!
O, that an Iron Pen's repeated stroke,
Would grave deep Furrows in the Marble Rock!
Let Letters fill them up of inlaid Lead,
That all to come may my Profession read.
I solemnly pronounce, that I believe
That my Redeemer does for ever live.
When future Ages shall their Circuit end,
And Bankrupt Time shall its last Minute spend,
Then he from Heaven in Triumph shall descend.
He on the Surface of the Earth shall stand,
And from the Grave his Captive Saints demand.
The slumbering Dead shall waken at his Call,
And from their Limbs their Leaden Chains shall fall.
Victorious Life at his Command shall flee^
To vanquish Death, and set her Prisoners free.
It shall new warmth and vital Vigor spread,
Through all the cold Apartments of the Dead.
It shall in Triumph march through Shades beneath,
Through all the dusty Galleries of Death.
The invading Conqueror shall Sack the Grave,
Force every Tomb, and rescue every Slave.
Destruction's Empire shall no longer last,
Death from her sad Dominions shall be chas't,
And Desolation laid for ever wast.
From opening Tombs the enlivened Dead shall rise,
And to enjoy the Light lift up their wondering eyes.
Though Worms and Putrefaction shall consume
This mortal Body in the silent Tomb,
I shall revive, and from the Grave arise,
And see my God with these corporeal Eyes.
I for my Self shall see the blessed sight,
For my own Profit, for my vast Delight.
He shall my Virtue from your Slanders clear,
Assert my Cause, and Job pronounce sincere.
This is the unshaken Pillar of my Hope,
This does my Soul oppressed with Sorrow prop;
That though, as I have said, the rav'ning Worm
Shall eat my Flesh, and break this mortal Form,
My reunited Parts I shall assume,
When my Redeemer does to Judgment come,
For ever to be cleared by an impartial Doom.
But you my Friends, no doubt will still aver,
That Persecuting me you do not err.
You Will say, that in my Conduct may be found,
For your Censorious words abundant ground.
But of the Almighty's Justice be afraid,
His dreadful Vengeance will your Heads invade.
He will from Heaven consuming Wrath reveal,
Against all fierce, uncharitable Zeal.
The Day is coming, when the Judge supreme
Will your rash Words and Cruelty condemn.
CHAPTER XX.
He said, and Zophar thus in heat replied:
Such is thy Obstinacy, such thy Pride;
With such disdain thou do our Reasons slight,
And art so careful to exclude the Light;
All thy own Words so full and weighty seem
To thee, sufficient in thy own esteem:
That I no farther Argument designed,
To Cure a Man so obstinately Blind.
But since transported to a wild excess,
Thou do against thy Friends such Threats express;
Since thou do Heaven with thy Complaints alarm,
And mark us out for God's vindictive Arm;
I must my settled Resolution break;
For thus provoked, who can forbear to speak?
Thou do upbraid us, as of Sense bereft,
Without Compassion, without Justice left.
That we Contempt and Shame would on thee pour,
And like outrageous Beasts thy Life devour.
But I that fully know thy gross mistake,
Cannot silent sit, but must an Answer make.
Have thou, who make to Wisdom such pretense,
Not yet remarked the Course of Providence?
How since the Earth's Foundations first were laid,
Through all the Revolutions Time has made,
The Triumphs of the unjust have quickly past,
And his vain Joys did but a moment last.
Though his bright Head above the Clouds he reers,
And mingles Luster with contiguous Stars,
O'erturn'd and ruined he deserts the Skies,
And in the Dust dispersed in Fragments lies.
The unrighteous perish with a swift decay,
Like his own Ordure cast with Scorn away.
Those who before his Glory did admire,
Now seized with Wonder, for his Place enquire.
Astonished, they these questions often repeat,
Where can we find him now? where is his Seat?
His Fame and short-lived Glory disappear,
Like thin Illusions formed of gaudy Air.
Like wanton Dreams that in the Fancy play,
Or empty Phantomes that by Twilight stray.
The Eye that saw him never shall see him more,
Never shall his House again unfold to him her Door.
His Children strive to appease the Poor in vain,
These of their Sufferings publicly complain;
Those to restore their Substance are compelled,
Which from the Poor their griping Father held.
With Vice decrepit, he perceives within,
The sad effects of his past youthful Sin.
His wasted Flesh and putrefying Bones,
Force him to utter never-ceasing moans.
As he to Sin did with Affection cleave,
So Sin too faithful him shall never leave.
The guilty marks of his unbridled Lust,
Are still his sad Companions in the Dust.
Though Vice is by him greedily embraced,
And proves most sweet and grateful to his taste;
Though the delicious Morsel, with his Tongue
He rolls about, the Pleasure to prolong;
Yet the sweet Meat he swallowed down so slow,
Does in his Bowels Gall and Wormwood grow.
It does like Poison, rage along his Veins,
And gripes and racks him with tormenting pains.
What if the Oppressor Riches has devoured,
And down his Throat unmeasured Treasure poured?
He cannot long the unrighteous Load retain,
His loathing Stomach with regret and pain,
Shall cast the precious Surfeit up again.
God shall his Belly of its Prey beguil,
And from his Bowels wrest the wealthy Spoil.
The profitable and delightful Sin,
Which he has sucked with so much pleasure in,
Shall like a Viper gnaw and tare his Heart,
And wound his Entrails, like a poisoned Dart.
The Streams of Joy, and Rivers of Delight,
Which he believed, would all his toil requite,
Shall disappoint his hope, and in their stead,
Amazing Floods of Sorrow shall succeed.
For that his Neighbors wrongs may be redrest,
Which he by Fraud or Violence oppressed,
He shall refund his wicked Wealth, and more
Shall give what justly was his own before.
Though he may Riches gorge, the painful Spoil,
In massy Vomit quickly will recoil.
The time it stays the bloated Glutton lies
Distended to a vast Hydropic Size;
But he no Strength or Nourishment shall reap
From the crude Mass, and undigested heap.
Because the Poor despairing he has left,
Whom he by Rapine of his Goods bereft.
Because by open, or by secret Guilt,
The Dwelling he has seized another built.
Therefore his inward Gripes and conscious Fear,
With self-revenging Pains his heart shall tare.
Convulsive Throws, and raging Agonies,
Shall rack his Soul, and on his Bowels seize.
The Riches he so eagerly did crave,
With all his watchful Care he shall not save.
His Heir, what Treasure he has left behind
Shall never enquire, for none he will hope to find.
When he shall most with Power and Wealth abound,
With Guards encompassed, and with Empire crowned,
Then sudden Mischiefs shall his Seat surround.
Fierce Bands of Spoilers shall his Lands invade,
And far away his Wealth shall be conveyed.
When he designs his Riches to enjoy,
And all his Senses with Delights to cloy,
A dismal storm of Wrath Divine shall rise,
And gathering Vengeance shall disturb the Skies.
While he is feasting, free from Fear or Care,
The Heaven's shall hurl down unexpected War.
God on his Head shall such a Tempest pour,
As did thy Children in their Mirth devour.
His Consternation and distracting Fear,
Shall make him fly to escape the Sword and Spear;
But a swift Arrow from an Iron Bow
Shall overtake, and strike the Rebel through.
Officious Friends to heal his wounded Veins,
Shall draw the bloody Weapon from his Reins,
Whose glittering point distained with issuing Gall,
Shows certain Death attends his sudden fall.
He shall in raging Pangs and Horror lie,
Hopeless of Life, and yet afraid to dye.
Against him God shall Storms and Plagues provide,
And stores of Wrath in secret places hide.
He his dark Caves and Magazines shall stow,
With chosen Vengeance and collected Woe.
From cleaving Clouds a fiery Tempest poured,
Like that which on the Hills thy Flocks devoured,
Shall on his Substance and his House descend,
And to destroy the Wretch its Fury spend.
His Progeny, if any shall remain,
Shall pass their dismal Days in Grief and Pain.
Thus Heaven by dreadful Judgments shall reveal,
The Wickedness he did with Care conceal.
The Earth shall all her Elements unite,
Muster her Armies, and against him Fight.
The Substance he has gained shall flow away,
Like rapid Torrents, in that dreadful Day,
When God provoked by all his Crimes, shall come
In Storms of Wrath the Oppressor to consume.
God to the unjust this Portion shall divide,
This sad Inheritance is on him tied;
He Is the right Heir, with him it shall abide.
CHAPTER XXI.
And then afflicted Job replied: Forbear
To interrupt me thus, with Patience hear
And weigh my Arguments, while I proceed
In my Defense; this I Will accept instead
Of all the Consolation which from you
Is to a Friend in such Affliction due.
Sedately hear my Reasons out, and then
Reproach and mock your suffering Friend again.
When I in bitter Anguish make my moan,
Do I complain of cruel Man alone?
I often with Reason do, and must declare,
That God's vindictive Arm is too severe.
That I the mark of all his Weapons stand,
While Men more guilty escape his vengeful Hand.
But what if I of Man alone complain?
Is my Complaint unjust, because it is vain?
Have I not reason to indulge my Grief,
When neither Man nor God afford Relief?
Consider well my sad afflicted State,
My unexampled Sufferings will create
Astonishment, and make you hold your Peace,
And from reproaching me for ever cease.
When I reflect, that Providence Divine
Does on the Wicked, as on Favorites shine,
That vile and irreligious Wretches cloy
Their pampered Senses with Delight and Joy;
Whose Skins grow smooth, and sleek with Fat and Rest,
And no Invaders Arms their Peace molest:
While the mean time the Just and Godlike Kind,
From Heaven and Earth alike hard measure find;
Are marked and singled out to undergo
The Almighty's Anger, and the Oppressors blow;
Puzzled, confounded and amazed I stand,
And cannot forbear a Reason to demand
Of this unequal Distribution, why
The Impious thrive, the Just despairing lie.
Here I from Heaven Instruction would implore
How to defend the Justice I adore.
Why do the Wicked unmolested thrive,
Flow in Abundance, and in Pleasure live?
In Mirth and Ease they pass their Days away,
Healthful in Riot, and in Age not Gray.
In Triumph they the Regal Throne ascend,
And far around their Empire they extend.
With Health and Vigor blessed, they live to see
A flourishing and numerous Progeny.
Protected from Assaults they dwell secure,
And never the Almighty's scourging Rod endure.
Their fruitful Flocks engender on the Hill,
And with their Young their Herds the Valley fill.
Their verdant Meadows pour such Riches forth,
Strong Mowers groan to heave the unweildy Birth.
Their unexhausted, never-failing Field,
Does a rich Harvest to the Reaper yield.
Their Gardens flourish, and the Golden Fruit
Bend down the laden Boughs, and kiss the Parent Root.
Their Children from their House in Flocks advance,
Sport in the Streets, and over the Meadows dance.
To highten yet the Pleasure of the Day,
They take the Harp, and on the Timbrel play.
They Are ravished with the Singer's charming Voice,
And at the Organ's cheerful Sound rejoice.
In Ease and Wealth they spend their golden Days,
And wearing by insensible decays,
With years, and not with pains their Shoulders bend,
And ripe with Age, they to the Grave descend.
Therefore elated with prodigious Pride,
The Almighty's Power and Precepts they deride.
Religion's Heavenly Graces they contemn,
And God-like Saints, as cheated Fools, condemn.
The obdurate Rebels arrogantly say,
What is the Almighty? why should we obey?
What shall we get, if we in Praises spend
Our Breath, and Prayers to Heaven devoutly send?
But as it is impious, so it is foolish too,
Such Pride, and such Contempt of Heaven to show:
This Man's own hand his Riches cannot defend,
On God whom he provokes, he must depend.
Let him be rich, I cannot his Conduct praise,
Nor shall I imitate the Sinner's ways.
For though it is certain that you grossly err,
When you with so much Confidence aver,
That the good Man God's favor still enjoys,
But that his Fury all the unjust destroys;
Yet by experience taught I must avow,
That though not always, yet it is often so.
I grant, destruction often the unjust invades,
That often the glory of the Wicked fades.
Their impious Deeds the Almighty often incense,
Who does his Judgments on their Heads dispense.
He with his driving Wrath does often chase
From off the Earth, this irreligious Race.
They, as the Chaff, before the Tempest fly,
Or Stubble born by Whirlwinds through the Sky.
Their Guilt the Almighty treasures up with care,
And stores of Wrath does for their Sons prepare.
Their Progeny shall suffer for their Crime,
And they shall live to see that dismal time.
Their Lips shall drink of God's embitter'd Bowl,
And their dim Eyes shall in Destruction roll.
What Comfort, what Delight shall they derive
From all their Offspring, who shall them survive;
When an untimely Violence has shut
Their Eyelids, and their Days in sunder cut?
Thus that the wicked suffer I assert,
But it is not all, nor yet the greatest part.
I grant, the Just too sometimes prosperous are,
But they more often Pain and Trouble bear.
Yet who shall to the Almighty's ways object?
Who shall to guide the World, his Hand direct?
Must always God flagitious Men consume,
And never the Righteous to Affliction doom?
Must this distinction always be expressed,
Because you fancy this becomes him best?
Does not the All-searching God exactly know,
And judge blessed Saints above, and mighty Kings below?
Who then to teach him, Knowledge will pretend,
And show him how his Government to mend?
One in his Vigor, and his Strength full grown,
To whom enfeebling Aches are unknown,
Whose Breasts and Sides congested Fat distends,
And through whose Bones a Marrow Flood descends,
Shall lie extended in the Grave beneath,
Lopt by an unexpected stroke of Death:
Another wretched Suff'rer who has spent
His mournful days in Grief and Discontent,
In torturing Pains and bitter Anguish lies,
Nor till he is worn with lingering Sickness, dies.
The friendly Grave does both alike embrace,
And all Distinction's former marks efface:
The Worm alike does on their Bodies feast,
And mingling Dust, the Dead together rest.
Thus Troubles Men promiscuously invade,
And Death alike befalls the Good and Bad.
These Dispensations no regard express
To this Man's Crimes, or that Man's Righteousness.
Nor does the Love or Wrath of God appear
By what he gives, or makes us suffer here.
I know my Friends, by what you have expressed,
The imaginations lodged within your Breast.
Your inward thoughts your suffering Friend abuse,
And though the wicked only you accuse
In general Speeches, yet I plainly see
What you assert of them, you aim at me.
For often you disdainfully demand,
Where does the wicked Prince's Palace stand?
Who does the Dwelling where he flourished know?
Who its Remains and Monuments can show?
But cannot the meanest Man that passes by,
To this demand convincingly reply?
Ask of the next you meet, and he will tell,
Where now the wicked unmolested dwell.
He Will point, and show the Towers where they abide,
The marks and tokens of their prosperous Pride.
It Is plain, they often flourish, though it is true,
That Vengeance sometimes does their Crimes pursue.
From present Troubles some are kept with care,
For greater Shame, and Judgments more severe.
God shall in solemn Triumph lead them forth,
To suffer public, ignominious Wrath.
They Fat for Ruin, and for Slaughter fed,
With Garlands crowned, and Crowds around them spread,
Are to Destruction's bloody Altar led.
Often on the Wicked dreadful Judgments wait,
But Power and Plenty is their usual Fate.
Awed by their Wealth and Greatness, Men forbear
To tell them what their Crimes and Dangers are.
Elated, and impatient of Reproof,
They at the wisest Admonitions scoff.
They Are Great above the fear of Punishment,
Too wise to own their Errors, and repent.
The proud Oppressor's Death will often vye
With his past Life, and great prosperity;
For, as he lived in Pride and State, he will dye.
His mourning Friends with sad magnificence,
With honorable Pomp, and vast expense,
Shall in the Dust the ungodly heap inter,
And paint and carve his stately Sepulcher.
The Corpse embalmed with wondrous Cost and Art,
Shall rest entire, and ^ound in every part,
That 'twill a living Watchman posted there
To guard the Dead, not a Dead Corpse appear.
He in the Grave shall find a sweet repose,
From Cares delivered, and from threatening Foes.
The Men who live, or who are yet unborn,
Shall follow him, and all File off in turn.
He is not more unhappy than the rest,
His Fate is common to the worst and best.
Why then do you pretend, that prosperous days
I yet might see, would I amend my ways?
Experience your Assertion contradicts,
And shows, that Heaven the Righteous often afflicts:
That the best Men prodigious Sufferings bear,
While God is pleased great Wickedness to spare.
CH XXII.
Then Eliphaz:
If undefiled thou do thy Virtue keep,
Is God obliged? does he the Profit reap?
Were all thy Days in pure Religion spent,
Would that the Almighty's Happiness augment?
When he does strictly Righteousness enjoin,
Does he his own Advancement seek, or Thine?
If thou art Good the Profit is thy own,
God needs thee not, he on his Heavenly Throne
Crowned with Essential Bliss, in Triumph ^its,
Unmeasured Bliss which no increase admits.
Does he in Wrath attempt thy overthrow,
Fearing in time thou should too Potent grow?
I grant thy Sufferings great and numerous are,
But with thy Guilt they just Proportion bear.
Justice Divine its Banks never overflows,
All monstrous Sufferings, monstrous Crimes suppose.
Either thy Neighbor's Pledge thou have detained,
And by Extortion have his Substance drained:
Or of his Garment thou have stripped the Poor,
And sent him Naked from thy cruel Door.
Or to the Man with burning Sunbeams fried,
At his last Gasp thou have thy Spring denied.
Or thou have seen thy hungry Neighbor dye
For want of Bread, which thou would not supply.
Or else unjustly to the Rich and Great,
Thou have decreed another's Land and Seat.
While thou the mournful Widow did oppress,
And crush without Remorse the needy Fatherless.
For some such Crime though secret and unknown,
Thou do beneath this heavy Vengeance groan.
For this, with Snares thou art encompassed round,
And sudden Fears thy trembling Soul confound.
Thick Shades and Darkness over thy Dwelling spread,
And dismal Floods of Grief whelm over thy Head.
Does not the Almighty sit enthroned on high,
On the steep Unequal of the Empyreal Sky,
Whence with a quick and easy Prospect he
Can all his Works and Worlds around him see?
Yet thou do act, as if thou did believe,
Thou could the Almighty's searching Eye deceive:
As if thou said, how can the Almighty know,
How can he mind and judge of things below?
Vast is the Gulf of Air that lies between,
And from his sight thick Clouds the Sinner skreen.
He walks the happy Circuit of the Sky,
Nor casts on this low dirty Ball an Eye.
Uninterrupted Pleasure him employs,
While he alone his Blissful Self enjoys.
Our Good or Evil Deeds, our Joys or Pains,
Unworthy of his Notice, he disdains.
Lo, from thy Lips whatever expressions break,
This is the Language which thy Actions speak.
Did thou with due Attention never behold,
The Paths in which the Wicked trod of Old;
Who from the Earth for their enormous Crime,
Were hurried off by Death before their time;
Who to the general Flood became a Prey,
And with their Sons and Wealth were swept away.
These did the Almighty's sacred Laws deride,
Contemned his Favor, and his Threats defied.
They cried, if we Religion's Rule regard,
Who will our Pains, and pious Zeal reward?
Yet God their Houses with Abundance blessed,
Enlarged their Empire, and their Stores increast.
But who was by their Wealth to Envy moved,
Or who their impious Words or Ways approved?
For though like thee, they Peace a while enjoyed,
Yet they at last were from the Earth destroyed.
But Righteous Men have still the Joy to see,
Justice Divine rebuke Impiety.
The Almighty they will exalt in Songs of Praise,
Who does his Glory by such Judgments raise.
They shall the Oppressor's Pomp and Power deride,
When Heaven's just Vengeance thus corrects their Pride.
The wicked perish, while the pious Race
Of Patriarchs, whence our Descent we trace,
Favored by Heaven, possessed their ancient place.
They never were to Desolation doomed,
Never by such prodigious Fire consumed,
As raining down from Heaven in flaming Showers,
Destroyed proud Sodom's and Gomorrah's Towers.
Wherefore, O Job, to God with speed return,
With deep Contrition thy Offenses mourn;
Overwhelmed with Shame and Sorrow, prostrate lie
Before his Feet, and for Compassion cry.
Let humble Prayer and penitential Tears,
Appease Heaven's Wrath, and thus remove thy Fears.
When God is pleased, all Nature will express
A forward Zeal to advance thy Happiness.
God's gracious Aspect, with its Heavenly Light,
Will dissipate this dark tempestuous Night.
Joy will arise, and with its cheerful Ray,
Chase all these sullen Clouds of Grief away.
Will Job profane and impious Maxims learn
From stupid Heathens, who from all concern
From Things below the Almighty's Care exempt,
And thus expose Religion to Contempt?
No, let the Law which God of old revealed
To humane Kind, which yet is unrepeal'd;
Or which should written in thy Heart abide,
Be made thy Rule of Life, and sacred Guide.
Within thy Breast with pious Care record
His blessed Instructions, and his Heavenly Word.
If thou sincerely wilt thy Life devote
To virtuous Deeds, and wilt with Zeal promote
The Almighty's Honor and Religions Cause,
By strict observance of his Righteous Laws;
He all thy dismal Ruins will repair,
And all thy reunited Fragments rear.
He Will raise thy Head now buried in the Dust,
And make thee midst the Clouds thy glittering Turrets thrust.
He Will fix thy Pillars deeper in the ground,
And stronger Bulwarks shall thy House surround.
He shall thy Plenty and thy Peace restore,
And give thee Empire wider than before.
Thou shall no more of Vengeance be afraid,
No Terrors more shall thy safe Tents invade.
Thy Neighbors shall with Wonder thee behold,
With Cedar blessed, adorned with Gems and Gold.
Thou such prodigious Treasures shall command,
Thou shall, like Dust, collect thy Golden Sand.
Thy rich, but disregarded Ophir Oar,
Shall lie like Stones on every River's Shore.
Wedges of Silver from the purest Mine
Pil'd high in Heaps, shall round thy Dwelling shine.
Against thy Foes the Almighty will contend,
Protect thy Plenty, and thy Life defend.
Thou with his Favor shall be ever blessed,
A vast Reward exceeding all the rest.
Thou shall derive from him thy chief Delight,
The Thoughts of whom does now thy Soul affright.
Up thou shall look with Courage, and employ
Thy Thoughts on Heaven with Confidence and Joy.
Thou to the Almighty shall have free Access,
And to his Throne prevailing Prayers address.
When thou art heard, thy Vows in Trouble made,
Shall with a glad and thankful Heart be paid.
All thy designs the Almighty shall approve,
And thy decrees will ratify above.
Before thee he shall Heavenly Light display*
To solace, and to guide thee in thy way.
He shall protect thy Paths, thy Counsels bless,
And crown thy Undertakings with Success.
When wicked Men shall be around destroyed,
Stripped of the Power and Wealth they once enjoyed:
Thou shall not feel the Almighty's wrathful hand,
But undisturbed enjoy thy fruitful Land.
For God the humble Person will regard,
And with his Blessing will his Love reward.
Nor shall thy Prayer sent to the Almighty's Throne
Obtain his Favors for thy self alone;
If thou shall Supplication for them make,
Thy Neighbors round shall prosper for thy sake.
CHAPTER XXIII.
But Job replied:
From you I find my hopes of Ease are vain,
Your Consolations aggravate my Pain.
I after all your Applications find
The bitter Anguish raging in my Mind.
The sharp redoubled Strokes by which I bleed,
Do all my Cries and loudest Groans exceed.
You give me prudent Counsel to acquaint
My self with God, but this is my Complaint,
That from my Sight he does with Care retreat;
O, that I knew where I might find his Seat.
I would before him justify my Cause,
And show I Am no Contemner of his Laws.
I would convincing Arguments prepare,
And all my Reasons orderly declare,
To prove my angry Judge is over-strict,
And does too rig'rous Punishments inflict.
I long to know what Charge he would produce,
Of what black Crimes he would my ways accuse.
Let him detect those Crimes to me unknown,
And I Will the Guilt with Shame and Sorrow own.
I will with Patience my Affliction bear,
And never complain his Strokes are too severe.
If I an equal Hearing could procure,
Would he control me with his Sovereign Power,
And not a calm and fair Debate endure?
No, he would give me Strength and Confidence,
And favorably hear my just Defense.
Then I might state my righteous Case at large,
And God would clear me from your groundless Charge.
I fain would know where I my God might find,
For still he is just, and long I found him kind,
Though grown of late estranged he has my search declined.
If I go forward to the Eastern Coast
To seek him out, I mourn my labor lost.
If I turn backward to the Western Seats
To find him there, he still my Hope defeats.
I roam through populous Northern Kingdoms, where
His mighty Works and Wonders most appear,
Yet is my strict Enquiry fruitless there.
I try if Southern Climates will reveal
His Seat, but still he does himself conceal.
But though the Righteous God will not appear
In Judgment now, my Innocence to clear;
This is my Comfort, that his searching Eye
Does all my Thoughts, my Heart and Ways descry:
When he my Virtue tries, which I desire,
I shall, like Gold, come purer from the Fire.
I with unerring Feet have always trod,
In Virtue's Paths, and kept the Heavenly Road.
I never the rough and steepy Way declined,
But to the Almighty's Will, my own resigned.
Through threatening Dangers I my passage made,
Of no low Gulf, or sharp Ascent afraid.
Heaven's sacred Precepts still I did obey,
And always shunned the smooth, but crooked Way,
In which lost Sinners from their Maker stray.
I have preserved the Almighty's sacred Word,
As wealthy Men their choicest Treasures Hoard.
To save the precious Store, I ever showed
As much Concern, as for my daily Food.
But though the Eternal Mind did always see
These pregnant Proofs of my Integrity,
Inflexibly resolved he will never relent,
Nor of his harsh proceeding ever repent.
Confirmed in Wrath he will not change his Mind,
Never for me a tender Passion find.
My Sufferings to accomplish he will proceed,
And execute the Wrath he has decreed.
The Righteous by him often are oppressed,
For secret Reasons lodged within his Breast.
This is his Pleasure, who shall dare dispute
His Sovereign Will, and Empire Absolute?
Me to his Throne of Grace would he admit,
His Clemency my Virtue would acquit:
But on he comes his Creature to devour,
Armed with resistless, Arbitrary Power.
Therefore when I my great Creator see
Clothed with August, Imperial Majesty,
I at his awful Presence shake with fear,
Nor can the Sight of Sovereign Glory bear.
When on his Terrors I reflect, I feel
An inward Dread, and struck with Horror reel.
My sinking Heart dissolves within my Breast
And bitter Sorrows interrupt my rest;
Because he did not cut me off, before
These dismal Shades and Troubles whelmed me over:
Because he never would let the friendly Grave
From so much Woe his wretched Creature save.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Why do my Friends Erroneous Doctrines teach
That certain Sufferings here the Wicked reach?
God does conceal the Times and Seasons when
His Vengeance shall destroy flagitious Men.
Even those who most his righteous Laws obey,
And mark with care his Providential way,
Are unacquainted with his Judgment Day.
They know of no determined, certain Times,
When he will visit Men's provoking Crimes.
Some Men remove with their perfidious Hands,
The Marks that bound appropriated Lands.
They take their Neighbors Goats from off the Rocks,
And from the Airy Downs their Woolly Flocks.
With wicked Spoils they feast their Luxury,
And gorged with Rapine on their Couches lie.
They the poor Widow of her Ox defraud,
They rob the Orphan, and the Deed applaud.
These Robbers scare the Helpless from their way,
Who leave the Road, and over the Forest stray.
The affrighted Trav'llers to the Mountains fly,
And to escape their Rage in Caver^s lie.
Other vile Men frequented Towns forsake,
And their Abode in desert Places make.
Where Wild and Salvage grown, at Dawn of Day
They leave their secret Dens to hunt their Prey.
These Men by Plunder and by Rapine thrive
And in a Wilderness in Plenty live.
They sudden Inroads on their Neighbors make,
And from their Fields by Force their Harvest take.
They from another's Vine the Clusters tear
And the rich Spoil to their own Presses bear.
To their Strongholds their Booty they convey;
They strip the Lab'rers, make them naked stray,
Exposed to Cold by Night, to Heat by Day.
The Wretches when they hear a Tempest rise,
And see the gathering Clouds o'erspred the Skies,
To neighboring Rocks their Flight for Refuge bend;
Their craggy Arms the friendly Rocks extend;
Embrace, and hide them in their Clefts, and show
Less hardness than the cruel Robbers do.
Besides their Substance, which they make their Prey,
By Force they take the Owners too away:
For from their Coverts they Incursions make
Into the Country round, and Captives take
Poor Herdsmen, Trav'llers, laboring Swains, and wrest
The struggling Infant from the Nurse's Breast.
They lead them stripped and starving to their Caves,
And treat the helpless Creatures, as their Slaves.
Though their ill-gotten Substance be immense,
Yet they despoil with salvage Violence
Their hungry Captives of that little Fruit
Which they had gleaned their Vigor to recruit.
They make them labor in their Olive-yard,
But with redoubled Stripes their toil reward.
They never permit them who their Vineyards dress,
And tread the swelling Clusters in the Press,
To take, though faint, a Grape from off the Vine,
Or taste, though fried with Heat, one drop of Wine.
These desperate Outlaws distant Towns invade,
Their cruel Yoke is on whole Cities laid.
In whose sad Streets the suffering People groan,
And make, like wounded Men, a dismal Moan.
There is, besides this more audacious Race,
Whose open Crimes the Noonday Sun outface;
A sort of secret Sinners, who require
Darkness to hide them, and from Light retire.
For instance, at the uncertain Dawn of Day,
The lurking Murderer does his Neighbor slay.
Then full of Fear away the Assassin flies,
And all the Day in some close Covert lies.
Then turning Thief, by Night he comes abroad,
And with stoll'n Substance does his Shoulders load.
His guilty Joys the Adulterer delays,
And for the Evening's doubtful Twilight stays.
To pass unseen he muffles up his Head,
And steals in secret to the Harlot's Bed.
Hot with unbridled Flames, he in the Dark
Breaks Houses up, on which he set his mark
The Day before, where to assuage his Lust;
But he can only to the Darkness trust:
Before the Morn returns, he takes his Flight,
He hates the Day, and courts the welcome Night.
For if discovered, all the marks of Fear
And Consternation, in his Looks appear.
To this vile Crew you may the Pyrate add,
Who puts to Sea the Merchant to invade,
And reaps the Profit of another's Trade.
He sculks behind some Rock, or swiftly flies
From Creek to Creek, rich Vessels to surprise.
By this ungodly Course the Robber gains,
And lays up so much Wealth, that he disdains
And mocks the poor, unprofitable toil
Of those, who plant the Vine, or till the Soil.
Others as Vile, deflower a Virgin first,
And then destroy the Offspring of their Lust
Within the Mother's Womb, to hide their Shame,
And escape Reproaches that would blast their Fame.
The poor and helpless Widow they abuse,
And Reparation cruelly refuse.
Their Power and Threats the timorous Judges awe,
And to their side the Great and Mighty draw.
For if the Villains, on pretense of Wrong,
Assail the mighty, be they never so strong,
Can they against Assassins make Defense?
Whose Life is safe from secret Violence?
Though by repeated Vows they should declare,
That their Intentions inoffensive are;
And make such solemn Promises, that you
May think you're safe, because you think them true;
Yet they will wait, and all occasions watch,
The mischief they designed you, to dispatch.
These in their wicked Courses, free from fear,
Because they live unpunished, persevere.
It Is true, the Almighty sees their Insolence,
But unconcerned, no Vengeance does dispense.
The troubled Skies with Lightning grows not red,
Nor does his Thunder strike Oppressors dead.
The Eternal pours no dreadful Viols forth,
On Rebels worthy of exalted Wrath.
Among 'em no strange Plagues are sent abroad,
No Tempests Vengeance on their heads unload.
In Peace and Plenty they securely live,
And from Impunity their Pride derive.
All things to make them happy here comply,
And, as they lived, they unmolested Dye.
They to the Grave a quiet, easy Bed
In Peace, as much as others, are conveyed,
Part of the long Procession of the Dead.
With grievous Sickness they are never distressed,
Nor dye with long tormenting Pains oppressed.
Gently cut down by Fate, like Ears of Corn
When fully ripe, they to the Tomb are born.
By slow degrees they sink and wear away,
Their Death's a kind, insensible decay.
Their Streams of Life, like peaceful Rivers flow,
And when they dye, they gently melt, as Snow.
God no such marks of Wrath does on them set,
But that the Mothers may their Sons forget.
Their Bodies hang not by the public way,
To Men a Terror, and to Beasts a Prey.
But Men in Pomp their Carcasses inter,
To be a Feast for Worms, as others are.
There they enjoy profound Tranquillity,
And buried with them their Oppressions lie.
When they are Dead, the Age that next succeeds,
As quickly will forget their wicked Deeds,
As a lost Tree by Time to Atoms worn,
Or by a riving Storm to Shivers torn.
I these remarks deliberately have weighed,
And know no strong Objections can be made.
I on the Truth of this Discourse rely,
And all Opposers Arguments defy.
CHAPTER XXV.
Then Bildad answered, Why does Job delight
Thus to reflect on Wisdom Infinite?
Will thou the Almighty's Providence correct,
And charge him with Injustice, or Neglect?
As if he never did Righteousness regard,
And did the Impious, not the Just reward?
Or else as if he never did interpose,
But doubtful Chance did all Events dispose.
Should not his awful Majesty deter
Thy Arrogance, and make thee shake with fear?
His Creatures never should debating stand,
But strait obey his absolute Command.
This low Terrestrial World does not alone,
His Sovereign Rule and Jurisdiction own;
His Empire is of unconfined extent,
Over all the wide Etherial Continent;
Over all the liquid Regions of the Air,
And all the shining Islands floating there.
He Peace preserves in the bright Realms above,
And makes the Spheres in beauteous order move.
All the Seraphic, glorious Hierarchy,
The Pure and God-like People of the Sky,
Adore the depths of Providence Divine,
And to the Almighty's Will, their Wills resign.
And yet shall discontented Job debate
His Case with God, and quarrel with his Fate?
His Empire to protect, and to control
Uproar and Strife, what Troops can he enroll?
What mighty Armies can the Almighty head?
What numerous Brigades to Battle lead?
Myriads of Angels lie encampt on high,
His Household Squadrons that defend the Sky:
Sabres of Flame the Immortal Warriors weild,
And now in ^iery Chariots take the Field;
Now high in Air the Winged Battalions rise;
And glorious War hangs hovering in the Skies.
Along the inferior Air at his Command,
His must'ring Meteors Regimented stand.
Tempests of Thunder, Whirlwinds, Rain and Fire
To fight the Almighty's Battles will conspire.
All Nature at his beck, if Rebels rage,
Strait take up Arms, and on his Part engage.
Of such Extent is his Imperial Power;
With so much Ease he can his Foes devour.
Yet is his Goodness equal to his Might;
The Sun his unexhausted Sea of Light,
Lavish of Glory, does to all dispense
His chearing Beams, and fruitful Influence.
Wide as the World, God has his Table spread,
At his Expense are all his Creatures fed.
Who of his Regal Bounty does not taste?
Whose Stores, if not supplied by him, can last?
If on his Power and Goodness we depend,
And can to nothing as a Debt pretend;
We murmur and complain without a Cause,
When he his Blessings, not our Right, withdraws.
Besides our various Crimes which Heaven provoke,
Justly expose us to his wrathful stroke.
Who can before his high Tribunal stand,
Plead Innocence, and his Discharge demand?
Can Man be Clean, born of degenerate Race,
And escape the Leaven that infects the Mass?
Never a wholesome, unpolluted Stream,
From an impure, infected Fountain came.
Can a wild Vine a generous Vintage bring?
From a base Stock, can noble Branches spring?
The Constellations that adorn the Sky,
Reveal their Spots to God's All-searching Eye,
Then what foul Stains will he in Man descry?
In Man, a worthless Worm, who turns to Dust
And Putrefaction, whence he sprang at first.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Then pious Job did Bildad thus bespeak:
To cheer the Mourner, and to help the weak
Thou have a happy, masterly Address,
A charming way, that never can miss Success.
How pertinent, how clear is thy discourse,
No sullen Sorrow can resist its force.
Thy blessed Instructions, and thy grave Advice,
Can teach the Blind, and make the stupid Wise.
Displayed by thy Divine Discourse I find
A Heavenly Day irradiates my Mind.
Thou have thy point by solid Reason proved,
And like an Oracle, all doubts removed.
What knowing Spirit has thy Bosom fired,
For thou have argued, as a Man inspired?
But say to whom do thou address thy Speech?
Am I so weak, and of so short a reach,
That I must still be taught the Common Theme
Of God's Imperial Sway, and Power supreme?
I could the Almighty's wondrous Works with ease
Like you recite, as for example these.
He all the wanton Monsters formed that play,
And bound above the Bosom of the Sea;
Wild Water-Gyants, hideous Forms that reign
Lords of the vast, inhospitable Main:
A salvage Race that range the liquid Fields,
And fill with Rapine all the wavy Wilds.
All the mute Nations of the deep Abyss,
And Finny People of the Floods are his.
To hide from God its sad Inhabitants,
And dusky Realms, Hell thicker Darkness wants.
Compacted Shadows, and substantial Night
Elude the Sun's, but not the Almighty's Sight.
Death does in vain her sable Covering spread,
And in her secret Vaults lo^k up the Dead:
The Almighty's Eye does all her Spoils survey,
And no distinction knows of Night or Day.
He over the empty Space displays on high
The blue Expansion of the Northern Sky.
He hangs the ponderous Earth in liquid Air,
And his Command and Providential Care,
Are the sole Pillars that support it there.
He bids the loose and fluid Clouds sustain
Imprisoned Tempests, and suspend the Rain.
Distended with the Waters in 'em pent,
Their Wombs hang low in Air, but are not rent.
But then at his Command, successive Drops
Distill from Heaven, and crown the Farmer's Hopes.
Lest his high Throne above expression bright,
With deadly Glory should oppress our sight,
To break the dazzling Force, he draws a Skreen
Of sable Shades, and spreads his Clouds between.
He raises rocky Bounds around the Deep,
And does the raging Waves in Prison keep.
That, whilst as ordered by Alternate sway,
The Sun and Moon shall rule the Night and Day;
The Foaming Surges rolling over the Strand,
Might not a Deluge spread, and drown the Land.
The Hills and Mountains whose aspiring tops
Appear the Pillars, and unshaken props
Reer'd to sustain the Heaven's expanded Roof,
Tremble with Fear, and shake at his Reproof.
He with his mighty Power the Sea divides,
And ploughs deep Furrows in its wounded Sides.
At his Command the threatening Billows rise,
Mix Waters with the Clouds, and lave with foam the Skies.
But in a moment he corrects their Pride,
And bids the Sea repel her swelling Tide.
Uproar is hushed, the Ocean at his Frown
Shrinks in, and calls it is towering Surges down.
The trembling Waves creep softly to the Shore,
And Tempests over-awed no longer roar.
The Heavenly Spheres around in Order turned,
With clust'ring Constellations he adorned.
He the great Serpent formed, and bid him roll
His Starry Volumes round the Northern Pole.
These of his Works are part, but still I own
To us his Wonders are but little known.
To such extent who can his Reason stretch,
As his vast Power and Providence can reach?
His boundless Wisdom who can comprehend?
Who will to search the dark Abyss descend?
Who can his Wonders number, who declare
Of Energy divine the utmost Sphere?
CHAPTER XXVII.
The Pious Job here paused a while, and stayed
For their reply; but no reply was made.
Then he his grave and wise Discourse revives,
And said, as God my great Creator lives,
Who has to hear and judge my Cause denied,
And my vexed Soul with sharp Affliction tried,
While the warm blood dilates my winding Veins,
And in my Nostrils while my Breath remains;
That Breath the Almighty did himself inspire,
Gently to fan and feed the vital Fire;
No Falsehood will I mix in this debate,
Nor with perfidious Lips express Deceit.
Under the Censure of my Friends I lie
Charged with Offenses of the deepest Dye,
Oppression, Fraud, and deep Hypocrisy.
Shall I acquit their rash Censorious Tongue,
Confess the Indictment, and my Virtue wrong?
Forbid, O Heaven, that I should ever own
So black a Charge of Crimes to me unknown.
I till I Dye will steadfastly assert
The pure Intention of my upright Heart;
From this Profession will I never depart.
Conscience, whose Court of Justice is within,
Can never accuse me of delib'rate Sin.
The wicked and their ways I so detest,
That might I feed Revenge within my Breast,
And might I have permission to bestow
The greatest Curse, upon my greatest Foe,
I would desire that Foe might all his days
Delight in vicious Men, and vicious Ways.
What if the Sinner's Magazines are stored
With the rich Spoils that Ophir's Mines afford?
What if he spends his happy Days and Nights,
In softest Joys and undisturbed Delights?
Where is his Hope at last, when God shall wrest
His trembling Soul from his reluctant Breast?
Must he not then Heaven's Vengeance undergo,
Condemned to Chains, and Everlasting Woe?
This is his Fate; but often here below,
Justice o'ertakes him, though it marches slow.
And when the Day of Vengeance does appear,
The Wretch will cry, but will the Almighty hear?
If bathed in Tears Compassion he invokes,
The unrelenting Judge will multiply his Strokes.
His vain Complaints, and unregarded Prayer,
Will drive the raving Rebel to despair.
Or will he ever with Confidence apply
Himself to God, and on his Aid rely?
Will he not rather cease in his distress,
His Prayers to Heaven hereafter to address?
Do not disdain to learn, and I Will reveal,
How the just God does with the Wicked deal.
To you some secret Methods I Will detect,
By which he is pleased his Conduct to direct.
All you your selves have by Experience found,
For my Assertions there is abundant ground.
I grant that some, not all the wicked Band,
As you assert, feel God's vindictive Hand.
And this should make the proud Oppressor dread,
Lest Vengeance should assail his guilty Head.
Children he multiplies to be devoured
By lingering Famine, or the raging Sword.
Untimely Death his Offspring shall consume,
And sink them deep in black Oblivion's Womb.
His Wives well pleased to see the Tyrant's Fate,
Shall joyful Mourners on his Funeral wait.
Though he does Gold in lofty Mountains heap,
And as the dust, has Silver Treasure cheap,
Though Robes of State wrought with Sidonian Skill,
And rich embroidered Vests his Wardrobe fill;
Yet shall the Just and Upright Man divide
His precious Treasures, and his Purple Pride.
The Judge's righteous Sentence shall restore
The Wealth he wrested from the injured Poor.
His Dwelling, like the Moths, shall soon decay,
Which settles in a Garment for a Day;
But suddenly is crushed, and swept away.
Or like the Lodge, a Keeper does erect,
His Garden Fruit or Vintage to protect;
Which, when the Swain has gathered in his Store,
Is pulled as quickly down, as reer'd before.
When Heaven the Oppressor shall of Life bereave,
The Wretch no Funeral Honors shall receive.
His cursed Corpse exposed to open Day,
Shall lie to ravening Beasts and Birds a Prey.
While one with open Eyes can look around,
Heaven shall the Man, his Race, and Name confound.
A dreadful Inundation of Distress,
And Woes like thronging Waves, his Soul shall press.
An unexpected Storm of Wrath shall rise,
And in the Night, the careless Man surprise.
An Eastern Whirlwind shall his Palace tear,
Catch up, and with its rapid Eddy bear
The Oppressor far away through Wilds of Air.
God shall his fatal Darts against him throw,
Nor will he spare him, when involved in Woe.
The miserable Man for Mercy cries,
In vain he weeps, and prays, in vain he flys.
His Neighbors round shall his just fall deride,
Applauding Heaven, that thus corrects his Pride.
I always thought the righteous God, at last
Would on the wicked sure Destruction cast;
Nay, some his Wrath does in their blooming blast:
But taught by observation, I assert,
That he is pleased to let the greater part,
In Peace and Splendor pass their happy years,
And long their day of Punishment defers.
Whilst often the Just that serve and love their God,
Bewail their Wounds inflicted by his Rod.
This puzzling Conduct, these mysterious ways
Create my Trouble, and my Wonder raise.
But you, because your Reason cannot unty
The hard perplexing Knot, the Fact deny.
As if you thought your narrow Wit and Sense,
Could reach the un^athom'd Depths of Providence.
In things below your Wisdom may appear,
But these are Heights that far surmount your Sphere.
CHAPTER XXVIII
Adventurous Man may with successful pains,
Dissect the Ground, trace all the shining Veins
Of Silver Oar, and wrest with labor forth
Its golden Entrails from the embowel'd Earth.
The sweaty Smelter finds a proper place,
Where from the Dross to purge the precious Mass.
Men dig out pondrous Iron from the Mine,
And Molten Copper in the Flames refine.
The Miner ^earches all the Seats beneath,
Gloomy and lonesome, as the Shades of Death.
Where Nature far withdrawn from humane sight,
To mould and shape her Min'rals does delight.
To fashion precious Stones with curious Art,
And hardness due to Metals does impart.
They all the Earth's dark Bowels open lay,
And make the Central Shades acquainted with the Day.
But often subterranean Floods invade
The Miner's Caves, through which he cannot wade.
With wondrous Toil the Men their Works maintain,
And from the Mine the flowing Deluge drain.
While fruitful Trees and bending Ears of Corn
Laden with Bread, the Earth above adorn;
With sparkling Gems its inward Parts are stored,
And fatty Minerals full of Fire afford.
Here beauteous Saphirs far remote from Day,
Do a blue Heaven midst common Stones display.
Here Nature scatters with a lavish hand,
And with the Rubbish mingles golden Sand.
No Fowl of Heaven, no not the Vulture's Eye
Famed for quick Sight, did ever these Seats descry.
Those Sons of Pride the Lions never found
These Caves, and dark Recesses under ground.
To Beasts and Birds these Regions are unknown,
By Men discovered, and by Men alone:
By Men who cut through hardest Rocks their way,
Dig through the Hills, and Mountains level lay;
That the Metallic Wealth may be revealed,
Which in their massy Bowels lies concealed.
If rising Springs overflow the precious Vein,
Men fashion Channels in the Rocks to drain,
The invading Flood, till they their Treasure gain.
Thus into Nature's Secrets Men descend,
And may to Knowledge in her Works pretend;
But who can Heaven's deep Counsels comprehend?
Who can inform the Enquirer, who can tell
Where Skill Divine, and Heavenly Wisdom dwell?
For senseless Man its value does not know,
It Is never found midst Mortals here below.
The Land exclaims aloud, I am not blessed
To be the abode of this Celestial Guest.
The Sea and all its noisy Waves, declare,
In vain you seek the sacred Stranger here.
The Infernal Deep cries with a hollow Sound,
Here Is no Apartment for her under ground.
The unvaluable Blessing cannot be bought,
With all the golden Wealth from Ophir brought.
He that has Wisdom Rubies will despise,
And Pearl, if tendered as an equal Price.
Saphires and Diamonds, with vast labor sought,
The Topaz fetched from Countries far remote;
Which worn by mighty Kings, attract regard,
Are worthless Toys, with this bright Gem compared.
Who can instruct us then whence Wisdom flows?
And who the place of Understanding knows:
Since after strict enquiry we despair
To find it in the Land, the Sea, or Air?
Death and Destruction cry, midst all our Slaves
We never saw Wisdom; to our secret Caves
We the Celestial Stranger never conveyed,
Nor hid her in our solitary Shade.
We only are acquainted with her Name,
Have only heard of her Immortal Fame.
Only the Great All-penetrating God
Knows his own Offspring, Wisdom's blessed abode.
For he surveys from Heaven's bright Crystal brow,
The vast expanded Universe below;
The spacious liquid Vales of Sky and Air,
And all his Worlds, that hang in order there.
The Bounds of Nature, Chaos, and old Night,
Limit the Sun's, but not its Maker's Sight:
He has in Prospect this Terrestrial Isle,
And sees the extremest Bound'rys of its Soil.
He forms the various Meteors which appear
Through the low Regions of the Atmosphere.
He deals out to the Winds their proper weight,
Gives them their Wings, and then directs their Flight*
He measures out the drops with wondrous Skill,
Which the black Clouds his floating Bottles fill.
When he decreed the manner of the Rain,
And did the Lightning's crooked Path ordain;
When he appointed Nature's course and way,
And gave command that thence she should not stray;
Then Wisdom he beheld, he searched with care
His own All-seeing Mind, and found it there.
He often reflected on the sacred Guest,
Which had her sixth abode within his Breast,
And in his Works her God-like Form expressed.
But then to Man, to whom he had denied
The perfect Knowledge of his Ways, he cried,
The Fear of God is Wisdom, to depart
From Evil, this is Science, this is Art.
Attempt to know no more than God reveals,
Search not the Secrets which his Breast conceals.
In this Abyss trust not thy venurous Oar,
Would thou be safe, then keep upon the Shore,
And from afar this awful Deep adore.
Thy Happiness in being Righteous lies,
Be Good, and in Perfection thou art wise.
Justly thou may despise the boastful Schools,
And learned Cant of grave, disputing Fools.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Moreover Job continued thus, and said:
O that the happy Days might be restored,
When gracious Aid the Almighty did afford.
When his Celestial Lamp shone over my Head,
And with its Light directed me to tread
In lonesome Paths, with horrid Darkness spread.
When secret Blessings did my Youth attend,
And Guardian Providence my House defend.
When all my Children round me stood, and God
Did with his Presence bless my safe abode.
With Teats distended with their milky store,
Such numerous lowing Herds before my door
Their painful Burden to unload, did meet,
That we with Butter might have washed our Feet.
Besides the Harvest of my richer Soil,
Even Rocks themselves poured Rivers out of Oil.
When through the Streets I marched in Princely State,
To fit in Judgment in the City Gate;
The younger Men, soon as my Face they saw,
Drew back through Fear, or reverential Awe.
The Aged Fathers as I past along,
Stood up, and bowed amidst the gazing throng.
Princes and Lords, of ancient noble Blood,
To show Regard, before me silent stood.
The Ear that heard me did the Speaker bless,
The Eye that saw me, did its Joy confess.
Because the Oppressor's Rage I did withstand,
And wrested Suff'rers from his griping hand.
The Poor and Helpless when almost devoured,
Rescued by me, on me their Blessings poured.
A Father's Place to Orphans I supplied,
And made the Widow joyful, as a Bride.
With Righteousness and Mercy clothed I ^ate,
Awful, as dressed in splendid Robes of State.
And spotless Justice won me more esteem,
Then a great Monarch's Guards or Diadem.
Refreshed by me, the Naked, Blind and Lame,
Through ringing Streets my Bounty did proclaim.
I with Paternal Bowels fed the Poor,
No needy Wretch went Hungry from my Door.
Those Frauds and Injurys, of which the Oppressed
Durst not complain, I sought out and redrest.
My righteous Hand broke fierce Oppressor's Jaws,
And of their Spoil disseiz'd their bloody Paws.
I now have built, said I, my lofty Nest
Where I Will repose, and feed on endless Rest.
My Days shall all be prosperous, and increase,
Till they exceed the Sands around the Seas.
With neighboring Streams below my Root was fed,
And from above kind Heaven by Night did spread
Refreshing Dews over all my branching Head.
I then was strong, as in my youthful Bloom,
And with new Vigor did my Bow assume.
The attentive Throng while I in Judgment sat
Profoundly Silent, did around me wait.
Like clust'ring Bees upon my Lips they hung,
And sucked the Words, like Honey from my Tongue.
To my Discourses no reply was made,
My Dictates were, as Oracles obeyed.
My Speech upon them dropped like Summer Rai^,
That falls from Heaven upon the thirsty Plain.
If I my solemn Air put off, if ever
I kind and condescending did appear,
The People scarcely could believe me so,
Nor did they rude, or too Familiar grow*
They no ill use of those my Favors made,
But still a due Respect and Reverence paid.
What way to follow I the Enquirer told,
And all Men's doubtful Questions did unfold.
I sat as Chief, while they around did stand,
My Looks and Language did their Minds command.
When I appeared, they did such Joy express,
As shouting Armies do, when in distress
They see their General come, whose Presence gives
Their Breasts new Courage, and their Hopes revives.
CHAPTER XXX
Now Providence Divine has changed my State,
Such are my Wants, and such my Woes of late,
That those young Men my Poverty deride,
To whose entreating Fathers I denied
The Privilege my numerous Herds to keep,
Or with my Dogs to sit and guard my Sheep.
For they were grown, their Manly Vigor spent
With Vice and Age, so Weak and Impotent;
They were no more for useful Labor fit,
But wandered Hoary Beggars through the Street:
Oppressed with Want and Famine, till at last,
They were, like Thieves, from every City chased.
Trembling with fear, to shun their Neighbor's sight,
To solitary Woods they took their Flight,
Roam'd over the Plains by Day, and skulk'd in Hills by Night.
In thorny Dens and rocky Caves they lay,
To Lions Hunger, or their own, a Prey.
Of Juniper they Eat the bitter Root,
Unsavory Herbs, and wild, unwholesome Fruit.
To ease their Hunger with Supplys of Food,
They made the Mountains bare, and stripped the Wood.
Brambles and Thorny Branches they devour,
Beneath whose shelter they had lodged before.
A Stock so Vile, a Progeny so base,
Never brought on Humane Nature more disgrace,
Never was a Kingdom cursed with such a Race.
Yet to their Sons I am a standing Jest;
So low is Job, so Poor, and so Oppressed.
What Contumelious Insults have I born
From these vile Men, what unexampled Scorn?
With bitter Scoffs they suffering Job revile,
And pass me by with a disdainful Smile.
They have me in Contempt, abhor my sight,
And as from one Infected, take their Flight.
They dare affront, and mock me to my Face,
Since God is pleased on Job to bring disgrace,
And to afflict me does his Power engage,
They too unbridle all their savage Rage.
Young Striplings, poor afflicted Job despise,
And to obstruct my way, against me rise.
No Methods, no Devices they neglect,
Which likely seem my Ruin to effect.
My Righteous Actions they perversely wrest,
And by their Taunts my Anguish is increast.
Still to invent new Slanders they proceed,
And are so fruitful, they no Helper need.
On me they come, as conquering Soldiers rush
Into a Town, or as a mighty Flush
Of rapid Waters, which have broken down
The opposing Banks, and then the Valley drown.
Like pressing Waves their Terrors on me roll,
And as a Storm my Foes pursue my Soul.
My Joy and Peace dissolve and melt away,
As morning Mists before the rising Day.
And now my Soul is grieved, my Flesh diseased,
And dismal Woes have me their Prisoner seized.
All Night I lie extended on a Rack,
My Bones are tortured, and my Sinews crack.
The Putrefaction from my running Boils,
In loathsome manner all my Vest defiles:
Close to my Sores it sticks, as to my Throat,
The narrow Collar of my seamless Coat.
Me deep in Mire God has in Anger spurned,
Even while alive, I seem to Ashes turned.
I cry unto thee, but am never heard,
I make my Moan, but does the Lord regard?
The gracious God is grown to me severe,
Quite changed his very Nature does appear.
His mighty Hand, from which I hoped Relief,
Is now extended to augment my Grief.
Like Chaff I Am caught up by the Wind, and tossed,
And this and that way driven, till I have lost
My Flesh and Substance, which I once could boast.
I find the Tomb must quickly me receive,
The general Rendezvous of all that live.
His Hand the Almighty will not stretch to save
A Wretch, that seems already in the Grave.
Not all the Cries that by my Friends are sent
To Heaven, my sure Destruction shall prevent.
Did not my Soul for Men in Trouble mourn,
Did not my moving Bowels in me turn,
And over the Poor touched with Compassion yern?
Yet (fatal Disappointment!) fore Distress
Came, when I most expected Joy and Peace.
While I was waiting for the cheerful Light,
Darkness overspread me, and a dismal Night.
My Soul in restless Agonys of Grief
Tormented lay, and hopeless of Relief.
So unawares was my Affliction sent,
The sudden Stroke did quick-ey'd Fear prevent.
To solitary Seats I love to creep,
And dark Recesses, where I groan and weep.
To ancient, lonesome Ruins I repair,
And mossy Heaps, in damp, unwholesome Air;
A Desolation wild, as my Despair.
There I so long have cried, and made my moan,
That to the salvage Beasts my Story's known.
Well pleased, with Owls and Ravens I converse,
And the sad Series of my Woes rehearse.
They Scriech and Croak, and from ill-boding Throats,
To my sad Grief return becoming Notes.
By Night midst Wolves I well acquainted sit,
Howling Companions, for my Sorrow fit.
Serpents my hissing Friends, with me abide,
And with my Brother Dragons I reside.
I am with Horror now familiar grown,
To all the Terrors of the Desert known,
And friendly Satyrs take me for their own.
My Bones quite dried by scorching Heat within,
Start out, and break my black and withered Skin.
I now no more my tuneful Harp employ,
Sad Tears and Cries succeed my banished Joy.
No longer to the Organ I rejoice,
I Have for the Mourner's changed the Singer's Voice.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Yet though my Wants and Pains are so extreme,
None can my Life of heinous Sin condemn.
So far from that, I have with care suppressed
Sin's first Conception struggling in my Breast.
I did the Spark, as soon as kindled, tame,
Before it blazed, and spread resistless Flame.
I with my Eyes, whose Objects often inspire
The Heart with wild, unquenchable Desire,
A sacred League did make, that they should never
Look on forbidden Fruit, though wondrous fair.
That they on Beauty should not gazing stay,
Nor on the enchanting Brink of Ruin play.
Besides my inward Thoughts I did restrain,
They never did wanton Objects entertain.
My modest Fancy never had leave to rove,
To fetch in Fuel for unlawful Love.
I knew what Portion did the Unclean attend,
What Vengeance on them would from Heaven descend,
And of their sweet Delights I saw the bitter End.
Distress and Ruin on the Wicked wait,
This is their sad, inevitable Fate.
Does not the Almighty with his watchful Eye
Mark all my Steps, and all my Paths descry?
If I unrighteous ways did ever applaud,
If I grew rich by Violence or Fraud,
Let Heaven my Head with heavy Vengeance load.
Me in a Balance weight, that God may see
Convincing Proof of my Integrity.
If my unrighteous Feet did from the way
Of sacred Truth and Justice ever stray;
If ever tempted by a greedy Eye
In all the Walks of Life I trod awry;
Or if Clandestine Bribes, or sordid gain
My avaricious Hand did ever stain;
Then let Invaders over my Fences leap,
And when I sow, let them the Harvest reap.
Let the rich Offspring which my Fields produce,
By Force be taken for another's use.
If any Woman's Charms did ever move
My Heart to entertain Adulterous Love;
If ever I skulk'd before my Neighbor's Gate,
Or for unchaste Embraces lay in wait:
Then make my Wife a Captive, or by Night
Let a proud Stranger rob me of my Right.
For of Adult'ry I will ever assert,
Death is the due Commensurate desert.
It is a secret and consuming Fire,
That would devour the Substance I acquire.
Of all my numerous Servants none complained
That I oppressed them, or their Right detained.
I ever gave them, when I heard their Cause,
Against my self, the advantage of the Laws.
Else if I stood before the Throne on high
Of God my Heavenly Master, what reply,
To justify my Conduct, could I make?
To escape his Wrath, what method could I take?
Did not his Hand me and my Servant Frame?
Is not the Clay alike, the Work the same?
We both alike Divine Impressions bear,
And both alike our Maker's Image wear.
If then, not for his own, yet I should take
Compassion on him, for his Maker's sake.
If Poor Men's Cries did not with me prevail,
If ever I caused the Widows Hopes to fail;
If I alone devoured Luxurious Meat,
And did not make the hungry Orphans eat;
Poor Orphans, who even as my Children, were
Up from my Infancy my tender care.
If ever I saw poor Wretches naked lie,
And did for want of Clothing, let them dye;
If their lean Loins warmed with my woolly Fleece,
Did not my Bounty and Compassion bless;
If I against an Orphan raised my hand,
When I had power the Judges to command;
Then let my Arm (for Punishment I call)
Rot from the Joint, and from my Shoulder fall.
For I the sure and swift Destruction feared,
Which the great Judge for Rebels has prepared;
His awful Power and Glory me detered.
I never placed the Strength of my Abode
In high-rais'd Works, or made my Gold my God.
Never my increasing Wealth and prosperous Fate,
Did Pride, or unbecoming Joy create.
When I beheld the glorious Sun arise,
And saw the Moon's full Face adorn the Skies;
My yielding Heart was never enticed away,
Nor did I kiss my hand, and sacred Worship pay.
If I had once the Creature thus adored,
Abjured my Faith, renounced my Sovereign Lord,
I should have justly felt the Judge's Sword.
I was so little to Revenge inclined,
I wished my Foe no mischief in my Mind.
No secret Pleasure felt, or inward Joy,
When God was pleased the Rebel to destroy.
I never designed him Harm, never cursed his Name,
Nor ever insulted, when his Ruin came.
Though he expressed such Cruelty and Spite,
And so provoked me in my Servants sight;
That they enraged, did all demand his Blood,
And would have Eat his very Flesh for Food.
I to my House the Stranger did invite,
Who in the Streets must else have past the Night.
The weary Trav'ller was my welcome Guest;
I cheered his Heart with Wine, his Limbs with Oil and Rest*
I never with anxious care suppressed my Sin,
Nor, as the Hypocrite, concealed my fault within.
I small concern for Man's Displeasure showed,
Nor swerved from Truth to court the Multitude.
In a just Cause I boldly did appear,
My Silence never betrayed my secret Fear.
O, that the strictest Scrutiny were made,
That all my Scenes of Life were open laid.
Let my Accusers my Indictment draw,
And prosecute their Charge by course of Law:
Then by the Almighty let my Cause be heard,
And let me be condemned, if I have erred.
My written Process would my Pride create,
As much as Royal Crowns, or Robes of State.
I would as boldly to my Trial go,
As Valiant Generals march to meet the Foe.
If ever my unpurchas'd Lands complained,
That I by Force or Fraud Possession gained:
If ever I another's Acres tilled,
Ever my House with his Harvest filled,
Or to possess his Goods my Neighbor killed:
Let Thistles fill my Fields, instead of Wheat,
And all my Labor and my Hopes defeat.
Instead of Barley, let my Land produce
Cockle of none, or Weeds of noxious use.
CHAPTER XXXII.
When the three Men who pious Job arraigned,
And their high Charge in long replys maintained,
Perceived him firmly fixed in his Defense,
And resolute to clear his Innocence;
They hopeless of Success from this debate,
Let fall the Argument, and silent sat.
Then a young Man, who as a faithful Friend,
When the three Sages came, did Job attend,
And who attention gave, and duly weighed
What for their Cause on either side was said,
Only in years inferior to the rest,
Felt a just Anger kindled in his Breast.
His Name was Elibu, in Blood allied
To faithful Abram by the Brother's side.
Against good Job did his Displeasure rise,
Because in all his long and sharp replies
He had less warmth, and less Concernment shown
For his great Maker's Honor, than his own:
Nor did the wise young Man less Passion feel
Against the rash, uncharitable Zeal
Of Job's Accusers, who could not defend
Their groundless Charge against their suffering Friend.
Yet did he long discreetly moderate
His struggling Passion, and attentive wait
Till the grave Men had finished their Debate.
But when he saw they had their Treasures spent,
And none resumed their baffled Argument;
Unable to forbear, he Silence broke,
And Job's severe Accusers thus bespoke.
Your Wisdom which profoundly I revered,
From giving my Opinion me deterred.
Awed by your Fame, and Age, and Eloquence,
I never yet have interposed my Sense.
For one so young, I judged it rather meet
To sit a modest Learner at the Feet
Of Men of such Experience, than to rise
To dictate to the Grave, and teach the Wise.
But now, convinced of my Mistake, I find
That Man, though gray with years, continues blind,
Unless Celestial Light irradiates his Mind.
Wisdom Divine is never to be acquired,
Unless the Man be from above inspired.
It Is not the sure possession of the Great,
Nor does it still adorn the Teacher's Seat.
Many are in acquiring Knowledge slow,
Nor by experience will they Wiser grow.
Therefore Attention give, and I Will declare
What in this great Affair, my Notions are.
Let none condemn me, that I speak at last,
I Have interrupted no Discourses past.
Your Arguments I Have weighed, which you pretend,
Prove your Indictment brought against your Friend*
But after all, if I may freely speak,
To gain your Cause, your Reasons are too weak.
You never could in this prolix Dispute,
Make good your Charge, or Job's Defense confute.
In vain you say, that you will silent stand,
And leave him wholly to the Allmighty's Hand;
Hoping his Terrors will your Friend subdue,
Which your weak Arguments can never do.
Weapons so feeble I disdain to weild,
When to dispute with Job I take the Field.
To me he never did his Discourse direct,
Nor will I use your Words his Error to correct.
To all around I justly may complain,
That for Instruction I have staid in vain.
You are exhausted, and confounded left,
Silent you stand, as if of Speech bereft.
Therefore, as I have told you, I will give
My Judgment, and this great Debate revive.
While I my Lips by Violence restrain,
My fullness gives unsufferable Pain.
My struggling Thoughts which in my Bosom pent,
Like new pressed Wines within the Vate, ferment,
Will make me burst, unless they find a Vent.
To ease my self I am compelled to speak,
Full, working Vessels, if not opened, break.
While I attempt your Errors to correct,
I will not Persons, but the Cause respect.
Quite uninstructed in the F^atterer's ways,
I cannot sooth you with excessive Praise.
I cannot ^awn, and your Admirer seem,
To gain your Approbation and Esteem.
Should I such vile unworthy Arts employ,
Me my Creator would in Wrath destroy.
CHAPTER XXXIII
And sure, O Job, this Preface I have made,
Suffices thy Attention to persuade.
To my discourse afford a patient Ear,
I am prepared to speak, if thou art so to hear.
And be assured whatever I impart,
Shall be the inward Language of my Heart.
Such plain and clear Instruction I will give,
That thou with Ease my meaning shall receive.
And first consider well, our Structure came
From the same Model, and our Clay's the same.
With Breath the Almighty did my Breast inspire,
And kindled in my Veins the Vital Fire.
Therefore, if thou thy Cause wilt now defend,
Thou only with thy Equal shall contend.
To plead with God thou rashly did demand,
First answer me, I in his Place will stand.
Thou need not thy Brother-Creature fear,
I cannot in dreadful Majesty appear.
I bring no Terrors with me to affright;
No Force, but Reason's clear, convincing Light.
I Will not accuse thee, as thy Friends have done,
Of secret Errors, and of Crimes unknown.
None but the Almighty's all-observing Eye,
The Heart his proper Empire can descry.
I shall assault thee with no other Force,
Then what I borrow from thy own Discourse.
Have I not heard thee often in thy Defense,
Boldly assert thy spotless Innocence.
Have thou not said, thy Justice to maintain,
"My Heart is pure, my Hands are free from stain.
He, who I hoped, would mitigate my Woe,
On slight pretenses is become my Foe.
He seeks occasions to repeat his Strokes,
And every slight Offense his Wrath provokes.
In Prison me his Captive he detains,
And loads my fettered Feet with ponderous Chains.
And yet his watchful Guards around me stay,
Lest I should loose my Bonds, and break away."
By such absurd and wild Complaints as these,
Impatient of thy Grief thou seek Ease.
Now though thy inward Faults I cannot detect,
Nor like thy Friends uncertain Crimes object.
Yet here, O Job, thy rashness does appear,
Here thy presumptuous Arrogance is clear.
For can a Man, a Worm, a silly Wight,
Removed from God at distance infinite;
Can such a worthless, wretched Creature dare,
Himself, with him that gave him Breath, compare?
Why do thou then engage in this dispute,
Audacious Man, would thou thy God confute?
Will he his secret Counsels open lay,
And his mysterious Providence display?
Will he be summoned to his Creature's Bar,
The grounds of his Transactions to declare?
Will ever the Almighty Sovereign condescend,
The Conduct of his Empire to defend,
A peevish Creature's Error to amend?
Will he, because he does our Censure fear,
Set forth his Justice, and his Prudence clear,
And let the hidden Springs of Government appear?
The Almighty's Works, thou should have understood,
Because they are his, are therefore Just and Good.
Where shallow Reason cannot the grounds discern
Of Providence, it should submission learn.
Not that our Knowledge of his Works and Ways,
Does ever our kind Creator's Envy raise;
For he by various ways does Knowledge give,
And more than Man is willing to receive.
Sometimes in Dreams and Visions of the Night,
He to our Minds conveys instructive Light.
When a deep Sleep does from our Breasts exclude
The Cares and Business which by Day intrude:
Or when a short Repose we seek to take,
And slumbring lie half sleeping, half awake;
With a still Voice he whispers to the Ear,
Or to the Eye, in Scenes distinct and clear,
He makes an Airy Imagery appear.
Thus he reveals his Will, and leaves behind,
Divine Instructions printed on the Mind.
But the Celestial Teacher does not show,
The Reasons of his Conduct here below.
This Heavenly Converse is not with intent,
TO expose the Secrets of his Government.
God by his gracious Revelations tries,
Rather to make his Creature Good, than Wise:
From evil Paths to turn his erring Feet,
And make him humbly to his God submit.
Who thus preserves the Man, if he obeys
God's Admonitions, from pernicious Ways:
And from those Judgments does his Life defend,
Which on his Head were ready to descend.
O^t does the Almighty to the Mind convey,
Divine Instruction by a sharper way.
Sickness and Pain at his Command assail
The strongest Man, and in the Assault prevail.
Even he who prospers in his youthful Pride,
And feels within a vigorous, vital Tide;
When ever the Infection through his Veins is spread,
Shall groaning lie extended on his Bed.
The secret Poison will his Beauty blast,
Unbrace his Sinews, and his Vigor wast.
He Will languish, and abhor the offensive sight
Of those rich Meats, that were his great delight.
He who before had such a beauteous Air,
And pampered with his Ease, seemed plump and fair,
Does all his Friends (amazing Change!) surprise
With pale, lean Cheeks, and ghastly, hollow Eyes.
His Bones, a horrid Sight! start through his Skin,
Which lay before in Flesh and Fat unseen.
His throbbing Heart in Pain and Labor beats,
And Life pursued through every Vein, retreats.
His Friends believe each gasp will end his Toil,
And Death stands ready to possess her Spoil.
If then a Man, who does the rest outshine
In sacred Knowledge, and in Gifts Divine,
Some rare and God-like Messenger be sent
To teach the Sick, and bring him to repent;
If by his Words the dying Person's Mind
Is formed to Virtue, and to Heaven inclined;
Then he with due Compassion touched, shall pray
That God his Mercy would extend, and say,
In Pity, Lord, to spare his Life consent,
Chastise, but not destroy a Penitent.
Let it suffice, that thou did him Correct,
And that thy Rod has wrought its due effect.
Then presently the Almighty shall restore
The Health and Ease, which he enjoyed before.
He in his Blood reviving Heat shall find,
Renewed as well in Body, as in Mind.
Again shall all his Bones be clothed with Flesh,
That like a Child's looks beautifully fresh.
He shall as bold and vigorous become,
As when he flourished in his youthful Bloom:
When he, his Veins swollen with a noble Tide,
Did in the fullness of his Strength confide.
His humble Prayer shall be to Heaven addressed,
And God well-pleased, shall grant him his request.
He shall the House of God approach with Joy,
And his glad Lips in Songs of Praise employ.
The Almighty reconciled, shall then Acquit,
And to his Favor this Poor Man admit.
Then to his Neighbors round him he will confess
His Errors past, and thus himself express.
Against the Almighty I have sinned, and he
For my Offense has justly punished me.
To my desert he suited a Reward,
But has my Life in great Compassion spared.
He kindly interposed his Hand, to save
A helpless Creature, sinking to the Grave.
And more, is pleased reviving Hopes to give,
That I again in Wealth and Joy shall live.
Therefore, let all his wondrous Goodness praise*
That finds to admonish Man so many ways.
To turn him from the evil Paths, that led
His Feet so near the Chambers of the Dead.
To raise him from the Grave to live in Peace,
And see his Riches and his Friends increase.
Mark well, O Job, for this is thy concern,
And I Will instruct thee on, if I discern
Thou art disposed attentively to learn.
Or if what I advance thou can deny,
And to the Reasons I have urged reply;
A speedy Answer to my Reasons give,
Before the important Subject I revive.
For it is my ardent Wish thou should appear
From every Crime, and every Error, clear.
But if thou think my Words have weight and force,
Continue to attend to my Discourse.
CHAPTER XXXIV
After a pause, Job making no reply,
The wise young Man proceeded thus: Should I
Presume to judge alone in such a Cause,
I should receive Contempt, and not Applause:
Wherefore to you who Knowledge have acquired,
Who are as Men of mighty Reach admired:
To all the Wise among you I appeal;
For Truth to you her Secrets will reveal.
As by the Palate various Meats are tried,
So does the Mind what is true or false decide.
Let us a strict Examination make,
That we in judging may right Measures take.
Let us the matter carefully debate,
Let us the weighty Subject justly state.
For Job asserts his Innocence, and says,
"My Heart is pure, and Righteous are my Ways.
Yet God in my Affliction takes Delight,
And tho I pray, denis to do me Right.
Evasions I Will not use in my Defense,
Nor shall a Lie support my Innocence.
I must assert, I have not Justice found,
Mine, though a fatal, is a causless Wound."
A Man, like Job, say, have you ever known
So Arrogant, and so Licentious grown?
One, who instead of honoring his God,
And humbly suffering his Chastising Rod,
Justice Divine presumptuously arralgns,
And of his Wrongs received from Heaven, complains?
Who boldly does contemptuous Language vent
Against the Almighty, and his Government.
Who joins himself with the Irreligious Crew,
And speaks of God, just as the Wicked do.
He seems this impious Doctrine to defend,
That though a Man should all his Days contend
To please his God, yet should he nothing gain;
And therefore all Religion is in vain.
Ye Wise, to whom I first my self addressed,
At this, what Passions rise within your Breast?
Say, do not you such impious thoughts detest?
Can God the sacred Rules of Right transgress,
God who does all things in himself possess?
He by his full and rich Sufficiency,
Is from Temptation to Injustice free.
He on his Independent Throne secure,
No favor courts, and dreads no greater Power.
The Almighty so much weakness never betrays,
But deals with Man according to his Ways.
Never is the bold obdurate Sinner spared,
Nor does the Righteous miss a just Reward.
Sure none can censure me when I assert,
Our great Creator cannot Right pervert.
Who shall of Fraud or Violence condemn
Nature's Despotic Lord, and Judge supreme?
Is there a Being of superior Sway,
Whose Laws oblige the Almighty to obey?
For which of all his Kingdoms does he Homage pay?
With his great Power what Prince does him entrust,
Whose Frowns should him incline to be unjust?
He that with all Perfections does abound,
He must with perfect Justice too be crowned.
His Mind without a Stain shines pure and bright,
No Spot appears in uncreated Light.
He who is Lord of all can injure none,
Whatever he takes, he but resumes his own.
All Beings are the Creatures of his Power,
And only while he pleases, they endure.
Should he recall the Breath and Vital Fire,
With which at first he did our Breasts inspire,
Mankind would perish, and to Common Dust
Would strait return, from whence they came at first.
If thou art Wise these Observations mind,
And well attend to what is yet behind.
The God from whom that Truth and Justice flow,
Which we observe in Kings that Rule below;
He who with Power does Potentates entrust
Only for Good, can he be thought unjust?
Should we Terrestrial Kings as Tyrants blame,
Their Wrath would show how they abhor the Name.
If to inferior Rulers we object
That they in judging Law and Right neglect;
Would they the opprobrious Language tamely bear?
When thus provoked, would they the Offender spare?
How impious then is that envenomed Tongue,
That dares the Almighty charge with doing wrong?
By him great Conqu'rors are esteemed no more
Than Captives, nor the Wealthy than the Poor.
All Men before him stand on equal ground;
There Kings and Slaves are undistinguished found.
On all alike he executes his Laws,
And Judges not the Person, but the Cause.
The High and Low, the Rich and Needy are
Alike his Creatures, and alike his Care.
Can he be over^aw'd? will he to make
Unjust Decrees, a Bribe in secret take?
Will he the Power of mighty Monarchs dread?
His Arm can in a moment strike 'em dead.
He can affright whole Nations, and destroy
Great Empires, when they settled Peace enjoy.
When a proud Prince is ripe for Vengeance grown,
Though God by humane means often pulls him down,
Yet he without them can his Foe dethrone.
For Powers unseen descending through the Air,
Shall far away the trembling Tyrant bear.
His vast and wide Creation God surveys,
Views all his Subjects, and remarks their ways.
He sees our Thoughts first rising in the Mind,
Knows what we do, and how we are inclined.
Therefore the Almighty cannot through mistake,
Or ignorance, a wrong Decision make.
A Judge that cannot err, unbiased, free
From Hopes and Fears, cannot make an ill Decree.
Evasive Arts in vain the Wicked use,
Their Crimes in vain they labor to excuse.
No Mist before the Almighty's Eye can dwell,
Whose piercing Beams will blackest Shades dispel,
Shades from the dark and deepest Caves of Hell.
Therefore as God will never our Guilt enlarge,
Nor on us Crimes we never committed charge;
So when for Judgment he appoints a day,
He Will the Judicial Sentence not delay,
To hear what Man, for his excuse can say.
He calls no Witness, no Enquiry needs,
But strait to Condemnation he proceeds.
He breaks the Mighty, pulls the Tyrant down,
And raises others to the vacant Throne.
These wrathful Strokes inflicted justly, show.
He does the Offenses and the Offender know.
On these he doubles his avenging blows,
And marks them out as Heaven's notorious Foes.
The Wretches are exposed to public sight,
Objects of Vengeance others to affright.
Because they hated Virtue's Heavenly way,
And would not God's most equal Laws obey:
But crushed the Needy with Tyrannic Pride,
Whilst humbly they to Heaven for Justice cried.
And when such poor, afflicted Creatures cry,
The God of Mercy will not help deny.
At last the Almighty will proud Kings dethrone,
Beneath whose Yoke the ruined People groan.
Though they would Pious seem, and Zeal pretend
For Public Good, Destruction is their end.
Lest their Examples which Contagious are,
Should by degrees the Peoples Minds ensnare.
Therefore let all in Misery and Pain
Suspect themselves, and not of God complain.
Let them to God such words as these address,
"Just are my Sufferings, freely I confess.
Nor will I now commit a fresh Offense
By pleading at thy Bar my Innocence.
Teach me thy Will, my Ignorance instruct,
And through the Paths of Life my Feet conduct.
Before my Eyes thy Heavenly Light display,
Which may both cheer, and guide me in my way.
Forgive my Sin, my inward Peace restore,
Have I offended, I Will offend no more."
Say, Job, did thou in such an humble way,
Ever due Submission to the Almighty pay?
If thou this wholesome Counsel do despise,
Be sure thy stubborn Folly he will chastise.
Job may the method I propose refuse,
Which I, were I in his Distress, would choose.
Tell therefore, Job, what thy Opinions are,
Or let Judicious Men their Sense declare,
For I such Judges ask in this Affair.
To me, as impious Job's Discourses sound,
And with egregious Errors they abound.
He argues on a Capital mistake,
That does the Pillars of Religion shake.
Therefore that he may yet be farther tried,
I wish his sharp Affliction may abide;
Till he retract his Words, which God arraign,
Till he no more of Providence complain.
Else to the past he will fresh Rebellion add,
And justify what he has rashly said.
He will applaud his Wisdom, and relate,
That he the Conquest won in this Debate.
Hardened in Folly he will his Crimes repeat,
And Heaven with more indecent Language treat.
CHAPTER XXXV.
He paused: and Job not answering, Elihu
Did thus the important Argument pursue.
To the uncorrupted Judge within thy Breast
Thy Conscience I appeal* will that attest
That thou believ'st what thou have boldly said,
That Job does God in Righteousness exceed?
To any other meaning who can wrest
These Irreligious Words by thee expressed?
"Does ever God the least concernment show
Whether I Am Just and Innocent, or no?
What Profit shall I reap by being so?"
I will a short, but a full answer give
To thee, and those that thus of God believe.
Then up to Heaven cast thy admiring Eyes,
View the bright Orbs, and Clouds, and distant Skies.
High as they are, they are by the Almighty's Throne
In height, as much as thou by them, outdone.
Therefore, O Job, the most atrocious Crime
Thou dare commit, can never injure him.
Nor can his perfect Happiness be less,
Should thou grown bold, and hard in Wickedness,
By multiplied Affronts thy Hate of God express.
Nor can he ever the least advantage reap,
Should thou revere him, and his Precepts keep.
But do not thence this false Conclusion draw,
It Is therefore fruitless to obey his Law.
Thee and thy Sons thy Goodness will avail,
And Heavenly Blessings on thy House entail.
And thy Injustice and Impiety,
Though not to God, will hurtful be to thee.
Nor does the Mischief thee alone respect,
The Crimes of mighty Men Mankind affect.
When Men of Wealth and Power Oppressors turn,
They always make their Suffering Neighbors mourn.
The lamentable Cries of Realms oppressed,
What Evils wild Injustice brings, attest.
Crushed, and insulted by Tyrannic Might,
To the Just God they cry aloud for Right:
Who though unhurt himself, touched with the sense
Of their sharp Sufferings, will be their Defense.
Though it is a true, but sad Remark, that none
Of these poor Wretches who their Fate bemoan;
Do ever with a serious Mind enquire,
After the God who did their Breath inspire:
Who cannot therefore only Ease bestow,
And Comforts give to moderate their Woe.
But midst their greatest Sorrows can employ
Their Mouths in Songs; and fill their Breasts with joy.
It Is strange, that Man has so far lost his Sight;
Has not the Almighty given to guide him right,
Reason, a Portion of Etherial Light?
By which he is enabled to collect,
That he who does with tender care protect
Brute Beasts and Birds, will never Man neglect:
If we not only by complaining show
Our Wants, as those unreasoning Creatures do;
But of our past Offenses do repent,
And of his Goodness humbly confident,
Our Supplications to our God present.
He Will not, it is true, extend his Arm to save
All that Compassion and Protection crave.
For many to their God in Trouble cry,
From sense of Suffering, not of Piety.
To Pity he is inclined, but will not save
The Impenitent, though they his Pity crave.
Those who his Worship and his Laws tdespise,
In vain repeat their Prayers, and graceless cries.
And therefore though of God thou do complain,
That thou have waited for his Aid in vain;
Yet do not thence infer, that he is unjust;
But go and humbly prostrate in the Dust,
Condemn thy Self, and for his Mercy wait,
To rescue thee from thy afflicted State.
For it is because the Almighty cannot find
These pious Inclinations in thy Mind,
That he this weight of Trouble on thee lays,
And disregards thy former prosperous Days.
Hereafter thy complaining Speeches spare,
Which fruitless and unreasonable are;
And which, besides thy other Wants and Woes,
Thy want of Sense and Piety expose*
CHAPTER XXXVI
To this Discourse Job gave attentive heed,
Which made the young Instructor thus proceed:
I now more fully will impart my Sense,
And urge fresh Arguments in God's defense.
His spotless Justice I will vindicate,
Decide with clearness this perplexed Debate.
Nor will I labor to entangle thee
With artful words, and cheating Sophistry.
I the sublimest Principles will use;
Sincere and plain, and solid Reasons choose,
Fit to convince the Mind, not to amuse.
Know then, that God whose Throne surmounts the Skys,
Will never the meanest, lowest Man despise.
The Almighty is too Good, too Wise, too Great,
His Creature ever injuriously to treat.
When Men grow ripe in Wickedness, the Day
Of their Destruction God will not delay.
The Wretches he will extirpate, and restore
To Slaves their Ease, their Substance to the Poor.
What Sufferings ever the Good and Righteous bear,
They never cease to be the Almighty's Care.
And sometimes he exalts them from the Dust,
To Posts of highest Dignity and Trust.
They round the Thrones of Kings as Favorites stand,
And next to them in Power, the World command.
They rest secure above the reach of all
Who hate their Virtue, and design their Fall.
Or if by adverse Fate they are distressed,
And by Affliction's Iron Rod oppressed,
This is to make them on their Faults reflect,
Which God is pleased in Kindness to correct*
Sin's growing Power and Greatness to restrain,
Le^t in their Hearts it should Victorious reign.
Men are hereby inlighten'd, and the Mind
To hear Divine Instruction is inclined.
They for their Faults their Sorrow will declare,
Resolved from Virtue's Rule no more to err.
And if their Pains produce this blessed effect,
If thus their Faults and Follys they correct,
If they a Zeal for Piety maintain,
They shall their Splendor and their Power regain.
And blessed by gracious Heaven in all their ways,
Shall pass in unmolested Peace their Days.
But if they persevere to disobey,
God shall the unrelenting Rebels slay.
Enraged against them he shall take the Field,
And Darts of Fire, and Bolts of Thunder weild.
Then shall his Sword with horrid Sway descend,
To cut off those, his Rod could never amend.
False Hpocrites, to Vengeance destined, lay
Wrath up in Stores, against the wrathful Day.
Sudden Destruction on their Heads shall fall,
Before the Wretches can for Mercy call.
Their Life's short Course ends at the middle Stage,
Crushed in the Vigor of their Manly Age.
Unthought of Ruin shall their Seats surprise,
Like that which Rained on Sodom from the Skies.
But God is touched with Pity to the Poor,
And saves the humble, who his Aid implore.
He is to these, even in his Anger, kind,
Afflicts the Body, to instruct the Mind.
His Strokes are sharp, but strike out heavenly Light,
Whereby the afflicted learn to judge aright;
Their Eyes are opened to discern their Sin,
And Night without, dispels the Night within
Had thou thy humble Will to God's resigned,
And born Correction with a patient Mind,
When with his Rod he had thy Virtue proved,
He would have all thy grievous Pains removed.
Thy hideous train of Woes he had discharged,
And thee from all thy pinching Straits enlarged.
He would have made thy Table to abound,
And thee with lasting Peace and Honor crowned.
But since thy impious, rash Discourses show,
Job thinks of Heaven as Unbelievers do;
God will assert the Honor of his Laws,
And Judgment give according to thy Cause.
Since then thou findst the Almighty is displeased,
Fear, lest his Fury should be yet increased.
Let not thy Crimes afresh his Wrath provoke,
To cut thee off with his avenging Stroke.
Do thou believe he does thy Wealth regard,
Or can thy Power thy Punishment retard?
No, though a Sovereign Lord thou were, possessed
Of all the Strength and Treasure of the East.
That Power or Wealth can serve thee, do not dream,
Please not thy self with such an idle Scheme.
Never thy self with such vain Hopes delight,
Not even in musing on thy Bed by Night.
For God whole Nations who soft Peace enjoyed,
Sometimes with sudden Vengeance has destroyed.
But let thy Sufferings teach thee so much Sense,
Offended Justice never to incense.
Too much of this thou have already done,
Too much thy Sin, too much thy Folly shown:
While thou did rather Providence accuse,
Then patiently to bear Affliction, choose.
Consider, Job, God's vast and boundless Power,
He does debase at pleasure, and restore.
What Statesman shall invite him to his School,
To teach the Almighty how he ought to Rule?
Who can the Master that directs him, name?
What Visitor does his Proceedings blame?
Where is the Censor that presumes to say
Here thou have erred, here thou have kept thy way?
Against thy God no more Objections raise,
But let the Contemplation of his Ways
Excite thy Admiration and thy Praise.
The wonders of his Providence adore,
As much as Men admire the marks of Power,
Of Wisdom, and of masterly Design,
Which in the World's amazing Fabric shine.
All must the Maker's Skill Divine proclaim,
Who view the Parts of this stupendous Frame.
None are so stupid, none so dull of Thought,
Even in the Barbarous Regions far remote,
But, if their Eyes they open, must descry
The bright Impressions of his Majesty.
They Will own their Reasoning at its utmost stretch,
His boundless Power and Wisdom cannot reach.
They may their Arms from Pole to Pole extend,
And sooner grasp the Spheres, then comprehend
The immense Eternal Mind; for who can show
The number of his Days, that no Beginning know?
Our Thoughts their way in such Enquirys miss,
Overwhelmed, and swallowed in the vast Abyss.
When we approach him, his too glorious Light
Quite dazles, and confounds our feeble Sight.
He does in Air the fluid Clouds sustain,
Which he dissolves and melts to Dew or Rain.
Which falling down in small refreshing drops,
Dispose the Earth to bring forth fruitful Crops.
Thus to the Earth its Vapors he restores,
And makes the Clouds distill such frequent Showers,
As lookers on with Admiration fill
Of this Contrivance, this surprising Skill.
And who has Understanding to declare
How he extends his Clouds, and makes the Air
The pondrous Burden of the Water bear?
Who can account for that tremendous Noise,
Those awful Murmurs, and Majestic Voice
Which issue thence, and terribly declare,
That God has fixed his high Pavilion there.
Observe too how he spreds upon the Streams,
And on the Deep, the Sun's diffusive Beams.
Where for the Clouds they levy fresh Supplys,
And raise Recruits of Vapors which arise,
Drawn from the Sea to muster in the Skys:
Which he for different purpose does employ;
Some serve in Storms the Wicked to destroy.
Others refresh the Earth with genial Rains,
And make his Fields reward the Farmer's Pains.
Sometimes he draws his hovering Mists between
The Heavens and Earth, and makes his Clouds a Screen
To intercept the Light, and so defeat
The Fruits and Flowers of their expected Heat.
Brute Beasts themselves, by Nature's instinct Wise,
When they observe the gathering Clouds arise,
Can tell, if Storms and Tempests are designed,
Or if sweet Showers will to the Soil be kind.
C. XXXVII.
When Clouds with murmuring Thunder laden roll,
The dreadful Noise affrights my trembling Soul.
A noise, at which pale Atheists are distressed,
And feel a shivering Horror in their Breast.
A noise which makes the Righteous Man revere,
The Almighty's Judgments with a pious Fear.
Attend, I pray, to this Tempestuous sound,
Which breaking from the Clouds, does all around
Diffuse and propagate its Force, and you
Will the like Terror and Confusion show.
This dreadful Voice which Heaven's high Arches shakes,
Through all the Airy Realms its progress makes.
The Almighty to the World's remotest Ends,
His Red-wing'd Lightning always with it sends.
First from the Clouds the flashing Flames appear,
Then fearful Claps of Thunder strike the Ear.
The noise augments, till Storms of Rain or Hail
Descending through the Air, the Earth assail.
He that his Thunder with such Force projects,
Produces other wonderful Effects;
By which the greatest Wits confounded, own
Their Reason and Philosophy outdone.
He moulds, and whitens in the Air the Snow,
And with its Fleeces spreads the Earth below.
He bids the Rain descend in gentle Showers,
Or from the Clouds vast Spouts of Water pours.
Which interrupt the Labor of the Day,
And drives the unwilling Husbandman away
From all his rural toil, and makes him know,
That God the Seasons governs here below.
The Beasts themselves these stormy Seasons chase
From the wide Desert, to their lurking Place.
They slumbering in their Dens are forced to stay,
And in their Sleep pursue, and tear their Prey.
Mark from the Southern Regions of the Sky,
The Winds that blow, are turbulent and high.
These on their Wings do Foreign Tempests bear,
And charged with Seeds of Storms, and Stores of War,
Unload conflicting Meteors in the Air.
Then in the Northern quarter of the Skys,
By his Direction adverse Winds arise,
Which to remove the former are employed,
To purify and clear the Aerial Void.
He by the blasts of this restringent Wind,
Does the Cold Globe in Crystal Fetters bind.
To Glass they turn the Lakes on which they blow,
Benumb the Floods, and teach them not to flow.
He spends in Dew the Evening Mists, that stay
And lag below, drawn by a fainter Ray,
Spent with the exhaling labor of the Day.
Sometimes the Lord of Nature in the Air
Hangs evening Clouds, his Sable Canvas, where
His Pencil dipped in Heavenly Colors, made
Of intercepted Sunbeams mixed with Shade,
Of tempered Either, and refracted Light,
Paints his fair Rainbow, charming to the Sight.
These Meteors are directed by his Hand,
And move, and take their Course by his Command.
So do the rest that this low Region fill;
And on the Earth they execute his Will.
Sometimes a sinful Nation to destroy:
He Pestilential Vapors does employ.
Which their Clandestine poisoned Darts prepare,
And with Corruption arm the infected Air.
Over all the Land their Forces they diffuse,
And panting Thirst, and purple Plagues produce.
But if he is pleased his Bounty to express,
And will with Plenty pious Nations bless:
Then fruitful Dews descend at his Command,
And healthful Seasons make a happy Land.
O Job, Attention give, no more object,
To God, no more on Providence reflect.
Rather his Counsels and his Rule adore,
Admire his Works, and Reverence his Power.
Can thou declare what Orders from above
Will come, by which these Meteors are to move?
Can thou by all thy Skill so much as know,
When in the Clouds he will draw his beauteous Bow?
Can thou, presumptuous Man, the way declare,
How pondrous Clouds hang balanced in the Air?
Can thou expose such Secrets to the Light,
The wondrous Works of Wisdom Infinite?
Whence come the soultry Gleams and scorching Heat,
When we beneath our lightest Garments sweat?
Why should the Southern Breezes calm the Floods,
Make soft the Air, and dress in Green the Woods?
How should they breath through all the heaving Soil
Prolific Warmth, to bless the Labourer's toil,
When from the South such furious Whirlwinds rise,
And stormy Clouds pollute and vex the Skys.
But now, O Job, proceed, and raise thy thought
To Objects nobler, higher, more remote.
Were thou in Council with the Almighty joined,
When he the Model of the Heaven's designed?
To fashion them did thou Assistance give?
What Ornament, what Strength did thou contrive?
When he extended over the empty Space
His high Pavilion, where was then thy Place?
Did thou one end of the wide Curtain hold,
And help the Bales of Either to unfold;
Tell which Cerulean Pile was by thy hands unroll'd?
Though this transparent, Starry Firmament
Is so sublime, and of such vast Extent,
That it confounds our weak and feeble Sight,
Yet is it firm, as well as clear and bright.
If thou have Skill, instruct us what to say
Of Power Divine, and we'll Attention pay.
We own, when ever our Minds attempt to climb
To Objects so unequal, so sublime;
Our baffled Thoughts can no Discovery boast,
But are Confounded, and in Wonder lost.
What words that suit the Case can I express?
Or what to God, worthy of God, address?
He that of God would a Description give,
Will with a Task insuperable strive.
Let him his Reason stretch, he will quickly find,
The mighty Object will distract his Mind.
The steddiest Head will turn at such a height,
Who can undazled, gaze at uncreated Light?
The hardy Men that make the bold Essay,
Immensity of Being to survey,
Are lost in that unsearchable Abyss,
In Boundless Power, and vast, unmeasured Bliss.
Giddy with Splendor, and excess of Day,
They in a Maze of Glory miss their way.
For Men alas, their Eyes so feeble are,
Cannot the Sun's Meridian Luster bear,
When Northern Winds have swept and cleared the Air.
Then sure with Terror seized, they should decline
The awful Sight of Majesty Divine.
That Majesty from which we should retire,
And at a distance humbly should admire.
And not too far into its Nature pry,
Or gaze upon it with a curious Eye.
For after all the Attempts we make, we find
Our Reason cannot grasp the Eternal Mind.
So Boundless, so Transcendent is his Might,
So Wise his Conduct, his Decrees so right,
That no Man should debate the Almighty's Deeds,
Or ask a Reason why he thus proceeds.
If any do, God who does all surmount
As Sovereign Lord, need give them no account.
And this should humble Admiration draw
From mortal Man, and make him stand in Awe.
This should their peevish Arguments confute,
And teach them to Adore, and not dispute.
For God regards the Meek, but does despise
The proud conceited Man, and in his Eyes
All Men are Fools, who in their own are Wise.
C. XXXVIII
Then did the Almighty quit his high Abode,
And on the Winds his swift-wing'd Coursers rode.
Involved in Darkness, down the Skys he came,
Whirlwinds before him flew, and Storms of ruddy Flame.
The trembling Poles their Terror did express,
And flying Hills their dreadful Fright confess.
All Nature felt a Reverential Shock;
The Sea amazed, stood still to see the Mountains rock.
Approaching near the place the Eternal spoke,
And from an opening Cloud these awful Accents broke.
Where art thou Job, who by thy gross mistake,
Do false Constructions of my Actions make?
Gird up thy Loins, O Man, prepare to stand
Before a Judge, that comes at thy demand.
I will thy Wisdom and thy Knowledge try,
And to my Questions, if thou can, reply.
Say, what were thou, who could thy Station find,
When by the Model in my Breast, designed
Before all Ages, I was pleased to rear
The Frame of this capacious Theater?
Tell, if thou can this pitch of Knowledge reach,
Whence for my World did I Materials fetch?
Have thou the unexhausted Mines explored
In Chaos Bowels, which supplys afford?
Know thou the Strength and Skill that I employed,
To dig out Matter from an empty void?
Know thou how walking over the lonesome Plains,
Of ancient Night, I found the wealthy Veins
Of Stones and Metals, which her Womb contains.
Can thou declare by what stupendous Art,
I squared, and shaped, and fitted every Part?
How for the World I marked a proper place,
And with what Compass, circumscribed the Space?
How from the barren Wast I took in Ground,
Enclosed it for a World, and fenced it round?
On what think thou are its Foundations placed?
What Cement binds and knits the Fabric fast?
When I to work upon the World begun,
And of the Building laid the Corner Stone,
Know thou how soon the World's high Case was reer'd?
How soon the wide expanded Roof appeared?
When all the Seraphs, whose Celestial Race,
The Morning Star in Luster, far surpass;
The firstborn Sons of God, my Praises sung,
While the glad Heaven's with Acclamations rung.
Who placed the rocky Doors before the Deep?
And did in sandy Chains the Billows keep?
When the disruption of the upper Earth
Opened its Womb, to give the Ocean birth?
Which I with Clouds as with a Garment wrapped,
And misty Mantles over its Bosom lap'd.
Did I not form a Deep within the Land?
Did not the watery Troops at my Command,
March to their Station with obsequious have,
And find my rocky Bolts, had barred their Prison fast?
Then said I to the Sea diffused around,
Behold the Frontiers which thy Empire bound;
Hither thou may, but may no further roll,
These Bars shall thy impetuous Waves control.
By Job's appointment does the Sun display
His Morning Beams, and bless the World with Day?
By thy discretion does the springing Light
To lengthen or contract, the Day or Night;
Early or later, in the East appear,
Dividing thus the Seasons of the year?
Do thou with Wings equip the dawning Ray,
Through the vast Gulf of Air to make its way?
Even in a moment to complete its flight,
And gild the Earth's remotest Bounds with Light?
Whose Heavenly Rays the Shapes of Things reveal,
And show them fair as printed with a Seal:
Nature that lay before with Shades oppressed,
Is now with Light, as with a Garment, dressed.
Light, by the Guiltless peaceably enjoyed,
But which obnoxious Criminals avoid;
For if detected by its beams, they know
They must the Death they Merit undergo.
Say, have thou ever descended to survey
The secret Springs, that feed the spacious Sea?
Have thou the Ocean searched, and wandered over
The watery Walks, their Wonders to explore?
Did Death ever meet thee at her Palace Gate?
Lead thee through all her Guards, and on thee wait
To see her gloomy Throne, and horrid Rooms of State?
Did she her Arms and bloody Trophys show,
And draw her Armies forth for thy review?
Did ever Hell its Realms to thee disclose,
To thee its mournful Subjects ever expose?
Did it to thee its various Scenes explain,
Of perfect Grief, and everlasting Pain?
Have thou thy Compass ever drawn around
The spacious Globe, and its Dimensions found?
Say, do thou know the Etherial Mines on high,
Which the refulgent Oar of Light supply?
Is the Celestial Furnace to thee known,
In which I melt that Golden Metal down?
Know thou the Magazines, in which I lay
My Stores, and bright Materials for the Day?
Treasures, from whence I deal out Light as fast
As all my Stars, and lavish Sun can wast.
Can thou describe the silent Desert, where
Imperial Night does her black Standard rear,
To which her fable Troops, and must'ring Shades repair.
Whence she her gloomy Partys sends abroad,
To beat in chase of Day, the Aerial Road.
Did thou divide the Empire of the Air,
And give to Light and Shade an equal share?
Can thou to favor this alternate sway,
By turns extinguish, and restore the Day?
Have thou in all the Airy Regions been;
The Houses where I work my Meteors seen?
In which the Exhalations, which arise
Born on rebounding Sunbeams through the Skys,
Are thickened, wrought, and whitened till they grow
A Heavenly Fleece, and softly drop in Snow.
Have thou discovered how ascending Steams,
Thinn'd by the Sun's insinuating Beams,
Are wrought and tempered and become so hard,
That they to fall in Hailstones are prepared?
Have thou surveyed the Magazines on high,
Where I repose my loud Artillery?
Where I my Arms and Ammunition lay,
To be employed upon the dreadful Day,
When I against a sinful Land, declare
Destructive Vengeance, and resistless War.
When I my keen Etherial Weapons weild,
And to discharge my Fury take the Field.
How does the Light (I ask again) display
Its radiant Wings and spread the dawning Day?
Who the rich Metal beats, and then with care
Unfolds the Golden leaves to gild the Fields of Air?
Can thou declare which way the Architect,
His Cloudy Forges did aloft erect?
How the Metalic Mass was thither brought
From which the ruddy Thunderbolts are wrought?
At whose command do Winds whole Tempests blow;
That in those Forges make the Metal glow?
How in the Air are Trains of Sulphur found,
Which, when with watery Clouds encompassed round,
Take Fire, and give imprisoned Lightning birth,
Which tears the Air, and terrifys the Earth?
How are the Heavenly Aqueducts contrived,
Whence fruitful Floods are to the Earth derived?
With which refreshed the sandy Wilderness,
Does in its cheerful looks its joy express;
When like a healing Balm distilling Rains,
Cement their Wounds, and cure the gaping Plains.
With all their Fibrous Mouths the Plants and Trees
Drink the sweet Juices and their Thirst appease.
The rising Sap thrusts forth the tender Bud,
And crowns with verdant Honors all the Wood.
If thou art Master of the secret, show
How drops of Rain are formed, and how the Dew.
How is the Dew arrested in its flight,
Congealed, and whitened in the Air by Night?
How does it spread its Frostwork over the Meads,
Oppress the Trees, and bend their hoary Heads?
What is the nature of the Icy chain
Which does the fluid Element restrain,
Which often compels a rolling Flood to stand,
Hardens the Stream, and makes the Water Land?
Grown stiff with Cold the Billows roll no more,
But with their Crystal Arms embrace the rocky Shore.
Pavements of Glass conceal the Oceans Face,
And Armor like his spacious back encase.
Can thou keep back the Spring? close opening Flowers,
And sprouting Plants restrain, when kindly Showers
From Heaven descend, caused by the Influence
And Luster which the Pleiads dispense?
Can thou in Winter break the Frosty Chains,
With which Orion binds the slippery Plains?
And then to fit it for the Farmer's use,
Through all the heaving Soil prolific heat diffuse?
Can thou with Constellations fill the Skies,
And in his turn make Mazzaroth arise?
Can thou Arcturus guide around the Pole,
And bid his shining Sons in Order roll?
Know thou the eternal Rules decreed above
By which the Spears in fluid Either move?
What to his Crooked Path the Sun confines
Between the Northern and the Southern Lines?
Who gave him strength to run so swift a pace,
And set the Stages of his daily Race?
Do Planets choose untrodden Roads, and stray
By thy Appointment from the common way?
Do thou on Stars their Influence bestow,
And give them Empire over the World below?
Managed by thee will they their Power diffuse,
To make such Seasons here as thou shall choose?
Will Clouds to Orders given by thee attend?
And if thou call'st for Rain, will Rain descend?
At thy Command will ready Lightnings fly,
And Peals of Thunder ring around the Sky?
Who Godlike^Wisdom did to Man impart?
And who with Understanding filled his Heart?
Did thou inspire him with this Ray divine?
Was it thy Bounty Job, or was it mine?
Who can the number of the Clouds enroll,
Which spread the Atmosphere from Pole to Pole?
Can thou the Liquor which they hold restrain,
Or on the Earth pour down the Bottled Rain?
When from above sufficient Showers have bound
The dusty Glebe, and closed the cleaving Ground,
Can thou the Sluices fix, the Waters stop,
And in their floating Cisterns shut them up?
Are Forest Beasts by thee with Food supplied,
For hungry Lions does thy Care provide?
If an old Lion, that can now no more
(His vigor wasted) range the Desert over,
Couched in his Den shall watch to seize his Prey,
Thither do thou the uncautious Fawn betray?
Or does the Raven on thy Care depend?
Do thou their Portion to his Young Ones send?
Do thou thus far thy Providence extend?
C. XXXIX.
Know thou the Time when the wild Goats bring forth,
And to the flinty Rock commit their Birth?
Know thou the Months which pregnant Hinds complete,
And when to Calve they to the Brakes retreat?
In Pangs they bow themselves, and in the Wood
At once their Sorrows and their Birth exclude.
The Calves not only all their pains survive,
But as with Corn supplied, grow fat and thrive.
To seek their Meat they range the Forest over,
And to the Mother-Hind return no more.
Who did, O Job, to the wild Asse's Heart
A noble Sense of Liberty impart?
Bravely impatient of the Bit and Rein,
The Beast with generous Pride, a Master does disdain.
He does the Crib and proffered Corn refuse,
And Thistles joined with native Freedom choose.
From pop'lous Towns, he does to Mountains flee,
Often Hunger feels, but never Slavery,
Whatever are his wants, the noble Beast is free.
No Ignominious Burdens will he bear,
His Flesh no Driver's Whips, or Rider's tear.
He never pants upon the Sandy Road,
Choked with the Dust, and groaning with his Load.
The Hills and Forests Pasturage afford,
There he can range, and there command as Lord.
With Freedom blessed he will not the Desert quit,
But mocks the ignoble Ass, that tamely does submit.
Will the wild Bull, be willing to obey,
And a tame Lab'rer with thy Oxen stay?
Will he receive the Yoke, submit to toil,
And plough up Furrows in thy fertile Soil?
Will he of any Master stand in Aw,
And the sharp Harrow over the Valley draw?
Because his Strength is great, will thou presume
To let him bring thy gathered Harvest home?
With curious Colors who the Peacock died?
Whence has his sweeping Train its painted Pride?
Say, who the Honor to himself assumes,
Of forming by his skill, the noble Plumes,
And spacious Wings which the vast Ostrich wears;
Which by her Bulk a feathered Beast appears?
She does her Eggs to the wild Desert trust,
And leaves her unformed Offspring in the Dust;
Mean time forgets how soon it may be pressed
And crushed by Trav'lers, or a roaming Beast.
The careless Bird does from her Young retreat,
Expecting that the Sand's prolific Heat,
Her huge Conceptions, should at last complete.
When she exalts her Neck amidst the Skys,
She does the Horse and Rider's Arms despise.
Have thou, O Job, given to the generous Horse,
His Confidence, his Spirit and his Force?
The deep thick Mane that clothes the noble Beast,
The graceful Terror of his lofty Crest,
Is it thy work? can thou his Courage shake?
And make him like a wretched Insect quake?
With native Fire his dreadful Nostrils glow,
And smoke and flame amidst the Battle blow.
Proud with Excess of Life he paws the ground,
Tears up the Turf, and spurns the Sand around.
He pricks his Ears when the shrill Trumpet sounds,
And to the Music Capers, leaps, and bounds.
When from afar he hears the Foe's alarms,
He forward springs to meet the Warriour's Arms.
Fearless he runs on Swords, the Files invades,
And makes his Passage through the thick Brigades.
He mocks the Weapons which the Horsemen weild,
The rattling Quiver, and the blazing Shield.
In his fierce Rage he beats and bites the Ground,
Nor does the start at the loud Trumpet's sound:
Pleased with the Martial noise he snuffs the Air,
And smells the dusty Battle from afar,
Neighs to the Captain's Thunder, and the shouts of War.
Did thou instruct the Hawk to rove abroad
A murdering Robber on the Aerial Road?
By thee enabled does he wing his Flight,
Through the thin Gulf, swift as a Ray of Light?
What Feathered Trav'ller beats the Plains of Air,
That with the Eagle's can his Strength compare;
Midst cloudy Meteors that can soar so high,
Or with such swiftness cut the liquid Sky?
Gav'st thou the noble Bird her mighty Force,
And proper Wings to make her rapid Course?
Did thou direct her where to build her Nest,
Where no Invader might her Peace molest?
She as a For tress, does her dwelling keep
Midst craggy Cliffs, insuperably steep.
Towering upon the Rock's impending Brow,
She sees with decent Pride the ignoble Birds below.
She with a glance does all the Vale survey,
And like a Bolt of Thunder, makes her way
Down through the yiedling Heavens, to truss her prey.
Then to her Young, her crooked Pounces bear
The bloody Banquet swiftly through the Air.
CHAPTER XL
The Almighty paused, Job (speechless struck) suppressed,
All his Complaints and Anguish in his Breast.
The Almighty thus proceeded, tell me why
To my Demands, thou make no reply?
Have not the Allegations I have brought,
Inlighten'd thee, and full Conviction wrought?
He that desires the Argument to State,
And would with God his Providence debate,
To those Objections must Solutions find;
And more, must answer Questions yet behind.
Then humbly Job returned: thy heavenly Light
Shows me a wretched miserable Wight.
Confounded and amazed, I cannot withstand
Thy Arguments, nor answer one demand.
The Words which I have spoken, though but few,
Too many are, and high presumption show.
Prostrate before thy Footstool, I Will adore
Henceforth thy Greatness, but will speak no more.
Then did the Almighty, from the hovering Cloud
In which involved, he did his Glory shroud,
Bespeak the pious Patriarch, and said,
Thou who desir'dst so much with me to plead:
Thou who so much thy Innocence did boast,
Have thou thy Courage and Assurance lost?
Gird up thy Loins as for another task,
And answer Questions which I now shall ask.
Since I, O Job, did ever condescend
To all my lowest Creatures to extend
My Providential Care, can thou suspect,
That I Will Mankind, my nobler Work neglect?
What cannot Job his Innocence maintain,
Unless unjustly he does God arraign?
Must I then be reproached to clear thy Fame?
To make thee guiltless, must I bear the shame?
To make thy Cause appear to others right,
Will thou, audacious Man! thy God indict?
Do thou thy kind Creator thus requite?
Can thou like God, thy mighty Arm extend,
To crush the Proud, the Humble to defend?
Can thou the Heavens astonish with thy Voice,
And imitate the Thunder's dreadful noise?
Can thou swift Lightnings on thy Errand send,
And will the Meteors thy Commands attend?
In massy Robes of State thy Limbs'array,
Thy Triumph and Majestic Pomp display.
Thy dazzling Crown and costly Purple wear,
And on thy Throne Magnificent appear.
Let Throngs of humble Princes on thee wait,
And numerous Guards express thy Royal State;
That by unrivaled Glorys, thou may draw
Men's admiration, and excite their Awe.
Around thee Storms of vengeful Fury throw,
Let thy destructive Rage oppress thy Foe;
On all the Haughty in Displeasure frown,
And make them hang their troubled Faces down.
Again I say, let proud Oppressors struck
With Terror, tremble at thy angry look.
With thy fierce Rage oppress the wicked Race,
Who in their Wealth and Power their safety place:
Do these great things, and I my self will grant,
That independent Job does no Assistance want.
But now to humble and amaze thee more,
To make thee in the Dust thy self abhor;
Remark thy fellow Creature Behemoth,
A Beast so strong, of such prodigious growth,
That if on Flesh he feasted, what supplys
For such a mighty Hunger would suffice?
His vast capacious Belly would consume
Whole Flocks at once, and numerous Herds entomb.
Such Desolation to prevent, and spare
The living World, it was the Maker's care,
That pleased with Herbs he should incline his Head,
And like the Ox, should graze along the Mead.
O Man, contemplate with a serious thought,
How firm and strong his Muscles all are wrought:
Not only of his Back and Loins, but those
Which his prodigious Belly do enclose.
His wondrous Trunk he like a Cedar moves,
Or a tall Pine, that in the Mountain Groves,
Are by the Fury of a stormy Wind,
With mighty sway from side to side inclined.
The vigorous Sinews of his Thighs, are bound
Like complicated Cords, all wrapped and wound,
And knit so fast, that to the generous Beast
They give such Strength, as never can be oppressed.
Bones firm as Brass sustain the ponderous frame,
Or Bars of Iron, tempered in the Flame.
Though midst the various salvage Brotherhoods,
That range the Mountains, and infest the Woods,
Are many Creatures that in Force excel,
Vast for their Bulk, for fierceness terrible;
Yet this chief work of mine, this mighty Beast,
Exceeds in Strength and Structure all the rest.
To wound his Foe, and guard himself from harms,
His wondrous active Trunk, his native Arms,
To this prodigious Beast his Maker gave,
Which he on high does as a Fauchion wave.
For Pasture he frequents the verdant Plains,
And grassy Hills, where he a Monarch reigns;
To which the Forest Beasts in Troops resort,
And by the Huntsmen unmolested sport.
Thence to the Groves he does for Rest retreat,
Or to the Covert of a Reedy Seat.
He lies extended in the shady Wood,
Or by the Willows that adorn the Flood.
When to the Stream he does his Mouth apply,
To quench his Thirst, he drinks the River dry.
When faint with toil, and panting with his drought,
He hastens to the Banks, he makes no doubt
But he can from its Channel Jordan draw
Down his wide Throat, to the deep Gulf his Maw.
What hardy Mortal can approach his Sight?
Who dares attempt a fair and open Fight?
By Violence whoever undertook,
To fasten in his Nose the servile Hook?
CHAPTER XLI.
Can thou stand Angling on the Banks of Nile,
And with thy Bait Leviathan beguile?
Then strike the bearded Iron through his Jaw,
And through the Flood the flouncing Monster draw?
Have thou a Line to hold him? can thou guide,
And play him with thy Rod along the Tide?
Till spent and tired, thou can his Strength command,
And on the Flaggy Bank the gasping Captive Land?
Will he, like Men overwhelmed in sore distress,
To thee soft Words, and humble Prayers address?
Will he with tender Accents thee entreat,
Thy pity to excite his moan repeat?
Him as a menial Servant will thou take?
Will thou a solemn Contract with him make?
Will he his Empire over the Waters quit?
Will he to serve a Master ever submit?
Will he a tame Domestic with thee stay,
Fawn on thy Sons, and with thy Daughters play?
Shall the glad Fishermen divide the Spoil,
To recompense their hazard and their toil?
Shall each his Portion to the Market bear,
And to the Merchant sell for Gold his Share?
Can thou his Head with bearded Spears divide,
Or pierce the scaly Armor of his side?
Suppose that thou have Courage to assail
The furious Beast, would Spears or Darts prevail?
Should thou with Life escape, his dreadful Rage
Thou would remember, and no more engage.
The Hopes the bravest Warriors entertain,
Of Conquering him, presumptuous are and vain.
Would not the boldest Mortal, in despite
Of all his Courage, at the dreadful sight
Of such a Creature, pale with terror stand;
And drop his Weapons from his trembling hand?
Is there a Man so fierce and fearless found,
That dares though clad in Steel, approach the ground
Where midst the Reeds the Monster lies at ease,
And will adventure to disturb his Peace?
Is there a Man, that does not Courage lack,
To touch the scaly Coat that clothes his Back?
The most intrepid Chief, that dares advance
Against the brandished Sword, and threatening Lance,
With Consternation seized, in haste withdraws,
Far from the reach of his expanded Jaws.
Then can thou Job, of me be not afraid,
Who the vast Beast, and all his Terrors made?
Whoever on me did Obligations lay,
Which by my favors I did never repay?
To clear the Debt cannot I Rewards bestow,
Lord of the Worlds above, and this below?
But let us more distinctly yet explore
The Frame, the comely Parts and wondrous power
Of my stupendous Creature, named before.
He that his Mouth dares open, would disclose
The bloody Throne of Death, long murdering Rows
Of Spearlike Teeth, which fixed on either hand,
Along his Jaws in dreadful order stand.
Impenetrable Scales, like Plates of Brass;
In beauteous Figures set, his Sides encase.
Clad in this Coat of Mail, his Martial Pride,
He does the Spear and glittering Dart deride.
They Are all so firmly fixed, so closely joined,
That Air it self can no admission find.
In strict embraces they together grow,
Embraces that can never Division know.
Whenever he Sneezes, from his Nostrils flies
A flash, like Lightning darting through the Skys.
The luster of his Eyes the Meads adorn,
Bright as the Saffron Eyelids of the Morn.
His reeking Breath breaks from his hollow Throat,
As from a Forge or Caldron, boiling hot.
If hardy Swains his fury dare provoke,
His raging Nostrils belch out Clouds of Smoke.
From his wide Mouth, mingled with choking steams,
Impetuous Sparks fly out, and fiery Streams.
His Neck, though not of formidable length,
Is the Imperial Throne and Seat of Strength.
Triumphant Terror, with its dreadful Rear,
Amazement, Sorrow, Woe and shivering Fear,
Marching before, his hideous Pomp compose,
And seize on all around him where he goes.
The solid Strings of his hard Flesh, are wound
So fast together, and so firmly bound,
That Men can scarce by Violence or Art,
The adhering Muscles, and strong Sinews part.
His unrelenting Heart as Marble hard,
Did never Compassion's tender Moan regard.
Mercy's soft Fire did never melt his Breast,
Which never Fear, or Pity yet expressed.
Try all thy Arts, thy Prayers and Tears repeat,
Thou't find thou only do a Rock entreat,
All thy recoiling Strokes will but an Anvil beat.
But if amidst the Waves he reers his Head,
The most undaunted Hearts his Presence dread.
Such is their Consternation, such their Fright,
They know not whither to direct their Flight;
They cannot escape, nor yet abide his sight.
Let them with Sword in hand the Beast attack,
The Steel will break in pieces on his Back.
In vain the Spear and Dart the Assailant weilds,
His Scales are all impenetrable Shields;
His hardened Skin never to the Javelin yields.
Weapons of Iron made of every kind,
Which the destructive Wit of Man can find;
He values as the Bullrush by the Flood,
And those of Brass, as Spears of rotten Wood.
Thick Showers of Arrows singing through the Sky,
His Courage cannot shake, and make him fly.
He counts vast Stones, with Skill and Fury slung,
And Darts as Stubble, by the Invader flung.
Against him when the clamorous Troops advance,
He smiles at Spears, and mocks the threatening Lance.
The sharpest Weapons from his Back recoil,
And with their Shivers spread the miry Soil.
When through the Deep he rolls from side to side,
And tumbles in the Bottom of the Tide;
He shakes the Banks, and troubles all the Waves,
Like Tempests loosed from Subterranean Caves.
His motion works, and beats the Oazy Mud,
And with its Slime incorporates the Flood;
That all the encumbered, thick, fermenting Stream,
Does one vast Pot of boiling Ointment seem.
Whenever he Swims, he leaves along the Lake,
Such frothy Furrows, such a foamy Track,
That all the Waters of the Deep appear
Hoary with Age, or Gray with sudden fear.
On Earth, in Strength his Equal is not found,
For though he is low and creeps along the ground,
Yet he the loftiest, proudest Beast disdains,
And over the fruitful Valley Monarch reigns.
The strongest Creatures his dread Presence fear,
Whom he in pastime can in pieces tear.
CHAPTER XLII.
These awful words, in which so brightly shine
Wisdom and Power, and Majesty Divine;
Did Job awaken, and his Grief renew,
Setting his Errors fully in his View:
Who now a just and free Confession made,
Humbly submitted to his God, and said:
Thy Wisdom all thy Creatures reach transcends,
Far as thy Will thy Power its Sphere extends.
All thy Designs thou will at last complete,
No Force or Art can thy Wise Ends defeat.
As thou art pleased to crush me, thou have Power,
If thou were pleased, my Substance to restore.
Convinced by thy Reproofs, I freely own,
That I have rash, audacious Folly shown;
Vent'ring with Reason's short and treacherous Line,
To sound the Depths of Providence Divine.
Searching the secret Counsels of thy Breast,
I have presumptuous Forwardness expressed.
My rash and unconsider'd Words, and all
My Censures of thy Conduct I recall.
My stupid Arrogance I now condemn,
That made me speak on so sublime a Theme.
Such Wonders all Created Wit exceed,
And should our silent Admiration feed.
Awful, Mysterious Things to be adored,
But not by vain and curious Heads explored.
O, let thy Anger be appeased, and hear
My humble Questions with a gracious Ear.
I will no more to Knowledge make pretense,
Or of thy Power, or of thy Providence.
Do thou instruct me, let thy Heavenly Light
Dispel the hovering Shades that cloud my Sight.
Let Truth Divine its glorious Beams display,
Remove the Night, and bless my Mind with Day.
Something I own I understood before,
Both of thy Wisdom, and thy mighty Power,
But since thy dreadful Glory I beheld,
Those Attributes more clearly are revealed.
Wherefore a Sting does in my Bosom stick,
And self-displeasure wounds me to the quick;
When I reflect on my Behavior past,
My bold Aspersions on the Almighty cast.
That I thy Strokes did with Reluctance bear,
And wished for Death so often in my Despair,
As if the Righteous Man no longer were thy Care.
My arrogant Discourses I repent,
My Charges brought against thy Government;
Now drowned in Tears my Errors I lament.
I grieve that grown impatient of thy Rod,
I justified my self against my God.
So much the Almighty this Confession pleased,
That against Job his Anger was appeased.
Then turning, thus to Eliphaz he spoke,
But thou, and these thy Friends my Wrath provoke.
For you have all perverse Constructions made,
Of those Afflictions I on Job have laid.
Who, notwithstanding all his Faults, I own,
Has spoken better far than you have done.
Sev'n Bullocks then, and Rams as many take,
And go to Job, he shall Atonement make,
Which I Will accept, for his my Servant's sake.
He shall to me his Supplications send,
And I to you my Mercy will extend.
Let this be done, lest on your guilty Head
My Vengeance fall, because as I have said,
My ways you wrested to an evil sense,
And represented ill my Providence,
And would not hear my Servant Job's defense.
These three wise Friends, of Wrath Divine afraid,
Their due Submission to the Almighty made,
And Job to be their Intercessour prayed.
His humble Prayer the Almighty did receive,
And these Offenders for his sake forgive.
While Job this Duty for his Friends discharged,
God from his Straights the Patient Man enlarged.
He now began that Vigor to restore,
And all the Blessings he enjoyed before.
Nor did he cease his Bounty to repeat,
Till he had made him twice as rich and great.
Then all his Friends and Kindred, who as Foes
Had Job deserted in his Straits and Woes,
Of his Deliverance when they heard the Fame,
To show their Joy, in Throngs around him came.
And when they first his Losses had condol'd,
And for his Sufferings past their Sorrow told;
They their Congratulations did express,
For this his unexpected Happiness.
Each in his Hand did for a Present bear,
Or Coin, or golden Pendant for the Ear.
Thus God chastis'd him with a kind intent,
And made him Poor, his Riches to augment.
The Herds and Woolly Flocks he once possessed,
Now to a double number were increast.
His fruitful Wife his Offspring to restore,
Sev'n goodly Sons, and three fair Daughters bore.
One was Iemima, one Kesia named,
The third was Kerenhappuch, Virgins famed
For charming Beauty, which the Sisters blessed
Beyond the fairest Daughters of the East.
Job did not, as the Custom was to do,
These with small Portions of his Goods endow.
But being with his Sons Coheirs declared,
With them his vast Inheritance they shared.
God after this so happy turn of Fate,
Encreast his Years, as much as his Estate.
Of Years an Hundred, and twice Twenty more,
To those were added, which he lived before.
So the Good Man his numerous Progeny,
Did to the fourth Succession live to see.
Then ripe with Hoary Age, and fully pleased,
He dyed, or rather, he from Living ceased.
THE SONGS of Moses, Deborah, etc. WITH SOME Select Psalms and Chapters of
Isaiah, AND THE Third Chapter of Habakkuk, PARAPHRASED.

By Sir Richard Blackmore, Knight. M. D.

THE Song of MOSES PARAPHRASED. EXODUS, Chap. XV.
YOur Shouts to Heaven, ye Sons of Jacob raise,
And celebrate in Songs of Praise
The glorious Triumphs of Iehovah's Power,
Applaud the Almighty Conqueror.
Let all the wide stretched Mouths of Fame,
From Pole to Pole his wondrous Work proclaim,
To make Men tremble, and adore his Name.
Let it to all the Realms around be known,
How he his Foes has overthrown:
How he disclosed the Water's hideous Womb,
And did in Crystal Graves their Troops entomb.
They sunk and perished in the Tide,
Where now triumphant Waves over Horse and Horsemen ride.
He is our Bulwark and Defense,
Shielded by his Omnipotence
We all the Heathen World defy:
This mighty Warrior, this our great Ally,
With his Etherial Shield and Arms Divine,
Does at the head of our Battalions shine.
Griping his bright Immortal Lance
He does before our Host to charge the Foe advance.
Israel by strength derived from him is strong,
And as he is our Strength, he shall be too our Song.
He to discharge us from our Bondage, broke
The inexorable Tyrant's Yoke.
He from our heavy Chains our Feet released,
And our galled Shoulders of their Burdens eased.
He brought us from the inhospitable Land,
And rescued us from Pharoah's salvage hand.
He terribly chastis'd these Pagan Powers;
And as this Lord of Hosts was ours,
He was our Fathers All-sufficient God;
We therefore will prepare him an Abode:
We will an Altar and a Temple rear,
A sacred Place of Praise and Prayer,
There we'll adore our great Deliverer.
The Eternal does in Arms excel;
What Power can his projected Darts repel?
Who can against his Thunder stand,
Or who elude his never-erring Hand?
Let him but weild his dreadful Blade
Of malleable Lightning made,
Let him advance into the Field,
And lift on high his Adamantine Shield,
Whose brighter Luster drowns the waining Sun,
As much as that the sickening Moon;
Let him with his Celestial Equipage
March on as ready to engage;
And where is the undaunted Man that would not fly,
Or if he stayed, would not with Terror dye.
He sharply has rebuked the Egyptian's Pride,
Who his Almighty Arm defied.
Against their mighty Host he did prepare
An unexpected Watery War.
He on the Deep his Terrors did display,
And drew his rolling Legions in Array:
He bad the Waves in Martial Order flow,
And made his fluid Squadrons charge the Foe.
The amazed Egyptians fled for fear,
While roaring Surges hung upon their Rear:
The foaming Files o'ertook them in the Chase,
And overwhelmed the cruel Race.
Bows, Banners, Spears, an unexampled Wreck,
Lay floating on the Ocean's back.
While Chariots, Horse and Horsemen killed,
The Seas inferior Chambers filled.
The mighty Host the Caves beneath oppressed,
And the low horrors of the Deep increast.
Of such a wealthy Spoil the Sea before
Never robbed the Land, while pent within the Shore.
While no Detachment of its Waves it made,
The Frontier Regions to invade,
No Watery Partys sent abroad
To sweep the neighboring Fields, and plunder M^ns Abode.
High heaps of Swords and Bucklers stood
Like Rocks of polished Iron in the Flood.
The Fish made have to seize their Prey,
But when they saw the shining Shields display
Through the dark Realm a monstrous unknown Day,
And how the Dead in Armor shone
With scaly Sides far brighter than their own;
Away the affrighted Spoilers fled,
And thus their Arms that could not give
Protection to the Egyptians when alive,
Protected them when Dead.
Like Stones they sank beneath the Flood,
And the Red Sea appeased their Thirst of Blood.
Glorious in Power, great Lord of Hosts,
Is thy right hand which such Atchievments boasts,
Which has defeated Pharoah's Troops,
And sunk to Hell the proud Egyptian's Hopes.
In the low Prisons of the Deep
Thou do thy Captive Rebels keep,
Mountains of liquid Crystal on 'em cast,
Secure the Doors, and bar the Dungeons fast.
Arrayed with fearful Glory, girt with Might,
Thou did thy Peoples Battles fight.
Thou have overthrown the impious Foes,
Who against thee and Israel rose;
They were in Storms of Fury on them poured,
As Stubble is by raging Flames devoured.
Commanded by thy Breath the obsequious Main
Stood still, and gathered up its flowing Train.
The Almighty did the Sea divide,
And as he rends the Hills, he split the cleaving Tide.
Benumbed with fear the Waves erected stood,
O'erlooking all the distant Flood.
Mountains of Craggy Billows did arise,
And Rocks of stiffen'd Water reached the Skys.
Remoter Waves came crowding on to see
This strange Transforming Mystery,
But they approaching near
Where the high Crystal Ridges did appear,
Felt the Divine Contagion's Force,
Moved slothfully a while, and then quite stopped their course.
Upon their March they insolently cried,
Let us pursue the flying Slaves,
We'll overtake them, and the Spoil divide,
Where is the God that Israel saves?
We'll our Revenge, and Lust of Slaughter cloy,
Without relenting we'll destroy,
We'll weild the Spear, and draw the Sword,
And root this Nation out by all abhorred.
We'll bath the Desert with a Purple Flood,
And heal its gaping Wounds with Hebrew Blood!
While one vile Wretch alive is found,
The Trumpet no retreat shall sound.
In dreadful Language we'll declare,
The Egyptians still their Masters are.
Though their Rebellion they should mourn,
And ask to Egypt's Brick-kilns to return,
We would not spare the hateful Race,
We would all marks of Jacob's House efface.
Let 'em to Moses cry they are oppressed,
While we in Vengeance reign, and on Destruction feast.
As thus the Gulf the proud Egyptians crossed,
And with loud threats pursued our trembling Host,
Thou with thy powerful Wind did blow,
And strait the thawing Heaps began to flow.
The Waves that stood as Bullwarks were dissolved,
And Pharoah's Chariots and his Troops involved.
They from the roaring Deluge would have fled,
But to the bottom sank as Lead.
Among the Gods of all the Nations round,
Equal to thee is any found?
Any that can with Rival Glory shine,
And show as perfect Holiness as thine?
When we thy various Triumphs sing,
And great Atchievments which exalt thy Name,
To us thy Praises Joy and Comfort bring,
But to thy Foes Confusion, Fear and Shame.
Thou art a wonder-working God, thy Might
Does all thy trembling Enemies affright,
But grateful Admiration in our Breasts excite.
When thou extendest over the Tide
Thy hand, that does all Nature guide,
The conscious Waves the high Command obeyed,
Like melting heaps of Snow they flowed apace,
Marching with fury on, they disarray'd,
Then swallowed up the impious Race.
In great Compassion thou have broke
The Oppressor's hard unsufferable Yoke;
For Jacob's Sons in Person thou have fought,
Amazing Miracles have wrought,
And Israel back from Egypt brought.
To sacred Canaan's promised Land,
Thou with thy mighty outstretcht hand
Shall rescued Israel guide,
Where with thy favor blessed they shall in Peace abide.
Fame shall together with these Tidings spread
Through all the Nations Universal dread;
Wild looks and gestures shall declare,
How great their Fears and Sorrows are.
The Inhabitants of Palestina's Land
Shall trembling and astonished stand,
Edom's proud Potentates shall be afraid,
And Moab's mighty Men dismayed.
The dreadful News shall make pale Tyrants start,
And melt within his Breast the stoutest Warriour's Heart.
The Lords of Canaan shall their fears express,
And all their People their distress.
The Terrors of thy Conquering Arm,
These of their Strength and Courage shall disarm.
Thy Wonders will their Captains so amaze,
That they will still and Speechless stand and gaze;
While Jacob's Sons by thee from Bondage brought,
The People thou have bought,
And for the Purchase newly made,
Such mighty Sums of Miracles have paid,
To Canaans happy Land shall safely be conveyed.
Thither thou wilt lead the favored Race,
And give them safe Possession of the Place;
Thou will fulfill thy great design,
By planting there these Colonys Divine,
Their happy Dwellings shall be spread,
Around Moriah's lofty head,
On which thy sacred Dome shall stand,
Diffusing pious Awe through all the Land.
The Lord shall rule with Power and Glory crowned,
No Time or Space shall ever his Empire bound.
Immortal Pillars his sixth Throne sustain,
And as himself, Eternal is his Reign.
Not like proud Pharoah's, who his Army led
To chase our Youth, who from his Fury fled.
Who entered with his Troops the opening Sea,
And hoped to pass the dreadful Defile;
But God who had his way beset,
Drew over the Host his watery Net;
To finish this miraculous Campaign,
He loosed the Bonds that did the Waves restrain;
Strait the congested Billows tumbled down,
And liquid Ruins did the Tyrant drown:
His Chariots and his Horse were swept away,
Ingulph'd, and swallowed by the o'erwhelming Sea.
But the firm Waters did erected stand,
On either hand,
And left dry ground between till Israel gained the Land.
THE Song of DEBORAH PARAPHRASED. JUDGES, Chap. V.
LET the Victorious Tribes of Israel sing,
Let their loud Shouts through Heavens wide Chambers ring.
Let them applaud with one united Voice,
Their God, the glorious Author of their Joys.
Let them Triumphant Acclamations raise,
And spend the Breath he gives them, in his Praise.
He has our Swords with Conquest crowned,
And spread the fear of Israel's Name around.
He to avenge us on our Foes,
Has crushed the haughty Powers that did our Arms oppose.
Our Troops from Heaven with noble Zeal inspired,
The glorious Hazards of the Field desired.
God fired their Veins with Military Rage,
And made 'em long for Arms, and eager to engage.
Ye Potentates and Princes hear,
Ye Kings and Rulers of the Earth give Ear.
I Deb'rah I, will in a lofty strain
Sing the great King, by whom you live and reign.
When God in Person did our Tribes command,
And led 'em with a mighty Hand
From wild Arabia's Rocks to Canaan's Land:
As soon as he had passed the Field,
By the Idumean Farmer tilled,
What marks of Greatness did his March attend?
What Power in Miracles did he expend?
What Terrors did he send before to fright
The Lords of Canaan and the Amorite?
What Pomp and Majesty did he display?
Floods of impetuous Glory deluged all his way.
From his refulgent Sword, and radiant Shield,
Flushes of rapid Splendour spread the Field.
The trembling Heathen fled for fear,
For who could such a stress of Luster bear?
At every step the Almighty Leader took,
The astonished Earth down to its Center shook.
Contending Tempests bellowed under ground,
And strong Convulsions did with horrid sound
The low Apartments break, and all the Vaults confound.
The Earth with dreadful Gripes was sore oppressed,
Which did its twisted Bowels wrest.
From their low Channels, Subterranean Waves
Were thrown on Sulphur Mines, and fiery Caves.
The Chasms of gaping Plains and Mountains rent,
Did yield to struggling Vapors vent,
And suffocated Nature to relieve,
To ambient Air admission give.
Heavens Crystal Battlements to pieces dashed,
In Storms of Hail were downward hurled;
Loud Thunder roared, red Lightning flashed,
And universal Uproar filled the World.
Torrents of Water, Floods of Flame
From Heaven in fighting Ruins came.
At once the Hills that to the Clouds aspire,
Were washed with Rain, and scorcht with Fire.
The Waters down the Mountains Sides were poured,
And over the Vale the unbridled Deluge roared.
Canaan's proud Hills with this affright
Shook to their Base, and well they might;
For Sinai rocked and quaked, when God
Made on its Brow his terrible Abode.
In Shamgar's and in Iael's days,
Robbers and Thieves infested all the ways.
These Sons of Violence pursued their Prey
On public Roads in open day.
Poor Trav'llers to escape the cruel hands
Of these Licentious, lawless Bands,
They passed through Ways and Paths unknown,
Yet still in fear, from Town to Town.
The trembling People by these Spoilers scared,
To Towns of Strength in Troops repaired.
They left their old Abodes to be possessed
By Owls and Bats, and every rav'ning Beast:
Until their fruitful Land at last,
Became a wild Inhospitable Wast.
O Israel, these were thy sad Wants and Woes,
These thy Oppressions when I Deb'rah rose;
When I arose a Mother to restore
Thy former Peace, and Wealth, and Power.
Till then thy blind Apostate Sons forsook
Theirs, and their Father's God, and took
New fangled Gods, of old unknown,
Gods lately into Reputation grown,
Gods carved in Wood, or cut in Stone.
Heaven thus provoked, excited Foes,
Who full of rage against our Citys rose.
Confed'rate Kingdoms War with Israel waged,
And horrid Slaughter in our Bowels raged:
And well it might, for we were so disarmed,
That when the Foe our Gates alarmed,
Did there a single Shield or Spear,
Midst forty Thousand Israelites appear?
O Israel then, I rose to rescue thee
From thy vile Chains to set thee free.
Nor can my Song too much exalt the Fame
Of those great Chiefs, who freely came
To give me Aid, and to subdue our Foes,
Did gen'rously their Lives expose.
Give them their due Applause, but chiefly bless
The God, who gave them Courage and Success.
Ye Lords in Courts of Judgment who preside,
And through the Streets in awful State,
With numerous Trains attended ride,
The Almighty's wondrous Work relate.
Ye People who can leave your safe Abodes,
And travel now secure in Public Roads;
You that do now in Joy and Peace,
Your Fig Trees and your Vines possess;
You who no more the noise of Archers hear,
But unmolested to your Springs repair;
Do you rehearse God's righteous Deeds,
Whence this your unexpected Peace proceeds.
Awake, awake, O Deborah, awake,
Quickly thy Harp and Timbrel take.
A Song of Triumph and of Joy rehearse,
In lofty Strains, and noble Verse.
A Song that may just Honor pay
To the great Deeds of this illustrious Day.
O Barak rise, arise thou valiant Chief,
Whose Conquering Arms have brought relief
To Israel in our vast distress,
And made our haughty Foes their Impotence confess.
Thou mighty Man advance, and lead along
Thy Spoils and Trophys through the cleaving Throng,
Thy Captives lead in clanking Chains,
All their vast Army's small Rematns.
Thou who the dreadful Battle did display
On that decisive, glorious Day,
Now draw thy Pomp and Triumph in Array.
Jacob's Remains by Heaven with Empire crowned
Have laid their Yoke on Canaan's Kings around.
Even me the Lord has raised to Regal Sway,
And made the Mighty my Commands obey.
Thy Sons did first the War embrace,
Forward in Arms, O Benjamin;
And next to thee a few of Ephraim's Race
Advanced, and joined their Troops with thine.
Rulers and Nobles from Manasses came,
Whose brave example did the rest inflame.
The Scribes of Zebulun, and learned Men,
To weild the Sword laid down the Pen.
The Princes and the Lords of Issachar?
Despising Danger, undertook the War.
With Zeal they followed me their Head,
And Barak to the Field their valiant Squadrons led.
Ah Reuben, how were we dismayed,
To be defrauded of thy Aid!
Ah, why did thou desert thy Country's Cause?
Why did not Reuben share this day's applause?
Say when thy Brethren armed with Sword and Shield,
For Liberty advanced into the Field,
Why did thou sullen in thy Tents abide,
As if in Blood and Interest not Allied?
Could thou to Arms thy Shepherd's Crook prefer,
And rather choose thy bleating Sheep to hear,
Than the loud Thunder of a noble War?
Oh, how much Trouble to our State,
Did this ignoble Deed of thine create?
Gilead beyond the Flood of Iopran stayed,
And of the haughty Foe afraid,
Refused to give his Brethren Aid.
Dan on his Wealth and Shipping too intent,
No Succors to our Army sent.
Asher with like inglorious Negligence,
Trusting to Rocks and Caves as his defense,
Stayed on the Shore, and no Assistance gave,
Our Worship, or our Liberty to save.
But oh! what wondrous Deeds were done
By Napthali and Zebulun!
With what an ardour, what a warlike rage
Did those brave Men in Fight engage?
Methinks I see those Warriors make
Their bold and irresistible Attack.
Greedy and fond of Danger, they
The Squadrons cleft, and cut the way
To the chief Places of the Field,
Which did the chiefest choice of ruin yield,
Which were with plenty of Destruction stored,
And all the horrid shapes of danger did afford:
Where Death triumphant in the Battle stood,
Besmeared with Brains, and Dust, and Blood.
Great Potentates of formidable Fame,
Captains and Kings against us came;
Their confluent Troops from every Coast,
Composed a vast o'er^lowing Host.
We saw the advancing Deluge from afar,
And all the must'ring Tides of complicated War.
They stopped, and in Battalia stood,
Upon the Banks of Kishon's Flood;
Thither our eager Squadrons flew,
There did we fight, and there proud Iabin's Troops subdue.
The radiant Host of Stars above
Drew out, and did in warlike order move.
They did their Darts from Heaven's high Turrets throw,
And charged with fatal influence the Foe.
They to our Aid their glittering Forces brought
And against Sisera in their Courses fought.
O Kishon, then thy troubled Tide
Was choked with Carcasses, with Crimson died.
Swords, Helmets, Shields rolled all beneath,
And of the lighter Instruments of Death
Spears, Arrows, Darts, a floating Wood
Overspread the surface of thy Flood.
Thy current swept their Troops away,
And with their mighty Spoils enriched the wondering Sea.
Thy banks, and all the Vale about,
Were spread with marks of ignominious rout.
Chariots o'erturn'd, and scattered Shields,
And broken Hoofs deformed the Fields:
Hoofs torn, and on the stony places cast,
Over which the flying Horsemen past.
Accursed the Almighty's Angel cried,
Accursed be Meroz who her help denied.
Vengeance and Plagues on her vile People light,
Who would not for their God and Country fight.
But let us Iael's Courage sing,
Let loud Applauses through our Citys ring
Of Heber's Wife, above the rest
Of Womankind may she be blessed.
Great Sis'ra choked with heat and dust;
Demanded Water from the Spring;
She to allay the Gen'ral's thirst,
Did Milk and Cream in costly Vessels bring.
She to the Nail the left applied,
And with her right hand did the Hammer guid^.
And as the mighty Sisera
Stretched on the Pavement ^leeping lay,
The undaunted Woman with a noble blow,
Drove in the Nail, and pierced his Temples through.
Amazed, not wakened with the Wound,
He sprung, and bounded from the ground:
The brave Virago did her blow repeat,
And laid him prostrate at her feet.
He bowed and fell, and gasping lay,
Quiver'd and groaned his Life away.
She drew his Sword, and with a Manly stroke,
The Warriors Head from off his Shoulders took.
His Mother looking through her Window said,
Why is his Triumph thus delayed?
Why does his lingering Chariot stay?
Why roll his Wheels so slowly on the way?
Her Maids, nay, she her self replied,
The Conqu'rors stay their Booty to divide.
The distribution made, each Chief can show
A Damsel for his share, or two.
But Sis'ra's Prey outshines the rest,
His is a party-colored Vest
Which Gems and rich Embroidery adorn,
Fit by the greatest Princes to be worn.
These boastful words she spoke, while Sisera
Dead in the Tent of Iael lay.
Lord let his Fate attend thine Enemies,
So let them perish who against thee rise.
But let the Men who Wickedness abhor,
Who love thee, and thy Name adore,
Be like the Sun,
Who when refreshed, does in his Vigor rise,
Eager to run
All the blew Stages of the spacious Skys.
David's Lamentation, Occasioned by the Death of Saul and Jonathan. 1 SAMUEL,
Chap. I.
WHen Jonathan and Saul expiring lay,
On the cursed Hills of Gilb^a,
(Ah black, inglorious, fatal Day!)
'Twas then, unhappy Israel,
Thy Beauty, Strength and Glory fell.
How were thy mighty Warriors slain?
What a red Deluge bathed the reeking Plain?
How were thy Sons to Conquest long inured,
How were thy Valiant Chiefs devoured
By the Philistine's unrelenting Sword?
How terrible, how sudden was their Fate?
These Pillars fallen that prop'd thy State,
Who shall support thy sinking Empire's weight?
Let Fame be struck with horror dumb,
That to our Foes the News may never come.
Let our dishonor be to Gath unknown,
Proclaim it not in Askelon;
Lest if their Daughters come to know
Our loss, and unexampled Woe,
They in their Feasts and Dances should express,
Insultingly their Joy at our distress;
And impiously 'devout, should raise
Their carved and graven Gods, in wicked Songs of P^
Ye Hills of Gilb^a, the fatal place,
Over which the Foe did Israel chase,
Ye luckless Hills,
Spread with your Monarch's Ignominious Spoils,
May you the marks of Heaven's displeasure bear;
Be you no more the Farmer's care:
Let no kind Cloud hereafter, pour
On your parched Heads one fruitful Shower:
May the relentless, hardened Sky,
No Rain by Day, or Dew by Night supply
To ease your Thir^t, and gaping clefts cement;
With Fire be blasted, and with Thunder rent.
Let not a blade of Grass or Corn,
Nor one green Tree your Heads adorn.
By Heaven accursed, to future Ages stand
Uncultivated Heaps of barren Sand.
For vanquished Israel over these Mountains fled,
There with ignoble Rout the Fields were spread,
There lay our Weapons mingled with our Dead*
There scattered Bucklers lay,
Which routed Israel cast away.
There may the Shield of Saul* be found,
Midst common Bucklers on the ground.
Thy Body too, unhappy Monarch, there
Lys mixed with vulgar Corpse, exposed in open Air.
O Saul, O Jonathan, ye mighty Dead,
You never before in Battle fled.
The Arrows from the Son's unerring Bow,
Have pierced ten thousand valiant Warriors through.
The Father's unresisted Sword,
Like raging Fires around devoured:
By no Opposer ever withstood,
The crimson Conq'ror reek'd in Hostile Blood.
Till now, you ever used to come.
Laden with Spoils and Trophys home.
Your Chariots through the confluent, gazing Throng,
Used in slow State to roll along:
While crowds of Captive Princes chained,
Wiping their Brows with dust and sweat distained,
Did panting in the Pomp appear,
Part of the long Procession of the Rear.
Our Daughters, both in Mind and Habit gay,
With Songs and Dances on the way,
Met, and increast the Triumph of the Day.
Thus Victory used to crown
The mighty Father, and the valiant Son.
Now vanquished, over the Hills they fly
From the pursuing Enemy.
Surprising change of Providence,
Those who resistless were, can now make no defense!
So courteous were the Royal Pair,
So condescending, mild and Debonnair,
That they became to all the Nation dear.
No more their kindness failed to move
The People's universal Love,
Than their famed Courage did their Neighbors fear.
They lived in strongest bonds of Love combined,
And as they lived, so they together died;
So close was their Affection joined,
That Death it self could not the knot divide.
For though they fell oppressed with Pagan Power,
Their Love still triumphed over the Conqueror.
And yet their Clemency did never abate
Their Courage, and their Martial heat.
For they, as swift as hungry Eagles, flew,
Or to attack, or to pursue:
And when they were in fight engaged,
Like Lions when provoked, they through the Battle raged.
O Daughters of Jerusalem express,
A Sorrow worthy of our vast distress.
Unite your Groans and mournful Cries,
Unite your Tears and Agonys.
Apply your selves to weeping day and night,
Raptures of Grief be your Delight.
Through every Street lamenting go,
Strains of unruly Anguish show,
And howling Temp^sts raise of wild despairing Woe.
too exquisite Affliction cannot be shown,
Since Saul is fallen from his Imperial Throne.
Saul lys upon the Mountains dead,
Who with abundance Israel fed:
Who gave you Garments glorious to behold,
Scarlet adorned with Needle Work and Gold.
Who hung rich Bracelets on your Arms,
And with bright Gems increased your native Charms.
Whose Arms enriched your Towns with precious Spoil,
And filled with Foreign Wealth Iudea's happy Soil.
How did the mighty Prince, and all
His valiant Chiefs in Battle fall!
How are the Hills with Slaughter spread!
How are our Captive Sons in Triumph led!
Captives who drag the inglorious Chain,
Captives less happy than the Slain!
Horror and Shame! hark, how the shouting Foe,
How proud Philistia mocks our Woe!
Through all their Streets what Acclamations ring?
Hear how their Daughters sing,
See how they dance,
While their victorious Troops with Israel's Spoils advance*
O Israel, where is now thy warlike Fame?
How will thy once much dreaded Name,
By Foes so often vanquished, be despised
By all the Nations of the Uncircumsised?
Oh Jonathan, how dear were thou to me?
How dear must be thy Memory?
No Time can from my Breast remove
Thy Image, or thy wondrous love:
A Love, like which we none recorded find,
A Love surpassing that of Womankind.
Their Love was never so tender, pure and strong,
And never lasted in excess so long.
What generous Friendship have thou shown,
What dreadful Dangers undergone,
To raise thy Rival to thy Father's Throne?
Kindest of Brothers, my afflicted Soul,
Does thy unhappy Fall condole.
Thy sudden, thy disast'rous Fate,
Does Agonies of Grief create.
As in a Storm, my rolling Bowels move
With strong Convulsive Throws of sad, distracted Love.
I would the highest marks express
Of uncontrolled, unmerciful distress:
For if my Grief does not outrageous grow,
It Is unbecoming my unmeasured Woe,
Nothing's enough that is less than all that Love can show.
THE Second PSALM PARAPHRASED.
WHat means this mighty Uproar? whence arise
This great Commotion, these tumultuous Cries?
What has alarmed the Nations? what offense
Does all the jealous States around incense?
What does the Heathen Fire with so much Rage?
What Jacob's Sons in such Designs engage
As they can never effect, or if they do,
They Will miss the end they furiously pursue?
Infatuated Men! you will sure repent
Your rash Attempts, too late the sad event
Will show your Projects vain, your Malice impotent.
Confed'rate Princes wicked Friendship make,
And in their Anger desperate Councels take
Against their great Creator and his Son,
And hope the Lord's Anointed to dethrone.
Let us, say they, assert our Liberty,
And keep our Kingdoms from Oppression free.
We'll never agree to vindicate the Cause
Of this new King, nor ever obey his Laws.
The Almighty sets his Favorite up in vain,
We'll never consent to this Usurper's Reign.
We his proud Yoke will never tamely bear,
But will his servile Chains asunder tear.
But the great God who sits enthroned on high,
Above the Starry Unequal of the Sky,
Insultingly will mock their foolish Pride,
Laugh at their Threats, and their vain Plots deride.
In fiery Indignation, he shall pass
A dreadful Sentence on this impious Race.
The marks of high Displeasure he shall show,
And pour Destruction on the audacious Foe.
Thus from his Throne sublime the Eternal spoke,
And with his awful Voice the Frame of Nature shook,
In spite of all the Princes that combine,
Or to retard, or frustrate my design;
On Sion's Hill my Favorite I Will enthrone,
And fix upon his Head the Imperial Crown.
Submissive States his Empire shall obey,
And at his Footstool Kings their Scepters lay.
He shall Tyrannic Cruelty correct,
And tenderly his Subject's Rights protect.
He shall assert Divine Religion's Cause,
Heaven's sacred Interests manage with Applause,
And rule the World with just and equal Laws.
To execute his high important Charge,
My Viceroy I invest with Power at large:
Vast Power I give him, but I give him none,
But what is mixed with Mercy like my own.
No other Power, but what is understood
To be intended for his Subjects good.
His just and gentle Conduct shall confess,
He seeks his Glory in their Happiness.
I to the World will publish thy Decree,
That raises me to Regal Dignity.
Thus said the Lord, let it this Day be known,
That thou art my begotten only Son,
Thy high Descent let all the Nations own.
Thou art intitul'd by thy Royal Birth,
To all the Realms and Nations of the Earth:
Make thy demand, and by my Grant divine,
The Pagan States and Kingdoms shall be thine.
I Will subject all the spacious tracks of Land,
From Pole to Pole to thy supreme command*
Thou shall of all the Regions be possessed,
From the Sun's rising to the adverse West.
Only the limits which the World surround,
Thy Universal Monarchy shall bound.
Armed with a Rod of Iron thou shall reign
Over proud Oppressors, and their Rage restrain.
Thou shall in pieces dash, like Potters Clay,
Thy stubborn Foes, who insolently say,
We'll never his Title own, nor his Commands obey.
Ye foolish Kings and Potentates be wise,
And be instructed where your Safety lies.
The Son of God with Acclamations meet,
And prostrate lie adoring at his feet.
Bow down your Necks to take his gentle Yoke,
Lest your neglect his Fury should provoke.
If you refuse this Monarch to obey,
Be sure you will perish in your wicked way.
For if his Wrath so dreadful does appear,
When scarcely kindled, what have you to fear
Who by your desperate Provocations raise
The Spark to Flames, and make his Fury blaze?
No longer your Subjection then delay,
The safe and happy Men are only they
Who as their Refuge and secure Defense,
Repose in him their Trust and Confidence.
THE CIVth PSALM PARAPHRASED.
MY grateful Soul the Almighty's Name adore;
Great is his Being, great his Works of Power
Immortal Honors, Majesty, Renown,
And Dignity Divine his Temples crown.
His Robe of State is wrought with Light re^in'd;
An endless Train of Luster flows behind.
His Throne's of massy, burnished Glory made,
With Heavenly Pearl, and Gems Divine inlaid:
Whence Floods of Joy, and Seas of Splendor flow,
On all the Angelic gazing Throng below:
Who drink in Pleasures by their ravished Sight,
Deluged in vast ineffable Delight.
He as a Tent the Heaven's expansion reers,
And as a Curtain stretches out the Spears.
He makes the Mists his Pillars to sustain
His airy Rooms, and lays their Beams in Rain.
The Clouds the Almighty's rolling Chariots bear
Their Lord through all the spacious Fields of Air.
He harnasses the manag' Winds, and flys
On their swift Wings to visit all the Skys.
The various Meteors of the Air above
Wait his Commands, and by his Order move.
Tempests and Windy Vapors, raised on high
To do his Will, like Menial Servants fly.
Lightnings, and all his wildest Works of Fire,
His Ministers, to serve their Lord conspire.
These senseless Creatures such Obedience show
To their great Master, as his Angels do.
To him her Father, Nature owes her Birth,
He laid the deep Foundations of the Earth.
He hung the pondrous heap in fluid Air,
And made its weight its own Supporter there.
Then he the Waters over its Bosom rolled;
And liquid Garments did the Earth enfold.
The Rocks and Hills concealed in Billows stood,
And over the Mountains tops the Deluge raised its Flood.
God's great Command chastis'd the Water's Pride,
He bad the Flood call down its towering Tide,
And strait the ebbing Deluge did subside.
The Almighty formed a vast capacious Deep,
Where he his Watery Regiments might keep:
The waves file off, and thither make their way,
To form the mighty Body of the Sea.
Where they encamp, and in their Stations stand,
Entrenched in Works of Rock and Lines of Sand.
Yet some Deserters still the Sea forsake,
And from their Posts by stealth Excursions make.
The Sun to some lets down his helping Ray,
They climb the golden Line, and thus convey
Themselves in Vapors high amidst the Air,
And to the Hills aspiring heads repair.
Others by secret Channels from the Deep
Pass undiscerned, and up the Mountains creep:
Whence gushing out in Springs they downward flow.
And through the flowery Vales back to the Ocean go.
While God in Prison holds the mighty Deep,
And does in rocky Chains the raging Monster keep,
That it may never surmount the ambient Shore,
And with its Flood may drown the Earth no more,
He to refresh, and cloth the Meads with Grass,
Bids all his Rivers through the Vallys pass.
Kindly their course the indented Banks restrain,
Kindly the Hills retard their gliding train.
For thus the lingering Streams at leisure flow,
And greater Riches on the Fields bestow.
Beasts tame and salvage to the River's brink,
Come from the Fields and Wilderness to drink.
Thither the feathered Singers of the Air,
To quench their thirst and prune their Wings, repair.
Then midst the Willows that adorn the Flood,
Or on the Branches in some neighboring Wood,
The painted Heralds in melodious Lays,
Proclaim their gracious Benefactor's Praise.
He from his high Aerial Chambers, where
The Almighty Chemist does his Works prepare,
Digests his Lightnings, and distills his Rain,
Pours down his Waters on the thirsty Plain.
He sends refreshing Showers to cheer the Hills,
And with his Bounty all the Valley fills;
The Earth made fruitful with his Heavenly drops,
With a rich Harvest crowns the Farmer's Hopes.
He does the Fields his open Table spread,
Where all the Beasts with grassy Meat are fed.
He Plants, for Food and Physic does produce
Through all the Earth, for Man his Viceroys use.
He pours from Heaven his Rain upon the Vine,
And thus converts the Water into Wine.
Which does revive Man's Heart, his Cares relieve,
And to his Face a better Luster give,
Than when with Oil it does anointed shine,
With Oil, another noble Gift Divine.
He fills the teeming Glebe with Crops of Corn,
Which cloth the Vallys, and the Hills adorn.
The Staff of Humane Life at his Command,
Springs from the Furrows of the fruitful Land.
He from the Clouds does the sweet Liquor squeeze,
Which cheers the Forests and the Garden Trees,
With the rich Juice he feeds their thirsty root,
Which fills their Limbs with Sap, their Heads with Fruit.
To this the Cedars that adorn the Brow
Of Lebanon, their Height and Beauty owe.
The Firs too thrive by drops from Heaven distilled,
In which the Storks their Airy Houses build.
The Mountains reer'd their Heads at his Command,
And Pillars to his Praise erected stand:
In these, and in the Rocks, the salvage Kind,
From the pursuer's Arms safe Refuge find.
He formed the Moon the Seasons to divide,
And gave it Empire over the Ocean's tide.
The Sun he burnished, till its Orb became
A Spring of Light, and undecaying Flame.
Which knows the Stages of its heavenly way,
And does by turns roll up, by turns display
The wide and bright expansion of the Day.
It Is God who made the Day, that makes the Night,
He in the Air to suffocate the Light,
Does from his opened Stores of Darkness let
A gloomy Deluge out of liquid Jet.
He wipes the Colors off from Nature's Face,
And lays on Night's deep Shadows in their place.
Now the wild Beasts by Hunger bit awake,
And from their drowsy Eyes their Slumber shake.
From out their Dens the Spoilers yawning come,
The Forests Range, and over the Mountains roam.
Young rav'ning Lions from the Woods retreat,
Roar out to Heaven, and beg from God their Meat.
They on his Providential Care rely,
Who does his Creatures various Wants supply.
But when with his reviving Morning Ray
The rising Sun regenerates the Day,
They to their Dens retire with Toil oppressed,
Stretch out their weary Limbs, and take their rest.
But Man goes forth to labor in the Morn,
When the tired Lion does from his return.
God's Works of Power our Wonder, and his Praise
Through all the World his Works of Goodness raise.
To form the Sea he drew his Compass round,
And with the mark it left described the ground:
Then dug the unfathomed Hollow, which the Main
And all the Floods and Rivers might contain.
So populous these watery Regions are,
That Nations numberless inhabit there.
Mute Nations that are here supplied with Food,
Whose Finny Wings divide the crystal Flood.
Here it is the Ships along the yielding Tide,
Before the Wind upon their Bellys glide.
The Whale, the Sovereign that the Sea controlls,
Here takes his Pleasure, and in Pastime rolls.
He plays, and tumbles in his Watery Court,
And troubles all the Ocean with his Sport.
He makes his Spouts for his Diversion play,
And toss against the Clouds the uplifted Sea.
Projected Billows from his Nostrils rise,
And mix the Ocean with the astonished Skys.
This mighty Monster who does Monarch reign,
And all the Nations that possess the Main;
All creeping Creatures, Herds and harmless Flocks,
All Beasts that range the Woods, or hide in Rocks,
All Passengers that beat the Etherial Road
With feathered Wings, wait for their Meat from God.
At his expense they eat, by various ways
He for his numerous Family purveys.
His opened Hand dispences fresh supplys,
That more than all his Creatures Wants suffice.
To substitute Successors in the place
Of those that perish, and to save the Race
And Kind of every living Creature, God
Does his prolific Spirit send abroad;
Which through the Earth does quickening Power diffuse,
And Heat, which fresh Productions there produce.
Since on the Earth the Almighty does dispense
The unnumber'd Blessings of his Providence,
And with his Favors has all Nature crowned,
Let all the World with Songs of Joy resound.
Let Men for ever bless his glorious Name,
Recite his Wonders, and his Praise proclaim.
If stupid Man this Tribute should neglect,
His God the ungrateful Wretch can soon correct.
If on the Earth he does in Anger look,
It trembles at the terrible Rebuke.
It from its strong Foundations starts for fear,
And twisting Gripes its working Entrails tear.
The Mountains shiver, and their Heads incline
At the reproof of Majesty Divine.
The Hills forget they are fixed, and in their fright
Of all their weight they strip themselves for flight.
The Rocks from off their Marble Pillars break,
And which they used to give, a Refuge seek.
The Woods with Terror winged outstrip the Wind,
And leave the heavy, panting Hills behind.
All Nature troubled and in deep distress,
Of God's Displeasure does her Fear express.
But I, whatever others do, will sing
The due Applauses of the Eternal King.
With pleasure I Will contemplate, all my days
His wondrous Works, and wondrous Goodness praise.
And let obd^^ate Sinners, who refuse
To give him Glory, and his Gifts abuse,
Be from the Earth, as they deserve, destroyed,
While, thou my Soul, art in his Praise employed.
THE CXIVth PSALM PARAPHRASED.
WHen God a thousand Miracles had wrought,
The favorite Tribes Deliverance to promote,
And marching on in Triumph at their head,
Their Host to promised Canaan led;
Then, Jacob, was thy rescued Race,
Distinguished by peculiar marks of Grace.
Their Happiness and Honor to advance,
He chose them for his own Inheritance.
With whom alone their gracious God
Would make his Residence, and blessed abode.
They were from Heaven instructed to adore
Their God, and with Celestial Light,
Canaan was blessed, as Goshen was before,
While all their Neighbors lay involved in Night.
God the Foundations of their Empire laid,
The Model of their Constitution made:
He on their Throne their King in Person sat,
And ruled with equal Laws the Sacred State.
For this blessed purpose Jacob's Seed
Was from Egyptian Bondage freed,
When God to do this wondrous work was pleased,
Great Consternation Nature seized.
The restif Floods refused to flow,
Panting with Fear the Winds could find no Breath to blow.
The astonished Sea did motionless become,
Horror its Waters did benumb.
The briny Waves that reer'd themselves to see
The Almighty's Judgments, and his Majesty,
With Terror crystaliz'd began to halt,
Then Pillars grew, and Rocks of Salt.
Jordan as soon as this great Deed it saw,
Struck with a reverential Aw
Started, and with Precipitation fled,
In have the thronging Waves ran backward to their Head.
Vast Hills were moved from out their place,
Terror the Mountains did constrain
To lift themselves from off their Base,
And on their rocky Roots to dance about the Plain.
The little Hills astonished at the Sight,
Flew to the Mother Mountains in a fright,
And did about them skip, as Lambs
Run to, and bleat around their trembling Dams.
What ailed thee, O thou troubled Sea,
That thou with all thy watery Troops did flee?
What ailed thee, Jordan? tell the cause
That made thy Flood break Nature's Laws:
Thy Course thou did not only stop,
And roll thy liquid Volumes up,
But did even backward flow, to hide,
Within thy Fountain's Head thy refluent Tide.
What did the lofty Mountains ail?
What Pangs of Fear did all the Hills assail
That they their Station could not keep,
But scared with danger run, like timorous scattered Sheep?
But why do I demand a Cause
Of your Amazement, which deserves Applause?
Yours was a just becoming Fear,
For when the Almighty does appear,
Not only you, but the whole Earth should quake,
And out of Reverence should its place forsake.
For he is Nature's Sovereign Lord,
Who by his great commanding Word,
Can make the Floods to solid Crystal grow,
Or melt the Rocks, and make their Marble flow.
THE CXLVIII PSALM PARAPHRASED.
YE bright, Immortal Colonys,
That People all the Regions of the Skys,
That in your blissful Seats above
Inhabit Glory, dwell in Light and Love:
Ye mighty Generals, who command
The Almighty's Host, ye Ministers that stand
In his blessed Presence to receive
What Orders he is pleased to give:
Ye Guards and Household Servants who resort
To pay attendance at his Court:
Ye Saints and Seraphs who astonished see
His Greatness, and essential Majesty:
Tune your Celestial Harps, and sing
The Triumphs of the Eternal King.
All ye his Heavenly Hosts applaud
In long continued Shouts your wonder-working God.
Ye Sun and Moon and Stars, that grace the Night,
Praise him the unexhausted Spring of Light,
Whence your dependent Influence streams,
Whence you derive your delegated Beams.
Exalt his Name, and spread his Praise
As far as you diffuse your Rays.
Let all the glorious Worlds above agree
In this Celestial Harmony:
And let the dancing, ecchoing Spears around
Reverberate the Joy, and propagate the sound.
Ye thin transparent Regions of the Air,
And all ye flying Nations there
With one melodious Voice the Eternals Praise declare.
Let Tempests with their stormy Noise,
And Thunder with its roaring Voice,
God's own Artillery, proclaim
Through all the listening World the Eternal's Fame.
From every Quarter all ye Winds arise,
On whose swift Wings the Almighty flys,
When he his Progress makes into the inferior Skys.
Blow all your Blasts, and all your Breath employ
In loud Applauses, and in Songs of Joy.
Ye Vapors that by God's Command arise,
To fill Heaven's Magazines with fresh Supplys,
And for the Meteors new Materials bring,
As you ascend to Heaven, the Eternal's Praises sing.
Ye Clouds that by pursuing Winds are driven,
Pour with your Rain your Praises forth,
Let these ascend, as high as Heaven,
As that descends to bless the Earth.
Praise the Divine Artificer,
Ye Lightnings, which his Hands prepare,
And all ye curious Fireworks of the Air.
Praise him ye other Meteors of the Sky,
Ye Hailstones, Mists and Woolly Snow,
The Manufactures which he works on high,
For Nature's Service here below.
Let Nature's mighty Sovereign Lord,
Be by the Deep, and all the Floods adored.
In Consort let the Billows roar,
And make his Praise rebound from Shore to Shore.
Let the scaly People dance
Before 'em let their Lords, the mighty Whales advance:
And high amidst the Air on this great Day
Let all the Waterworks from their vast Nostrils play.
And while the Deep, the Air and Sky,
Vocal become the Almighty's Name to raise,
Let not the Earth stand silent by,
But join to celebrate his Praise.
Ye Dragons, Wolves, and all ye salvage Kind
On ecchoing Hills in Consort joined,
To him your Adoration pay,
Whose Bounty in the Desert finds you Prey.
Do you your Gratitude express,
And make his Praises ring through all the Wilderness.
Ye Pines and Cedars tune your selves to play
The Almighty's Praises on this solemn Day.
And sing ye Mountains, Hills, and Floods,
To the Instrumental Music of the Woods.
Ye Kings, the King of Kings adore,
And at his Feet your borrowed Scepters lay,
Applaud the Spring of all Imperial Power,
You 're here but Subjects, and should Homage pay.
Let Songs of Praise the Gratitude attest
Of Aged Men, long by his Favors blessed.
Let rapturous Zeal Young Men and Maids inflame,
To celebrate their Maker's Fame,
Let lisping Infants at his Praises aim.
Let all the Eternal's Works conspire
To execute this blessed design,
To praise him let them all combine,
And make the World one Universal Quire.
THE Song of MOSES PARAPHRASED. DEUTERONOMY. Chap. 32.
ATtend, O Heavens, and you Empyreal Spears
Did you possess as many listening Ears,
As Starry Eyes, all, as you roll along,
Should be employed to hear my following Song.
To my important words a while attend,
And back my Notes in tuneful Echoes send.
Peace, ye tumultuous Waters of the Deep,
A while ye yelling Monsters silence keep,
And let the Billows roll, and rock themselves asleep.
Be still, ye Earthquakes, in the Caves beneath,
Ye Winds be hushed, and stop your stormy Breath.
Thunders, your bellowing, deaf'ning Noise forbear,
Tempests be gone, and leave in Peace the Air;
That so the quiet Earth, and Air, and Sea,
Without disturbance may attention pay,
Whilst I the Almighty's wondrous Deeds display.
And let not my Divine Discourse be vain,
Let it distill as Dew, and drop as Rain,
That in their grassy Garments clothes the Hills,
And with rich Fruits the smiling Valley fills.
Whilst I to all the World aloud proclaim
His Majesty, his great and awful Name,
Whilst I his Triumphs sing, ye Tribes, do you
To God ascribe the Power and Glory due.
God is a Rock unchanged by Ages past,
And by the future shall unshaken last.
Perfect are all his Works, and all his Ways;
From Truth's Eternal Rule he never strays.
Upright and Equal all his Acts appear,
He Is just, when kind, and gracious, when severe.
Therefore, ye Sons of Jacob, be it known
On your own heads you have pulled Destruction down.
Your black Offenses have incensed your God,
And forced his hand to take his vengeful Rod.
Say not that yours, the Faults of Children are,
Which a kind Father is induced to spare:
Your Crimson Spots, your foul and loathsome stains
Tell the rank Poison that infects your Veins.
Your unexampled Contumacy shows
You are not Children, but invet'rate Foes.
The Almighty's Goodness do you thus despise,
Ah foolish Generation and unwise!
Your Great Deliverer do you thus requite?
His Power and Mercy thus perversely slight?
You by a vast expense of Wonders bought,
He from your Bondage back from Egypt brought.
He then advanced you to Imperial Sway,
And made the Pagan Kings your Laws obey.
From all Mankind he chose you for his own,
And did your Sons with Power and Plenty crown.
Consult our ancient Fathers, to the source
Of our recorded Story have recourse:
You Will find when God did with a liberal hand
Among the Nations give the parted Land,
He Canaan's happy Region did divide,
Where Jacob's Offspring should at last reside.
He from the Pagan did his People bound,
And for himself fenced this Enclosure round,
And blessed with his Abode the sacred Ground.
To Wealth and Power he Israel did advance,
And with his Gifts enriched his own Inheritance.
To seek out Jacob he the Desert past,
And found him in a lonesome yelling Wast,
With pain and want, and servile Chains oppressed,
A Prey to every fierce Egyptian Beast.
God with Compassion moved to such distress,
Led the lost Stranger through the Wilderness.
He shielded him with his resistless Might,
And to direct him to proceed aright,
He on his Mind diffused his Heavenly Light.
He did his Wants and Pleasures too supply,
And kept him as the Apple of his Eye.
See as an Eagle over her young ones flys,
Spreads out her Wings, and flutters in the Skys.
How from their Nest she does her Offspring bear,
Their Courage to provoke, and make 'em dare
To try their Wings, and trust themselves in Air:
So did the Almighty Jacob's Sons excite,
From Egypt's Prisons to attempt their flight:
Which he assisted with a Father's Care,
And did their way through parting Waves prepare.
He through the pathless Desert was their guide,
And when the Tribes for Egypt's Onions cried,
He in the Wilderness his Table spread,
And in his Airy Ovens baked the Bread,
With which the ungrateful Murmurers were fed.
Then marching onward with a mighty hand,
He led them to possess a fertile Land.
There they the vanquished Heathen Lords pursued,
Reduced their Towns, and their strong Forts subdued,
That they the fruitful Region might enjoy,
And with delights their ravished Senses cloy.
A Soil which Nature's choicest Favors crown,
With Floods of Milk and Honey overflown:
Honey, that runs in yellow, fragrant Seas,
From out the holes of Rocks and hollow Trees.
Bathed in their Oil their cheerful Faces shone,
And with the Grape's rich blood they warmed their own.
And yet the Tribes by gracious Heaven carest,
Revered abroad, at home with Plenty blessed,
Grew fat and vicious, like a pampered Beast.
They all the Bounds of grateful Duty broke,
Spurned at their Lord, and kicked against his Yoke.
Strange Gods inveigled their perfidious Heart
The Worship of the Almighty to desert;
Though he had unexampled Kindness shown,
And had espoused their Interests, as his own.
Then in his Breast fierce Jealousy began,
The Rage of God, as well as it is of Man.
They impious Adoration prostrate pay,
And Sacrifices in their Temples slay
To foul Infernal Fiends, that there abide,
And in the Mock-Divinitys reside.
The Fools, the Gods they serve, themselves create,
All upstart Deitys of modern Date.
Gods the productions of fantastic Fear,
Not Gods above, but manufactur'd here.
But their Celestial Father they forgot,
Who their unthankful Tribes from Egypt brought.
Who as a Rock did them in danger hide,
Remove their Fears, and for their Wants provide.
Who gave them Riches with a bounteous Hand,
Raised them to Honor, and to wide Command.
Such their Perverseness and Offenses were,
That God his People, once his tender Care,
In his fierce Indignation did disclaim,
And threw his Children off, his Children but in Name.
Henceforth, he said, I will conceal my Face,
And hide my self from this unfaithful Race.
Then they, and all the Nations round shall see
The sad Event of their Apostasy.
From my Protection and my Favor cast,
Which they have long abused, they shall at last,
The dreadful fruits of their Rebellions taste.
Since the perverse and stubborn Tribes agree,
To fire my Soul with Rage and Jealousy,
Imaginary Gods while they adore,
And to their Fictions give Almighty Power;
In like designs against them I Will engage,
And will their Sons with Jealousy enrage.
The Time will come when I Will no more confine
My Favors and Regard to Jacob's Line,
To grieve their Sons, my Blessing I Will dispense
Among a salvage People void of Sense.
I Will, like my Sun, spread my inlightning Grace
On every Nation sprung from Adam's Race.
On thee, O Jacob, I thy angry God,
Vast heaps of heavy Mischief will unload.
For kindled by my Wrath a Fire shall burn
The Forests down, and Hills to Cinders turn.
It through the Bowels of the Earth shall spread,
And scorch the cold Apartments of the Dead.
All Nature's Frame shall my fierce Anger feel,
And surfeited with Wrath, the drunken Earth shall reel.
I all my Stores and Arsenals will drain,
To pour Destruction down, and deadly Pain.
I Will from my Quiver all my Arrows send,
And Israel to destroy will all my Vengeance spend.
Some shall by lingering Famine wasted ly,
And shall not, till it is late, have leave to die.
Their Air shall be infected, and the Breath
That fed their Life, shall now give certain Death.
Fevers in livid, poisonous Steams conveyed,
And burning Plagues their Dwellings shall invade,
If any should these foremost Plagues outlive,
I Will to the Forest Beasts Commissions give,
And to the Serpents that in Caves abide,
Or in the Dust their speckled Terrors hide,
The Apostate Sons of Jacob to devour,
That slight my Favors, and defy my Power.
If these Domestic Mischiefs cannot destroy
This stubborn Nation, I Will the Sword employ.
I Will bring in sure Destruction from afar,
And all the Terrors of resistless War.
Their Innocence in vain the Virgins plead,
Young Men their Youth, the Old their Hoary Head.
Pierced with the Sword the sucking Infant cries,
And in the expiring Mother's Bosom dys.
I from the Earth would these Apostates drive,
And leave no Soul of Jacob's Line alive;
Did not I fear the Heathen would blaspheme,
Reproach my Conduct, and my Wrath condemn.
That they would vaunt, and say their mighty hand
Israel subdued, and chased him from his Land.
For Jacob's void of Sense, and does reject
The Advice by which he should his ways direct.
O that these unconsidering Tribes were wise!
O that they knew wherein their Interest lies!
That they to wholesome Counsels would attend,
Think on their Ways, and on their later End!
That they would thus reflect, God's vengeful Blow
Is sure and fatal, be it never so slow.
The Debt of Vengeance does by his delay
Augment the Sum, which he at last will pay.
How should a Man a Thousand chase, and two
Ten Thousand flying Enemies pursue,
Had not their God in Wrath withdrawn his Aid
And their high Fences flat and open laid;
Had he not shut them up in Holes and Caves,
Or sold 'em to the insulting Foe for Slaves?
For, let our Foes be Judges, they will declare
That to our God, their own inferior are.
This by the Suff^rings which they undergo,
Their conquered Towns and routed Armies know.
Had he been pleased among us to abide,
Conquest had still attended Israel's side.
It Is from our selves alone our Sufferings spring,
For Sin at last will sure Destruction bring.
I planted Jacob as a noble Vine,
Expecting thence a rich and generous Wine,
But it is degenerate, and a sourer Juice
The Vines in Sodom's Fields did never produce.
No base^ Stock did in Gomorrah grow;
Wormwood and Gall from its pressed Clusters flow.
No ranker Poison wild Arabia yields
Than this, that grows in Palestina's Fields.
Their Wine outdoes the Venom Asps afford,
Or that, with which the Serpent's Teeth are stored.
But though I suffer long they grossly err,
That thence shall their Impunity infer.
Their Wickedness exactly I record,
Their Crimes are safely with my Treasure stored,
Next to the Caves where I my Vengeance hoard.
To me belongs to punish and reward,
The Debt is never forgotten, though deferred.
Vengeance digests, and strengthens as it lies,
And will at last to full Perfection rise.
Sin and Destruction still together go,
Vengeance is ripe, whenever Sin is so.
The black and dismal Day approaches near,
When Justice in its Terrors will appear.
A Day of greater Sorrow and Distress
Than Fear can apprehend, or Words express.
Then suffering Israel will in Anguish say,
I did not pardon, though I did delay.
Yet God at last will from his Wrath depart,
Plead for his People, and their Cause assert.
His tender Nature will at last relent,
And if his People do, he will soon repent.
Commiseration will possess his Breast,
When he shall see his Israel sore oppressed.
When he shall find the Plagues that he employed,
Has almost Jacob's guilty Race destroyed.
He Will thus the stupid Criminals upbraid,
Where are the Gods to whom you bowed and prayed?
Now for Protection to your Idols flee,
The Gods you chose, when you rejected me.
You did your Adoration to them pay;
Your Sacrifices at their Altars slay,
And rich Oblations there profusely lay.
To these Abominations, Israel, cry,
In thy distress their Power and Goodness try.
With loud repeated Prayers thy Gods invoke,
To bring thee Aid and break thy heavy Yoke.
Now by your sad experience learn and see,
That I the Lord, even I alone am he,
That can subdue your Foes and set your Captives free.
I at my Pleasure Kill and make alive,
I wound and heal, I health and sickness give.
Where is the Arm that can my Power withstand,
And tear a Prisoner from my griping Hand?
I lift my hand, most solemnly I swear,
And, as I live for ever, I declare
That when I once begin to take the Field,
To whet my glittering Sword, and raise my Shield,
When I my deadly Instruments prepare,
And arm my self to undertake the War;
My Fury shall my Enemies devour,
And on their Land I Will Storms of Vengeance pour.
I Will give my hungry Sword their Flesh for Food,
And make my thirsty Arrows drunk with Blood.
Their Voices let the Gentile World employ,
And join with Jacob's Sons in Songs of Joy:
For on their Foes God will avenge the blood
Of those who steadfast in his Service stood.
To Israel he his Mercy will extend,
And Heavenly Light and Truth amidst their Dwellings send.
A PARAPHRASE On part of the xivth Cha. of Isaiah.
Beginning at the 4th, and ending at the 24th Verse.
THE Nations round amazed and overjoyed,
Shall crowd to see proud Babylon destroyed.
They Will spread their Hands to Heaven, and say,
O blessed, O long expected Day!
How from his Throne is the great Tyrant cast,
The Ravager that all our Towns defaced,
Ruined Mankind, and laid all Nature wast!
How is the Imperial, Purple Plague that reigned,
And raged so long at last restrained?
Where are the Guards who used to wait
Before the Oppressor's Palace Gate?
Where are the awful Ensigns of his State?
Where is the fawning flattering Throng,
That to his Court did once belong?
Who did the Monster as a God adore,
And bless the rav'ning Jaws that did Mankind devour.
The haughty City which the World controlled,
Magnificent with Cedar, and with Gold,
Which towering stood amidst the Skys,
See where her Head in heaps of Rubbish lys.
Is this the City will Spectators say,
That all the World her Empire did survey?
That made the Nations tremble with her Frowns,
And gave to Kings their Tributary Crowns?
How great a Change! good Heavens, how soon
Is all her Pride and Glory gone!
God by a great illustrious Stroke
Of Justice, has her Monarch's Scepter broke,
And freed the groaning Nations from his Yoke.
He has destroyed the Towers of Babylon,
And rent the Pillars that upheld her Throne.
He has her cruel Power withstood,
And on her Head avenged the Nation's Blood.
She that the Faces of the Poor did grind,
That never to Mercy was inclined,
Shall no Compassion from the Conq'rour find.
The People by her Yoke oppressed,
By Heaven delivered from their Bondage rest.
Kingdoms enslaved their Liberty regain,
And Captives from their Feet shake off the servile Chain.
Loud Triumphs, universal Joy,
And Songs of Praise shall all the Earth employ.
The Pines and Fir-trees on the Hills rejoice,
And with a grateful Voice
The Cedars that in stately Order grow
On Lebanon's high Airy Brow,
Cry, we of this Deliverance too partake,
Let us as well as Men our thankful Offering make.
We Liberty, as well as they, enjoy;
No more shall Babylon employ,
Her Ravagers our quiet to annoy.
Our Spoils shall yield no more supply
To the proud City's Luxury.
No more the Feller shall our Forest wound,
No more the Axe shall through the Hills resound,
Nor shall our mangled Limbs o'erspred the encumbered ground
The Grave shall for the Assyrian Monarch's sake
Disturb the Peaceful Dead, and make
Her drousy Lodgers rise,
Shake from their Feet their Chains, and Slumber from their Eyes.
Princes and Kings who underground
Only with Worms and Dust are crowned,
She from their Beds of Darkness shall release,
The only Thrones they now possess:
To meet Assyria's Tyrant on his way,
The Grave this Royal Embassy shall send;
And, as instructed, they shall say,
O King, does thus thy Pomp and Empire end?
Feeble as we art thou become?
Must we conduct thee to a narrow Tomb,
For whom the World before had scarce sufficient room?
Art thou whose Scepter had so vast a sway,
Whose Will even Kings themselves did once obey,
Stripped of thy Power and Majesty,
Art thou as Naked, Poor and Weak as we?
Could not thy Conquering Armies save
Their mighty Monarch from the Grave?
Must thou too in a dark and dusty Bed
Lay thy Imperial awful Head,
And be with Worms instead of Scarlet spread?
And must the Ear
That used to hear
The Viol's, or the Harp's melodious Noise,
Or the Flatterer's softer Voice,
Be now with us the Dead entombed,
To everlasting Silence doomed?
How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer,
Son of the Morn,
How does thy Glory disappear,
Which once thy Temples did adorn?
Grown mad with Pride, by Flattery fed,
Thou in thy Heart has often blaspheming said,
I into Heaven, will, as a God, arise,
And shine above the Stars amidst the Skys.
Worship Divine will me befit,
I base Mortality disown,
And therefore will on Zion fix my Throne,
And there to be adored in Majesty will sit.
Above the Clouds of Heaven will I ascend,
And my Dominion over the World extend.
My Greatness Men shall like to God's adore,
And uncontrolled, like his, shall be my Sovereign Power.
Yet, Tyrant, thou shall sink as low as Hell,
And of thy State divested dwell
In the gloomy Shades beneath,
In the dusty Courts of Death.
Where thy Arrival will the Dead amaze,
On thee the pale Inhabitants will gaze,
And cry, is this the late pretended God
That governed Millions with his Nod,
And on the Necks of Captive Princes trod?
Is this the Immortal Man that never cloyed
With Blood and Rapine all the Earth destroyed?
That Princes of their Thrones did disposses
Did wasted Nations with his Yoke oppress,
And made the empty World a howling Wilderness?
Who Towers demolished, goodly Buildings burned
And Cities into Rubbish turned;
Who never gave his People rest,
Nor once his Prisoners from their Chains releast.
When other Sovereign Princes die,
They lie in pompous Sepulchers, prepared
To Lodge their Royal Family,
And as they lived they are in State interred.
But none thy Body in the Tomb shall lay,
They Will cast it as a rotten Branch away.
No Funeral Honors shall thy Hearse adorn,
But as the bloody Raiment of the Slain
Whom the next Pit or Quarries entertain,
Thy more polluted Carcass shall with scorn
Be trodden under foot, and into pieces torn.
Thou shall not from thy Palace be conveyed
As other Monarchs use to be,
Nor in a stately Tomb be laid
With costly Rites and sad Solemnity.
Because thy Salvage Hand
Has slain thy People and destroyed thy Land.
God shall all Marks and Monuments efface
Of this ungodly, cruel Race.
His Hand that raised them up shall pull 'em down,
And strip them of their Glory and Renown.
Resistless Ruin he will on 'em send,
Their House and Empire shall together end.
Let it ye Medes and Persians be you Care
Destruction for their Children to prepare.
No tenderness to Age or Sex express,
But on the Sons avenge the Father's Wickedness.
That this cursed House may never more
Regain their Splendour and their former Power.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, OBabilon,
Thou 'rt fully ripe for Ruin grown:
In Storms of Vengeance I Will against thee rise
Which shall thy careless Sons surprise.
Thy lofty Towers I Will level lay,
And sweep thy vile Inhabitants away.
Thee like to Sodom I will make,
And turn thee to a mighty Lake.
The lonesome Bittern shall possess
This Fenny Seat, this Reedy Wilderness.
The Waves shall through thy Cedar Chambers roll,
And on thy Shore shall Water-Monsters howl.
The Palaces where cruel Kings did reign,
In time to come shall entertain
The mute Oppressors of the Main.
So Babylon shall always be
The Seat of Blood and Tyranny.
A scaly Garrison shall dwell
In every Fort and Citadel.
The swift Assassins of the Flood shall sport
Within thy Monarch's weedy Court;
Thither shall Fish of every Kind resort.
There thy Luxurious Sons they shall devour,
And feed on those; who fed on them before.
THE xxxivth Cha. of Isaiah. PARAPHRASED.
YE various Nations who disperse
Your Dwellings through the spacious Universe,
Inhabitants of every distant Soil,
Of every Continent and every Isle,
At Heaven's dread Summons all appear;
Let all the World collected throng to hear
Things that will melt their trembling Hearts with fear.
Against the Nations God's fierce Anger burns,
Against them he his pointed Vengeance turns.
He brings his oldest Stores of Fury forth,
Hidden Reserves of Rage, and high fermented Wrath.
He will the swiftest Kinds of Death employ
The Heathen Nations to destroy;
Who mixing Arms advance from far
Against our Land Confed'rate War.
Their Bodies shall unburied lie, a Feast
To every rav'ning Forest Beast.
Vultures and all the Rovers of the Air,
To the red Fields of Slaughter shall repair;
Where they great Chiefs and Potentates shall eat,
And royal Banquets shall their Hunger treat.
From heaps of putrefying Dead,
Amidst the Skies
A noisome Scent shall rise,
And through the tainted Air Malignant Vapors spread.
Down from the Hills on which their Armies stood
Torrents shall run of reeking Blood,
And rocky Fragments roll along the impetous Flood.
The Plains shall lie, and all the Vales around
Beneath the Purple Inundation drowned.
Nature shall groan, and during this attack
Her universal Frame shall with Convulsions shake.
The Sun and Moon amazed to see
Nature's convulsive Agony
Shall spring, and start from out their Spears;
And all the glittering Host of Stars
Seized with no less affright,
Shall fly away from Mortals sight,
And in the Bosom hide of ancient Night.
The vast Expansion drawn around the World,
Shall like a useless Sail be furled.
All the blew Volumes of the Sky shall roll
Themselves together, as a Parchment Scrole.
Celestial Orbs that round us shine
Falling from Heaven the World shall see
As Leaves in Autumn from the Vine,
Or Figgs when ripe, fall from the shaken Tree.
The Almighty's Sword, so it is in Heaven decreed,
Shall bath it self in Blood, and on Destruction feed.
The radiant Spoiler down the Sky
Shall like projected Lightning fly.
On Edom's Fields he will make his swift descent
To execute his dire Intent.
The reeking Ravager will march in have
To slay the Men, and lay the Country wast.
Where ever his Course the Conq'rour bends,
Ruin in all its frightful Forms attends.
Death and Destruction keep an equal pace,
And Desolation shows her ghastly, wastful Face.
The glittering Glutton shall be gorged with Food
Made fat with Spoil and drunk with Blood.
Not with the Blood of Goats and Lambs,
Nor fatted with the Flesh of Rams,
But with the Blood of Israel's Foes,
And with their Flesh who Israel's God oppose.
Princes and Lords with these combined
Against us, in Destruction too are joined.
Princes and Lords who armed with Power
The People, as their Prey devour:
Who lawless sway like Unicorns possess,
Or the wild Bulls that range the Wilderness.
God has a mighty Sacrifice in hand
In Bozrah, and at his command
Vast slaughter will be made in Edom's Land.
A Slaughter and a Sacrifice
Where harmless Beasts are saved, and Man the Offender dies.
So great a Slaughter shall be made,
That all the Land shall under Blood be laid.
The Carcasses of Idumeans slain
Shall cover every Hill and Plain.
For this is that tremendous Day
Which God appoints, wherein to pay
The mighty Sums of Fury in arrear,
And his vast Debt of Vengeance clear;
His long contracted Debt of Vengeance due
To Nations, that his People's fall pursue.
Their Floods to lazy Streams of Pitch shall turn,
And kindled Brimstone shall their Cities burn.
The Clouds shall spouts of Flame on Edom pour,
Such as Gomorrah did devour;
Whence everlasting Smoke shall rise,
As from a burning Mount amidst the Skies.
No People more shall ever possess
This ruined Land, this burning Wilderness.
No Trav'ller ever more shall pass
Through this accursed, inhospitable Place.
Never shall be seen the footsteps of a Man,
But the hoarce Bittern, and the Pelican,
The Owl and Raven shall inhabit there
With all the illboding Monsters of the Air.
God to accomplish his design,
Over Edom shall extend his measuring Line:
Shall draw his Compass round about,
And for Destruction mark the People out.
No Idumean Prince or Lord
Shall escape the Conquering Sword.
Thistles and thorny Trees
Shall flourish in their Princes Palaces.
Nettles shall sp^ing around their Monarch's Throne;
Their Forts with (...) shall be overgrown,
And mossy Turf shall cover every Stone.
Their gilded Roofs shall lodge the Bat and Owl,
And in their lofty Rooms of State
Where cringing Sycophants did wait,
Dragons shall hiss, and hungry Wolves shall howl.
In Courts before by mighty Lords possessed,
The Serpent shall erect his speckled Crest,
Or fold his circling Spires to rest.
The long-neck'd Giant of the feathered Kind
The Ostrich, there a sandy Nest shall find.
Leopards and all the rav'ning Brotherhoods
That range the Plains, or lurk in Woods,
Each other shall invite to come
And make this wilder Place their home.
Fierce Beasts of every frightful shape and size,
Shall setle here their bloody Colonys.
Satyrs shall to their Fellows cry, advance,
Let us to Edom's Land make have,
It Is a silent, lonesome Wast,
There let us dwell, there let us sport and dance.
The Screech-Owl thither shall direct her flight,
With all the Hooping Horrors of the Night:
There they shall build their Nests and breed;
Their Eggs they will unmolested lay,
There over their Young their Wings display
And there the gaping Callow Monsters feed.
The Vultures there and all the Eagle Kind
Shall rendezvous o'erjoy'd to find
A perfect desolation to their Mind.
THE xlth Chap. of Isaiah. PARAPHRASED.
YE Prophets who divine Credentials bear
Distinguished by your Sacred Character,
Envoys and Agents, who by my Command
Reside in Palestina's Land;
To whom Commission I have given
To manage there the Interests of Heaven;
Ye holy Heralds who proclaim
Or War or Peace in mine your Master's Name,
Let my desponding People know,
That I their God will mitigate their Woe,
Tell them Compassion melts my Heart
That I of punishing Repent,
And that their bleeding Wounds and Smart
Which my own hand inflicted, I Lament.
Comfort Jerusalem, and cry
The time of her Deliverance is nigh.
Say her Offenses I Will forget,
Nor more my scourging Strokes repeat.
Her Sufferings and her Servitude shall cease,
And from Oppression I Will her Sons release.
The Allarms of War she shall no longer hear,
No more Assyrian Armies fear.
She shall enjoy uninterrupted Ease,
Gathered beneath the downy Wings of Peace.
The Sufferings she has undergone
Abundantly my Wrath for all her Sins atone.
Hark! What a loud Majestic sound
What awful Accents from the Hills rebound!
Listen with Reverence, Hark! the noise
Grows more distinct; it is the commanding Voice
Of one that in the Desert cries,
Let all the Nations round arise:
Ye Pioneers of Heaven prepare a Road
Through the pathless Wilderness,
Make it plain and strait and broad,
And let your Shouts your Joy express.
The obstructing Groves and Forests level lay,
And for the Almighty make a way;
For he in Person will his People head
And out from Babylon his rescued Captives lead.
He will from Heaven descend to free
The Nations from Infernal Slavery.
He Will bring them out by Miracles of Might
From Pagan Darkness to Celestial Light.
Sink every Mountain, every Hill,
And with their Ruins every valley fill.
Smooth every rugged, rocky place,
And every narrow De^ile enlarge,
For God this way in Triumph means to pass,
As he from Babylon conducts his Charge.
Make an open, easy way,
Where God his Glory may display;
For the Divine Deliverer
Will on his March in Majesty appear.
His high Perfections he will reveal, and show
The astonished World what Wonders he can do.
That he will effect this mighty Work, the Lord
Has given his never-failing Word.
The Almighty bid his Prophet say,
All Men are subject to decay,
And wither, like the Grass, away.
To every Storm or Blast they yield,
And fade, like Flowers, that paint the Field;
But the Almighty's Word shall stand secure,
And like himself for ever shall endure.
O Zion! whose impending, airy Brow
Surveys the Hills, as well as Vales below.
The joyful Tidings thou have got, impart
To raise my People's drooping Heart.
Lift up thy Voice and let the Ecchoing sound
From Wood to Wood, from Hill to Hill rebound,
And ring through all the Vales and all the Towns around.
Cry with a loud and fearless Voice,
Let* all thy Cities, Palestine, rejoice.
Your sinking Heads ye Towns of Judah rear
Behold your God your great Deliverer
In Person to your Aid advances near.
See where the Almighty Conq'rour takes the Field;
In his strong Hand what Terrors does he wield?
How dreadful are his Steps? how bright his Sword and Shield?
See how the Forests at his Presence bow
How silently the Rivers flow.
How do the Plains, through which he marches, smoke!
How do the troubled Mountains rock!
He needs the Aid of no Confed'rate Power,
His single Arms will Victory ensure.
He brings to crown the Just a bright Reward,
And for the Wicked Vengeance has prepared.
He as a faithful Shepherd, will attend
His Flock with tender Care, and condescend
To carry in his Arms the Feeble Lambs,
And gently lead the pregnant Dams.
His People in his Word may rest secure,
For Boundless, as his Mercy, is his Power.
In the wide hollow of his Hand may sleep
All the collected Waters of the Deep:
Let all the Rivers too be thither rolled,
The vast Abyss will yet more Seas and Rivers hold.
His Span across the widest Heavens can stretch,
And the vast Void beyond 'em overreach.
The Rocks and Hills he in a Balance lays
And high amid'st the Air the uplifted Mountains weighs.
This Globe when held in his Capacious Hand,
Seems a small Atome, or a single Sand.
When God the Draughts of Heaven and Earth designed,
And formed the noble Platform in his Mind,
Did any skilful Architect
Help him his wondrous Model to correct?
When he the World's Foundations laid
And raised the lofty Pillars with his Hand,
To give him or Advice or Aid
Did any Wise Surveyor by him stand?
Did he from any, Counsel need
How in Creation to proceed?
When by a thousand Wonders wrought
His vast Design was to perfection brought,
What Counselor of State did him instruct
The World his Creature to conduct?
Who taught him how the Universe to sway,
And form the Maxims of his Government,
To settle Nature in a stedy Way,
And all destructive Uproar to prevent?
How, where ten thousand Creatures disagree,
To make their Motions end in perfect Harmony?
How with unerring Methods to pursue
The glorious Ends he had at first in view?
God does the Nations of the World regard
As a small drop with the vast Deep compared;
Or Dust that in the Balance gives no Weight
To press the Scale and change its equal State.
God by their rocky Roots takes up the Hills,
And from their Oazy Beds the Isles.
He hurls them from their former Seat,
As things of neither Bulk, nor Weight.
O Lebanon whose spacious Head
Is with aspiring Cedars spread,
With Wood sufficient is thy Forest stored,
Or can it Beasts enough afford
For a Burnt offering for all Nature's Lord?
Against him should the Nations rise
He would neglect their weak alarms,
This wretched Host of Worms he would despise,
And laugh at empty Vanity in Arms.
If God the Spring of Life and Power
By whose supplys his various Worlds endure,
Held back his Streams, Mankind would soon expire,
Dissolve, and into nothing strait retire.
Since his Perfections so transcendent are,
What Image can his Being represent?
What can you with Almighty Strength compare?
What Figure of Infinity invent?
The senseless Heathens to the Artist run
Who deals in Deities of Wood and Stone;
The Fools bespeak an Antic lacker'd God
To Guard their Persons, and Abode.
The melted Metal in the Furnace flows
Then in the Mould the stiff'ning Idol glows:
And when their God grows Hard and Cold,
The Workman makes him fine, and daubs him over with Gold.
The Crowd their gaudy Deity admire
The effect of Art, the Creature of the Fire.
Then least their Feeble God should fall
With Silver Chains they fix him to the Wall.
A likely Guardian this, to save
The Men, that his Protection crave.
The Man that is grown so Indigent and Poor
He cannot an Offering for his God procure,
To Idols he is so much inclind,
Will ways to get Materials find,
And to engage the chiefest Artist's Care
A Graven Image to prepare.
Though after all his Cost and Pains
The worthless Piece fixed in his Place remains.
It cannot advance a Step, or move a Hand
In his Defense that does his help demand.
Ye Pagan Realms that covered lie
With the thick Darkness of Idolatry,
How can a Truth to all revealed,
As clear as Day, be still from you concealed?
That is, that God's the only God, to whom
You should with humble Adoration come.
The Starry Heavens which he has made,
The Earth whose deep Foundations he has laid,
His Being and his Majesty declare,
And show how boundless his Perfection^ are:
Above the Circle of the Earth, on high
He sits enthro^'d amidst the Emperial Sky;
Whence when he casts his Eyes around,
And views the Earth hung low in Air,
As little Insects creeping on the Ground,
Contemptible Mankind appear.
The Heavenly Spears as Curtains he expands,
With Orbs of Light Magnificent,
His fine transparent Either with his Hands,
He spreads to form his Royal Tent.
He at his Pleasure can destroy
The Kings that greatest Power and Wealth enjoy.
He can their royal Heads uncrown
And from their Thrones can cast them headlong down.
Deep Root they shall not take nor spread
Amidst the Clouds their shady Head.
Blasted, and with the Almighty's Breath oppressed,
As with a furious Tempest from the East,
Their ruined Branches shall decay,
And fade, like withering Plants, away.
Where then, says God, can Men my Equal see?
What Object can resemble me?
Lift up, O Man, on high thy wondering Eyes,
Regard the Palace of the Holy One,
View the bright Constellations of the Skies
Where he has ^ixt his Adamantine Throne.
Did not the Eternal from the Abyss of Night
Call forth those Heavens, and all those Orbs of Light?
Do they not run their Courses and dispense
At his Command their Light and Influence?
He their great General Day by Day
Draws out his glittering Armies in Array.
In constant Musters on the Etherial Plains
The Squadrons he reviews, and all their Posts ordains.
As Master of his Starry Family,
He calls his shining Servants out by Name,
Gives them their Tasks to which they all agree,
Whereby his Power and Greatness they proclaim.
Why do thou say, O Jacob, I complain,
And make to God my moan in Vain.
He to my Sorrow no Compassion shows,
Neglects my Tears, and disregards my Woes.
The proud Oppressors cruel Yoke
Does not his vengeful Wrath provoke.
I am no more the Almighty's Care,
Else he would hear my mournful Prayer,
And not desert me in my deep Despair.
He Will be no more my Advocate,
My Cause to manage in debate.
He will no more my Injuries redress,
No more condemn my Foes, who me oppress.
He Is pleased so long his People to disown,
That now our Case is desperate grown.
Now, if he would, he cannot assistance give,
We Are ruined, and undone, past all retrieve.
O, do thou not unthoughtful Jacob, know
Who made the Heavens above and Earth below?
Did not thy God, the Eternal Lord
Create them with his great commanding Word?
He rules the World he made, with equal Laws,
Will such a God desert his Peoples Cause?
Will he that all things wisely does direct,
His People's Interests neglect,
Will he their Sufferings slight, and earnest Prayers reject?
He grows not faint, nor does his Vigor wast
With Age, or with his Labor past.
His undeclining Strength feels no decay,
Still can he punish those who disobey.
He can as strong an arm as ever extend
To crush his Foes, his People to defend.
Nor dos he with a less attentive Ear
The Cries of guiltless Suff'rers hear:
But then the Seasons of Deliverance rest
As Secrets in the Almighty's Breast.
The Depths of Providence are fathomless,
Nor will its Heights admit access,
And therefore in his Pleasure Man must Acquiesce.
He to his People still Deliverance sends
When it promotes their Good, and serves his glorious Ends.
His Counsels, which so far exceed our reach,
Sold Patience and Submission teach.
He gives supplies of Power to those that want,
Strengthens the Feeble and revives the Faint.
The Youngest Men in whose distended Veins,
And brawny Nerves Athletic Vigor reigns,
If they on God should not rely,
Would quickly languish, sink and die.
But those who humbly on his Strength depend,
Their stock of Vigor never shall spend.
He Will reinforce them with recruits of Power,
And their decaying Strength restore.
They shall on Wings like Eagles mount on high*
And with like force and swiftness cut the Sky.
They shall or Walk or Run, still forward press,
And never complain of Weariness.
God daily shall their Strength increase,
That they their Burdens may sustain with Ease,
Till he shall choose his time his Captives to release.
Part of the LII And the whole LIII Chap. of Isaiah, PARAPHRASED.
MY Servant shall acquire divine Renown,
And regal Honors shall his Temples crown.
Kings at his Feet their Diadems shall lay,
And all the willing World his Empire shall obey.
His Godlike Government and righteous Laws
From Men and Angels shall receive applause.
He shall his own and Subjects Rights maintain,
Protect his Friends, Oppressors rage restrain,
And everlasting Peace shall bless his glorious Reign.
As Men at his Affliction were amazed
And on his wondrous Woe with Horror gazed,
(Whose Face was so deformed, his Flesh so worn
With all the Toil and Torments he had born,
No Eye ever saw, no Tongue can ever express
Such perfect Grief such infinite distress.)
So shall he be exalted and his height,
Shall bear proportion to his humble state.
His Heavenly Doctrines on the Nations round
Shall fall as dropping Rain upon the Ground.
Attentive Monarchs with a greedy Ear
Shall all his wise Divine Instructions hear.
They Will with profound Humility receive
The Oracles and Counsels he shall give.
No more their impious Tongues shall him condemn,
No more Religion or its God blaspheme.
His Godlike Wisdom they shall all adore,
And joyful Tidings hear they never heard before.
Tidings that new and wondrous Things assert,
That God the Nations will at length convert
And of his Kingdom make the Heathen World a part.
CHAPTER LIII.
When the Messiah by his Love inclined
And tender Mercy moved to lost Mankind,
From his Immortal Throne on high descends
To compass all his great and glorious Ends,
Who in the blessed Redeemer will believe?
Who Will the Divine Commissioner receive,
Or to his Heavenly Message Credit give?
He Will not advance in Pomp and regal State,
No shouting Crowds shall on his Chariot wait.
No Harbengers or Heralds shall proclaim
His coming down, and spread abroad his Fame.
He shall no Guards, no long Retinue take
Like earthly Kings that Public Entrys make.
He Will not as Lords and mighty Conq'rours do,
Vast Armies head the Nations to subdue,
And found an Empire for the ambitious Jew.
Mean and obscure shall be my Servants Birth,
As that of Plants in dry and barren Earth.
Expecting some great General should arise
The Jews his Poor Extraction shall despise.
They will his Sacred Person too condemn,
And the great Power and Word of God blaspheme.
As his Condition and his Birth are low,
Mean and despised, his Person too is so.
They Will in his Face no Air of Greatness see,
Nor in his M^en the marks of Majesty.
He Will by uncommon Beauty never be known
Distinguished by Calamity alone.
His Presence will not cause or Love, or Aw,
But great Contempt from all Spectators draw.
Hence Men will my Commissioner neglect,
And all his gracious Overtures reject.
His Life shall be but one continued Chain
Of Labor, Sorrow, and consuming Pain.
He daily shall converse with Grief and Woe,
And with Affliction shall familiar grow.
Unmeasured Sufferings, exquisite Distress,
And pondrous Trouble shall his Soul oppress.
These sad Companions shall around him stay,
Consume his Flesh and on his Vitals prey.
The obdurate Jews my Servant will defame,
And of his low Estate express their Shame.
The guiltless, just and wondrous Man shall bear
Such heavy Grief and Torments so severe
The Almighty's high displeasure to atone
For other Men's Transgressions, not his own.
He shall the whole Collected Guilt assume
Of lost Mankind, and suffer in their room;
Yet will the spiteful Jew blaspheme, and say
That God did all this Vengeance on him lay
To punish his enormous Crimes, who never
Was known from Virtue's strictest Rule to err.
No, our Offenses all his Pains procure,
For our Transgressions he will his Wounds endure.
By his most free and merciful Consent
He Will undergo the mighty Punishment
Due to the Sins of Men, and so remove
The Almighty's Wrath, and make our Peace above.
He on his Guiltless self our Guilt shall take,
And by his Sufferings full atonement make.
By his sharp Stripes he will Ease to us procure,
And by his Death Eternal Life ensure.
Since Adam fell, all his degenerate Kind
The Heavenly Paths of Virtue have declined:
Fond of their own pernicious, sinful way
They Are lost like straggling Sheep and gone astray.
All-gracious God has on his Servant laid
The Sins of all, for all have disobeyed.
All the black Streams of Guilt do hither flow
As all the Rivers to the Ocean go.
He that so vast a load would not decline,
Must sure be conscious of a Strength Divine.
Justice incensed did Punishment demand,
Exacting Payment at the offenders Hand:
And since we could not pay so great a Sum,
The blessed Messiah Surety did become.
He did himself the mighty Debt discharge
Due to offended Heaven and Man enlarge.
When God's Right Hand with Vengeance armed, designed
To execute his Wrath on Humane Kind,
He interposing, on his Guiltless Head
Received the Blow, and suffered in our Stead.
For as the harmless Sheep beneath the Shears
Is Dumb, and all his Sufferings meekly bears,
Dos even without Resistance, Noise or Strife
When to the Slaughter led, lay down his Life:
With like Submission does the Lamb of God,
Bear furious Persecution's Iron Rod.
In prosecution of his blessed design
His Pains he will undergo, his Life resign
Serene as Heaven, and mild as Love Divine.
It Is true, at last he shall surmount his Woes,
Break all the Powers, that his high Aims oppose,
And Triumph over the Malice of his Foes.
He Will from the Iron Prisons of the Dead,
And from the Dust raise his Victorious Head*
He shall with brighter Glory to the Skys
After a red and bloody Seting rise.
The Conq'rour shall ascend in Royal State,
And Death it self in Chains shall on him wait*
When thus Exalted he shall live to see
A numberless believing Progeny.
Of his Adopted Sons the Godlike Race
Exceed the Stars that Heaven's high Arches grace.
A willing Victim he resigned his Breath
In all the Tortures of a lingering Death.
To suffer as a Criminal conveyed.
The Grave his Bed he with the Wicked made.
Though so much Pain and Shame he underwent,
Yet was he Righteous, Pure and Innocent.
He all his Ignominious Torments bore,
Man to his Maker's Favor to restore.
To raise lapsed Adam's Race from Death and Hell
To the most happy State from whence they fell.
Though he was just and spotless, yet his God
Was pleased to bruise and wound him with his Rod.
When that a Ransom may for Man be paid
He of his Life an Offering shall have made,
He from the Grave shall as a Conq'rour come,
And next his Father's Throne his former Seat resume.
Where he shall dwell secure from Death and Pain,
And endless, as his Life, shall be his Reign.
A numerous Seed a pure and Godlike Line
Breathing Repentance, and Belief Divine,
Quickened by his Prolifi^ Death shall crown
His Sufferings past, and him their Father own.
His work completed he will with great content
Review the Torments which he underwent.
He shall enjoy the Travel of his Soul;
Pleased to have drank the Almighty's wrathful Bowl.
The Glory of his Father he will regard
And Man's Redemption as a full reward.
For by his Knowledge and Celestial Grace
(...) many save of Adam's sinful Race.
He of their Guilt shall the vast Burden bear,
Shall all their Debt by Sin contracted clear,
And at the Almighty's Bar their Advocate appear.
Therefore the Eternal said, above the Skys
My righteous Servant shall in Triumph rise.
He with the Mighty and the Great shall share
Renown, Applauses, and the Spoils of War.
Wide as the World shall be his regal Sway,
And subject Monarchs shall his Laws obey.
He all triumphant Conq'rours shall excel,
Rich with the spoils of Death, the Grave and Hell.
His Chariot-Wheels shall drag along the ground
Destruction ruined with a deadly Wound.
Captivity exposed to public scorn,
A fettered Slave his triumph shall adorn.
These Honors on my Servant I Will confer,
Because he chose the Pains of Death to bear,
From Man impending Vengeance to avert,
And of the ruined Race a chosen part
To save from Death and Hell, their due desert.
THE III Chapter of Habakkuk. PARAPHRASED.
AS God advanced from lofty Teman's Head,
And over the Plains of Paran came,
The Heavens around were with his glory spread,
And Wonders on the Earth his Presence did proclaim.
He did the Marks of Majesty display,
And fearful Ensigns of Omnipotence,
Ten thousand Prodigys prepared his way,
Such Power the Almighty did dispense.
Torrents of Glory dazzling bright,
Too fierce and keen for Humane Sight
Broke from the immense Abyss of uncreated Light.
Even from his Hands a bright Eruption came,
A pointed Efflux of Immortal Flame.
Transcendant Splendour did the Almighty shroud;
No less than did the thick surrounding Cloud.
His Being thus lay hidden either way,
In too much Darkness, or in too much Day.
Of thirsty, panting Plagues a fiery Train,
Pale Pestilence and yelling Pain,
His dreadful Equipage, before him ran,
And of his Terrors led the Van.
While Famine, Desolation and Despair,
Wringing their Hands and tearing off their Hair,
A formidable Troop, came howling in the Rear.
The Almighty on the Frontiers made a stand
To measure out the promised Land.
He did distinctly circumscribe
The Inheritance of every Tribe.
That done the Nations he asunder drove,
And marched the Lords of Canaan to remove.
His swift-wing'd Whirlwinds onward flew,
And over the Hills his Chariot drew;
Whose awful Wheels rolled on in Clouds and Smoke,
Whence Flakes of Fire and flashing Lightnings broke.
Such Bolts were cast, such Thunder claps did roar,
As shook the Rocks which never shook before.
The shudd'ring Hills expressed their dread
And everlasting Mountains bowed their aged Head.
When Israel marched over dry Arabia's Sand,
By Moses led to Canaan's Land,
How were the States on either side
At their approach alarmed and terrified?
How did the Tents of Cushan shake?
How did the Kings of Midian quake?
How did they dread the Fame of Isr'el's God,
And his great Gen'ral's wonder-working Rod?
That Rod which turned to Crystal Walls the Flood,
Its Virtue still retains,
And in the trembling Heathens Veins
Chills and congeals their Vital Streams of Blood*
Did ever the Rivers God displease?
Or did his Anger rise against the Seas,
That he their Waters did divide,
And rolled them up on Heaps on either side,
When he prepared his warlike Equipage
His Chariots and his Horse King Pharaoh to engage?
No, those amazing Miracles were shown
To make his kindness to his People known.
His Chariots and his Horsemen brought
Salvation to the Tribes, for whom he fought.
He did his fatal Bow prepare,
And all his dreadful Instruments of War,
Which put the Pagan Lords to flight
And from their Country chased the Cananite.
Thus to his Promise God was true
Which to the Tribes he did so often renew.
As Israel's Host advanced to Canaan's Land,
Oppressed with drought amidst the Sand.
Refreshing Streams were in the Desert found,
And bubbling Springs broke from the thirsty Ground.
Instead of Fire the Almighty struck
Fresh Water from the Flinty Rock.
When God in Triumph did appear,
The lofty Mountains shook for fear.
Jordan held back his cleaving Flood
And high in Craggy Heaps the Crystal Waters stood.
Bare and defrauded of its Tide,
The sandy Chanel lay from side to side;
This Passage for the Tribes the Almighty did provide.
The obsequious Deep did raise its roaring Voice
And split asunder with prodigious noise
It showed as if by lifting up the Hand
It Is Readiness to obey the high Command.
At God's command the restless Sun
That as a Giant loves his Course to run,
Did in his full Carreer his Chariot stay
On Heavens Descent, and stopped the falling Day.
Progressive Time was at a stand,
His drooping Wings unable to expand.
The Constellations, and the astonished Moon,
Halted to gaze upon the standing Sun.
So long its lingering Orb its Light did lend
As Ioshuah's Troops had Spears to spend;
As long as they had Darts to cast away,
Or there remained a Foe to slay.
In Indignation God through Canaan past,
And with his terrible alarms
And Conquering Arms
He chased the Kings, and laid the Nations wast.
Isr'els Salvation to complete
He onward marched the Heathen to defeat.
To save his People and to crown
Great Iosua's Arms with Triumph and Renown,
To Canaan's Kings he gave a deadly Wound
And did their Friends and Familys confound.
He overthrew their Palaces
The Imperial Seats of Pride and Wickedness.
He broke the Pillars that sustained their weight,
And razed the strong Foundations of their State.
God did by Isr'el's Arms subdue
Their Towns and all their Villages o'erthrew.
Though at the first the Nations round arose
And like a Tempest did our March oppose,
They onward came with Shouts of Joy
As sure the Tribes they should destroy:
They did our Army so much slight
They thought they came to Plunder, not to fight.
O Israel, in despite of these alarms,
In spite of all their Plots and Arms:
Thou with thy Conquering Sword did make thy way,
From Iordan's Flood to the great Western Sea.
Thus for the Tribes the Almighty did appear,
Once to their God his People were so dear.
But now he threatens to employ
Assyrian Arms his People to destroy.
For this my Blood hangs curdled in my Veins,
And strong Convulsions rend my tortured Reins
My Bones all rattle in their rocking Frame,
And in my Heart Fear damps the Vital Flame.
Horror my Spirits does possess,
Nor can my quivering Lips one perfect word express.
I Tremble now, and Weep and Mourn,
That when the sad amazing Turn
Shall happen, and the gloomy Day
Of Vengeance all its Terrors shall display;
Safe from the Tempest I may find,
Peace in my House, and Comfort in my Mind.
I Will to the Almighty's Mercy fly
And on his faithful Providence rely,
When Babylon's insulting King
Shall all his fierce and numerous Armies bring,
Armies to Blood and Rapine bred,
To pull down Isr'el's lofty Head,
And dreadful Desolation over our Citys spread
And then though Famine should invade,
Though Plants and Flowers and Fruits should fade;
Though on the Vine no Clusters should appear,
And though the Fig Tree should no Blossoms bear;
Though the Olive yields not to the Dresser Oil,
And barren Fields defeat the Farmer's toil;
Though the high Folds no bleating Flocks surround,
And in the Stalls no lowing Herds are found;
Yet I Will rejoice in God my sure defense,
And in his Strength repose my Confidence.
Still will I trust him still I will believe,
That he will Isr'el's Captive State retrieve:
That to our Country he will our Sons restore,
And rescue them from Babylonish Power.
FINIS.

