portrait of King David of Israel KING DAVID Blessed be the Kingdom of our
Father David that comes in ye name of the Lord. Hosannah in the highest. Mar.
11.10.


THE PSALTER or PSALMS OF DAVID Paraphrased in Verse.

Set to new Tunes. And so designed that by Two Tunes only, the whole Number of
Psalms (Four only excepted) may be Sung; One of which Tunes is already known
(being the usual Tune of the C. Psalm) the other Tunes only are new. But any
one of them being learnt, all the other Psalms may be sung by that one only
Tune: As on the contrary any one Psalm may be Sung by all the new Tunes. So
that a greater facility for those who are less able to Sing; or a greater
variety for those who are more able, cannot reasonably be desired or afforded.

The Second Edition, wherein the whole Number is Completed.

By RICHARD GOODRIDGE.

Te decet Hymnus.

Psalm 65. Praise is comely.

Psalm 147. Hallelujah.

OXFORD Printed by L. Lichfield Printer to the University, for Jo. Crosley.
1684.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY EARL of ARLINGTON, Lord Chamberlain of His
Majesty's Household, One of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and
Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
WERE not the Subject of these Papers, and the End they aim at, of the greatest
Moment, I durst not have adventured them to your Lordship: For, as for what
ever I may have performed in them, I know it to be far more beneath the Heights
of the Original, than David, when he counterfeited the Madman before Acish,
was unlike that David, who returning with the Spoils of the Philistin, was met
in triumph by the Daughters of Israel; and his Conquest over that One Monster,
was sung above the thousands of Saul. My aim then is not Praise, which I thus
unfeignedly acknowledge, not to be due: and therefore am not so vain, as to
think they will ever be received into the place of those now used; which have
the same fortunate, and ill luck with us, as the Mathematicians of Old had at
Rome; still to be reteyn'd, yet still condemned. All I shall hope for, is, that
having first obteyn'd His Pardon, who, not requiring our exact, but our utmost
possible performances, will accept the faithful Endeavors, and pardon the
failings of the Weak and Impotent: I may have the like Measures from Your
Lordship; and from all such as Your Lordship; who endeavoring to express in
themselves the Image of their Maker, will, as himself does, remit to those who
have no other end but to edeavour to celebrate his Praise, and promote the Good
of others, the infelicities of their Success. Which I cannot but hope from Your
Lordship, not only from Your Lordships Noble inclinations to such in general;
but from Your Lordships particular Favor to your Servant; which, begun so many
years past, in that Society, to which Your Lordship is so confessed an Honor,
Your Lordship has been pleased to continue hitherto; and to look back upon, and
know him yet, at that distance of Fortune, in which Your Lordship so eminently,
and so deserv'dly stands. The God of Heaven multiply his Graces on Your
Lordship here; and assign You your Portion hereafter among the Pious and the
Just.

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and, most affectionately devoted Servant,
Ric. Goodridge.

PREFACE.
. 1. WHAT Offense is generally taken, and how justly, at our English Version of
David's Psalms into Meeter, is sufficiently known. Dr. Done, upon that of Sr.
Philip Sidney, and the Countess of Pembrooke, commending theirs, censures the
other of Sternhold, and Hopkins, and our Churches Toleration of it, thus.

When I behold that these Psalms are become
So well attyr'd abroad, so Ill at Home;
So well in Chambers; in the Church, so Ill;
I scarcely can call That reformed, until
This be reformed. Would the State present
A lesser Gift, than some One Man has sent?
And shall our Church, unto her Spouse, and King,
More hoarse, more harsh, than any other sing?
. 2. Some have endeavored to make it more tolerable, by expunging those many
low, and indecent Expressions; and putting others in their Places: but the
Attempt is fruitless. For, if what they substitute be like the remainder,
'twill be all flat: If it be raised somewhat above that level, the whole will
be unlike it self; and by the Addition of new Pieces, -- cum vnus and alter
Assuitur Pannus, --
the Rents will be made worse. Wherefore, a New Version is doubtless the only
Expedient; for, if to imitate the best Originals be mean and servile; what is
it to draw after the worst Copies?

. 3. There are many excellent Versions extant; out of all which, if the
choicest in Each were taken, and put together; such a Collection would not only
exceed that which is now in use; but any one particular Version, of any of
those Persons, who have labored in them.

. 4. For doubtless, as there is no Man but is much more himself at some one
time, than another: ( Ego nunquam (says Scaliger) ad scribendum accingor, nisi
ab ipso Genio invitatus) so there is no Man, who may not be much more concerned
in the Subject of some one Psalm than another: as expressing, possibly, his
particular Wants or Enjoyments; or having more affinity, either with the
constant innate Temper, and Genius of his Mind; or With the accidental Emotions
and Sallyes of it, from some emergent Occasion: So that what he shall then
perform in that Fervor, that Ecstasy, that Indignation or Agony, shall not
only exceed what others, less concerned, shall have done on it; but what
himself could have performed, at any other cooler time: And all this, in a
Natural way; not to say, what greater Assistances may be lent, upon an humble
Addressto Him, who will undoubtedly open those Lips which beg it of Him, for no
other end, but that they may show forth his Praise.

. 5. Besides, they who have indifferently undertaken all the Psalms, have set
themselves a kind of Task; and probably would not have adventured on some few
particular ones, had they not been found among the number which they had
obliged themselves to complete. So that though they may have gone through them
all with great Diligence, yet the Effects of Care and Diligence, can never
equal the Efforts of Love, Joy, Zeal, or other mighty Passion; which possessing
the Soul, and being further raised and excited by the Hymn, composed by the
same, (for kind) but by a far higher (in Degree) and more inspired an ardour,
the mutual Fire kindles; And as the Hymn awakes a fervor in the Soul, so the
exalted Soul impresse^s that fervor in its Transcript of the Hymn; into which,
it self thus excited, passing forth, copies out, and arrests in it, its own
Transports and Emanations; and joining, as in Consort, with the Divine Raptures
there, fixes in it the lasting Character, and Image of both; which Character,
that Transcript bears, and is; remaining an Eternal Mean, Guide, and Conduct,
by which, the penitent, the distressed, the ravished, or the any other way
divinely-affected Soul, uniting with it, its own cognate Fires, may ascend
together, to his Throne who will accept those Sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise,
which himself has inspired, and kindled as with a Coal from his own Altar.

. 6. Wherefore, as it will not seem unagreeable to the honor of the sacred
Poem, that all, as out of Duty, should humbly present the utmost they are able
to contribute toward the copying out the Beauty of the Divine Original: So
that Copy, doubtless, will be the least reproach to it, which shall be drawn
from out the choicest of all the Offerings.

. 7. The Reader, I hope, will have the Charity to believe, that (...) seeing I
have taken them all indifferently as they lie, I do not pretend to have done
them otherwise, than as imposed upon my self; and to present them out of Duty
only, and as to be refused; being satisfied in the attempt only, of rescuing
that Divine Poem from dishonor; and to excite those of greater Abilities, to
pursue it by a joint Endeavor; and to that end, to have cast into the Common
Treasury, this mean and unprofitable Labor.

. 8. Having thus let the Reader know, how much I am concerned for vindicating
the Honor of the Divine Poem; and how unconcerned for what ever I may have
offered toward it, I shall acquaint him what I have obliged my self to in the
Prosecution.

. 9. First, therefore, I have endeavored to avoid all obscurity; which though
it be a Rock, that all who speak or write, are bound to shun; and therefore it
may seem impertinent to take notice of it here, as of a new care: Yet, when it
shall be remembered, how Universal the number is, of those who are invited, and
bound to join in celebrating the Honor of their Maker; Young Men and Maidens;
Old Men and Children; and all the different Ranks and Conditions of all those
Ages and Sexes; it cannot but be acknowledged, that a very particular care
ought to be had, that what is thus to be performed by all, should be rendered
intelligible to all; to the High and the Low; to the Rich and the Poor; to the
One with the Other.

. 10. In order to which, I have not rendered it literally, but (as possibly all
Translations ought to be) by way of Paraphrase; since not only Proverbial, and
Parabolical Speeches, and the whole Train of Verbal Allusions, etc. but the
very disposition, and coordination of Words, being different in differing
Languages, what was Natural to one, will not only be indecent, and, possibly,
ridiculous in another; but, a^ varying from its known accustomed Forms, obscure
too. For Idioms and the peculiar Characters of the Language of one People,
literally rendered into another, are notwithstanding such traduction, strange,
and foreign still: And, (as Coins) bearing on them the Impresses proper to the
Places whence they came, are not current elsewhere: the stamping of Money and
Words, and the Minting of Dialects and Modes of Expressions, being the peculiar
Royalties of each Place and People. That which is fixed in any Writing, is its
intrinsique worth; which, as the Rich Metal, reteyns its value still, whose
soever the Image and Superscription be; and is that alone, which being designed
to be transferred to others, ought therefore to be impressed with those
Significant Characters which those People know, and allow of; and not rendered
dark, either by reteyning any of its former perplexed Original Characters; or
by the close Order of a Verbal exchange.

.11. I shall not give the Reader the trouble to show him, how very particularly
a litteral Translation of the Hebrew would be concerned in this Case; but leave
him to think how differing their Modes are like to be from ours, who Write
without Vowels, and read backward.

. 12. As I have chosen to render it by way of Paraphrase, so I have put that
Paraphrase into Verse; for such are the Psalms in the Original, (though we
cannot yet find out the measures; but we abundantly find the footsteps of a
Poem in the admirable Heights, and Divine Raptures every where;) and how great
a disadvantage it must be for Verse to be unravel'd into Prose, any one may
judge, who knows the bounds of either; and that there are words and expressions
peculiar to Verse, which Prose dares not assume; as on the other side, there
are infinite Prose-words, which Poesic disdains: being adapted, and
proportioned to the expressing the different heights of thoughts and
conceptions, peculiar to Verse, and peculiar to Prose. So that to dissolve a
Poem, and melt it down into Prose, were to destroy both the Verse, and the
Prose too. For, as the Verse would be no more such, when the Words had lost
their numbers, and their order; so those disordered, Poetial Words and
Expressions appearing eminenly, and unseasonably here and there above the level
of Prose; -- rarinantes in gurgite vasto -- the Prose would cant: You would
find every where -- disjecti Membra Poetoe -- the unfortunate Spoils of a Poem,
which gathered up, and disposed in no other Order than as they fell, would look
like the barbarousBuildings of the Turks, raised out of the Noble Ruins of the
Groecian Cities and Temples; where the fragment of some mighty Column sustains
a Shed; and the Walls of a poor Cottage, are indifferently made up of
ill-rang'd Marbles, and inverted Statues, laid in Beds of Mud and Clay: which
being thus unworthily placed, appear more rude and deformed, in the wild Order,
than in the Ruin; for 'twas a Spectacle of Pity to the Beholder, to see them
in the heap; but of Scorn and Indignation, in the unhappy structure.

. 13. I desire not to be misunderstood here; for it must be truly, and with all
submission acknowledged, that the litteral Prose Versions of the Psalms, as
they are in Vulgar Translations ( Latin or English, etc.) conform to the
Original, are absolutely necessary so to stand, as the Rule and Canon of
Scripture; by which, the truth of any Pharaphrase may be judged Notwithstanding
which, since in the Text it self, there are many things hard to be understood,
therefore, as the unfolding it in other words, by way of Paraphrase, or short
Exposition, is expedient for the better informing our Understanding; so it
seems as expedient, that (as the Original it self has given the Example) that
Paraphrase should be in Verse; for the better raising and exciting our Wills
and Affections in the zealous performance of those Duties and Services, of
which those Divine Hymns are given us as the Forms.

. 14. In the choice of words and expressions, I have taken care to use such, as
may be both intelligible to the meanest, and yet (as far as we were able) not
unbeseeming the Dignity of the Subject: remembering at the same time, both, who
some are among the many who are to speak the Praises; and whose Praises they
are, which we all celebrate. Wherefore, though I have endeavored that the
expressions be plain; yet understanding by plainness only Perspicuity, as it is
opposs'd to what is perplexed or obscure; I endeavor to avoid that meanness of
expression, which is made up out of the Language of the People; and which, some
by descending to take up, have lost the Poem in the too great a plainness and
condescension of the Style; for -- mediocribus esse Poetis, Non Homines, non
Dii, non concessere Columnoe. there being in a Poem, as in a Natural Body, a
minimum quod non (as it is called) within which Size and Stature, when either of
them are shrunk, they quite degenerate and lose themselves; that Poem being no
longer One, which is so indifferent and languishing, as to be also Prose, if
the Measures and the Rhimewere away.

. 15. I should not here have reflected upon the Translation now used with us,
were it not even necessary, that some few of the many Indecencies being laid
open, we should be convinced of the unworthiness of such Addresses; and not
henceforth dare to offer up unto God, a Praise which is not comely; and to
speak in his Temple unbeseeming his Honor.

. 16. We shall not all accuse the Translators for any of those Words or Forms
of expression which having been in use in the Age they lived in, are now
discontinued; that were unjust; since every Age has absolute Power of
repealing, continuing, or new making those words which do then obtain; It Is a
sufficient Plea to say -- volutt Vsus -- ( Custom gave the Sanction.) Quam
penes arbitrium est, and jus and Norma loquendi. Which words, and much of the
Style, are so expressly the Characters of their own Age, that it is no unusual or
difficult thing, to discover the Age of a Writing by its Language; as is
oftentimes successfully performed, in detecting Spurious Authors. And
therefore, we shall not blame them for that, or any other the like expression,
Psalm 1. v. 1. The Man is blessed that has not bent to wicked Read his Ear.
the word Read, signifying only Lecture, or Instruction; frequent in Chawcer,
and continued down to that Age, but left off in Ours; and therefore though
justly to be rejected now, as not intelligible, yet with no reproach to those
who spoke intelligibly to their own Times.

. 17. That which is the fundamental perpetual Law of expression, is, That
things be naturally represented; which they then are, when as in Picture, the
Original, or first Transcript, is as the Life: the first Requisite of which, is
Verity; and the next, Decency. Now, though in every thing Natural, there is an
innate Decency; and therefore what is truly and properly delivered, is also, as
being conform to the thing it self, Decent; yet there is a farther Measure of
Decency; which, though it have its Foundation in the things themselves, yet the
taking it out thence, is much owing to us.

. 18. For we being seated as amidst a world of Beings, do behold them, not only
as they are Simple in themselves, but as they have diverse Respects, and
Habitudes to each other, according as they are differently placed, and orderd;
which diverse ordering them, makes them appear to us (as Objects placed in
differing Lights) full of admirable, and indefinite Varieties: Each Mode of
considering the Subject, (as it is called) varying it; and by changing its
Situation, giving it a new Color, and new Relations and Alliances to other
things. And hence, as we observe how things are proportioned to, and do bear to
each other, so we speak them, borrowing the Names proper to some things, and
their Accidents, etc. and transferring them to others; yet not rudely, and
abusively enforcing them, but as complying with their own inclinations, we wed
together the Beautiful, and proportioned Varieties. And this is the great and
inexhausted Promptuary of those words, and expressions, which are called
Tropical, in the decent managery, and cultivating of which, consists the
greater part of the so much controverted Dominion, and Province of Wit.

. 19. As single Words are thus regulated, so are they when they are woven
together into Propositions and Sentences; which are to move within the same
Bounds, as of Truth, so of Decency; the measure of which, (chiefly) is the
adapting the Style and Character of those Enuntiations to the Subject treated
of, and according to the Mode after which it is treated; with respect also to
those Circumstances of Time, and Place, of the Persons speaking, and of those
to whom the Address is made, etc. So as (to instance only in what we shall have
occasion here to note) those Vulgar Forms of Expression, as the Common Sayings,
and By-words of the People, be not applied to Subjects grand, and far above
that level; For though possibly there may be Truth in such expressions, yet
there will certainly want Decency; and by default of observing a fit and
proportioned distance, the Address will appear altogether Rude and Vulgar.

. 20. The same Laws of Proportion are to pass through the whole Discourse;
which being informed as by a Soul of Truth and Decency, becomes one thing;
true, and proportioned to the Subject it treats of, (and to all, both its usual
Train of Circumstances, and those often new and surprising Ones, which emerge
upon occasion; and are (as some particular Airs of a Countenance, or glances of
an Eye, are by Painters) heedfully to be watched, caught up and arrested as
they sly) and throughout to it self

And by these Laws, if we examine the Version, we shall not injure it.

.21. We are to remember then, that the Psalms are Forms of our Addresses of
Prayer and Praise to God: Of whom, and to whom, nothing ought to be spoken, but
with the highest Veneration; what is common here, is also (as) unclean; and in
Offering up these Sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise, we are to observe what the
Universal Laws of Sacrifice require, to choose them (at least as far as we are
able) without blemish.

. 22. Not to distinguish betwixt Persons and Things, but to speak of them
alike, were untrue, and indecent in any writing, whether Verse or Prose. As,

Psalm. 72.1. -- with his Son that Princely Thing. So Psalm 135.11. He slew
also the Kingdoms all. How monstrous, and beyond all Truth, is that Similitude?

Psalm 58.6. The Tusks which in their great Jaw-bones like Lions Whelps hang
out. How false and ridiculous is that expression!

Psalm 35.14. When they were sick, I mourned therefore, and clad my self in
Sack.

And how too abundantly true, is this other? Psalm 115.6. And they have Ears
joined to their Heads.

Psalm 127.2. How is that excellent borrowed expression -- eating the Bread of
Sorrows, lost, in being made (as) true and proper. Feeding full hardly with
Brown-bread.

How rude are the following Ones? and taken out from amidst the Manners and the
Language of the Street! Psalm 33.21. Our Soul in God has Joy and Game -- Psalm
35.26. There! There! this Gear goes trim. Psalm 49.14. When as from House to
Pit they pass with woe and wellaway. Psalm 55.16. For mifchief reigns in their
Hall, and Parlour where they dwell.

With the same folly and rudeness, they speak of God Himself. Psalm 60.6. The
Lord did speak from his own Place, that was his joyful Tale. Psalm 64.9. And
praise his witty Works. Psalm 77.8. What is his goodness clean decayed for ever
and a day? Psalm 78.38. Yea many a time he turned his Wrath, and did himself
advise.

In their immediate Addresses to him, they use the same boldness, and
irreverence; as in the following Petirions. Psalm 31.9. -- My Womb for woe does
ache. Psalm 74.12. Why do thou draw thy Hand aback, and hide it in thy Lap?
O pluck it forth, and be not slack to give thy foes a rap.
Psalm 35.23. But Lord thou see what ways they take, cease not this gear to
mend,
Be not far off, nor me forsake, as Men that fail their friend.


And their Praises are as indecent as their Prayers. Psalm 139.6. Too wonderful
above my reach, Lord! is thy cunning Skill. Psalm 18.13. Lord! at thy wrath and
threatening, and at thy thiding Thear. Psalm 35.10. O Lord! though they do seem
full gay, what man is like to Thee!

But what follows, being neither Prayer, nor Praise, I shall leave the Reader
to name. Psalm 20.3. And so receive right thankfully thy burnt Offerings each
one. Psalm 22.9. But Lord! out of my Mothers Womb, I came by thy request.

. 22. However we may in Charity believe, that these Men meant not so falsely,
and unworthily as they spoke; yet whosoever shall think to repeat after them,
may do well to consider, that God is in Heaven, and himself on Earth; and
therefore to take care that such Expressions as these, be not any of those few
words he utters; but that he first well weigh the Gift he brings, before he lay
it on the Altar; that so he be not hasty to offer up the Sacrifice of Fools.

. 23. For, can any sober, devout Soul imagine, that being to celebrate (for
instance) the Power of the Almighty, in rendering Vengeance upon his Enermes, he
does worthily express the Indignation of an offended God, by calling it -- his
chiding Cheer? -- To say, he made bare his Holy Arm -- and gave his Foes a rap?
And then to give him thanks in the Blasphemy of a Ballad, for vindicating, not
the Right, but the malice of the informer? -- Psalm 9.4. Thou have revenged all
my wrong, my grief, and all my grudge;
Thou do with Justice hear my Cause, most like a righteous Judge.
Which is somewhat like that expression, To Justice, Equity, and Right, he has
a great good will. Can that, or any other Soul imagine, that such Expresstions
as these bear any proportion to the Majesty of the Judge, the Glory of the
Vengeance, or the fearful Praise!

. 24. I have forborne to make any such Reflections on them, as they are too very
much obnoxious to; since it cannot be done without too great a Levity, and a
rallery unfit to be affixed to those Expressions, which, how indecent soever
they be, are yet interwoven with things sacred. Nor had I took notice of so
many (though an inconsiderable number in respect of what are left behind) had
it not been even necessary, that by giving the most ordinary Reader some
particular view of the deformities he dotes on, he might no longer oblige those
Persons, who have so often, and so highly resented them, to indulge the use of
them to his ignorance and humor; that so at length, as the Buyers and the
Sellers were scourged out of the Temple; so the Language which they trade in,
and which so much abounds here, may be driven out too. Which may the more
easily be effected, since those Exchangers, and their Wares, did not more
unlawfully intrude themselves into the Temple, than these have done; And though
these seem more excusable, as having (which we will most readily, and
charitably grant them) far different, and most contrary intentions, yet we
cannot possibly justify them, or any other, who shall speak dishonourably of
God, and mean well.

. 25. It has been said, that such Psalms as these, are not usually Sung; but
the Clark refusing them, takes others. If this excuse were admitted, and that
there were really any considerable number of Psalms remaining, after such were
excluded, which without Scandal to a Pious Soul it might cheerfully offer up to
its God; yet (without taking notice of the acknowledged dishonor done to these
Hymns, by reducing them to so condemned a state, that they must unavoidably
fall to the Judgment of a poor Parish-Clark, when ever the great work of
refusing shall be submitted to his Arbitrament) how can we patiently bear the
injuries and losses we our selves sustain, when so confessed a number of Psalms
shall be ravished from us; and be retained amongst the rest, only to fill up a
useless number?

26. Having thus avoided that low and vicious plainness which destroys the very
Being of Verse; and cast out those impious indecencies which profane the
Honor of the Hymn (in farther abhorrence of which latter, we have refused such
words, which having once born an innocent Sense, our Manners have debauched) we
have in order to our design for Perspicuity, forborne to make use of any words
which may be above the capacity of the Meanest; having therefore coined no new
ones, nor taken in any which have not for a sufficient time been naturalized.
Nor can I imagine that such a plainness of words which aims at Perspicuity, the
end of all Speech, can depress a Style; or that unusual words, with difficulty,
and perhaps obscurity, can advance it; greatness of Expression, being like
greatness of Mind, free, generous, and condescending; that swelling and Tumor
of words, of a dark and reserved Sense, is as Pride; vainly great, and
unprofitable; the Language of Pedants, and Critiques; and of those Sons of Art,
who speak on purpose not to be understood.

. 27: As care has been taken to avoid obscurity in Words; so the like care has
been, to clear that obscurity which seems to be in the Sense, from the great
and unexpected Transitions; which seem to us, who are unaoquainted with such
admirable sallies, abrupt, and incoherent; but are in themselves extremely
Noble; and the Evidences and Remains of those powerful Emotions, which proceed
from Rapture, and Ecstasy: When the same Spirit animated both the Prophet and
the Poet; who thus doubly inspired -- velox mente nova -- despised the safeties
of our low timorous flights; taking new pathless ways of his own; through,
beyond, and above which, how abrupt and dangerous soever they seemed, and how
lessening their heights were, and disappearing to us that Spirit securely bare
him. Which Transitions, though they seem closed, and viewless, have yet really
signed, and described their way; and the Connexions which seem to have been
made, flow naturally out of the Text; and are not Additions, but Emanations.

. 28. And such liberty of Connection, is no more than what is usually taken in
the litteral Prose version of the Psalms; where (to instance only in our
English Version) those additional words, with which the Interpreters found it
necessary to conjoyn the words of the Text, which otherwise would have seemed
loose, and incoherent, are printed in a different Character; yet were before
such their actual emergency, always in Power, and understood in the Text: Which
Additions, being most justifiable in the very Text, and Canon of Scripture,
cannot be condemned in a Paraphrase, or Comment; which has the same design of
manifesting the Syntax, and coordination of the Sense, as the litteral Version
has of the Words.

. 29. The same care has been taken to keep close to the Text, that its sown
proper vigor be not lost in too wide a Paraphrase; as when Spirits are too
much diluted; Or, as when the Beams of the Sun, which have been so united and
contracted as to Burn, being too far released, lose their Fires, and are again
dissolved into Light. Vherefore, we have made the Paraphrase to wait on the
particular Verses of the Psalms, as they are distinguished in the new
Translation of our Church-Bible; guiding it by them, as by the designing Lines
in Originals; and as those Originals are themselves guided by the natural
Lineaments, and exact Proportions of the Life; that so at any time, the Truth
of the Paraphrase may be justified by the Text; as the Text, explained by the
Paraphrase; when from each to other, there may be a mutual Recourse.

. 30. Nor can I suspect, the Paraphrase should go less from such an Imitation
as this; for, though it be true, that whoever takes his Measures wholly from
another Pattern, forfeits his Liberty; and under that restraint, (as under a
state of Captivity) becomes mean, and servile; not daring to exert his own
Powers beyond the bounds prescribed him; and therefore, while he thus continues
true and faithful to the Copy, can never aspire to any thing of his own, great,
and exceeding; in consideration of which, some have nobly, and successfully
adventured to make Translations better things than they have usually been, and
to set them above their Originals: Yet this bravery cannot be admitted in all
Cases: Since, as it would be too rash and daring; so it would be unsucessful,
when the attempt shall be made upon the Psalms; or other Hymns, penned by
immediate Divine Inspiration: Where doubtless, it is not lawful for any one, to
take, leave out, or add what they please; but adhering firmly to the Original
(as they would do, in copying out Records, or the Deeds, and Evidences of their
Lands) to transcribe the whole Truth; to raze out nothing but the Veil, which
(as to us) was drawn before it; nor to add any thing, but what the necessary
Circumstances of the transferring them to other Places, and Persons, will
require, and decently admit; remembering always, that our business is only to
copy out, and not to Design; and that the Copy, being taken from an Original
that is Divine, (whose Heights are not like our Heights) the aims we take, can
never be beneath us; but that perfectly to imitate, is to exceed our selves;
and that that Fancy, and those Powers cannot but move with the greatest
freedom, which are limited by no other Bounds, but such as are transcendent.

. 31. What measures the Hebrews had for their Verse, is unknown to us; and
possibly were they known, our words might as ill comply with them, as with the
Hexameters and Pentameters of the Greeks and Latins. Wherefore, in putting the
Psalms into Verse, we are obliged only to make choice of such Modes as are most
conducing to the End we design, and beseeming the Dignity of the Subject we
treat of. I have therefore rejected the Verse of seven Feet, (so frequent in
our common Version) not only as being worn out of use, and therefore as being
indecent to us, who have exploded it; but also as being so, really in it self.
For if the whole length of seven Feet be accounted as one Verse, the Verse is
then too long; but if that Verse be divided into two unequal Parts, of four,
and three Feet, (as is usual) those pieces will be too short; and (as that
eminent Person, the late Reverend Bishop of Chichester acknowledged) of all
other Measures, the least graceful: Who yet, to his extreme disadvantage, took
that very Measure; who, otherwise, had he given himself the liberty of choosing
such as his own Judgment could have better directed him to, there had been no
need of any other Version but his.

. 32. As that form of Verse is indecent for its Measure, whether whole or
divided: So others, both for the Measures of their Verse, and the Time of their
Feet; which makes their motions more light and trifling than the former. Thus
that heavenly, and most seraphick Psalm the Hundred and fourth, is made to beat
the Time of a Northern Jig; a Time, so indecent for the Majesty of that Hymn,
that though the Language were most decent, (as it is most otherwise) the
Measure only would condemn it.

. 33. I have made choice of the Verses of four or of five Feet (One only Psalm
excepted) each following Verse giving the Rhyme to the preceding; as seeming to
me, more indifferent to be either Read or Sung, (as the Psalms are left to the
choice, or abilities of the Performer) than those of shorter, and unequal
lengths; or where the Rhyme is alternate, or of greater distance. Diverse of
which Modes (as the short alternate) seem too light and airy to be Read; being
(as all Lyriques are) -- socianda chordis -- designed only to be Sung; Nor can
I think that any Person, how well-affected soever to that Version, did ever
make his Addresses to God (or would believe so falsely as to imagine that it were
decent to do so) in those Forms (otherwise than when he allowed himself to sing
them) which are left by Sternhold, and Hopkins. Whereas the Verse of five Feet,
or that of four, may be solemny repeated by speaking; as we might instance, not
only in our English Epick, from whence Tragedy borrows its Mode, speaking in no
other than in such measured Language, (the Verse of five Feet:) But also in one
of our Churches most solemn Offices; where the Hymn Veni Creator, is Verse; and
that not sung, but spoken; and altered from that of seven Feet to that of four:
And we cannot doubt, but the taking such Measures as are fittest to be spoken,
may be useful, not only for those Persons who are naturally unapt for singing,
but for all (whatever the Subject of the Address be) and that (...) the
Poenitentials, and others of like nature, may be as fervently poured forth in
the Closet, in the voice of weeping, as they may be Sung; -- cum versa est in
luctum Cythara, and Organum in vocem flentium.

. 34. But this is not to prefer the repeating them by speaking, before that of
singing; nor (generally) to equal it; for, our affections being heavy and dull,
the utmost assistances are requisite to be called in, to excite them; and to
help our infirmities. Wherefore, the Psalms were not only composed in Verse,
(the most exalted Language) but a farther height was added to them in the
Address; and the grand (...) the dark Parable, and the deep Saying being opened
upon the Harp, was thence inspired anew; and raised yet higher on another Wing.

. 35. And 'twas from the aforesaid Consideration, viz. the dullness of our
Affections, and the weakness of our Nature, (too apt to be tired, by any long
intention) which induced our Church to give so great a Variety to our Service:
making the particular Prayers, short, like Ejaculations; intermingling
Responds, Readings, Psalms, and Hymns: whose excellent design, if it were
prosecuted; and that those Psalms, and Hymns, were performed in that natural
way, which is most proper for them, by singing; (which our Church recommends,
though she permits them to be said as well as sung) and that after some better
manner than is usual; as the designed Variety would be greater; so would our
intentions be more unbent, and consequently our Devotions more quickened. For,
as any Member, laboring in that posture which they call Tonique, (as an Arm
working at its full extent over the Head) will not be able, long, with any
strength to continne so working, but being released from that posture, it will
presently be eased, and refreshed for a new labor: So the Soul being served by
the Organs of the Body, (whose weight presses down the Spirit) if those Organs
be too long intent upon any one Operation, they, as being corporeal, will
certainly tire; and the Strengths of the Soul will seem to be abated and
enfeebled as those of its Organs are: But if the Soul vary its thought, the
Organs will receive a new Schematism; and be disposed and conceived into
another Form, according to the Idea and Impress of that new thought: and the
Souls vigor, which seemed tired by the weariness of the Organs, will return;
and be quickened by that acceptable Variety which refreshes the Organs, by which
it self necessarily operates.

. 36. In order to this Mode of performing them by singing, I have refused such
words as are improper for Song; for as there are some words proper for Verse
which are not for Prose, and contrary: So there are others, though proper
enough for Verse, or Prose, yet are not so for Song; such are the finals in (n)
where the (e) is quiescent; as darken, fasten, golden; and sometimes in the
middle of a word, as oftentimes, Even-song, etc. where, if the (e) be not
sounded (as it ought not to be) the stress of the Syllable resting upon the
(n,) whose sound passes through the Nose, the Tone so held, will be very
indecent; but if, to avoid that indecency, the (e) be sounded, as when the
Syllable ten in fasten shall be pronounced as in the word tender; and the
Syllable ken in darken, as in the word ken (to discover) and that of den, in
golden, as in the word Den (antrum) such a Pronunciation being different from
the common one, will be ridiculous

. 37. As the Verses of four, or five Feet seemed fitter to be read than those
other of shorter and unequal lengths, etc. as being not so light and airy; so,
for the same reason, they are more proper to be set for Church-Musick; since
the Measures which are Originally in the Verse, have an influence on the
Measures of the Air.

. 38. For, as when a firm Body is compassed with a soft fluid One, that firm
Body is as a Mould to that other; and impresses its own Form and Signature in
the Bounds it gives it: So the Ditty, appearing as in a Vest of Air, gives that
Air its own Measures and Proportions: So that not only the length of each Verse
is set forth in an equal length and Measure of Air; determined by some longer
Note, or Rest, or Portion of a Strain; which ends, where the Rhyme ends; or, as
in the present Case, where the divided parts of four and three Feet do end;
whether with, or without Rhyme, (which are always closed with a Sembrief or
whole Time); But also the Time of the Feet of the Verse, does very often
necessitate the Time of the Air, and appear in it. As to instance in the 104
Psalm; the Measure of whose Feet is Triple; and will oblige any one, who shall
give it an Air, to make the Time of that Air Triple. But that Triple, being not
so solemn as that of the Iambique (the Measure of our English Verse) when at
the (...) (or depressing of the Hand, or Foot, in keeping Time) One only
Syllable is repeated, of a double quantity to that Syllable repeated at the
(...) or Elevation: But that of the Tribrach, (where two Sillables pass at the
((...)) and the Iambique, alternately; the Verse composed of that dancing
Measure, will be too moving; and the Air set to it, too light for any Subject
which is in Dignity, equal to, or above the Heroique.

. 39. Wherefore, since the Measures of the Verses, and of their Feet, have an
influence on the Airs set to those Verses; and contrariwise, that the Tunes so
set, will impress their own received Measures on any other words which shall be
formed by them: we have rather chosen, in stead of conforming our Verses to
those obsolete Measures, for the Tune's sake; to take other Measures on purpose
to avoid them; lest they should betray the Words to the Old levity: and to take
such others, as were not like to introduce any new one; not excepting against
many other Forms which diverse have happily taken, as the excellent Pindaric
(though unfit for a Parochial Congregation, because every Verse is particularly
to be set) nor any other which moving more temperately, are more commensurate
to the Subject which they express; and more inservient to the End for which
they were designed.

. 40. And the due respect to these, is the equal concern both of Verse, and
Music; being grounded upon that great and Universal Law of proportioned
Decency; which, like the Platonic Soul of the World, being dissus'd through
the whole Body of Nature ( magno se Corpore miscens) is thence copied out by
all our Modes of Imitation; and particularly by that of Verse and Music.
Which conforms it self to the Nature of those Subjects, which the Verses or the
Airs describe; and the End they tend to. For Motion, which is as the Soul both
of Verse and Music, represents, by the different proportion it bears to the
different Subjects, which the Verse or the Music express, the difference
which those Subjects bear to each other: the Motion being as the Movent; as the
Port, and Min of Persons, ought to be as their Worth and Dignity; and therefore
to be expressed after the Rate themselves move. Thus the step of the Hero, was
not equaled by those of the Child Ascanius; who followed him -- non passibus
oequis -- and the grand and flow recurses of the deeper Tones, are impossible
to be adjusted, by the swift narrow Purlings, and Undulations of the higher.
And this great Law of Decency is, as to Verse, the ground of that Rule (whose
converse also holds, and regulates all, both true, and Poetic Subjects, and
their Measures.)

Versibus exponi tragicis, res Comica non vult. And, as to Song, it obliges the
Musician, to make the Air and Time of the Music, proportioned to the Nature
and Air of the Subject; which is what they call humouring it. So that what is
given to a Comic Subject, must be a brisk Comic Air; and what sings the
Heroique, must be high and Heroique. And therefore, since the Subject of
Church-Musique is the highest, and most transcendent, its excellency cannot
consist in being light and airy; but in being Solemn, Grave, and Majestic. The
Music, as the Verse, being to be proportioned, as to the great Subject and
the End, so to the sublime Affections which ought to be excited, and carried up
toward it. So that as far as Earth, and the Affections to Earth, are distant
from Heaven, and the Affections tending thither: So far ought we to sever those
Airs, which tend to Gayety, and to Rapture.

. 41. It would be too far a Digression to show, how Music in general excites
such Motions in our Spirits as it excites in Air; how they both tremble, and
vibrate alike; and how, as the Vibrations of particular Chords do particularly
vary, and modifie the Air, and the modified Air trembles on, as a continued
Body, and conveys the Impress to the proportioned distant Chord, and moves it,
as it self was first moved, by the impulse of the Elater: So particular Airs in
Music, impress their particular Sallyes, and the various Movements, and
Contextures of those Sallyes, upon the Common Air; which, being so impressed,
strikes our Sense, as it self is struck; and either finding the same cognate
Motions in our Spirits (such is the one Harmony of floating Spirits and Tones)
cherishes, and advances them; or strongly beating on them, impresses them. It
will be enough, here, to say, that particular Airs, excite particular
Affections; and (without digressing so largely, as were requisite to show the
Reason) to confirm it with that one known Old Example, of those Young Men,
quieted by the Dorick Harmony, whom the Phrygian had enraged: (as if those
Passions had been first in the Music, and afterward in the Men) and thence,
farther, to infer, that since particular Airs excite particular Affections, we
ought to take care, that the Church-Musique be such as the Church-Affection
ought to be: such, as by which the Mind may be composed, and withdrawn within
it self, from attending the Objects here below, to be fixed on Heaven only, and
the things above; That the Music be not composed, nor at any time performed,
for it self; (as when (possibly) the Air, or the Composition being graceful,
One only Verse of a Psalm or Hymn is usually Sung, by those, who pretend to be
lovers of Music; limitting their Devotions by the length of the Tune; airy
alike, and alike passing into nothing) but in order only to those Ends for
which it serves; that so, the Mind following only after those, and being
abstracted from things sensible to those unseen, it may be ravished above 'em,
and find another Harmony within its self, beyond that of Music; when, (as
Preluding to its Separation) she quits all her Interest in the Affections here,
and their miquiet tumultuary Joys, and begins to taste some earnest of her
future State, in the first Heaven of an inward Peace and Tranquillity.

. 42, And it were to be wished, that all they who truly mind their own Peace,
and the Peace of Jerusalem too, would join the Quire: That all, who profess,
and call themselves Christians, would renounce all those Lusts and Affections,
from whence, all, both our inward and outward Enmities, our Wars, Strifes, and
Contentions come; and Sacrificing them to the private Peace of each Man's Bosom,
and the General Peace and Honor of the Christian Name, would unite, as One, in
Offering up their joint Praises to their Common Father, and the God of their
Common Salvation; That each would invite his Brother, (there is no Schism in
Praise) in our Prophets own Words, O Praise the Lord with Me! and let us
magifie his Name together.

. 43. And doubtless the Psalms may be looked upon, not only in those Forms of
Thanksgiving, but in all other the numerous Modes of Address, as a Universal
Character of Devotion; in which, all the Pious of all the differing
Persuasions, and Languages in Religion, may consent; and speaking all in that
one known Tongue, may both rightly understand each other, and be understood
themselves, and (which it is probable some are not) even by themselves. It were
utterly needless, to show, how the Psalms, throughout all the Ages of
Christianity, have been an express part of the Forms of their Devotion; the
Great Author himself, and Finisher of our Faith, repeated on the Cross the 22.
Psalm, if not entirely (as the Tradition holds) yet the first Verse of it word
for word: His Disciples often Sung them with Him; and his Apostles after; and the
same has been the undoubted Practice of the Christians throughout all Ages.

. 44. From these, and the like Considerations, some Peaceably-minded, and
well-dispos'd Modern Ones, have labored, by extracting particular Collects,
out of every Psalm, to compose such Forms of Devotion, as all the Societies of
Christians may join in without dissenting, or giving, or taking Offense: Which
Endeavor, as it can never be sufficiently commended; so it may seem as
possible, that the same end may be prosecuted, and as happily attained, by
rendering the entire Psalms themselves plain and intelligible to the meanest
Capacities, after the like Forms in which they were first Written, and
according to the ancient Modes of their performance, as by any Collect that may
be taken from them.

. 45. And how happy might the Consequence be of either! When, as the wild
Confusions of our differing Opinions, have withdrawn us into barbarous
misunderstandings, and into Actions, which would dishonor a very Heathen: So a
Union in our Devotions might beget a Union of Hearts, and Affections; and make
us all speak the same Language of Charity; contrary to whose Gospel, whatever
fair, and speciously adorned, but miserably adulterated Truth, the Tongue of
Men or Angels shall utter, will discover its falsehood by that very Doctrine;
that Religion which obliges us to dissolve the Bond of Charity, the End of
Religion, and to dispense with all, or any the known Practique Duties, and
Obligations to God and Man, by Perjuries, Rebellions, Murders; by all the
close holy Cheats, and Conspiracies against the Life or Fame of others; and by
all the open Violences and Ravages whatever, in order to the propagating our
vain Imaginations, and the setting up the Idols of our own Opinions, being
certainly, for those very Practices, false, and diabolical; and to be
countenac'd only, and professed, by those unhappily misguided Wretches, and
their (...)tique Leaders, who, under the pretended Ensigns of the Lord of
Hosts, do fight the Battles of the Ambitious.

. 46. And when by these, or by what other blessed means, we shall have broken
down all the narrow envious Enclosures which have hedged us out from each
other, within the Churches of our own Interests, the Fold will not only be One,
but 'twill be Universal too: For, when we shall be at leisure from disputing,
and fighting with each other, to convince those who are without; and when, by
beholding our true Gospel-temper, the honest Conversation; the Brotherly love;
the like-mindedness; the forbearing and forgiving one another for Christ's
sake; the Infidel shall be able to understand what we mean by Christanity:
When, he shall be no more perplexed which Party, undoubtedly, to be saved with;
and with which, inevitably to perish; which now (out of the seeming insuperable
difficulties of taking the right, and the numerous odds against him, that he
takes the wrong; since he fees each dissenting Party condemning, and being
condemned, by all the other Churches, Militant against it) makes him fearful to
choose any; and rather quietly to take his Lot among the Heathen, than amidst so
much Rage, and Zeal, and Malice, of Parties, and Opinions, to run the desperate
hazard, and adventure of Christianity: We may hope, that the promiss'd fullness
of the Gentiles (which delay, our selves are in so vast a Measure guilty of)
may be mercifully completed; when, in our Prophets own Language, All the Ends
of the Earth shall remember themselves, and be turned, unto the Lord; and All
the Kinreds of the Nations shall Worship before Him. When they, who already
offer at the Songs of Sion in that strange Land, without the Pale of the
Church, (for the Jew, and the Mohammedan practice them in their Synagogues, and
Mosques, (...) as admitted by this Key of David, enter into his Gates with
(these) Thanksgivings, and into his Courts with (these) Praises. When all the
World shall Worship Thee, O God! sing of Thee, and praise thy Power: And, as
thou shall have made thy ways known upon Earth, thy saving Health among all
Nations; shall have brought them out of Darkness, into thy Marvelous Light; and
filled all the Earth with thy Glory: So all Nations shall flow in unto Thee;
All the Earth shall be filled with thy Praise; and shall make the Returns of
thy Glory, as Universal as the Influence.

Laudate Dominum Omnes Gentes! Laudate eum Omnes Populi! Quoniam confirmata est
super Nos Miserecordia Ejus; and veritas Domini manet in Aeternum. Hallelujah!

A Collection of sundry of the Contents of the Psalms, disposed under several
Heads: Whence, as from a Promptuary, we may readily draw forth such
Instructions, Comforts, and Assistances, as may be proper to Our particular
Concerns, in the manifold Emergencies of Life; as also Patterns and Forms of
Address, in our Devotions of Prayer and Praise.
PSALMS, Showing,
That All Our Happiness is in God; the only Hope of the Pious and the Just. Ps.
4. v. 6. Ps. 39. v. 7. Ps. 62. v. 9. Ps. 73. v. 25. Ps. 84. v. 11. Who are the
Godly, and the Righteous. Their Actions. Their present, and their future State
of Bliss. Ps. 1. Ps. 15. Ps. 18. v. 20. Ps. 24. v. 3. Ps. 25. v. 9. Ps. 26. Ps.
31. v. 19. Ps. 32. Ps. 41. Ps. 92. v. 12. See more of their Happiness as they
are under God's Protection, and are the Care of his Providence. The Hope of the
Godly of a Resurrection to Eternal Life. Ps. 16. v. 9. Ps. 17. v. 15. Ps. 27.
v. 13 Ps. 49. v. 14. Their Happiness in Praising God, Ps. 92. in his Temple.
Ps. 26. v. 8. Ps. 27. v. 4. Ps. 31. v. 19. Ps. 36. v. 7. Ps. 65. v. 4. Ps. 84.
Ps. 89. v. 15. Their longing desire to Praise God in his Temple. Ps. 42. Ps.
43. Ps. 63. Ps. 84. Their Honor, as they belong to the Church. Ps. 87. The
Glory, Strength, and Safety of the Church under God's Protection. Ps. 46. Ps.
48. v. 13, 14. Ps. 87. The Beauty of the Church, inward Holiness. Ps. 45. v.
13. The Glory of Christ's Kingdom. Ps. 72. v. 3. How prepared They ought to be,
who present themselves before God, and approach his Altar. Ps. 4. v. 3. Ps. 5.
Ps. 26. v. 6. Ps. 66. v. 17. That the Offerings of Prayer and Praise; The Vow
performed; and the Pure Heart, are the most acceptable Sacrifice. Ps. 4. v. 4.
Ps. 40. v. 6. Ps. 50. v. 8. Ps. 51. v. 16. Ps. 69. v. 30. Ps. 96. v. 8. Diverse
Praecepts, and Instructions, to frame our Lives by, Ps. 1. v. 1. Ps. 4. v. 3.
Ps. 15. Ps. 32. v. 8. Ps. 34. v. 11. Ps. 37. Wherein True Glory and Honor
consists. Ps. 45. v. 3. Ps. 76. v. 4. Ps. 87. Wherein it does not consist. Ps.
9. v. 6. Ps. 52. Ps. 76. v. 4. That true Worth, and a just Fame, is not in
external, and circumstantial Glories, but in Our Own proper Virtue. Ps. 49. v.
18. That we are obliged to Acts of Charity, frm God's Benefits to us: On whom
to be bestowed. Ps. 16. v. 2. The Reward of it. Ps. 41. The Brevity and Vanity
of Life; And of all the Pompous Trifles here below. Ps. 39. v. 4. Ps. 49. Ps.
90. That God beholds Humane Affairs; protects the Pious, and the Poor
Oppressed, appealing to him; and guards them from the Wicked, against whom He
appears in vengeance, Ps. 9. v. 7. Ps. 11. Ps. 12. v. 5. Ps. 46. Ps. 37. Ps.
55. v. 22. Ps. 73. Ps. 75. Ps. 92. v. 5. Ps. 94. The Happiness of the Pious, in
their acquiescence under God's Protection of them, and Provision for them. ps.
3. v. 5. ps. 31. v. 6. ps. 22. v. 23. ps. 23. ps. 27. ps. 33. v. 12. ps. 34. v.
6. ps. 37. ps. 42. v. 5. ps. 46. ps. 62. ps. 73. v. 23. ps. 85. v. 9. ps. 91.
ps. 93. ps. 94. v. 12. The wretched State of the ungodly and the unjust, here
and hereafter. ps. 1. v. 4. ps. 5. v. 6. ps. 11. v. 5. ps. 58. ps. 52. ps. 82.
ps. 92. v. 5. expressed as Execrations; but may be understood as real
Declarations of the Vengeance that justly follows them; or Prophetic
Denunciations of it. ps. 35. v. 4. ps. 69. v. 22. That God will judge the
World. ps. 50. ps. 75. ps. 96. v. 10. ps. 97. That the Prosperity of the Wicked
is not to be envied. ps. 37. ps. 49. v. 16. ps. 73. v. 16. That the Sinner is
an Atheist. ps. 10. v. 4. and v. 11. ps. 36. The folly and the cursed
consequences of Atheism. ps. 14. ps. 36. That the visible Works of God may
convince the Atheist. ps. 8. ps. 19. That his Judgments on the Wicked may also
convince him. ps. 58. v. 10.
PSALMS, Invocating God for deliverance and protection
From his Enemies. ps. 3. ps. 7. ps. 10. ps. 13. ps. 22. ps. 25. v. 19. ps. 38.
v. 12. ps. 59. ps. 70. ps. 71. ps. 86. v. 14. enforcing his Petition from his
Own Innocence, and the Justice of his Cause. ps. 17. ps. 7. v. 4. ps. 26. ps.
43. Against Liars, and Dissemblers; false and subtle Accusers; Hypocrites, and
the treacherous Friend. ps. 5. v. 8. ps. 10. ps. 12. ps. 28. v. 3. ps. 31. v.
11. ps. 35. ps. 38 v. 11. ps. 41. v. 5 ps. 55. ps. 56. ps. 57. ps. 69. Against
declared Enemies, and open Hostilities ps. 44. ps. 60. ps. 68. ps. 74. ps. 79.
ps. 83. ps 89. v. 38. ps. 94 As going forth against their Enemies. ps. 20. ps.
80 Against Oppressors, and Unjust Judges. ps. 10. ps. 56 ps. 58. ps. 69. ps.
82. ps. 94. ps. 63. v. 4. Against Detractors, and Slanderers. ps. 57. ps. 64
ps. 69. v. 19. ps. 70. Being persecuted and reviled for God's Cause. ps. 42 ps.
44. v. 13. ps. 22. v. 7. ps. 69. v. 6. In time of Sickness. ps. 38. ps. 39. v.
8. In time of Affliction. ps. 25. ps. 31. ps. 40. v. 11 ps. 61. ps. 77. ps. 86.
Being under a sense of God's Displeasure. ps. 77 ps. 88. In his Old Age. ps.
71. From Sin. ps. 19. v. 13. ps. 25. v. 6. ps. 85. ps. 90 v. 13. From Sin, and
its punishment (in the Penitentials.) ps. 6. ps. 32. ps. 38. ps. 51. Through
the whole Course of his Life. ps. 25. v. 4 ps. 90. v. 12.
PSALMS, Invocating God
To assist the king going forth against his Enemies. ps. 20. To succor him in
Distress. ps. 89. v. 38. ps. 80 v. 14 To give him a long Life here, and
Eternity hereafter. ps. 61. v. 6. To Crown Him with Justice and Righteonsness;
that those Grandeurs which exalt the just Throne, an extended Dominion, and an
extended Name, may follow his Virtues; and that Peace and Plenty may bless his
People. ps. 72. For the Churches Deliverance, and Restoration. ps. 14. v. 7.
ps. 51. v. 18. ps. 74. ps. 79. ps. 80. ps. 83. That the Light of Truth may
shine on all the World. ps. 67.
PSALMS, Giving Thanks to God
For his Blessings on the King. ps. 21. For the Assurance the Church has of
the continuance of his Favor toward it. ps. 69. v. 34. For deliverance from
Enemies. ps. 10. v. 16. ps. 54. v. 4. ps. 57. v. 7. ps. 59. v. 16, 17. For
Victory, and Deliverance from open Hostilities. ps. 9. ps. 18. ps. 21. ps. 31.
ps. 46. ps. 48. ps. 66. ps. 76. ps. 98. In a Song of Victory, encouraging the
Host, and sung by the Daughters of Jerusalem. ps. 68. v. 12. For deliverance
from Enemies and Sickness. ps. 30. ps. 56. v. 12. ps. 66. v. 8. For deliverance
from Misery and Affliction. ps. 22. v. 22. ps. 34. ps. 40. ps. 71. v. 19. That
he is seated where the True God is worshipped. ps. 16 v. 5. In the Feast of
(...) ps. 81.
PSALMS, Magnifying
God's Works and Power. ps. 8. ps. 19. ps. 24. v. 1, 2. ps. 29. ps. 33. ps. 65.
v. 5. ps. 66. ps. 89. ps. 92. v. 4. ps. 95. ps. 96. ps. 97. His Justice,
Goodness, Mercy, and Truth. ps. 33. ps. 36. v. 5. ps. 42. v. 8. ps. 45. v. 6.
ps. 65. ps. 68. v. 4. ps. 71. v. 19. ps. 94. v. 12. ps. 98. ps. 99. His
Righteous Laws. ps. 19. v. 7.
PSALMS, Exhorting
PSALMS,
To join in magnifying and praising God. ps. 34. ps. 66. ps. 95. ps. 96. ps.
98. ps. 100. To instrust the Gentiles. ps. 96. v. 10 The Gentiles to embrace
Christ. ps. 2. v. 10. Inveighing against the Enemies of the Church. ps. 2.
Prophesying the Conversion of the Gentiles. ps. 22. v. 27. ps. 47. v. 6. ps.
86. v. 8. Prophesying of our Savior's Passion. ps. 22.
ERRATA
In the Preface.
PAge 3. l. 25. for impressess, r. impresses. p. 8. l. ult. for Affection, r.
Affections. p. 10. l. 9. for not all, r. not at all. ibid. l. 17. for Quam, r.
Quem. p. 17. l. 23. for those, r. these. p. 19. l. 13. for of r. in. p. 20. l.
25. for dilated, r. diluted, p. 24. l. 15. for would, r. could.

In the Psalms.
Page 5. l. 10. comma after enough, p. 6. l. 11. for Mouth. r. Mouth. p. 13. l.
10. for Arms, r. Arm. p. 15. l. 6. for guiltless, r. guileless. p. 20. l. 6.
for destroy, r. deteyn. p. 21. l. 19. for the Portions, r. their Portions p.
35. l. 7. for Sense r. Cense. p. 51. l. 12. for Bonds, r. Bounds, ibid, l. 25.
for when, r. where. p. 57. l. 17. for Affairs, r. Affair. p. 64. l. 3. for
exalting, r. exulting, p. 72. l. 15 for Guard, r. Guards. p. 79. l. 8. for thy,
r. the p. 80. l. 7. for shall r. shall. p. 93. l. 2. for the emitted, r. the
immitted. p. 100. and 101. the Verses to be all thus noted. ".p. 106. l. 10.
for Songs, r. Song. p. 108. l. 22. for thrown, r. prone, p. 114. l. 16. for
Labanon, r. Lebanon, p. 115. l. 25. for the, r. thy. p. 116. l. 9. and 10. to
be noted thus ".ibid. l. 23. for put, r. pull. p. 119. l. 10. for wonders, r.
wonder. p. 128. l. 3. for his Burden, r. the Burdens. p. 131. l. 17 for
or'e-fill'd, r. or filled. p. 135. l. 5. for Sense, r. Cense. p. 136. l. 6. for
Hand, r. Hands, p. 138. l. 11. for of, r. of the. p. 145. l. 2 for consent, r.
concent, p. 153. l. 9. for All the, r. All ye. p. 155. l. 26. for laboring
Soul, r. laboring wearyed Soul.

Advice to the READER For the more easy singing of these Psalms.
OVT of a due Regard to those, who though they think not so ill of this Version
of the Psalms, as they do of that of Sternhold and Hopkins: yet because of the
difficulty they apprehend to be in singing them by reason of the difference of
the measures, and consequently of the Tunes set to them, make use of the Other,
not out of Choice, but as out of Necessity: I think my self obliged to
represent to them how easily that imaginary difficulty may be removed; and that
All the Psalms, four only excepted (the VIII, the XI the XLVI and the CXXXVI)
may be sung to Two Tunes only; of which, One of them is already known, and
usually sung in Churches;the Other only is new; which comprehending only four
Verses, any Person who has but an ordinary Ear, and has heard it some few times
sung, may as easily learn so short an Air, as those old Tunes now used were at
first learnt, by the greater Number of People, when they also were new.

All that is requisite to this, is only taste the Verse of the Psalms into One
kind of Stanza; and the Stanza of four Verses being the shortest to take That.
This (...) so easy to be apprehended that it is needless to tell any One that
those Psalms whose Stanza is already of four Verses must continue so: Those of
eight must be divided into two Stanzas: And where the Stanza is six, the Verses
of that must be divided into Couples, two of which make a Stanza.

This being done, All the Psalms whose Verses are four Feet will be sung to the
known Tune of the (...) Psalm; and All the Psalms whose Verses are five Feet,
to the Tune of the XXIV, XXXII, XLIX, LXVI, LXVII XCI XCVI, or CXXXIII Psalm:
so great a variety of Tunes of that Measure being given, that any One may take
what he shall best fancy, or can most easily learn.

As by this means all they who are able to sing but (...) One new Tune, may by
that One only Tune sing any Psalm whose Verses are five Feet, (which is the
only Measure which is new.) So they who are able to sing All the Tunes may
receive a greater Benefit, For having regard to the Subject of the Psalm and to
the Affections to be raised in themselves in making the Address; They may
choose what Tune they find most proper for that Performance: since (having
respect only to the length of the Verse) any Tune will sing any Psalm.

If it happen that at the End of any Psalm some Verses are wanting to complete
the Stanza, a Gloria of the Number of Verses required, will supply that defect.
So likewise if any Portion of a Psalm be chosen out (as is usual before or
after Sermons, and in the Private Devotions of Families) If it happen that by
reason of some transition in the Psalm to another Subject, the Portion of the
Psalm so chosen be ended before the Stanza be finished, a Gloria will likeWise
complete it. So that by this means we may begin and end in any Part of any
Psalm we shall think convenient and proper for the Occasion we choose it for.

Another Benefit may be this: If we shall at any time select any particular
Verses out of diverse Psalms proper for our Concerns in our Private Devotions,
after that Mode which the Church has observed in those Hymns which are used in
stead of the Venite upon the Thirtieth of January, and the Twenty Ninth of May;
and in those Forms of Thanksgiving appointed to be used at Sea after a
dangerous Tempest, or for victory or deliverance from the Enemy (of which kind
the Author of the Whole Duty of Man has collected diverse under the Title of
Pious Ejaculations taken out of the Book Psalms) If, having made such a
Collection, we shall transcribe those Verses out of the Paraphrase, we shall
have formed a Hymn proper for our own Occasions, which may easily be sung to
one only, or to any of the Tunes, after the manner we have directed.

Wherever a Word is thus noted (*) as Israel, that Syllable upon whieh the two
Points, are is to be divided, and sung two Notes, as being to be accounted two
Syllables,

The FIRST BOOK of the PSALMS, Paraphrased in Verse.
Psalm I.
[Beatus vir qui non abiit.]

Led by false Counsels, in the Sinners way:
Who has not sat in the Proud Scorners Seat,
Who mock at Piety, and God forger.
Gods Law has placed his whole delight,
And makes that Law his study Day and Night.

Fed by the flowing Stream, yields timely Fruit.
His Leaves are crowned with an Eternal Spring,
And God his Deeds to a Blessed end shall bring.
different is the Sinners Lot!
Like Chaff, the scorn of the Winds, waved and forgot.

From the Just banished, and their promised Land
For God the ways does of the Righteous know,
But Sinners Paths lead to Eternal Woe.
Psalm II.
[Quare fremuerunt Gentes?]
confed'rate Nations rise,
Designing mighty Vanities?
God, and against his Christ conspire,
And against his Thunder, throw vain Fire?

And cast their Cords of Law away.

And does their feeble Threats deride;

And Potent Anger, hurles them down.

On Sion placed, secure, and High.
Decree
Which thou thy self reveal'dst to Me;
Thou art my Son! This day begot;

Shall be the Extents of Earth, and Sea;
All Nations shall thy Subjects be.

Shall to thy Powerful Scepter fall.

And Judges! Learn what Prudence is:
Serve ye this Lord with awful Fear,
With Joy and Reverence draw near.

And pay your Homage with a Kiss.
Shun not his Rule, lest He in Wrath
Permit you stray from the right Path;
For if his Wrath on (...) he pour,
O where is another Savior!
Psalm III.
[Domine quam multiplicati!]

Who seek to rob me of my Peace!

And that Thou have no help for me.
Thou my Shield art, Thou my Praise,
Thou my dejected Head do raise;

Thou hear'st, and help descends from High.

And rise: Who hurts whom thou do keep?

About me set, I would not fear;

And break the Jaw that would devour.

Can bless us with Salvation.
Psalm IV.
[Cum invocarem exaudivit.]

Which from the Pure in Heart ascend;
Who me enclosed with misery,
Did from its Straits and Pressures free;
As thou art wont an Ear to give,
Now hear! And when thou hear'st, relieve!

Mine Honor, and blaspheme my Name?
How long will you delight in Lies,
And cheat your selves with Vanities?
Those, and only Those,
Who love and fear his Name, has chose.
When I (Lord, I thee love and fear!)
Make my Petition, thou do hear.

Examine what does dwell within;
Your selves unto your selves impart,
And search the Closet of your Heart.
outward Sacrifice,
Nor Cleansings which from Offerings rise;
Bring other Fires, more Pure, more Blessed,
Chaste thoughts, and the Incense of the Breast:
And then in God put your whole trust;
For such He will accept as just.

For Good, who will show it us? And where?
O let our Souls enjoy thy sight,
The endless Treasures of thy Light.
forgetful of their Birth,
Fix their low hopes on Joys of Earth,
Upon their Corn, and Oil, and Wine;
Our Wealth's Immortal, all-Divine.
take thine ease, lie down and rest,
Thou have enough, of God possessed:
Under the shade of the most High
Enjoy a safe Tranquillity.
Psalm V.
[Verba mea auribus percipe.]
Words, my God and King!
thoughts I bring.
Hear, O my God! either Address,
Both what I can, and cannot express.
thee before the day is born
My Prayers ascend, chaste as the Morn;

Wilt no Impurity allow.
Sin can no more dwell in thy sight,
Than Darkness in the face of Light;

The Foolish Person, or the Vain.
Blood, the Men of Prey,
And they who kill the guileful way;
The smooth Acceiver too shall fall,
And from thy Presence perish all.

That thou with frailty's wilt dispense,
In reverence and holy fear,
Will to thy Sacred House draw near.

Because of these mine Enemies;
Guard and make plain thy Servants way
From the close Ambushes they lay.

With Guile their very Souls are stained;
Their Throat, like Monstors that devour,
Is as a gaping Sepulcher;
Whilst their fair, smooth, dissembling Tongue
Speaks kindly, and does no Man wrong.

By their own faithless Counsels fall.
In The midst of their Impiety
Cast out these Rebels against thee.


For those who love thee, thou will bless,
And against their powerful Enemies,
Thy mighty favor, as a shield,
Will cover them, and safety yield.
Psalm VI.
[Domine ne in furore.]

Punish my Guilty Soul; O turn!
Mercy, Lord! In Mercy speak!

O heal me! for my Bones are vexed,
But my grieved Soul far more perplexed.
How long, my God! my God! How long
Will thou my killing griefs prolong?

And save me, for thy Mercies sake.

In the Oblivion of the Grave;
Or who with Praise will honor thee
In The Land where all things covered lie?

My languishing extended Moans:
Night yields no rest, my floating Bed
With springs of Tears is watered.
veil on me,
And hid me in deformity;
My Eyes grow dim, griefs early Age
Hastes through my pains, and my Foes rage.

He hears! God hear me now I Pray.

Admitted are before his Throne;

Flee back, and in confusion fall.
Psalm VII.
[Domine Deus Meus!]

O save me from mine Enemy;

As a Wild Beast, when no help's near.

Good have rendered Ill;
If, 'bove revenge, I did not free
My base and causeless Enemy;

O're-take, and my false Soul subdue;
My hated Life seize as his Prey,
And in the Dust mine Honor lay.

Against my raging Enemies;
Rise for me in my Righteous Cause,
And Judge them by thy stablish'd Laws.

The God of their known refuge, flee;
When they the Examples thou shall make
Of Vengeance see; rise for their sake.

Regard my Soul's Integrity;
Thus, ever let the Sinner Bleed,
And ever be the Righteous freed.
For thou behold'st the inward Parts,
The Candor, or the Stains of Hearts;
thee alone is sent,
Who do preserve the Innocent.

But Patient, and from vengeance, long;
And God, (How does his vengeance stay!)
God is provoked every day.
will not turn, then know,

His Shafts against their Face presents,
And all Death's dreadful Instruments.
no end,
He Is big with Sin, but brings forth Wind;

And falls into the midst of it,
recoil, and all
Their fury on himself does fall;
The mischief which himself has bred,
Shall crush his own condemned Head.

According to his Righteousness;
And my just Praises shall advance
The God of my Deliverance.
Psalm VIII.
[Domine Deus noster.]
through the World is thy loud Name proclaimed
And 'bove the Heavens thy boundless Glory famed,
O our Great Maker! Our Great Governor!
Sucklings and Infants praise,
Who from their silence do Convictions raise,
To Charm Blasphemers, and assert thy Power.
Heavens I view, and those fair Orbs of Light,
The Moon, and Stars distinguishing the Night;
Which by thy Power and Wisdom stablish'd are;
I then reflect on Man; Lord! what is He?
Son of Man, that He should be
So great a part of the Almighty's Care?
next those Winged Ministers of Light,
This Second Order, Man, less High, less Bright,
In Glory and in Magnitude do Crown,
all thy Works Him Prince have set;
And having all things put beneath his Feet,
Have given to him the sole Dominion.
Pastures and the Fields,
floating Regions yield,
Of Sea and Air, are Subjects of his Power.
Through all the World be thy loud Name proclaimed,
And 'bove the Heavens thy boundless Glory famed,
O our Great Maker! Our Great Governor!
Psalm IX.
[Confitebor tibi Domine.]
whole Heart, O Lord! I thee
And thy Great Deeds will magnify.

And all my Song shall be of thee.

Thy Presence only him defeats:
Right, and just Cause own,
For Justice waits upon thy Throne.

And blotted out their memories:
Troubler of the World,
Who round it have Destruction hurled;
Both thou and thy Destruction's gone,
As the razed Cities thou have won;
Buried alike, to after Times,
Are they, and thy Victorious Crimes.
God lives ever; at whose Seat
Stand the Oppressed, and the Great:
He shall judge the Worlds great Cause
According to his Righteous Laws:

And flying to his Arms, receive.

Thou never fail'st those who to thee slay.
Sion's Name
To all the suffering World proclaim;
He the Poor's Complaint will hear,
When the price of Blood he does require.


Who from the Gates of Death can raise,
Raise me, that I may sing thy Praise.
I joy in thy Salvation;
lo! Mine Enemies are sunk down;
Into the Pit themselves have made,
Their own deceitful Foot's betrayed;
They fettered and entangled lie
In their own Nets of Polity
manifest Gods Judgments are!
The Sinner's caught in his own Snare.

The Oppressor's lie, who God forget;
Peace is the meek Sufferers lot,
Whose Patience is not still forgot.
frail
Proud Mortals over thee prevail?
Terrors, rise, and then
They Will know themselves to be but Men.
Psalm X.
[Vt quid Domine recessisti?]
O my helP! art tnou so far? and why
Do thou withdraw thy self, when Peril's nigh?
The Poor's exposed to the Lust of Tyranny,
O let all Guile by its own Malice dye.
own will sets up, does bless
What God abhors, Rapine and Avarice.

And from his Thoughts and Counsels banish him.
grievous; high, and far,

Wherefore he scorns his Enemies, Tush! says he,
What Arm can hurt? What Power ruin me?

And his lewd Tongue repleat with Vanities;

And drinks the Blood of the beguiled Innocent.

That he the Poor and Simple may surprise;
His subtle Nets, contrived to catch the Poor,
He closely spreads; and caught, he does devour.
entice the Poor, he humbly does fall down,
Taught the Arts of Holiness and Ambition;
God does not see, (says he) he takes no care
How the Affairs of Mortals hurried are.

The poor, and thine own Honor, vindicate;

And say, thou see not the Oppressed, nor him?
do see it, thy just wakeful Eye
Sees, that it may reward Impiety.
Wherefore the Poor commits himself to thee;
Who else the Father of Relicts can be?

Break it, till there be none lest to devour.
ever (Righteous King!) abides thy Throne,
The mighty-cruel, and the Oppressor's gone.
destitute,
Thou do prepare, and thou do grant their Suit:
Oppressed and the Fatherless.
That them the Man of Earth no more oppress.
Psalm XI.
[In Domino confido.]
God defend?
The God on whose Protection I rely,
Cannot he succor lend?
But, like a Bird, to the Hills for safety I must fly?

And his keen deadly Arrows does prepare,
And secretly intends
To pierce the exposed Heart of those who Righteousare.

All the Foundations, the Defenses all,
What now can the Righteous do;
The Righteous now must fly, or must defenseless fall.
For know, in Heaven God is,
And in his Temple is his Second Seat;
Thence his still wakeful Eyes
Look down, and try the Poor; look down, and try the Great.
Just
He sees, and does their gui^^less ways approve;
But who obey their Lust,
His Soul abhors, and from his Presence does remove.

Upon the Sinner Snares and Storms fall down,
Brimstone and Fire shall come,
This is their just, their Everlasting Portion:
loves Righteousness,
He is its spring, and therefore loves the upright;
He the pure Soul will bless,
He them beholds; and they, his everlasting Light.
Psalm XII.
[Salvum me fac Domine.]
great's the Solitude
Of Virtue, when not One Man's good?
Truth has forsook the Race of Men,
Thrust out, and made an Ahen.

The Pest of all Societies;
Their Lips speak fair, but their salse Hearts
Dissemble, and know other Arts.
The treacherous Lip, that thrives by wrong,
God shall root out, and the false Tongue;
That Tongue which, wanting other Powers,
Prevails by Lies, and so devours:
Then boasts its Conquest; Who is he
Binds me to truth? Lord over me?

Their languishing, despairing Groans,
I will arise, (says God) and free
The Poor, ensnared by subtlety;

Than Silver, sev'n times Purified;
lying Tongue,
And save thine from dissembled wrong;
every side,
Where safely can Truth's Servants 'bide?
Psalm XIII.
[Vsque quo Domine?]
HOw long, O Lord! Lord! can thou yet,
And will thou ever me forget?
How long withdraw thy Face away,
Whose Splendour lets in all my day?
How long shall be my Counses vexed,
What to embrace; or shun, perplexed?
How long shall my glad Enemy
Insult, and triumph over me?
Lord, consider! My God, hear!
O let thy Dawn of Light appear!
Let thy Soul-quick'ning Beams of Light
Wake my dead Soul, heavy with Night.
cast down,
I by their power am overthrown.
thy Mercies, Lord! I fly,
And cheerfully on them rely.
nigh;
O bless the Name of the most High.
Psalm XIV.
[Dixit Insipiens.]
God deny;
Hence, his secure Impiety
Levels the bounds of wrong and right,
And owns no Power above Might;
Thus none of these does Good, not One;
What Lust alone directs, is done.

And thence surveyed Earth's Region;
To see if any understood,
Sought God, and their own endless good;
all were lost, all went astray,
All had forsook Life's blesled way.
no knowledge? is that Light,
The God eclipsed in Man, lost quite?
Have Men of Prey their Nature sled?
Eating up Men, as they eat Bread?
fear shall pierce their Heart,
A Honor from an unseen Dart;

Shall find a God among the Poor.

Were from thy Holy Mount sent down;
That all thy Israel might rejoice,
Joined in One Freedom, and One Voice.
Psalm XV.
[Domine quis habitabit?]
who among the Blessed shall dwell?
Or, who rest on thy Holy Hill?
He who a guileless Life does lead,
Justice tread;
In whose firm Soul Truth sets her Throne;
Whose Lip's above detraction.
Who to his Neighbor does no wrong
In Act, nor wounds him with his Tongue;
vile, where vice he finds;
But pays due Honor to Great Minds.
Steadfast his promise is; and He,
All lost, keeps his Fidelity.
Who the distressed, and the Poor,
Does not by Usury devour;
Knows the high price of Innocence,
And, spite of Bribes, gives it defense
His great Soul, here, finds early rest,
And shall be added to the Blessed.
Psalm XVI.
[Conserva me Domine!]
sole refuge! unto thee I flee,
Preserve me, Lord! for all my trust's in thee;
Tribute shall we raise?
What can we render God, but barren Praise?
O Living! O Eternal Spring of Good!
What-e're we have, flows from thy boundless Flood;
Nor can, as a supply, return to thee,
Consummate in thine own Felicity.
Those alone our Good extends, who be
Great in their Virtue, and their Poverty:
All my delight is on thy Saints on Earth,
Who, in their Actions, do confess their Birth.
other Gods, are not preserved,
Their hopes are false; false as the God they served.
Their piercing sorrows shall be multiplied,
By their all-powerless God, not to be freed.
Their guilty Sacrifice I Will not offer up,
Nor the Drirnk-Offerings of the inhumane Cup,
Their hated Gods shall not my Lips profane;
Nor will I swear by their accursed Name:
Thou, Lord! My Worship art, and Portion;
thy Great Name is known;
Where, I, the Cup of Blessing take; and where,
Maintained by thee, all fertile Pleasures are.
remiss through happiness,
I bless thee, Lord! Afflictions me chastise;
But so chastise, as that I firmly stand,
Sustained by thee, still set at my Right Hand.

My Glory boasts, in its triumphant Song.
And full of hope, my flesh put off, shall rest;
Hell cannot de(...) the Soul, thou have released.
Nor will thou e're forsake thy Holy One,
Or suffer him to see Corruption.
Path, thou wilt show me, which to Life does lead,
And thither thou my happy steps wilt guide;
Where, in thy glorious presence, Joys shall flow,
Joys boundless, which nor term, nor measure know.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XVII.
[Exaudi Domine Justitiam.]

And cries, which from no feigned Lips ascend
own Presence let my Sentence come,
Who can not but pronounce an equal Doom.
thy sight
By darkness, or its own dissembling Night.
And thou know, Lord! my steadfast purpose is,
Nor in my Thoughts, or Words, e're to transgress.
thy Laws,
Not by the example of the destroyer's ways;
thy way!
That my foot slip not, that I never stray.
When e're I called to thee, O present, Lord!
Thou heard'st; that wonted favor now afford;
all Them who trust in thee,
The wonders of thy Love now show to me!

And let thy Wings vast Shadow cover me!
safely, from their threatening Power,
Who compass me as ready to devour.
Mighty in Power, their Tongue does proudly threat;
Not petty wrongs, but what are dared by the Great.

And closely couch, as ready to surprise.
lurks to seize his Prey,
Low, and obscured and quiet to betray.
Rise! disappoint them, Lord! and cast them down!
other Power can save me, but thine own.
From thine own Sword, by thine Almighty Hand,
Save! and the fury of these Men withstand;
These Men of the World, who have the Portion here,
Whose full enjoyments equal their desire.
Their Issue's numerous, and when they dye
They leave their Wealth to their Posterity.

In Righteousness, and when I Have run my Race,
And, in the Morn of my Eternal Day,
Ascending, dropped the Mantle of my Clay,
Shall wake up with thy likeness, I shall rest
For ever satisfied, for ever blessed.
Psalm XVIII.
[Diligam te Domine!]
can I but love thee
all Adversity?
Thou art my Rock; Thou my munited Tower;
Thou art my God, and thou my Savior;
Thou art my shield; my hope on thee is laid,
Thou art my only, Thou my numerous aid.
thee;
For thou will guard me from mine Enemy.

And Floods of Cruel Men did terrify,

Watched, to have canght my faint departing Breath

To God, my last and only hope, I cry,
He hears from Heaven, and my unfeigned Moan
Ascends, and finds access unto his Throne.

The Mountains from their firm Foundations broke;


Cherubim;
Their, and the Winds swift Wings did carry Him;
Darkness sat round about, a Night of Clouds
Enclosed Him, and impenetrable Floods.
heavy veil,
Shoots flames of Lightning, and revengeful Hail,
Heaven gives upon its Foes; Thunder and Hail
Fall thick, and loud; and the great Arms prevail.
part are beat down by the Hails cold wound,
And those that escape, the raging Flames confound.
great War,
And the Worlds low Foundations, opened are.
all this horror, God remembered me;
Sent down; and sunk In The Floods, saved me from high;
himself from my strong Enemy,
For their great Powers too mighty were for me:
Powers prevail, nor close surprise,
He, as their Power, so brake their subtleties;
liberty.
Because He had a favor unto me.
Righteous dealing did regard,
And cleanness of my guileless Hands reward,
Gods ways I never did forsake,
Nor wicked Men my foul Examples make;
Laws I made;
And my Religion to them never betrayed.
them I formed my Soul; new Nature took;
Was incorrupt; and all my self forsook.
thy recompense, O God! to me
As my just dealing was, and Purity;
Holy, crowned by thee, Blessed Saints shall shine,
The perfect shall be God-like, All-Divine;
Pure shall see the Glories of thy Face,
But the perverse, thy Frowns, to Death shall chase:
bring down from on High,
And raise thy People in Adversity.
me thou shall exalt; a Beam of Light
Shot through my Soul, shall chase away its Night.
By thee, I shall an Army break, and scale
Their City's proud defense, and leap its Wall.
Thy way, O God! is a just, perfect way;
Thy Word is tried, as by Fire's last Assay:
Those, who rely on thee, thou do sustain,
For none, who trust in God, trust Him in vain.
Gods! Or ye who serve them, tell!
Is any God, like the God of Israel?
Confess your vain weak Powers! And yield, at length,
The are, as your selves, but Images of strength.
Him, I Am armed, and girded unto War,
And owned by Him my Enterprises are,
my Feet, and I
Beyond, and above Danger, mount on High.
strength does give, and to that strength adds A^
Does force, and skill to govern it, impart.
Arms me with safety; with Salvation, Shields;
His Hand, sustains; Protection, Courage yields.
plain my way, and from false Ambush clears;
Secures me both from Dangers, and from Fears.

O're-take, assail, and their faint Troops subdue.
not to rise;
But at my Feet, the calm Insulter lies.
this I do, armed by thy Power Divine,
It Is not my Arm has vanquished 'em, but thine;
Thy fear astonished 'em when amazed, they fled;
When I destroyed, and gave 'em to the Dead.
all help, from their own Gods they fly,
And cry to thee, but thou reject'st their cry.

Mixed with the Earth, made but one Bed of Clay.
unquiet Peoples Murmuring,
And do the Gentiles to my Scepter bring;
unknown, me serve; brought in by Fame,
without Arms, fall only to my Name.
They quit their strongest Holds, and to me fly;
Fly humbly, fear turns into Flattery.

ever! who me Strength and Conquest gives;

And 'bove them and their Malice does advance.
Gentiles, thy great Name I Will raise;
And sing abroad, my Triumph, and thy Praise;

To David, and his Seed, shall be my Song.
Psalm XIX.
[Coeli enarrant gloriam.]
God, the extended Sky
Tell, that their Maker was not less than He;
without voice, tells day; and Night tells Night;
Twisting Time's winding Chain, of Shade and Light.
What Land's unknown to Night? or shuts out Day?
Which part the World, and run divided way?
hears not the springing voice of cheerful Light?
Or the soft whispers of the charming Night?
In them the gilded Tent of the glorious Sun
Is placed, the Fountain of Light's motion.

Does open his Chamber, and lets forth the Day.
And, as a Champion, with known vigorous force,
Advances to run over his wonted Course;
Whole Heaven's the extent of his vast motion,
Gives East and West to us, Himself takes none,
His brooding heat inspires cold Clay with Breath,
His Ebbs and Floods of Light, give Life and Death.
Such are thy Laws to him; but nobler far
Thou giv'st to Man; by those Souls guided are;
Souls, taught by thy most perfect Law, to thee
Convert, and wed rejected Purity.
Thy Promises, to the Simple, Wisdom give;
Statutes, faint, oppressed Hearts relieve.
Thy pure Commands give light unto our Eyes;
fear our stained Souls purifies;
It lasts for ever, as thy Judgments do,
Thy Judgments, mighty Lord! Righteous and True.
Gold, much Gold, can much refined Gold
Any proportion, with these Treasures, hold?
Can Honey, dropping from the Virgin-Comb,
With these transcendent Gusts in trial come?
Souls are fed,
Taught Heaven; and for reward, are thither led.

often he does offend thee, who can tell?
From secret faults, and from Presumptuous Sin,
O cleanse my stained Soul, and make me clean!
And so shall I be clad in Innocence,
And be preserved from the Great Offense.

Accept, my God! my Strength! my Savior.
Psalm XX.
[Exaudiat te Dominns.]

The Name of Jacob's God for thee appear!
strong succors from the Sanctuary,
And Sion be thy great Auxiliary.



And triumph in thy safety: God thee hear!
wilt hear; wilt thine Anointed Shield;
And strength from Heaven, and thy Right Hand, wilt yield.
Chariots, some, and Horses boast,
Our Number, only is the Lord of Hosts.
Foes are fallen, brought down, and put to slight;
By the same Power we rise, and stand upright.

And grant the mighty succor that we crave.
Psalm XXI.
[Domine in virtute tua.]
all help, in thine, O God! alone
The King shall joy, and thy Salvation;
wish; and the easy task
Performed by him, only was to ask.
Thy Goodness did his utmost hopes prevent,
Vnlook'd-for Blessings, and a Crown it sent.
He begged the Guist, the Measure was from thee
He asked Life, thou gav'st Eternity.
Great in Glory; Great in's honored Crown,
His Greatest Honor's thy Salvation.
Humane Grandeur, ends; beholding thee
He shall enjoy termless Felicity.

It gives his Throne, and him, stability.



No more shall them remember, nor their Race.

Against thy Peace, but they have laid in vain.

And shall direct thine Arrows against their Face.

Thy Power we'll praise in Songs of Victory.
Psalm XXII.
[Deus, Deus Meus! quam dereliquisti?]
why have thou me forsook?
Why, of my woeful Moans, no knowledge took?

Nor Day, nor Night release my misery.
Israel!
Fathers of thy mighty Deeds do tell;
How they did cry to thee, and thou did hear
they did trust, and they delivered were:
I Am a Worm, trod down, and overborn
By all; and made their Fable and their Scorn.

They prosecute, and advance my misery.
Holy Ones, say they,
One who a mighty trust in God did lay;
If God do love him, God perhaps may save him,
And if he will deliver him, shall have him.


To whom, when hanging on my Mothers Breast,
My helpless Soul its Infant-vows addressed;
My first, and (now) last refuge! thou, on whom
I have been wholly cast on from the Womb,

For all Help's fled, and leaves the Danger by.
Herds of ravenous Men;
Fat Bulls from Basan, Lions from their Den,

Fearful to me, to their changed selves, much more.

My feeble joints, my Heart's like melted Wax.

Cleaves to my Mouth, and the cold Grave draws nigh.

The anguish'd Prey, and with fresh Counsels wound;
They pierce my Hands and Feet; my fleshless Bones
Exposed to view, may be told every One.
And now, unsatisfi'd with Cruelties,
They stare, and gaze, and glut their greedy Eyes,
And view, in me, what hate and rage can do;
In me, the source and spectacle of Woe.
part my Garments, which as spoils they got;
My Vesture's Owner is designed by Lot.

Thy help, who alone can help, my God afford!

Nor Lions Mouth, nor Dogs be made its Grave.

Have heard me of the numerous Unicorns.

Thy glorious Name to all thy Israel.


Nor hides, as unconcerned, his Face away,
But hears, and turns, and rescues when they pray.
all I Will pay my Vows; we'll raise
One common Cloud of Incense to thy Praise.
eat and live,
Live ever, He shall Bread Eternal give.
whence he fell, and all
The World return, and to their Maker fall:
alone shall Monarch be, for his
Kingdom, the Universal World is.
All from the Throne unto the Dust, shall fall
Before his Presence, for the are equal all;
All from their Maker took one common Breath,
To Life none raised himself, nor can from Death.


Gloria of Four Verses.

Psalm XXIII.
Dominus regit.
HOw can I want whose Shepherd is my God?
His mighty Scepter deigns to be a Rod;

My Soul has, Heavens own rest, Tranquillity.
How can I wander? He, when e're I stray,
Seeks his lost Sheep, and turns me into the way,
Death's dark veil cannot fright,
His glorious Presence does dispel the Night.

Balm shall anoint my Head, my Cup shall flow,
here, thy favor rests on me,
And shall, O my dear God! Eternally.
Psalm XXIV.
[Domini est Terra.]

All things, all Creatures, and the Sons of Men;
He its Foundations on the floating Bed
Of The Floods has set, and firm established.
Who shall ascend into the Holy Hill
Of God, and in his sacred Presence dwell?
Hands and Heart are clean; who hates what vain
Whom nor Deceit nor Perjury does stain.
He shall receive the Blessing from above,
And the Righteous God his doings will approve;
Race of the Blessed; such as He
Shall constitute Heaven's Glorious Colony.

Ye everlasting Doors! to the most High!
Who Is the most High? thus Great in Majesty?
The God of Battle is the Lord most High.

Ye everlasting Doors, to the most High!
Who Is the most High? thus Great in Majesty?
The Lord of Hosts, he is the Lord most High.
Psalm XXV.
[Ad te Domine levavi.]
thee, in whom I all my trust repose,

me, let none be put to shame
Who flee unto the refuge of thy Name.
But put to shame my causless Enemies,
And blast their cruel, hateful purposes.
thy Paths, O thou unerring Guide!

For thou art God of my Salvation,
On thee all day I wait, on thee alone.
ancient, tender Love;
Which has been ever, as thy years above.
Sins, blot out the memory,
Think on thy Mercies, Lord! then think on me.
good; full of compassion;
And will to Sinners his blessed ways make known.
lowly and the meek,
And they shall learn his ways, who his ways seek.
keep his Covenant, his Paths be
All Mercies, all Eternal Verity.
Name, for mercy infinite;
By pard'ning, Lord! my sin, because it is great.

God will direct; and guide him lest he err.
high contented Soul shall dwell at ease;
And his Posterity the Land possess.
mysteries,
Those Heavenly secrets which make truly wise;
Will show him his Eternal Covenant,
And seal unto his Soul Heavens mighty Grant.
thee,
For thou alone my entangled Feet can free.

For I Am in misery, and desolate.
still enlarged,
With growing Burdens more and more o'recharg'd.

And all my pain, and all my sins release.
who are mine Enemies;
And how their Numbers, Malice, Rage, increase.

Who trust in thee, to the triumph of my Foes.

Be still, Integrity and Innocence.
Israel rest! and set it free
From all its troubles! owned, and redeemed, by thee
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XXVI.
[Judica me Domine.]

For I have walked in my Integrity;
And wholly do on thy Protection trust,
Who, from the Sinner, do discern the Just.

Are fully open; try, and examine me!

Of Action, measures which I take from thee.
Dissemblers, who Truth's Candor stain,
I flee; and the Contagion of the vain.

Of the unjust, nor mix with their Results;

Thine Altar I Will approach with reverence.

And celebrate the Triumphs of thy Name.

The House where thou Inhabitest, our praise.

Of Men, who trade in Blood and Violence.

Prize Gold; and sell their Virtue for a Bribe.

Be thou my choice! and thou, Lord! my Defense.

Great God! and in thy House will praise thy Name.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XXVII.
[Dominus illuminatio mea.]
God's my safety; God my strength and might;
What Man, what Powers of Darkness can me fright?

With great assurance, and United Power;
But, as by chance, (the unseen Path who can tell?)
Approaching me, they all stumbled and fell.
Host charge me, in his Strength, I dare
Oppose my single Breast against a War.
One only thing I would of God desire,
One only thing, may I still This require!
That in his House I may spend all my Days,
TO admire his Beauty, and to sing his Praise.

He Will hide, and set me on a Rock of Stone:

Upon my Foes; great, and above their Frown.
There, O my God! to thee I Will offer Praise,
The service of thy Temple, and my Days;

And do not my unfeigned Requests deny.

Received these Words -- Seek thou my Face! from the
Thy Face, O God! I seek; what other Bliss
Can I pursue? This the transcendent is.
more desire?
Grant thy Command! Give, what thou do require!
Hide not thy Face! Turn, Lord! and grant my suit,
And help, as thou art wont, the destitute.
Parents care, and left alone
I was God's care; He was my Portion.

For my Foes wait to entrap me if I stray.
them! They Witnesses
Suborn, and stain my Innocence with lies.

But that I steadfastly expect to see
Thy Goodness, Lord! in Life's Eternal Land,
Where all shall have their Portions from thy Hand.
With fortitude, and patience, wait that time!
Dare to be virtuous! and leave all to him.
Psalm XXVIII.
[Ad te Domine clamabo.]

Hear, Lord! for if thou do deny,
They, who descend into the Grave,
Cannot more Night, and Darkness have.

And to thy Mercy's Seat, O hear!

Deceitful Ones, who Truth oppose;
Who, seeming Friends, their Neigbour wrong
By the fair treach'ry of their Tongue:

And malice of their borrowed smile.
Let them be carried smoothly on,
And flattered to destruction.
thy works regarded not,
Nor the Righteous Judgments thou have wrought!
Therefore they shall be overthrown,
And, not to be rebuilt, cast down.

And does my humble suit regard.
God is my Strength, God is my Shield,
I trust, and he does succor yield.
Wherefore my Soul new heat inspires;
Filled with Divine and Heavenly fires.
His praises shall inform my Tongue,
And God alone shall be my Song.

And his effectual Powers lend;

Here, and for ever them advance.
Psalm XXIX:
[Afferte Domino filii Dei.]

Bring Rams; and let the cheerful Incense rise
Confess God's Power; yield, and confess your own,
The honor of all Power give him alone.

And him, In The Beauty praise of Holiness.

He Thunders, and pours forth descending Floods,
his voice Power dwells and Majesty;


And the (...) too, Sirion and Lebanon.
Breath of Flames express,
Kadesh Wilderness;

Of the thick Bushes, darts its trembling Light.

High, over the Floods, Rules ever, Rules alone.
protect, He shall his People bless,
Bless with a present, and Eternal Peace.
Psalm XXX.
[Exaltabo te Domine!]

In triumph 'bove mine Enemy;

Thy Goodness has with Health relieved;

Thou caugh'st back my descending Breath.

Eternal Monuments of Praise.

But his Joys live, and Favors last;
If heaviness endure a Night,
Joy wakes, and springs up with the Light.


I am so strong, so great, so high,
No chance can ever ruin me:
Thou saw the folly of my Pride,
And did thy blesled Presence hide.
How soon did then my Glories fade!
Drop down, and sink into a shade!
I then sought my neglected Lord,
And humbly my Petition poured.

Is there in thy poor Creatures Blood?
Can Dust praise thee? Can Thanks return
From the dark silence of the Urn?


Thou have to joy my sorrow tnrn'd,
And comforted the Soul that mourned.
My Sackcloath thou have torn away,
And me, with gladness, do array;

And fill one Universal Quire:
And I, Great God! will sing to thee
Eternal praise, Eternally.
Psalm XXXI.
[In te Domine speravi.]
alone,
Put me not to Confusion!
But, Lord! as is my trust in thee,
So thy Protection be to me.

And make haste to deliver me.
Be thou my Rock! Be thou my Fort!
To whom I ever may refort.
For, Lord! as my sole Rock and Fort,
To thee alone I do resort.
O guide my wandering steps! And lead
Me in the Paths that I should tread.

Into the Net which they have laid;

Be made its great Redeemer's care!
Receive, into thine Arms now thrown,
My Spirit! and protect thine own.

My only trust has been the Lord;


And hid in sorrows, knew my Soul;
Raised it, and wounded, made it whole.
He took me from mine Enemy,
And gave me to my Liberty.
wonted mercies, Lord! extend;
And give my present troubles end;
Grief, a deep shade casts over mine Eyes,
And clouds my Soul with heaviness.
other years,
Time computes my Cares;
My strength 'does fail, and Vigor dies;
My Neighbors too are Enemies,
O're-power'd by mine Enemies,
And false to my Adversities.
Shun, as a Pest, my misery;
And me, and my Sick Fortunes flee.

All my deserts are buried.
As a broke Vessel, I Am refused,
They took me, only to be used.
living to their hate,
That treads upon my lowest state;
That to new Counsels does them bring,
How to remove the useless thing.
Thou art my aid!
On thee I all my hope have laid.
thy Hand, O save!
O save me from the untimely Grave!
And from my cruel Enemy,
And bitter Persecutors free.
One Beam, One Ray, from thee
Break through my Clouds of misery!

For I have called upon thy Name.
Put Sinners to Confusion,
Into Eternal silence thrown.

Shut up for ever in the Grave.
Which does maliciously traduce
The Innocence of the Righteous.

For those who fear thee stored above!
Thy present Bounties too, given here,
Do to the Sons of Men appear.
Presence, thou shall hide,
And they shall in thy House abide;
Where, in a Blessed, long recess,
Far from the World, they will rest in peace;
In Peace, under the Eternal Shade
Which thy vast powerful Wing has made.
No malice there; no strife of Tongue;
No entrance for condemned wrong;
None, who insultingly deride,
The Proud are banished thence, and Pride.
now, I, of thy glorious Name,
The present Honor must proclaim.
And the great mercy to me shown
In a strong, well-munited Town:

Rash, in my uncollected fear;
But, though astonished. and dismayed,
Thou heard'st me, when to thee I prayed.

He saves the faithful, hears their plaints;
But gives the Proud, who Right contemn,
A vengeance, worthy him, and them.
His strength is thine;
He Will guard thee with an Arm Divine.
Psalm XXXII.
[Beati quorum remissa.]

God covers; and his stained Soul makes clean!

And in whose (...) Soul is found no spot.

Concealed within my Breast, and held it in,
It festred, and consumed my raging Bones,
My tedious hours were counted by my Groans.

My strength, like Summer's moisture, breathed away
Then I returned to God, then I confessed,
Then I made known to him how I transgressed.
And he, O miracle of Love! He heard;
Pardon, as my Confession, swift appeared.

In a due time; Pray, while it is called to Day;
'Twill be too late, when Life, or Time, shall be
Swallowed In The Ocean of Eternity.
reconciled to God, I boldly flee
To him; he hides me, and he sets me free;
My Sighs are fled, Joys only now advance;
With Songs I Am compassed of Deliverance.
I will (says He) direct thy future way,
My careful Eye shall watch thee left thou stray.
self then! Be not like Horse and Mule,
Reason must thee; them Bit and Bridle rule.
Set up the Man! Dethrone the Beast within,
The Usurping Beast; Remember ye are Men!

Virtue, and Vice; the blessed or dreadful End,
What raging Flames shall round the unjust be thrown,
What lambent Glories shall the Righteous Crown.

Be Righteous still! And ye shall still rejoice.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XXXIII.
[Exultate Justi in Domino.]

The Just becomes the decency of praise.

Let the Voice, and Harmony of Souls consent.
new Song! apt Words, and Notes prepare;
To the great Ditty, join the equal Air.


His Goodness, through the World diffused, does know
No Ebb; no other motion, but to flow.
His Word, the Heaven's, out of the empty shade
Of Nothing, called forth; and the Heaven's were made
Their noble Host marched up in bright array
Of differing Glories, leading in Night and Day.

Rolled down into the Treasures of the Deep.

Thy People, with due fear, before him fall.
spoke, and it was done; by his Command
Nature's great Laws firm and unmoved do stand;
Princes Decrees, and what the People speak
He blasts, and then their giddy selves do break;
Gods Decrees, His Counsels, and His Laws,
Stand ever; Stand Eternal as their Cause.

Who call him, God; and he does call them, His;



Of The Heart he made, that Heart's still in his Hand.
vain a King trusts in his numerous Host;
In vain the strong Man in his strength does boast,
In vain is safety sought from Humane force,
strength, or swiftness of a Horse;
him, trust not in vain,
He sees their wants; sees that he may sustain.
Hosts, nor Strength, nor any power of Earth
Can save, God saves; and feeds in time of Dearth.
To him alone in all distress we fly,

alone,
With mercy, our long hopes, and patience Crown.
Psalm XXXIV.
[Benedicam Dominum.]
O Thou! whose mercies do me ever bless,
Shall they still flow, and shall my Praises cease?
afflicted Soul shall hear, and join with me,
together, will him magnify.

And he delivered me from all my fear.
mournful Eyes,
And on their Face a dawn of Joy did rise.
Poor, who fear him, cry! and see
How God does pity! How he sets them free!
fears God, God does protect that Man,
Gives him an Angel for his Guardian.

Who trust in him, with him, have all of Bliss.

Will all your fit desires and wants supply.
Prey may want, and bloody food,
But who fear God, shall nothing want that is Good.

I will instruct you in the Almighty's fear.

false Lip; charm the deceitful Tongue;
Shun Ill; do good; seek calm beloved Peace;
Peace the way to, Peace the glad end of Bliss.
Such God will bless; their steps his careful Eyes
Will watch, and guard; his Ears receive their Cries.

Blasts their fallen Glories, and plucks up their Race.

He sends relief, and wipes away their Tears.
contrite Hearts ascend on high,
Mercy descends, and God himself draws nigh.
great the troubles of the Righteous are,
Their God delivers them, for they are his care;
as entrusted, safely keeps each Bone,
And firm, and whole, restores them every One.

Who, the Object of his hate the upright does make.

And to their captived Souls Redemption gives.
Psalm XXXV.
[Judica Domine Nocentes.]

Who my weak strength o'repow'r, thy self oppose.

stop the Torrent of the Field.
Turn the Pursuer back! Tell! who alone
Can tell, my Soul, I Am thy Salvation.

Turned back, and fall into Confusion.

And before a wrathful Angel's fury flee.
dark, and slippery,
And a commanded Angel, Enemy.
without a cause, have laid a Net
For my too credulous Soul, and dig'd a Pit.
Let a swist Vengeance seize him unaware,
Caught in his own malicious, wanton Snare.

Both, freed; both his Salvation shall confess.
Who, Lord! is like to thee, who sav'st the Poor,
The helpless Poor, from him that does devour?
stain my Innocence;
Stain without Crime; blot with their true Offense.

For Good, I did to them; me, Ill repay.
so with them; for I, when they
Were Sick, with Sackcloth clothed, did fast and pray;
And, since my Prayer cast off, in vain did mourn,
My Dove into my Bosom shall return.

Than I for them, more tender Grief have shown.
they, in mine Adversity were glad;
Not singly, but a Public Triumph made.
All flow together, the very Abjects flout,
One Joy the unworthy Great, mixed with the Rout.
scorns, my Soul afresh wound, and destroy,
The tender'st of my Sufferings was their joy.
long shall they afflict? How long thou see?
Lord! will thou but look, on my misery?
O from the cruel pains which me invade
Save! and more cruel Men; Men Lions made.

I Will praise, and my deliverance loud proclaim.

Insult, O Lord! and triumph over me:

Made smooth, to take the Souls that guileless are,

Out on the Wretch! we saw it with our Eye.

Against them, and for my Soul, Just God, appear!

Shall Malice triumph over Innocence?
great in success, cry, He Is devoured?
There! There! the Holy Man is overpowr'd.

Who me oppress, with foul dishonor fall.

When thou regard'st the Righteous, take delight:
All shall thee bless, call happy, who thee trust,
Who pleased art in the Prosperity of the Just.

And Truth, shall celebrate all my Day long.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XXXVI.
[Dixit Injustus ut delinquat.]
he who follows sin
Dethrones his God, and Atheist is within.

And cheats his Soul, till his dark Crimes be known.
all subtle, all pretense;
The Serpent in him kills the Innocence.

Results of the Night, and Counsels of the Bed.
He starts at naught; but, to attain his will,
Unravels all the Bounds of Good and Ill.

Thy mercy is, O Lord! and Verity.

And thy great Judgments deep are as the Abyss;
On all thy Works thy boundless Mercies flow,
The Beasts, them, with thy Creature Man do know;
last Hand made,
Under thy Wing does find another Shade.

Drinks Joys, and Pleasures that for ever last.
Joys with them Immortal Life do bring;
For there is both Joy's and Life's Eternal Spring.
Where Souls with a new flame, more high, more bright,
Shall quick'ned be, struck from thy Font of Light.

To the Pure in Heart, who still thirst thee to know;

Nor let me be by wicked Hands o're-thrown.

All wicked doers, never to rise, shall fall.
Psalm XXXVII.
[Noli aemulari.]
Opinion of the ungodly's State
Move thy firm Soul; nor envy thou his Fate.
cut down, or gathered Flowr,
Vengeance shall him, and his vain Pride devour.
Do good, and trust in God; dwell in the Land,
And thou shall feed of the Bounties of his Hand.
him possess
Thy whole desire; true, and all Happiness.
him, and the success
Shall show, how all succeeds, where God does bless.
He shall clear up thy wronged Integrity,
It shall acquit, and it shall honor thee.
still on God; on him thy hope repose:

With Patience armed, bear thine own Lot, and theirs,
Immov'd, or by their hopes, or thine own fears.

The Just shall live; live the great Heirs of Bliss.

Of his swift Glories, and forsake his Place.
Meek Spirit shall the Earth possess,
Refreshed among the blessed Shades of Peace.

beyond his Day.

vain.
Through his own Heart, shall pierce the fatal stroke,
And his prepared, and threatening Bow be broke,
little, the contented Poor Man has
Does the vast Treasures of the unjust surpass.

But God sustains the upright in Poverty.

And makes perpetual his Heritage.

Through Dangers, and in time of Dearth, be fed.

And vanishes like the ascending Fumes.

The Good Man lends, is great, and can bestow.
Blessed,
The Sinner shall be cursed, and dispossessed.

Himself shall be his Conduct, can he stray?
should fall, yet he shall rise again;
For though he is weak, God's strong, who does sustain.
Through my whole Life, to Age from Childhood led,
I never saw the upright left, or his, beg Bread.

And the great Recompense to his Seed descends.
beloved Good, and Evil flee,
And thou, unmoved, shall dwell Eternally.
Almighty's Love, and he
Keeps that fair Soul that weds Integrity.
The Sinners Branch, cut off, shall withered lie,


Wisdom and Judgment are their exercise.

Guided by that, their sure steps never can slide.

Nothing can satiate but the Precious Blood.

And himself rescues the condemned Prey.
still in God! still keep his Righteous way;
And thou shall see the wicked snatched away.

Fresh as the Laurel clad in its own Spring,
by, and lo! the Scene was gone,
And all his Glories withered into none.

Wrapped in the blessed Shades of Peace shall rest.
all;
For the End of the Transgressour is to fall.
God does the Righteous keep; from him alone
Comes strength in trouble, comes Salvation.
He shall stand by them; He, protect and save;
Such rescue, all who trust in God, shall have.
Psalm XXXVIII.
[Domine ne in furore.]
Anger me reprove,
Nor punish in thy Wrath, great God of Love!
fixed stand,
And I am sorely pressed by thy Hand.

Is pierced with deeper Arrows of my sin.

Swell over my Head, and their weight sinks me down.

And I abhor the folly of my wound.

By misery, that all the Day I mourn.

And all my tortured Body's but one Wound:

With pains, not to be told, but groaned and roared.

But Lord! Thou know the Language of these Groans.
begs this panting Heart? these gasping Cries?
Cast up to thee, these longing, dying Eyes?
thou' Lord! forsake me; Friends are gone;
They, or desert, or unconcerned look on.
my Foes leave me not; they seek yet more
TO afflict, and add their Malice to my Sore.

hear, nor make reply.
wholly refer to thee,
O thou my trust! Thou answer shall for me.

Who watch my steps, and each small lapse expose.
prone to slide; but as my Error is,
So is my sorrow, and my heaviness.

And my changed Soul, from Guilt shall find release;
inveterate,
No change of mine alters their lasting hate.

And hate me, cause in Good I take delight.
Thou, Lord! my Refuge art; and I thy Care;
Forsake me not, O God! nor be thou far.
all my help and safety placed,
Help, O my God! and let that help make haste.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XXXIX.
[Dixi custodiam vias.]

Provoked me, I took heed unto my way:
offend, I silence kept;
Bridled my Tongue; and all my Passions slept.
heard; but it was pain and grief to me
To hear, and not what is Just, and Good, reply.
My Passions calmed, a nobler fire did burn;
Slighting the World, and them, to God I turn.
thou! to whom our space of Life's defined,
Number my Days, and let me know mine End!
That I may learn how long I chained must be
To Life, and Care, and when I shall be free.
Span, to the Heaven's unbounded space,
thee, the moment of my Days!
How vain's the Affair of Life! the Scenick Stage
Of Greatness! and the Nothing of our Age!
Man, like a Shadow hastes; while passing, fled;
Busy in vain; in vain disquieted.
He gathers Wealth, his fruitless heaps still rise;
Leaves all, unknown to whom, leaves all, and dies.
now, Lord! what is my hope? what can it be?
What can I still enjoy, but only thee?
sin, which separates from thee,
And let me not to Fools a Triumph be.
no excuse;
For I had sinned, and tthou had let them loose;
them, and all thy other Plagues away,
Too heavy thy consuming Hand does lay.
How vain is Man! when thou do Man chastise
His Beauty fades; fades, and before him dies;
So, Garments by consuming Moths are gnawn;
And Man's unravelled, So: How vain is Man!

Admit my servent Sighs, and grant my Tears.
My Soul's already on its Wing, for here
I Am but a Stranger, as my Fathers were.
Life; some little strength, before
I go from hence, and shall be seen no more.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XL.
[Expectans Expectavi.]

He heard, and to my steadfast Prayer inclined.
far from the Day,
He drew me forth; struggling in the Mire and Clay:
And on a safe high Rock advanced my Head,
Safe, for himself my goings ordered.
new fire,
For God himself does his own praise inspire.
Behold, ye long afficted ones! Draw near!
Trust in my God; see me, and learn his fear.

Of The great, he is blessd alone wh' on God relies.

And thy great Thoughts to us, comprised by none.
Our Praise is dumb, and cannot them express;
For who can Number what is Nnmberless?
Sacrifice,
In vain the Guiltess, for the Guilty dies;

To do thy will, my self, and bear thy Doom.
In The Volumn of thy Book it is writ of me,
I must thy Law and Justice satisfy.
Heart's the Transcript of thy Law; thy Will,
O Righteous God! I Am ready to fulfill.

But thy great Goodness, and thy Truth revealed.

Been hid, but loudly unto all confessed.
ever follow me!
Thy Truth, and Love, still my Safe Conduct be.

Which only than my Sins vast heap, are less.

Haste, Lord! my fainting Heart, o're-numbred, fails.

Together, for my Soul's Destruction.

Who do, insultingly, traduce my Name;

Still freed, still their Redeemer magnify.

But thou, O powerful God, have care of me.
Thou art my Savior, I thy rescued Prey;
O my Redeemer, make no long delay.
Psalm XLl.
[Beatus vir qai intelligit]
WHo helps the Poor, the woeful, and distressed,
God will help him, and free him when oppress(...)

Be satisfied with Life, and would be free;
No force, nor malice of his Enemies
Him, from his mighty Guardian shall surprise.

God will sustain him, comfort, and give ease.
Himself will in his Sickness make his Bed,
Compose his Mind, raise his declining Head.

O wash the Wound, bind it, and make it whole.
die?
Dye, all? He and his blasted Memory?
Visit me, it is to ensnare,
Spy, betray me unaware,
His talk is vain, his free demeanours, loose
And airy, but his dark intents are close.
For whatever of my innocent concerns
Perversely and maliciously he learns,
When he comes forth, he tells; and then, they all
Together whisper to traduce my fall.

And will the loathed Wretch bear loathed away.
Professed; alone,
But mine own near familiar Friend made One.
He, whom I fed, whom I did trust, did prove
False to his Faith, and Traitor to my Love.

Their Guile, and smooth Hypocrisy repay.
wilt me raise; thy love I know
By this, that I Am not triumphed by my Foe.
For, the Integrity they would disgrace
Thou have upheld, and set me before thy Face.

Throughout all Ages, and beyond. Amen.
FINIS.
The SECOND BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRASED.
Psalm XLII.
[Quemadmodum desiderat Cervus.]
Heart more longs for the cool Flood,
Than my faint Soul for thee, my only good!
athirst for God, the living God,
Who 'twixt the Cherubims makes his abode:
When shall my longing Soul be satisfied?
My famished Eyes, when with thy Presence fed!
feed, and Tears consume me; while my Foes
Deride my Miseries, and upbraid my Woes.
They will not me a quiet grief allow;
But cry, where is God? where is thy dear Refuge now!

Condemned to grieve, condemned to grieve alone.
How am I altered! Ah! How changed from me,
Who to thy House led the glad company:
When the triumphant and exulting Throng
Sung on the glorious Day, the glorious Song?
Why, O niy Soul! do thou thus grieve? And why
Desert thy self, and unlearn Constancy?
O trust in God! He will again thee raise,
Who holds thee now, and is the afflicted's Praise.

Forced beyond Jordan, and to Hermon's Tent?
Yet, there I Will think on thee, and Hermon's Hill
Shall learn the Praises which thy Sion fill.
Wave to Wave, and Deep to Deep does call,
By the roaring Cataracts impetuous fall;
So Woe to Woe, and Grief to Grief succeeds:
Each fruitful Ill a second greater breeds:
All have gone over my Head; on me alone,
Thou the whole Tempest of thy Wrath pour'dst down;
midst of Wrath his mercy shone,
And all his loving kindness was not gone;
Each day discovered it, it sprang as Light;
Less certain the Morn rose, and rose less bright.
Night blessed him for the Day, and praise returned;
My Song gave Praise; whilst thus my Prayer mourned.
God of my Strength! God of my Life! O why
Have thou forgot me? why thus heavily,
As of my God deserted, do I go?
Oppressed and derided by my Foe.
less wound; and Spears less pierce my Heart,
Than do the quick and killing words they dart:
Whilst my insulting Foes continually
Where Is thy dear God? where is thy sure refuge? cry.
Why, O my Soul! do thou thus grieve? And why
Desert thy self, and unlearn Constancy?
O trust in God! He will again thee raise,
Who holds thee now; and is the afficted's Praise.
Psalm XLIII.
[Judica me Deus!]
me, and my just Cause,
Against the Men who violate thy Laws;
Those who the plain and simple circumvent,
The unjust, the treacherous, and the fraudulent.
none can have redress, but thee;
From none but thee, who now have banished me;
O why am I cast out; Why, Lord! am I
Thrown to the Mercies of mine Enemy?
above, and save! O send thy Light
And thy Truth forth, and chase away my Night;
That they may lead me to thy Holy Hill,
And to the House where thou my God do dwell.

Unto my God, my banished Offering;
Take up my Harp age, and, new inspired,
May mix Thanksgivings with the Altars Fire.
Why, O my Soul! do thou thus grieve? And why
Desert thy self, and unlearn Constancy?
O trust in God! He will again thee raise;
Who holds thee now, and is the afflicted's Praise.
Psalm XLIV.
[Deus auribus nostris.]

Thou did;and none but thou could do, of Old?

And its own People cast out, by thy Hand;
thy Hand; thy Pow'erful Arm alone,
Not their own Sword, got them Possession;
But thy Almighty Favor, and the bright
Beams of thy countenance, and their conquering Light,
same God! Our same Almighty King!
To thine oppressed Jacob succor, bring;
thee aided, we shall soon put down
Our Foes, and tread them to Confusion.
Bow; it is not my Sword
Can help, or my weak Arm relief afford;
thou, O Lord of Hosts! alone
Who savest us, and throw'st our Enemies down:
all the day long,
And still as Victors, triumph in our Song.
now thou do not with our Armies go;
But have abandoned us unto the Foe;
The strength of Israel is departed; we
despised Enemy.
They spoil us, and like Sheep, we scattered fly,
'Midst our Foes scattered, and like Sheep we dye.
cheap and useless Souls we are given away;
And thou take nothing for the worthless Prey.
scorned by those about us; who all tell,
Fable of thy Israel.
amazed quite; covered with shame and scorn,
By Miseries and vile Reproaches torn.

And foul Blasphemers deeper piercing words;
yet,
Yet, O our God! we do not thee forget;
Nor have we the Eternal Covenant brake
Which thee our God, thy People, us, did make.
turned back, nor do we stray
In Paths forbid, from thy commanded way,

Of Dragons, Places yet untrod by Men:
Though, languishing, we draw our gasping Breath
Within the Region of the Shade of Death.
Had we for other Gods deserted thee,

To whose clear sight, plain and distinct are brought
The subtlest Webs, and nicest Chains of thought.
thee our God, we are put to shame;
We bear the Offense and Scandal of thy Name:
For thy sake we are oppressed; for thee we flee;
For thee we are hated, and for thee we dye:
as asleep,
Forget us? Will thou no more thy Israel keep?
Why do thou hide thy Face? O turn! look down!
See, Lord! thy Peoples last Oppression.
Grovelling, we creep upon the Earth; bowed down
Low as the Dust, and levelled with the Ground.

Great God of Mercy! for thy Mercy's sake.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XLV.
[Eructavit cor meum.]

My Heart breaths forth the Glories of my King,
My flowing thoughts move swifter than my Pen,

Graces sit on thy Lips, from Heaven showered down,
Round thy fair Soul, by Beauties Author thrown;

Bright, as thine Honor; Brave, as thy Renown.
true Honor is,
Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness.
Be ever prosperous in pursuit of these,
Ride on! and may just Heaven its own Arms bless.
A glorious terror from about thee hurled
Shall scatter, shall confound the Apostate World.
firm's thy Throne! firm as thy Righteousness,
O King! O God! whose Scepter Justice is.
Justice has been thy Love, and Wrong thy hate;
Wherefore 'bove others, God has raised thy state;
God is made thine; and on thy conquering Head
He has the Oil of his own gladness shed.

Poured on thy Garments from their Ivory Cells;

And Princesses adorn thy Family.
But more adorned, more fair than these, did stand
Thy Queen; on thine and Beauties own right Hand;
Clad in a Vest of Gold, with Colors wrought,
The Tribute to her Beauty Ophir brought.

Thy old affections, and new plant thy Love;
his own;
For he is thy Lord, he is thy God alone.
Tyrians shall their Purple bring;
And all the Rich present their Offering;
All-Divine!
Thou art all fair; all Glorious, within:
And though the art clad with all we precious hold,
Art gives thy Garments Texture; Nature, Gold;
Yet, than thy Soul, that Gold is less refined,
Even thine own Beauties yield unto thy Mind.

The Royal Consort, and the Spouse of Heaven:
A glorious train of Virgins wait on thee;
And the Chaste, Fair, with thee presented be.
Joy, presented; and received with thee,
They the most Beaut^^^^ Palace Beautify,
Parents, shall be blessed with Son's;
A Race of Princes for all Regions.
all Ages I Will extend thy Fame;
And, beyond Time fix thy Eternal Name.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XLVI.
[Deus noster Refugium.]
still! O still protecting Lord!
Who help to thy distressed do afford,
What can us fright? should the fixed Laws of the world
Be broke, and Mountains into Seas be hurled;

Over Immense Cliffs the vaster Billows flow;
own Calm, Sion the Storm derides,
Sion, the Holy Place, where God resides.
midst of her, How can she move,
Sustained by the Powerful Arm above?
The Lord of Hosts, his Sions strength shall be;
Himself shall help, shall help her speedily.
Heathen move; and mighty Kingdoms threat,
Earth's shook by the wild Tempests of the Great.
But God appears, utters his Voice, and they,
And their tempestuous greatness, melt away.
mortal Powers,
Who can hurt, when God is ours?
wonders this our God has wrought,
What desolations on the Mighty brought.
bleeding Earth makes Wars to cease,
And sheds the soft, the dewy Balm of Peace.
He breaks the Bow; confounds the mortal Spear,
And drives the furious Chariot to the fire:
Know then that I am God! know and be still;
Great amongst the Heathen, and my Israel.

Who can hurt, when God is ours?
Psalm XLVII.
[Omnes Gentes Plaudite.]
redeemed World! Sing
Triumphant Praise to thy Triumphant King;
God is King, He bears Dominion
Over all the Kings and Gods of Earth, alone.

Us, whom for his loved Heritage he chose.

With joyful noise, and Songs of Victory.

O Praises sing to our Triumphant King:
For God over all the rescued Earth is King,
Praises with Skill and Understanding sing.
God rules the Nations, God, upon his Seat
Exalted, ever sits; Holy and Great;
his Rod,
All made One Israel, under Abraham's God:
Who else can save? what new Almighty Power?
And who can hurt, when God's our Savior?
Psalm XLVIII.
[Magnus Dominus.]
still
In thine own Temple, on thine Holy Hill.
Sion Earth's joy, which, to the North side is seen

Sion's known God, who guardsher Palaces;
Still known to her, now to her Enemies:

Together came Assembled to devour;

Together gathered, and together gone.
Amazement seized 'em at thy Terrors sent,
Disarmed by a Divine astonishment.

And they fell, as the fearful fall, with shame;

O 'th' Eastern Wind, in pieces against the Rocks.
Such, Mighty God! thy marvels were of Old
By our delivered, wondering Fathers told;
Which now thou have renewed, and, what they tell,
To our slow Faiths confirm'st the Miracle:
And this great Truth confirm'st, That thou will still,
O God of Hosts! Protect thy holy Hill.

Within thy House thus speak the flowing Thought.

To the end of Earth extended as thy Name.
And justly, Lord! all Honor's due to thee,
Whose Hand divides Justice and Equity;
Sion praise thy Judgments, shown for them,
And all the Daughters of Jerusalem.
Sion; view the Glorious Mount;

And tell from whom all her firm Glories rise,
To our Sons Sons, and their Posterities.
For, Lord! You Are God of us, and of our Seed,
Our present, now, and our Eternal Guide.
Psalm XLIX.
[Audite haec omnes.]
who-e're you are;

One with another; for all equal be
In the great Doom passed on Mortality.
understanding I Will incline my Heart,
And the great Depths of Wisdom will impart.

And strike an Air, high as the Mysteries.
Adversity?
Death it self draws nigh?
Mighty Ones, who boast
Redeem a Brother, lost;
Unseal the Eternal Grave; or, unto Death
Pay down the unknown, the unvalued price of Breath;

Beyond the Confines of Mortality.

His painful Wealth to Strangers; leaves, not gives:
own House of Clay
Dissolve, their Dewlling Place shall ever stay;
And to preserve the Shadow of a Fame,
Give to their Lands their own departed Name.
vain Honor dies;
Dies, as the ignoble Beast that perishes.
still; this their lost way,
And their Posterity praise All they say.

And Death devours Them and their Memory.
How far shall the bright Glories of the Upright,
In the Great Morn of Life's Eternal Light,
Outshine these Meteors! whose wan, sickly Ray,
Shall set in Night, and vanish at their Day.

Of The Grave into the Regions of Light.

Who does advance the Grandeur of his House:
born, so naked dies;
And in the Dust, cold and inglorious lies;
Pomp mixes not with Clay, he is rest of All,
And his stripped Glories have their Funeral.

But with his breath the gilded Dream did pass:
Do well unto thy self, and cultivate
Thy Mind; such Good's thine Own, and above Fate;
For Men, who see it, will record thy Fame;
And with thy proper Worth adorn thy Name:

With their Forefathers, and shall never see Light.
dies;
And dies, as the dull Beast that perishes.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm L.
[Deus Deorum Dominus.]
Men and Gods, is come,

He on his Glorious Mount appears, and calls
The Earth, from the Sun's rise, to where it falls.

With Storms and Glories circled, God will come.

His Judgment; calls Heaven, and its conscious Fires.

With whom, to make a Covenant, I have chose:
Hear, O ye Heavens! Hear, and confess
(For God is Judge himself) his Righteousness.
Israel! Hear, my People! thy self be
The Witness, how thy God shall deal with thee:
Offerings
Thou did less frequent to mine Altar bring.
Goat out of thy Fold;
Or other Creature which thy Pastures hold:
All Beasts are mine which the wild Forest fills;
And Cattle on a thousand thousand Hills:

Each Beast, which in his closest Covert lies.
could hunger, I Would not tell it Thee;
The World, and all it holds, belongs to Me.

The Offering? And I live by Sacrifice?
Thanks and Praise, make good
Thy Vows, and thou may Offer without Blood:

Of trouble; I will hear, and Thou shall praise.

false to the Truths they teach.
Why do thou vainly boast my Covenant,
Who having naught performed, cancell'st my Grant?
consent,
And follow'dst when the close Adulterer went.

To Falsehood, Treachery, black Reproach and Wrong: Name.
tender Fame
Of The virtuous, and wound'st thine own Brothers
slept for thee,
Thy Blasphemy rose higher and aimed at Me.
But I Will thy sins order before thine Eyes,
Beyond the Evasions of thine own Replies.
this!
Before I pluck you hence, and none release.
Thanks, does offer Sacrifice,
Praise ascends higher, and above Incense flies:
And that cleans'd, grateful Soul, which lives upright,
I Will free from death, and place in endless Light.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LI.
[Miserere mei Deus secundum, etc.

And, as thy self, nor Term, nor Measure know,
Let my transfixed, anguish'd soul, now prove
The inexhausted Bounties of thy Love.

Whose virtuous Streams can cleanse and heal my Wound;
Wound; which (Lord) I here expose,
And my abominated Crimes disclose.
The horror of their Guilt me terrifies
In ghastly Forms, still waking to mine Eyes.
thee (holy God) against thee alone
I Have sinned, and in thy sight this Evil done:
And, if thou should condemn me, must confess
My Doom were just, and just thy Righteousness.
Dawn of life, before I saw the Sun,
The Seeds of Ill stained my Conception.

Thy Wisdom, and a Ray of Light Divine;
Yet my frail Soul, false to that Heavenly Fire,
Weds the base Lusts and Follies of Desire.
With thy Blood

More Pure, more White, than is the falling Snow.

Of Gladness, that the broke bones may rejoice.

And all the deep and leprous Prints erase.

And kindle in it its fallen primitive Fires.

But guide me with thy Spirit lest I stray;

And stablish me, that I may fall no more.
stray,
Like me, shall turn again into the way;

Wash me in the living Font's Immortal Flood.
Then shall my ravished Tongue aloud confess
Thy Mercies and amazing Righteousness.
higher Anthem raise
When thou thy self inspir'st the mighty Praise.
Sacrifice appease thee, I had soon
The certain Price of all my sins paid down;
But Pardon comes not at so vile a rate;
Now Blood, nor Incense, can sins Expiate.
Bleeding Heart; Souls changed to new desires
Which put out Earthly; kindle Heavenly Fires;
Are the only Pure accepted Sacrifice;
A contrite Heart, O God! thou wilt not despise.
Sion, Lord! Build up the Wall
Of thy Jerusalem, broke down by all;
We'll then, with Blood and common Sacrifice,
Bring the true Sacrifice of Righteousness.
Psalm LII.
[Quid gloriaris in Malitia?]

As if 'twere great and glorious to devour?
Know, Goodness the Almighty's Honor is,
Which shall blast thee, and thine Oppressed release.

Sharpened with Lies and killing Treacheries:

And do in Ill alone place thy delight.
own power,
And love the words are mighty to devour;

Will vindicate Oppressed Truth and Right;
Will pluck thee out from thy close winding Den
Of Guile, and banish thee the Race of Men;

The ruined heights and confusions of Pride.

Than God; And where is the powerful Wretch at length?
His Trophies, got by Force, or Fraud and Stealth,
Where are they sunk? where is his Almighty Wealth?
I? who ever on my God rely,
On his sure Mercies long Benignity,
Like a green Olive Tree in Peace shall stand,
In Gods own Courts, planted by Gods own Hand.

O just Avenger! I thee magnify.
You Are all my hope; with me join in thy Love
The Just on Earth and all the Blessed above.
The 53 Psalm being the same with the 14th is omitted.

Psalm LIVE.
[Deus in Nomine tuo.]

And the wild rage of the Oppressor tame;

thee despise:

Sets me, and those who do assist me, free:

To his unconquered Truth just Triumphs fall.

The Offering of a voluntary Heart:
I will thy holy Name for ever bless,
So Great, so Good, so all my happiness:

And see thy Glory on mine Enemy.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm, LV.
[Exaudi Dens orationem.]

Look on me, Lord! oppressed with Misery.
Mingled with sighs, hear my Petition,
And hear those sighs, and the deep frequent Groan;

Pursues me, and with Violent Cries draws nigh.

And Death's black Cloud stoops hovering over my Head

My melted strength's dissolved in the Agony:

Would I soon fly from the fallen Race of Men!

Born with the Doves VVing, and Doves Innocence:

In its vast Calm lost to the spent Storms of the Tongue:

For strife and wrong the City dwells throughout:

The Oppressors wrongs, the Oppressed's Tears abound;

Deceit bears Rule, and all its Curious Arts.

I could have born the expected Injury;
And from a Foe, who had himself declared,
I had withdrawn my self, if unprepared
I from thee fear harms?
Embracing me, have crushed me in thine Arms.

In Friendship's, and our God's Religion.

And the Grave seize their unexpired Breath.
For they themselves abandon to all Ill,
Mischiefs, and they as in one Household dwell

For Refuge, and my God will rescue me.

Who wilt not shut out my continual Cry;

Beset me, or subdued, or brought them over;

And Vengeance against the obdurate did reveal.
Who being never wakened by distress,
Feared not the Lord; undone by happiness.

And a feigned Peace, did Wars chief Engine make:

With healing Dews the killing Venom went.
Smoother than Oil, flowed out his Charming Words,
But when believed, they were very Swords.

All unto him, and he shall care for it.
He shall himself sustain the Righteous,
Whom, resting on his Power, no Power o're-throws
But his Just Arm shall hurl the Oppressor down,
Down into the Pit of Destruction,
The false and Bloody Man his Days shall never
Fulfill; But I, trusting in God, live ever.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LVI.
[Miserere mei Deus quoniam.]


From their beloved strife who never cease,
But with new Quarrels daily rend my Peace.
Mine Enemies combine to swallow me,
Pressing with Number and Sedulity,

I view my hopes, and the two strengths compare

O thou my Praise! the assurance does afford.
And what can any Arm of Flesh do now?
My Trust's above; Injustice is below.

Another Sense, from what my clear thoughts meant;
All their contrivances for mischiefs be,
And their whole business is to ruin me.

And my unwary Soul's plain footsteps mark.

Thou shall it down precipitately drive.

Pour mine appealing Tears into thine Urne:

O my known Aid! mine Enemies must fall.



And thee, its Great Redeemer, magnify.

Heldst my prone steps, put forth and ready to fall;
That I, thus rescued, might enjoy thy sight
In The Land of the Living, amongst the Sons of Light,
Psalm LVII.
[Miserere mei Deus Miserere.]

Have mercy, Lord! Have mercy, Lord! on me.
To the known safety of thy Wing I sly,
Until the Fury of these Storms pass by.

O never-failing! O sufficient Aid!

Devours my Fame, shall save me from on High.
Truth shall descend, and vindicate my Cause;
And mercy save me from those Lions Jaws,

Rage, that lets loose the Beast, and the Man Chains;
Whose quick Reproaches pierce like sharpest Swords;
And Spears and Arrows are their killing Words.

And through all the Earth diffuse thy Majesty.

And hid in my plain Path a treacherous Net:
The Net has caught themselves, and the false Pit
Beguiled its own Contrivers wary Feet.

Breaks into Praise, not to be' held in by me.

Tell, if you can, what is Ineffable!
And thou, my Soul, wake first! wake all my Powe'rs!
Prevent the Morn, and give the Day more Hours!

Extend it wide as his Dominions!

Mercy and Truth reach thither, where is no End.

And through all the Earth, diffuse thy Majesty.
Psalm LVIII.
[Si vere utique Judicium.]


O Sons of Men? O Sons of Men, alone!
From your great Parents Image lapsed and gone.
Your false Hearts favor Violence and Might;

Born Truth's deserters and Right's Enemies,
Ye weave a Life full of deceit and Lies.
Serpents flow,

As the deaf Adder, so you stop your Ear,
Kill on, and will not any Charmer hear.

Of Men, young Lions; and curse them from their Place.
poured out, be they still melting down,
Be empti'd quite, and drank up by the Ground.
When they their cruel Arrows shall prepare,
Cut the vain Shafts, and break 'em in the Air.

And like Abortives, fall before their time.

Rapt by thy Anger's Whirlwind, let them dye:
Be they with sense of Guilt and Wrath perplexed;
As a raw Wound by a rough Hand is vexed

And all the World convinced acknowledge thee:
Doubtless (they will say) there is a God above,
Condemns the Unjust, and does the Just approve.
Psalm LIX.
[Eripe me de Inimicis.]



Not by my sins, O Lord! but by their Own:

Behold, O Lord! and guard mine Innocence.

Visit the Heathen! Judge their Cause and Ours:
And punish those who causelessly transgress,
And sin out of malicious Wickedness.

They rowze at Even; Creatures of Night and Prey:
Snarling like Dogs, the City they invest,
When sleep Chains all, and all, but Malice, rest:

They strike with both, and kill with either Sword:
And who shall hear? who shall revenge? they cry;
More high than us is Israel's most High?

And shall, contemning, crush the Insulters Pride.

My known Defense against mine Enemy.

Thy Vengeance, swifter than my wishes, flee.

Forget the Almighty's signal Victory:
But be they through the World, the Examples known
Of Divine Vengeance, and Protection.

Entangle them, which their own Lips devise;

That Jacob, and the World may confess thee.

And again compass despised Sion in:

And grudge and pine, because unsatisfi'd.


O my sole Refuge! who have set me free
In the great Day of my Calamity.
Psalm LX.
[Deus repulisti nos.]


O turn! O heal us! and again make One
Thy wasted and divided Region.

Made us drink off a deadly Potion:

Thy Banner, and sent those who fear thee, Aid.

May be delivered; O hear, and save!

For thou have sworn, sworn in thy Holiness,
I will in Triumph Sichem's Land divide,
And give to mine Succoth's rich Valley's Pride:
Manasses; mine fair Gilead's Fields;
Ephraim's my Guard; Judah my Scepter wields.
Moab shall serve, Edom I down will tread,
And the bold Philistims in Triumph lead.
Edoms Forts secures my way?
And its proud Towers shall in Ruins lay?

Deserting ruind'st, returning shall advance.

Be thou our help, for all Man's help is vain.

And we shall rise; Great God! we follow thee.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXI.
[Exaudi Deus deprecationem.]


O're-whelm'd with grief, I send up unto thee,
Who fill'st each place, my no-where-distant cry.
O set me on the Rock higher than I!
High above Earth, Man's Land of Misery:

Has still my shelter been, and still my Tower;

And trust that VVing whose shade obscures my Head,

Who fear thy Name, an Heritage have chose.

Throughout all Ages, and when Ages end.

Thy Goodness, and Eternal Verity.

Renewed Thanksgivings humbly vow and pay.
Psalm LXII.
[Nonne Deo subjecta erit.]


For since my God is my Salvation,
My Guard, my Rock, I never can be overthrown.

Mischiefs devise, and wicked be, in vain?
Prone unto ruin, ye shall perish all,
Like a broke Hedge, or undermined Wall.

And level his advanced Station.
Spreading ill Fames and bold Infectious Lies,
Curse with good words, and with false Hearts they bless;

O thou my Soul! still on thy God rely.

My Guard, my Rock, I never can be overthrown.

My Glory, and my sole Protection.
O all ye Sons of Men! pour forth your Heart
In all Distress to him, He Will help impart.

Nor trust the Great, the Great will it deceive:
Put in the Balance them and Vanity,
And Vanity it self will over-weigh.

Nor the vast Gains safe Robberies do yield;
In none of Earths deceitful Treasures trust,
Nor the false Bounties of the Gilded Dust.

Have often to Mortals told, All Power is mine;
Proclaimed thy Goodness too, who will dispense
To all our Actions their just Recompense.
Psalm LXIII.
[Deus Deus meus ad te.]

E're the Day mount, and the chased Shadows flee.
My Soul, so thirsts, so, dying, languishies,
As here, my Body, where no Water is;

Within thy Temple, as I erst have seen.

Immortal Joys, which Souls but taste and live.

In Offering Thanks; and live a Life of Praise.
O the high tastes of Souls thy Love inspires!
When they, in Praise, reflect the emitted Fires.

When Night and Silence fed the mighty thought.

Made by that Wing, where safety is the Shade.

My Soul does still enjoy, still thirst for thee.



With Praise rewarded be, who him obey;
For their black Mouths who do Untruths devise,
Shall be for ever closed; they, and their Lies.
Psalm LXIV.
[Exaudi Deus Orationem!]



The Weapons of malicious, private War.


Close, as their Snare, their selves in secret lie,
And, who shall see? who shall reward? they Cry.

By wresting, they interpret into One.
Their thoughts are subtle, curious, and profound;
Pierce deep, as their malicious Hearts do wound.

Unseen, inevitable, strikes through their Heart.

'Maze the Confed'rates, and the Truth disclose.

Vengeance came down, dispensed by Gods own Hand.

Appeared for them, and trust that Savior.
Psalm LXV.
[Te decet Hymnus Deus!]

When Souls, no voice, equal to Thought, can raise:
To thine own Courts, in Sion, we will bring
Our humble Vows, and promised Offering.

Of the distressed! All Flesh shall come to thee.

O're-whelm'd us, but thy Mercies did surmount.

Whose ravished Soul shall in thy Courts repose;
Who, with the abundant Pleasures shall be filled
Thy House affords, and only it can yield.

When thou sav'st us, and learn'st the World thy fear!
Hope of all the Earth! All the Earth on thee depend;
And who to the Terrors of the Deep descend.

And their sunk Roots, steep, as their Heights have placed.

And the Tumultuous People, wild as they.

As Natures Coast, or that of Being's known.
Whom setting and returning Light does praise,
And the full Circles of the Nights and Days.

Blessings from thee descend, and Fruits abound.
Thy Bounties waste not; but their River flows,
Still full, still pouring forth, and no Ebb knows.
Thus for the Earth thou Blessings do command;
And all Flesh waits the Bounties of thy Hand.

Melt down the Mass, and wake the Life of the Seed.

And thine abundant Clouds drop Plenty down.

And all the little Hills the Donor bless.
Pastures with Flocks abound; with Corn the Field,
All, blessed by thee, all, to thee Praises yield.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXVI.
[Jubilate Deo omnis terra.]

And the one only Language speak, of Praise!

And in his Glory join the distant Choire.

To whose acknowledged Power thine Enemies bow!

Confess thee, and adore thy Majesty.

For Man; his terrible Salvation.

Stood fast, while the safe Host marched through the Deep.

Of Nature, firm and potent in their Cause.
He wakes for Man; the Obedient does sustain;
But makes the attempts of the Rebellious, vain.

Praise him aloud; make his just Praise be heard.

And gently winds it in the soft Bonds of Life.
Confirms our strength, sustains it from above;
And gives to our tried footsteps not to move:

As Silver, when in the Fire it is purified.

And chain'dst us fast to Miseries and Care.

Subjected to a scorned Oppression.
We, through the midst of Fire, and Water, went;
And all the inhuman Arts of Punishment.
'Midst Fire and Water, and the extremes of Pain,
Thou brought us off, and safe restor'dst again.


And what, amidst those Tortures, thou did Vow;
Be Just, and in Gods House, pay the Offering, now.

And in one Cloud, let the invovl'd Incense rise.

What his Almighty Goodness wrought for me.

And did his help, above all help, extol;

Polluted Vows, who abhors Wickedness?
And, O my God! Thou heard'st me; did attend,
And from thy Heaven a mighty Succor lend.
Blessed ever be my God who heard my suit,
Drew nigh, raised up, and saved the Destitute
Psalm LXVII.
[Deus Misereatur Nostri!]

And bless us with the Vision of thy Light;

Thy Universal, glad Salvation.

Through all dark Coasts of fallen Humanity!

When Justice comes, and Mercy dawns again?

Through all dark Coasts of fallen Humanity!

And God, his own Mankind, all People, bless.

Be thy Redeemed Ones, All! and All thy Sons!
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXVIII.
[Exurgat deus.]

And scatter those, dare be thine Enemies.
As Smoke, dispersing still, ascends and dies,
Or melted Wax, floating and formless lies;

Live ever, and Immortal Praises give.
Jehovah's Praise! sing it aloud,
Who rides upon the Chariot of a Cloud.

Which he regards from out his holy Place.

Leads forth the Prisoner from Captivity:
But the Rebellious, false to his Command,
Condemns to the Labors of a thirsty Land.
self did Israel lead,
And of our Host thou Lord of Hosts were Head,

Sinai was loosed from its Foundation.
When Drouth had parched the Land, thou gav'st it rain,
Renew 'dst its spent, and wearied strength again.

O Lord of Bounty! furni'shes the Poor.

Thus chanted, by the numerous, feeble Throng.

"Who sat at home, the weak, possessed the Prey.

"In Beds of Clay, ye shall be bright again;
"As the fair glittering Plume of the Dove is bright;
"Gilded with Beams, and the rich strokes of Light.

"Kings for your sakes, bright as is Salmon's Snow.
Basan boast no more; God's Hill
"Exalted Basan's Height does far excel.

"Can equal that where God himself does dwell?
Host and all the Strength of Heaven,
In thousand thousand winged Chariots, driven?
In The midst of whom, as in his Sanctuary,
God rests; praised with Eternal Harmony.

And with thee, Captive lead'st, Captivity.
And have received the Donatives of Heaven,
Which thou to men; to men, thy Foes, have given.
That the Rebellious Souls, thou did redeem,
Might dwell with God; and God might dwell with them.

Whose Love no Current has, but to bestow.

Frees from, or gives us Victory in Death.

Who wilfully persist in wickedness.
mine own, says God, in Triumph bring,
As led through the Sea; or leading Basan's King.

And Dogs, in the purple flood, their dipped tongues stain.

In the Processions of thy Sanctu'ry:
Instruments,
Virgins in the midst, with waving Timbrels went.
bless the Lord! each Israelite bear his part!
And, loudest in the Consort, bring his Heart.
Benjamin,
Who with their little Tribe, their Ruler bring;
Judah their strength, who sits upon the Throne;
Their Counsel, Nepthali and Zabulon.
What e're our Numbers be, our strength alone
Is God; O finish what thou have begun!

Their Gold; and more, themselves, an Offering.

The Bulls and Calves; the Brutes of humane Race.
Bring back the Man! Bring him again from far;
But scatter those who do delight in War.
Aegypt's Land;
And unto God, the Aethiop stretch his Hand.

To him, who was, e're the Beginning was:

Whose mighty Voice is in loud Thunder told.

To Israel, and in the Clouds above.

Thou, with thy Power, us bless; we, Thee, with Praise!
Psalm LXIX.
[Salvum me fac Deus!]

My Soul, are working still, and mightier grow.

Still sinking, while the Stream runs over my Head:

My Voice is gone, and my hoarse Throat is dry.
Waiting for God, my longing Eyes grow dim;
Yet still they wait; languish and dye towered him.

The Number of the Hairs upon my Head:
Great, and unjust, my Right they overthrow;
Compelled to pay them what I did not owe.

And my wronged Innocence is known to thee:

Grow faint, and be discouraged for me:
Hide my Example! that, who seek thy Name
Be not reproached and covered with my shame.

And thy dishonour's drawn upon my Face.

An Alien unto my Mothers Son.

Dishonor most, fall heaviest on me.

I, and those Services, am made their scorn.

Deride my sackcloath, and the lowly Vest;

Who live in vain, and theirs who sit in the Gate.

In thine own time, the extremes of Misery.
O God of Love! O God of Verity!
That Love, and that thy Truth deliver me.

Sunk in the deep Floods, and my Foes deeper Hate.

Swallow me up, nor close me in the Grave.





None pitied me; I looked, but no relief!
One, last drop I called,
They gave me Vinegar mingled with Gall:
Altar prove a Snare! All Good
Turn Ill! and as their Malice, be their Food.

Horror dwell on them and a lasting Fright:

The fury of a Just, Almighty Hand.
From out their hated Dwellings, pluck their Race,


Upbraid Afflictions; and thy stroke renew.

Of their Injustice, and complete their Doom.

The Living Names of Just and Virtuous Souls.

Raise, O my God! and set me safe on High:

Thy most accepted, grateful Offering.

Than Praise, the Incense of a flaming Heart.

Live, as Immortal as the Praise ye give.

Has nothing but Captivity and Breath,
When into Praise, he does that Breath convert,
And gives it from the free Altar of his Heart.

Earth! Sea! and all therein, his Name confess!
Sion save; and Judah Build,
And to his People its Possession yield;
To us and to our Seed, and to all them
Who love his Name, and praise and honor him.
Psalm LXX.
[Deus in adjutorium.]

Pressed down by Malice and Calamity.


Turn the Reviler back oppressed with shame,
Whose falsehood does my Innocence defame.

That trusts his God, and his Salvation,
Fill with thy Joy; and dry up every Tear;
Let it begin its Hallelujahs here:

O my Redeemer! O my God! draw nigh!
Thou art my Savior; Thou my only stay,
Lord help! and do not, Lord! that help delay.
[Gloria of four Verses.]

Psalm LXXI.
[In te Domine speravi.]



When lost and helpless, I thy help do crave.

Of Men unmanned; the unjust and merciless!

My only Refuge, from my Youth, till now.

And to this Hour sustain'st; O still my Praise!

Strange and unheard, yet still I trust in thee.

Thine Honor be the Song of all my Days.
When strength forsakes me, do not thou forsake!


My Foes hope more Success unto their hate.

Enfeebled quite, and of his God disarmed.


hopes shall crowned be with success,
I shall untyr'd, still hope, untyr'd, still bless.

And bless those Mercies I can never express.

Thy Righteousness, thy Righteousness alone.

And of thy Goodness my whole Life's the story.

Leave not my Gray Hairs now, in Life's last Stage;
Till to the present times I have made known
Thy Power, and to all Succession.

Above all Praise; who, Lord! is like to thee?
And how immense, thy Acts of Goodness are,
O God of Love, who may with thee compare?

Raised up again, sunk lower than the Ground!
And how divided have, 'twixt hopes and praise,
The Showers, and the Sun-shines of my Days!

And have on every side me comforted!

I Will sing the Honors of thy Truth and thee;
And on the Harp, loudly thy Praises tell,
O thou the Holy One of Israel.


For thou, my Soul did with Redemption crown;
And trod'st my Foes into Confusion.
Psalm LXXII.
[Deus Judicium tuum.]


And on his Son! Then shall He Right dispense
To all, and shield the Poor from Violence.
Mountains and Hills shall yield the Fruits of Peace;
And Peace shall be the Fruit of Righteousness.

And the weak friendless poor, whom Might o'repow'rs
But the Oppressor shall in pieces break,
And on his guilty head just Vengeance wreak.

Still glorious, still increasing as their Hours.

Of its own Shade bereft, the Showers drop down:

And Peace shall wait on his established Seat;
Still wait, 'till with the course of Sun and Moon
Time shall set too; when their spent Lights are done

Vast spreading, as the Seas vast Arms are thrown,
Beneath those shady Coasts, where to our Eye
The swelling Flood meets the descending Sky.

He them shall cultivate, and their Wilderness.
His Enemies, such are the wild Unjust,
(...) at his Feet, shall pining, lick the Dust.

And Saba Gums and Spices bear for Thee:

And all their joyful Tributary Kings.

He rescues them, as only Great, to save.
His Goodness does the poor and needy spare;
And takes them, from themselves, to his own care:

For dear their precious Blood is in his sight.

Present its Gold, now, Happy Araby.
Successive Vows of Prayers, mixed with Praise,
As Wreaths of Glories, circle all thy Days.

And Cities, flourish as the Field, with Peace.

Blessed by all the Earth, and who all the Earth do bless.

Of Israel's God, from whom all Wonders be:
And be thy Name, by all the Sons of Men,
For ever and for ever blessed! Amen.
Hallelujah.

The THIRD BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRASED.
Psalm LXXIII.
[Quam bonus Israel.]
true Israelite,
The pure in Heart, must be his God's Delight.

Fool and the Unjust.
free's their State! How full of Happiness!
Flowing still on in Vanity, and Peace?
Their strength continues to Life's utmost Stage;
And Years alone, not weakness, brings on Age.

These are exempt; as Heavens Peculiars.

Spoiling the Weak, the are clothed with Violence.

Yet their excess, cannot their abundance tame.
Virtuous, and the abandoned Poor;
Speak high; and justify their Wrongs by Power.
Earth, against Heaven they fly;
And raise their Blasphemy against the most High.
People, judging such Men blessed;
And Virtue unregarded, 'cause distressed;
Fall in unto them; who, their wants relieve;
And from their flowing Cups, give them to live.
thus they say; God knows not our Affairs;
Nor, from above, respects mean humane Cares.
Unjust is great; the Oppressor thrives;
The World is made; and Mankind, for them lives;
in vain! in vain,
In spotless Innocence, washed out my stain!
unregarded Sufferings, long sustained!
And each Morn languish'd, in unheeded Pain!
our Lot?
Our Patience, and Fidelity forgot?
Shall that high Race of Souls, which mind their Birth;
Be for their Virtue, still, condemned on Earth?
This cannot be; nor can that other be:
Reason's short sight cannot pierce the Mystery.
Sanctuary then I went,
And my dark Vail of Ignorance was rent.
There, I beheld their future, dreadful End;
The Pit, to which, their fatal Glories tend.

Raised thither, and thence thrown down, by thy Hand.

Struck, by the Lightning of thy Vengeance, down.

Fancy's vain Creature, and the dread Vision dies:
So vanish, when Thou hurlst them from their Seat,
The dreadful, but imaginary Great.

Wrought on my Body; and went through my Reins.

As if turned Brute; and acted by His Soul.
Thou art always with me! By thy Hand
Of Providence, I Lord! am still sustained.

Guide me to Glory; and immortal Love.
Heavens, dear Lord! but Thee?
Or what Good, on this Earth, can satisfy?

And Hearts, that court those Objects, dye as they:
But the pure heart, fixing its Love on Thee,
Thou strengthnest; and it loves Eternally.
And Thou, whose love kindles the Immortal Fire,
Wilt satisfy the infinite desire.

And seek false Loves, shall perish utterly.
I, who Thee parsue, O my sole Good!
My only Hope! my whole Beatitude!
Shall ever live; shall ever live with Thee;
And praise Thee, and thy Works, Eternally.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXXIV.
[Vt quid Deus?]
ever, us rejected, Lord?
O why, are thy deserted Sheep abhorred?
Price thou did advance!
Thy Purchased; thy dear Inheritance;
Remember Sion, where thy self have sat!
Behold the Mount! -- See, Lord! it is desolate.

Revenge our endless Desolation!
Blaspheme thee in thy House of Praise;
And, as defying thee, their Ensigns raise.
softer Forms, carved by the sweetening stroke
tender Hand, lie rude, and broke;
And the rough Axe, and Hammer, have beat down
What Art could yield, or the Pride of Lebanon.
For, what to the Builder, erst, did give renown,
They count it now, more glory to pull down.

Burnt, and Unhallowed is by other Flame:
And the Ax, forbid to raise the peaceful Pile,
Does to the Ground, both ruin't, and defile.

And all our Synagogues to Ashes turn.
quite forsook us, we
Nor Sign, nor Prophet see, nor Prophecy.
There Is none can tell, how long their Cruelty
Against us shall last, and Blasphemy against thee.
How long? How long this Misery?
Shall it for ever, thus? for ever, be?
Almighty Hand? thy jealous Arm?
O pluck it forth! Guard us, and them disarm.
alone;

O God! my King of Old! who did divide
The Sea; and in it, brak'st the Dragon's Head;
Pharaoh's Proud Host, the bold Leviathan;
Levell'dst his Pride; and shrunk'st him to a Man:
Did, with a Wonder armed, his Power defeat;
And threw'st him to the Vultur for his Meat.
thee, were thawed into a Flood;
And Floods, at thy Command, as firm Rocks stood.
Thine, is the Day; Thine, the Repose of Night;
And the advancing Sun, shines with thy Light.
Thou, have the Borders of the Earth, defined;
Which stated Limits it shall never transcend.
Giv'st Laws to Time, boundest its floating Tide
'Twixt Winter's Ebb; and Summer's flowing Pride.
Fool no more,
Nor the Proud Foe, Blaspheme thy obvious Power.

Which to thy Bosom flies, the Vultur's Prey!
Forget not ever the unremembred Poor;
Nor leave him in their Jaws, who thus devour!
Dens, and Coverts, be
Filled with the Darkness of their Cruelty.
still be shamed! but raise
The Poor, and turn his anguish'd sighs to praise.
thy self thine own Cause plead!
The Fool, his daily Blasphemies does spread,
Forget him not! Nor, Lord! forget the Poor:
For his successful Rage grows more and more.
Psalm LXXV.
[Confitebimur tibi Deus!]

O God of Wonders, and of Love! we bless.

That Mortals must receive their final Doom,
I, then, will judge according to the Laws
Of Right; and vindicate the Oppressed's Cause.

But I, Earth's Pillars bear; and Man sustain.
less so; bad the Great,
The Oppressing Great, to Power Limits set;
high! and do not speak,
Hurried by wilful Power with a stiff Neck.
East,
Nor West, nor South, makes potent, or distressed;
I am Judge; I am, who pull down One,
And set Another on his empty Throne.
cup, and the Wine's red;
Full mixed; and through the World distributed:
But all the Dregs thereof, and fatal Lee,
Shall the Ungodly's deadly Potion be.

"For ever; we'll for ever sing to thee.

And crown with Joys, the patience of the Just.
Psalm LXXVI.
[Notus in Judaea Dominus.]
Judah, and in Israel, God is known;
His Name's there great, and his Salvation.
Salem He has pitched his Tent;
And in Mount Sion God is resident.
Shield, and Spear;
The safeties, and the furies of the War.
True Honor, thy Victorious Arms does crown;
Which flies the ambitious Robber's false Renown.

Rest of his Glories, sleeps within a Cloud.
No fruits, from his cursed Ravages abound;
His empty, guilty Hands, have nothing found,

O God of Jacob! fall and lose their Force.
Who, Lord! is to be feared, but thou, alone?
And who can stand the Power of thy Frown?

Of Judgment, the Earth trembled, and was still.

To save the Meek, and helpless Man, oppressed;
fierceness which thou tam'dst, turned to thy Praise;
And the Ravages restrained, thine Honor raise.

Vow, and perform; and with your Presents bow.

And over the Kings of Earth with Terror Reign.
Gloria of four Verses.

Psalm LXXVII.
Voce mea ad Dominum.]
aloud I cried; and He

Wasted with pains, when I found no relief;
And Night's slow Hours, told, heavily, my grief.
Then I remembered God; and 'midst my Pains,
My anguish'd Spirit thus to him complains.

Whilst overwhelmed with Grief, I nothing spoke:
drew the Scene
Of The Day, of Old, and the Mercies, erst had been:
How, in the midst of Night, my joyful Tongue
Gave thanks to thee; and thy great Praises sung.
And then, my Soul into it self withdrawn,
Viewing its present state, did thus complain.
Will God for ever cast me off? and be
No more, no more inclined to pity me?
clean, for ever gone? and shall
the Promise of the God of Truth, now fail?
quite forgot?
His Love's Eternal Spring, and Fountain shut?
back my Soul! and see
The Years of the Right Hand of the most High:
again, and there behold
His works of Love, and wonder, done of Old.
within thee; and proclaim
His Works to All; and the Honor of his Name.
hid to our faint sight,
Alike in Goodness, and in Power are Great.
thee, O God! alone, are Wonders done;
Who have thy strength,'midst all the People shown.
Israelites, Jacob's, and Joseph's Seed,
In Bondage held, thy Powerful Arm has freed.
saw thee, and the frighted Flood
Shrunk back; while the naked Depths amazed stood.

And new Floods poured down from the breaking Cloud.

And Thunder roared; Earth trembled with the fright.
unknown way;
Whose viewless Path the closed Waves never betray.
Moses, and Aron, led
Safely thy Flock; by thee from Bondage freed.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXXVIII.
[Attendite Popule.]
Israel!

Old;
Which both our selves have known, and Fathers told.
we the same, should to our Children tell,
And to Succession Gods great Acts reveal.

them and their Posterity.

Might always hope in him and him obey:
Fathers; who, forsook
His Laws, and their own froward Counsels took.
Ephraim's, Children, soon discomfited,
Who against the Battle armed themselves, and fled.
soon forgot the Laws he gave; and soon

mighty Wonders which their Fathers saw;
Wonders, which did the Proud Egyptian awe.

Whilst firm, as their own Banks, the steep Waves lay.
Day a Cloud conducted them; by Night
From out a flaming Pillar issued Light.


still they sinned; and by a new desire
Meat require.
Rocks (said they) and Streams did flow;
here prepare a Table too?
Can He, within this barren Wilderness,
With Bread, and Flesh, his wandering People bless?

Wrapped in consuming Flames, sent Vengeance down.
faithless, his great Conduct feared;
new Salvations every Day appeared:
Manna rained; and from the Cloud
Another Plenty dropped, even Angels Food.
And unto Man, Rebellious Man, had given
loathed, the Food of Heaven.

Flesh, to the Host conveigh.
Clouds, fraught with Quails, a choice Provision bring;

eat, and were well filled; for he
satisfy.
But 'midst their wanton Food Vengeance drew nigh;
And overtook the cursed Satiety.
He slew the choicest of them; and his just
Incensed Wrath revenged the prosperous Lust.
still the Remnant sinned; and though, before
Their Eyes, Judgment marched on, sinned the same sins over.

And they, Life's Treasure wasting, lived in vain.
Death devoured them, they seemed, then, to enquire
still was God, during, their fear.
belied their Hearts; for they
upright, and steadfast in his way.
still Merciful, still inclined to save,
Full of Compassion, still, their sins forgave:
Checked his fierce Anger; made his Vengeance stay;
And through his Wrath, for Mercy, forced a way.
Flesh was as a blast;
A Wind that never returns, when once it is past.

such and such a Miracle?
soon forgot his Works; that glorious Hand
Whose Wonders did Deliverance command.
Egyptians shown;
And the dreadful Miracles to Zoan known.
Blood;
So that they could not drink the infected Flood.
Powerless
Of all his Creatures, Armies of Frogs and Lice.
themselves, no Fruit did yield;
Commanded Locusts ravaged the Field.
Hailstones, their rich Grapes were lost;
And all their other Fruits destroyed by the Frost.
Cattle flew;
And fiery Thunderbolts the Remnant slew.
fiercest Anger was against them sent;
Their anguish'd Souls were their own Punishment.
Horror, and Conscious Guilt, and black Despair,
those, he sent, their own Ill Angels were.
Death was loosed; against the Firstborn, empowered;
All whom, the swift Plague, in one Night devoured.
own, He other measures took;
And led them in the Desert, like a Flock.
through Seas, when the stupendous Wave
To their Foes Death; to them, safe passage gave.

The Purchase of the Arm of the Most High.
Heathen; and assigned by Lot
To Israel's Tribes, the Conquests he had got.
still they tempted him; still went astray;
Taking their own, they soon forgot his way.

Like a deceitful Bow, starting aside.
carved God's adored,
Dull Gods of Wood; forsook the Living Lord.
loathing them, from Shiloh went;

Ark, gave to the Enemy;
them to Death, and to Captivity.
Fire consumed; their Priests the Sword;

Then God, as Men refreshed by sleep, arose;
Or strong ones filled with Wine; and on his Foes
Revenged his captived Glory; whom he smote
With Plagues, which pame, and which dishonor brought.
Joseph's Tribe refused
To be its Seat; nor Ephraim did choose;
chose the Tribe of Judah; and the Hill
Sion, where he, alone, delights to dwell.
High;
Fixed, like the Earth's firm Roots, perpetually.
Fold, his Servant David took;
own Great Flock.

And, with a prudent Conduct, safely led.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXXIX.
[Deus, venerunt Gentes.]
own Inheritance
The Heathen are broke in; who do advance
Their Ensigns on thy sacred Mount; defile
Thy Temple, and the place where thou do dwell.
Jerusalem's a Heap. The Slaughtered they
Cast out to be the wild Beasts arid Vultur's Prey.
Water, round about is shed;
And none are left to see them Buried.
Our Neighbors, now, express their utmost Hate,
All scorn, reproach, and wound the Unfortunate.
How long? O Lord! Lord! will thou ever, thus
Forsake? thus, ever, will thou punish us?

Upon the Heathen, where thy Name's unknown.
thee Blaspheme; devour thy Israel;
And who lay waste the place where thou do dwell.
former sin!
most Rebllious we have been!
Call back thy Mercies! call them speedily;
For we are fallen to the lowest Misery:
God of Salvation, help! Help, for thy Name!
Thy Glory is reproached in our shame.
Why should the Heathen say, Where is their God?
Revenge thy Glory, and thy Servents Blood!
Captives sighs! their trembling Breath!
And save those helpless Souls, are chained for Death.

Give back a manifold return of shame.
we thy Flock, shall to thee praises send;
All, shall continue them; but none, shall End.
Psalm LXXX.
[Qui regis Israel, intend!]
Israel,
Who 'midst the winged Cherubim do dwell;
Regard! and from the Glories of thy Throne,
Upon thy Flock, thy Beams of Light shower down.
thou our Armies! Before Benjamin
Advance! Manasseh's Tribe, and Ephraim.

Salvation waits on thy Victorious Light.
long, O Lord! will thou displeased appear
With those, who lowly offer up the Address of Prayer?
Drink; and we with Tears are fed;
Which thou have plenteously measured.
Snare;
Whilst they contest, how they may Israel share.

Salvation waits on thy Victorious Light.
Egypt, did transplant a Vine;
Did root the Heathen out, and set that, in;

Dropped on the under shrubs, and kept them low.
'bove the Hills, and blessed them with its shade,
Which vast was, as is that by Cedars made;

Whence to the Sea, the extended Branches spread
Why have thou all its Fences rooted out?
So that who-e're pass by, pluck off her Fruit?
Why is it given a spoil, to the wild Boar,
And other Beasts of the Forest, to devour?
Return, O God of Hosts! Visit the Vine!
And the exposed Vineyard, which is thine:
selected Branch, chose out among
The rest, which, for thy self, thou made so strong.
cut down;
And burnt with Fire; and blasted with thy Frown.
Man of thy Right Hand! Arise,
Great God! Raise him, confound his Enemies.

Help us, that we thy Name may glorify.

Salvation waits on thy Victorious Light.
Psalm LXXXI.
[Exultate Deo adjutori!]


appointed Feast, when the New Moon
Varies her Light, be the loud Trumpets blown.
Israel, of Old, commanded was
To keep this Statute, and this Law of Praise.
Egypt led,
From their strange Tongue, and from their thraldom freed.
Egyptian Chain;
Loosed him; and gave him to Himself again.
Threw down the Burdens on his Shoulders lay;
And his spent Arms released, from moulding Clay.

By Thunder, that my Powerful Aid was nigh.
Tried thee at Massah, when thou murmur'dst there,
Sated thy Thirst, and did even Murmurs hear.
Israel! Bow thy Knee
Other God; no God but Me.
I, from Pharaoh's Power rescued thee;
And who, alone, can all thy Wants supply.
Israel would none of Me; forsook
God; and his Own wandering Counsels, took.
Me obeyed, how soon

My Foes had soon submitted; but their Day
No Night had closed; nor shall, who me obey.

And flowing Honey, from the Rock distilled.
Psalm LXXXII.
[Deus stetit in Synagoga.]

Judge of those Earthly Gods, and their Commad.
his sight, wrong Judgment give?
The great Unjust, or guilty Friend receive?
Fatherless,
want a Bribe; and whom no favors bless;
Yours are the Poor, who flying to the Laws,
Bring nothing, but a barren Righteous Cause.
The Oppressed, and the Outcasts are your care;
Who, what the Oppressor left, beg you would spare.
not hear; you will not understand;
Your Souls are Slaves, and at your Lusts Command;
You walk in Darkness, in despite of Light;
Move the Foundations, and the Bounds of Right.
Gods, the Sons of the Most High;
And such are those Great Souls who Earth desie.
Unrighteous Souls! your selves degrade:
Dye Men, then! Dye, what ye your selves have made.

From Heaven, on the injured World, which is thine own.
Psalm LXXXIII.
[Deus quis similis.]


Name;
live but in a long dishonored Fame.
Moab, and the Ismaelites,
Hagarens, and Edomites.
Gebal, and the Amalekites conspire
With Ammon, the Philistines, and them of Tire.
Assyrians too, combine,
And join in League with Lot's detested Line.
Midian overtook,
Jabin, and Sisera, at Kison's Brook,
Endor, flung
To Birds, and Beasts of Prey, became as Dung;

Like Zeb, and Oreb, and Zalmunna, fall.

Our selves will enter, and the God cast out.
Wheel;
Let them, like Chaff, by Whirl-winds hurried, reel.

Born down, as by a swist impetuous Flood,
Whence their bright Waves over the steep Mountains born,
All their fair crowns of Trees, to Ashes turn:

And with thy dreadful Vengeance, hurl them down.

perishing, they may confess thy Name.
Jehovah! may be known
To be the Highest, to be God alone.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXXXIV.
[Quam dilecta.]

Where thou have chose thy Seat, thy dwellings are?
faints for thy Courts, and thee;
Naught else, the thirst of Souls, can satisfy.
Sparrow, Lord! may nigh thine Altars rest;
And Swallow, undisturbed, build her Nest.
happy they, who in thy House of Praise,
Hon'ring thy Name, number their joyful Days.
happy they, who do thy Laws fulfill,
And in thy strength approach thy Holy Hill.
Who think on nothing more, than on those ways
Which to thy Temple lead, and House of Praise.

Yet, for their use, commanded Springs do flow;
O r filled with Floods, descending from the Sky,
The swelling Pools do all their wants supply.
Stated Feasts of the Year,
Before their God in Sion do appear.


one day is better far
Than in another place, a thousand are;
I would despise the Courts, and glorious State
Of The Wicked, for the Threshold of thy Gate.
thine?
Who Grace bestow'st, and Glories All-Divine?
Who do to those who do uprightly live,
O Sun! O Shield! O God! all good things give.
surely blessed is he
Who quits all other strength, and trusts in thee.
Psalm LXXXV.
[Benedixisti Domine.]
owned thy People; set them free;
And brake the Chain of their Captivity.

sins, and their due Punishment.
us now, Lord! as thou thy Wrath did turn;
That neither we may sin, nor thy Wrath burn.
Check our renewing Evils; and oppose
The still-advancing Powers of our Foes.
ever, Lord! displeased be?
Extend thy Wrath to all Posterity?
no more? No more revive
Our Souls, which only, joying in thee, live?
save! and manifest
Thy Mercies, which alone can make us blessed.
Peace to those who mourn
Their Sins; if they no more to folly turn.

And brightest Glories overspread their Land.
Mercy there joins with Truth; and Righteousness
Meeting with blessed Peace, each other kiss.
new increase be given;
And banished Righteousness look down from Heaven.

full Increase.
The Just shall reap, what Heaven and Earth can yield;
Graces of Heaven, and Bounties of the Field.
Thus God appears for those who him obey;
Whom Justice goes before, and signs his Way.
Psalm LXXXVI.
[Inclina Domine.]

For I am Poor; Poor, and in Misery.

trust in thee, and serve thee Day by Day.




thee is none;
And who can do the Works that thou have done?
dissenting Race,
Those scattered Limbs shall join, and thus thee Praise.
"Thou, Lord, art Great! Thou art our God alone!
"By Wonders, by Man's self, the Noblest, known;
Truth! and our seduced Heart,
"From thee betrayed, unto thee convert!
"Our Souls shall then for ever Praise thy Name;
"Enlightened by their first Original Flame;
Mighty Love, which, when they fell
"From thee, redeem'dst them from the lowest Hell.
Mighty Ones against me rise;
Forces and Counsels join, and thee despise:

Fountain of Truth! Mercy's unwasted Flood;
threatened Storm! and from thy Throne
Thy Forces, thy resistless Aids, send down.
Own thy weak Servant! and by some blessed Sign,
Tell my amazed Foes, that I am thine.
Psalm LXXXVII.
[Fundamenta ejus.]

Sion there stands, and the loved House of Praise.
'Bove Jacob's other Dwellings loved; for God
Has made thee glorious, with his own abode.
Rahab, or of Babylon,
To those to whom the greater Sion's known!
Let no Man boast, he is born a Tyrian,
A Philistin, or Ethiopian.
firmer Honor gives to them
Natives of Jerusalem:
For when he lists the World, it shall be told
From thence, are Men; from hence, are Saints enrolled.
all who Praise him,
Are Sons of Sion, and Jerusalem.
Who, those blessed Springs, which his abundant Grace
Sheds on their Souls, return again in Praise.
Psalm LXXXVIII.
[Domine Deus.]



Hastes to an early Grave, pierced through with Grief.
already dead;
Sorrow has slain me, e're my Days are fled.
Slaughtered, whom the Sword sets free,
Released from Life, to the Grave's dark Liberty.
And like to them, I unremembred lie;
Shut from the Light; and, Lord! forgot by thee.
lowest Pit I am sunk down;
Down into the Deep, and the Land of Darkness thrown.
renews the Load;
As Waves urge Waves, and reinforce the Flood.
No Eye does pity me; I Am left alone;
My Friends are fled; for Misery has None.
Chained to my Woes, I, as in Bendage, lie,
Grief's Captive; and there is None to ransom me.
Thee, O Refuge of my Soul! I turn,
Stretch out my Hands all day, and all day mourn.
Wonders amongst the Dead?
Shall the closed Lip praise Thee? and the Breath that is fled?
Sepulcher thy Goodness tell?
Thy Truth be shown, there, where Life's Ruins dwell?
buried Wonders known?
Thy Justice, honored in Oblivion?
Living praise Thee! O let Me
Who, e're the Dawn appears, wake up to Thee.

And not One Mercy, not One Beam reflect?

counted my Fears.
My God! I dye; thy Terrors me surround;
Thine Anger, and the Fury of thy Frown.

And the vast Deluge overwhelms my Soul.
remove;
And banish from my sight their useless Love.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm LXXXIX.
[Misericordias Domini.]
Truth and Love! thy Name I Will praise
Ever; and leave my Song to after Days.

And thy Truth's fixed, as stable as thy Throne.
David I have sworn, raised by my Hand,
beyond Time's ruin, stand.

And all thy Saints sing loud, thy Faithfulness.
Who, mighty Lord! with Thee, compared may be?
Nor Earth can yield, nor Heaven, a God like Thee.
Thee, thy Saints revere;
And all the Great on Earth, with Terror, fear.
Thee? Thee Truth surrounds, with bright,
But softer Glories, than thy Robes of Light.

And in a Calm all its bold Terrors sleep.
Egypt, in vain, withstood thy Powerful Hand;
Thou did destroy proud Pharaoh, and his Land.
thine; thine is the Earth; and thine
Nature's vast Wealth, and inexhausted Mine.
Thee; and to rejoice
In Thee, Tabor and Hermon find a Voice.
above power; and high, is the Command
Of thy Victorious, thine Almighty Hand.
Justice, before thy Throne; and Judgment, wait;
Mercy and Truth, Heaven's Ministers of State.

Summoned, attend Thee in thy Feasts of Praise.
They in thy Light shall walk; whose glorious Beam
Shed round them, shall direct and cover them.
pass their happy days;
And hon'ring thee, learn the Delights of Praise.
Divine,
Own; theirs is wrapped up in thine.
Thy Justice them exalts; that strength is theirs,
And that high favor which for them appears.
They Are safe in thy Defense; and then they sing
They People's Bliss, when they sing Thee their King.
Vision said.
To One that is Mighty, I more Help did add.
David I have chose, and shed
My sacred Oil, on his Anointed Head;
My powerful Arm shall be his strong Defense,


And strike with Plagues, those who against him rise.
Himself, my Truth and Love shall stand
For ever; and exalt his high Command.
Euphrates shall extend,
Till in the Western Sea his Regions end.
Me, Father call; Me, God alone;
And Me, the Rock, of his Salvation.
Him, Heir will make; the sirst in Birth;
And First,'bove all the Princes of the Earth:
never shall leave him; but as sure,
And steadfast, as my Covenant endure.

termless Measure of the Days of Heaven.
break my Laws, I'II them recall
Stripes; will punish, but relieve the Fall.
sworn Mercies, and transcendent Love,
Exceeding, far, their Crimes, I Will never remove.
They break their part of the Covenant,
My Mercy shall confirm the forfeit Grant.
Israel shall not lie;
Nor the Oath he swear to David, falsify.
ever shall endure; thy Throne
Sun.
And shall, beyond Heavens second Light, the Mon,
A Circle of unvaried Glories, run.
These conscious Lights attest my steadfast Truth;
Are Witnesses of Me, and of my Oath.
now, thou have forsook;
revoke;
No more regardest his dishonored Crown,
But have struck't off, and cast it to the Ground.

And his firm Powers to confusion shook;
Now He Is the Spoil and Scorn of All; to All
Exposed, since Thou art pleased with his Fall.
no more, his Enemies overthrow,
Thy David is the Triumph of his Foe.
How are his Glories fallen! and how, their Light
Not wan and fading, but extinguished quite!
How are his youthful days, not fully ran,
Cut off! and measured by a shorter Span!
When, for thy Servant, Lord! will thou appear?
When quench the wrath of thy consuming Fire?
swift, Life's Shadow hastes;
Man's days are lost, whose Hours Affliction wastes.
longest, freest life, must end; and Death
Stops our unsimsh'd Labors with our Breath.
where, O God! where is thy former Love?
To David sworn, and registered Above?
Reproaches I endure,
Cast in my Breast, exposed to the Men of power.
there; for what by them is thrown
Against thine Annointed's Honor, wounds thine Own:
from all Ages, been,
And be it ever blessed! Amen! Amen!
Hallelujah.

Part of the FOURTH BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRASED.
Psalm XC.
[Domine Refugium factus es.]

Has to us ever been a safe Retreat.
horrid Night was chased away,
And severed from the Censines of the Day;
E're Being was; or Motion received Laws;
But the World slept, in Thee the Almighty Cause,
Thou were: And when their measured Race is run,
Thou shall endure beyond Succession.
out the Dust, thou have called VVretched Man;
Then call'st him back, and he is Dust again.
extend his Span, what would it be,
Compared, O God! to thy Eternity?
Forth' Ages of a thousand Years, thy sight
Beholds, but as the past Hours of One Night.
Stream, our Years are born;
runs not back; nor the Years return.
Our Days seem as a sleep; when we awake
Dying; and on the Dream of life, look back.
We Are like the Flower, which in the Morn was Gay;
But cropped in the Evening, pale, and withered lay.

And on our wretched Life, more Plagues call down.
Vanity, and Care,
Whilst our dark Crimes exposed to Justice are.
Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness, is drawn
The Scene of Life; and Fable of the Man.
Seventy Years; if we attain
Eighty, those feeble Ones, are Years of Pain;
So soon, or so unuseful our Days run;
They swiftly haste; and e're we live, the are gone.

Who minds, till Death's Eternal Hour draws near?
value; that the Years we have,
We may redeem; and rescue from the Grave.
And may learn Wisdom, whilst we draw that Breath
Which, as a glorious Prize, we gain from Death.
no more!
Remit our Sins! and the Judgments we deplore.
early Mercy, that yet we,
Our few remaining Years, may joy in thee.
return of Bliss for those Years spent
In Woe; and worn out by thy Punishment.
Be these thy Works of Favor, and of Grace,
Shown unto us, and our Succeeding Race.
thy Conduct, bless
Us, and our Works; and crown them with Success.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XCI.
[Qui habitat!]
Almighty his Defense has made,
May rest secure under the Powerful Shade;
alone, whose strength can succor me,
All my dependence, Lord! and hope's in thee.
dissembled Snare
Of The Guileful, and from the Pest's killing Air.

And his sure Promises, thy Refuge be.
Night's Terrors, nor the Arrows shot by Day,
Shall the sure Peace of thy firm Soul betray;
dark Pest, which, as in Ambush, kills;
Nor bolder War, which Day with Slaughter fills.
this, Thousands on that Hand dye;
But the vain Fury shall not come to thee.
safety art, shall see
The just Revenges on Impiety.

On God, and fix thy Thoughts on the most High;
Therefore no Plague Shall ever daret' infest
Thy Dwelling, nor disturb thy happy Rest.

For thee; the Blessed shall on the Blessed attend.
unseen Guard, shall in their Arms thee bear
Over Dangers, that thy stumbling Foot not err.

And on the harmless Poison, safely tread.
me was set,
Rescued from Perils, I will make him Great.

And will in Mercy answer his desire:
In Troubles I Will be with him; set him free;
And make his Sufferings, his Honor be.
satisfied with Life, his Years are done,
I then will show him my Salvation.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XCII.
[Bonum est confiteri.]
Pleasant, are the Acts of Praise,
When we to Heaven our Souls and Voices raise!
Before, the Stars, in the Morn, lose their pale Light;
And when their sparkling Fires relieve the Night;
all the modes, the trembling Air is shook,
When sounds, sounds meeting, are in murmurs broke.
Upon the Lute and Ten string'd Instrument,
Joined with the full, and solemn Harps, concent.

And, as in Triumphs raised, lift up its Voice.
every where, thy Works present!
How full of Order! full of Ornament!
How deep thy Counsels! and how dark to Sense,
Are thy mysterious Ways of Providence!
Fool will never comprehend;
Nor learn his own, and the Just Man's, different End.
fully grown,
Fatally sprung, only to be cut down.


me, thou do exalt; and on my Head
Thy freshest Oil, and softest Balm have shed.

Punished by thee; and unto Vengeance sold.
continual verdures crown;
Or Cedars on the Head of Lebanon.

And, as by Age renewed, then bear more Fruit.
all may know, that God loves Righteousness;
Will Sinners punish; and the Just Man bless.
Psalm XCIII.
[Dominus regnat.]
Glory, God reigns King alone;
And armed with Power; for what he wills is done.
He has fixed Nature's Laws; by his Command
All things were made; by that Command they stand.
Old; when the World was nothing, stood;
Thou, from and to Eternity, art God,

Their o'regrown Waves the lower Banks despise.
thy Frown checks their Pride,
All their swollen Waves in a low Calm subside.

Whom thy Truth guards, and thy sure Promises:
Whom, with the Beauties of thine House, thou wilt bless,
And the true Decencies of Holiness.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XCIV.
[Deus Vltionum.]

Behold'st what ever on the Earth is done;
Proud! and on his guilty Head
Pour down the Vengeance he has merited.
How long shall He successful mischiefs boast?


And does thy weak, unguarded Flock devour.
Adds Grief to those, already in distress;
Slays the VVidow, Stranger, and the Fatherless:
Forgets the Recompense of the most High;
For God (says he) does not our Actions see.
When will thou learn? Shall he
made the Ear, not hear? the Eye, not see?
He, who by his Judgments does reclaim
teach them to fear his Name;
Not punish thee? He knows thy thoughts, weak Man!
Knows thy short reasonings, and those Thoughts are vain.
thus thy Fear is taught,
And by thy Chastisement, to knowledge brought.

The Sinner's fall, and his condemned End.
Just; and will not leave
The Oppresled, nor the Oppressor will forgive.

And by those Laws, the Upright shall guide their ways.
other Powers we aid expect;
alone Revenge; alone, Protect.

Sustained by him, I my firm Station kept.

On him reflecting, Joy and Comfort find.
Just God does not own
The Unjust Counsels of the impious Throne:
Whose black Consults favor the unrighteous Cause;
Rules for Injustice frame; oppress by Laws;
Just; and in his Blood consent,
Condemning by a Law, the Innocent.

Who saves me from the Sons of Violence;

Turned on themselves, and they themselves cut down
Psalm XCV.
[Venite exultemus.]

And with our Voices, let our Hearts accord.

And Psalms, and Praises, in his Presence Sing.
all Gods, is Great;
King, over all other Gods, and Powers, set.
lowest Depths of the Earth, are in his Hand;
And by his Strength the threatening Mountains stand.
Sea, and does that Sea command;
Withdrew its Waves, and raised up the dry Land.

The Lord our Maker! and his Name adore!

his Hand leads, and his own Pastures keep.
O hear our Shepherd's Voice! Bring Hearts prepar'ad
Not such as in the Desert: Proud and hard:
tempted me;
And did those works, of which they doubted, see.

Their Heart (said I) knows not my way, but errs.

They should not come; nor be with Canaan blessed.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XCVI.
[Cantate Domino.i]
SIng a new Song to God: Let all conspire
In his great Praise, and make the World one Quire.
Give him continual Honor! Let each Day
His known Salvation to the next conveigh.
Sing loud! that Mankind may at distance hear;
And all the World, their and our God revere.
Sing, God is Great! and greatly to be Praised;
His Glory far 'bove other Gods is raised.
He made the Heavens; made that Idolater,
Who made his God; the stupid Heathen's fear.
Before him, Honor bows; him Majesty
Surrounds; Beauty adorns his Sanctu'ry.
To him, O all ye Sons of mortal Men
Ascribe all Glory! and all Power resign.
Enter his glorious Courts with Praise; and bring
great, the acceptable Offering.
Bring Holiness; Soul's undefiled, and clean;
Graces of Heaven; and Beauties all-Divine;
Then Worship; Offering that pure Sacrifice;
Such as becomes his House of Holiness.
God does reign;
That he made the world; and does his work maintain
And tell them, he is Judge of all; that he
Will come, and judge the grieved Earth Righteously

Thou, Sea and all thy Wonders, join your Voice

The mighty Presence; for our God descends.
Clothed with new Verdures let the Fields be glad
And the fair Trees with fresher crowns be clad;
relieve the Oppressed, does come;
Bring Justice back; and give the World its Doom.
Psalm XCVII.
[Dominus regnavit.]

And all the losser Worlds, the Isles rejoice.

His Throne by Truth, and Right established.


The Heavens above declare his Righteousness;

make Gods, theft Worship that fond Power,
Confounded be! God, All ye Gods adore!
Sion, O mighty Lord! thy Judgments heard,
Judah's Daughters in their Songs declared.
They Sung thy Judgments on those Gods sent down;
Exalting thee, in their Confusion.
he loves!
He hates all III, and Good alone approves.
The Soul that walks in its Integrity,
God keeps; and rescues from his Enemy.
Immortal Joys and Glories wait the Upright!
Prepared for them in the Fields of Light.

Be spent in the memorials of his Praise.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm XCVIII.
[Cantate Domino.]
new Thanksgivings, let new Mercies move;
That we may sing the Wonders of Gods Love.
For he Himself, lent his immediate Hand!
And God for us, our Victory has gained.
all the Heathen's known;
The Conquests of his great Salvation.
His Truth of Old, engaged to Israel,
Israel redeemed, and all the World can tell.

Who saved his Gentiles, and his Israel.
inspired Hymn! Give it a Voice!
With all the Powers of Harmony rejoice.


Nature, at the approaching of its King
As from one Soul diffused, One Joy shall spring.
The Earth and Sea rejoice; the Floods, and Hills,
A kindly slowing Warmth of Gladness fills.

Shall judge with Justice, and with Equity.
Psalm XCIX.
[Dominus regnavit irascantur, etc.]

Tremble, O Earth! approach and Worship him
Sion, where h' has fixed his Seat,
And over all the Powers of Earth is Great.
Holiness; in Judgment Great;


His Holiness, who is the Holy One.
Moses, Anon and to Samuel,
Calling on him, he aid his Will reveal.
To them, from out the Cloudy Pillar, spoke;
Who, nor the Laws he gave, nor Statutes, brake;

Their sin did punish, but the Offenders save:

His Holiness, who is the Holy One.
Psalm C.
[Jubilate Deo]

Bless God! who gave the World its Birth.

Learn, and express the Joys of Praise!
made, and peopled all the Lands;
Man's not the Work of his own Hands.
And what he made, he feeds and keeps;
The Almighty Shepherd never seeps.

IN the Temple of his Holiness!
With grateful Hearts aloud proclaim
The Honors of his Honored Narne.
Good; is Good alone;
All Ages have his Mercies known;
His Truth beyond them shall endure
Steadfast, and, as his Mercy, sure.
Psalm CI.
Misericordiam and Judicium.

Which showered on Us, our Praise returns to Thee

That what Thine Empire Crowns, may stablish Mine.

I Will rend the faithless guiles of Policy.
convenient Truths, I hate;
Just Truth, shall Our great Reason be of State.

Whispring, fair Lies; as hiding what he tells.
I will not brook the Proud, who does disdain
True Worth, and values in himself what is vain.

Splendid in virtues, in my Court enroll:
And who, most glorious, in that Court would shine,
Must, first be Virtue's Servant, and then Mine.
Sycophant shall not there remain;
Nor, who with Lies, his spotted Soul does stain.

None Such must dwell in the Sion of Our Lord.
Psalm CII.
Domine exaudi.

My Godland with thy present help draw nigh.

Breathed off, by lingering Grief's continual fires.

And I, over filled with Grief, mind not my Bread.
so spent, so wasted with my Moans,
That only skin covers my steshless Bones.

So moans alone in the shades, but She moans less:
So moans alone, the Bird that shuns the Light,
In The Desert of the unfrequented Night.
alone,
Fixed to her solitary, watchful Moan:
And so, my sleepless Eyes, Griefs hold awake;
Break my lone Rests, and Slumbers overtake.

And against me joined, Swear their confederate Hate.

My Tears, which flowing swelled the mournful Cup.

Which raisd Me that it more, might cast Me down.
Like Shadows, my declining Days do pass;
Languish, like dying Flowers, or withring Grass.
thy Day ever was, ever will be;
Nor Morn, nor Evening bound Eternity.

Let Mercy rise, now Judgments are fulfilled.
tender eyes;
Love the Remains; and the Sacred Ruins Prize.

All Kings, of All the Earth, set up thy Throne.
Sion, shall advance
His Glory in its famed Deliverance.

He bends his Ear, and grants their lowly suit.
After-daies,
That what One Age has witnessed, All may Praise.

Looked down on the distressed of Humane Race:
sentenced breath;
And free him from Captivity and Death,

And in the Assembly, thy just Honors raise.
All the world, thy praise may tell,
That All the world may become Israel.

And Life grew weary ere its course was done.

Give not to Death, my short, untimely hour:
Thy years do an eternal circle run;
A boundless space, unfinished, unbegun.

When Time, (now Old) and Being, first had Birth:
From the same Power, Heaven's immense Fabric came,
And all the Gloryes of the stupendous Frame:
bright, but dying Gloryes; for all these
Must fade; and the Ages of their Circuits, cease:
And changed by Thee, appear in Other Sc(...);
New Heaven's; New ranged Orbs; New-unknown Beams.
Alone;
O Thou Eternal! ever, ever, One.

Established by thine Almighty Hand.
Psalm CIII.
Benedic Anima mea.

Praise Him, who every Blessing on thee showers.

And all thy frail Infirmities relieves.

And thee, with mercy does, and goodness crown.

Sets back thine Age, renewed like Eagles years.

Judges the Oppressor, and the Oppressed frees.
Israel; who did prove
His Miracles of Judgment, and of Love.
stops his Anger; is, to Vengeance slow;
But Mercies and Compassions ever flow.
lasts not; but he bounded has
The swift contracted Moments of his wrath.
Limits his Judgments, which unequal be
To our full Measures of Iniquity,

So great, to those who fear him, is his Love.

Than are the East, and Western bounds of Day.

Who does correct, but not destroy the Child.

Kindled the flame of Life, the Lamp of Day:
tender Clay
Grew up, grew fair awhile, grew fresh, and gay;
that Flower, and like that Grass, how soon
Blasted, the fading Flower of life is gone.
Eternal state of unchanged Bliss
The Righteous God continues unto His.
His, who fear him; keep his Covenant,
Faithful to the Conditions of his Grant.

And over All the Earth's thy Monarchy.

Round his bright Throne, and wait the great Command,
Blessed Angels! who in Power and Strength excel,
And ready are to execute his will,

Who Him obey! Praise Him, through all the Coasts
Of Being, All his Works! My Soul! Praise Him;
Join in the high Praise, for thou art One of them.
Psalm CIV.
Benedic Anima mea.

That I, by Thee inspired, may sing Thy praise.
O Thou Eternal! O alone most high!
With Honor circled, and with Majesty;

Vested with Glories, which forbid our sight!
Who spread'st out Heaven, the Curtain of thy Tent;
Guilding with glittring Orbs the Firmament;

In the unfathomed Bosom of the Deep:
Thy Chariot are the Clouds, sustained by
The stormy Winds, upon whose wings they fly.
Spirits thine Angels are; who minister
To Thee; and thy bright Agents, slaming fire.

On Nothing; on the soft Air's floating Bed:
first was Sea; which flowing round
Covered the uninhabitable ground.
retired
Sunk down to the Deep, and the Dry land appeared.

Subside, and the fallen Wave's a Vale again.
know their bound,
And must no more invade the usurped ground.

Which gliding on, through the rich Valleys go:

To all the Beasts oth' Forest, and oth' Field.

Natures rich bounties, Food, and Liberty.

No place on Earth's abandoned by thy Love.

The Seeds of Plenty drop; from whence their birth
The tender Grass, and powerful Herb derive;
Which, all thy Creatures, Beasts, and Men relieve.
Men, taught to improve thy Gifts; (...) from the Vine,
The Corn, and Olive, gather Bread, and Wine,
And Oil: Thou giv'st Man strength, and do allow
For Joys, for the glad Heart, and cheerful Brow,
sapless; bounteous Lebanon
Sweats Balms, and Gums, and yields virtues unknown.
safe heights flies
'The Storke; the Goat from a bold Precipice
Looks down on danger, timorous Creatures dwell
In Rocks; safe, in the Refuge of a Cell.
certain Seasons the uncertain Moon
Does know; and the Sun knows his going down.

When Beasts of Prey do rowse, who shun the Light.

And ravage in the Night the silent wood.

Each severing, betakes him to his Den.

Goes forth to work, and does at night return.

Are the undefin'd extents of Providence!
Diffused through All, and over All the Earth,
All have Relief from Thee, as All had Birth.

Of Creatures, small and great, or swim, or creep.

Ophir has Balsam, and Judea Gold.
There moves Leviathan, and his numerous train,
And all the sporting Monsters of the Main.

In thine Own time do apt supplies allow.

And thine extended hand does All relieve.

And if thou take away their breath, they dye.

Dust wakes, the dying, or the dead shall live.

O Great! O Good! O termless Majesty!
Who in thy self do ever blessed abide;
Pleased in thy works, and by them magnified.

Touching he melts; and Day with horror fills.
liv'st praise God; dying expire
In praise, and mount to the immortal Quire.

Can think, but cannot speak the Ecstasy.
Let sinners perish! be their hated root
Never to be planted, from the earth torn out.

That I, by Thee inspired, may sing thy praise.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CV.
Confitemini Domino.

And his great deeds to all the world Proclaim
alone,
And His great works, the Subject of our Song.
God! Rejoice in God! what soul can miss
Of Joy, who makes his God his Happiness?
Seek then, O seek his strength! his saving Power;
His favor seek; seek his face evermore.
Jacob! think upon
His righteous Laws, his great salvation.
our God; the worlds great God; His fear
And his great judgments are known every where.
Abraham made, stand fast,
And firm to thousand thousand ages last,
Law; when to his Seed, of old
He gave our Land, and Canaan foretold:
few, few and unknown;
Seized but of a believed Possession.

Peoples wild Rage, Princes wild Lusts restrained.
Sacred to Me, Touch not the Anointed Head!
My Prophets to my self are severed.
He called a Famine; but before h' had sent
Joseph, unjustly doomed to punishment.
Held doubly Captive; for the bitter Chain
Piere'd his grieved soul, unmeriting the pain.

Who thy repeated Vision could divine.
Freed by the King, he managed All alone,
And Pharaoh only sat upon the Throne.
He taught his Senate wisdom; to fulfill
Unknown before, the Precepts of his will.
Israel, invited, then, to Egypt came;
And Jacob was a sojourner in Ham.
Aegypts jealousy, increased,
By thine Almighty, fruitful promise, blessed.
Joseph was then forgot; his Merits were
All sacrificed to faithless, jealous Fear.
Moses and Aaron then were sent; who gave
Proofs of thy power to destroy, and save.
He spoke. -- Night rose, and his black Mantle spread;
Darkness rebelled not, though the Egyptians did.
Nilus ran Blood, and slew their Fish; the Field
Covered with Frogs, Pharaoh's own Palace filld.

All armed with different envenomed Stings:

Their blasted Vines and Fig Trees bare in vain.
Flames, the Locusts did devour;
The withering Grass, and half-scorcht, dying Flower,
Pharaoh still hardened, the Almighty word
In all the first born sheathed the Avenging Sword.
The Egyptians terrified, urged them to be gone;
Rich with those spoils, the ransomed Host (...) on;
All vigorous; covered with shade, and light,
The alternate Wing spread over them day and night.

And Rivers gusht out from the Rocks he clave.

To Abraham made, and those of him begot.
Israel free;
Set free even 'bove the Joys of Liberty:
For he gave them, what Others Toils did yield,
Their Sweat; and the Plenties of the labored Field.
Israel!
Keep thou his Laws, and he will bless thee still.
Psalm CVI.
Confitemini Domino.
Good;
Because his Mercies have no Period.
who can speak enough his Acts? How great!
How good! when they in All are infinite.

Offering pure Souls, cleans'd and prepared for Bliss.

To thy beloved Ones, Lord! remember Me.
O visit me with thy Salvation
That I may see Isreal's Redemption!
That Both joined, They with Me, and I with Them
May joy one Joy in thy Jerusalem.
Such as our Fathers were, Such, Lord! are We;
A Race of Sinners, their true Progeny.
Egypt held them in,
The ungrateful Multitude even then did sin:
Sinned on the Bounds of Egypt; whilst they stood
By the next wonder, the miraculous Flood.
then he helped them, that he might make known
His Power in their full Redemption.
He spoke -- The Sea rose high on either side,
And opened the deep valley of its Bed:
The Host descended the dread way, which gave
Them, Safety; but the Egyptians a Grave
Then they believed again, and Then, sung high
His Glory in the Red-Sea's victory.
But soon forg at his works; and to fulfill
Their Lust, called for another Miracle.
gave't, but with it, gave a deadly Gust,
And took their Lives the price of their dear Lust.
Moses, then, and Aaron murmured,
Envying those Guides by whom their God them led.
Nathan swallowd down,
Coverd Abiram's Congregation.

Rapt by the Torrent of an angry flame.
Horeb, they out sinned Themselves; for there
The ransomed Israelite turned Idolater.
Worshipped an Image; the Image of a Beast;
A God, in Hay, and plenteous Fodder blessed.
true, the living God,
The God who saved Them from the Egyptian Rod.
Egypt tells,
Egypt, the dreadful Scene of Miracles.
Moses stood
Twixt them and vengeance, and turned back the Flood.
Then, they contemned the Land, the Promised Land;
Murmured, and hearkened not to God's Command.
that Race should never possess
His Canaan, but fall in the Wilderness.
Then, they served Baal; and eat the Sacrifice
Offered to the Dead, served whom, and how they pleased.
This called a Plague; but from it they were freed
By Phineas's still celebrated Deed.
Then sinned at Meribah; where Moses spoke
Unfitly, and was punished for their sake.

Canaan to them, and did the Heathen save.
Mingled with them; and by their customs led,
Deserted God, and to the Devil fled:
Learnt their abominabel Rites; and threw
Their Babes to Devils, whom in the fire they slew.
Accursed Gods! Accursed Sacrifice!
To whom, the unpittied, flaming Infant dies.
Thus, by their own Inventions led away,
From their first God, their first love, went astray.
And leaving Him, his Israel were no more,
But Canaan was the Canaan 'twas before,
God loathed them then; left them in the Enemies power,
To whose Religion they were slaves before.
He often delivered them, they as often did sin,
Snares of their own Opinions held them in:
These bound them Captive; yet when they did cry
He heard, and straight his Covenant was nigh;
And God repented. O the unknown Love!
The placable, the facile wraths above!
tenderly beheld them; swag'd their woes;
Slackned their Chain by the Pity of their Foes

That thy Redeemed may their Redemption sing.

The God of Israel to Eternity!
Let Israel, and all the world, join in
An endless, universal praise! Amen.
Hallelujah.

The FIFTH BOOK of the PSALMS, PARAPHRASED.
PSALM CVII.
Confitemini Domino.
ever bless!
His Mercy's endless, shall his Praise be less?

Whom he has saved from their Enemies.

Which round the Coasts of all the Earth were spread.

No City found; All vast and harbourless.

Fainted; their way unknown as at the first.
now, but God; to him they cry
In this their last, dying Necessity.
He heard; And to a Place inhabited,
By a near way, the famisht Party led.

The Mercies, and the Goodness of thy God!
O that his wonders more Thou would confess!
And that thou more could know him, more could bless,

Gives it the Plenty of Convenient Food.

Which hovering over them death's black wing had made,
Who in the low Cavern of the Dungeon lie,
Fettered with chains; fettered with misery.

And slighted the greai counsel of his Will;

And made them see there was no help but his.
till now despised, they cried;
He heard; who never the returning Heart denied.

Were freed into the Liberties of Day.
aloud
The Mercies and the goodness of thy God!
O that his wonders more thou would confess!
And that thou more could know him, more could bless

Struck off the Fetters of Captivity.

And on the Bed of Languishing had thrown,

And could not the expense of Life make good:

He sent his Word, bad them rise up and Live.

The mercies and the goodness of thy God!
O that his wonders more thou would confess!
And that thou more could know him, more could bless

For Incense, Praise; for Blood, Thanksgivingsbring.

A Scene of wonders dreadful to be told.

Whose waves, swollen high, menace the stooping Cloud.

By a steep, horrid Gulf, are swallowed again.
They faint, the giddy Ship like a Drunkard reels,
Art now despairs, the Ship no Rudder feels.

He hears, he checks the storms, and the winds obey.

Smoothly they glide, swiftly their Port attain.

The mercies and the goodness of thy God!
O that his wonders more thou would confess!
And that thou more could know him, more could bless.

His Name exalt, and his great Facts make known.

Makes thirsty Deserts where before were Springs;

And blast the fairest Paradise for sin.

Fills it with Pooles; leads streaming Rivers in.

And blessed by the Arts their peopled City yields.

And wait the Increase from the great Donor's hand.

And suffers not their Cattle to decrease.

To Plagues, to Vengeance, and the Oppressor thrown,

The higher than the highest did regard.
Threw scorn upon the Great; shamed his success;
And turned the Ravager to the wilderness;

'Bove dangers, and encrcai'd him like a Flock.

What ye behold; but let the unjust be dumb.

Is wise; and shall the Almighties goodness find.
Gloria of four Verses.

Psalm CVIII.
Paratum est Cor meum.

My soul; It kindles and returns the fire.
Wake Glory! wake my soul! ere rising day
Chaces Night's falling languid fires away.

Extend it wide as his Dominions.

Mercy and Truth reach thither where is no end.

And through allth' earth diffuse thy Majesty.

May be delivered; O hear and save!
wilt save; wilt the torn Remnant bless;
For thou have sworn, sworn in thy Holiness,
I will, in triumph, Sichem's Land divide,
And give to mine Succoth's rich valleys pride.
Manasses, mine fair Gilead's Fields;
Ephraim's my guard; Judah my Scepter wields,
Moab shall serve; Edom I down will tread;
And the bold Philistines in triumph lead.
Edom's Forts secures my way?
And its proud Towers shall in Ruins lay?

Deserring, ruind'st; returning shall advance.

Be Thou our help, for All Man's help is vain.

And we shall rise; Great God! we follow thee.
Psalm CIX.
Deus laudem.

And vindicate aspersed Innocence.
For the dissembling, false, malicious tongue
Blasts my cleanefame, conspiringin my wrong.
no cause; they make this false return
For the Good I did; whilst I in prayer mourn.
En'myes prove,
Convicted of no Crime to them, but Love

And Satan be his only Counselor.

And his appealing prayer be contemned.

And to his Function another raise.

From their own wasted dwellings cursed and fied:

And to a Stranger his rapt spoils transfer.
Him, or His; but All
His Race in the next Age extinguished, fall.

And his loathed Memory together dye.

Oppressed the Poor, the exposed, the helpless one.
Trod down again the Afflicted; and yet more
The grieved Heart brake that was broke before.

And the devouring pest his own heart burn.
He hated Blessing; Blessing shall be far
And fly the soul that Cursing loves, and war.

Like Oil! be girded to him as his Vest.
thus unto mine Enemies
Who my wronged Innocence defame with Lies.

Thy mercyes, and the goodness of thy Love.
For I am poor and helpless; Mercy extend!
And swage the anguish of my wounded mind!

Chased, as storms chase the Grasshopper away.

Shaking their heads, revile my misery.
so help, that they convinced may see
All my deliverance was wrought by Thee.
Thou! that they, confounded, may confess
They him in vain do curse, whom Thou do bles^
Let that confusion cover them! whilst I
Rejoice, and my Redeemer magnify.
Whilst, before All, thy Goodness I adore;
Who, from unrighteous Judges, sav'st the poor.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CX.
Dixit Deminus.
my Lord, sit thou
At my Right hand, till thy fallen enemies bow,
Subdued, beneath thy feet: Thy Scepter shall
From Zion sent, rule high, rule over All.
then the willing Sacrifice;
Hearts, roab'd in the beauties of true Holiness.
The humid dews oth' Morn are as thy Birth,
In thousand thousand Gems shed over the Earth.

A Priest for ever as Melchisedeck.

Shall strike through Kings, and give Thee their Command,
He shall the Nations judge; and the Regions fill
With Carcasses of those who do rebel.

Drink oth' low Brook, and then advance his Head
Psalm CXI.
Confitebor Tibi.

In The Great Assembly praise thee, and in the less.
Gods works are Great; the pleasure of all Those
Who find them Out; Or raped with wonder, loose.
All full of Glory; full of Honor, All;
And his firm Righteousness Perpetual.
No Day can blot out what is renewed each Day;
Whilst on his works, his signal Blessings stay.
And every Moment, All his Creatures prove
The Goodness of their Lord, and Present Love.

Mindful for ever of his Covenant.

When He gave them the vanquishd Heathens Land.

Their Natures, All, Eternal verities.
And, As his Works, his Laws for ever be;
All done in Truth; All done in Equity.

Mercy looked down, and sent Redemption.
He stablished his Covenant without End;
O Holy ever! ever Reverend!

True Understanding have, who him obey;
And who, their Wills, guide by that steadfast Rein,
Immortal Praise, and Glory shall attain.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXII.
Beatus Vir.

And fears his Maker, Happiness is his.

And Blessings follow his Posterity.

But his never wasting store is Rightcousness.

Who Pity does extend, but not his Hate;
Midst his dark thoughts, midst the despairing Night
Of Terrors, breaks in a descending Light.

Lends to the Poor, and his fallen State repaires.

Those wreaths, his virtues crown, never withring dye.
Midst the World's Changes, He unchanged appears,
Nor raised by Hopes, nor terrifid by Fears.
unconcerned He stands;
Resigned up to the Conduct of God's Hands.

God glorified upon his Enemies.

And made his fruitful Treasury, the Poor.
Glories hereafter, Glories here below
Wait him, who reaps the Honor to bestow.

He, and his Hopes, shall perish utterly.
Gloria of four Verses.

Psalm CXIII.
Laudate Pueri.
YE Servants of the living God, Praise Him!
Whose Praise, no place can circumscribe, nor time.
Over all the Earth, as the Sun sheds his Rays,
So undefin'd the Circuits are of Praise.

And over all the Kings of Earth, his Throne.
descend, to know
The Affairs of Heaven; yet stoops to these Below.
Dust, the ignoble He makes Great;
And among Princes, does the lowly set.

The Mother of a happy Progeny.
Psalm CXIV.
In exitu Israel.
Israel from Aegyt led,
And the triumphant Host Himself did head,
Judah; his high Throne
Israel, the Seat of his Dominion.

Jordan ran frighted back into his Head.

Dancing like Rams; like Lambs, the lesser Hills.
Jordan! what aild'st thou? And what ailed thee, Sea?
What Earthquakes, Hills! did in your Bowels lie?

Who, from Flints, pours a Spring; from Rocks, a Flood.
Psalm CXV.
Non Nobis Domine.
Us be Praise; Not unto Us;
But be thy ruth, and Mercy glorious.
Where was their God might then the Heathen say,
If we should boast, We gave Our selves the Day.
Our Arm gave us the Victory;
But thine from Heaven; for what thou will'st shall be.
Their Gods, are Gold and Silver; formed by Man;
Gods, that can do less than their Makers can.
They gave them Mouths, and Eyes, Noses, and Ears;
Yet the blind God sees not, tastes, smells, or hears.

Nor through their Throat, the breathless Idols talk.
makes Them, as much Idol is as They;
Or who to the carved, or painted God, does pray.
But trust in God, Thou House of Israel!
Make Him thy Hope; He can defend, and will.
Aaron! on thy God rely;
He Will be thy Strength; He Will thy Defender be.
All Ye who fear the living Lord,
Trust Him! for He will sure Relief afford.
this, both Aarons House, and Israel,
Whom He their God remembered has, can tell.

The Great are his; the Poor Man is his Care.
you, and yours God shall extend his Love;
The God who made the Earth, and the Heavens above.

These Praise Thee; Earth's given to the Sons of Men.

Coverd with Night, a lasting Silence keep.
Living then, the Living must Praise Thee,
As we do now, and will eternally.
Psalm CXVI
Dilexi quoniam.

For Thou have heard, and saved Me from above.

And I will ever bless Thee whilst I live.

Now falling, his Almighty help I crave.
O Thou! who woundest, and again make whole,
Who to the Grave have brought, bring back my Soul.

From Him, All Mercy, All Compassion flows;

I was in Misery, and He helped Me.

O Care of Heaven! Return unto thy Rest!

Dried up thy Tears, and gasping Breath reprieved.

In The Land oth' Living; walk, as in thy sight.
still believe;
Said, Man's Help's false; God only can relieve.

For All the Benefits He has bestowd?

Us with the Joys of his Salvation.

Of Thine, to Thee, who thus lend'st back their Breath!

Brake every Chain, and made it free indeed.

And on that Altar, Praise shall the Incense be.
All shall behold; All shall with Me accord;
And All Jerusalem shall Praise the Lord.
Psalm CXVII.

Whom Place does sever, but whom, mercy joins.

Are everlasting as the Days above.
psalm. CXVIII.
Consitemini Domino.

Because his Mercies have no Period.
Israel's House, and Aarons, bless their God;
And say His Mercies have no Period.

Confess his Mercies have no Period.

Calling He Me enlarged, and set Me free.
Lord is on my side; Whom should I fear?
Who Is He can hurt, when the Almighty's near?

For, with mine Aids, God joins Auxiliary.

Confirm, as does Our God, Our Confidence.
A dreadful Multitude, not to be told,
Compassed Me round about, enraged and bold.
But in the name of God, I Will charge the Foe;
Break Him, and in that powerful Name overthrow.

So Thorns, make a loud Noise but dye in the flame.

As if over Him God aids, Man could prevail.
God is my Strength; and He my strength's my Song:
And He, alone, is my Salvation.

The Conquests of his high, victorious Hand.

The Conquests of his high victorious Hand.

My Soul from Death, my Soul shall ever Praise.
chastned, and corrected Me,
But saved; O Goodness 'bove Severity!

That with Thanksgivings I may enter in.
This is the Gate; this is the glorious Gate;
Which all the Just, with Praise, shall enter at.
alone;
Who art become my strong Salvation.
refused, the Stone, a Scandal made,
Binds now the Building on the Angle laid.
This is Gods doing; This, He did for Us;
His Deed, and Love, alike, are mavelous.

Designed for Glories, set apart for Praise.
Now, save us Lord! Now, give us Happiness;
And fill our Souls with thy descended Bliss.
Hail! O immortal Love! Hail! Light of Light!
Thy Glories in thy Temple we will recite.

To the Horns oth' Altar bind the Sacrifice,
Thee, O our God! I Will Praise; still honor thee;
Thee worship still; still, I Will The magnify.

Because his Mercies have no Period.
Psalm CXIX.
Beati immaculati.
1 Part Aleph.

The just Law of their God directed has.
whole Affection, and aspiring Love,
Taught by his Laws, seek Him who is above.
they stray
Who shun the false, keep the commanded way.

Were measured and directed by thy Laws!

Nor conscious Guilt shame my sttain'd Innocences
O then instruct me in thy Righteousness.
And with a Heart unfeigned I shall thee bless.
desires to keep thy way;
O leave me not! but guide Me that I may.
Gloria of two Verses.

2 Part. Beth.

Thy Law will either quench, or cleanse its Fires.
all my Love; Lord! I seek thee
By seeking It; O guide and govern Me!

O be it by thy self more deep impressed!

And the unknown Delights thy ways afford.
There I incorruptible Treasures find;
Gold, that will follow hence, and crown the Mind.

TO obey; and what I Know, with Joy, fulfill.
Part 3. Gimel.
serve Thee:
Unveil mine Eyes I may thy wonders see.
like One, I stray;
Direct my wandering Soul in thy right way.

And fainting, languishes in no Other Fires.
The Proud, Thou cursest, who contemn thy Law;
O save Me from their Scorn, who it obey.

And follow the great Counsels of thy way.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 4. Daleth.

Lord raise the Soul that in thy Word does trust!
my ways, and Thou have heard;
O teach Me thine! and teach Me to regard.

Reveal! and I shall teach thy Mysteries.

O cheer it with thy faithful Promises!

Teach Me thy Truth, O Lord of Verity!

The Captive, and enlarged, He Will follow Thee.
Part 4. He.
Instruct Me Lord! and I Will observe thy Law
For ever; and with my whole Heart, obey.
guide Me, Lord! that in the Paths I know,
And love, by thine Assistance I may go.

Dethrone my self, and All the Gods of Lust!
O close mine Eyes to Vanity! and then
Fixed on thy Statutes, wake them up again.

Increase my Confidence and Fear in Thee.

From Those, who scorn those ways by which I Am led.

Behold it Lord! and quickening, satisfy.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 6. Vau.

Did ever on that Promised Help rely;
Help! that my Foes may see, how thy Defense
Was never vain, nor vain my Confidence.
still boast that Promised Word!
And equal to my Hopes, Relief afford!

Bound by those Laws, whose Bonds are Liberty.

And boast, what above All, I love and fear.

And vowed to observe and keepthy loved Commands
Part 7. Zain.

That Word, on which Thou made Me to rely.
Joys, thence, in the Agonies of despairing Grief,
Quickening my anguish'd Soul, give it New Life.
mocked by the Proud, who dare blaspheme thy Law,
I Am not ashamed of thy derided way.

Thy Judgments against my Foes, and for thine Own.

The Apostate wretches who without Thee live.
continual Song; for they
Are my sole Comfort in my House of Clay.
no Night;
Who keep thy Precepts, dwell in unseen Light.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 8. Cheth.

Beyond that Wealth, rich in thy Promises.

Thy promised Aid according to thy word.
Own way;
Abhorred it, and sought thine without delay.
All by the spoiler, and unjust;
But 'bove their Reach, They Have left Me still my Trust.

Thy powerful Judgments, and thy Righteousness.

I love; and join in their Society.

O teach my grateful Heart to do thy will.
Part 9. Teth.
Word, so have thy Mercies been;

Prosperity I went astray,
Affliction has reduced me into the way.
knowing Thee,
O only Good! gain true Felicity.
falsely flanderd me, but I
Framed by thy Laws, my Actions justify.

Whilst I, another way am led to Bliss.
Afflictions are my Guide; by Them, I Am brought
To know thy Laws, by surer Methods taught.
There, I possess a Treasure firm, and stable.
And 'bove their Thousands, choose the invaluable.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 10. Jod.

Finish his Mind, inspired with thy Commands!

When the Successes of my Hopes they see.
higher, from Afflictions rise;
For out of Faithfulness thou do Chastise.
thy Supports afford!
For such, Lord! is the Promise of thy Word.

Live, blessed in the Delights thy Laws do give.
causeless violence;
Who only think on Thee, and thy Defense.
Thee, and have thy Judgments known,
Shall turn to Me, and Both, trust Thee alone,

For I shall never be ashamed that God I fear.
Part 11. Caph.

But firmly trusts what thy sure word makes known.
when, O Lord? When will Thou comfort me?
When shall my longing Eyes Deliverance see?
Bladder, in the Smoke, or Guard;
Wrinckled, and shrunk; yet still I trust thy Word.
few, and to their period tend,
Shall They, ere thou redress my Wrongs, have end?
falsely persecute me; their Laws are Snares;
Unlike, thy just ones Lord! in my Help declare.
ruined me, yet I kept thy Law;
My God relieve me, for I Will still obey!
Part 12. Lamed.

Ages pass off, thy faithfulness stands sure

For All Thy Servants are, and Thee obey.

I soon had Perished, in my fatal Grief.

O save me! for by keeping it I Am thine.
Vain the Sinner threats, his Hate must end;
But thy Salvations beyond end extend.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 13. Mem.

Have I to love, and to observe thy Laws!
The Subtleties of Foes; ^ Science Wise;
And Prudence of the Aged, fall to these.
Actions do express my Love, for they
Shun Ill; He falsely loves who walks astray.
Thee, I keep; Honey has less
Of sweetness, than to Souls, thy Promises.
true Wisdom raise;
Therefore I hate the low false sensual ways.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 14. Nun.
Feet, as in the Night
To the strayed Traveller a directing Light.

In keeping of thy Judgments; Lord! assist.

And, as thy Word has promised, sustain.
Teach Me thy Laws! so teach, that I may keep!
And take from the Heart, the Sacrifice oth' Lip.

Make not my steadfast Soul, from thee, to err.

And what that Word directs, I Will keep to the End.
Part 15. Samech.
vain Thoughts, and wild Opinions hate;
But on thy Law, and known Truths meditate.
thy Word and thee;
Depart ye workers of Iniquity!

And let Me not be ashamed of my Trust.

Safe, and observe thy Laws continually.

Does my experienced Trust to thy Laws bind.
dread, and fear what most I trust;
Even their Examples fear, for who is Just?
Part 16. Ain.

Who unto Me and Righteousness are Foes.

Be Thou thy self the great Security!
Thee, and looking faint;
Till thou thy promised Salvation grant,
Pity thy Servant, for thy Servant's thine;
Inform his Soul, and to thy Laws incline.
time, O Lord! to exert thy powrful Hand,
For they have made void, and cancelled thy Command.
wicked, hate; thy Law, I prize;
Shun Ill; and above Gold, choose Righteousness.
Part 17. Pe.

Wherefore my ravished Soul does them revere,
thy Word Our fallen Heat reinspires,
The Simple's Wise; and Souls renew their Fires.

And thy Command, possess! and satisfy.
so Lord! in Mercy look on Me,
As Thou art wont on Those who honor Thee.

And be thy Word sole Regent of my Mind!

Shine, Lord! and Teach; shine, Lord! and succor me.

For Sinners pours down a continual Flood.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 8. Tsaddi.



Desert thy Laws, and their Own Counsels choose.
Choose what is adulterate, and refuse the Gold
Which the just Test of the last fire does hold.
Poor; low, and of no repute;
Of All things but thy precepss, destitute.
still remain, and will eternally;
For Righteousness and Truth immortal be.
thy Word yields Relief
In The lingering Torments of an anguish'd Life.

My Soul true knowledge, that it still may live.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 19. Koph.

Lord save! and my Soul, rescued, shall serve Thee.

I, Both prevent; and on Thee meditate.

And my Soul's drooping, languid Heats repair.
thine, and my declared Foes draw nigh;
But Thou art nigh too, Lord of Verity!

All sure; All stablish'd to Eternity.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 20. Resh.

And, cause thy Word's my Trust, deliver Me.
Plead Thou my Cause! my oppressed Soul relieve!
And, As thy Word has promised, revive.

Who keeps no Law, finds no Salvation.

Me from my numerous Foes, who still serve Thee.

Think how I love, my God! and me revive.

All measurd by the same Eternity.
Part 21. Schin.

But 'bove their Threats, Lord! I revere thy Laws.

Thy Word's Eternal Treasure joys my Mind.

But honor thy great Law of Verity.

Great God! because thy Judgments righteous be.

Framed by thy Laws to it self gives no Offense.

For thy Commandments I have loved, and done.

For thou art still in mine, I, in thy sight.
Gloria of two Verses.

Part 22. Tau.

From Ignorance, and from Adversity.

Shall make thy righteous Precepts my glad Song.

Help Lord! grant thy desired Salvation.

And taught by Thee, my Soul shall Praises give.

O seek! O turn the strayed into the way.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXX.
Ad Dominum.

Save, Lord! from the false Lip, and tongues that lie.
thine; Coals quick as thine own Fire,
(Know thy reward, false Tongue!) shall be thy hire.
Mesech's Tent,
In savage Kedar thrown to Banishment;

Of what all earthly Blessings blesses, Peace.

But their rough brutish Souls are all for War.
Psalm CXXI.
Levavi Oculos.
Mountains tops look up, and thence
From the Refuge of their Heights, expect defense?
False Refuge! I Have no hope but in his name
Who made the Earth, and the Heavens stupendous Frame.
weak, steps, firm, and assured will keep;
His care who watches o'r thee never does sleep;

Never sleep; All watchful still, yet never relieved.

Nor in the night, the Moon's pale humid Ray.

Shall keep thy Soul, shall keep it without end.
psalm. CXXII.
Laetatus sum.

When our glad Feet, shall meet in the house of Praise.
Jerusalem! shall stand in thee,
O blessed! O City built by Unity.

Dissenting Israelite straggles alone.

The exalted Seat of his Anoynted's Throne.
Jerusalem!
They, who shall seek thy Bliss, God shall bless them.

The fruit of Peace, within thy Palaces.
Israel's Pace,
May thee, all Bliss, all happiness embrace!

On thee that is good, from his own goodness showered.
Psalm CXXIII.
Ad Telocavi Oculos.

On all the Creatures of thy Hand look down,
Behold thy People! who, with tender Eyes,
As chastned servants wait, low, and submisse
Wait for thy Mercy; and shall still attend.
Till thou, appeased, shall their chastnings end.
lowest scorn
Of the Disdainful, Sloathful, Proud w' are torn.
We, low in Misery, and dejected lie;
And their Contempt treds on that Misery.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXIV.
Nisi quia Dominus.
IF God himself had not our strength sustained,
And his own Arm our vanquished Right maintained
Our Foes had swallowed us alive; when they
To Fury, quitting all that is Just, gave way.

And by the Torrent of the Proud born down.

And from their Jaws, rapt the despayring Prey.
lost Bird flattered into the Net
By the deceit of the treacherous Fowler set,
Mounts up when some kind Hand breaks the false Snare:
Our cheated Souls, so caught, so rescued are.

Thou only who giv'st Life, can save from Death.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXV.
Qui Confidunt.

Gathered, his wing, their trust have made,
Shall firm as his own Sion stand;
Which never can move, by him sustained.
Jerusalem
Hills compass; so the Lord does Him.

Not rest in the Portion of the Just:
Least He, thinking Himself forgot,
Murmur, and perish with his Lot.

Do good to the upright in Heart.

With Sinners God shall them destroy.
Whilst that 'fair Wing where Peace does dwell
Shall overshadow Israel.
Psalm CXXVI.
In convertendo.

Mercy looked down on our Captivity;
Amazed as men who joyful Visions see,
We thought we had but dreamt a Liberty:
true, the Vision fled,
But the dear Ravishments, and high Joys abide.
The very Heathen said, what has God done?
What wonders Israel's, God, for Israel shown?
Heathen, Lord! attest, we, more confess;
Confess thy Mercies, and confessing, bless.
all thy Israel free;
Bring back the whole redeemed Captivity,
Turn us, as Southern Floods that plenty bring;
So turn back, Lord! the flowing Remnant in.
Joy, which sows in Tears;
The bounteous Harvest shall discount its Fears.
good Seed, shall come,
Shall doubtless come with Joy, and full Sheaves home.
Psalm CXXVII.
Nisi Dominus.
Lord the prosperous Building raise,
Man, the Foundation of a Ruin lays.
Except the City's Guard, God undertakes,
The careful sleepless Watchman in vain wakes.
vain, ye early rise; and late sit up;
The Bread of Sorrow eat, and drink its Cup;
From anxious cares, He, his beloved does keep;
He gives what is fit; and the Contented, sleep.

And does the increased Parent's strength advance.

And He, by Them, his Enemies, shall withstand.
Psalm CXXVIII.
Beati Omnes.

And in his righteous ways do persevere.
what is enough, supply;
O happy Man! O safe Felicity!

So fair thy Wise shall, and so fruitful be.
Children about thy Table shall be spread
Like Olive Plants; and there, contented, sed.

Sion does afford.
Thou, Aged, shall thy Children's Children see:
And all thy days, Isreal's Prosperity.
Psalm CXXIX.
Saepe expugnaverunt Me.
often have Me assailed
May Israel say; but never have prevailed.

But God, who is just, the Cords oth' wicked brake.

Who, to their Malice, Sion would betray!
Be they like Grass, which on the House-tops does spring;
Does dying, spring; and grows up, withering.

Nor Any passing by, One good wish gives.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXX.
De profundis.

Where conscious Guilt still wakes and black despair,
To thee, O Lord! my anguish'd Soul does fly,
Lord hear Me! and admit my woeful cry.
extreme
And let thy Justice urge, and try each Crime,
O! Who? Who may abide? Who Is He, of All
The Sons of Men but must, condemned, fall?
Mercy, O our God's! with thee, that we
For Mercy, may revere thy Majesty.

Tired with a restless Night, who wait for Day,
And Lord! I shall not wait in vain; O just
Of Promise! O faithful of that Word I trust!

The Plenty of his full Redemption.
O Israel! trus My Soul! trust God with them.
He Will Them, and Thee, from all Our Sins redeem.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXXI.
Domine non est.

Scorn not the Mean, nor Him who is lefs than Me.
Nor does my bold presumptuous Reason pry
Proud of its Strength, on Mysteries too high.

From Pride without, and greater Pride within.
For what, Proud Clay! can thy Self profit thee?
Israel! trust in God; thy self deny.
Psalm CXXXII.
Memento Domine.
David's Troubles, Lord! and how
He to the Almighty swear, and vowed a Vow,

My Bed; no Sleep shall to mine Eyes descend,

And separate a Place for his abode.
to-fore has stood
At Ephraeta; where we found it in the Wood.
But in thy Sanctu'ry it is seated Now,
Where we, before thy Footstool; lowly bow.
Arise, O Lord! Thou, and the dispossessed
Ark of thy Strength, and come into thy Rest.

And by thy Saints, be thy glad Praise expressed.
David's sake:

If thy Sons keep my Laws, their Sons shall set
For ever, on the Throne of David's Seat.
As their Obedience to my Laws (...) shown,
So lasting shall their days be on the Throne.
Sion made his Own Abode,
The Choice, and the Peculiar of its God.
Here will I fix my everlasting Seat;
Here, ever rest; for Sion's my Delight.
Plenty shall make her Stores, and give forth Bread
To the Poor; who by her Bounty shall be fed.

With whom, my joyful Saints in Praise shall join.
David I Will exalt; and round his Head
Wreathed with his Power, a circling Glory spread.
Foes, I Will pour Confusion;
But on Himself, plant his still flourishing Crown.
Gloria of Four Verses.

psalm CXXXIII.
Ecce quam bonum.

Where Good, and Pleasant, in One, joined be;
Where Peaceful Brethren do consent in Thee,
How blessed to All, is the blessed Harmony!
Aaron's consecrated Head
The precious Unguents, and the Dews were shed,
Flowed down his Beard; from whence, the lowest Hemm
Oth' sacred Vest, was lav'd by the Balm-like stream.
Hermon's Hill, descending Rain
Falling, enriches all the humble Plain:
Or, as both Sion's Tops, the melting Dew
And the Valley's withering Verdure does renew.
On All the Peaceful, so, from God descends
A Present Bliss, and One that never ends.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXXIV.
Ecce Nunc.

In his blessed Courts, fulfilling his Command,

And bless, and Praise Him in his Sanctu'ry.
Him Praise in the Sanctu'ry,
The Lord from out his Sanctu'ry bless Thee!
Psalm CXXXV.
Laudate Nomen.

Who tread his Courts! All in his Praise accord!

Sing Praise! for pleasant are the Heavn'ly Lays.
Israel! his Name advance
Who has chose Thee for his Inheritance,
all Gods, Our God is God alone;
And 'bove all Powers his ex^alted Throne.

In Earth and Sea; his Will, Them, Laws has given
Natures Recesses He buried low in the Deep,
Which, unto Man, dark and unfathomed sleep.
licenses and the stormy Tempests binds;
Vnbarrs his Treasury, and lets forth the Winds.
The Lightnings break forth, and mixed Rains pour down;
And threat on All Confusions like their Own.
Egypt were made known,
Fertile in wonders to its Destruction.
He mighty Kingdoms smote, and Potent Kings;
And did their Power in Subjection bring.
Og, Basan's King; and Sehon, the Amorite's;
And Canaan gave to his Own Israelites.
ever shall be told;
And their renewed Memorials never wax old.
Judgemenys are made known
Upon thy Foes; and Mercies on thine Own
Gold, which the vain Heathen please,
Such wonders do? Such Miracles as these?
dumb Mouth, the sightless Eye deas Ear,
Reagard the Idol-like Idolater?
The God, his living Workman's far beneath;
No stroke, no softest Pencil ever formed Breath.
makes Gods, or Them worships, does degrade
The Man; the Man's false as the God He made
O Israel's House and Aaron's bless the Lord
He can, alone, defense and help afford.
O House of Levi Praise that God with Them!
From Sion, who dwells at Jerusalem.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXXVI.
Confitemini.
still bestows,
Yet the unwasted Fountain ever flows.

His everlasting Mercies do endure.

And every wonder is from Him alone.


Mercies thus, He still bestows,
Yet the immortal Fountain flows.

Diffused at first, in Orbs collected stood.

Deputed has the Government of Day.

He has assigned the Region of the Night.
He smote the firstborn of the Egyptians,
And thence his Arm brought his inheritance.
Mercies thus, he still bestows,
Yet the immortal Fountain flows.


Pharaoh's Host the Sea returned again;
Coverd, and not a Witness did remain.

Led Them by wonders, and by wonders fed.
Who, potent Kings, and mighty Princes smote;
And into their Possessions Israel brought.
Mercies thus, he still bestows,
Yet the immortal Fountain flows.
Sehon, the Amorite's and Og, Basan's King;
Israel did into those Conquests bring.
afflicted were, low, and oppressed,
He, from Above, regarded the distressed.

And rescued us from out our Enemies hands.

To Man, and All the Creatures of the Field.

Yet the immortal Fountain flows.
Psalm CXXXVII.
Super flumina.
Babylon,
As the Streams glided on, our Tears ran down.

Neglected, hung; disordered, and unstrung.

"Sing one oth' Songs sacred to Sion's King!

In their strange Land, sing a devoted Song?
Sion! O Jerusalem! Can I,
Can my Soul, ever, unremember Thee?
Cleave to my Mouth my hated tongue! and let
Forgetting Thee, my Hand its Art forget!
Or when, 'bove Sion's Tears, I Joys shall prize:
O Sion! All my Grief; and All my Bliss,
Edom's cries in thy Jerusalem's Day!
Down with that Temple! All in Ruins lay!
Babylon! And thy Day too will come;
Who thy Race ended, must abide thy Doom;
May he, who vengeance takes, be prosperous!
And deal with Thee, as Thou have dealt with us.

And with the Root the untimely Branches take.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXXXVIII.
Confitebor tibi.

And before All the Gods, thy Name confess.

And for thy Love, and Truth due Praises vow.
For above All Things, Thou thy word have set;
Even 'bove (...) thy famed Name made great.

And in my Soul, wak'dst its extinguished Fire.

And then All crowned Heads shall sing to Thee.
Sing in thy ways; Sing that All Glory's thine;


But stands far off, and on the Haughty frowns.

Thou shall restrain their fury, and save Me.

Restore thine Image, nor the lapsed forsake.
Psalm CXXXIX.
Domine probasti.

Hid from the view of thine All-searching Eye.
when I lie down: when I arise;
Nothing withdraws from Thee; naught veiled lies.
To Thee the viewless shadow of a Thought,
Before its texture was designed, was brought.
Bed; 'bout all my ways;
From Thee nor any Deed's removed, nor Place.
one word's in my Tongue, Thou do not know;
When even our Thoughts are loud are whispers low?
Clay, thine artful Hand have laid.
And of the unfashion'd Substance, Man have made.
My self amazes Me; I cannot attain
To the deep knowledge of the wonder, Man.
Where, from thy Spirit, then shall I retreat?
What Land to Thee lies undiscovered yet?
Heaven, Thou, Lord! art there;
Or make my Bed in Hell, Thou would be near.

Where breaking Light dawns from the farthest Sea;
there thine Hand would hold upon Me lay,
And seize Me midst the twilights of the Day.
Darkness fhall cover Me,
Darkness it self, Lord! is not dark to Thee.
Midnight to Thee is Noon; and Shade is Light;
Where thy bright Presence comes, there is no Night.
thine; formed and designed by Thee,
Who in my Mother's Womb have coverd Me.
Thou have made Me, made the fearful Frame;
O! may the Soul that knows it, Praise thy Name.
rude, and inform did lie,
And moulding was to the sbape of Man, did see;
then on the imperfect Substance look,
Wrote down in the Idea of thy Book.
Which daily, into Parts grew out of None;
Unknown then to my self, and yet unknown.
infinite! How high! How dear!
Great God! the unfathomed Depths thy Counsels are!
tell;
Silence alone denotes the ineffable.
When I awake, Thou present art to Me;
Let thy work bless thee, Lord! and wake to Thee.

Who boldly take thine awful Name in vain!
Thee, and against Thee do rise,
I truly hate; for the are mine Enemies.

O guide Me in the everlasting way!
Psalm CXL.
Eripe Me Domine.

And Discords daily move, Lord! rescue Me!
speak, as Serpents sting; untruths devise;
Strike through just Fames; and poison with their Lies.

Where ever I go, designmine Overthrow.
fair untruths, and hopeful to betray,
Like Nets, and Snares, They cover in my way

As Thou in the Day of Battle did appear.
Defeat their Counsels! Blast their Policies!
And let Them not exalt Themselves by Lies.
Return the infected Breath! and let the Pest,
Whence it first brake, pierce the in venomed Breast.

And, cast down, let them perish utterly,

Whose flowing words, fair specious mischiefs vent.

Assert his Cause and violated Fame.

And They, for ever, in his Presence, rest.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXLI.
Domine clamavi.

And swiftly let my Prayer to Thee arise!
sweet, and flaming rise!
And the Hands lift up, be the Evening Sacrifice!

From all that is Ill, the guarded Doors oth' Lip.

But spotless keep the Candor of my Mind.
In Sinners works let me take no Delight!
Nor stain my Soul to serve my Appetite.
stroke
My Head no more shall, than by Balms, be broke.
I will repay the Debt; and when They mourn
I Will pray for Them, and the kind Balm return.

They Will hear my words; and warned attend to Me.

(As Chips from Wood) from Carcasses hewed out,

Thou art my Help; do not my Soul despise.

Preserved by Thee, Lord! May I still escape.
Own Pit!
But let Me still avoid, or break the Net.
Psalm CXLII.
Voce mea ad Dominum

And unto Him, my troubled State made known.

More anxious made, the False their Snares did lay.
no man would Me know;
To mine Affliction, every One was Foe;

In The Land oth' Living, art my Portion.

And from my powerful Persecutors, free;

joined All with Me, shall All in Thee rejoice.
Psalm CXLIII.
Domine exaudi.

For thy Truth's sake, and for thy Righteousness;
thy pure sight
Who Is spotless found? who shall be found upright?

My Life; and in the low, dark Dungeon thrown;
Like One that is Dead, I Am coverd over with Night;
Shut from the Day, and the departed Light.
Lost to All Joys, and buried unto Life,
Benumbed with Cold, I Have no Sense but of Grief.
Soul looks forth; looks back, and sees
The wonders of thy Old Deliv'rances.
I muse on All thy works; and in my Mind
Free, and enlarged, a whole World I find.
quite! To Thee I lift my Hands,
Gasp for thy Help, as for Rain, thirsty Lands.
speedily!
My Life's expiring; and the Grave draws nigh.

And thy Salvation with the rising Morn.
Teach me to know the Path where I should tread!
And in the instructed way, my frail steps lead.
Lord! Save my Soul from its fierce Enemies;
Which to thine Arms, for Aid, and Shelter flies.

And lead me into the Land of Righteousness.
Own Glory, Lord! Raise my fallen State!
And to thy Mercies Honor, vindicate.

Let not thy Servant be his Enemies Slave.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXLIV.
Benedictus Dominus.

My Hope; my Fortress, and Deliverer.
Subdues my People; Crowns Me with Success;
And ends my War in Victory, and Peace.
What is Man Thou should thus honor Him?
Thus high, the low, the unvalu'd Thing esteem?
prone shade hasts his contracting Span!
And the same poise weighs Vanity, and Man.
Bow the Heavens; and let the stooping Cloud
The flaming Mounts in glorious Horrors shroud!
close array!
And their disordered Troops thy Thunder slay.
Thus on my Foes! On Me descend in Love!
The Arm that slays can rescue from Above,
Stretch forth that Arm! and from the mighty wave
Draw forth my Soul, and from strange Children save:
perjurd Lips no sacred Vows can bind,
Their Hand Plights Faith, but from a faithless Mind.
Then, to the Harp, my voice I Will higher raise;
And made victorious, sing another Praise,
alone Salvation brings
To David, and to his Anointed Kings.
Those whose Lips no vows can bind,
Whose Hand plights Faith but from a faithless Mind.

(Our hopeful Branches) All our Sons may spring.
And, like the Temple's polished Marbles, may
Our Daughters, fair, and graceful be as they!
Plenty filled!
And our Sheep Thousands and ten thousands yield.
strong to break the labored Ground;
No Cries, no Ravages, our Quiet wound.
such People; yea, thrice blessed, are They
Whom God Protects, and who that God obey.
Gloria of Two Verses.

Psalm CXLV.
Exaltabo Te Domine.

Will Praise Thee now, Praise Thee Eternally.
The Lord is Great, above all Praise is Great;
No Limits to his boundless power are set.
Age shall tell Age; This, shall tell That succeeds;
None shall not know, and none not sing thy deeds.
high
Thy Works, and the Honor of thy Majesty.
distant Name,
And All record the Stories of thy Fame.
Thy Acts of Terror, and thy Acts of Love;
The Judgments, and Compassions from Above.
Good; The Lord is slow to Wrath;
His boundless termless Love no measure has.
All Mankind his abundant Goodness prove,
And All his works share his extended love.
All thy works, Lord! Thee magnify, and All
Thy Saints confessing thee, before thee fall.
Power, sing thy Majesty;
Sing thy great Kingdom, and thy Praise on high,
All, thy Kingdom may be known,
And All flesh honor thine exalted Throne.
eternal Kingdom is,
Beyond the Ages of Posterities.
sustains the falling; Those fallen down
He raises up, and lifts them from the Ground.
All Eyes do wait on thee; thy Providence
Thy Blessings to All Creatures does dispense.

And at thine inexhausted Stores are fed.
righteous is;
And all his works express his holiness.
All who call upon Him's nigh;
To All who call upon Him and obey.
All them
Who fear, and faithfully rely on Him.
Righteous bless; but the hated Root
Of the ungodly shall be cursed out.

All Flesh to bless his Name eternally.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CXLVI.
Lauda Anima mea.

Thy Being; and in him do move and live.
O! While that Breath of Life, that Being stays,
The Donour of that Breath and Being Praise.
Princes! in no Mortal trust!
No lasting Help can come from him that is Dust.

All his Thoughts perish; and the Great Prince is Clay.
blessed is He, and faithful is his Trust,
Who hopes in God, the Portion of the Just.
Men's Trusts in Death, or in Oblivion sleep,
The ETERNAL does eternal Promise keep.
Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, and all the Coasts
Of Nature made peopled with numerous Hosts.

And Food unto the pining Hungry gives.
Restores the Blind, and makes the dark Eye see;
Strikes off the Prisoner's Chain, and sets him free.
Raises the bowed and fallen down; keeps the upright;
For They Are Gods Care, who are their God's Delight.
Widow, Stranger, and the Fatherless,
God does protect, but does the unjust depress.
Such, Sion! is thy King; whose endless Reign
Shall from, and to Eternity remain.
Psalm CXLVII.
Laudate Dominum.
SIng Praise! it is good unto our God to sing;
Praise is a decent, joyful Offering.
The Lord his fallen Jerusalem rebuilds,
Recalls his exiles to their banished Fields.
To the grieved, anguish'd Soul, does Joys impart,
And pours His Balm into the wounded Heart.
The Stars, the Ornaments of Heavens glittring Frame,
Though infinite, He calls Them forth by Name.
Great is our God, his immense Power is Great;
And like his Wisdom, All is infinite.
(...)
And great above them Both, his Praise express.

And They with all his Saints their God shall Praise.
Psalm CXLIX.
Cantate Domino.
New Song! in the Saints Assembly sing!
Bless Sion! thy Creator, and thy King.

The Dance, and the various conspiring Tone.

The Meek with beauties of Salvation.

And in their Bed lift up their cheerful voice.

A two edged Sword to cut through the Heathen's Bands

Upon their Captive Nobles, and their Kings.

Such Honor, telling them, have All his Saints.
Gloria of two Verses.

Psalm CL.
Laudate Dominum in.
Power and Holiness!
Acts excelling Greatness bless!
Unite each differing Vibration,
From Air, from Strings, and trembling Bodies thrown!
The Trumpet, Harp, and waving Cimbal join!
And let their diffring Tones conspire in One.
living Soul, that Soul unto him raise!
And coin its Breath of Life into his Praise. Amen.
HYMNS Used in the Church Service.
[Te Deum laudamus.]
THEE, O our Ood! we praise; and thee
Confess to be the only Lord.
To bless thy Name, O thou most High!
All the dissenting World accord.
Angels and Heavens joynth' loud Hymn;
And all the high Celestial Powers.
The Cherubim and Seraphim
Thus pass their blessed, Eternal Hours.
" O Holy, Holy Lord most High!
" O Holy God of Sabbath!
" Full of thy glorious Majesty
" All Earth is, and all Heaven is both.
The Apostles add themselves to the Quire,
And all the Prophets, full of Thee,
Thy present Vision does inspire
With Raptures for Eternity.
Triumphant Martyrs bring their Palms,
And Songs, and Crowns of Victory;
And we, thy Militants, our Psalms,
With all thy Church confessing thee.
All Glory to the Majesty on High!
The ever blessing, blessed Trinity.
As in the Beginning was, is now; shall be
When Time shall pass into Eternity,
Gloria of six Verses.
O Holy! Holy! Holy! Lord most High,
Coequal, Coeternal Deity!
Who made us; did Redeem; and do inspire
Our Soul's fallen heat with new Celestial Fire,
We bless thee now, and shall Eternally,
O Holy! Holy! Holy Lord most High!
Gloria of eight Verses.
To God who did create the World's great Frame;
To God by whom lost Man's Redemption came;
To God who Graces sends, God the Holy Ghost,
We now, give Praise, with all the Heavenly Host.
Thy early praises in the Beginning were;
When all the Morning Stars made up the Quire: Job. 38. v. 7.

Thee, all thy Works, Angels and Men adore;
As we do now; and shall do evermore.
Hallelujah.

PSALM I.
To this Tune may be Sang all those Psalms, whose Verses are Five Feet, and
their Stanza Eight Verses

^ BLessings Crown his fair Soul who does not stray,
^ Led by false Councels in the Sinners way.
^ Who has not sat in the proud scorners Seat,
^ Who mock at Piety and God forget;
^ But in Gods Law has set his whole Delight;
^ And makes that Law his study Day and Night
^ He Is like the Fruitful Tree, whose spreading Root,
^ Fed by the living Streams yield timely Fruit.
Mr. MICH. WISE.
PSALM. XIX
To this Tune may be sung any Psalm, whose Verses are Five Feet, and the Stanza
Six Verses.

^ THe Heavens declare a God; The extended Sky
^ tell that their Maker was not less than he.
^ Day without voice tells day, and night tells night.
^ Twisting Time's winding chain of shade and light.
^ What Land's unknown to night, or shuts out day!
^ which part the world, and run divided way.
PSALM LXVII
To this Tune may be Sung any Psalm whose Verses are Five Feet, and its Stanza
Four Verses.

^ BE merciful O God! chase away Night;
^ And bless us with the vision of thy light.
^ That unto all the Earth thy way be known,
^ Thy u -- ni -- ver -- sal glad Sal -- va -- ti -- on.
Mr. Michael Wise.
Those Psalms whose Verses are Four Feet, and their Stanza Four Verses, may be
sung to the usual Tune of the 100 Psalm. Or of this Gloria.

^ TO God the Father, God the Son,
^ and God the Spirit; Glory be,
^ as was when Time its Race begun,
^ and shall be for Eternity.
PSALM XV.
To this Tune may be Sung any Psalm whose Verses are Four Feet, and their
Stanza Six Verses.

^ LOrd who among the Just shall dwell?
^ Or who rest on thy Holy Hill?
^ He, who a guileless Life does lead,
^ And in the paths of Justice tread.
^ In whose firm Soul Truth sets her Throne;
^ Whose Lip's above Detraction.
PSALM XI.
Those Psalms whose Verses are Four Feet, and their Stanza Eight Verses, may be
sung to the known Tunes of the LI. Psalm, or the Lamentation.

^ ANd cannot God Defend?
^ The God in whose Protection I re -- lie;
^ Cannot He succor lend?
^ But like a Bird to the Hills for safe -- ty I must fly.
Mr. MICH. WiSE
PSALM XLVI.
^ O Present still! O still protecting Lord;
^ Who help to thy distressed do afford.
^ What can us fright? should the fixed Laws of the World,
^ Be broke, and Mountains into Seas be hurled.
^ Though Hills through Tempests, rock; Seas overgrow;
^ Over immense Cliffs the vaster Billows flow;
^ 'Midst its own Calm, Sion the Storm derides;
^ Sion the Holy place where God resides.
^ Fear not any mortal Powers!
^ Who can hurt, when God is Ours?
Mr. Michael Wise.
PSALM XXIV.
^
^ All Things all Creatures, and the Sons of men
^
^ Oth' Floods has set; and Firmly stablished.
PSALM XXXII.
^
^ God covers, and his stained Soul makes clean.
^
^ And in whose guiless Soul is found no spot.
PSALM XLIX.
^ who ere ye are,
^
^ One with Another; for All equal be
^ In the great doom Passed on mortality.
PSALM LXVI.
^ different voices raise!
^ And the one only Language, speak of Praise.
^ All! Each his part bear,
^ And in his Glory, join the distant Quire.
See Psalm 67. among the foregoing Tunes.

PSALM XCI.
^
^ May rest secure under the powr'ful shade,
^
^ All my dependence, Lord! and Hope's in Thee.
PSALM XCVI.
^ new Song to God! Let All conspire
^ In his great Praise, and make the World one Quire.
^ continual honor! Let each day
^ His known Salvation to the next conveigh.
PSALM CXXXIII.
^ O Unity! Celestial Unity!
^ Where Good, and Pleasant in one joined be,
^ Where peaceful Brethren do consent in Thee,
^ How blessed to All, is the blessed Harmony.

