THE Batchelor's Directory: BEING A TREATISE OF THE Excellence of Marriage.

Of its necessity, and the means to live happy in it.

Together with an Apology for the Women against the Calumnies of the Men.

Honorabile connubium in omnibus, and torus immaculatus: Fornicatores enim and
Adultores judicabit Deus Heb. c. 13. v. 4. Licensed

April 21. 1694. Edw. Cork.



LONDON: Pr nted for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and Benjamin Bragg, at the White-Hart over against Water-Lane in
Fleet Street, 1694.

To his much esteemd Friend John Meres, Esquire;
SIR,
TO prefix your Name to a piece of so little worth, may argue somewhat of
presumption; but to be entirely wanting in those respects, so much your due, is
a more considerable fault.

It was not without reluctance, that I consented to put this little Treatise
under your safeguard: Not that I questioned the influence of your Name; but
least the slender value of the thing should lead a contempt from you to the
Author.

But then I considered, that although you would certainly discover the meanness
of this attempt, yet you were endued with a sufficient share of goodness, not
to misconceive the honest end; The first opposed my growing inclination to make
you the Patron hereof: the last advised me to go on, as being inconsistent with
censure, or displeasure.

You are engaged, Sir, in an especial manner to the Office of pardoning, as
well upon the account of your distance from our inferior Orb, as in regard to
the fair endowments of your mind: both implying goodness in a conspicuous
degree.

As to my Author, I durst venture to assert, that he has managed himself like a
man of Honesty and Parts, that his arguments are as material and persuasive as
the Subject will bear, and if any thing renders him of less value, it is the ill
performance of the Translation, which, I believe, is made worse by the mistakes
of the Printer.

I can easily foresee, that it will be condemned by the licentious part of the
world, but since the wiser men must infallibly commend the design; I am little
concerned at what the Fop shall declare against it.

It has been always matter of great wonder to me, that men should be for
generally (...) ^^^gracefull (...) Ba^ implying Contumely and Disorder.

But, Sir, least I should be prolix, give the leave to assure you, that this
little Book is presented to you with all imaginable respect by,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Design not, Reader, to tell you all the advantages of this Book. You will
sufficiently discover them, when you read it. I hope you will not find it
altogether unworthy of your esteem, if you judge of it without prejudice. You
will learn in it the art of fearing God, and to be an honest Man; to avoid the
irregularities of a licentious life, and to parctice the virtues of a Christian
life. This is its general aim. And what follows its particular. It endeavors
to inspire you with the love of Marriage. It makes appear that there is nothing
in the World more excellent, or more necessary, than this holy Society. It
opens to you an easy way to enter it advantagiously. It furnishes you with
means to make it an eternal Spring of lawful pleasures, and to partake of them
with so much the more satisfaction, as they are pure and innocent. In a word it
affords you precepts to speak well and to make a true judgment of Ladies; that
is to say, what you naturally love the most, and whom ever the Laws of civility
oblige you to respect.

You will without doubt applaud the usefulness of the design, but the
difficulty of executing it well remain^ I promise (...) pleases you, and yo^
approve (...) the Style! I have endeavored to make my Subject as agreeable as
(...) could, and as little tiresome. To this purpose I have even seasoned my
discourse with diverse sentences of ancient Authors of the World and Church,
Holy and Profane. Never was matter more susceptible of this mixture, than that
of Mar^iage; and it is a Liberty which ^ught to be pardoned me in this ^lace,
though it were not allowable ^n any thing else. The necessity I was under
oftentimes to relate passages, which might in our language offend tender ears,
is one of the forcible reasons that has the most ^bliged me to employ more than
one ^o express my thought. But I can ^ssure those, who are unacquainted with
it, that it renders not the ^eading of this Book the more un^ (...) One may
pass beyond (...) mark one thing more. ^ou will, perhaps, be surprised to see
that I apply to Batchelors alone the necessity of Marrying, as if it r^ferred
only to them, and that Maids had no share in it. But you will apprehend, I
assure my self, without my telling you, so that in speaking to one, I likewise
designe^ to speak to the rest. The two Sexes are under an equal necessity of
Marriage. It is thorefore to both that my exhortations are directed. I confess
notwithstanding that they less agree to the Maids, than Batchelors. Besides
that they are much more docile than these, and tha^ they readily give
themselves up to the direction of their Parents, one o^ my Poets tells me very
agreebly, that when they are of an Age to Marry, their very silence demands a
Husband.

^ilia N^bilis, etsi plane nil loquatur,
Ipso tamen silentio plurimum de se praedicat.
In effect, it is certain that though a Maid never asks to Marry, because she has
modesty, yet there is nothing she desires with greater passion. Her heart in
this respect often contradicting her mouth. She says, I will not, when she is
ready sometimes to dye with desire. It must be confessed likewise that it is
her true state, and that there is no better party for her to take. A single
Woman makes a sad Figure in the world. She wants the shadow of a Husband to
protect her from Misery, Seduction, or Calumny. I have two things more to let
you know. If you find some repetitions in this work, remember that the parts
which compose it, are so connected to one another that it was a hard matter to
avoid them absolutely. Besides if ^here are some, they are in other ^erms, and
diversified in a manner that will render them agreeable to ^ou, instead of
being incommodious. Not to tell you that these would be ^ven worthy of your
support, consi^ering the importance of the Subject. Can one say too often, says
Seneca what can never be know enough? Nunquam nimis dicitur, Sen. Ep. 2^
quod nunquam satis dicitur. The other thing is, that if this Apolog^ of
Marriage occasions you any ple^sure, you must be wholly obliged (...) the
design I had of persuading t^ necessity of it to a Person of No^ whose Merit
and Family I extrea^ly honor. This particular victo^ is the single end I
proposed to (...) self in the composition of this pie^ And how much reason
should I ha^ to bless it, if it was capable of pr^ducing this fruit? What
better r^ward could I desire for the pains has cost me?

Some persons nevertheless ha^ been willing to persuade me, that would be
unjust to confine its wh^ effect to the conquest of one sing^ Man, and that it
might, by runni^ through the world, gain several others to the Empire of Hyme^
Thus I was subdued to the solicitations of making it public, which have been
made to me from diverse places. God grant that I may have no occasion to repent
of it, nor to apply to my Book what Ovid says with lamentation of some of his
Writings.

Hei mihi, quam paucos hac mea dicta movent! Be indulgent, Reader, and forget
not the saying of the ancient Sages, That it is easy to find fault but hard to
excel.

Of the Parts of this BOOK.
PART. I. Of the Excellence of Marriage. page 8. PART. II. Of the Infamy of
Incontinence. page 60. PART. III. Of the Motives that might reasonanably induce
men to Marry. page 83. PART. IV. Where those objections which are made against
Marriage, and the false reasons that are alleged to rest unmarried, are
answered. page 163. PART. V. Of the means to Marry well, and to live happy in
Marriage. page 215.
ADVERTISEMENT.
MIscellanious Letter and Essays, on several Subjects. Philosophical, Moral,
Historica^ Critical, Amorous, etc. (...) Prose and Verse. Directed t^ John
Drayden, Esquire; the Honorable George Granvill, Esquire; Walter Moile, Esquire; Mr.
Dennis, Mr. Congreve, and other Eminent Men of the Age. B^ (...) al Gentlemen
and Ladies ^ed for Benjamen Bragg ^e White-Heart over against ^r-Lane in
Fleet Street.

Of the Excellency of Marriage; of its Necessity, and the means to live happily
in it.
Together with the Apology of the Women against the Calumnies of the Men.
THERE never was a bolder undertaking, than that of this Book. Its design is to
establish an opinion, which all Men oppose, and to disengage them from an Error
which is almost as ancient as the World. We say every day a thousand injurious
things of Marriage. One would have it to be the Sepulcher of Pleasures. Another
looks upon it as a severe Bondage. Even those, who speak of it with most
moderation, cease not to term it a necessary Evil. Behold the error I design to
confute. On the otherside that Marriage is an excellent thing, a happy
condition, and a Society full of sweetness, is what exceeds belief. It is even
ridiculed: and it is notwithstanding the truth, which I propose my self to
persuade. Judge, Sir, what courage is necessary, and what strong assurance one
must have in the justice of his Cause, to be able to prevent a repulse at the
entrance of an attempt, tha^ is apparently so difficult. Is it not here on^ may
truly affirm, Hoc opus, hic labor est?

You know that in effect nothing is more cried down in the World, than
Marriage. People frame to themselves Ideas of it, which cause an abhorrence. I
confess likewise, tha^ it has long served for a subject of detraction. Where is
he that has no merry Tale to relate of it; or to speak better, that has no i^
reason to allege in order to discourage others and to remove himself from it?
How acceptable is this Dilemma of the Philosopher those persons: If thou
Marryest; I suppos^ thy Wife to be either handsome or ugly. If she be ugly,
thou can never love her if handsome thou will be jealous of her Whether one
or the other, can one find ou^ a severer punishment for thee? How agreeable do
they find this precept of another* When thou art young, say that it is too soon
to Marry: when old, that it is too late. How this comparison of Theodectes
please^ them! Marriage and Old Age have this Resemblance, to wit, that Men
equally desire to reach both, where they are no sooner arrived, but they begin
to repent. In a word, with how much satisfaction do they hear that horrid
invective of the most unjust of all men! One passes but two good days with a
Wife, the Wedding Day, and the day of her Death. She is also good but in two
places, Vel in Thalamo, vel in Tumulo, either in her Bridal Bed, or in her
Grave.

As little equity as one may have, can one observe (without passion) such
vilifying of that fair half of Human-kind, to whom it seems as if Nature had
given all her Graces in possession? The very Gods of our Metamorphosis have
been affected with them. They have often preferred the pleasure of being
captivated under the Empire of our Mortal Goddesses, before all the glory of
Olympus. Is it not surprising after this, that Men should affirm so much ill of
them, and that they should oppress their innocence with their injuries? The
contempt which they make of them ought to appear to us so much the more
extraordinary, as they cannot without them enjoy any satisfaction in life. They
might in some measure be able to make a shift without us, bu^ we could ne^e^
excuse our selves from then. If one believes Herodotus, there was Kingdom of
Women without Men, The Amasons.
but there never was se^ a Kingdom of Men without Women.

Even those who are insolent enough t^ blame their defects in public, are
often amorous enough to adore their Charms i^ private, witness he, of whom one
speak^ That ridebat in choro, amabat in thoro.

This false prejudice of the Men again^ the Women, is that which discourage
them so much from Marriage, and wha^ ought likewise to make me despair of the
happy success of my undertaking, if it wa^ not the most reasonable of the
world. But Sir, my cause supports it self. It is no^ a particular one, and of
little consequence As much abandoned as it is, notwithstanding the most general
and important caus^ that ever was, since it is at the sam^ time the cause of
God and Man: of Heaven and Earth: of Nature an^ Grace: of States and Families:
of the Church Militant, and Church Triumphant. May not one affirm, in effect,
tha^ all these different Subjects have an interest equally sensible in
Marriage? Is it not the ordinary Channel to give Chosen Vessels to God,
Faithful ones t^ the Church, Members to the State, Children to Families, and
to people Heaven and Earth with inhabitants? What would become of the World
without Marriage? What would become of all Human-kind? It Is certain that it
would soon be at an end, and with it all our Interests. This consideration
animates my Courage, and makes me even hope, that in spite of the infatuation
of Men, and their bloody Critics against Marriage; God will enable me to
support its sacred rights, and to convince them that in the bottom, this of all
conditions of life is most agreeable to them.

As to what remains, I cannot make the Apology of Marriage without making that
of this lovely Sex, for whom all sensible men ought to have a veneration, since
by relation to Marriage it self, it is the soundest and most considerable part.
I was always pleased to justify the Women against the Calumnies of the Men;
but I propose to my self to do it in this piece after a particular manner. I
owe to them this justice, and methinks no o^ should refuse it them. They
deserve unquestionably much better usage, than the meet with. Is it not
wonderful, tha^ the very Devils should have advocate to plead their Cause as
deplorable as (...) is; and that Women should want the^ to defend theirs, which
is so good? I^ Heaven is propitious to me, and gives (...) favorable answer to
my endeavors, possib^ it will not be a little powerful also t^ triumph over
that opposition, that ha^ been made against Hymen. Behold one o^ my chiefest
ends. You know, Sir, my reasons which make me desire your thought of it, and
the motives which ought t^ dispose you to it for your advantage, an^ the
comfort of your illustrious Family.

That I may observe some order in my discourse, and make the lecture more
agreeable, I shall divide it into five Parts. In the first I will treat of the
Excellency of Marriage: In the second discover the infamy of Incontinence: In
the third examine the motives, which may reasonably dispose men to Marriage. In
the fourth answer the objections they make, and the false reasons they allege
to remain unmarried. And finally, in the fifth part I shall furnish them with
Precepts in order to Marry well, and to live happily in Marriage. Behold
Subjects enough to compose a large Volume, if a Man would exhaust the matter of
them, and treat of them in all their extent: but as I love little Books, and am
naturally disheartened with those that are not so; I shall only insist upon
things necessary and essential to my design, as much as I am able, to the end
that it may not hold you long, and you may soon discover the scope of it.

OF THE EXCELLENCY OF MARRIAGE PART. I.
THAT which is said b^ way of Proverb, Aliud in titulo, aliud in pixide, may
very well be applied to Marriage. One observes one thing in it, but one finds
another exactly different. It is remarked of the Temples of ancient Egypt, that
nothing was more magnificent without, nor more barbarous within. On the other
side we read of the Tabernacle of Moses, that under a mean covering of
Goats-Skins, it contained the Ark of Alliance, the Mercy-Seat, the Altar of
Gold, and a thousand other precious things. This History, and not the other, is
a very plain representation of Marriage. If you consider the outside of it,
what can be more miserable in appearance? One sees nothing but difficulties.
One must please a Wife. One must bring up Children. One must be mindful of a
Family. One must pass through a thousand kinds of proofs. But if you examine
its inward part, what sweetness, what satisfaction, what delight shall you not
discover for Man, since God resides therein, and pours out the influence of his
grace upon it? Nothing in nature can represent to us the felicity of a Marriage
blessed of Heaven, and possessed of the peace of the Holy-Spirit.

I confess likewise that Marriage, as well all other humane conditions, is a
composition of Good and Evil, of Sweets and Bitters, of Joy and Sorrow: it is
not exempt from disgraces. It has its Thorns, and it (...) Tribulations: One
may affirm it, 'ti^ true, In eadem urna, auru^ est, Sen. Ep. 87.
and vipera. But fir^ of all, Sir, where is tha^ condit^on of Man, as I have
said, tha^ is exempted from it? there is no on^ but must consent to this.

Nihil est ex omni part beatum. Ho^t. l. 2. Carm. od. 16.


There is no state entirely happy.

As happy as he may be, he alway^ wants many things in o^der to his being
perfectly Non Miser. Ci^. 1. Tuscul


The life of Man, according to Jo^ is a train of continual War, an^ Moses
informs us, that the fairest o^ his days is a sort of punishmen^ Put him in
what situation you please he will never be entirely comp sed He will always
complain: He man torment himself long enough to procure a real happiness; but
he will never find it in this world. Whatsoever care he may take to avoid the
troubles of life, he will be oppressed with them in spite of all his
precautions. Afflictions will proceed to ^im out of his own repose, and crosses
from the very source of pleasures; as Lucretius* so well observes.

-- Medio de font le^ porum
Surgit amari aliquid, Lucr. lib. 4.
quod in ipsis floribus angat.
I say in the second place, that Marriage is that of all the conditions of Man,
the most proper to support crosses. A Batchelour cannot share them with any
body: He must foment and digest them all entire in his own breast. It is in
this prospect, that the Wise Man pronounces unhappiness to him that is alone.
If he falls down, says he, who shall raise him up? I add, if he be afflicted;
who shall comfort him? If he be indisposed, who shall take care of him? If his
heart be charged with what is called gravamen mentis, who shall give him ^ase?
Whom shall he entrust with the secret of his grief? In what Bosom shall he pour
forth his sighs? One says that a good thing possessed alone, Sen. Ep. 6.
is not agreeable. Nullius boni sine socio jucunda possessio est. But what is
all more afflicting, than to be unable t^ divide ones sufferings, with one tha^
is concerned in them, and that help you to support them?

It is directly otherwise of a Married Man. He has an assistant. H^ has a
companion. He has another self, that enters into his heart; tha^ partakes of
all that happens to him that is touched with all his disasters and does all
that lies in her power t^ sweeten his mind. S^ Spiritus illjus in meo ver^ I
know said Seneca of h^ Paulina, Sen. Ep. 104.
that her Spirit move in mine. The Wife is to an afflic^ed Husband, the most
comfortabl^ thing of the world, she averts the trouble of mind, and rebates
ange^ Vxor marito, in malis aut morbis affect^ suavissima est. Iram mitigat,
and a tr^stitia animum avertit. There is nothin^ that comes near to the
assistance h^ receives from her in the most trouble some occasions of life.

In a word, when I speak of the excellence of Marriage, I pretend t^ consider
it as it is in it self; an^ not as it may be in its consequences. One must
distinguish between what is proper to it, and what is accidental. By nature it
has nothing but what is good, and may render a man happy. But if it becomes
fatal to him, and he finds in it nothing but Thorns, it is through his own
fault; Marriage it self is free from that guilt. It is not impossible, if he
will, to make of it a source of pleasures to himself, and to make it serve
advantagiously to the greatest of his interests, which is Salvation, as I will
demonstrate in the latter parts of this work.

To understand this well, one must consider Marriage in a threefold relation.
In relation to God, who is the Author of it. In relation to Man, for whom it
was instituted; and in relation to the World, to which it is a perpetual
principle of subsistence. In these three respects one may say that there is
nothing in nature of more excellence than Marriage.

It is then from God, and immediately from God, that this holy Society draws
its original. He had no sooner taken Man from nothing, b^ he took out of Man
the Woman for the sake of Man. Scarce had he cr^ated him, but he thought to
marr^ him. It is not good, sa^ he, Genesis 2.18.
for Man to be alon^ Let us make him a^ assistant, that may be like him: Thu^
he formed an Eve to Adam, from Adam himself, which is not without mystery. Then
he pronounced their words which are of an eternal obligation to all men. Man
shall lea^ his Father and his Mother and stick (...) his Wife, and they shall
be two in o^ flesh. Behold, Sir, the Institution o^ Marriage, which is, you
see, as ancient as the world. One can observ^ nothing since the Creation, that
ha^ preceeded it. It was the first car^ that God took after this great
Master-peice, so necessary did he estee^ it. It even seems to be in some
measure a part of it, and that without it, it had been imperfect. You Will sa^
that it was a quality, which Man wanted for his perfection, and tha^ without it
he had been unworthy to obtain an Empire over those creatures, which the
Creator gave him. (...) was perhaps for this reason that the Jews termed a
Batchelour, but ^alf a man.

How many Laws and humane Institutions are there, which one esteems not only
for themselves, but also for the sake of their Authors? who will not
acknowledge that it was a great happiness for Philosophy, to have been taught
by Aristotle? And that the So^rates's and C^to's have done as much honor to
Wisdom, as Wisdom has done them? who does not know likewise that the Order of
Knighthood so famous among Christians is of it self a very small matter, and
that it draws almost all its Dignity from the very institution of Kings, who
had a mind thereby to make a mark of distinction between the Lords of their
Court?

Upon this foot one may affirm that Marriage is a very considerable thing.
There is here more than Aristotle, more than Socrates, more than Cato, more
than a mortal King, more than Moses himself the Author of the Law; ^n a word,
more than all the Legislators together. Its Institutor is G^ himself; that is
to say the Master the world; the Lord of Heaven a^ Earth; the King of Ages, and
^ther of Eternity; Yes, Sir, Marri^ is his production; It is the bre^ of his
mouth; It is the work of (...) hands. It is the character of his A^thority. If
the institution of Je^ Christ, as well as the thing it se^ makes us find in
Baptism, and in t^ Eucharist, a supernatural excellenc^ how should one be
wanting in M^riage by relation to the instituti^ of God? Behold then, Sir, the
fi^ degree of its excellence. viz. T^ it is of right divine. That it is (...)
universal right. That it is of pe^petual right. God has ordained (...) God has
established it. And he (...) ordained it for all men, and for (...) times. It is
not good for Man to (...) alone. Let him forsake his Father a^ Mother, and join
himself to a Wife That not only relates to Adam, b^ to all his posterity to the
end (...) the world. What can be more S^cred than this Law? 'twas God the made
it. What can be more exte^sive? it regards all humankind. What ^n be more
durable? It ought to continue during the Revolution of all ^ges.

I introduce into the excellence of ^arriage, that God has instituted it (...)
the state of Innocence, and in the Terrestrial Paradise. In effect, methinks
these two particulars should extremely advance the price of it. Undoubtedly
there was nothing in that happy condition, wherein God had placed our first
Parents, but what was very good, and participated of the purity of their
original: They carried at that time, upon their Foreheads the glorious Stamps
of their Creator. Sin had not yet defaced in them that curious Image of
himself, which he had communicated to them. Holy, and without defects, they
enjoyed a perfect felicity. All things conspired to their happiness. Who can
disagree then, that the Marriage whereof they were at this time in possession;
was in it self, and of its nature an excellent thing.

Is it not also the consequenc^ which follows from that place of d^lights,
wherein it was establishe^ When God gave his Laws to his People, he descended
upon Sinai, when with testimonies of his Majesty in^^nitely glorious, he made
his voi^^ known to Moses, and pronounced (...) those divine Words, which
inspi^^ veneration and fear. Those terrib^^ preparations wherein God appear^ to
the Jews, that sounding of Tru^pets, those flashes of Lightning, a^^ claps of
Thunder, which overwhelm^ the holy Mountain; which gave ^stonishment to Moses
himself; a^^ which made the Israelites to cry o^ We shall dye: for we have seen
G^^^ All this, I say, must without dou^^ contribute much to their receivi^^
with veneration the Celestial Law They might reasonably infer, the what should
be directed to them from a place crowned with so much gl^ry and magnificence
must be divine.

What opinion likewise should (...) not have of Marriage, when we s^^ it
proceed from a bed of Innocenc^ and a Paradise of delights? As ho^^ and august
as Sinai was at the Pub^^^ation of the Law, yet I dare affirm ^^at it was
nothing in comparison of ^^at Garden of God, when he inst^tuted Marriage
therein. It was of ^^at one might truly say, Introite, ^^m and hic Dij sunt.
God was in (...) God walked therein. God made (...) (that I may so speak) his
habi^^tion of pleasure. God familiarly ^^^kt with Man therein. There was
nothing, but what inspired satisfacti^^. The Rivers wherewith it was
^^cessantly watered, were as so many ^^rrents of delights. All the Ele^ents
concurred to render it agree^^le. It was not yet subject to the ^^regularities
of Seasons; the frosts of Winter, and heats of Summer, were never perceived
there. It was ^^owned with a perpetual Spring. (...) a word there was nothing
there, ^^t what was proportioned to the perfection of their being, and the
purity of their original; nothing, but that exactly agreed with the happy
^ondition of innocent Man. Nathaniel ^^id to Philip, through a false
prepossession against Jesus Christ: Can (...) thing that is good come out of
Nazaret^ Let us say on the other side, can any thing that is bad come out of
P^radise? We often judge of the qu^lity of things, and likewise of m^ by the
places from whence they com^ It should be good; as we say (...) Fruit: for it
comes from a go^ Soil. He must needs deserve, we (...) of a person, whom we
know only by his Family and Education, (...) he belongs to people of merit.
(...) is of Noble Blood. He comes from a good place. And what should (...) not
say of Marriage, that it must (...) of singular excellency, since we (...) it
comes from the Center of pl^sures; from the Eden of God, a^ from God himself.

Let us consider it, in the seco^ place, with relation to Man for who^ it was
instituted. In morality o^ calls that a good, which agrees w^ our nature, and
is proportioned (...) the condition we are in. Accordi^ to this definition,
Marriage ought (...) be a considerable good. What can b^ter agree with man and
more exac^ relate to his necessities?

Man was made for Society. He (...) called by some an animal of compa^. He
cannot live alone. Even those ^^^o repair to solitude, repair to it ^^th
others: without that they would not survive it long. There are but (...) of
those Hermits who enclose t^^mselves alive in a Cave, as in a ^^^eous
Sepulcher, to be deprived of (...) sort of conversation. I am even (...)
opinion that the Chartreux would s^^n be weary of their condition, as h^^y, and
as much esteemed as it is, (...) they had not the liberty of being ^^^n of
their friends, and of conversing ^^th them sometimes in a week.

There are but few who can practice ^^^t instruction: (...) solis sis tibi
turba lociis. Lib. 1. Polit.

(...) Company to thy Self in Solitude.


One must be Angel, or Brute, (...) live alone, says Aristo^^^ Natura
Solitarium ^^il amat. Cicer. lib. de Amicit.
Nature loves (...) Solitude, says Cicero ^^^ewise. This Law of the Creator is
general for all men, It is not goo^ for Man to be alone, that is to say It is
good for him to live in Company, and to enjoy Society.

But, Sir, of all Societies, that of i^ Woman is undoubtedly what Man desires
with most ardency. Nature ha^ given him. I know not what inclination to join
himself with that object, which makes him turn toward it all his thoughts, from
the momen^ he discerns the ^use for which he wa^ made. It has been said, long
since, Tha^ life is no value without Women.

Sine venere vita non est, nec jucundita There Is no life nor pleasure with
Love. Nothing is more agreeable than thi^ mixture of the two Sexes, and ther^
wants no very great Reason to convince Man, that one was really mad^ for the
other.

Those, who have the least propensity to Marriage, do not fail t^ love Women.
Oftentimes they ar^ even most enflamed, and would estee^ their condition to
come behind tha^ o^ Beasts, if they were deprived of t^^ir sight and
conversation. After h^^ing said much ill of them, they are constrained to
acknowledge that it is an evil which one cannot be without, and that the
privation of th^s evil would be an evil incomparably greater. Mulieres sunt
malum, se^ tamen O cives! Non licet habitare h^^ sine malo. Women are an evil,
but such an evil, O Citi^ens! that w^^ cannot live without. How excellent a
thing then is Marriage, that gives to Man a Woman; that is to say, somewhat he
covets more than all the Gold of the world, and without the enjoyment of which,
all the rest would be almost insupportable? How is it proportion d to his
necessities? How is it conformable to his to his natural circumstance?

This also very clearly proves the v^hement desire Man is affected with (...)
increase his kind, and to leave ^er him a posterity, conformable to ^^s order
of the Creator. Increase and ^^ltiply, which is the principal end of ^^rriage.
I know there is an infinite ^^mber of persons who would marry if on the
otherside they were assure of not multiplying. A Wife is onl^ dear to them in
that she is barren.

Jucundum and char^^ sterilis facit uxor amic^^ Juvenal. sat 5.
A Barren Wife mak^ our friend pleasant and intimate.

But be it as it will, pure and direct nature is desirous of a successo^ Let
Cato say as long as he please, (...) mundus carere posset liberis conversat
nostra non esset sine Dijs: If the wo^ could be without Children we shou^
converse with the Gods. Good men a^ways return to this, That Conjugi^ sine
prole est mundus sine sole. The Marriage without Children is like (...) a world
without a Sun. Children a^ undoubtedly the most legitimate an^ agreeable fruits
of Marriage. It (...) the principal thing that Men of reason propose to
themselves: And (...) consequence the institution that G^ has made of it to
favor that vi^lent inclination which has cost many tears to barren Wives, and
u^fruitful Husbands, must needs pass f^ super-excellent.

Shall I enlarge yet, that Marriage i^ to Man, both an excellent remed^ to cure
him of his Incontinence, (...) an admirable means to ease him (...) his
domestic cares? Who is ig^^rant that Man was born for one ^^^ng, and the Woman
for another? t^^t there are a thousand sorts of cares s^^table to a Woman, and
by no means ^^^ent for a Man? who knows not t^^t the Man is subject to an
infinite number of accidents and distempers? ^^at in these occasions no body is
^^tter assistance to him than a Wife? ^^en as another Author says, she is
^^^ther a Burden nor a Cross, but (...) the contrary she wonderfully ea^ from
the shoulders of the Man (...) weightiest crosses, and most op^^^ssing burdens.
Nec ^m per jovem uxor onus, (...) molestia est: Hierocl. apud Stobaeum. Brm.
186.
Sed con^ facillime ac sine negotio ^ri potest, una res mole^ and pergraves
ipsa le^. Who is not sensible that man often inflamed with that fire, which
Father of the Church calls Cupidi^incendium, the fire of Concupiscence, and of
which St. Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.^
That it were better to marry, than burn. In a word, who does not know that
(...) can never lawfully extinguish this fir^ but in the bosom of his Spouse,
a^ in drinking the wate^ of her Cistern, Prove. 5.15.
To spe^ with the wise man How excellent is Marriage in (...) these respects?
How advantagio^ for man?

It is no less, Sir, with relation (...) the world. Without it one may ^firm
one of these two things, eith^ that the Creature had been depriv^ of its end,
which was to multip^ in infinitum the individuals of h^mane-kind; or else if
that had be^ accomplished, it could only have be^ by ways indirect, unjust,
violent, a^ criminal: which would have broug^ the world into confusion, and
m^king it the Threater of all sorts (...) immodesty, disorders, and
abomina^ons. Marriage produces that goo^ and prevents this evil. It answe^ the
end proposed by God, and sa^ the world from ruin. It peop^ (...) earth with
inhabitants, and keeps (...) amongst them wisdom and mo^^^ty. It gives, to each
Sex its le^^^imate use, and is a bridle to their ^emperance, securing virtue
from (...) insults, and violence.

After all this should one admire, ^^t in all well regulated States such
^^^^nite care has been taken to cause a^ exact observation of Marriage? ^s it a
wonder, that in the Republic of Lycurgus, the haters of it should (...)
excluded from public sports, Spe^^^cles, and entertainments? Can one (...)
surprised, that in the Common^^alth of Plato, Batchelors of 35 ^^^rs were
accounted infamous? In (...) lord, it is miraculous that in all ^es, and even
amongst the barba^^^s Nations, a particular deference (...) been paid to
married men, and ^^^t Marriage has been much more ^^eemed than Celibacy? It is,
Sir, (...) foundation of the world, and the ^^^xhaustable source of Families.
It Is ^^^t which gives Citizens to Cities, ^^^abitants to Provinces, and
Subjects (...) Kingdoms. It Is that which af^^^ds Kings to People, and People to
Kings: It Is that which furni^ the Country with Laborers, the T^bunals with
Judges, the Churches w^ Preachers, and the Armies with So^diers. It Is that
which has produ^ Heroes on Earth, and Gods in H^ven. Poets have married Gods,
(...) well as Men. Saturn had his Ceb^ and Jupiter his Juno, both which h^
been Mothers of several of those f^ Divinities, which Pagan antiquity f^merly
adored. In a word, it is M^riage that gives life to Arts and S^ences; That keeps
up Traffic; T^ maintains Societies, and to which owing the greatest part of
those wh^ some Laws and prudent Disciplin^ without which the world would (...)
but a Cavern of Thieves. Can it (...) too much esteemed after this? A^ needs
there any more to prove, t^ nothing is better, or more exc^lent, if you except,
a real con^nence?

Yes, Sir, there is required more for one may make appear that it such in a
manner yet more conv^cingly. You will be satisfied of (...) if you consider it
with me, Fi^ ^he bond of the most perfect, most ^et, and most wholesome of all
hu^ ^e conjunctions. And Secondly, (...) ^he exercise of the most lawful, ^^st
agreeable, and most absolute au^^^rity of the world.

Nothing unquestionably is more ^^^fect than this union, in respect (...) its
subject, to its end, and to its ^^nner. Marriage unites Man and ^oman; that is
to say, what there (...) of most excellent, and most perfect (...) the
corporeal nature: what resem^^^s ^s in it self all the Beautys of this ^^eat
Universe: what alone is of ^^re value, than all the other Crea^^es together. In
fine, what by the ^^derstanding and reason, with which (...) is endowed to the
exclusion of (...) other Creatures, has merited ^^e glorious name of the Image
of ^od.

What do you imagine to be the ^^st part of this subject? It is a ^elestial
Soul: It is an immortal spirit, an angelical and immaterial ^^bstance. It is a
being, that partakes (...) some sort of that of God himself. ^eneca goes yet
further. When he considers its excellency, he will have it to be God himself,
who, that a^ I may say, is come to lodge within our bodies. Quid aliud voces
animan nisi, Deum in humano corpore hospitem. Sen. Ep. 32.
It Is tha^ makes St. Austin say (...) That after God, nothing is bette^ than
the Soul, Anima post Deum nihil melius.

As to the Body, which is the other part that Marriage unites it the Man and
woman, we may affirm that as miserable as it is in relation to its substance,
and to the various accidents to which it is subject, it is notwithstanding the
most perfect and most excellent work of Nature, in respect of its composition;
which, as the Psalmist so ellegantly asserts, is all embroadery: of its aim,
which is to serve as an organ to the Soul, and to be as it were its Ornament,
Corpus est vestimentum animae, says, St. Chrysostom, The Body is the Garment of
the Soul; and in a word of its use, which is to be employed in the most noble,
most necessary, and most important actions of life.

Behold then the first perfection of ^^raiage: viz. That it unites Bo^^^s and
Souls; that it joins toge^^^r the two finest Creatures in the ^orld; That it
is a composition that i^ most rare and precious in the es^^^ce of things. This
kind of Union (...) seen no where else, nor in any other subject. The
Conjunction of the Stars is a Union purely corpor^al, the Copulation of Beasts
is a Union purely carnal. Fornication is a Union of Body without Soul: And
Friendship, as strong as it may be betwixt two friends, is notwithstanding but
a U ion of Souls without Body. There is nothing but Marriage, that truly unites
Bodies and Souls togather.

Its second perfection consists in its and; which according to nature is to
multiply men: according to grace is to increase the number of the Elect: and
according to Nature and Grace to retain the Sexes in the ^ounds of Wisdom,
Modesty, and Honesty, in removing the disorders of debauchery. What can be more
worthy of God and Man, than this End?

I say, in the last place, that t^^ manner of this Union likewise mak^ up one
of its beauties. Marriage dot^ not only join the Bodies, it also ^nites the
Souls. It Is much, I confess but there is still something incomparably greater.
It not only unit^ Bodies and Souls, but O surprisin^ wonder! of two Bodies and
tw^ Souls, it makes one and the sam^ Person. Man and Wife, says Jes^ Christ,
are no more two, but one fles^ Aristotle affirms of a real friendship that it
is a soul which inhabits (...) two Bodies. But the union of Marr^age is still
much more intimate. The^ are no more two Bodies, but one single Body, no more
two Souls, but on^ single Soul. They are no longer tw^ Bodies tied to one Soul:
No longer two Souls confounded in one Body. It Is a something, I know no^ what,
which is not absolutely one o^ the other, but is more than both, and cannot be
expressed.

Possibly the Comic Poet thought of nothing less than to represent to us the
wonder of this Union, when he made the diverting piece of his (...) ^nphytrion.
It is notwithstanding that he does after the most natu^^^ way imaginable in the
Scene of ^^e two Sofias. He makes them to (...) of so perfect a resemblance,
that ^^ey look upon one another as one ^^d the same person. They are not (...)
all distinguishable. They are two (...) number, yet but one in action and
^ovement. They always speak by I, and not by We. They do not say, ^ou art
there, and I am here; but I am there, I am here. Plautus expresses (...) in his
Language with an emphasis ^e cannot render in ours. What you would persuade me
no body ever heard says Amphytrion to Sosia, that one man should be at the same
time in two different places.

Nemo unquam homo antehac Plaut Amphyt. Act 2. Sc. 1.

Vidit, nec potest fieri tempore uno
Homo idem duobus locis ut simul sit.
"By what inconceiveable art could it be that thou wast at the same moment here
and in the House.

Quo id malum pacto potest
Fieri, nunc uti tu hic sis and Domi, id ^ci volo.
You may well be astonished (...) what I have told you, replies Sosi^ but it is
a manifest truth.

Sum profecto and hic and illic. I am both here and there. Nothing, I confess,
is more The ^tral than these ways of speakin^ but it must be granted also that
n^thing better explains the nature (...) this strict union that Marriage mak^
There are no words that can exa^ly represent it. One ought for the end to
compose a new Gramm^ One cannot speak of it but in maki^ Solecisms, and in
confounding t^ plural with the singular, and the si^gular with the plural. They
are (...) more two, but one flesh, says G^ himself of Man and Woman. The are
one in two persons. They a^ but one person in two bodies. A^ mae duae, two
Souls. Animus unus, o^ mind. Idem Velle, idem nolle, and one ^ill. There
happens nothing to one, ^t what arrives to the other. The ^usband and the Wife
feel the same ^ings. They suffer the same evils. ^hey enjoy the same good
things. ^rief and joy make the same im^^essions in each of them. Morbo de^^etur
unus? Detinentur duo. Adversa p^^munt unum? Sensus in utroque est, u^^umque
risus, utrumque lachrymae. Pros^^^a laetaque tenent unum? tenent u^^umque As
the Phylopher so well ^^presses in Seneca* The same distempers ^^d misfortunes
reach both. If one laugh so ^^th the other, their tears are the same, etc.

This is too strong for a simple ^^endship: Such a one as this never ^^peared.
Or if such a one has been ^^und, one must necessarily suppose (...) to be more
than a union of Spi^^^s. You know that another was ^^actised frequently enough
amongst ^^e Pagans, which might much con^^^bute to the making of such friends,
^^t which is so scandalous to nature, ^^at you must be contented to read (...)
in the first Chapter of St. Paul to ^^e Romans, without hearing it named.

But, Sir, if you would be perfectl^ convinced that there is nothing in nature
more excellent than Marriage, you are only to look upon it with relation to the
great mysteries it represents. The holy Spirit has mad^ use of in a thousand
places in our Divine Scriptures to testify to us the tenderness of the Father
under the Law; and of the charity of the So^ under the Gospel. I wi^ espouse
thee to me for ever. Hosea. 2.
I will espouse thee t^ me in justice, in judgment, in mercy, an^ in
compassion. I will espouse thee with constancy, and thou shall call me thy
Husband, said God himself to his ancient Israel. I have appropriated you, 2.
Cor. 11. Ephesians. 5.23.32.
said also St. Paul to the new People, to one single Husband to present you as
a chaste Virgin, to Jesus Christ. Besides the Church is called the Body of
Christ, and the Spouse of the Lamb, the Song of Songs is nothing else but the
Epithalamium of this Divine Marriage. Thus God was Married with the Jewish
Church. Jesus Christ is also Married with the Christian Church. It Is thus the
Sacred Authors represent to us that intimate ^nion of the Faithful with the
Divinity, and Flesh of Christ. It Is thus ^hey insinuate to us that profoundness
of love we find in his heart. It Is thus they instruct us how dear we are to him
and it, as we ought to make our interests of his, so he never fails to make
ours his own.

The ancient Doctors have carried yet further, the perfection of Marriage, when
they considered it as the natural Image of the Hypostatick union of the two
Natures in Christ. One must acknowledge in effect that nothing discovers to us
better the bottom of this adorable mystery. As we have seen, of one Man and one
Woman Marriage makes but one and the same person: they are no more two, but one
flesh. From thence proceeds this reasoning of St. Paul, that he who loves his
Wife loves himself. The Son of God being also united to our Flesh, is become
the Son of Man. He does not think it a point of usurpation to make himself
equal to God, and notwithstanding in uniting himself to us by the Incarnation,
he is become flesh of ou^ flesh, and bone of our bone. By the incomprehensible
force of this unio^ he has ceased to be simply God, neither is he become simply
Man. He has reunited in one and the same person those two opposite Natures,
which make him to be our Emanuel. God with us. He is not only Man, he is
Man-God. He is not only God, he is God-Man: but as in Marriage, the union which
is made, as intimate as it is, yet destroys not the substance of the two
parties which compose it, each preserving its own with its essential qualities:
So the Hypostatick union of the two Natures in Christ confounds them not. The
one is not absolved by the other. They both subsist in him after a distinct and
inexpressible manner, without any alteration of their essential qualities. Do
not imagine with the Nestorians two persons; there is but one. Do not fancy to
your self with the Eutichians a single Nature: there are two.

In a word, the Ancients affirm of Marriage, that it is the Symbol of the ^nion
of regenerate Souls with God. They are all in him, and he in all them. As he
who joins himself to (...) Wife, becomes one and the same ^ody with her: So,
says ^t. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. John 17.21.
He who is joyn^d to the Lord, is made ^ne and the same Spirit with him. It is
by the efficacy of this mystical union that Jesus Christ said of the whole body
of his ^elect, Gal. 2.20.
That they are but one with him, and with his Father; That his Apostle says, He
lives no more, but that it is Jesus Christ who lives in him; And that the holy
Spouse says, That her well-beloved appertains to her, Cant. 2.16.
and she to her well-beloved. It is the divine Love that is the efficient cause
of this mystical union. It Is that which produces in us this holy metamorphosis.
It Is that which transforms us into God himself. Solus amor est, quo convirtimur
ad Deum, transformamur in Deum, ad haeremus Deo, ut simus, unus Spiritus cum
eo, Said a learned man, It Is love alone by which we are turned to God,
transformed into God, we stick to God that we may be one Spirit with him. O
Love! that always burns, and is never extinguished! Inflame me all over with
thy fire, to the end, that being consumed by the sweet flames of thy affection,
I may be never sensible of any other love, said also the same holy Soul. How
much, I beseech you, ought one to determine in all these prospects for the
perfection and excellency of Marriage?

All other Societies are transitory unfertile, made up of nothing; or of a pure
temporal interest. This of Marriage is only eternal. Death it self, that puts
an end to all, does not always conclude this, because it does not only unite
the Bodies: It unites also the Souls.

Trajicit and fati littora magnus amor. Propert. lib. 1. Eleg. 19 Sen. Agam.
Act. 2.

Amor jugalis vincit, ac flectit retro.
It is likewise very fertile, and the fruits which it produces are more
precious than all the Gold of the Indies. Thy Wife, says the Prophet, shall be
in thy House, as (...) Vine abounding in fruits; Psalm. 128.3.
and thy Children like O^^ve branches round about thy table. In (...) word, as
I have already said, nothing is more disinteressed than the love of a Wife. She
loves her Hus^and for the sake of himself, and because she is easily persuaded
that in ^is respect nothing ought to appear ^ore aimable to her.

To know its whole extent, and how ^ar it goes, you need only to read ^he Song
of Songs in the Bible: There ^ou will perceive the Air, and dis^over the
secrets of a certain plea^ure which charms the heart, and ^ransports the Soul
in spite of it ^elf. It is filled with expressions so ^ender, and figures so
effecting, that ^ne must be harder than a Rock not ^o be wrought upon
therewith. I (...) now very well, that the principal ^esign of the Holy Spirit,
that di^tated to Solomon, was to represent ^o us the flames of the Divine Love,
and the mystical union of Christ and ^is Church. But we can never be ^ble to
frame to our selves the excellency thereof, unless we suppos^ the same things
in the conjugal union, since the one is employed there in as the lively Image
of the other This being so, it is impossible to express the sweetness and
satisfaction of a happy Marriage. This wise Kin^ speaks to us of it in such
magnifice^ terms, and exposes to our eyes a^ its delights in so pleasant a
manne^ that one is transported almost out (...) himself. One talks of nothing
the^ but of my Love, my particular Frien^ my Dove, my perfect one, my Siste^ my
Spouse, of surfeiting with Lov^ of Myrrh, of Aloes, of Aromati^ smells; of
passing the day with h^ well-beloved under the shade of Palm Trees, and amidst
the flowers of Pom^granets: and the night, on the boso^ and between the breasts
of the faire^ amongst Women. All this, it is tru^ ought to exalt our minds above
the objects of the senses, and to put before our eyes the ineffable sweetne^ of
our Communion with Jesus Christ the real Spouse of our souls: Bu^ who does not
see yet further, tha^ man ought to find in the union of Marriage well near the
same pleasures ^^at the faithful discover in their u^^on with God: since the
first is as (...) were the Plan and Model of the ^^^ond, and that the pleasures
of the ^^^ond cannot be real, if the pleasure (...) the first is not so?

In fine, I add that nothing is more ^holsome than this union. Marriage (...)
of it felf the undoubted way to ^^radise. If an infinite number of ^^rsons go
astray, and make it the ^^y of Hell, it is because they practice ^^t its pure
maxims, and remove ^^emselves from the ends which it ^^oposes. God has
instituted it to be (...) excellent remedy for Man against ^^continence; and by
consequence to ^^ntribute wonderfully to his Salva^^^n, by carrying him to
Wisdom and ^^nctity. He likewise designed it for ^^m to be a perpetual means of
in^^easing his virtues. One has a Wife. ^^e has a Husband. They must be ^^ved:
They must be supported: And (...) spite of their proper infirmities, ^^ey must
make it a continual joy to ^^ssess one another, by a love of ^^mplaisance which
appears in no other Society. One has Children, they must be instructed. One
must labor to make them good in their kinds. They must have examples of
goodness. One must instill into their minds wholesome principles. In a word, one
must endeavor to save them. Can one afford them for their Salvation the cares
which Nature and Grace require, without taking some for ones own? One has
troubles: One has displeasures: One has tribulations: Alas! who has not?

O quam dura premit miseros conditio vitae! Cornel. Gall. ^leg. 2.
O! how hard a state of life oppresses the miserable One must digest them in
patience: One must receive them with humility from the hand which dispences
them: One must recollect all the motions of real faith and hope to avoid being
overwhelmed with their weight, and to discern through all these miseries, that
hand of God who delivers when it is time, and who by an adorable dispensation
oftentimes makes of them in a Christian Marriage a source of Benediction and
Grace: as they are one of Salvation and Sanctification.

It is, Sir, with the virtue of a Batchelour, and that of a married Man, as
with avarice and liberality. This requires nothing but communication. That has
nothing for its aim but restriction. One has the hand always open, because it
loves to diffuse it self, and the other has it always shut, because it has no
pleasure in gifts. The virtue of Celibacy with the men of this world is a dead
virtue, that is of no use, nor profits any body. Which made Tertullian say very
eloquently, Malo nullum bonum quam vanum. Tertull. lib. 1. de pud.
Quid prodest esse, quod esse non prodest? It is an idle, barren, particular
virtue, and which terminates in the sole subject, to which it is fastened. In a
word it is a virtue of a carnal temparament or prudence, which has nothing of
nobleness in it self, and which, if one examines it near, will appear to be
founded upon the motives of a soft delicacy.

The virtue of Marriage on the otherside, is a living and fructifying virtue.
It is a productive virtue which tends only to multiplication It is a public
virtue. It is a virtu^ of example, Omnibus patet. It is (...) virtue of choice
and election. It i^ a virtue of force and victory, and i^ only so upon the
account of the great difficulties it has to engage with. Virtus dum patitur
vincit, as a Poet says Virtue whilst it suffers conquers.

Certamen aufer ne quidem virtus erit. Without opposition and engaging their
would be no virtue. In a word, it is a virtue of usefulness and profitable to
all the world. There is none perhaps but this, to which one may justly apply
these two verses of Sententious Horace.

Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque. Hor. Ep. l. 1. Ep. 1.


Aeque neglectum pueris senibusque nocebit.

It Is equally advantageous to the poor and rich.

And the neglect of it brings equal damage to Boys and Old Men.

After having shown you the excel^ency of Marriage with relation to the
^dvantage of its union, it is not un^t to make it appear to you with ^elation
to the authority it confers. By nature we love to rule, and to be ^uperior. The
design of making themselves equal to God, is what de^troy'd our first Parents.
One finds nothing so sweet as the power of commanding others, and of being
obeyed. The Sacred Author lets us know that the very Apostles dispu^ed
concerning precedence. It is cer^ain that this Spirit of pre-eminence ^s born
with us: and one may say that it is perhaps the first of our ^nclinations. How
much then ought Men to esteem Marriage, since it satisfies it in so agreeable a
manner?

In effect, all cannot be Kings in a Monarchy. Dukes in an Aristocracy. States
and Lords in a Democracy. Heaven bestows this hono^ but on a few. Yet these for
the mo^ part marry, and are in a right t^ hope for Children. Thus, Sir, of a^
humane dominions, the paternal is undoubtedly most ancient and legitimat^ It Is
even that which has served as foundation to all others.

Methinks there is not enough observance of this Sovereign authorit^ of Fathers
over their Children. The^ is not perhaps any thing in nature so pleasant, or so
admirable: Wha^ delight to see this people of free will, subjected to your
wills: Alway^ disposed to obey you: always zealou^ for your service: always
interesse^ for whatsoever has relation to yo^ Do you speak? they reply to you
Do you not speak? they remain i^ silence. Do you blame? they are submissive. Do
you command? they ar^ full of joy. Do you give directions they obey. Do you
prohibit? they abstain. Do you make appear to them an angry countenance? they
trembl^ and are frightened. Do you discover one of good humor and love? yo^
fill them with contentment. In ^ word, you do even what you please ^ongst them.
You are the Master (...) their good and evil destiny. With^t ever demanding of
you the rea^ns of your conduct in their respect, ^ey suppose it always full of
wisdom, ^d they take a pride in a blind sub^ssion to it. As they are satisfied
^u can never do any thing to their ^ejudice, and that all your aim is but (...)
procure their good: so they ne^ undertaking any thing against ^u, but on the
other side they ef^t all they can to give you a testi^ony of their respect,
their zeal, and ^knowledgment. In fine, there ne^r was an authority more
agreea^e, or more absolute than this. It (...) to a Father that this Verse of
Ju^nal perfectly agrees, in relation to (...) Children.

^oc volo, sic jubeo. Sit pro ^ratione voluntas. Juv. Sat. 6.
^his I will, this I command, my Will is my Reason. There is nothing that comes
never to the Divinity, than this. A^ it is principally in this regard, the it
is the lively image of it.

Nobis parents sunt Deorum im^nes. Our Parents are as the Images (...) the
Gods. You will allege perhaps that t^ great number of Subjects which man the
felicity of other Governments, (...) the misfortune of this, because it m^
needs be that all Children are (...) of the character I represent the^ How many
does one fee, that (...) would swear they were born o^ to be a perpetual
torment to the Parents? If one believes Euripi^ Amongst a great multitude
scarce will ^pear a better man than his Father. A^ according to Sophocles.
There are (...) better, but many worse. I deny (...) the consequence. It is but
too t^ Every place is full of ill-born C^dren, and unhappy Fathers. But, (...)
in spite of this ancient Prove^ Heroum filij noxae, and whatever (...) P^ets
affirm, it must notwithstanding (...) granted, that it is chiefly among (...)
scum of the people that appear ^se unnat^ral Children, who in^nge all the
rights of Nature, and ^ace of Heaven and Earth, like ^er Chams and other
Absaloms em^y their sacraligious hands, either (...) dishonor or persecute
their Fa^rs. This is rarely seen amongst (...) generous s^rt, and in Famalies
^ll orderd. I add, that there are ^y few Fathers, who may not, if ^y will,
enjoy with pleasure that ^ream Authority, which God has ^en them over their
Children. It Is ^thing which depends only upon ^acation, and the manner of
bring^ them up.

There are three things which ex^amly favor this paternal govern^nt, and may
much contribute to under it agreeable and propitious. ^e first is, That Fathers
do them^ves form their own Subjects, not ^ly by the birth they take from ^em,
but also by the education which ^ey give them. They are in some ^t Masters of
their minds. Nature puts them into their hands, like ^zed Tables, wherein is
nothing (...) yet written. They may impri^on them such Maxims, as they thi^
fit. They find there no resistanc^ They receive the propensity the would give
them without any o^position.

Terent. in Adelph. Act. 3. Sc. 3.
Vt quisque suum vult esse, ita est. Insomuch that it depends only (...) them to
teach them the art of ^beying and respecting. They al^ have the power to make
them wi^ It is their own fault if they do^ enjoy that Empire whereof Sen^
affirms, That the chiefest streng^ consists in the love (...) Subjects. Sen l.
1. decl. c. 19.
Vnum est (...) inexpugnabile muniment^ amor civium. In fine, depends on them
alone to inspi^ them with the fairest sentiments (...) virtue.

^o semel est imbuta rece^ns, Hor. Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 2.
servabit odorem Testa^diu. that scent a Vessel first ^kes, will affect it a
great while. For that end you want no store (...) Rhetoric. There needs but
your ^wn proper example. All Children (...) general are pleased to imitate ^eir
Fathers, and to do all they see ^em practice. They copy them e^rnally in their
way of action, in ^eir manners, and oftentimes in their ^ry gestures. Amat
unusquisque sequi ^tam parentum, says St. Ambrose. O^rator filius quae viderit
patrem facient^n, says likewise St. Austin. Thus nothing is more important for
Chil^ren than example. But nothing also (...) more commodious for Fathers, ^ho
are capable of affording good ^nes. They may by this means save ^n infinite
number of words and dis^ourses. If we believe St Bernard, Example is the best
of Sermons. Sernovivus and efficax exemplum operis est. And after Seneca, there
is no shorter road to virtue, Le^gum iter est per praecepta br^ve and efficax
per exempla. Sen. Ep. 6.
Long is the way by Precepts short and efficacious by Examples.

The second advantage of this government, whereof I speak, is founded upon the
hope, which all Subjects entertain of holding one day or other the same place
their Fathers do, and of becoming in their turn the Kings of their Children.
Therefore if they have never so small a stock of reason, they will take care to
practice toward their Fathers those duties, which they would be displeased to
see unpractised toward them, when they should possess the throne of Paternity,
if one may be allowed to speak so. If we love to imitate our Fathers, we do not
less love to be traced of our Children. It is undoubtedly for their interests
to acquit themselves religiously toward us of that obedience, submission, and
profound respect, which even nature dictates to them, and not to establish
Maxims repugnant thereto, because they will establish them against themselves.
For the most part one is long^r Father than Child, and so were ^ot these
Duties, as they are, the ^stest in the world, by a principle ^f Self-love there
is not a Child ^ut ought to hold them sacred.

Would you know what I call the ^hird advantage of this authority of ^he Father
over his Children? It is, that he exercises it continually un^er their eyes. It
is, that he alone ^roposes to himself their good. It ^s, that he labors only
for their ad^ancement. This is his general de^ign. This is his principal end.
This ^s his single prospect. Must not Children become very ungrateful, not to
honor and respect with all their power those Fathers, who undergo such pains
of body and mind, and who sweat in their sight even blood and water, in order
to render their condition happy, and to leave them a good fortune? All have not
success, it is true: Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum. But, be it as it will,
all have the intention. All tend that way. All propose it to themselves. Are
you not of opinion, Sir, that there would be even more blindne^ than
ingratitude in Children, tha^ refuse to submit themselves to thi^ reasonable
dominion, since it has bee^ established by nature, and so strongly recommended
by God himself i^ his Divine Scriptures, purely for their Salvation: and that
it entirely aims at their proper good?

Behold three Characters, that ar^ peculiar to paternal government, an^ which
distinguish it extremely from all others. Who can dispute after this the
sweetness of it? In effect nothing is more. But it is not enough considered. I
maintain that it is one of those things, which may most aleviate the cares and
troubles of a Father. What pleasure is it, once again, to have Children, who
like so many faithful Subjects are about you for your guard, to serve you, to
love you, to respect you. What satisfaction to be able at all times and in all
things to rely upon their heart, their faith, and their zeal! What contentment
never to impose but such commands, as they readily perform, to say to one go,
^d he goes; to bid another do this, ^d he does it! What secret joy to ^serve
all these other-selves, these ^erdant plants, these rising Stars, which God has
brought forth in your ^wn bosom, to envy one another in ^e concern of your
welfare! In a lord, what extreme bliss to have ^ways at one's table and about
one ^ch a troop of real friends, uncor^upted Servants, and submissive Sub^cts!
If one regarded things as they ^re, where are the bitters that all ^his is not
capable of sweetning? ^here are the misfortunes, that the ^rospect of this good
would not ob^terate? And yet it is Marriage that ^roduces all this satisfaction
for man. It Is that which procures him all ^hese advantages. It is by that
Chan^el, that God distributes to him all ^hese favors. By consequence what ^an
one apprehend of more use to him? What can be more excellent.

One affirms of truth, that it is what all the world believes. I assert just
the same of an excellent thing, it is what all the world makes practice of.
According to this principle one may say in a certain sense that nothing can be
more excellen^ than Marriage. It is of universa^ practice, As I have already
insin^ated, a perpetual Celibacy was never esteemed in the world. At all time^
it has been regarded as a thing di^graceful to mankind, and as the Pe^^^ of
Republics. The Romans deprived Batchelours of Testamentary Legacies. The
Corinthians, of Burial The Argives, of all sorts of Presents And the Athenians
even carried their severity so far as to whip them before their Alters upon
their solemn Feast days.

But, Sir, if Marriage is of all time^ and of all places, one may say tha^ it
is likewise of all persons. Birth Death, and Marriage are the thre^ bounds
where all men meet. A^^ are born: all dye, and almost all are married. Little
and Great: Rich and Poor. Kings and Shepherds. Learned and Ignorant. Civilized
and Barbarians. Philosophers and Orators. Young and Old. All kinds of Men. Of
all kind of professions. Of all Ages. Of all Statures. Of all Com^lexions. All
Marry. All enter in^o this great Society. All get them^lves admitted into the
Brotherhood. ^here is no condition in the world, ^here one has so many
companions. ^ethinks this ought to render it ye^ ^ery considerable. But as
nothing ^akes a virtue appear more splendid, ^han to compare it with its
^ppo^te vice; to show more fully the ex^ellency of Marriage; is to com^are it
with the infamy of inconti^ence, its contrary, which is the sub^ct of the
Second Part of this Work.

OF THE INFAMY OF Incontinence. PART. II.
IF I was only to treat with Saints upon this Subject, I should not have
occasion to use many words in order to persuade them, that nothing is more
infamous than Incontinence. To convince them hereof, it would be sufficient to
tell them, that nothing is more repugnant to that purity, which they profess.
But, Sir, it is with Sinners and great ones too, that I must have to do. Even
with such, who for the most part are grown old in criminal habits, and who make
a sport of that filthy debauchery, for which Heaven declares so much abhorrence.

You apprehend that if they are insensible of the charms of Marriage, they are
no less of the horrors of Lust, and that it is equally difficult to convince
them of the excellency of the one, and the infamy of the other. They are a sort
of people willful in their blindness. They resolve to see nothing in the first
but what is irksome, in order to make it an object of Contempt. They refuse to
see any thing in the second but what is agreeable, in order to make that a
continual object of Concupisence.

This disorder is even so common, so general, and so well fixed in Society,
that to undertake to withdraw men from it, and to exhort them to return from an
error, which it is much more easy to blame than avoid, is in some sort to
make himself ridiculous; Blandum malum est Luxuria and qua^ accusare facilius
est aliquanto, Max. lib. 9.
quam vitare! as an ancien^ Author so admirably says. That is Luxury is a
soothing evil, which we may with more ease censure, than avoid.

It Is certain that there is within a^ apparent sweetness. One may affirm of
Lust, that it is the bosom of the voluptuousness of the senses, where sinners
take their sleep with pleasure But O cruel, fatal, and pernicious bosom! one
sleeps there only to be destroyed. If on one side you taste the sweets of
Nectar, on the other, you suck the bitter of Poison. Alas! who knows not that
Samson found his death in that of Dalilah: David almost his in that of his
Bersheba: and Mark Anthony the loss of an Empire in the bosom of his Cleopatra?

-- O! fallax bonum,
Sen. Aedip. Act. 1.
Quantum malum front quam tanda legis!
Oh faithless good! how much ill does thy smooth looks conceal.

What satisfactions soever the Li^ertines find in such wanton imbra^es, early,
or late, says Seneca, they ^re converted into pun^hments. Sen. Ep. 25.
Sed ipsae vo^ptates in tormenta ver^ntur

All this is most true. Experience ^roves it every day in an incontesta^le
manner, and yet men will not ^efrain this evil conduct. They take ^elight in
such an error, and are plea^ed with so agreeable a madness. It ^s a Sea,
wherein they take a plea^ure to drown themselves: They hold ^o this unhappy
vice with indissoluble ^hains: Toto corpore, omnibus ungui^ulis, as the Proverb.

We may distinguish three sorts of persons, that are engaged in the shameful
commerce of the flesh. The one seeks after it by inclination, and make it their
chiefest good. Another sort continues it because they cannot get rid thereof,
being retained as it were in spite of themselves by force and custom, and by
the fatality of their temperature. The last apply themselves to it both by
inclination and custom; but they look upon this sin as a piece of gallantry and
as a mode in Society which the^ are allowed to follow with other^ and without
hazard. All these offenders equally deserve your horror.

Place, Sir, in the first rank all thos^ Libertines of Profession. All thos^
Epecureans. All those Sardanapali^ who only study to satisfy the irregular
appetites of Nature, whose Belly is their God, and who seek their glory in
their proper confusion, as a^ Apostle says. They are naturalize^ into their
offense. It is their ver^ Element. They are so pleased with their condition,
that they are extrea^ unwilling to leave it. Like true Swine, they love to
abide in their uncleanness.

For whom has this fair Sex bee^ made, that is the ornament of the world if not
for man, say these Debauchees? where can he find more delight than i^ the bosom
of a fine woman? Have not these mortal Goddesses been embraced by the Gods
themselves? those Gods that are so much above humanity? Have they not quited
all the charms of Olympus in order to enjoy here below their ^luptuous
embraces? and yet forsooth, we, (...) whom nature has given them in pos^sion,
must not be affected with them: (...) if we are, as it is impossible not to be,
^ce one single regard of theirs is ^le to inflame the heart, ^it videndo
faemina, Virg. Georg.
we ^ust be prohibited to re^ at our caresses, and to be enamored of ^em!
What, say they still, we are born ^th dispositions, that draw us impetu^sly
toward this charming object, and ^e must exert all our cares to remove ^r
selves from it. Nature it self shall ^ve us an extreme hunger after this
^licious food, and we must not be satisfied ^ith it in the midst of that
abundance we ^ve thereof. If this ardent desire of ^rs was not lawful, Nature
doubtless ^ould not have afforded us the same. Ni^il censeamus esse malum, quod
sit a ^atura datum hominibus, says the Father of eloquence. And if it is good,
why ^ould we not receive its influence?

But, add these infamous Men, if it (...) lawful to use women, and to make
these amorous thefts; which the great ^upiter himself has so often preferred to
all the glory of his Throne, must (...) a man be a fool to be eternally fixed
(...) one, and to deprive himself by this mea^ of the pleasing liberty of
change? Natura diversis gaudit. What is there t^ effect that is more acceptable
to man than variety of meats, and that happ^ diversity of all things, which
this goo^ Mother affords him? Is it possible the this man, for whom she has
made (...) things, should enjoy less privilege the Beasts, and that she would
connect hi^ to one single Woman, whilst she grant to other creatures the
lisence of takin^ what they please, those, to whom she h^ given infinitely less
inclination for the pleasure, than to Man? Has not the likewise obliged a
thousand people of the world to establish Poligamy, Letters o^ Divorce, and
even some to render all W^men common in Society.

Happy the Country, that is destitute of such Monsters! Happy i^ Christendom
were void thereof, an^ they enclosed in those miserable places, where reason is
extinguished and where men have nothing of Man but the Name! Sunt quidam non r^
sed nomine homines, as the Roman Orator. Can one imagine, that there ^ould be
found of them any where ^se? Can it be believed that a thing (...) such
absolute impiety and base^^ss, Nihil est aut nequius, aut turpius ^aeminato
viro, should come into a ^od and civilized Nation? But, a^ss! they are every
where. The ^isest people, and best ordered ^ates are no more exempt, than o^ers.

What horror, Sir, ought one to ^onceive for these persons, who have (...) it
were sworn upon the very Al^rs to continue all their life in the ^^plication of
this Sin, and to make (...) all the Paradise they allow of? ^s if this very
nature, which has ^onfin'd our inclination to the other Sex, and which for the
propogation of Mankind makes us ardently co^et the same, had not given us a
^ason to discern good and evil, and (...) rule our desires. As if she had ^ot
placed in our minds impressions (...) shame, which are not to be ef^ced without
ceasing to be Man. As (...) one of her first Lessons, which she ^ves us, was
not temperence and sobriety. As if one of her principa^ ends was not also to
distinguish (...) from Bruits in subjecting all our senses to the empire of
reason. As i^ the same nature did not instruct us that the pleasure of virtue
is yet much greater than that of voluptuousness Major est virtutis jucunditas,
Cic. in Verrem L. 1.
quam ipsa volupta^ quae percipitur ex libidi^ and cupidate. In a word as if
the real happiness, to which she makes us tend, did not consist in the practice
of things which are most agreeable to the excellence of ou^ being, and which
make us approach nearest to that Divinity, from whom we receive it.

The offenders of the second order are unquestionably very culpable, but they
are, I confess, much less than those of the first. They deserve an infinite
blame, it is true, for being engaged in such criminal habits; but they are in
some sort worthy of our praises for being displeased therewith, and for
desiring to quit them. He that affirmed habit to be a second nature has not hit
amiss. It must be granted that nothing is of more force, and that ^here is a
great difficulty in its con^uest. Vincere consuetudinem dura est ^ugna, as St.
Austin says: And to speak with Seneca the Tragedian, Dediscit animus sero quod
didicit diu. Sen. in Troad. Act. 9.


It Is very hard to forget what one ^as learnt by a repeated practice, and a
wound often renewed is long in curing, Vulnus iteratum tardius sanatur; Tedious
is the cure of a repeated wound.

Experience tells us that a single Act does not suffice to form a habit. One
must repeat it often. A man is not wicked just of a sudden, he grows so by
degrees.

Nemo repent fuit turpissimus. Juv. Sat. 2.
But when this habit is once formed, it is not easily forsaken with us.
Consuetudo pessima non statim abjicitur. One has need of all the efficacy of
Grace to disengage himself from it. The great St. Austin is a^ admirable
example of it. After h^ had reflected upon the irregularitie^ of his conduct,
and the necessity that was imposed on him to convert himself, in order to be
made partake^ of the Salvation of Jesus Christ. How much time did he take to
determine himself to it? How many delays* What difficulties in breaking his
Fetters? What pleasure did he find in bearing them notwithstanding their
weight? Delectatus more carnis and mortifera suavitate trahebam catenam meam,
Aug. Conf. L. 6. C. 12.
Pleased with the disease of the flesh, and the fatal sweetness, I drag my
chains about; Says he of himself. From whence appears the truth of what he
writes elsewhere, that when one does not immediately resist the evil custom of
sinning, it is turned into necessity.

Behold precisely the State of these Lascivious Demy-converts. They are
somewhat ashamed of themselves. They are persuaded they live ill. They even
form desires of being freed from the tyranny of Sin. Would to God, ^ay they,
that our hearts were pure e^ough and our reasons sufficiently enlight^ed to
disengage us once from all these ^bjects of our Lusts! We know that our duty
engages us to it, and that nothing ^s of more necessity. But, alas! when we
would dispose our selves to the practice of this virtue, we find the vice so
strongly rooted in us, that it renders all our ^fforts unprofitable. The Law of
the members fights against the Law of the understanding. Every day we take the
resolution to forsake our obscene courses, but we are still infatuated so far
as to represent our selves incapable thereof. Putabam enim me miserum fore
nimis, si faeminae privarer amplexibus, said St. Austin; behold the very
condition we are in.

You will find others, Sir, that will even excuse themselves upon their
constitution. We are, say they, of an amorous complexion. Nature has framed us
in such a manner, that she has made women absolutely necessary for us. Were we
to lose an empire, or life it self, we are compelled to follow our Cleopatra's
and sleep in the bosom of our Dalila's. It is the fatality of our Star^, and
its Influence we cannot resist, though we are concerned we cannot do it.

Non equidem vellem: sed me mea fat a trahebant. Ovid. Trist. Lib. 2.
Not my own will but fate still pushed me on. Who is ignorant of the force of
constitution? who forgets the Father of Philosophy, Mores animi sequunter
temparamentum corporis? The inclination of the mind follow the temparament or
constitution of the body.

It Is true, there are those unhappy tempers, which nature seems to have given
men only to destroy them. We observe those, who are so subject to the
transports of anger, that when they want occasions to exercise it, they fall
upon themselves. Like the fool in the Poet, who ran after his own shadow with
a stick in his hand, in order to be revenged of it because it represented him
much bigger than he was. There are others so extraordinary lascivious, that
nothing is capable of qualifying the fury of their brutality. Witness that
Monster of immodesty, of whom Juvenal.

Et laessata viri^, nec dum satiata, recessit. Juv. Sat. 6.
With repetition tired, the insatiate Whore retires. As you are wise, and of a
regular conduct, I question not, Sir, but you abhor all these debauchees. And
who does not? In short, habit and complexion are very idle excuses in the
Tribunal of the Divine Wisdom. They are even of no validity in that of human
wisdom. This knows its force and tyranny, I confess, but it detests those who
practice not all due efforts to surmount them. It says, it is true, that man is
prone to Sin, but to remain in his error is proper to the Beast. Est humanum
peccare, sed beluinum in errore perseverare, Humane frailty errs, but
perseverance denotes a brutal Nature. There is no man so barbarous, but
education can civilize.

Nemo adeo ferus est, qui non mitescere possit, Hor. Ep. L. 1. Ep.

Simodo culturae patientem accomodet aurem.
Sure there is none so miserably wild,
But wholesome precepts may reduce to mild.
As great as the number and crime of these lustful persons is, those of the
last Order surpass them still extremely. Here, Sir, I would have you recollect
all the motions of your modesty to detest the most execrable thing, that it is
possible to imagine. The Libertines of the first Order are doubtless very
abominable. Nothing is more horrible than their conduct, and there is not one
of them, but is most justly entitled to what a Christian Poet says of the
wickedst Man in the World, with as much elegance as truth.

Susque velut vivit sus moritur sue velut. Hog like he lives, and like a Hog he
dies. But why should we be surprised? Are not these unhappy wretches professed
Atheists? They allow neither Heaven, nor Hell: and they equally ridicule
Religion and God, who is the object of it. Their Libertinism is a necessary
consequence of their pernicious principles.

Those of the second Order, are, I confess, so much the more criminal, as they
know their Duty, and perform it not; as they sin against the light of their
proper Conscience, and as they are acquainted with the Law of God, which is,
that they who do these things are worthy of death: But they are the first in
condemning their own conduct. They grown under the weight of their infirmities.
They accknowledge that they are lost without the intervention of God's mercy.
They entreat him to deliver them from the slavery of their passions. And what
delight soever they find in the crime, they have no sooner committed it, but
they feel shame and remorse, at least generally. This is some alleviation
comparatively to the former.

But where can one find terms of force enough to represent the enormity of the
Crime of these last offenders? they not only abandon themselves to the
filthiness of Incontinence, but which is a Prodigy of iniquity, they think a
Christian may do it with impunity. They look upon it as a lawful thing, and
practice it without any token of shame. Not the least scruple of committing the
same. They do it with as much delight, as a Fish drinks water. It is the proper
element of their flesh.

Can one believe, say they, that what is so natural to man, so universal,
authorized by the example of all sorts of Persons, and all sorts of Nations,
that what is practiced by those very people, who prohibit it to others, should
be a sin? What is more ordinary, and of more general use, more extensive, and
more constant, than the sport of love?

Vitium commune omnium est. Gerent in Adelph.
It Is the common vice of all Men. Certainly, say they, this cannot pass for a
sin, and if it be one, it is at most but a venial sin, which of its nature is
not damnable. In a word, they are so desperate to say, that the worst which can
happen to them is, that if they are damned, it is with company. O madness
worthy of Hell! Is it not very amazing, that persons of this opinion should
dare to call themselves Christians, and that they should be impudent enough to
dishonor every day by their presence the Sanctuaries and Alters of the God of
Holiness?

Methinks there needs but a little good sense, if they had no other helps, to
convince these detestable incontinents of the most prodigious blindness that
ever was. Shall custom be able to change the nature of things, and to make that
become a good which is of it self an evil? If we were in the Persian Climate,
should we be under an obligation to adore the Sun under pretense that it is the
mode and Religion of the Country? Must we of necessity ruin our selves,
because others do the same? we may, it is true, be somet^mes deceived in the
Judgment we make of things; we may take that for a virtue, which is but a vice
at bottom.

Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and umbra. Juv. Sat. 14.
Vice deceives with the borrowed shape of virtue. But when we are once
persuaded, that what we do is a sin, and we don't cease to commit it under
pretense that it is public, and of common use, nothing can ever excuse us. We
are worthy of the utmost punishments. What shall we say then of those wretches,
who upon this foundation abandon themselves to the dissolution of Lust: That is
to say, to what Cicero himself, as much Pagan as he was looks upon as the
greatest of all evils, Nihil est malum, nisi quod turpe aut vitiosum est. There
is nothing ill but what is base and vicious. Cicer. Tuscul.


We shall observe in the sequel a little more particularly the vanity of all
these illusions, and the enormity of the crime of all these kinds of
Libertines. But, before we leave them, be pleased to remark, Sir, that this
filthy debauchery, which is the subject thereof, is a many-headed Monster, and
a spring which divides it self into several rivolets. To speak properly the men
of the world acknowledge no other incontinence, than that of the Body, which is
accomplished by the union of Sexes. But the Gospel whose morality is infinitely
more holy than that of men, establishes four others besides that, which it
likewise affirms to be very criminal, to wit, that of the heart, that of the
eyes, that of the mouth, and that of the hand.

The incontinence of the heart is nothing else but the Concupisence of Women,
and a violent desire of being joined with them, through the sole principle of a
sensual pleasure. Naturally we find a satisfaction in the thoughts of a
handsome Woman, and we revolve agreeably in our minds the remembrance of what
we have seen aimable in them. When that blind Boy, whom Paganism yet more blind
has made a God, has once pierc d the heart with one of his in venom d Arrows,
he produces there immediately all the motions of his immodest mother. Then it
is, Man becomes Frantic, and void of sense. All his conduct is but a pure
extravagance. He is no more himself, but the object's that inflames him. It is
a shadow that pursues him every where. His continual thought day and night. His
watchings and his dreams are full of it, his imagination represents to him
continually the Image of her whom he adores. Her idea is always present with
him, and he embraces it with the same pleasure as if he held her effectually in
his Arms.

Hanc specto, tenecque sinu pro conjuge vera Ovid in Leodamia.
Her I behold, and as my real Wife embrace. This infemous love so captivates
all the senses and all the faculties, that the principal end the Soul proposes
to it self, is to satisfy the passion. Need one be amazed after this, that
Actantius assures us with St. Paul that nothing is so disagreeable to God, as
an impure mind, and a lustful Soul: Nihil est tam invisum Deo, quam men's
incesta and animus impurus. There is nothing so hateful to God as an incestuous
and impure mind.

You will admire perhaps that I give to the eyes a particular fornication. But,
Sir, without doubt you have not forgot what Jesus Christ says, That a Man who
looks upon a Woman with an eye of Concupisence has committed adultery with her
in his heart. Mat. 5.
You know likewise that St, John speaks of the lust of the eyes. And you are
not ignorant that nothing is more common in the world, than this sort of
wantonness. I dare even affirm, that the eyes corrupt the heart, and the one
would be innocent, if the others were not faulty. In effect the eyes are the
Gates or Windows of the Soul. It is by them that objects enter into it; and
these objects exite therein the motions of Concupisence; from whence comes this
common Axiom, Objecta movent sensum. It Is for this Quintilian regards the eyes,
as the path which leads Vice into the Soul. Vitijs nostris in animo p^r oculos
via est. Quintil. Decla n. 1.
That St. Austin says, a lascivious eye is the messenger of an immodest heart,
Impudicus oculus impudici cordis est nuncius: and that the Athenian Oraters
would have us judge of the manners of men by their eyes. Oculi morum indices,
The eyes are the interpreters of the inclinations and manners.

One cannot sufficiently aggravate the disorders of the sight. By that was sin
admitted into the world, and by sin death, and by death the end of all men. The
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge was fair to see, says the Scripture Eve beheld
it. She desired it. She eat of it. She sinned. One may say that a fine Woman is
this prohibited fruit. But where is he that is not pleased to look upon it? The
best of men cannot refrain. They do it oftentimes without any design to offend
God. They propose nothing to themselves, if you will, but to admire the
excellency of the Workman in considering so curious a work. But the Devil more
ingenious than they, makes use of this sight to kindle in their hearts the fire
of concupisence.

Si nescis, oculi sunt in amore duces. Propert. L. 2. El. 12.
If you know it not, the eyes are the first guides to love. They come at last
to desire this fruit. Their flesh is tickled with hopes of possession. They
unhappily destroy themselves by this means.

Virg. Eclocg. 8.
Vt vidi, ut perii, ut me malus abstulit error. Alas there are but few now a
days like Job, who made a contract with his eyes not to look upon a Virgin. One
sees every where lascivious eyes. The Public walks serve only to exercise
their immodesty. They respect not even the Altars of the Lord, and the
Assemblies of his People. If a man discovers a Lady there of a well made,
agreeable aspect, he willingly prefers the pleasure of observing her, to that
of discharging the duties of Piety. There needs no more to freeze the hottest
devotion. Homo ex humo sine humanitate non est homo. Man is made out of the
earth, nor is a man without humanity.

By the lust of the mouth, I apprehend those filthy Words and Songs, so
unbecoming and lascivious, that hurt chaste ears, that excite the reddest
modesty, and whereof the use notwithstanding is so frequent amongst men. This
is certainly a species of fornication, as well by the pleasure that is taken in
uttering these obscenities, as because they are the inkindlers of concupisence,
and contribute much to the corrupting of the affections. One may even be
assured without fear of a mistake, that those who are pleased with such kind of
discourses, are already very much corrupted in their hearts. In effect, the
mouth speaks only from the abundance of the heart, as Christ himself. One is
the interpreter of the other. The mouth speaks ill, because the heart thinks
ill. The effect pursues the nature of its cause: and such as the principle is,
such also is the act. Ream linguam non facit, nisi men's rea. We may even
affirm; that these lascivious tongues are almost an infallible proof of a
licentious life; for as St. Chrisostom says, Verba sunt signa eorum, Words are
the images or representation of things. The words of men very often give us to
understand what they are.

There is very little appearance that a man will not act as he loves to talk,
and that being immodest in his conversation he should not be so in his conduct.

If in the morality of our Savior, one must give an account of useless words,
which are neither good nor evil; Judge, Sir, what a reckoning those will have,
who make these impure and hurtful words a subject of diversion, and who have
contracted so large a habit of them, that they cannot express themselves,
whether in speaking, or in writing, without naming every thing by its name; As
the Plautus's, the Hora^e 's, the Ovid's of the time past, the R^halai's and
the Montaign's of our time. It must be confessed that nothing is more unworthy
of a Gentleman, than this manner of action. Modesty is the thing of the world
most agreeable to Man, but especially essential to a Christian. It is a
character that denotes him from all the rest. What was more carefully and
earnestly recommended to us by the Apostles, than a purity and sanctity in all
our conversation?

In fine, what shall I say of the excesses of the hand with relation to this
miserable sin of wantonness. O God, what abominations! what obscenities! what
unlawful uses! what infamous things, which one durst not either think or
relate, does it not commit? This crime, which modesty will not suffer to be
named, as common as it is, is never the less enormous. It was long since struck
with the curse of Heaven in the person of Onan, Gen 38.9.
Son of Judah, whereof the Scripture tells us.

Is it a wonder after all this, that God should have so much horror for this
crime? Is it any surprise that he should thunder against it such dreadful
menaces? It is matter of consternation that he should join to it an heriditary
curse upon families? In a word, that he should so often bring upon the people
and upon private persons such terrible marks of his displeasure? It must be
granted that nothing is more frequent in Holy Scripture, than prohibitions to
commit this Sin, and the examples of its punishment. It is not in the Decalogue
alone, that God says, Thou shall not commit Adultery. He speaks it in a
thousand other places of his word. The New Testament especially recommends to
us nothing else. The Sermons of our Savior, and the Epistles of the Apostles
are filled therewith. Their principal end is to dispose us to a purity of body
and mind: and they protest that nothing is more displeasing to God, than the
polluted Garment of the flesh. It is not Sodom and Gomarrha alone that has
drawn down the fire of Heaven. Alas! a thousand other Cities, and an infinite
number of other sinners have been consumed in all Ages and all Nations upon
account of this unhappy Lust. But admit there was nothing else except the
punishments of another life, and that hideous Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to
which in the Theology of Jesus Christ and his Apostles it necessarily leads
men, needs there any more to convince us, that nothing is more pernicious, and
ought to be more soveraignly hated by us?

Is it not strange, perhaps you will say, that God who knows Man so well, should
with so much exactness prohibit a thing, which is so natural to him, and that
he should condemn him to the punishments of Hell for a Sin, which it is almost
impossible for him not to commit in one of those kinds you have treated of?
does not St. Paul say, That the flesh is not subject to the Law of God, neither
can it be. Romans 8.7.


I reply, Sir, that this great propensity it self, which Man naturally has for
this debauchery is one of the principal reasons, that have obliged the Creator
to join so much punishment to it, and to thunder so many Curses upon it. If
inspite of his prohibition and all his threatenings, Man is insolent enough to
abandon himself to it as much as he does, judge to what excess he has pushed
on the crime, and what he had been able to attempt without it.

Et nihil est, Ovid. Met. L. 6. Fab 8.
quod non effraeno captus amore Ausit. It is then to abate a little the
impetuosity of this furious passion, that God has used him so. He has been
pleased to punish with most bitterness and severity the vice, where Man finds
most pleasure, and for which he has most inclination, to the end that the fear
of so formidable a chastisement, might be as a Bridle to retain him in his
duty. There are few of those persons left, of whom one might affirm, Oderunt
peccare bonae virtutis amore. Hor. Epist. L. 1.
They hate to sin for the pure love of virtue.

Most frequently we love this virtue, not for its own sake, but by reason of
the punishments that attend vice. Difficile est persuadere hominibus honestum
propter seipsum diligendum. Cic.
It Is a difficult thing to persuade men that virtue is to be loved for its own
sake. If there was no good to hope for in practicing the one, and no evil to
fear in committing the other, we should become as wicked as the very Devils.
Our Love and our hatred are equally concerned. God proposes magnificent rewards
to our virtue, and terrible punishments to our vice, in order to tie us fast to
the one, and to remove us from the other. It Is certain that this fear, as
servile as it is, becomes extremely advantageous to ^s, and is of great
assistance to rectify our manners; from whence comes this saying of Divine
Plato, Vbi timor, ^bi and pudor, Where there is fear, there ^s modesty. And
that of the learned Tertullian, That there is no conversion where there is no
fear. Em n^latio nulla, ^bi nullus est metus; There is no punishment where
there is no fear.

I grant that it is very difficult to practice the duty of that Evangelical
continence, to which our Baptism engages us. Of this kind of sin, which one
usually calls the favorite sin, the wantonness of the flesh is that of all ^he
rest, which is hardest to get rid of. It Is that which our Savior al^udes to,
when he speaks of pulling out the eye, and cutting off the hand. But the
rougher the Fight is, the more glorious is the Victory. Non est gloriosa
victoria, nisi ubi fuerint laboriosa certamina, as St. Ambrose says. There is
no glorious victory without a difficult engagement.

God in prohibting us this wantonness, commands us at the same time to
sacrifice to him all those unhappy inclinations we have to commit it, which so
agreeably flatter our senses. Nothing is harder, I acknowledge, to such carnal
men as we are: but nothing is of more necessity, nothing more just.

Hoc decet, hoc leges, jusque, pudorque jubent. This every Law and Modesty
requires. You must needs be fully convinced of this, if you reflect upon the
horrible miserys that fornication draws after it. I have already hinted them in
diverse places. But one can never produce them all, so great is the number of
them. It stupifies the mind. It blinds the understanding. It corrupts the will.
It weakens the memory. Luxuria sensum hebetat, confundit intellectum, Greg. in
Moral.
memoriam obdurat. It sullys all the affections. It impoysons the virtues. It
fortifies the vices. It interrupts the quiet of the Soul. It puts it into a
perpetual agitation. Saevus criminum stimulus est libido, quae nunquam quietum
affectum manner patitur. Amb.
Nocte fervet, die anhelat. So that what satisfaction soever our unhappy flesh
finds in it, it still discovers more of bitterness.

Plus aloes quam mellis habet. Juv. Sat. 6.
It has more of bitter, than sweet. We ought to affirm no less in relation to
the miseries it makes the body s^ffer. In general, it is extremely weakened with
it.

Vires adimit veneris damnosa voluptas. Ovid de Ponto.
The fights of Venus much abate our strength. The greatest part of those
distempers, that Physicians call Chronical, which are the sharpest and most
incurable, proceeds from thence. How many other debaucheries does this occasion
to those, who are plunged herein? what pains, what infirmities does a man
incurr for the sake of a pleasure, that is equally short and unprofitable, says
that eloquent mouth of ancient Rome? Plerique propter voluptatem and pravam,
Cicer. L. 1.
and non necessariam tum in morbos graves, tum in damna, tum in dedecora in
currunt. There are some foolish enough to choose rather to dye thereof, than to
discover their shame by a modesty, that Horace has reason to misinterpret.

Hor. Ep. L. 1. l. 16.
Stultorum incurata pudor malus ulcera celat. Almost all the inconveniences of
Old Age are owing to a Licentious Youth, but how few are there that attain to
it, by pursuing this path; there needs an exceeding strong temperature to live
long in such a course. This maxim of St. Chrysostom is certain and general,
Luxuriose viventes senes fieri non expedit.

What prejudice does not this very Lust cause a man in his fortune? What else
could hinder Mark Anthony from obtaining the Empire of Rome? what made Paris
lose his Troy? How many persons become miserable every day through this
occasion? Does it not impoverish the rich, and obstruct the poor from growing
so? How many are there, who like the Prodigal in the Gospel spend all their
estates with Women of currupted lives, and after they have ruined themselves by
the excesses of this debauchery, naturally, as it were, fall into an Hospital,
or slavery? For an adulterous Woman, Prove. 6.26.
says the wise man, a man is reduced to a morsel of bread.

All these calamities are undoubtedly very great, but approach not the loss of
Salvation, which very often attends the sin of Lust. The Whoremongers, says the
Scripture, shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Their portion is in a lake
of Sulpher. In effect, this of all sins makes the most impenitents. There is
not one that is more pleasing to the flesh. It Is found agreeable in every Age.
The very Grey-beards are no less subject to it, than youngmen. If they have
less vigor, they are oftentimes more concupiscent. The two Elders in the Story
of Susanna, who were so taken with her beauty, and seei g her naked in her
Garden burnt for love of her, are a very sensible example of it. If Old Age be
impotent in respect of action, it is not so in respect of desire. When old, we
always wish to do what we did being young, and if we are not able yet we find a
sort of pleasure in desiring it, and entertaining our selves with it, as Plato
said of himself. O God! That ever Man should be so wretched as to endanger
eternal and infinite joys for such insipid, short delights! That Men of such
contrivance and wisdom in the civil and politic life, should be capable of
such a monstrous indiscretion! That our loss should depend on the Eye of a fine
Woman! That a little simple Skin extended over the flesh, and covers naught but
blood and ^ones should have force enough upon our minds to make us renounce ^ur
largest Interests, and all the hopes ^f Paradise! How much reason have ^e, I
beseech you, to humble our ^inds in the thought of so much in^rmity?

In a word, Sir, if you are not yet ^ersuaded, that nothing is more infa^ous,
or more pernicious than Lust, ^onsider the disorders which it causes ^n the
world and in Families, then ^uestion it if you can. One must ^efer to this
detestable Sin the greatest ^art of general and particular, pub^ick and
domestic quarrels. How ^ften has it embroil d States, and over^hrown Empires?
How many Wars and disputes has it occasion d? How ^any Marriages has it
disturbed, and ^ade unhappy? If a man considers, he shall find that it is the
Origin of almost all the thorns of those, who suc^eed ill. If Husbands lov d
their Wives ^s tenderly as Vlyssis did his Penelope: and if Wives were as
faithful to their Husbands, as Penelope was to her Vlissis, it is certain that we
should not see a hundredth part of those disgraces that we do. They are owing to
the want of this common wisdom of Men and Women, at least generally speaking.
From this principle arise those evil humors, and cruel jealousies, which cause
to them both such smart vexations.

But it is not only in this that Incontinence is fatal to the World. It is
likewise in this respect, viz. That it aims at nothing but its ruin in
averting Men from Marriage; which is the true principle of its preservation.
Would you know the difference between Marriage and Fornication? Marriage
proposes nothing to itself but the propagation of Mankind, whereas the other
aims at its destruction. Adulter non prolem, sed voluptatem quaerit. Marriage
glories in the production of Children. Fornication is ashamed of it, and tends
only to obstruct their generation. What horrors, what infamies are practiced
for that end? It Is easy to conceive them. But it would be indecent to express
them. So that the world receives from this vice a prejudice proportioned to all
those great advantages which it draws from Marriage, whereof I have discoursed
in my first Part. Will you not confess after all ^his, that it is the greatest
of all crimes, and that Cicero could not have ^it better, when he said that all
evils ^ut together were not equal to this? Si unum in locum collata sint omnia
mala, ^um turpitudinis malo non erunt comparanda.

As to what remains, I distinguish not between Fornication, Adultery, and
keeping of Concubines. Yet I know one might observe difference: for all
Concubine keeping is a Fornication, ^ut all Fornication and Adultery is not
keeping of Concubines. How^ver, all this is but one and the same ^pecies of
Sin. It is one in it self, and ^s only diversifived by the State of those who
commit it.

But why do you so severely prohibit, ^ou'll say perhaps, a thing that Mo^es
himself permitted to the Jews, and which was practiced by the Patriarchs, and
the ancient Kings of Israel? Abraham and Jacob had many Wives, and ^arious
Concubines. Solomon had even ^o the number of a thousand; and Polygamy, keeping
of Concubines, and Letters of Divorce have been of use, and are at this time
amongst diverse People of the earth. This objection is natural to the matter I
treat of: and it immediately seems so favorable to the inclinations of the
flesh, that it is no wonder it falls into the minds of all men: and that
Fornicators make use of it to flatter themselves in their irregularity. It is
long since that these sort of Persons, and several ancient Heriticks have
prevailed thereby to authorize their evil conduct, and pernicious sentiments
upon the subject of intemperance.

To which I answer first, that God from the beginning of the World established
Marriage between two Persons only, Man says he, shall leave his Father and
Mother, and join himself, Genesis 2.24.
not to several Wives, but to one Wife. Not to Harlots and Concubines, but to
his wife; not to the wife of his Neighbor but to his own; they shall be, adds
the Creator, not three, four, five and six, but they shall be two in one flesh.
Could he Condemn more expressly, Fornication and Adultery, Polygamy, and
keeping of Concubines?

Secondly, The example of the Patriarchs and Kings of Israel makes no
consequence against a Law so express as that is, because according to several
Fathers of the Church, if they did not confine themselves to it, it was through
a very particular and mysterious permission of God. Not to say that as good Men
as they were, they were still men; capable of sinning like the rest. David
himself assures us, that there is not one just person; and Solomon says that
the most perfect falls seven times a day.

Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit. No Man is wise at all times. It must be
confessed, that herein they were seduced by their temper; and that the force of
custom and example of Idolatrous Nations, in the midst of which they lived,
contributed much thereto. But at the same time we ought to be persuaded that
God bestowed on them the Grace of Repentance; and to admire the ways of his
eternal Wisd^m, which has often times made use of the proper sins of its o^n
Ser ants, to make us apprehend exceeding miseries. Which made St. Ambross say,
that the very faults of the Patriarchs were advantageous to us. Instruunt
Patriarchae non solum docentes, sed etiam errantes.

In effect, St. Paul discovers to the Gallatians a great mystery in the
Concubinary Union of Abraham and Hagar, and in the birth of Ismael his Son. Are
not we acquainted likewise that the very incestious Fornication of Judah with
Thamer his Daughter in Law, has served Providence to make thereof one of the
Characters of the humiliation of jesus Christ; who according to the flesh was
derived from Pha^iz, one of those Children that sprung from this unlawful
copulation. And it is in this consideration that a holy Man has ventured to
call even the Sin of Adam happy, because without it we had been deprived of
this Great Redeemer, who makes all the glory of our Nature, and all the comfort
of our Souls. O! felix culpa, Greg.
quae tal^m meruisti habere Redemptor^m.

Moreover the faults of the ancient Patriarchs ought to advantage us by way of
precaution. Besides we live under a dispensation infinitely more than that of
the Patriarchs and Jews. Moses for the hardness of their hearts allowed them
diverse things, that Jesus Christ has prohibited us. But do not we know that the
Church was in its Infancy under the Law, and that it is in its Manhood under
the Gospel? It would be shameful for us to be no wiser than they, and to
practice in this perfect age of grace, where we are arrived, the same actions
they practiced under the imperfect age of the Law. If your Justice does not
exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, said the Master to his
Disciples. That which is in some sort supportable by the Law of the Jews, and
also by the Law of the Mahometans, can never be so by the Law of Christians.
They have engagements to a purity of manners, which other men have not.

Ter. in Heaut.
Aliis silicet, tibi non licet. The blindness of Pagans and Infidels excuses a
part of their crime. They may say with one of their Poets.

Sed partem nostri criminis error habet. Ovid. Trist. L. 3. El. 5.
Part of my crime was caused by mistake. But nothing can excuse us Christians:
and we should be so much the more faulty to live with the same remission, as we
have a perfect knowledge of the will of God; of virtues and vices; of what is
necessary to be done, and what to be avoided in order to attain to salvation.

The Jews of the first Christian Penticost, after ha ing been convicted of
infidelity and felony against Jesus Christ by a Sermon of St. Peter, cried out
in the motions of their sadness: Men and Brethren, what shall we do? If the
things which I have represented to you concerning the sin of Incontinence have
an influance upon you, and you ask me just in the same manner, what you must do
to avoid it, I answer to you in the first place what St. Peter replied to the
Jews, Repent. There is no method more secure than that, in order to put of
entirely the bondage of the passions; or to say better, it is the only one
whose success is infallible to that end. When a man is truly converted, he has
a holy dislike of himself. He detests his precedent conversation. He has a
horror for his crime. He finds no further pleasure, but in the enjoyment of
his God. He has a disgust for all the vain delights of the flesh. David,
Magdelain, and St. Austin are great and admirable examples hereof. I reply to
you in the second place, Marry. In effect, although there is no condition happy
enough to be perfectly exempt from all the blots of Incontinence, and that a
thousand married persons fail not to render themselves faulty, yet it must be
granted that Marriage is that of all conditions of Man, wherein he may best be
cured. It Is what St. Paul instructs us in that exhortation, which he makes to
all men: To avoid Fornication, says he, let every man have his own Wife, and
every Woman her own Husband. This, Sir, shall be the subject of my Third Part.

OF THE MOTIVES, Which might reasonably Induce Men to MARRY. PART. III.
MEthinks, Sir, to represent to an honest Man the Excellency of Marriage, and
the Infamy of Incontinence; the great advantages of the one, and the dreadful
horrors of the other, were enough to produce in him an inclination to marry
without any further enlargement. Neverthelss there are diverse other Motives
which may dispose them to it: and they appear to me considerable enough to make
a particular part of this Treatise.

To begin where I finished the other, you ought to observe that Marriage is an
essential remedy to Incontinence. Whatsoe^er you do to subdue your flesh, and
to allay the fire of its lust, you will not easily accomplish it without
Marriage. Retirements, Fastings, Disciplines, Macerations, may lessen part of
the forces of this formidable enemy, but not absolutely overcome him. Without a
particular favor of Heaven, he will always triumph over your power; and in
spite of all the ca^es of your piety, you will find it hard enough to avoid
falling into one of the Fornications I have discoursed of. Nothing but Marriage
can naturally cure you. That Is the true Antidote against this mortal Poison. I
repeat it once more: To avoid Fornication, let every Man have his Wife, and
every Woman her Husband. Ought any one to qustion after this the efficacy of
Marriage, to deliver us from this pernicious malady? should we not believe an
Apostle, who brought all he has said to us from the third Heaven, and who has
given us nothing but what he received from the Lord himself? who could judge
better than he, of our necessities? I am surprised that after so express an
Order to Marry, and so authentic a testimony of the necessity of Marriage in
reference to Salvation, there should be a single man in the world, that can
have it in contempt.

This is so much the more amazing, as this Order is as ancient as the World. It
is not from St. Paul. It is from God himself. As soon as he had formed Man, he
gave him a Wife. He married him. And he commanded all his descendents to marry.
Jesus Christ has renewed the precept under the Gospel. I don't pretend, Sir,
that this command is absolute and obligatory for all men, as some have been of
opinion. A man does not absolutely disobey God in remaining a Batchelour,
provided that he lives piously in that state How many persons are there, wh^
are improper for Marriage? But (...) affirm that herein God was please^ to let
us know, that it is a condition very agreeable to him, and is extremely
necessary to fulfill all the duties of humanity, and to accompli^ all the ends
of our Creation. The Apostle discovers in it another advantage for Man, that is
yet more important: To wit, as I have said, that it may much contribute to make
him live piously in causing him to avoid Incontinence. Insomuch that he answers
at the same time, both the end of Nature, which is to multiply men: and the end
of Grace, which is to sanctify them.

Let us assert then of Marriage with relation to the men of the world, that it
is the true path of wisdom; that there is no condition more secure for man, and
that Calera caca via est. Ovid. amor.
The other is an obscure path.

Nevertheless I am not unacquainted with those words of our Savior, Sunt qui
se castraverunt propter regnum caelorum. Mat. 19.
As there is an infinite number of Libertines within the sacred Bonds of
Marriage, it is not to be questioned but that in the engagement of vows there
is also a great many persons, who live in an exemplary purity. I respect their
Character, and have a veneration for their virtue. But besides that all men
cannot become Hermits, nor espouse a Convent: and that the number of those who
do, is very small in comparison of those who do not, who knows not the
difficulty which the greatest Saints have had to vanquish the stings of the
flesh, and to preserve an incorruptible Celibacy.

It Is certain that what is most difficult to observe is the Law of Continence.
Perhaps the best man of the world does not acquit himself of his duties with
all the exactness of the Sanctuary. This saying of the Son of God is but too
true, That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh. As I have often remarked in the
precedent parts, nothing is more infirm than Man. The sight of a Woman, that is
to say, a handful of dust; of a thing which at the bottom is nothing but a heap
of rottenness and corruption with relation to that body which is adored, easily
puts an end to all his constancy, and makes him oftentimes forget all his
wisdom.

O miseras hominum mentes! O pectora caeca! Lucret.
O miserable minds of man, Oh! blind understanding. What ought to persuade us
more, that Marriage is a remedy good for all men in general, and that the
Creator who ordained it, knew very well that nothing was more necessary for us?
It was said long ago, Qui abhoret a societate conjugali, vel Angelus est, vel
stirpes. One must be either insensible, or above sensibility to be able to pass
by this Matrimonial Union.

I cannot forbear, Sir, at present to improve the usefulness, to say no worse,
of the Celebacy of Laymen. If it be a virtue, certainly it is none of the most
considerable It is even of the nature of those, which very often lead the way
to vice. What advantage does it bring to them, unless it be to expose them to
great temptations? unless it be to deprive them of a very commodious assistant,
such as a Wife is? unless it be to renounce the sweetest of Societies? And
this, for I know not what difficulties they frame to themselves; whereof one
part is purely imaginary, another is tied to all the conditions of life, and
the rest is nothing in comparison of the real pleasures of Marriage. What
advantages likewise return from thence to the Republic? People are oftener
scandalized than improved thereby, and very often are seen examples of them,
which more deserve our horror, than our imitation. I speak of worldly
Batchelors, and not of such as are withdrawn from the world, and consecrated to
the Almighty.

The most favorable judgment tha^ one can make of the wisest Celebacy is, that
it is a virtue which dot^ neither good nor evil. Now for the reason that it is
without action, o^ may say that it is a kind of vice: for according to Cicero,
Virtutis laus om^ in action consistit. From whence come this of Silius the
Italian.

Actio si desit, virtus est sutile (...) men. Virtue's a useless Name without
practice. Celibacy then has nothing but the name of Virtue. It has neither the
effect, nor the truth of it. It is a simple quality, which is very often
founded upon the temper and constitution of bodies; or (which is of less
importance) upon the maxims of a carnal prudence.

After all man was made for Society. Non solum no^ nati sumus. Cic. L. 2.
We are no^ born for our selves only. It is not good that man should (...)
alone, says God himself.

Est opus auxilio -- says Ovid. we have need of help. Tristis eris, si solus
eris: You Will be sorrowful if your alone. The testimony of a single person is of
no account amongst Lawyers. Vox unius, vox nullius. And as the Father of
Philosophers says, two are better than one, both for council and action. Arist.
L. 8. Eth.
Duo simul viventes and intelligere and agere sunt potentiores quam unus. The
Divinity it self which is but one in essence, is notwithstanding more than one
in person. And why has God created two Sexes in Nature, if it was not to make
us understand that one is necessary to the other, and that they cannot subsist
without being joined together. Are not all living creatures bent that way by a
natural inclination? Is it not this mutual love of males for females, and
females for males, thet multiplies their Species, and preserves the world?

Ovid.
Nec caeant pecudes, si levis absit amor. If we believe the Naturalists, this
desire extends to insensible things. They tell us of diverse Plants that can
neither increase nor fructify without company, as the Palm am ngst others. And
can Man after this without violating in some measure the rights of Nature,
despise his union with Woman, that is to say, what she has of most complete and
charming? It Is true, as the Ancients say, that Man is of a nature absolutely
Heroical, that can innocently excuse himself from her. But how ridiculous and
unjust is he, add they, that despise Marriage, the first and purest of
Societies?

But, Sir, if you would know the real motives of Marriage, you are only to
consider Man with relation to the four bodies, whereof he is composed. I shall
call the first, The Body Natural. The second* The Body Politic. The third, The
Body Domestic. And the fourth, The Body Ecclesiastic. Mankind, State, ^mily,
and Church are these four ^odies. With relation to mankind, ^e is Man. To the
State he is Citi^en. To the Family he is Son. And (...) the Church, he is
Faithful. These ^ur qualities put him equally under ^e obligigation of
Marriage. As ^an he ought to labor for the pro^agation of mankind. As Citizen,
^r the preservation of the Common^ealth. As Son he ows Successors to is Family;
and as Faithful, he owes ^lect ones to the Church. Marriage (...) absolutely
necessary to fulfill all these ^uties, and to discharge all these en^agements.
They ought to be ex^lain'd to you more at length.

To begin with the first point; It (...) certain that every Animal is obliged
^o interest himself in the conservation ^f his Species, but particularly Man,
^ho is king of all. It Is for him that all ^he rest were made: and without him
^he world would be but a frightfull So^itude. For this reason God com^anded him
to increase and multiply ^mmediately after his Creation. And ^or the same
reason he inspird him with the desire of it, and gave him that eager
inclination of Cooperating with another Sex, wherewith all men, as I have said,
are naturally transported. It must be granted that there is nothing in nature
either so violent, or so necessary. Without this love, where is that man that
would converse with woman? where is the woman, that would endure man? But to the
end that no abuse might be made thereof, God has assigned it bounds, he has
fixed it between two persons, he has confined it to the sacred laws of
Marriage. Be it as it will, if it is man's duty to increase his Species, it is
no less his duty to marry since one cannot reasonably be done without the other.

Man may be considered in a double sense, vel Physice, vel Theologice. In the
Theological prospect nothing is more dispisable, it is true, it is a revolted
Subject. It is a sinful creature. It is an object of Horror to Heaven and
Earth. It is a composition of crimes and miseries. Man, says the Prophet, in
this respect, is nothing but Vanity. If one should weigh him with nothing he
would ^e found even lighter. They are all, ^ys he elsewhere, cor^pted, Psalm.
14.1.
and become abo^inable by their works. ^here is not one does good. But in ^e
Physical and Natural sense, what (...) more admirable than Man? O God, ^id the
same David, What is Man ^at thou should remember him; and ^e Son of Man that
thou should be (...) careful of him. Thou have made him ^t a little less than
the Angels. Thou ^ast crowned him with glory and ho^our. Thou have given him
the Empire (...) all things here below. In this re^pect the Philosopher regards
him as ^he end of all Creatures. Nos sumus quodam modo ^is omnium. St. Arist.
Anstin ^kewise instructs us that all things are ^omprised in him. In homine
est om^is creatura; He considers him as the miracle of Nature. Homo magnum ^t
miraculum. And our eloquent Ci^ero will have him to be of more worth ^han all
other creatures together. Ho^o caeteris animalibus long praestat. I add that
this same Theology, which lessens him so much, when it considers him in the
irregularities of Nature, exalts him to the highest Heaven; to the society of
Angels; to the glory of Eternity, when it considers him in those Privileges
which Grace confers upon him. Man then is without dispute what there is most
precious and recommendable in the world. And yet it is the fruit of Marriage.
It is from thence it derives its Original. What greater motive can one present
him with in order to dispose him to it.

Every one naturally covets to signalize himself in the employment he
professes; and to perform those things which may procure him the commendation
of Posterity. It Was this ambition that gave us the Speeches of a Demosthenes;
the Orations of a Cicero, and so many other masterpieces of the mind, which we
read with so much pleasure. What else has made immortal the Apelles, the
Michael-Angeli, the Titians, and all those other famous Artists of Antiquity,
whose works the curious still buy and value more than Gold. And, what! if man
is so much affected at the glory of making, either a good book, or an excellent
Picture, or a curious Statue, is it possible that he should be insensible of
the glory of composing Men? that is to say, other selves; that is to say, most
lively Ideas of the Divinity; such noble frames, that all the Gold of the
Indies can never purchase, and are of more account than the world it self? What
can be more admirably noble than this ambition? If man in particular is of so
great price, of what esteem should all in general be? And if the desire of
giving some individuals to Humankind, ought to dispose us for Marriage, how
much more the preservation of his whole body, which absolutely depends thereon?
The single use of reason in Beasts (if one may say they have reason) is to
secure their lives from dangers; but its great use in men is to multiply
theirs, and to increase their kinds. Vniversis animalibus data est ratio:
brutis tantum ad vi^am tuendam: Homini autem ad propa^andam, says Actantius.

Those good Sparks of the Town, who know so well the use of Women, will not
fail to say that one may without Marriage accomplish this end of Nature. They
not only say it but put it in practice. Without going any further, those
Hospitals that have been so wisely set up at Paris to receive the fruits of
their debauchery are too sencible testimonies of it to make the least doubt. O
God! how many Maidens ruined, how many Famalies dishonored by those lascivious
Libertines, what crimes, what abominations, what iniquities are committed in
the world upon this subject?

Heu, heu perpetuo debuit illa legi. Ovid Taste. l. 4.
My reply to this false reasoning is this, that one can never lawfully use
Women out of Marriage under any pretense whatsoever. I have sufficiently proved
it in my second part. Cicero says very well that man is the only creature that
is brought forh with modesty and shame. Hoc solum animal, natum pudoris ac
verecundiae particeps. Cic. de. finib.
But if we should believe those persons, no animal would enjoy less. In effect,
what is more impudent than all those Whoremongers of profession, who ^void
Marriage only to indulge themselves the more in this filthy pleasure? ^here are
no kind of infamies which they ^on't commit. They make no consci^nce of any
thing. For, says the Apostle, (...) would be even indecent to ^y those things
which are ^one by them in secret. Ephesians. 5.
Un^appy Sinners, who oppose the most na^ural of their duties only to confirm
themselves in the most criminal of ha^its! whatsoever they may assert, as the
multiplication of Men is the undoubted end of Marriage, it is certain that
Marriage is the only means it has ordained, and whereof it will make use to
that end. In its pure maxims all other ways of peopling the world are unlawful
and prohibited. It Is what she has even imprinted in the hearts of all honest
men. Those States, that acted only by their Principles, and to whom the orders
of God were unknown, have not ceased to recommend Marriage as the most
necessary of Societies: and to forbid Incontinence as the shame of humanity. I
have already made it appear, there needs no more upon this head.

But, Sir, if we would be entirely convinced, that Fornication, Polygamy, and
Concubine-keeping are no lawful ways of multiplying men, and that nothing more
displeases Heaven, consider the Countries where these kinds of Liberties are
permitted. Do you imagine that the Jews, the Mahometans, and the Pagans, who
live in all these disorders, increase their Species more than the Christians,
who abhor them? It is certain that they are even less fertile. Did you never
make reflection upon the Sheep and the Wolves? The first produce but once a
year, and only one Lamb at each time. Notwithstanding although an infinite number
of them is eaten every day, the earth is covered with them. The last on the
other side generate many times a year, and bring forth no less than six or
seven little ones. Besides being improper for the nourishment of men, their
number is not lessened for this use. And yet we know that there are but few of
them seen in comparison of Sheep. Who makes a doubt that there is a particular
Providence therein? It is exactly the same with all those prohibited Unions,
whereof I have treated, and with lawful Marriage. Who would not say that
Turkey, Persia, Japan, and all those other Countries where it is permitted to
have several Wives, and various Concubines, must be infinitely populous? and
yet they are less numerous than Europe. Although the Bed of Christians consists
but of two persons, it does not cease to be much more fertile, than that of all
these Infidels, as manifold as it is. There is no appearance of reason in
refering this to the single climate and particular constitution of Men. There
is without dispute somewhat of mystery therein. God and nature were pleased to
let us know by the same, that the union of one man with one single woman is the
real method one must pursue for the propogation of mankind Do we not know
likewise that almost all those Whores and debauched Women, who are the scandal
of their Sex, are barren, and that the greatest part of them need not make use
of a thousand sorts of criminal ways to become so, as they do every day? It
remains then to conclude that nothing but Marriage can really and lawfully
accomplish this first end of Nature, and therefore it is of indispensible
obligation to Men.

The quality of Citizens of the world, and members of the State, is a reason of
no less force to dispose them to it. Aristotle says that Man is an Animal
naturally politic. This is very true. Scarce were Men upon the Earth but they
thought how to erect themselves into a Body, into a Commonwealth, and into a
Kingdom. The most barbarous people have voluntarily submitted themselves either
to a Monarchy, or to an Aristocracy, or else to a Democracy. Monarchy without
doubt is the best of the three, because it comes nearest to the Divinity. But
they are all lawful and permitted of God; add, Sir, that they are all likewise
very necessary.

Nothing is more fatal to Society than Anarchy. Where there is no Superior all
the world aims at being so. Men live in an eternal confusion. The Laws are
dispossessed of their Authority. Every one leads himself by his own fancy, and
the impunity of a crime causes so prodigious a relaxation in manners, that one
sees nothing but Seditions, Murders, Rapes, Cicer. pro Milone.
and Violences. Qui ignorant maximam illecebram esse peccandi impunitatis Spes?
How excellent, I beseech you, ought that good to be which is opposed to so
great (...) evil? If Anarchy is the principle of (...) many disorders to
mankind, what ^^vantages does he not reap from Mon^rchy, and those other
politic Govern^ents, whereof I have spoken? In a lord, what can one imagine to
be of ^ore importance for him, then the holy ^ate of Marriage, which alone
furnish^ him with Subjects and Sovereigns for ^ose many Empires of the world,
which ^etain men in the duty of concord, cor^espondence, and Justice?

In all times that man has been esteem^d very happy and worthy of the prais^s
of posterity, who exposes himself for ^he safety of the Republic.

Dulce and decoru prom Patria mori. Horat. Car. l. 3. c. 2.
It Is charming and noble to dye for our Country. But if it be glorious to dye
for his Country, methinks it should be much more to live and to marry for its
sake. A Father that presents it with five or six Children brought up in virtue,
contri^utes oftentimes much more to its preservation, than a Captain who has
secured it from a hundred Enemies. It Is certain then, that man is under a
doubl^ obligation to labor, both for the propogation of mankind and the
subsistenc^ of that state wherein he is engaged. Marriage is necessary for the
one, it (...) no less for the other. The best way o^serving his Prince and
Country doubtless is to furnish him with a great number both of brave Subjects
and wise Citizens, fit for those uses which may advantage the Public.

This consideration has been a motive to several People of the World not only
to speak of Marriage with praise, but also to reward its fertillity with
magnificence. The Romans appointed public honors to those women, who had
brought into the world seven or eight Children; and with a Pension that
answered the Glory of their Empire, they gave a place in the Capitol to their
Statues. In effect, Marriage as I have said, is the safety of the Republic;
since it is the only Nursery from whence proceeds all its Captains, all its
Magistrates, all its Hand^craftsmen, and in a word all those different sorts of
Subjects, whose various employments and perpetual Subordination one to the
other make up the subsistence of States, and of the whole World. As much then
as Man is corcerned in his own preservation, and that of his Country, so much
is he obliged to Marry.

If this general Interest ought to dispose Man for Marriage, there is a
particular one that obliges him to it much more: It is the Interest of his
Family. What would become of that without Marriage? one Generation would see it
begin and end. The quality of Father, which is in life most worthy of our
ambition, would appertain but to few Persons. What ought we to esteem dearer
^han our Blood? and what nobler Jealousy can we be inflamed with than to leave
behind us a numerous Posterity? Why, ^o you imagine, has Nature given Men ^n
inclination to labor, to occasion themselves a thousand Cares, and a thousand
Difficulties to heap up Riches, a hundred ^imes more than they ought for
themselves? I make no doubt but it is because ^he has likewise given them an
Inclination ^o multiply, and to produce Children, to whom they leave the fruits
of their watch^ngs and industry. One may affirm that this ^s the design of all
honest Men, even those Batchelors that collect great Riches, very often do it
for the Advancement of their Nephews, and always from a Prospect of supporting
their Families.

There is nothing perhaps more reasonable than this Duty: If we believe St.
Paul, He is worse than an Infidel who is unmindful of his Family. Do not
suppose, Sir, that he has regard only to those who neglect the Subsistence and
Education of their Children: He speaks likewise of those, who being incapable
of preserving Continence, neglect the means of having any; and who rather than
Marry, choose to let their Race be extinguished, and to efface their Names from
the Memory of Men. Worse than an Infidel; O good God! what can be worse than an
Infidel in the World, that is to say, than a Turk or a Pagan? It must be
granted, that the Apostle could never more expressly recommend Marriage, than by
expressing himself in that manner. But it must be likewise agreed, that nothing
ought to be more pressing to determine Men for it: For in a word, what has been
long since asserted, is very true; Filii sunt Columnae familiarum. Children are
the Pillars of Families. Children are the only support of Families, without
them they must of Necessity fall, they must be reduced to nothing.

What was more insupportable to the Jews, than the Unfruitfulness of their
Wives, or their own: They looked upon it as a sort of Curse, and they valued not
all the other Advantages of Life, while they were deprived of the Blessing of
Children. Consider, in Genesis, the Complaints of a Sarah and a Rachel upon
this Occasion. I know very well that the sending of the Messiah, who had been
promised to our first Parents, was to these Persons a particular Motive to
desire Children, every one hoping to receive in his Family that invaluable
Present of Heaven. But I am sensible at the same time that many of them sighed
after Successors from the single Prospect of contributing somewhat to the
Subsistence of their Nation and Family, and that they only requested Children
because they looked upon them as the most excellent Possession of the World, as
indeed they are. It Is what the Psalmist nobly represents to us, in the 127 th.
Psalm.

The Israelites were so violently fond of having Children, that they
apprehended there could be no severer Punishment for them than to pass away
their Lives either in Barrenness or Celibacy. God has taken away my Reproach,
said Rachel, when she was delivered of Joseph her firstborn. The Daughter of
Jephtah likewise declares to us the same thing; Judges 11.
this unhappy Father having for the accomplishment of his rash vow condemned
her to the civil death of a perpetual Retreat, according to the opinions of the
best Authors; She requested of him a Damosel or two in order to go and lament
her Virginity for two Months. Amongst a thousand things she had to regret in
leaving the world, she esteems nothing more worthy of her tears, than to have
been unmarried and incapable of marrying. I am persuaded that the Batchelors
had the same desire for Marriage as the Maidens had, and that both Sexes were
under an equal passion for this condition of life. We may infe^ it from the
prodigious multiplication o^ the family of Jacob in Egypt. When i^ went down
there, it was composed but of seventy persons in all, and when they departed
from thence four hundred and thirty years after, they were six hundred thousand
Men, without computing Women and Children, Exodus 12.37.
who in all appearance amounted to twice or thrice the number, as it is easy to
imagine. Prodigious and scarce to be believed but in supposing what is true!
and that no People ever so much loved, or practiced Marriage, as this ancient
People, and that they confined themselves under it is pleasing chains, almost as
soon as they distinguished reason. This People, Sir, was the People of God;
whom he tenderly loved; a People, whom he looked upon as his most valuable
Treasure. A People, for whom he multiplied every day the wonders of his
Providence and Wisdom. In a word, a People who ought by consequence to serve
for an Example to all other People upon the Subject of Marriage, which was in
the midst of them, and so much recommended and blessed of God.

What, do you suppose, David calls the greatest of the blessings of God upon
earth? It is neither Riches, nor Honors, nor even a Crown. He passes beyond
all this without haesitation. The happiness which he engages to him that fears
God, is to have a fruitful Bed and a numerous Posterity. Would you know, Sir,
those two men, of all those whom the Scripture speaks of, that I esteem to have
been the most happy of the world? Do not imagine that it is either a David, or
a Solomon, or an Hezekiah. They are Ibzan and Abdon. If you ask me the reason,
Judges. 12.9.14.
you may read it in the Book of the Judges of Israel, in whose number are they.
There you will find concerning the first, that he had thirty Sons and thirty
Daughters. And of the second, that he had forty Sons and thirty Grandchildren,
whom he saw all together on horseback. What can be a greater happiness to a
Father? What can be more observable in the life of a man? It is likewise true,
that the sacred Author in speaking to us of those two famous Captains, contents
himself to report this single circumstance of them; which in my opinion goes
beyond all the great deeds of Caesar and Alexander.

You may apprehend it as you please, but to me it seems that such a geniture
contains somewhat very noble in it, and that one cannot be observed in the
History of Men through a siner place. It must be granted that these Men well
understood the Art of immortalizing their Families. What, Sir, will not so
great an Example encourage you to look after the Subsistence of yours? would
you suffer it to perish with your Name for want of marrying? will you always
entertain a repugnance for Marriage? will you never divest your self of those
false Ideas, you have conceived thereof? will you always be ingenious to frame
to your self, in order to remove your self from it, such punishments as do not
exist, which I shall make appear in the sequel? and will you never be convinced
of those real delights which I have shown to be in that state, and which ought
to attract the whole world? It is the only advantage that is wanting to your
happiness. But assure your self, that without this all the rest is of no value.
As well provided as you are with the goods of Fortune and Morals, can you fail
to please your self in Hymen, and to partake of pleasures a thousand times more
affecting than those which can be found in the happiest Celibacy? How much
satisfaction shall you give to those illustrious persons, to whom you owe all
things with your being? what glory shall you not obtain by adding to their
comfort what they desire with the utmost zeal? can you decently refuse them
this mark of your acknowledgment? must they go down to the grave without seeing
a young Sprig shoot forth from you, that may assure them their Name and Blood
will not perish with you? will you give them cause to make this sad complaint
of you?

Tecum una tota est nostra Sepulta domus. Catull. ad Mal. 69.
Grisly Grave is buried our whole house. Spare them this heaviness, and your
self this confusion. Do not render your self guilty of your own annihilation.
Become jealous of your glory. Determine your self at last to this generous
action, whereof one might truly say with re^ard to your family, ^ota domus
laeta est, paterque, materque, The whole family rejoices. Hearken to the
Precept of a wise man, Ne maneas sine nuptiis, ne sine nomine pereas, Phoci^.
Live not unmarry'd, lest you die without a name.

An ancient Author of Paganism, it is Musonius, examining the Motives of
Marriage, finds none more pressing than those I have offered. After having much
enlarged upon this matter, and in a wise and eloquent way, he at length
concludes his discourse with these words: Quisquis igitur homines nuptiis
private, is abolet familiam, Muson apud Stobaeum, Sermon. 186.
civitatem, and totum genus humanam, quod absque generatione non potest
permanere, ut neque justa and legitima generatio sine nuptijs. Since then
without a continual Series of Generations, Families, Commonwealths, and all
humane Kind would be absolutely annihilated, and that Marriage is the sole
lawful cause of these Generations, according to the remark of this learned man,
judge of the obligation you are under to marry. The heavenly voice seems to
call you to it. Resist no longer its Vocation. But to the end that you may know
all the Engagements you are under to pay obedience to it, make some
reflections, if you please, upon the quality of the faithful, which you have
taken into the bosom of the Church.

This, Sir, is the greatest motive, which ought to determine you for Marriage.
It even recollects in it self all the rest. What do you take the Church to be?
It is according to St. Paul, the City of the living God, Jerusalem from on
high, Heb. 12.22.23.
the Mother of us all. The Assembly of the firstborn whose names are written
in the Heavens. 1 Timothy 5.^5.
The Pillar and Support of Truth. The house of God. The Commonwealth of
Israel, according to the Spirit.

The divine Family, whereof God is the Father, Jesus Christ the eldest Son, and
the Elect the younger ones, if one may be allowed to speak so. Tell me, I
beseech you, if in all these regards, there is any thing more precious in the
world, than the Church? Tell me likewise if there is any thing, to whose
Subsistence men are more obliged to contribute? What are all our Interests in
comparison of that? If you ask me the true reason, that ought to make us desire
the propagation of Mankind, the duration of States, and the Conservation of
Families: It is nothing else but the Subsistence of the Church, which is
infinitely more excellent than the World, and all its Societies. This ought to
be the chiefest end of all our Vows, and all our Cares.

How ought a Christian, do you think, to endeavor the advancement of this
Mystical Empire of Jesus Christ, the exaltation of his Reign; the Subsistence
of his Church? He may, Sir, acquit himself of this Duty in a double manner;
both by Passion and by Action: First, he must suffer, he must mortify himself.
In the Second place, it is necessary that he labor, and put himself in action
for her. Now of all the Actions that may contribute to this end, Marriage is
without doubt the principal: Since it is the natural and material cause of the
faithful, without which all moral causes would be absolutely useless.

When Moses built his Tabernacle, the Men and Women contributed voluntarily and
with great Zeal, all that was necessary for its construction. What scandal
would it be for Christians not to do for the Truth, what the Jews did for the
Figure? Those people dispossessed themselves with pleasure of the most precious
things they had, in order to enrich that ancient Tent of the Desert. What
should not we perform then for the glory of this Divine Tabernacle, which God
has planted, and not Man? But Sir, the question here is neither of Gold, nor
Silver, precious Stones. or fine Linen, Purple, or Scarlet. The Tabernacle of
the Church is not composed of dead and insensible things. Brutal and Inanimate
Stones enter not into its construction. There must be living ones for that end.
There must be faithful Men. There must be reasonable creatures. There must be
Christians sanctified by the aspersion of the blood of Christ. How glorious is
it for a Father or Mother to contribute a great number of these living Stones
for the Edification and Conservation of the Church? Marriage is the only
quarry, 1 Pet. 1, 2.16.
from whence they must be had. God allows of no other. Indeed they are not in a
condition proper to build this holy structure. My Mother conceived me in sin,
and brought me forth in iniquity, says David. If we refer our selves even to
the Satyrick Poet, he will likewise instruct us in what the Scripture every
where tells us, that all Men are born with Sin.

Nam vitijs nemo sine nascitur. Horat. Sermon. L. 1. Sat. 3.
But here Grace is added to Nature. Marriage makes Men: And of these men God
makes his Elect. Insomuch that it is ever true to say in a certain sense, that
Marriage makes the Elect, which are members of the Church; since it is the
Organon of Nature to bring them into the world, and that Grace whfch
regenerates them, acts upon them only as upon works of this very Nature. In
this prospect it is scarce possible to express the excellency of Marriage, and
what strong engagements men are under to marry.

Philosophers say, that a Being may destroy it self two ways, by Substraction,
and by privation of means; either in doing things contrary to its Subsistence,
or in omitting those things which are necessary to it. Pharaoh destroyed the
Church of Israel in the first manner: And those who live unmarried now a days,
destroy the Christian Church in the second. That barbarous King by causing all
the Male Children of the Jews to be thrown into the Nile, rendered their
propagation fruitless; and those who remain in the state of single men, as far
as they can, make it impossible. So that the Church is not beholding to them
for its subsistence. This Doctrine is even conformable to the expressions of
Scriptute, which says, that he who does not prevent a man's death by furnishing
him with means to live, kills him. If this Theology be true, as we must not
question it, I can hardly conceive how all those obstinate and professed
Batchelors should not be amazed thereat. What greater misfortune could arrive
to them, than not only to have performed nothing for the Glory and Advantage of
this undefiled Spouse of our Savior, which cost him his life; but also to have
labored for its destruction by not doing what is capable to preserve it? Where
is the State, where is the Family, where is the Society, more worthy to subsist
than the Church? All the rest is supported only for her sake. Columna est Orbis
Ecclesia, The World, this unhappy World, which so outragiously persecutes her,
would be destroyed without this daughter of Heaven. It is preserved only to
give place to the fullness of the Elect. So soon as they are all in the Essence
of things, adieu to the world. Heavens! What afflictions should not those old
Batchelors undergo for not having contributed to its conformation?

But Sir, one of those things which ought, methinks, to be most prevailing with
you for Marriage, is, that you will infallibly marry at one time or other.
Sooner or later you will be inclined to it. It is with Marriage, as with new
fashions. At first they appear insupportable? But by little and little the eyes
are accustomed to them, and at length one submits to them with others. How many
men likewise do we observe, who after having long declamed against Marriage,
fail not to confine themselves under its laws? Are you ignorant that those who
speak of it, as of a solly, say that it must be done once in a man's life? That
Poet so knowing in the Art of Love, whom I have already cited so often, tells
us with a grace that Venus never loses her rights, and that all men are
tributary to her.

Et Venus ex tota gente tributa petit. Ovid. Ep. 4.
Venus claims Tribute from all the amorous Race. If you are not in Love whilst
you are young, you must necessarily love being old. If not to day, you must of
Course to morrow.

Catul. Privil. Ven.
Cras amet, qui nunquam amavit. The same Ovid observes likewise what is very
true that the later Love appears, the more violent it is.

Venit amor gravius, quo serius. Ep. 4.
Would you, Sir, deferr your Marriage to a time, wherein you will be unfit to
marry? to a time, wherein passion is as it were unactive? to a time wherein the
blood is congealed in the Veins? If Marriage is a sort of solly, it is certainly
a double one in that decrepit age, wherein a man is good for nothing but to
bewail the dismal Wast of years; wherein by the weakness of Nature, he cannot
walk without the support of a Stick; wherein a defenseless impotence confines
him to the Empire of a young wife; Sponso Seni mulier juvencula imperat.

Wherein the Body being cracked by the severe Efforts of age, is no longer able
to support its members, to speak with another Poet.

Vbi jam validis quassatum viribus aevi
Lucret. L. 3.
Corpus, and obtusis ceciderunt viribus artus.
Who makes a doubt, that marriage in this case is not a real punishment? If it
be true then, that you are destined for Marriage: If your Inclination must
dispose you to it one day: If you are unable to avoid its yoke, as a thousand
Examples and a thousand Reasons seem to persuade: Is it not for your interest,
Sir, as well as Prudence, to defer the duty of it no longer? why should you not
do that to day, which you necessarily must to morrow? why should you drive off
to the end of your life, a thing, which, that I may so speak, ought to be
fulfilled in the beginning?

I could make this appear to you, Sir, in a very convincing manner, by the
consideration of the great advantages, that a happy Marriage brings to man; but
as it is a Subject which I have enlarged upon in my first part, I will not make
this of a longer extent. The single reflection that I shall add, is, that it
has always been ^f universal belief, that a good and ver^uous Wife is the
rarest of all treasures, and the sweetest of possessions.

Nihil, O Cyrene, suavius uxore bona! There is nothing, O Cyrenus, more
charming than a good wife. Solomon says of this man, that he has ^ound a mighty
good, and received of God ^ singular Favor. He assures him that it ^s the only
advantage he ought to esteem ^n this life, and the sweetest recompense of all
his disquiets.

To make an end of convincing you, shall I allege yet, that the life of the
wisest Bachelor comes much nearer to Libertinism, than that strict Wisdom
which is the essential character of an honest man, and which has rendered the
Socrates's, and the Cato's so famous in the Greek and Roman Histories? He that
is without a Wife, will ramble here and there. Who would confide in a man, that
has no Nest, Eccl. c. 36.
and that lays him down wheresoever the Night comes upon him?

It is certain that Marriage is of extreme service to retain a man in his Duty,
and that it makes him avoid a thousand occasions to remove himself from it,
which are very ordinary with Batchelors. As I have said, we naturally love the
Society of Women. So that if a man has not one of his own, he without
difficulty persuades himself to go and seek out others abroad. He sees them, he
courts them, he endeavors to get himself beloved by them, and oftentimes he
succeeds but with too much easiness. The handsomer they are, the greater is the
danger for both. Our Ecclesiastical Author says, that many have been seduced by
the Beauty of the wife. From whence come all those Domestic Disorders which
render the condition of so many Husbands and Fathers unhappy; and which is
owing to the wantonness of these wicked Batchelors, who by frequent Visits and
criminal inventions, have found out a means to corrupt the virtue of their
Wives and Daughters?

How many of them are there, whose conversations are still much more infamous,
and who make no scruple of frequenting all those nasty places, which are unfit
to be named, in order to satisfy their Lusts with those professed Whores, who
ridicule them after they have obtained their money, and of whom a Poet so well
expresses, Te tenet, Tibull. L. 1. El. 7.
absentes alios suspirat amores.

If it be true, that they are capable of loving: For if we believe St.
Chrysostom, Meretrix amare nescit: There is none, Sir, but a real wife, that
knows really how to love, and whose love is permanent and solid.

Amor perennis Conjugis castae manet. Sen. Octav. Act. 1.
Add, that nothing is moere unworthy of a reasonable creature, of the King of
Animals, of the Companion even of Angels, than this filthy conduct of the
greatest part of single men. Add, that Marriage which usually frees men from
it, is equally excellent and necessary. Add, that since they cannot forbear to
love the Sex, that man is very happy who is possessed at home and not abroad of
what he loves, as Terrence so well declares.

Terent. Phorm.
O fortunatissime!
Cui quod amas domi est.
Add, in a word, that Lactantius has reason to exhort all those to marry, who
cannot overcome their passion, to the end that they may innocently enjoy what
they cannot without offense under Celibacy. Quisquis affectus illos frenare non
potest, cohibeat eos intra praescriptum ^legitimi Thori: Vt and illud, quod
avide expetit, assequatur, and tamen non in peccatum incidet. I cannot better
conclude this third part.

Fourth Part. Where the Objections which are made against Marriage, and the
false Reasons which are alleged to live Unmarried, are answered.
I Enter, Sir, into the greatest and most formidable battle that was ever
given. To make no doubt hereof, you are only to consider the Subject, the
Parties, and the Arms. Marriage is the Subject. The business is to know whether
it be useful and advantageous for Man, and conducive to his Happiness. A
Question infinitely important, since it extends to the decision of the Fate of
all Mankind. The Parties I have to engage with, are well near all men. There
are but few on my side, the greatest part are combined against this holy
Society, have conceived so strong an aversion against it, that they cannot bear
to hear it commended, nor forbear to say all that is ill concerning it. Never
was Combat more unequal. My adversaries are a thousand to one. Non unius urbis,
sed universi orbis iniquam sententiam sustinet, says Tertullian. It is not only
in one place, in one City, in one Kingdom, that Marriage is exclaimed against,
it is throughout all the Universe. As to the Arms of those, with whom I have to
deal, they are composed of less Reason than Passion; and savor more of
Invective than of Justice. But yet they are so much the more dangerous, as they
are favored both by the temper of men, and the appearance of things. When a
man reflects upon the sweetness of Liberty, the sad perplexities of Marriage,
and all those evil managements which afflict Society, who would not say that
all our Detracters ought to depend on victory in the dispute I undertake
against them?

But Sir, if Caesar discourages me, St. Bernard on the other side, enlivens me.
When the occasion of the battle is just, says he, one cannot fail of succeeding
in it with advantage, Si bona fuerit causae pugnantis, belli excituus malus
esse non po^erit. Was there ever a cause juster than that which I defend? It is
for the interest of all Men, all Families, and all Nations. It is likewise for
a thing of great Consequence, whereon depends their happiness, and without
which it is impossible for them to subsist. In a word, it is not for a Subject
contrary to Law, or Reason. It is for a Subject approved of God, always
recommended by wise Men, required by true Reason, agreeable to the nature of
Man, and conformable to all sort of right and equity. If a man may promise to
himself the protection of Heaven in any attempt, surely he may in this.

To reply in order to those objections which are made against those
propositions I have established, one must immediately distinguish them into
these three heads, to which in my esteem they easily be reduced. First, they
object against the Conduct and ill Temper of Wives, whereof they make a most
severe censure. Secondly, they say of Marriage, that it is of it self unworthy
of Man, and that nothing less agrees with the perfection of his Being. And in
the third place, they speak of its Consequences and Obligations, as of an
insupportable burden. I hope to make appear that in all these respects the
cause of my Adversaries is most deplorable, and that there is not only
injustice, but even madness in the desence of it.

It is then by the consideration of Women that men begin to be disgusted at
Marriage. What disobliging things do they not assert of them? with what
Calumnies, and Aspersions do they tear their reputation, and their virtue? If
one should believe them, there would not be a Vice in Morality, but ought to be
imputed to them: Nor a Misfortune in the world, whereof they are not the
occasion.

Inconstancy, say they, is one of the principal characters of a woman.

Virg. Aeneid. 4.
Varium et mutabile semper Foemina. Nothing is more volatile. She never stays
long in the same Situation. It very often happens that what she loved
yesterday, she hates to day. The least thing which intervenes in her mind,
makes ^er forget her promise; and violate her Faith. When you think your self
to be ^ost in her favor, you are most in dis^race. Afrer having sighed many
years ^or the conquest of her heart, one single ^oment apprehends its loss. How
ma^y sad examples have we seen of this ^costant humor of the Sex? How can ^ne
confide in them after all this? Se^eca asks wherein wisdom consists. Quid ^st
sapientia? He answers, Sem^er idem velle, Ep. 20.
atque idem nol^. It is, says he, to continue ^rm in his resolutions. Are women
of ^is constitution?

Our Slanderers add, that the woman is ^orn with a spirit of Contradiction.
^hey make a cruel Commentary upon ^is text of a Poet.

^olunt, ubi velis, ubi nolis cupiunt ultro. Terent.
When you are willing they are ^y, when you fall off then they pursue (...)
with strong desire.

The wife, say they, is only fit to make the husband miserable. She is
eternally repugnant to his opinions. If a man proposes Peace, it must be under
the condition of surrendering his arms. She always insists upon her own terms.
Which made an Author say, that of all things uneasy to subdue, Woman is the
chief.

Inter omnes alias res, maxim inexpugnabilis est mulier. Euripid ap. Stob.
And although she is not born to rule, Mulieri non imperare concedi^ Natura, Pub.
Max.
yet man must submit to her. He must dispossess himself of his Authority, or
else there i^ no repose, no Union, no Concord; bu^ a perpetual trouble and an
immorta^ war. What more miserable Fate can (...) man have, than to pass his
life in so severe a Slavery? These morose and whimsical men, who can say
nothing of women, but what is injurious, still place i^ the rank of their evil
Qualities, Malice Dissimulation, a desire of Revenge, and a difficulty of
restraining their Tongues which makes them often tell what the^ know, and what
they know not. In a word, say they, there are no sorts of miseries and
vexations, but woman is capable of occasioning to man, as likewise there are no
crimes but she is able to commit.

Dux malorum foemina, and scelarum artifex. Woman the Leader of Evils, and the
Inventor of wickedness. Judge after all this, if the wise man had not reason to
prefer the Society of Lions and Dragons to that of an evil woman, and if there
is any thing more judicious, than those words of Terence, Verbum unum, cave de
nuptijs. In Andr.


But one word with you, have a care of a conjugal Noose.

I ask pardon of the Ladies for having heaped together so many outrages against
them, and all those invectives wherewith they are defamed. It was not without
extreme violence to my self. As much as I love to speak well of them, so much
pain is it to me to suffer them to be calumniated; but let them not be
concerned at my Liberty, I hope i^ will be advantageous to them. The design I
have to protect their persecuted innocence, engaged me to it in an
indispensable manner. 'Twas necessary to know whereof they were accused, in
order to justify them. Behold then the principal heads of this great process
which the disaffected of all Ages have entered against them. Let us see whether
they are well grounded therein; or rather let us observe (for who sees it not?)
that they maintain therein the worst cause in the world; and that there is not
a single person of them, but in the tribunal of an impartial justice ought to
be condemned, to make reparation of honor to a Sex whose virtue every one
ought to venerate, and not to assault its reputation?

A man may immediately justify the Women by way of recrimination. If they
deserve to have defects imputed to them, are the Men exempt from them? if they
have evil Qualities, are the men possessed of none but good ones? it will but
ill become me, it is true, to abandon the party of my own Sex. I know that in
the order of nature, it has considerable prerogatives over the other, and that
it is of a much more excellent kind. Masculinum neutraliter dignius est
foemi^ino, says the Father of Philosophy. But if a man is never so little just,
he must grant that all these privileges singly refer themselves to the
intellect and knowledge of the mind. The Siences, it is true, are above their
reach. They admit themselves in this respect be much inferior to men: And
confess that they are born for other things. Not but that this rare Genius, who
deserved to be called by a famous Author the Tenth Muse, Opusc. Annae Mariae
Schurman. P. 26.
and who in our age has proved the glory of her sex, has justified in a very
convincing manner, by a discourse expressly made, that Fathers and Mothers are
guilty of an extreme injustice for allotting them the Spindle and the Needle,
when they are by nature as well fitted for Arts and Disciplines as Men, if they
were pushed on. Be it as it will, the essential perfection of a reasonable
creature does nor consist in humane Sciences. Oftentimes they are more
injurious than profitable. Inflat Scientia, says St. Paul. Scientia mundi docet
vanitatem; Bern Cant.
Sciantia carnis voluptatem, says St. Bernard. And it is perhaps for this
reason, that Tertullian alleges by way of Paradox, Scire nihil, est omnia
scire. To know nothing, is to know all things.

It Is certain then, that what distinguishes man from Woman is not what is most
important in him, but what he has in community with her; that is to say,
Virtues, and Vices, which are of the nature of all kinds, of all Sexes, and of
all Conditions. Virtus and Malitia determinat nobiles and ignobiles, servos and
liberos, as Aristotle teaches. Now it is undeniable, that the man has not more
of one, and less of others, than the woman. One may even affirm, that he has
less virtue, and more vice. First, since he is a subject more noble, and
enlightened; vice is incomparably more notorious in him, than in the woman, as
Juveual says, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se.
Crimen habet, quanto major, qui peccat, habetur.
All Vices are more conspicuous and criminal, as the party offending is more or
less great.

I remark in the second place, that men are really much more criminal than
women, not only because they ought to be much more virtuous, and that the
offense has one degree of iniquity in them which is not in the women, but also
because they commit much more, and after a more egregious manner. This is so
true, that in the third place, the men are themselves guilty of the most part
of the failings of women. If these are in any wise ill humored, the men ought
to impute the cause thereof to their own proper conduct, which is very often
full of Tyranny, Contempt, and Licentiousness: And if they dispose themselves
sometimes to vicious excesses, it is either because they give them an example,
or because they solicit them with the utmost application. Possibly they are not
altogether insensible of the darts of love. It may be too, that the tenderness
of their hearts, and the sweetness of their Constitution, is often fatal to
them in this respect. It Is well known that they are not Angels, but infirm and
sinful creatures. Nevertheless one may judge how discree^ they would be, were
it not for the cruel persecutions of men, by the difficulty of ^ubduing the
Daphne's, the Io's, the Danae's, and the Europa's even by the Gods Apollo and
Jupiter.

Yes, Sir, make no doubt hereof: It is a manifest truth, that the greatest part
of women, either debauched, or ignorant, are made so by the wickedness of Men.
If women were allowed to follow their natural Inclinations, and their charms
did not excite against them the passion of Men; I am persuaded they would go in
the high road to virtue, without turning to the right, or to the left. It Is
true, if they observed in us the same attractions we observe in them, they
would perhaps be otherwise propens'd: But they discover none: Or if they do, it
must be granted that they have more strength of mind, than we, to surmount the
temptations. What is certain herein is, that they are indifferent enough upon
the Score of Love. Their great infirmity is not in loving, but in desiring to
be beloved, and to study to appear amiable, in order to procure themselves
hearts. They love to hear men talk things relating to their Beauty: But they do
not willingly give them an opportunity of talking; yet I confess, that they who
know how to prevail over this infirmity of the Sex, which makes them covet
incense and cajoling, at length confine them to their Laws, and get above their
constancy. But why should we attribute to them the crime of Men? Why do they
employ means to corrupt them? why do they practice so many stratagems to make
them forget their duty? Why do they putt things in their mind, which they would
never have thought on? why do they abuse their simplicity? Does it not ill
become the men after this to accuse them of indiscretion, and to asperse their
honor? They, who made them faulty in spite of themselves; they, who are the
real cause of the crimes which they commit in this respect: In a word, they who
are infinitely more culpable, than the women.

I affirm as much of their humor. If there are amongst them such as are
uneasy, and of a difficult access, I cannot abstain from saying that the
greatest part of Husbands make them so. How many of them are there, who treat
their wives like slaves, and imagine to themselves that they are only born for
servitude? Hearken, I beseech you, to the Complaint which they make in a Poet
touching the unhappiness of their fate: Must it not be granted, say they, that
of all creatures we are the most unfortunate? after having purchased a Husband
dear enough, he must be the disposer of our Bodies and Estates. It Is necessary
that with his person we espouse his Inclinations, and undergo that yoke he is
pleased to impose upon us. He acts with impunity what we cannot do without loss
of Fame. If he disapproves of us, he has the liberty to forsake us. Whatsoever
evils we endure with him, we must in no wise think of a Separation. Divorces
are indecent in women. When Domestic affairs succeed amiss, he goes to find
his consolation abroad. He walks, he diverts himself, he frequents good
Societies. He visits his friends. He disperses by this means all his vexations.
But as for us we must digest them alone. We are unable to seek any alleviation
but in our selves. If we do any thing that is well, no notice is taken of it;
but if any disaster arrives to the family, we are presently to be condemned.
Our pains are sufficiently known in producing and educating Children, and in
the management of all Domestic affairs, whilst our husbands are pleasing
themselves, and consider only many times how to rejoice. How deplorable
especially is our condition, when by false suspicions against our conduct, they
become jealous: Or else by their courses they oblige us to prove so? Were we as
fair and complete as Angels, they will not cease to be weary of us, and to
despise us, as if we were the most deformed. After the first heat of their Love
is extinguished in our bosoms, and they have satisfied the desire of their
flesh, they laugh at us, and contemns their promises.

Simul ac cupidae mentis satiata libido est, Catul. Argon. 65.

Dicta nihil metuere, nihil perjuria curant.
As for me, I confess ingenuously, that this complaint is just, and that she
had reason to say of her own Sex, Miserius nihil est quam mulier. There Is
nothing more miserable than Woman.

But I allege at the same time, that the men are unjust and ungrateful to
complain, so much as they do, of the ill humor of their wives; to say so many
disobliging things of them, and to attribute to them all the Severities of
Marriage. Besides, that they ought to hold them very much excused in
consideration of their frailty: I affirm that the chiefest part of their evil
conducts is derived less from their fault, than that of their husbands.
Generally speaking, the Wives have much more vexation, and much less pleasure.

How many husbands ruin their Families every day by gaming? How many are
starved by their filthy Debaucheries? How many of them are undone by
mischievous affairs, and destructive correspondencies, from which their wives
might have diverted them, if they had been made acquainted with their designs?
After all this, can be Wives be misconstrued if Patience escapes them
sometimes? if they are not always good humored, and it happens that they are
carried to murmur and complain of these ill husbands, who by their unhappy
conduct render their lives insupportable? O Detractors! assert as long as you
will that they are cruel, and violent: As for me, I find that they are but
little so, in regard of the occasion they have.

In the second place, we may justily the women by way of exception. They who
condemn them so magisterially, are men; that is to say, they are really
parties, and by consequence very suspicious Judges; or to say better, they
cannot be their Judges. They have an ample right to challenge them: They are
too much interessed in this process, to have the decision referred to them. As
prejudiced as they are against the Sex, how should they give an equitable
judgment? They only act in passion here, which ought to make one presume the
injustice of their Sentiments. If Oracles or Heroes had pronounced a Sentence
to the disadvantage of Women, one ought, I consess, to have some deference for
their testimony: But those are neither Gods, nor Demigods, that slander them
so much. They are very Men, and amongst them the least sincere, such as Poets
are. That which one of them asserted of himself, may be alleged of all, Ovid.
Trist. L. 2.
Magnaque pars mendax operum est, and ficta meorum.

Thus nothing obliges us to believe them, especially in their Satirical
declamations against the Sex; for it is principally in this regard that they
have vented Fables and Romances.

Let us speak things as they are, the depravation of both sexes is extreme. One
may equally apply to both, that thundering Sentence of the Scripture, All the
thoughts of the heart of Man are evil continually. Genesis 6.
But if a man would speak sincerely, he would freely acknowledge that the
Female Sex is least corrupted, and that it still preserves some relics of its
original innocence. When a man has regard only to the sweetness or the temper
of women, and to that gentleness of Soul which is so natural to them, should he
not be persuaded that they have much fewer evil qualities than men?

There are some notwithstanding, it is true, who are insupportable; and
Histories give us an account of some, who are capable of frightning all single
men, such as the wife of Job, and that of Socrates. But these are exceptions to
the general rule, which are not to be considered. There would be no justice in
referring to all the crime of some particulars.

Cur omnium fit culpa, paucorum Scelus. May we not assert likewise of Men, what
Solomon said of women, that amongst a thousand 'twou'd be a hard matter to find
one perfect? Diogenes sought after him heretofore with his eyes shut, and a
Lanthorn in his hand at full Noon, to let us know that it was impossible to
find him.

Moreover to apprehend rightly the thought of Solomon, it is not so
disadvantagious to the Sex, as it is imagined. He speaks of a thousand men with
regard to the thousand Concubines he had. It is as if he had said, if I had a
thousand Men to examine, sure I should find one very reasonable. But, O
Affliction! amongst an equal number of women whom I have chosen, I have not
found one perfect, and free from great defects. One may observe that he does
not speak of women in general, but of his women in particular. How can any one
attribute to him the belief of not one good woman, he that in so many places
makes the Encomium of virtuous women; that speaks of them in such honorable
terms, and exhorts those men so often whom God has favored with them, to
praise him incessantly for it? As for his own, I contest not but he had reason
to judge of them as he did. It is perhaps the most unworthy part of the
triumphant Reign of Solomon, to have taken such a prodigious multitude of women
for his use, against the express Law of the Creator. But to this first offense
he added still that of taking almost all of them out of the bosom of Paganism;
which was no less prohibited to the Jews. Who makes any doubt of Gods being
highly incensed at such a proceeding?

It may be that to punish Solomon he purposely suffered all his women to be of
a disingenious temper. We may very boldly say they were very wicked, since they
laid snares for him even to his Death. His Women, says the Scripture, 1 Kings
11.4.
made him turn his heart after other Gods in the time of his old age. The
imposing charms of his women, and the inventions of their mind, made him fall
into this Misfortune. As he foresaw that he should have much ado to get rid of
their ambushes in this respect, he pronounced this Sentence against them by
anticipation, I never found a good woman. He had reason with relation to his
own women, but one must not extend his thoughts to all women, as if he would
have said that there are none good in the world, which never fell into his
mind, and which is likewise very repugnant to the truth of things. The Wives of
the ancient Patriarchs, an Abigal, a Vasti, a Susanna, an Elizabeth, a Dorcas,
a Priscilla, a Penelope, a Paulina, a Lucretia, an Arria, and a hundred others,
whereof our sacred and profane Histories make mention, sufficiently make
appear that a wise and virtuous woman is not so uncommon, as it is imagined: And
that even the sight of them is not difficult, if a man would give himself the
trouble of seeking after them, as he ought.

Above all it is very difficult to support the Enemies of Women, when they
declaim against their Chastity. Is it not ridiculing God and Men, to cry them
down in a particular wherein they are so worthy of our Praises? What Is more
natural to them than this admirable virtue, which they pretend women seldom
have? How many stratagems, how many cares, how many artifices must a man use in
order to obtain their Favors? Who can be ignorant that they make all their Joy
consist in the single possession of their Husbands?

Horat. L. 3. Od. 14.
Vnico gaudens mulier marito. Is it not apparent that a woman ordinarily sees,
without emotion, and with unactive sense, the handsom'st men of the world? and
that as the Sun, who whilst he burns the earth is never inflamed within his own
Sphere, she likewise burns without receiving heat? In a word, who can deny that
modesty is inseparable from woman, and that if she divests her self of it a
nights to satisfy the sacred Laws of Marriage, she puts it on a mornings with
her habits; as Herodotus remarks? Pliny would even insinuate, that she
preserves it after death.

Harbor not an opinion, Sir, that my Adversaries are better grounded in the
Second, than in the first part of their Critics: They reason equally amiss in
both. You have seen the weakness of their objections in relation to women; I
hope to persuade you that they have not more reason in those which they prefer
against Marriage it self.

First, say they, Marriage is unworthy of Man. It puts him in some measure in
the rank of Beasts. Secondly, it is repugnant to his happiness, because it
deprives him of liberty, without which he can never be happy. What propositions
are here! Is it not formally to contradict St. Paul, who says of Marriage, That
it is honorable for all Men? Is it not a pretending to be wiser than God, who
has pronounced that it was advantageous for man not to be alone, and to have a
wife like him? But let us observe what arguments these Persons bring to support
such erroneous opinions.

Man, say they, is born not so much for the actions of the body, as for those
of the mind. That proper figure, that erected head which he has received from
Nature, incites him to despise all sensual things, and to apply himself to the
meditation of celestial ones.

Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Ovid. Metam. L. 1. Fab. 2.
Jussit and erectos ad Sydera tollere vultus.
As his Soul is the most noble part of himself, he ought likewise chiefly to
discharge those Functions which are agreeable to it: How opposite are those of
Marriage to the excellency of his Original? what is more inferior, what more
animal? Is it not the order of Justice, that the weakest should submit to the
strongest? and what! can any one approve that so precious and divine a thing as
the Soul should condescend so far as to pursue the brutal appetites of the
flesh; that it should renounce the right of commanding, to put it self under a
necessity of obeying; and that it should descend from the Throne of Reason to
confine it self under the Empire of the Senses? ought not this reason to hold
the Reins against the concupiscible appetite, as well as the irascible? Is it
fit that to satisfy the custom of a Country, or private interests, or the
Transports of an inconsiderate youth, it should yield it is right of Sovereignty
to this simple passion? Domina omnium, and Regina Ratio. Reason is the Queen,
and Mistress of all things, and ought to command the passions, as Cicero
observes, Velut servo Dominus, velut Imperator militi, velut Parens filio. In
Marriage this order is overthrown. Here the passions command, and draw Reason
away in spite of it self, in order to obtain those things which it does not
approve of, because it esteems them contrary to that real wisdom, which
consists in the subduction of all the Motions of the inferior part of the Soul.

Let the Brutes accompany as long as they will. Let them enter, if they please,
into that filthy commerce of the Union of both Sexes necessary to generation,
pursuant to a blind Instinct: But what? ought not Man, that noble Creature, who
descended from the blood of Heroes and Gods, to entertertain higher thoughts,
and to apply himself to somewhat more worthy of his Original? In a word, as
much as the Spirit exceeds the flesh, and an Angel Man, so much ought Celibacy
to be more excellent than Marriage. Those who live therein, resemble in some
sort the happy Souls, and anticipate the Time of that Life which is to come.
What can be more glorious for Man, than to do upon Earth what is done in
Paradise? To imitate Angels and Saints, who live in the Virginity of an eternal
Celibacy? Jesus Christ himself lived in that condition. He was never married.
It is said of those privileged Persons, who in the Revelations follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, that they are Virgins, and were never defiled with women.
If one may believe an Author of a great Character, we ought to refer to
Marriage these words of the Apostle: Romans 8.
Those who are in the flesh, can never please God. For he has employed this
Text to celebrate the Praises and Necessity of the Batchellors State,
especially in regard of Ecclesiastics.

Behold what the Enemies of Marriage allege for the support of their first
Proposition. Nothing doubtless, could be siner than this reasoning, if the
effects answered the words. But, Sir, most unhappily they do not. These persons
represent to us a Man of the other world, and not of this we live in. They
allege what it is to be wished we were, but what we shall never really be,
till we are dispossessed of this infirm body, wherewith our Souls are clothed.
We are by nature too far engaged in the Empire of the Senses, to be able to
break off our correspondence with them? nothing it is true, can be of more
advantage to us. Nothing more worthy of our desire. But what?

Homo sum, humani a me nihil alienum puto. Terent. Meaut.
I Am a Man, and therefore I Am not ashamed to own the consequence of humanity.
Where is the Man, that is not subject to make this confession? Who likewise, do
you imagine, these ill declaimers are, who would pass for Wits, and be
distinguished from the vulgar? I am persuaded that if one examined their
conduct, one should find that Marriage is more necessary for them, than for an
infinite number of others, in whom they condemn it. This precept of a true
Orator, Doce facienda, and doce faciendo, has no relation to them. They teach,
but they don't act. They show the way that ought to be pursued, but they do not
march in it themselves, as our Savior reproached the Pharisees. Where is the
advantage of knowing Virtue, if one leaves it unpractised? Non est beatus qui
scit illa, sed qui facit: says Seneca. How contrary is man to himself, how
different, how various? Had not Ovid reason to say, Pectoribus mores tot sunt,
Ovid. de Art. Am.
quot in orb figurae.

In my second part, I have shown you persons so possessed with the love of
Women, that they declare themselves incapable of withstanding them, They argue
for nothing but their necessity. Behold now some, who are directly opposite to
them. They are for dispensing with their absence. They maintain that they are
not necessary. What contrariety! A man needs only to consult with himself in
order to judge that these last are even more unreasonable than the first. For
these are at least more sincere. They speak according to their Sentiments.
Concordat Sermo cum vita. They talk as they live. But those are Impostors, who
feel not what they speak, but would be taken for persons much exalted above the
passions, when they are oftentimes enslaved to them. Their dissimultation does
not cease to procure them praises. Men, who examine but the outside, and who
only judge of things by appearances, imagine that there are heroical and very
extraordinary Qualities in them. Which made Virgil to observe, Ah! hodie laus
est non ultima, fingere vultum. Alas! None of the least Praises now adays is to
dissemble.

So much is Virtue despised, and Sincerity out of use in the world.

To enter into the bottom of the dispute, I make a proposition directly
contrary to that of my Adveriaries. Marriage, say they, is not agreeable to
man. It is for his glory not to marry. And I affirm, that Marriage does agree
with Man It is necessary for him. He cannot well forbear it. The first part of
this work very clearly proves the truth of my Proposition; since God has
instituted Marriage; since our Savior has confirmed it; since the Apostles
have recommended it, since all Nations of the World have practiced it, since it
conveys to man such great advantages, can one doubt of its agreement with him?
and if it is thus excellently good, as I have maintained it all along, can one
assert that it is unworthy of man?

But let us see the Reasons, upon which it is Adversaries rely in order to cry
it down. They all return to these three. First, It is repugnant to the Empire
of Reason over the Senses and Passions. Secondly, It puts man in the rank of
Beasts. Lastly, it hinders him from resembling the Angels. One may reply to all
this in few words. What Logic is this! Reason is in man what the King is in
the State. It ought to subject all to it self, and to submit it self to
nothing. All the passions should condescend to it, but it should never yield it
self to any of them. Therefore Marriage does not agree with Man. Therefore man
ought not to marry. Can there be more miserable arguing? One grants the
Principle. Reason ought to govern the passions. It ought to be the Mistress.
But where have these men learnt that Marriage is contrary to its Sovereignty?
One may from this principle infer conclusions absoluetly opposite to theirs.
Reason ought to govern the passions, by consequence Marriage is necessary for
Man. Why? because the Passions are much stronger in Celibacy, than in Marriage;
because Marriage is it self a means to tame the Passions, because Reason
governs them, consequently* with more easiness. But say they, it ought to
triumph over them. It ought to captivate them. Reason ought, that I may so
speak, to swallow up the passions. This is an evil Doctrine equally unknown in
the School of God, and that of Men. The passions are good in themselves. They
are become criminal only by the pollution of Sin, which has disordered them.
Man must not be absolutely dispossessed of them; they are essential to him: He
cannot even live with integrity, according to St. Austin, without their
assistance. Affectus animi qui non habent, recte non vivunt. The Indolence of
the Stoics has been at all times condemned. Man neither can nor ought ever to
be without Passion. The simple Question is to rectify it, by reducing it into
that happy Limit, above or beneath which virtue cannot subsist.

Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines, Hor. Sermon. lib. 1. sat. 1.

Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
There are certain means, and limits of things, which bound right on either
side. One ought to place it under the just law of Reason, without which it
ceases to be legitimate: For appetitus lege naturae subjectus est rationi, as
St. Ambrose says. And without that, St. Austin tells us, that Passion is
nothing but the motion of the Beast, Affectio sine ratione motus est bestialis.
Now of all things that are able to father his Empire of Reason upon the
passions, I affirm that there is nothing more efficacious than Marriage. St.
Paul sees nothing fitter to dispose men to wisdom. By consequence I have reason
to say, and my adversaries are in the wrong to deny it, that Marriage is very
worthy of man, and absolutely necessary for him, even according to their own
principle.

As animal as the action of Marriage is, it is notwithstanding very conformable
to right Reason and the Nature of man. One may say that man is a mixed animal.
He is neither all Flesh, nor all Spirit, he is a compositum of both. He has a
Body, he has a Soul. Each of these two parts of his Being applies it self to
those objects which are suitable to it, and agreeable to its Nature. As the
Soul is of a celestial and immaterial Original, its single prospect is, to
exalt it self above sensible things. But the body, which is terrestrial,
follows its natural destination. All it is motions tend downward. It proposes to
it self nothing but the enjoyment of Creatures. Man by his Soul has the honor
to be the Image of God, and the Companion of Angels. But indeed by his Body, he
enters in some sort in communion of Nature and Society with Beasts. He does in
this regard what they do. The same accidents happen to him. He has the same
desires. He is touched with the same Objects, and has no privilege over them
in this respect. Those ancient Heroes, who gave terror and admiration to the
whole world, by the force of their judgments, and the excellency of their
Genius, have not failed to be subject to the concupiscible appetites, as well
as the vilest of animals. After having equaled themselves to the Gods in the
superior part of their being, they must resemble beasts by the insurmountable
Law of the inferior part. I confess that it is very mortifying, for the King of
Animals not to be distinguished herein from his Subjects, and to increase after
the same manner and by the same ways, as they. But be not surprised at it. This
was necessary for the design of their common Creator. He has of a sudden and
without distinction of Sex formed that innumerable multitude of Spirits, which
compose the Hierarchy of Angels and Devils, because being incorruptible
intelligences they were by consequence incapable of generation. But God having
been pleased to make all human-kind of one blood, as the Apostle says, and by
way of generation, it was necessary to give to Man, an Organized body. It was
necessaty to render him capable of multiplying. It was expedient for him to
make two Sexes. In a word, it was convenient to give them that natural desire
of uniting together, which makes the propagation of the kind, but which is
never lawful without Marriage. Can one assert after this, that it is unworthy
of man with relation to this Union of Sexes? As despicable as it is in it self,
is it not sufficient that it is the design of Nature, and the very order of
God, who has commanded us to increase and multiply, in order to raze all the
Scandal, which the most scrupulous persons might receive from thence? As I have
already said, it is as conformable to reason, as agreeable to the nature of
man. Reason it self disposes men to it. In general it approves of all that is
designed by Providence. And in particular it suffers man to practice all that
tends to the good and preservation of his being. Its prospect is not to
dispossess him of a desire so essential to him as that is, but only to reduce
it to its just measure, and to bring it back to lawful use. Thus we may affirm,
that this Union is no less necessary to the world, than drinking and eating,
and all other animal functions. Let us say then by consequence- that it
contains nothing unworthy of us, provided that Reason conducts the passion to
it, and that the passion is not without reason therein. In all this we shall
affirm what is true.

But say they, the State of a Batchellor makes us resemble Angels and Saints.
It is by consequence in man an admirable perfection. I deny, that a Celibacy
purely corporeal is a perfection, and that it likens us to Angels and Saints:
Since marriage is of the order of Nature, and the institution of God, and the
duty of man, pursuant to the proofs I have brought, how should a single state
which is directly opposite to it, be of it self a virtue? It is exactly with
Celibacy, as with a Fast. What is more indifferent, than to eat and drink?
Fasting is only considerable because the Church recommends the practice of it,
and may contribute much to the diminution of their Vices, and the increase of
their Virtues: But no body ever said that it was a Virtue in it self. They, who
remain in a single state with that wisdom prescribed by the Gospel, are
doubtless worthy of our praises; not with relation to Celibacy it self; but
because it may make them fitter to discharge the duties of Piety. If Celibacy
were a virtue, then Marriage must be a crime. It is indeed what the Montainists
and other Heretics formerly taught; But St. Paul puts this Doctrine amongst
those of the Devils: And it is a long time since the Church thunderstruck it
with its Anathema's. As for those happy Virgins of the Revelations who follow
the Lamb every where, and who were never defiled with women, what follows, and
what precedes, most clearly justifies; that one must refer that to a sense
purely spiritual and metaphorical. It Is evident, and the Text says it, that the
holy Spirit means by these Virgins the 144000 marked out, who in the same Book
remained faithful to the Lamb, Rev. 14.4.
having never prostituted themselves to the Idolatries and Abominations of
those Mystical women, who were to make all the Earth drunk with the wine of
their whoredoms, but having only followed Jesus Christ in his Word, and in the
practice of the Precepts of his Gospel. This therefore makes neither for
Celibacy nor against Marriage. Amongst those Virgins there might be as many
married, as single. All the advantage of Celibacy over Marriage, is, that they
who make a good use of it, may find more easiness to serve God, and avoid
diverse inconveniences to which married persons are subject. But besides that
each State has its own difficulty, as I have made appear, how much hazard does
a man run in that of Celibacy by the almost insuperable difficulty of
fulfilling all its duties? who knows not what St. Bernard says of the Empire of
our bodies over our Souls; Corpus trahit animam in regionem suam? Who is
ignorant with what rapidity the passions draw us along? who is not sensible
that it is of no importance, to have a purity of body without a cleanness of
Soul? who knows not, in a word, to speak with St. Austin, that an humble
Marriage is of much more value, than a proud Virginity? Melius est humile
conjugium, quam superba Virginitas

You see, Sir, how fallacious the consequence is, that the Enemies of marriage
would draw from this principle, and that nothing is more miserable than the
reasoning they make, in order to sustain that it is unworthy of man. Let us
observe if they argue better for their second Proposition, and if it be true
that it does not agree with his happiness.

Liberty, say they, is the sweetest thing in the world. Enjoy all the rest, you
will be unhappy without that, there is nothing more precious.

Aureae Libertas auro pretiosior omni. Golden Liberty is more precious than
Mines of Oar. Let a man be Rich, let him be of a great Extraction, let him
possess all the other advantages of life, if Liberty be wanting, life it self
is but a death.

Seneca was not acquainted with a greater blessing, than of belonging to
himself. Inestimabile bonum est suum fieri. It is for this reason, that amongst
the Lawyers a free man is invaluable. Liber homo non recipit estimationem. This
being presupposed, what can one imagine more repugnant to happiness than
Marriage? Is it not a real slavery? if the wife depends upon the man, is not
the man under the dependence of the wife? are they not Masters of each other?
can they Separate at any time? Mulier aligata est legi, quanto tempore vir ejus
vivit. Does not the Etimology of Conjugium acquaint you that Marriage is a
yoke, to which the husband and wife are, as it were, fastened together, in order
to bear in common the weighty burden of those inconveniences which occur
therein? most certainly then, conclude my adversaries, it is the real Tomb of
Liberty. By consequence it is infinitely contrary to the happiness of man.

Et mihi dulce magis resoluto vivere colo. It Is granted, that Marriage puts men
under engagements, which come very near to servitude. But, Sir, you must not
think that there is no servitude, but what is scandalous, and contrary to
happiness. Don't you know, for Instance, that to serve God is to reign It the
same with Marriage in some measure. It is a servitude, I confess; but it is a
volutary one. It gives a right of commanding Sovereignty. It is rewarded with a
thousand charms, which are not to be found in the liberty of a single life.
What do you apprehend this freedom to be? It is for the most part nothing but a
pure licentiousness. Does it not appear how the greatest part of Batchelors
live? They are not confined to one woman, but are concatenated by a thousand
criminal passions. Seneca the Philosopher conceived nothing to be more
infamous, than the servitude of a Voluptuous Person. Nulla servitus turpior est
quam voluptaria. These Persons imagine themselves to be free, because they are
not subject to the Law of Marriage. But does not the same thing happen to them
exactly, which fell out to those Fools, whom Horace speaks of, Dum vita^nt
stulti vitia, in contraria current. Horat. Sermon.
Fools fly one vice, run into a contrary?

They think to avoid one Slavery, and fall into another which is worse. They
fly from that of Marriage which is noble, and conformable to the Nature of Man,
and take up that of Vices, which dishonours them, and is directly contrary to
the Grace of our Savior. For in Fine, one must not be deceived. As a good man
is free, although he serves, so a man that is free, who indulges his lusts, is a
real slave. These are two things equally certain. St. Austin establishes the
one, Bonus, etiam si serviat, liber est, says he: and Cicero establishes the
other in these words, Liber est existimandus, qui nulli turpitudini servit.
Since therefore the more virtuous a man is, the more he is free, it necessarily
follows that Marriage is a less Servitude than Celibacy, because those who are
married have generally more virtue than single persons. Add, Sir, that as
thorny as this servitude is, one does not cease to be pleased with it. One of
the greatest perplexities one finds in it, is, even the fear of its not
continuing long enough. A husband and a wise, that love one another, cannot
reflect without trouble upon their future separation. They had rather die, than
live apart. And according to the rule of the Roman Orator, one should not call
the yoke of Marriage incommodious or tiresom, since one bears it with an
easiness. Onus, says he, non est appellandum, quod cum laetitia feras ac
voluptate.

Socrates being asked which was best, Marriage, or a single Life, made this
reply; Marry, or marry not, thou shall ever repent. It Is true, that there are
in both conditions subjects of vexations and displeasures. I even confess that
one may meet with much more in that of Marriage, than in that of Celibacy. But
in recompense, the satisfactions a man tastes in Marriage, are much more pure
and sensible, which I have made appear in the first parts of this work. The
peace which succeeds a long and cruel war, is so much the more sweet and
relishing: And after the experience of rough tempests, one finds the Calm
infinitely better. The repose of Celibacy, is a repose of softness, security
and self love: By consequence it is a fatal, and deceitful repose. There is
none real or agreeable, says Seneca, but that which comes from reason. Nulla
placida quies est, nisi quam ratio composuit. The trouble of Marriage, on the
other side, is a trouble of safety, magnanimity, and courage. Aspera vita, sed
salubris. It is of that one may truly say, Sic itur ad astra. It is the way to
Heaven; very difficult, it is true: But it is what Virtue seeks for.

Difficile est, fateor, Ovid. de Ponto.
sed tendit in ardua virtus. It degenerates into Vice, when it has no adversary
to encounter. But I maintain, that there is no condition, wherein the Virtues
have a more lawful and advantageous exercise than Marriage. Admit that a person
should not taste those real pleasures I have spoken of, by reason of those
vexations he may meet with, yet he ought not to desist inrolling himself under
it is discipline; since it is so proper to illustrate it is virtues, and to
direct him to Salvation.

Amongst the difficulties of Marriage, I allow the Education and Establishment
of Children to be one of the chief. It Is necessary for that end to observe such
cares, which very often renders life extremely uneasy. But after all, since man
is born for trouble, and that he is animal. Onerificum, as St. Bernard
elegantly calls him, can he undertake a more lawful one, or for a nobler
subject? That Maxim of Seneca, is here naturally applied, Non est viri timere
sudorem? Is it humane to fear the fatigue of making men? Is it the part of a
man to continue in Celibacy, in order to avoid the real occupations of man? or
in a word, to fly from Marriage through the fear of discharging one of the
principal duties of humanity, and of answering the first end of Nature?

I have yet two things to reply to the enemies of Marriage, upon the subject of
children: One is, that sloth and idleness are the most shameful things to man
in the world: And the other is, that nothing is more capable of disposing him
to it, than the want of Children. These two propositions are of a sensible
truth. As to the first, An Apostle tells us in express terms, that he who does
not labor, that is, remains without action, putting himself to no trouble, is
not worthy to eat. In effect, it has been very properly said, Nihil agendo
homines male agere discunt. By doing nothing one learns to do what is ill.
Idleness corrupts bodies, as want of motion infects Rivers.

Cernis ut ignarum corrumpant otia corpus?
Vt capiant vitium ne moreantur aquae?
Oftentimes this Vice has been even fatal to great Princes, and the happiest
Commonwealths.

Otium reges prius, and beatas perdidit urbes. Catul. ad Cest. 52.
Idleness gave the first push to the Ruin of Kings and flourishing Cities. Rome
and Carthage were destroyed hereby. One cannot therefore too sedulously shun
it. I say in the second place, that nothing can be imagined more effectual
against it, than a Marriage fruitful in Children; when a man is alone, and has
nothing to think of but himself, he is scarce moved for what is to come. He
flies from labor, and applies himself to the diversions of a licentious life.
But when God has given you Heirs to succeed you in your Fortnnes, you must
necessarily mind somewhat else. You must consider them, as well as your self.
Our Children are our first Creditors. They are born such. We owe to them
naturally Subsistence and Education. We must labor all our lives to acquit our
selves of that debt. St. Gregory says that riches are a pain to those who have
no children, Quibus deficit soboles sua potentia poena est. But I add, that
poverty is doubly one to those who want them. Poor men have occasion for them
to be a continual motive to them to exercise and practice all honest means
toward the delivering them out of their miseries. It is perhaps for this
reason that Children are usually termed their Riches. Thus Children are
necessary to all the world, and to deprive ones self of Marriage through the
fear of having them, is to shut ones Ears against the voice of Nature, and that
of Providence.

There remains nothing more but to answer the objection, which is made
concerning the ill humor of Wives, and domestic Quarrels. Without dispute
this is what is most uneasy in marriage. When once division is introduced, and
one comes to disputes, thorns arise on ^ll sides. What injustice is it, said a
Malecontent with a grace, to deny that Marriage is a Sacrament, since one finds
^ut too often a double one therein: That of Repentance being almost always
inseparable from it. But, Sir, let not this ^maze you. As one usually says,
there ^s a remedy for all things, but death. The last part of this Treatise
will fur^her convince you hereof, in relation to Marriage. If it could be even
sustained, that there is no Marriage happy enough ^o be perfectly exempted from
vexations, remember that all humane conditions are liable thereto, that they
are ea^ier to be born in that of Marriage, than ^n all others; and that it is
our duty to suffer patiently those crosses, which are derived to us from a
subject where we have found a thousand Charms.

In some respects women may be incommodious, I deny it not; some of them are
very troublesome, and ^ender the purchase of that pleasure, which they afford,
very dear. At the same time, if one examines the thing without prejudice, one
shall find that a woman procures infinitely more good to the man, than she can
do ill. Besides, it is unjust, says Lactantius, to pretend to exact of any one
an impossibility. Iniquum est enim ut id exigas, Lact. L. 6. c. 23.
quod praestare ipse non possis. Notwithstanding this is the humor of the men.
They would have women to be without any sort of defect. They maintain, they
should be as perfect as Angels. They propose that with the Beauty of Helena,
they should have the virtue of Penelope, and the wisdom of Lucretia. In a word,
they would have them to act nothing against their duty; and to be so far
Mistrisses of their passions, that they should never be able to say, do, or
think any thing that might be incapable of pleasing them.

What injustice is here! can the demandants practice it themselves? Is it not a
thing above humanity? Since then we cannot be without defects, we ought to love
one another with them. The man should charitably bear with those of the woman,
and the woman those of the man. Every one has his own. You will find them every
where. If you do not suffer those of a wife, you will have those of a Friend,
those of a Domestic, those of all the world to bear; and should you be
delivered from them, you would have still your own to suffer, which would be so
much the more insupportable, in that having none but them to think of, they
will appear to you infinitely more worthy of your horror. What the Naturalists
remark, that the same soil which produces Poisons, likewise brings forth
remedies for them, may be very well applied to the wife. If she be to her
husband a cause of disquiet, she is likewise to him one of joy. If she afflicts
him sometimes, she comforts him much oftener. If she displeases you in one kind,
how agreeable does she appear to you in a hundred others? in respect of the
differences one has with her, I confess that nothing is more affecting at the
time, and that there never was a fruit of so unrelishing a taste. But happily
they do not continue long. Faciles conjugum sunt reconciliationes. One night,
says the same Author, suffices for that end. They even serve for the most part
but to confirm the knot of their loves.

Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est. Ter. in And.
The falling out of Lovers is the renewing of Love. One may truly affirm of the
discord^ of husband and wife, Discordia sit charior concordia. They at length
turn t^ pleasure, and doubly increase their satisfaction.

Irae interveniunt, redeunt rursum in gratiam.
Verum irae sique forte eveniu^ hujusmodi. Plaut. in Amph.

Inter eos rursum si eventum i^ gratiam est,
Bis tanto amici sunt inter se quam pacis
It Is said of the Americans, that as the^ believe the Moon to be the wife of
the Sun, they likewise imagine that she ha^ been abused by him, and that they
a^ at variance every time they see her in he^ crescents. If that were true,
their disputes would re-commence very often, but however they would not last
very long. Those of married persons are yet much shorter. Thus all the
objections of the enemies of Marriage come to nothing. They have no true
reasons not to love it, and they have a thousand to desire it. After what I
have represented to you upon this subject, I dare assure my self that you will
subscribe to the Oath of that good Vestal in an ancient Author, Moriar nisi
nubere dulce est.

Fifth Part. Of the Means to marry well, and to live happy in Marriage.
AT length I am arrived where you have, doubtless, expected me long. Indeed
this last part is of most importance in the business of Marriage. All that I
have said hitherto necessarily supposes one well done, and well conditioned. To
this is referrable all the advantages which I have declared to be found in a
conjugal union. As much against Marriage as its adversaries are, they
voluntrily grant, that it is a Society which may be agreeable, if the parties
were always at peace, and in case they never had occasion to complain of one
another. That which causes their mistake, is the prepossession they are in,
that it is impossible to find such a circumstance. If then it can be made
appear that such a thing may be, and that such Precepts are given which may be
of force to persuade them, that in the practice of them it is easy to attain to
this happy Marriage, they must confess themselves to be overcome. I hope, Sir,
this part of my Treatise will have this success both for them, and for you. I
hope it will perfectly convince you, that nothing is more advantageous for man,
than a good Marriage. What one ought to do in order to marry, and what one
ought to do in Marriage, are the two points, which I propose to explain, in
order to satisfy my Engagement, and your Expectation.

The first thing that an honest man should do, after he is determined for
Marriage, is to request of God a wife according to his mind. Remember, Sir,
that Providence is concerned in every thing, and that there is nothing here
below, but it diffuses its influences upon. As corrupted as the Pagan Theology
was, yet the sine Deo nihil feliciter succedit, was one of its Maxims. What
else was that Fortune to which even Cicero subjects all Events, and which he
regards as the Sovereign Empress of the world, Fortuna Domina rerum, but that
particular conduct of God toward all creatures, which we adore under the name
of Providence?

After having asked of God a wife according to his mind, he ought under the
protection of Providence to seek one after his own. This, Sir, imports two
things; the one is, that she be pleasing to his Eyes: And the other, that she
be agreeable to his humor. Behold what is most essential to observe, in order
to marry well. I confess he should not espouse a person through the single
motive of her Beauty. It is too frail a quality to have an entire dependence on.

Nec semper viola, nec semper lilia florent: Ovid. de At. am. l. 2.

Et riget amissa spina relict rosa.
And as Cicero says, Formae dignitas aut morb^ deflorescit, aut Vetustate. The
worst is, that when this happens, the wise is easily contemned. As she was only
taken for her Beauty, that is no sooner gone, but she is valued no longer. Her
sight fatigues the Eyes, and as much as she was loved being handsome, so much is
she disregarded when she is deprived of such a charm.

What Mortification is it to a husband, when he finds himself compelled to
dislike a Companion, with whom he ought to pass all his days? It is then
certain, that he should not fix his utmost bliss in Beauty, since it may be
lost every momemt.

Nevertheless it must be granted, that nothing is more amiable in nature, nor
more proportioned to the heart of man, to speak with Plato. I have told you
more than once, that the Gods themselves have been affected with them. Beauty
has been always reverenced. The greatest Barbarians have sacrificed upon its
Altars. If according to Juvenal, it can hardly consist with wisdom, Rara est
adeo concordia formae
Atque pudicitiae. Juv. Sat. 10.



It is because it is too much loved by men, and is continually in prospect to
irregular passion, for otherwise far from being of it self a Vice, it seems to
give a new luster to Virtue.

Gratior and pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Virg. Eneid. L. 5.
I will add yet something more, that in a fair body is generally lodged a noble
soul. It is uncommon enough to see a handsome person absolutely wicked.
Sweetness and Honesty seem to be inseparable from Beauty. Thus it well deserves
that man should give it the preference, and that he should search after it with
some care, when he is inclined to marry. What satisfaction is it to have a
wife, whose sight alone is capable of delighting you, and whom you judge worthy
of your love, even when she has deserved your hatred!

Facta merent odium: Ovid. amor. L. 3. El. 10.
Facies exorat amorem. I confess all women are not handsome, and that the number
of those who are so, is small in comparison of those who are not. But, Sir, by
a very particular Providence, in this as well as in all other things, every one
has his fancy. That which displeases one, is pleasing to another. All men do
not respect women with the same eye, nor in the same manner. Nothing is more
various, than the Judgment they make of them. If some pay their vows to the
fair person, how many are soonest reconciled to the brown? Some men are most
affected with a fat Beauty, whilst others conser the Laurel upon the slender
one. Several will imagine those unhandsom, who will appear agreeable to others.
If one can ^ccommodate himself only to a finished Beauty, another shall be
satisfied with a good mien. Thus every one finds wherewithal to indulge himself
according to his inclination, and the Ideas which he ^rames of the Sex.

If it imports, that the Wife should please the Eyes, it imports still more
that she should please the mind. It is not sufficient for her to be Handsome,
^or of a good mien, she ought chiefly ^o Sympathize with your humor, and that
her Manners be conformable to yours.

Vxor vade for as, Mart. L. 11.
aut moribus utere nostris. Without that, you will always disagree. You will be
in eternal disputes. Your Marriage will be a sort of Sepulcher, wherein you
will be interred alive.

-- Luctus
Non lectus. Tumulus non thalamus fuerit.
It is a thing, it is true, wherein one is often deceived, by reason of that Art
of fiction which is so natural to the Sex. It is an ordinary saying, That there
never was a wicked Maid, because they know how to appear good, when they are
not so. St. Chrisostom remarks, that Horses and other Beasts are always bought
upon trial; but that it is not so with a Wife. Sola uxor non ostenditur ne ante
displiceat quam ducatur. If she be violent, hasty, proud, infirm, whatsoever
vice she has, we never find it till the Nuptials are over. He would insinuate
hereby, that one runs a great hazard in Marrying; and I deny it not. But
without having recourse either to that proof of six Months, practiced in
Herodotus, by certain people of the Earth before Marriage; or to the Letter of
divorce amongst the Jews and Romans, which are things directly contrary to the
purity of Christianity, it is not impossible to conduct ones self in this
important Affair with some kind of assurance, by the means of several precepts
of wisdom.

That which Aristotle gives, is to Marry a young Wife, and one that is a
Virgin, in order to the more easy forming of her into good Manners. He affords
this reason elsewhere: Juvenes non sunt maligni moris, sed facilis, propterea
quod nondum viderunt nequitias. It is undoubted, that young Women are much more
easy to modify than others. As they have not yet contracted any evil habits,
you may without difficulty inspire them with good ones. Being scarce acquainted
with evil, they may so much the better suck in the good.

Dum faciles animi juvenum, Virg. 3. Georg.
dum mobilis aetas. In effect, it is easy to imprint upon a heart the Maxims
of Virtue, when it is void of the Maxims of Vice. It were better for a Wife to
be wanting in some of the qualities necessary for the Conduct of a House, than
to have those which are capable of making a Husband unhappy. The one may be
obtained with Years, but Years do but fortify the others.

If this advice be good, that of Hesiod is no less. He would have the person
who is to Marry, take a young Woman of his Acquain^ance and Neighborhood.

I don't know any precept, Sir, more important for practice than this. Why do
Marriages ordinarily succeed so ill? It is because the parties Marry without
knowing one another, and without distinguishing whether one be the make of the
other. One being enchanted with a beauty, which perhaps he never saw but once,
is so transported with his love, that he can only sigh, and live for her,
without examining whether she has besides what a Woman ought to have in order
to live contented with her, and without considering any thing else but to
satisfy his foolish Passion, he Marries her. The other through a desire of
being Rich, will most willingly accept of such a Person who is the worst
shaped, and the least reasonable in the World, provided he may have wherewith
to make his Fortune. The greatest part of Marriages are made either by the
interposition of another, or for reasons of wordly interest. One regards the
outside, without a thought of what relates to the inward part. A man examines
the possessions of a Woman, and is utterly unacquainted with her Manners. This
without dispute is the reason why so many people are unhappy in the choice they
make. The principal thing then is, to study well the humor and conduct of a
Woman, in order to know if she has a conformity with yours, and if you could
live peaceably together. For this end you must not go to seek her in a Country
remote from you; you must, as far as in you lies, take her as it were at your
door. It will be a difficult matter if you see her often, and have a little
regard to her deportments, not to discover at length all that she is.

Behold, Sir, a third precept, which is yet more assured than the other two.
Marry a young Lady of good exstraction and who belongs to People of an
irreproachable Life. This is founded upon a Maxim, whose truth is sufficiently
known, viz. That Children almost always resemble those from whom they derived
their being.

I know there are those who degenerate from the virtue of their Ancestors; but
to speak generally, one may say, without danger of being decived, Like Father,
like Son; like Mother, like Daughter.

Saepe patris mores imitatur filius infans. The boy often imitates the Fathers
manners. Qualis erat matter, fiilia talis erit. And the Daughter grenerally
treads in her Mothers footsteps. It is the Example they continually propose to
themselves. But they are always more inclined to imitate them in evil, than in
good. For, as Juvenal informs us, Velocius and citius nos
Juv. Sat. 14.
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica.
Domestic examples soonest corrupt us.

There is nothing that more corrupts our Manners, than Domestic ill Examples.
Doubtless then it would be a great imprudence, for an honest man to Marry into
a Family of a bad reputation, and to take the Daughter of a Mother who is
either immodest, or sullied with some scandalous Vice. On the other side, one
may presuppose much prudence and good dispositions in a damosel of good
Extraction, and who was educated by a Virtuous Mother. Not but that exceptions
are to be allowed: The most general Rule is not excused from them. But it may
be taken for granted, that this is one of the most certain, and that few of
those who shall practice it, will find it unsuccessful.

I add, Sir, this Precept to the rest. In Marrying, affect as much as in you
lies an Equality of condition and Fortune. If you take a Wife of a Family more
exalted than yours, she will not fail to boast of it at your expense, you shall
be sufficiently told of the Nobleness of her Original, and the Baseness of your
own. Besides, the certainty of attributing to her self the right of commanding.
Let there be Wisdom then in the Counsel of Ovid, Ovid. Ep 9.
Siqua voles ante nubere nube pari. If you will Marry hapiply, Marry your equal.

He does not mean by this, that in order to Marry happily, an equality of
Manners and Complexion is necessary. He would insinuate particularly, that that
of Blood is essential to that end, and that it is hardly possible for instance,
that a Plebeian should succeed in his Match with a Lady of Quality. This is
what experience has often justified.

It would be much worse, if you should Marry one who has more Riches than your
self: Or if being poor, you should take a rich Wife. This is what the Poet
calls having lost his Empire.

Plaut.
Argentum accipi, dole imperium vendidi. The poor Man, says another, who has a
Wife well endowed, has no Wife. He has a Superior at home, whom he must obey.
And what can be more insupportable for him?

Juv. Sat. 6.
Intolerablilius nihil est quam faemina dives. There Is nothing more
insupportable than a Rich Woman. To avoid this inconvenience so repugnant to
the order of Nature, Lycurgus had forbid men to receive any portion with their
Wives. The Relations of Japan, likewise inform us, that this Law is exactly
observed there still: It is founded upon this Maxim, that a Woman who has
nothing is all to her Husband. Whereas others occasion him a thousand Troubles
and uneasinesses.

Dotatae mactant and malo and damno viros How little is this precept respected
amongst men. when a Bachelor seeks after a Wife, he does not ask about her
Virtues, but her Possessions. These include all his desires, and the chief
felicity of Hymen. I confess that Riches may be very useful in Marriage, and
that it is very pleasing to all the World to espouse them with a Wife, when she
has besides all the qualities that are agreeable to him, for what has been said
of one, is very often but too true: O ter infelix qui existens pauper ducit
uxorem!

But Sir, be persuaded, that Virtue is of infinite more worth without Riches,
than Riches without Virtue; they ought never to be the end of Marriage: The
same Author who speaks of Poverty in so disadvantagious a manner, with relation
to Marriage, does not fail to acknowledge that Merit ought to be preferred to
Silver: Morem praeponere pecuniis ducturum uxorem oportet.

Yes without doubt, the best portion a Wife can bring to a Husband, is the
wisdom of her and her Fathers.

Nothing but this is capable of rendering him happy in the possession of a Wife.
If you take a Wife upon account of her virtue, you may assure your self that
you will never repent of it. She will incessantly draw down upon you the
blessings of Heaven, and you will find your self much happier with such a wife,
even in the midst of indigence, than you would be in the greatest prosperity
with a wife of Gold, but without this precious Virtue. He who enjoys such a
one, says Cicero, has all that is necessary to live happily. In quo virtus sit
ei nihil deesse ad beat vivendum puto.

I have but one precept more to give you upon this subject. Be careful not to
marry one against her will, who will always have a contempt of you. I will
pronounce it boldly, nothing is more capital than that in the design of
mrariage There are but very few of this kind, which have not very fatal
consequences. Thinking to entertain in your Bed another self, such a one as a
wife ought to be, you will lodge there a cruel adversary, who will every day
find a thousand occasions to give you some disquiet.

Hostis est uxor invita quae ad nuptum viro datur. A wife that is married to a
man against her will, is an Enemy. It is the most unhappy thing a Father can be
guilty of, to commit violence upon her inclination, and to constrain her to
espouse a man whom she cannot love. You will never make her renounce her
resentments. This marriage will occasion to you all the thorns and
displeasures, which Juvenal represents in these Verses: Semper habet lites,
alternaque jurgia lectus,
Juv. Sat. 6.
In quo nupta jacet minimum dormitur in illo.
Tunc gravis illa viro.


The wife is a Victim, which ought to go voluntarily to the Altar. Her
resistance would be of ill presage. The offering of her Heart is of more value
than all the rest. If you are not loved by her, you are necessarily hated.

Aut amat, aut odit mulier. Non habet medium. There Is no Medium in a Woman, she
always either loves or hates. Avoid then, as you would death, a woman in whom
you see no disposition to love you. Admit her to be exquisitely fair,
unmeasurably rich, extremely virtuous, she is not fit for you. Of what service
is all that to you, if you are the object of her aversion? This evil, Sir, is
almost without remedy. What cares soever you may take to win the heart of a
wife, who is only yours by the force of paternal Authority, you will find it
extremely difficult to go through with it.

Never have any thoughts for marriage, Sir, unless you resolve to practice all
these precepts. I could add still many others: But these are the chief, and
they suffice to make a good marriage. The mischief is, that people do not stop
here, and that almost all those who marry, act herein by motives disengaged
from the subject they look after. The person which they take, is a thing of the
least regard with them. They are determined by particular considerations. This
enters into their design but by accident, and after the rest. If she has a
Fortune: If she can draw me out of necessity: If she belongs to persons who by
their Credit are able to advance me, it is enough, says one. I demand no other
advantage. If besides all this she is handsome, well shaped, and virtuous, so
much the better: It is a double happiness for me. But in case this does not
appear, the rest remaining, I shall not fail to marry her. What destruction of
Maxims and good Sense! Now certainly to choose a wife with whom one may propose
to live happily, a man is only to consider if she pleases him: If she be
deserving, and if she be derived from honest parents. Whether she be rich or
poor, it imports not.

Dummodo morata veniat. Dotata est satis. This without dispute is the directest
way of reasoning. After having given you precepts for the attaining to a happy
Marriage, it is at present necessary to afford you some in order to live
happily therein. They all consist in the practice of two sorts of Duties,
toward two sorts of Persons. The one regard the wife, and the others refer to
the Children. The good or evil of marriage proceed alone from these two parts.
There was reason to say, Est uxor aut tutum refugium, aut penale tormentum. She
is also as another Author has it, either the ruin or safety of the Family,
Mulier domi damnum est aut Salus. On another side, the wise man informs us that
Children are the Joy or sorrow of their parents, according as they are well or
ill inclined. This renders the matter which remains to be treated of in order
to fulfill the design of this work, very important. It is, Sir, so much the
more, in that by acquitting your self of the duties whereof I shall discourse,
you will make your wife be a blessed Fountain to you at all times, to speak
with Solomon. All the world is not happy enough to meet with this advantage:
The Precautions, which one takes for this end, are, I confess, sometimes
unprofitable: But it is almost infallible, that a wife, who by nature is not
very reasonable, shall become so if the Husband rules himself with relation to
her according to my Instructions.

I begin them, by declaring to you, that if you would be happy in Marriage, you
must necessarily be loved of your wife. You cannot be beloved of her, if you do
not love her. Therefore be sure to love her. This is the first Lesson a Husband
ought to learn. It comes from St. Paul: Hushands, Ephesians. 5.25.28.
says he, love your Wives, as Christ loved his Church, etc. Would you know the
reason? Husbands ought to love their Wives as their own Bodies; He that loves
his wife, loves himself. No body ever hated his own Flesh. By consequence the
Husband ought to love his Wife, for his wife is his own flesh. They are no more
two, but one flesh. What is more reasonable than this duty? what ought to be
more precious to us, than our selves? We ought then in the first place to love
our wives by a motive of self-love, since we cannot love our selves, but we
must love them, being, that I may so speak, a part of our own substance: Horat.
Animae dimidium meae. What a prodigious thing would it be to see a man declare
himself an enemy to himself, and to have an aversion for his own person? St.
Paul assures us, that it was never seen, and insinuates to us that it is a
thing not to be seen in the order of Nature. It is notwithstanding what arrives
to all those who love not their wives.

A man ought in the second place to love his wife by a Motive either of
personal Interest, or pure acknowldgment. Either she loves you, or she does not
love you. If she loves you, you cannot without ingratitude forbear to love her.
On the other side if she loves you not, you ought to love her, to the end that
she may be won to love you. This Maxim of Seneca is of absolute necessity in
Marriage: Si vis amari, ama. Love is gained only by Love. It is not to be
obtained by Force or Violence. Amor extorqueri non potest, says Seneca.
Naturally we love those who love us. If we did otherwise, we should be less
reasonable than Brutes.

Amore dicimus vinci feras. Sen. Trag.
We say that the very Brute Beasts are overcome by Love. A Philosopher of old
time made these Questions and Answers. What is most insupportable in life? To
love without being beloved. What is the most unjust thing in the world? To be
beloved without loving. What is most mortifying to a man? To see himself
compelled to hate what he has loved. I^ a word, what is most dreadful to him? A
love converted into hatred; which becomes so much the more implacable, as the
other was passionate.

Semper bonus amicus gravis irascitur. Our best Friends are always the mos^
angry with us. All this, Sir, is true, and these are Axioms which make so many
certai^ principles in the Morality of Men. A Husband that does not love, or who
loves without being beloved, is equally unhappy. The true secret to suppor^
patiently the inconveniences of Marriage and to live happy therein, is to love.
Miserable is he who marries without determining to love his wife, and proposes
only to embrace her Riches. Meipsum igitur amare oportet, non mea, si very
amici futuri simus. There is not a wife but has a right of using such language
to her Husband, nor a Husband but ought to observe the same to his wife.

After this Rule I cannot give you a better, than to afford your self for an
Example to your wife: Of all the Maxims of the Christian Morality, the most
equitable and most certain is undoubtedly this, to do to others what we would
have done to our selves. Would you be beloved of your wife? Love her. Would you
have her wife? Be so your self. Would you have her complaisant to you? Be you
the same to her. Would you have her make appear a sweetness of Behavior, and
Fidelity in her Conduct? Make appear the same in yours. Nothing is more just
than this duty, and Husbands are insupportable to complain of the ill Humors,
and untoward conduct of their Wives, if their own is no bettter. One may say,
that they are in some measure guilty of their Irregularities; because they
would have persisted in wisdom, if their Husband^ had not removed themselves
from it. I^ is certain, as Plutarch observes, that the wife usually conforms
her self to the manners of her Husband. And Aristotle informs us, that she will
be alway^ chaste and constant to him, if she find^ him so to her. Si mulier
cognoverit s^bi castum and fidum virum, and ipsa etiam casta and fida erit. You
will say perhaps that this duty is of very difficul^ Practice, and that it were
better not to marry at all, than to constrain ones sel^ to this degree. I grant
the difficulty But what? would it not be scandalou^ to omit a thing which is
good in it self* and very necessary for Salvation, because it imposes an
indispensible obligation to be a good man, and to live according to the Maxims
of Virtue? O God! What Christians are we? Is i^ not a thing which ought on the
other side to determine men for Marriage? Wha^ method is more infallible to
withdraw men from Debaucheries, or to preven^ them, than Marriage? Does not the
example, which is owing to a wife and Children, render a Man more circumspec^
in his Conduct? Marriage is a Bridle, that keeps men within the bounds of
sanctity, and Motive to eschew Vices. Is there a single man, who does not
desire to be wife, and to be able to deserve the Praises of a good man? and is
not this the true way that directs to it?

But, Sir, amongst the Virtues whose Example you owe to a wife, you must above
all things study to inspire her with that of devotion. One cannot imagine what
Good a devout Wife is capable of doing a Husband, and the advantages he may
receive from thence. Whether he be sick or well, rich or poor: In prosperity,
or in misery; in joy, or sorrow: He will always find in her an assistance
proportioned to his necessities. St. Paul somewhere says, that Piety is good
for every thing. I say as much of a devout Wife. Nothing is more Angelical,
nothing more excellent. Happy, and thrice happy, may one call that man, to whom
Heaven has afforded such a present.

The exterior Cause of Devotion is the frequent Reading Divine Books, and the
works of Piety of Ecclesiastical Authors. To this, Sir, you ought to turn the
genius of your Wife, as much as in you lies. If once she takes a pleasure
herein, it is almost infallible that she will have a regard to her Salvation, a
contempt for the World, and a horror for Sin, which are the essential
Characters of true devotion. But if this kind of reading be infinitely
necessary to dispose a Wife to wisdom, that of Romances and Comedies is not
less effectual to turn her inclination from it. Whatsoever may be said in
favor of these eloquent fictions, I can assure you that nothing is fitter to
corrupt the heart and to inflame it with the love of Creatures. If Fathers and
Mothers were sensible of the pernicious impressions, which these forts of books
are capable of giving their Daughters, they would undoubtedly employ all their
cares to conceal the very Names from them. Take off your Wife therefore from
the humor of reading such books. It is a School wherein she will never fail to
learn what will render you unhappy, they will make her wanton, vain,
ridiculous, insupportable. When she comes to compare you with those imaginary
Heroes dressed in Romances after the manner of the Gods, she will be apt to
esteem you no longer, you will almost necessarily become the Object of her
contempt. On the other side, be careful to put into her hands the Prophets and
Apostles: Let this be her ordinary Employment. Let her make thereof the whole
matter of her diversion. O Holy and Divine School, where one learns to become
like God himself, and to practice the Duties of an Angelical perfection:

Prayer is both the principal act of Devotion, and the most assured means to
obtain Grace. Practice it, Sir, and make your Wife practice the same with
exactness. Accustom your self to pray often to God with her in the midst of
your Family: Humble your selves often together before that Eternal Majesty,
from whom you expect all your good things, and all your Comforts. Let him hear
several times in a day the voice of your heart with that of your mouth.
Represent to him all your wants, and make appear in your Prayers a holy ardour,
that may inflame the zeal of your Wife. Were she the most unreasonable of
Women, she would become the Sweetest and most compliant, if you would confine
your self, as you ought, to the practice of this Duty. It is extremely
neglected now a days in the most part of Christian Families, to their shame be
it spoken, and we have but too much reason to say with the Poet, Virg. Aen. 6
He u pietas! Heu prisca fides!

Above all, Sir, a man ought to live in a good understanding with his wife, and
to agree well together in relation to Domestic affairs. In the little state of
a Family, as well as in the great State of the Republic, concord is absolately
necessary for its subsistence. By that, says Salust, the least things become
great, and without it the greatest are of no account. Concordiares parvae
crescunt. Discordia maximae dilabuntur. When a Husband and Wife misunderstand
one another, Sal. in Jug.
and each follows his own caprice or design, all is lost, the family falls of
course. This is called in our Proverbial Language to Light a Candle at both
Ends. If you con't instruct your Wife in your affairs, and manage all things
without her participation, she will easily be persuaded of one of these two
things. Either she will believe that you are Rich, when perhaps you are poor:
Or she will imagine that you are poor, when it may be you are Rich. This double
error will make her fall into a double excess. Either she will become Prodigal,
and be at a hundred sorts of vain and unprofitable expenses: Or she will become
covetous, and spare even what is necessary. Both will be equally inconvenient
for you. To avoid which, impose upon your self this Law of accounting to her
your administration. Let her know from time to time the terms you are in with
Fortune. Undertake nothing of moment without her advice. It is both just and
advantageous for you to do so. For what end have the Laws and customs
established community of goods between Husbands and Wives, but to inform us,
that as both ought to contribute their utmost cares to make it good, so it is
just that the Husbands who are masters thereof, should inform their Wives of
the good or evil, the loss or the advantage of it. Is it not a thing which
regards them in common? would it be reasonable for them to be always ignorant
of their own affairs? and can they beat with such unjust Husbands, whole single
aim is to hold them perpetually in ignorance, to deceive them, and to conceal
all things from them? it is not to be admired at, if they find themselves
mistaken, and if their wives practice on their side such methods as displease
them. Let a wise be never so patient and easy, it is impossible to bear for
ever with a Husband, who uses her like a Turk or Moor, and not as his wife, but
as his Servant. Wherefore I said, that it was for his advantage to treat her
otherwise, and to discover to her the whole bottom of his heart and his afairs.
In effect, besides that this will please her, and that she will find her self
obliged to a Husband that has so much complaisance for her, she will learn by
this means to regulate her expenses, and to manage her self after a manner
proportioned to the condition of the family. What is more important, and
deserves more application, than the practice of this Precept?

But this is enough concerning the methods Husbands ought to practice toward
their wives, in order to live happy in their Society. Now let us see in a few
words, to the end we may conclude this work, to what this design engages them
with relation to their Children. This, Sir, is one of the Springs, from whence
as I have said, proceeds to married persons all their happiness, or all their
Misfortune. In effect, when a man has Children, that seem to be well born, and
in whom appear the marks of a true wisdom, as miserable as he is, and how great
soever their number is, he finds therein the motives of a very sweet
consolation. On the other side, what is more afflicting than to have such as
are vicious, and of unwise conduct? Solomon assures us of both; Filius sapiens,
says he, laetificat Patrem. Filius stultus dolor est Patris. A wise Son
rejoices the Father, the foolish Son is the grief of the Father.

From thence you may judge of what importance education is, and how necessary
it is to give Children a good one. Educatio and disciplina mores facit, says
Seneca. Plutarch regards it as a new birth, which we take in the bosom of our
Masters. And Aristotle puts those Masters, who have taught us the art of living
well in the rank of those to whom we can never acquit our selves of the
obligation, Magistris, Diis, and Parentibus non potest reddi aequivalens. They
are all equally reasonable. For if it be true, that Praemium virtutis est bona
institutio, it necessarily follows, both that Education is what is very
considerable for men, and that we are no less obliged to our fathers for having
given us a good one, than for our life it self; and that we can never show
acknowledgment enough. It Is a great deal, I confess, to have received a being,
but I dare affirm that it is infinitely more to have received a good one. Birth
gives us one common with beasts: But it is education that presents us with the
other, and which renders us in some kind, like to the Angels.

But, Sir, if a good Education be very important with relation to the Children,
it is no less in regard of the Fathers. If it be to the one a principle of
wisdom, it is one of good fortune to the others. As I have said, a Father
cannot be happy, if his Children be unwise. The one is a necessary step to the
other. From whence appears the indispensible obligation of a Father to
sacrifice with pleasure his cares and his substance for the instruction of his
Children, and the forming of them to good manners. When he has the advantage of
succeeding herein, he tastes in Marriage that felicity which I have spoken of in
my first part: that is to say, what is most agreeable, and delightful in the
World.

All Fathers, it is true, are not in a condition to advance their Children to
Sciences, nor capable of teaching them themselves. I confess, this is a
misfortune for both. I know very well that Sciences are not absolutely
necessary to bring men to the habits of wisdom. They may be obtained, I grant,
without them. Notwithstanding it must be agreed on, that they may be of great
use toward it, and that Philosopher, doubtless, had reason to place in the
number of those principal Subjects he had to thank God for, that he was a
Philosopher. In effect, there is much less corruption amongst the Learned, than
amongst others. Their vice is less in the heart, than in the understanding, and
it consists more in opinion than in action. As imperfect as knowing men are,
they always make appear in their conduct some degrees of honesty, which
distinguish them to advantage. If knowledge has corrupted men, it has been by
accident, after the same manner that the Sun infects common Sinks and
Carcasses. It has been often abused, I confess, but in the bottom nothing is
beter of it self. Would to God, said Moses, that all these People were
Prophets! There is not a Father but ought to make the same wish for his
Children, to desire they might become Learned, and to use his last endeavors
to obtain them this advantage, as the greatest of all goods.

Observe, Sir, that to succeed well in the Education of Children, one must go
in the midst of two opposite extremities, and preserve a just temper between
severity and indulgence. Love and Fear ought to divide the whole christian
Education on the childrens side, as correction and instruction on the fathers.
If you give them too large a freedom, they will despise you: If you allow them
none they will hate you. If you have too much indulgence for them, they will
become licentious: If you are too austere, they will be too reserved. In a
word, if you make appear too much sweetness in your conduct, theirs will be
extremely loose. On the other side, if you never look upon them but with an
angry eye, you make them violent, extravagant, and insensible of all your
Exhortations. You see then how necessary it is to join these two things
together in paternal discipline. A Father ought in some measure to imitate God
herein, of whom the Prophet says, That in the midst of his chastisements he
always thinks of Mercy. The Father, it is true, is the sovereign Magistrate of
his Family, and as such he ought to try his children, and punish them when he
finds them guilty. But if he condemns them as a Judge, he ought to chastise
them as a Father, that is to say, with humanity, and emotions of Love.

Pro peccato magno paulum supplicij satis est patri. Terent. in And. Sect. 5.
Sc. 3.
A small punishment atones for a great fault with a father. This manner of
acting is in effect a very good way to make us be loved and feared of our
children: For as Quintilian says perfectly well, Quin. Declam 4.
Plures moribus quam viribus vincimus. We reduce them much better to their duty
by a soft and familiar conduct, than we can ever be able to do by force and
violence. And although one should always preserve a certain grave Character with
them, which may obtain respect, yet it is much better to retain them in their
duty by love, than by fear: By a modest Liberty, than too severe a constraint.

Pudore and Liberalitate liberos
Retinere satius esse credo, quam metu.
Jer. in Adelph.
I Am of the opinion that it is the safer way to keep our children within their
duty by modesty and Liberality than fear. Thus, Sir, I have finished my design:
Which was, to show you the Excellency, Necessity, and Happiness of Marriage.
Nothing more remains for me, but to make wishes for the prosperity of yours,
when it shall please God to establish you therein.

Dij faciant possis gaudere fideli conjuge. Ovid.
Gods grant you the Joy of a faithful Wife. I wish you this advantage with all
my heart. Without it, of what service would all the rest be? I hope it will not
be wanting to you, and that God at length will hearken to my prayers upon this
subject.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by Richard Cumberland at the Angel in
St. Pauls-Churchyard.
HOrological Disquisitions concerning the Nature of Time, and the Reasons why
all Days, from Noon to Noon, are not alike Twenty Four Hours long. In which
appears the impossibility of a Clocks being always kept exactly true to the
Sun. With Tables of Equation, and Newer and Better Rules than any yet extant,
how thereby precisely to adjust Royal Pendulums, and keep them afterward, as
near as possible to the apparent Time. With a Table of Pendulums, showing the
Beats that any Length makes in an Hour. A Work very necessary for all that
would understand the true way of rightly managing Clocks and Watches. By John
Smith, C. M. To which is added, the best Rules for the Ordering and Use both of
the Quick Silver and Spirit Weather-Glasses: And Mr. S. Watson's Rules for
adjusting a Clock by the Fixed Stars.

The Government of the Thoughts, a Prefatory Discourse to The Government of the
Tongue. By the Author of The Whole Duty of Man.

Reformed Devotions, in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions, for every Day in the
Week, and every Holiday in the Year. Divided into Two Parts. The Third Edition,
Reviewed.

Analecta: Or, a Collection of some of the Choicest Notions, and what seemed
most remarkoble in more than forty Authors, Philosophical, Chemical, Medical,
Astronomical, Historical, etc. Whereunto is added an Appendix, containing short
but very profitable and delightful Rules in many parts of the Mathematics. By
T. B. Gent.

At which Place Gentlemen may be furnished with all sorts of Acts of
Parliament.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Benj. Bragg, at the White Heart over against
Water-lane in Fleet Street.
A Companion for the Persecuted: Or, an Office for those who suffer for
Righteousness: Containing particular Prayers and Devotions for particular
Graces, and for their Private or Public Wants and Occasions. By John
Kettlewell, a Presbyter of the Church of England.

There is now in the Press, and will be speedily published, The Companion for
the Penitent, and for Persons troubled in Mind, Consistent of an Office for the
Penitent, to carry on their Reconciliation with God: And a Trial or Judgment of
the Soul, for discovering the Safety of their Spiritual Estate: And an Office
for Persons troubled in Mind, to settle them in Peace and Comfort. By John
Kettlewell, a Presbyter of the Church of England.


