THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS, As they are now sung in the Churches: WITH THE
SINGING NOTES OF TIME and TUNE Set to every SYLLABLE, Made plain and easy to
the Understandings of all that can read; by the Directions in the latter part
of the Preface. Never before done in England.

Col. 3. 16. (...).

Teaching and admonishing each other in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs.

Licensed, July 26. 1688.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham for the Company of Stationers, and are to be
Sold by E. Brewster in S. Paul's Churchyard, and S. Keeble near the
Temple-gate. 1688.

David Thanksgiving.
II Samuel 22 Verse 1. And David spoke unto ye Lord ye words of this song in ye
day that ye Lord had deliverd him out of ye hand of all his Enemies



To the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.
May it please Your Honor,
THE presumption of this Dedication was first taken from that Religious and
Honorable Character, which Your Piety and Moderation have made famous, and
celebrated among Godly Men of diverse Persuasions; from whence I did conclude,
That the shelter of Your Honor's Patronage would not only be a sufficient
Protection for this well-designed Work, from whatever reflections may happen to
be cast against it; but would also introduce the much more general acceptance
of it to multitudes of well-disposed people.

And now, Sir, that Your Condescension has been so great, in stooping to
peruse the Preface, and inspect the Work; and after all, That Your Wisdom has
crowned it with Your Approbation and Countenance, and also vouchsafed that
generous Grant, of permitting Your Honorable Name to be prefixed in the Front
of it; the Eyes of those who are truly virtuous, will have a regard answerable
thereunto, and they will be animated thereby to pursue the footsteps of a
Precedent so highly Noble, and universally Renowned.

Sir, Complements are things beneath the dignity and gravity of the Subject, or
Your self: But Duty and Gratitude call upon me to acknowledge, That by how much
I am a Stranger to Your Honor, by so much the more infinitely, do these
immense Favors render me beyond expression,

YOUR HONOURS'S Most obliged and most devoted Servant, T. M.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
GOD gave to Moses, and to all Israel certain Rules for the performance of
Divine Worship, from Exodus 20. to 31. inclusive. St. Paul says, Let all things
be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. and Holy men have (successively)
introduced Institutions agreeable (at least as they have judged) to the tenor
of the Sacred Scriptures.

I do not presume to think of any new thing (much less to offer any such to the
Public) but only to make plain what has been of long time used imperfectly;
That seeing some more worthy Instrument has not yet applied himself to
facilitate the means of Singing the Psalms true, I have thought this little
piece of Service may be acceptable to Almighty God, and to good men not
unwelcome.

The antiquity and profitableness of singing Psalms, and Divine Hymns, may
appear to those that shall be at the charge of a few minutes to read the
following Preface, wherein I hope they will not find any faults too big for
their Charity to bear with, because my meaning is good and sincere, and what I
have done is for Ease to the skilful, and for a Guide to the unskilful.

Let those that want instruction, and reject it, be content with their own
remissness, but not envy, or be offended at the ingenious and devout, who are
desirous of present comfort, and everlasting safety.

Let him that accepts it, make the improvement desired.

Let God give his Blessing, and take all the thanks.

Let me have your Love and Prayers, because I have endeavored to be

Your helpful Servant, T. M.

THE PREFACE.
IN this Preface I purpose Two things; First, To recommend the singing of
Psalms, from its Antiquity, and the Examples, and Commands of Holy men, and
from its profitableness to those that sing with the heart and with
understanding: And secondly, To give plain directions, whereby persons that can
but read, may be (quickly) able to sing true, by perusing them a few times
over, and practicing the same at Churches, and at vacant opportunities.

The first Master of Music, recorded in Scripture, was Jubal, Genesis 4. 21. long
before Noah; but Moses (who gives us the account of him) is brief in his
History of things in times before his own, especially of those before the
Flood, or else we might have (perhaps) had many other instances. Songs also
were used in Jacob's time, as appears Genesis 31. 27. The Israelites, Numb. 21.
17. sang for joy of being delivered from perishing by thrist. Deborah and
Barak, Judge. 5. 1. sang at the Conquest of Sisera: These were before King
David, whereby we see he was not the Inventer of this vocal sort of Sacrifice,
or if he had been so, a man after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14. and of a
heart perfect with the Lord, 1 King. 15. 3. were an Author worthy to recommend
the use thereof unto us.

The Wisest of wise men has left us the Song of Songs of his own compiling,
viz. the Book called, The Song of Solomon; and we are informed of a thousand
and five Songs that he made, 1 Kings 4. 32. which (are concluded) were lost in
the Babylonian Captivity. Godly Hezekiah commanded singing to the Lord in the
words of his holy Predecessor David, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. The people which came
back to Jerusalem with Zerubbabel from their slavery in Babylon, sang for joy
of their return, Nehem. 12. 43. The succeeding Prophets do approve and practice
the same, Isa. 5. 1. and in many other places of that Book; and Jer. 31. 7,
etc. and Ezekiel. 27. 25, etc. in diverse places of both those Books; and Hos. 2.
15. Zeph. 2. 14. Zach. 2. 10. Hab. 3. 1.

And lest any should imagine Christ to have disapproved that ancient and pious
custom of Songs to God, see the Example of himself, Matt. 26. 30. None can say
how often he did so, because our Records have only a few fragments of his
actions, Joh. 21. 25. Nor can we suppose to have more of those the Apostles
did; yet are there enough to let us know their continuance of vocal Melody both
in precept and practice, Act. 16. 25. Paul. and Silas sang in prison: 1 Cor.
14. 15. I will sing with the Spirit and understanding. Ephesians. 5. 19. and Col. 3.
16. S. Paul bids them speak in spiritual songs, etc. and Jam. 5. 13. commands
the like.

The profitableness and usefulness of this pleasant Exercise may appear also
from the several occasions, whereby holy men have been prompted thereto, which
have not only been outward causes of joy and exultation; but even the greatest
straits and troubles, wherein the same has been made use of, to comfort and
solace the Soul.

The Songs indeed of Moses, of Barak, and Deborah, etc. were made upon times of
public temporal deliverances, whereto agrees the command of the Apostle James,
Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. But we find holy and devour David apply
himself hereto, under both outward and inward troubles, in the sixth and
thirteenth Psalms, and thereby to obtain relief from God in those grievous
distresses, as appears by the latter parts of both those Psalms; nay, the
contents of the twenty second Psalm render him a man ultra spem, and in abysso
tentationum, beyond hope, and in the bottomless ^it of temptations: and also
the 25, 26. 28. 32. 35, 36. 38, 39. 41, 42, 43. 51, 52. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59.
64. 69. 74. 83, 84, 85, 86. 88. 102. 109. 120. 123. 130. 137. 140, 141. 143.
Psalms were all penned in seasons of sorrow and heaviness, as you may read at
leisure. And we may understand in what anguish our Lord himself was, when he
sung that Hymn or Psalm, Mark 14. 26. by looking forward to the 34. verse,
where it is said, His soul was sorrowful even to death: which words were spoken
immediately after that Supper at which he had been singing, and at the same
time had told his Disci^les of the reason plotting against him, and the Actor,
in the 18. and 20. verses of the same Chapter.

These practices of our blessed Savior and the Prophet David may teach us,
That to recommend our selves and our Cause to God by way of finging (even in
the greatest afflictions) is a very proper remedy to alleviate the ^ame, and he
that shall try it will find, That though Prayers do oftentimes (through his
Mercy) procure case and relief in the most grievous perplexities; yet by
lifting up the Soul unto the Lord, Psalm. 25. 1. in singing some Psalm of David
that may fit our case, or some Divine Hymn of our own composing, it will be
enabled ^he more to exult, and bear it self up under the heaviest ^ads of
trouble, and to rejoye in God, when no other things do minister any comfort,
and for your guide herein, see the latter end of the Preface, where diverse
^salms are recommended to their proper seasons.

Something I have seen taxing the conversation of Mr Clement Marot, asserting
him to have been the first ^at did digest the Psalms into Meter: But it is said
by there is, there were two of that name, the one dissolute, ^he other a man of
austere holiness. Neither is it easy (...) believe, That a man who did employ
himself in such solemn and sacred labors, should be culpable of a corrupted
government in other matters, and all the World have celebrated that Reverend
Divine his Fellow Laborer Theodore de Beza. But suppose it were the same
person, yet I do not find any thing objected against him like to that of the
man after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14. (the divine Royal Author of the
Psalms) with Vriah the Hittite, 2 Samuel 11. Notwithstanding which, God did not
reject him, nor ought we to slight his Psalms on that account. We ought not to
oppose men's vices against the honor due to their virtues, lest the major part
of the Bible come under challenge: For there we see Moses, that man of God, 1 Chronicles. 23. 14. as not any Prophet like him, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. murmuring at Meribah,
Deuteronomy. 12. 51. and Job cursing his birthday, Job 3. 3. -- 9. Solomon an
Idolater, 1 Kings 11. 33. and all the very best Kings (even) of Judah, have
left blemishes upon their names, if we begin with Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and read
their History: Nay, Christ found every one of his (very) Apostles tardy of
unbelief, Matt. 17. 20. and the chief of them were guilty of gross crimes. And
if S. Paul may be born with for murdering S. Stephen, Acts 7. 58. because it
was before his Conversion; yet zealous S. Peter has not that excuse, who did
no less than forswear his Lord and Master, Matt. 26. 74. after his (unasked)
Oath of Allegiance, by which he had (voluntarily) bound himself to the contrary
(though he should die) not two hours before, as may be inferred, and yet their
laudable actions are not reflected on with upbraidings of their failings.
Neither are Mr. Marot's Works of Piety to be ridiculed with the memory of his
miscarriages in other cases, if they were yielded to have been true of the same
person.

Songs to God are recommended too much by example and practice in Sacred Writ
to be spoken against; and if any shall attempt an assault upon Divinity in
Meter, he will give just offense to diverse modern emiminent Champions for God,
who will take up the challenge and manage the conflict: But here is not
occasion to say more, than that daily Experience proves what is writ in Meter,
to be sung, is more grateful to men's fancies, sooner imbibed, makes a deeper
impress, and is longer retained in memory; yea, it elevates the hearts and
minds to more heightened contemplations, and excelse divine raptures than Prose.

These are not slender Reasons for its approbation, and (no doubt) were part of
the well-grounded considerations, that have prevailed with Churches and
Kingdoms to approve and establish the same.

Some do except against (I shall not say altogether without cause) the ill
compilement of the English Meter now in use, nor is that objection new, or
unanswered; but if it shall be desired to have the Psalms tuned to the Prose,
or the Meter altered, or to have both done, by so many as may bear the charge
of composing and printing Rules for them, there will be no unwillingness to
gratify their good likings also.

Those who shall be desirous to see more on this subject, may have recourse to
Mr. Cotton's Book, entitled, Singing of Psalms a Gospel-Ordinance, and to Mr.
Ford's Book called, Singing of Psalms the Duty of Christians, for Exhortation
to the Musical; and to the third and fourth Parts of Dr. Sherlock's Practical
Christian, for the Contemplative part thereof.

Thus much therefore may suffice in this place, to recommend this devout and
holy Exercise: What remains is to give such directions, as that (in the use of
this Edition) all persons may be capable of singing the Psalms true, both as to
Time and Tune; which two things are all that are to be observed in Music.

The DIRECTIONS explaining the meanings of all the Characters in the
Musick-part of the Psalms.
I entreat those who shall read them, to go deliberately through all of them,
once or twice, before they find any faults, or ask any questions, and by that
time they will see all the marks so very clearly unfolded, as to have nothing
in them abstruse, or uneasy to be understood, that is necessary to the singing
of the Psalms true.

I will speak first of the Times, which are but three in all, used in singing
of Psalms.

The first Time is marked thus *

The second Time is marked thus *

The third Time is marked thus * or thus *

The first Time * (and which is least used) is called a Brief, or two Times, or
a double Time, being about the duration of eight pulses at the wrist of a
person in good health and temper; and about that length of Time must the same
Tune of Voice continue unto any Syllable which has this Brief * marked over it.

The second Time * is called a Semibrief, or a whole Time, and is but one half
of a Brief *, and so holds the Voice the space of but four pulses on that
Syllable which has this mark or note over it *.

The third Time * or * (whether the strokes be upwards or downwards) is called
a Minim, or half a Time, and is but one half of a Semibrief * or whole Time,
and but one quarter or fourth part of a Brief * or double Time, and holds the
Voice the space but of two pulses.

In Sum,

One Brief * is two * * Semibriefs, or eight pulses.

One Semibrief * is two * or * Minims, or four pulses.

One * or * Minim is but two pulses.

So that one * or * Minim is half of a Semibrief *, or a quarter of a Brief *,
and one Semibrief * is half of a Brief *, as is said before.

But the Clerks are seldom so exact as to keep these distinct Times in the
Churches: They do generally observe but one Time, as indeed is most easy, and
therefore most agreeable to the capacities of the greater number in
Congregations and Families, and that is (usually) about a Minim and half, or
three pulses, or three quarters of a Semibrief.

But it would be more musical, and commendable to keep the due Times also,
which, if the Clerks and Masters of Families will take but a little care in,
all the people may quickly be expert at, after a small practice, if each Singer
have but one of these Books in his hand.

But I hold it best, That the Clerks do proceed in their old fashion, of one
Time, for a while, until the people may become acquainted with the different
Times of the Notes, and the right way of singing them; who (then) will be able
to follow as readily as Travelers do their Guides; wherein also the Clerks
must remember to declare, with an audible voice, to the Congregations when they
will keep their accustomed one Time, or when the proper musical Times; and
likewise when they will observe the. flat, called in Music the fa Notes, or
half Notes, and the mark called sharp, or when they will omit the notice of
them, which Characters. and will be spoken of in their proper place. For
otherwise the people in Congregations will confound one another all over, not
knowing which sorts of Times to observe, nor how to conform the degrees of
their Voices.

This is all that is needful to be said in this place, of the Times of Voices
in singing of Psalms.

The next thing to be spoken of is, the lowness, or height of the Voice; of
which there are eleven degrees, plainly demonstrated by five Lines, upon and
between which, the Notes (aforementioned) of the Tunes are set. Wherein
observe, That the degrees of the Voice are like unto the differences in the
Sounds of Bells, save that in singing is practiced a twofold contrary order to
that of the Bells: For in ringing, the smallest and most shrill Bell (which
begins first) the Ringers call the Treble or lowest; and so the Bells go (in
their terms) upwards to the biggest, and most full expression of the Sound: But
the first Note in singing begins at the biggest and most full delivery of the
Voice next to grumbling, and so goes upwards to the smallest and most shrill
utterance of it next to squeaking; so that what soundings the Singers call
downward, the Ringers call upward. And thus the difference between Singers and
Ringers appears to be twofold, as is said before. For one difference is in the
order of their beginning, the other in their order of naming the degrees to the
Sounds, as is plainly showed in what next follows, viz.

The first is the lowest, or most deep (and is the biggest, or most full.)
Sound, or degree of the Voice, which is under the lowest Line called the first
Line.

The second degree of the Voice, is upon the lowest Line.

The third degree of the Voice, is between the lowest Line and that Line next
above it, called the second Line.

The fourth degree of the Voice, is upon the second Line, which is that next
above the lowest Line.

The fifth degree of the Voice, is betwixt the second and third Line upwards.

The sixth degree of the Voice is upon the third, or middle Line.

The seventh degree of the Voice is betwixt the third Line, and the fourth Line
upward from the lowest or first Line.

The eighth degree of the Voice is upon the fonrth Line, which is next to the
uppermost Line.

The ninth degree of the Voice is betwixt the fourth Line, and the fifth and
uppermost Line.

The tenth degree of the Voice is upon that uppermost Line.

The eleventh, and highest degree of the Voice, is above the fifth Line, and is
the most shrill Note of all in singing of Psalms.

These Lines are figured in the two first Examples, that Beginners may know the
degrees of the Voice at sight, and learn (the more easily) to understand them.

The Lines are figured at the right hand ends of them, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and the
degrees of the Voice are set in words under the Lines, which now I come to the
demonstration of, as in these Examples, viz.

The first Example.
Begin to tune your Voice at the lowest degree, which is at the first Note, and
is under the lowest Line, and sing the numbers upwards, one, two, three, and so
forth, up to eleven; and then sing them backwards down again, eleven, ten,
nine, and so back down to one.

These are all Semibriefs or four Pulse-notes, called whole Times, ^ one, two,
three, four, five, six, sev'n, eight, nine, ten, 'lev'n. Exercise the risings
and fallings of your Voice up and down a while by these Notes of Time,
pronouncing the numbers forwards up, raising your Voice, and backwards down,
falling your Voice, as before.

The second Example
Is to be sung as the first, only these are but Minims, or two Pulse-notes of
Time, called Half-times; for two * * Minims make but one * Semibrief, as is
taught before.

^ 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.

When you have used your self a little to these two Examples, then proceed to
the Changes, or breakings of your Voice, to the Tunes and Times in the next
Example; whereby you will have knowledge and practice to sing any Psalm true,
and with pleasure.

The third Example.
^ 2, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 6, 8, 11, 9, 10.] 10, 9, 11, 8, 6, 7, 5, 4, 3, 1, 2.

You will do well to hold some pointed thing in each hand to guide your eye the
more readily in the application of the Figures, and Notes to each other, when
you sing this Example; for thereby the eye and mind will take both of them at
once, without study or poring; but after a little practice, such pointing will
be left off as needless; for you will know to apply them readily without any
help. In this Example you must give Times to your Voice, longer or shorter,
according to the Notes, which will be very easy; because there are but two
Times used in singing of Psalms (as is said before) besides the Brief *, which
is applied chiefly to the last Syllable of some Verses, and to most of the
Staves or Stanza's.

Before you begin to sing any Psalm, observe the compass of the Tune; that is,
what distance, or how many degrees of the Voice there are from the lowest to
the highest degree in the Tune you are about to sing, that so you may form your
Voice to sing the lowest Note without grumbling, and the highest Note without
squeaking; and observe well upon what Line, or in what space the first Note
stands, and also have an eye where the lowest and highest Notes do both stand,
that so you may raise and fall your Voice betwixt them; for though some persons
have strong breasts, yet there are others, whose Voices will not so well reach
the compass of many Notes: As for instance, in the first Psalm, the first Note
stands upon the first Line, which is the second degree of the Voice answering
to the Figure 2. in the former Example, and to the word [the] in the Psalm. The
lowest Note stands in the first space, that is, under the first Line,
signifying the first degree of the Voice, and is over the Figure 1. in the
Example, and over the word [in] being the ninth Syllable in the third Line of
the Psalm-Book, which the fourth Example does not reach to; and the highest
Note stands in the space between the fourth and fifth Line, which shows the
ninth degree of the Voice, and is over the Figure 9. in the Example, and over
[doth] the first Syllable in the fourth Line of the Psalm, so that the compass
of this Tune is nine Notes, for that both the lowest and highest Notes are
inclusive in the number of the compass, because both of them must be sung.

The second Psalm has the same Tune with the first.

The third Psalm has the first Note upon the second Line, which is the fourth
degree of the Voice, and is over the Figure 4. in the Example, and belongs to
the Letter [O] in the Psalm. The lowest Note is under the first Line, and is
over the Figure 1. and over the word [my] in the first Line. The highest Note
is upon the fourth Line, and is over the Figure 8. and over the word [kill] in
the second Line, whereby the compass of this Tune is eight Notes.

The fourth Psalm has the first Note upon the second Line, and is over the
Figure 4. in the Example, and belongs to the letter [O] in the Psalm, and also
there is no Note lower than it in that Psalm, and the highest Note is in the
space between the third and fourth Line, as is over the Figure 7. and over the
word [call] which is the last Syllable in the first Line, whereby the compass
of this Tune is but four Notes; and therefore the more fit for Beginners to
sing: For those Tunes, which have the least compass, are the most easy, and
also they may be sung with the more cheerful high pitch of the Voice, because
people will not be in danger of squeaking, as in Tunes of greater compass; and
if they begin high, there can be no danger of ^rumbling; but I recommend an
indifferency of Voice ^s best to be used.

You are now prepared to begin upon the Psalms; ^ut that your entrance may be
the more easy, here ^ollows an Example of the first four Lines of the first
Psalm, wherein I have set the Figures under the Notes, ^hewing in what degree
of the Voice each Note is pla^ed, and which Notes you may (at your pleasure)
try your Voice by, pronouncing the words of the numbers before you sing the
words of the Psalm, which you will afterward do the more readily and
perfectly; and when you can sing this Psalm by the Notes, you will be able to
sing all the Psalms true by the help of these Notes which are set with them.

Here follow the words of the first long verse which contains four short verses
of the first Psalm.

The man is blessed that has not bent, being eight Syllables: Pronounce the
words of the numbers that do stand under those Notes, which do appertain to the
said Syllables, and then instead of the said words, or eight Syllables, you
will sing these eight numbers, viz.

Two, four, two, five, four, seven, seven, six, because the figures of these
numbers do stand under those Notes, and over the same Syllables to which the
said Notes do belong.

The second short verse is, To wicked read his ear.

There being but six Syllables, instead of them sing these six numbers, Five,
six, two, four, three, two.

The third short verse is, Nor led his life as sinners do.

There being eight Syllables (as in the first verse) sing instead of them,
these eight numbers, Six, six, six, five, four, seven, six, five.

The fourth short verse is, Nor sat in scorners chair.

This verse contains but six Syllables, as in the second verse, and therefore
instead of them sing but these six numbers, Five, eight, four, six, five, four.

And after a very little use of this, you will sing the words of the Psalms to
the Notes with great facility and delight, not only in this little trial, but
even throughout all the Psalms.

Thus having fully explained it, I come now to give you the last, being

The fourth Example.
^ 2 4 2 5 4 7 7 6. 5

The man is blessed that has not bent] to ^ 6 2 4 3 2. 6 6 6 5 4 wicked read his
ear] nor lead his life as ^ 7 6 5. 5 8 4 6 5 4 sinners do] nor sat in scorners
chair.]

In the Meter, four short verses which are four Lines in the common Psalm-books
(that have not the Musick-Notes) are accounted to one long verse, and two long
verses make one staff of eight short verses: The first of which short verses
consists of eight Syllables, which makes four feet, the next consists of six
Syllables, making three feet in Poetry, through the most part of the Psalms,
only these one and twenty Psalms following have ^ther sorts of Meter, viz. the
25, 50, 51, 67, 70, 100, 104, 111, 112, 113, 120, 121, 122, 124, 125, 126, 127,
130, 134, 136, 148.

The short Meter verses are divided by this Character ^etwixt them] and the
Music over them is divided by a cross Bar coming down thwart the Music thus *
^ut this stroke is put by the Printer more often than needful in some places.

Musicians, in teaching to Sing, did use to give unto the Notes of the degrees
of the Voice these seven terms, Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ci, as the French yet
do; but now they teach by no more than these four terms, Sol, la, ^ni, fa, and
so double the repetition of either sort of terms, until they come up to the
number of 11. as thus, Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ci, ut re, mi, fa. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. but now they change ut, re, into sol, la, and do teach
thus, Sol, la, mi, fa, sol, la, fa, sol, la, mi, fa.

But these unaccustomed words, or Syllables, and the repeating of them, being
difficult to be learned by such as have no acquaintance with Music, I have
made use of those numbers to distinguish the degrees of the Notes by, as more
intelligible, and easy to ordinary Capacities, wherein the numbers, seven and
eleven, are printed with Apostrophies thus, sev'n and 'lev'n, that each of them
may be pronounced in Singing, as but one Syllable, because two Syllables cannot
so conveniently be expressed to one Note in Singing.

The long strokes of the Minims, * or * are carried upwards or downwards, as
they will come in most commodiously among the five Lines, but do signify no
other thing than the same Time of two pulses.

The Characters at the right hand end of every System, or row of five Lines,
whereon the Notes are placed thus *, or else in some of the spaces thus *, is
on^ to show, that the Note ensuing on the left hand end i^ the next row of
Lines, stands in the same degree of the Voice, which this mark * is set at, on
the right han^ end of the System foregoing, that the Voice may take the Note
readily before the eye can find it at the left hand end of the System. I come
now to the letter. and the mark sharp, which I promised to speak of.

You find the Letter. in the fourth space at the beginning of the Tune to the
first Psalm, but you have no sharp until you come to the fourth Psalm, where it
is put at the beginning of the Tune upon the second line: Their signification
is only thus, that where the said letter. stands in any space, or upon any line
at the beginning of a Tune, all the Notes standing in that space, or upon that
line, ought to be sung one half degree of the Voice lower than else they should
have been; but if. stand in any other part of the Tune, it must be applied to
that Note only, which it stands before, and to no other Note: And on the
contrary, when the mark sharp stands in any space, or upon any line, at the
beginning of a Tune, all the Notes standing in that space, or upon that line,
ought to be sung one half degree of the Voice higher than else they should have
been; but if the mark sharp stands in any other part of the Tune, it must be
applied only to the raising that Note which stands next after it, one half
degree of the Voice, and to no other Note.

By this means the compass of the Tune of the first and second Psalms will be
no more than eight Notes and half, and the compass of the Tune of the third
Psalm will be but seven Notes and half, because the letter has fallen both
those Tunes half a Note; and also the compass of the Tune of the fourth Psalm
will be found but three Notes and half, because the mark does raise the lowest
degree of the Voice in that Tune half a Note.

Most of the Psalms have this mark or letter * with a stroke down it, at the
beginnings of the Tunes, but there are thirty three Psalms, viz. the 14, 15,
17, 19, 24, 29, 31, 39, 40, 42, 44, 50, 52, 54, 63, 65, 72, 79, 80, 82, 92, 93,
94, 99, 100, 104, 107, 109, 117, 128, 145, 147, 149. which have the said letter
* with a prick in it before them: The meaning is thus, The said marks are two
Moods which are explained as follows.

First, The imperfect of the more * called Tripla or (less usual) swift time
where one Semibrief * contains three Minims *** which ought to be observed by
the skilful, as an Exception from the general Rule at the beginning of these
Directions, where one Semibrief * is said to contain but two Minims **, as it
is in the other next Mood.

Secondly, The imperfect of the less * called dupla or more usual slow time,
signifies the Semibrief * to contain but two Minims ** according to the
aforesaid general Rule.

This mark * in Music is called the letter C. for Cliff, from the French word
Clef, which signifies in English Key, whereby to set the height or lowness of
the Tune according to what line the middle of the said Cliff stands upon, and
so all the rest of the Tune must be sung in proportion of voice; so this Cliff.
* which is called the C. sol, fa, ut Cliff, being placed on the fourth line
signifies a Tenor, on the third line a Contra-tenor on the second line a lower
mean, on the first line a higher mean; whereby is understood that the lower the
middle of this Cliff * stands in the System of lines, the higher it sets the
tune; so in the Psalms this Cliff is placed upon the fourth or upon the third
line, being a Tenor and Contra-tenor, each of which is applied three manner of
ways, being demonstrated and figured thus, viz.

1 2 3

Tenor Cliffs ^ 1 2 3 Contra Tenor Cliffs ^

But most part of the Psalms are sung by the first, called the Tenor, because
the middle of the cliff * stands on the fourth line; only these forty three,
viz. the 14, 15, 17, 19, 24, 29, 31, 39, 40, 42, 44, 50, 52, 54, 63, 65, 72,
79, 80, 82, 92, 93, 94, 99, 100, 104, 107, 111, 113, 115, 118, 220, 122, 124,
125, 129, 130, 136, 137, 139, 140, 146, 149. Psalms are sung by the second,
called the Contra-tenor, because at those the middle of the cliff * stands upon
the third line.

There are two other Cliffs in Music, namely the F. fa, ut cliff, marked thus
* and the G. sol, re, ut cliff, marked thus *. but I have spoken only of the C.
sol, fa, ut cliff *, because there is no other put to the Psalm-Musick, nor is
it material to insist further upon any of these mysterious Terms and intrigues
of Art, for that ^t would give greater trouble to render those intelligible to
the plurality of people, than is needful in this concernment: But this little
is not amiss, for that it may give satisfaction to some particular ingenious
persons, who may peradventure desire it.

All the other former Directions are necessary for Clerks Masters of Families,
or persons alone, to sing exactly, true; but any people may sing well enough in
Congregations, or single, when they shall have informed themselves only of the
three Notes of Time *, * and * or * mentioned at the beginning of these
Directions, and of the eleven degrees of the voice; and better perfection will
come, by a little practice, insensibly, as will be found by Experience.

These Psalms are printed in a small Character, that the Books may be the
cheaper, and of the less bulk, and by that means the more commodious for
pockets, in being the fewer sheets; it having been one of my greatest aims, to
make them as cheap, and portable as possible: But the smallness of both Letter
and Music, has made the printing of each sheet the more chargeable.

The Printer has also been very careful in placing the Notes exactly over
their respective Syllables, to prevent disorderly application of each to the
other, the neglect whereof is a great fault in those Books I have seen, wherein
the Notes are put to the first slaves, or verses of some of the Psalms.

These Directions are not long, and if they had been more brief, they must have
been less plain, which would no have been so fit and proper for such
Capacities, as this Work is partly intended: Wherefore here is every thing done
that could be devised or advised, and (I hope) enough to render this Seraphick
Devotion plain, easy, and pleasant to every unprejudiced Understanding;
persuading my self, that as many as shall be delighted in it, (how dissolute or
wicked soever beforehand) will be led into the contemplation of the rich Divine
things contained in these heavenly Songs, and (by degrees) to the knowledge of
Him, who may be said to have sung his own Elegy or Funeral Song, the Paschal
Psalm-Singer, even our Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

I commend all to the practice of the wise and of the unwise, with my most
hearty prayers to the Author of all Blessings, for His peculiar Benediction on
these frail endeavors of His most unworthy Servant,

T. M.

ERRATA.
Page 13. verse. 1. for with read wilt: Psalm. 48. v. 2. for he r. the: Psalm. 50.
v. 12. for well r. dwell: Ps. 89. v. 38. for whithin r. within: Psalm. 113. v.
7. for paor r. poor: Psalm. 119. v. 64. for they r. thy.

HEre are pointed out those Psalms for your Guide, as most proper to be sung
upon these respective Occasions following, taken out of some English
Collections, viz.

In times of Joy and Thanksgiving, the 30, 34, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108,
111, 113, 119, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150.

In times of Sorrow, the 25, 54, 67, 70, 72, 86, 143.

In case of Confession and Repentance, sing any of these called the seven
Penitential Psalms, the 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143.

In case of extraordinary Afflictions, burthensomness of life, or temptation to
despair, the 13, 22, 31, 42, 44, 54, 56, 64, 69, 84.

But those above being not so particular as the French Collections, I have
thought it requisite to translate and give you these also, viz.

For Remission of Sins, and especially if under trouble of mind, because of
them, or in sickness, the 6, 25, 32, 38, 51, 130.

For the Church, when under troubles of diverse kinds.

Of Calumnies, the 10, 12, 13, 14, 123.

Of hindrance in Religion, the 42.

If in trouble for the Word, the 35, 44, 74, 88.

If under Force, the 17, 20, 80, 83.

If molested by false Brethren, the 94.

If under Captivity, or for deliverance from it, the 99, 102, 137.

If for her Prosperity, the 67.

For returning of Thanks.

If after Deliverance, the 9, 18, 23, 27, 34, 77, 124, 129, 149.

If for Benefits received, the 48, 81, 106.

If for Deliverance in part, the 126.

If for increasing the Church, the 105.

For the general Supplication of private persons, the 85, 121.

If under inward Discomfort, the 16, 71.

If outwardly afflicted, the 88, 142, 143.

If under oppression of Adversaries, the 3, 5, 43, 52, 53, 54, 59.

If in great danger, the 31.

If God's Name be abused, the 28.

If the wicked prosper, the 37, 73.

If assaulted by despair, or but by impatience, the 39.

If to preserve one's Innocence, the 58.

If prevented of godly Company, the 84, 120.

If under reproach by false Witnesses, the 109.

If toward a Conflict, the 144.

If for deliverance from Death, the 30, 138.

If after Relief, the 40.

If to magnify God's Works, the 8, 19, 29, 104, 111.

If to extol, his Liberality, the 24, 33, 65, 66, 103, 118, 145.

-- His Mercy and Truth, the 88.

-- His Greatness, the 77.

-- His Righteousness, the 92, 93.

-- His Providence, the 75, 113, 136, 139.

-- His Laws, the 119.

-- His Adoption of his People, the 9, 60.

To invite Men and all Creatures to rejoice in God, the 47, 95, 96, 118, 135,
148, 150.

For Help and Assurance from God, the 46. 62. 63. 88. 91. 97. 125. 127. 146.

Of the Prophecy of Christ, his Kingdom and Church, the 2. 22. 45. 50. 72. 110.

The Righteous in Adversity, the 41.

A Description of the World's Vanity, the 49.

Exhortations to good Rulers, the 82.

A Description of them, the 101.

A Description of Man's Happiness, the 102. 128.

A Description of the Misery of Man's Life, the 90.

But where a whole Psalm does not suit to the Occasion, you may sing such parts
as do best agree with it, and so pick out of any Psalm such portions as shall
be most pertinent to your purposes.

ALl Hallowed Acts should be performed with awe And Reverence of Body, Voice,
and Heart. We Have Rules to Pray; but those who never saw Rules how to Sing, How
should they bear a part? To Avoid therefore, an uncouth jangling Noise, This
will direct Conformity of Voice.

The Names of those eminent Professors of Music who did long since compose the
Tunes of the Psalms.
THomas Tallis. John Douland Doctor of Music. Thomas Morley Bachelor of
Music. Giles Farnaby Bachelor of Music. Thomas Tomkins Bachelor of Music.
John Tomkins Bachelor of Music. Martin Pierson Bachelor of Music. William
Parsons. Edmund Hooper. George Kirby. Edward Blancks. Richard Allison. John
Farmer. Michael Cavendish. John Bennet. Robert Palmer. John Milton. Simon
Stubbs. William Cranford. William Cobhold. William Harrison. Thomas Ravenscroft
Bachelor of Music.
The Scale to Music, called the Gamut. 3 Scales, Showing the Names of Notes. E
la la mi fa D la Sol -- Sol la la C Sol fa fa Sol Sol B fa mi -- mi fa fa A la
mi re la la mi G Sol re ut * -- Sol Sol la F fa ut fa fa Sol E la mi -- la mi
fa D la Sol re Sol la la C Sol fa ut * -- fa Sol Sol B fa mi mi fa fa A la mi
re la la mi G Sol re ut Sol Sol la F fa ut * -- fa fa Sol E la mi la mi fa D
Sol re -- Sol la la C fa ut fa Sol Sol B mi -- mi fa fa A re la la mi Gam ut --
Sol Sol la B E A duralis. naturalis. mollaris.

You must Sing twice, fa, Sol, la, above mi: and twice la, Sol, fa, under mi.
Find out where mi is and you have all.

All the Characters used in this Book.
1 2 1 1/8 * * * * * * * * * ^ *3 * * * * * * * * * *
Explanation.
TO understand the Scale of Music, you must begin at the foot of the first
Colume, and say upwards, Gamut, Are, and so to Ela at the top: And then
downwards, Ela. D la Sol, to the bottom. In which Colume there are 3 Cliffs:

The Bass * the Mean * and the Treble *.

At the foot of the 3 last Columes you have three Capitals. B. E. A. all to
find out the Master note mi, which is always in the Compass of 8 Notes. B.
without a flat in that Colume. E. with a flat in B mi, and B fa b mi. And A
with 2 flats, that is, in B mi and Ela mi. Note that every 8 th. is the same in
naming the Notes in the 4 Columes.

As to the Characters in the last Line: The first is the Treble-Cliff. The 2 d.
the Mean. The third the Bass. The 6 Notes that follow in use are Named a Long,
a Breve, a Semi-breve, a Minim, a Crochet, a Quaver and a (.) Prick, when added
to any Note makes it half as much more in Time. Then 2 Moods, Tripla, 3 to 1:
and Dupla, 2 to 1. Then a b sharp, which makes the Note half a Note higher; and
a b flat, half a Note lower. Then the Pauses or Rests, the first a Long. 2 d. a
Breve 3 d. a Semibreve, 4 th. a Minim. Then a single Bar to part the Time, be
it Tripla or Dupla. Then a double Bar for the End of a Song. Then a Repeat, *
that is, when any part of the Music is to be Sung or Played over again. Then a
Hold or Close * And a Direct to lead the eye to the beginning of the next Line.

A Table for the whole number of Psalms, and also in what Page you may find
every of them.
A
Psalm ^ ALl laud and praise Folio 66 Psalm ^ All people hearken Folio 121
Psalm ^ Attend my people Folio 207 Psalm ^ Amid the press Folio 227 Psalm ^^
All people that Folio 272
B.
Psalm ^1 BE light and Folio 224 Psalm ^9 Blessed are they Folio 336 Psalm ^8
Blessed art thou Folio 376 Psalm ^4 Behold and Folio 382 Psalm ^2 Before the
Folio 403 Psalm ^4 Blessed be the Folio 406
D.
Psalm ^^ DO not O God Folio 228
E.
Psalm ^7 EXcept the Folio 374
G.
Psalm ^ GIve to the Folio 64 Psalm ^ Grudge not Folio 88 Psalm ^ Great is the
Folio 119 Psalm ^5 Give praise Folio 291 Psalm ^7 Give thanks Folio 306 Psalm
^48 Give laud Folio 415
H.
Psalm ^2 HElp Lord Folio 23 Psalm ^3 How long Folio 24 Psalm ^1 Have mercy on
me Folio 135 Psalm ^6 Have mercy Lord Folio 146 Psalm ^7 Have mercy on us Folio
170 Psalm ^8 How ever it be Folio 192 Psalm ^4 How pleasant is Folio 231 Psalm
^1 He that within Folio 255
I.
Psalm ^5 INcline thine Folio 7 Psalm ^1 I trust in God Folio 21 Psalm ^0 In
trouble Folio 42 Psalm ^5 I lift mine Folio 55 Psalm ^4 I will give Folio 77
Psalm ^9 I said I will Folio 98 Psalm ^0 I waited long Folio 100 Psalm ^3 Judge
and revenge Folio 108 Psalm ^7 I with my Folio 204 Psalm ^2 It is a thing Folio
258 Psalm ^00 In God the Folio 273 Psalm ^01 I mercy will Folio 271 Psalm ^09
In constant Folio 315 Psalm 116 I love the Folio 329 Psalm 120 In trouble Folio
365 Psalm 121 I lift mine eyes Folio 365 Psalm 122 I did in heart Folio 367
L.
Psalm 6 LOrd in thy Folio 9 Psalm 16 Lord keep Folio 27 Psalm 26 Lord be my
Folio 58 Psalm 35 Lord plead Folio 81 Psalm 42 Like as the Folio 106 Psalm 68
Let God arise Folio 171 Psalm 72 Lord give thy Folio 188 Psalm 86 Lord bow
thine Folio 236 Psalm 88 Lord God of Folio 240 Psalm 130 Lord to thee Folio 377
Psalm 140 Lord save me Folio 399 Psalm 143 Lord hear my Folio 404
M.
Psalm 23 MY shepherd Folio 12 Psalm 45 My heart does Folio 113 Psalm 62 My
soul to God Folio 119 Psalm 71 My Lord my Folio 184 Psalm 103 My soul give
Folio 281 Psalm 104 My soul praise Folio 285 Psalm 146 My soul praise Folio 411
N.
Psalm 125 NOt unto us Folio 326 Psalm 124 Now Israel Folio 369
O.
Psalm 3 O Lord how are Folio 4 Psalm 4 O God that Folio 5 Psalm 7 O Lord my
God Folio 11 Psalm 8 O God our Lord Folio 13 Psalm 15 O Lord within Folio 26
Psalm 17 O Lord give ear Folio 29 Psalm 18 O God my Folio 32 Psalm 21 O Lord
how joyful Folio 44 Psalm 22 O God my God Folio 46 Psalm 31 O Lord I put Folio
68 Psalm 44 Our ears have Folio 109 Psalm 51 O Lord consider Folio 132 Psalm 55
O God give ear Folio 142 Psalm 60 O Lord thou Folio 155 Psalm 63 O God my God
Folio 161 Psalm 64 O Lord unto my Folio 162 Psalm 70 O God to me Folio 183
Psalm 79 O God the Gentiles Folio 218 Psalm 94 O Lord thou Folio 261 Psalm 95 O
come let us Folio 263 Psalm 98 O sing ye now Folio 269 Psalm 102 O hear my
Folio 277 Psalm 108 O God my heart Folio 313 Psalm 117 O all ye Nations Folio
331 Psalm 118 O give ye Folio 332 Psalm 123 O Lord that heaven Folio 368 Psalm
129 Often they now Folio 376 Psalm 131 O Lord I am Folio 378 Psalm 133 O how
happy Folio 381 Psalm 135 O praise the Folio 383 Psalm 136 O laud the Lord
Folio 388 Psalm 139 O Lord thou Folio 396 Psalm 141 O Lord upon Folio 401
P.
Psalm 38 PUt me not to Folio 95 Psalm 106 Praise ye the Folio 298 Psalm 136
Praise ye the Folio 386 Psalm 147 Praise ye the Folio 413
R.
Psalm 61 REgard O Lord Folio 157 Psalm 132 Remember David Folio 379
S.
Psalm 54 SAve me O God Folio 141 Psalm 59 Send aid and Folio 152 Psalm 69 Save
me Folio 177 Psalm 96 Sing ye with Folio 265 Psalm 125 Such as in God Folio 370
Psalm 149 Sing ye unto Folio 417
T.
Psalm 1 THe man is Folio 1 Psalm 14 There is Folio 25 Psalm 19 The heavens
Folio 40 Psalm 23 The Lord is Folio 51 Psalm 24 The earth is Folio 53 Psalm 27
The Lord is both Folio 60 Psalm 28 Thou art Folio 63 Psalm 32 The man is blessed
Folio 72 Psalm 36 The wicked with Folio 86 Psalm 41 The man is blessed Folio 104
Psalm 46 The Lord is our Folio 116 Psalm 50 The mighty God Folio 124 Psalm ib.
The God of gods Folio 127 Psalm 53 The foolish man Folio 139 Psalm 57 Take pity
for Folio 148 Psalm 65 Thy praise Folio 164 Psalm 76 To all that now Folio 202
Psalm 80 Thou shepherd Folio 221 Psalm 85 Thou have been Folio 234 Psalm 87
That city shall Folio 239 Psalm 89 To sing the Folio 243 Psalm 90 Thou Lord
Folio 252 Psalm 93 The Lord as Folio 260 Psalm 97 The Lord does Folio 267 Psalm
99 The Lord does Folio 271 Psalm 110 The Lord did Folio 320 Psalm 112 The man
is Folio 323 Psalm 125 Those that Folio 371 Psalm 138 Thee will I praise Folio
394 Psalm 145 Thee will I laud Folio (...)
U.
Psalm 75 UNto thee Folio (...)
W.
Psalm 2 WHy did the Folio (...) Psalm 9 With heart Folio (...) Psalm 10 What
is the Folio (...) Psalm 52 Why do thou Folio ^1 Psalm 74 Wh^ a^t thou Folio
1^ Psalm 111 W^^h heart I do Folio 3^ Psalm 114 Wh^^ (...) Folio 3^ Psalm 126
When that the Folio 3^ Psalm 137 When as we sat Folio 39^
Y.
Psalm 30 YE righteous Folio (...) Psalm 47 Ye people all Folio 1^ Psalm 58 Ye
rulers that Folio 1^ Psalm 66 Ye men on earth Folio 1^ Psalm 113 Ye children
Folio 3^ Psalm 150 Yield unto God Folio 4^
These ye shall have after the Psalms.
Psalm Veni Creator Folio 42^ Veni Creator Spiritus Folio 42^ The humble suit
of a sinner Folio 42^ Venite exultemus Folio ibid. Te Deum Folio 423 The Song
of the three Children Folio 425 Benedictus Folio 425 Magnificat Folio 426 Nunc
dimittis Folio ibid. Quicunque vult Folio 427 The lamentation of a sinner Folio
428 The Lord's Prayer. I. F. Folio 429 The ten Commandments Folio 430 The
complaint of a sinner Folio ibid. A Psalm before Morning-prayer Folio 431 A
Psalm before Evening-prayer Folio 432 Audi Israel Folio ibid. The Lord's
Prayer, Dr. Cox Folio 433 The Creed 434 A Prayer to the Holy Ghost Folio 435 Da
pacem Folio ibid. The lamentation Folio 436 A Thanksgiving Folio ibid. A Prayer
Folio 438
THE PSALMS OF DAVID In METER.
PSALM I. Beatus vir.
T. S.
THe man is blessed that has not bent, ^
to wicked read his ear: ^
Nor led his life as sinners do, ^
nor sat in scorners chair: ^

does set his whole delight: ^
And in that law does exercise ^
himself both day and night. ^

fast by the river side, ^
Which brings for most-pleasant fruit ^
in his due time and tide. ^
Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, ^
but flourish still and stand: ^
Even so shall all things prosper well, ^
that this man takes in hand. ^

they shall be nothing so: ^
But as the dust which from the earth ^
the wind drives to and fro. ^

in judgment stand upright: ^
Nor yet the sinners with the just, ^
shall come in place or sight. ^

unto the Lord is known: ^
And eke the way of wicked men, ^
shall quite be overthrown. ^
PSALM II. Quare fremuerunt.
T. S.
WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? ^
what rage was in their brain? ^
Why did the Jewish people muse? ^
seeing all is but vain. ^

conspire, and are all bent ^
Against the Lord and Christ his Son, ^
which he amongst us sent. ^

let all their bonds be broke: ^
And of their doctrine and their law, ^
let us reject the yoke. ^

their doings will deride: ^
And make them all as mocking stocks, ^
throughout the world so wide. ^

to them upon a day: ^
And in his fury trouble them, ^
and then the Lord will say: ^

upon my holy hill: ^
I will therefore Lord preach thy law, ^
and eke declare thy will. ^

did say to me I wot, ^
Thou art my dear and only Son, ^
to day I thee begot. ^

as heirs at thy request: ^
The ends and coasts of all the earth, ^
by thee shall be possessed. ^

as men under foot trod, ^
And as the potters sherds shall break ^
them with an iron rod. ^

be wise therefore and learned: ^
By whom the matters of the world, ^
be judged and discerned. ^

in trembling and in fear: ^
See that with reverence ye rejoice ^
to him in like manner. ^

his blessed Son I say, ^
Lest in his wrath ye suddenly ^
perish in the mid way. ^

shall kindle in his breast: ^
O then all they that trust in Christ, ^
shall happy be and blessed. ^
PSALM III. Domine quid.
T. S.
O Lord how are my foes increast, ^
which vex me more and more? ^

God can him not restore. ^

when I am hard bestead: ^
My worship and mine honor both, ^
and thou holdst up my head. ^

I did both call and cry, ^
And he out of his holy hill, ^
did hear me by and by. ^

I slept, and rose again: ^
For why, I know assuredly ^
the Lord will me sustain. ^

I could not be afraid: ^
For thou are still my Lord and God, ^
my Savior and mine aid. ^
Rise up therefore, save me my God, ^
for now to thee I call: ^

of those wicked men all. ^

to thee O Lord above: ^
Thou do bestow upon thy folk, ^
thy blessing and thy love. ^
PSALM. IV. Cum invocarem.
T. S.
O God that art my righteousness, ^
Lord hear me when I call: ^
Thou have set me at liberty ^
when I was bound and thrall. ^

and grant me my request: ^
For unto thee uncessantly, ^
to cry I will not rest. ^

my glory thus despise? ^
Why wander ye in vanity, ^
and follow after lies? ^

the Lord does take and choose: ^
And when to him I make my plaint, ^
he does me not refuse. ^

examine well your heart: ^
And in your chamber quietly, ^
see you your selves convert. ^

of righteousness, I say: ^
And look that in the living Lord, ^
you put your trust always. ^

and riches do embrace: ^
But Lord grant us thy countenance, ^
thy favor and thy grace. ^

more joyful and more glad, ^
Than they that of their corn and wine, ^
full great increase have had. ^

taking my rest and sleep: ^
For thou only wilt me, O Lord, ^
alone in safety keep. ^
PSALM V. Verba mea auribus.
T. S.
INcline thine ears unto my words, ^
O Lord my plaint consider: ^

to thee I make my prayer. ^

for I will have respect, ^
My prayer early in the morn, ^
to thee for to direct. ^

in thee my God alone: ^
Thou art not pleased with wickedness, ^
and ill with thee dwells none. ^

these furious fools, O Lord: ^
Vain workers of iniquity, ^
thou have always abhord. ^

thou shall destroy them than: ^
And God will hate the blood-thirsty, ^
`and the deceitful man. ^

trusting upon thy grace: ^
And reverently will worship thee, ^
toward thine holy place. ^

for to confound my foes: ^
And eke the way that I shall walk, ^
before my face disclose. ^

their heart is foul and vain: ^
Their throat an open sepulcher, ^
their tongues do gloss and fain. ^

that they may come to naught: ^
Subvert them in their heaps of sin, ^
which have rebellion wrought. ^

let them be glad always: ^
And render thanks for thy defense, ^
and give thy Name the praise. ^

the just and righteous still: ^
And with thy grace, as with a shield, ^
defend him from all ill. ^
PSALM VI. Domine ne in furore.
T. S.
LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, ^
though I deserve thine ^e: ^
Ne yet correct me in thy rage, ^
O Lord I thee desire: ^

of mercy me forbear: ^
And heal me Lord, for why, thou know ^
my bones do quake for fear. ^

and vexed vehemently, ^
But, Lord, how long will thou delay ^
to cure my misery? ^

my silly soul up take: ^
Oh save me, not for my deserts, ^
but for thy mercies sake. ^

remembers thee one whit: ^
Or who shall worship thee, O Lord, ^
in the infernal pit? ^

that I wax wondrous faint: ^
All the night long I wash my bed, ^
with tears of my complaint. ^

with anguish of my heart: ^
For fear of those that be my foes, ^
and would my soul subvert. ^

that work iniquity: ^
For why, the Lord has heard the voice ^
of my complaint and cry. ^

and prayer of my heart: ^
But it received at my hands, ^
and took it in good part. ^

the Lord will soon defame: ^
And suddenly confound them all, ^
to their rebuke and shame. ^
PSALM VII. Domine Deus meus.
T. S.
O Lord my God, I put my trust ^
and confidence in thee: ^
Save me from them that me pursue, ^
and eke deliver me. ^

and rend in pieces small: ^
while there is none to succor me, ^
and rid me out of thrall. ^

the thing that is not right: ^
Or else if I be found in fault, ^
or guilty in thy sight. ^

or left him in distress, ^
which me pursued most cruelly, ^
and hated me causlesse. ^

and eke my life down thrust ^
Unto the earth, and also lay ^
mine honor in the dust. ^

and put my foes to pain: ^
Perform the kingdom promised ^
to me which wrong sustain. ^

and know thee by this thing: ^
If thou declare for love of them, ^
thy self as Lord and King. ^

O Lord now judge thou me, ^
According to my righteousness, ^
and mine integrity. ^

and be the just man's guide: ^
By whom the secrets of all hearts ^
are searched and descri'd. ^

in all my pain or smart: ^
That does preserve all those that be ^
of pure and perfect heart. ^

God judges by his power: ^
So that he feels his mighty hand, ^
even every day and hour. ^

for even as he should smite, ^
He whets his word, his bew he bends, ^
aiming where he may hit. ^

his arrows keen and sharp, ^
For them that do me persecute, ^
whilst he does mischief warp. ^

of his devilish forecast: ^
And of his michief once conceived, ^
yet brings forth naught at last. ^

in hope to hurt his brother: ^
But he shall fall into the pit, ^
that he dig'd up for other. ^

of him in whom it bred: ^
And all the mischief that he wrought, ^
shall fall upon his head. ^

that judges right'ously: ^
And with my song will praise the Name ^
of him that is most hie. ^
PSALM VIII. Domine Deus noster.
T. S.
O God our Lord, how wonderful ^
are thy works every where! ^
Whose fame surmounts in dignity, ^
above the heavens clear. ^
the mouths of sucking babes, ^
thou will confound thy foes: ^
For in those babes thy might is seen: ^
thy graces they disclose. ^

the works of thine own hand: ^
The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, ^
in order as they stand: ^

that thou do him remember? ^
Or what is man's posterity, ^
that thou do him consider? ^

than Angels in degree: ^
And thou have crowned him also, ^
with glory and dignity. ^

of all thy works of wonder: ^
And at his feet have set all things, ^
that he should keep them under. ^

that in the fields do feed: ^
Fowls of the air fish in the sea, ^
and all that therein breed. ^
I say once again, ^
O God that art our Lord: ^
How famous and how wonderful, ^
are thy works through the world? ^
PSALM IX. Confitebor tibi, Dom.
T. S.
WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord ^
will I sing laud and praise: ^
And speak of all his wondrous works, ^
and them declare always. ^

in thee O God most hie: ^
And make my songs extol thy name ^
above the starry sky. ^

and turned into flight, ^
They fall down flat and are destroyed, ^
by thy great power and might. ^

my grief and all my grudge: ^
Thou do with justice hear my cause ^
most like a right'ous Judge. ^

and wicked so confound: ^
That afterward the memory ^
of them cannot be found. ^

and all their towns destror'd: ^
Thou have their fame with them defaced, ^
throughout the world so wide. ^

for evermore shall reign: ^
And in the seat of equity, ^
true judgment will maintain. ^

the world and every wight: ^
And so will yield with equity, ^
to every man his right. ^

what time they be oppressed: ^
He is in all adversity, ^
their refuge and their rest. ^

therefore shall trust in thee: ^
For thou forsakest not their suite, ^
in their necessity. ^

that dwells in Sion hill: ^
Publish among all nations, ^
his noble acts and will. ^

of those that be oppressed: ^
Forgetting not the afflicted heart, ^
that seek to him for rest. ^

whose enemies still remain: ^
Whichs from the gate of death art wont ^
to raise me up again. ^

thy praise with heart and voice: ^
And that in thy salvation Lord, ^
my soul might still rejoice. ^

that they themselves prepared: ^
And in the net which they did set, ^
their own feet fast are snared. ^

for every man to mark: ^
When as we see the wicked man ^
lie trapt in his own wark. ^

go down to hell for ever: ^
And all the people of the world, ^
that will not God remember. ^

the poor man's grief and pain: ^
The patient people never look ^
for help of God in vain. ^

that be of worldly might: ^
And let the heathen folk receive ^
their judgment in thy sight. ^

into the hearts of them, ^
That they may know assuredly, ^
they be but mortal men. ^
PSALM X. Vt quid Domine.
T. S.
WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, ^
art now so far from thine? And keep close thy countenance ^
from us this troublous time? ^

and wicked men's desire: ^
Let them be taken in the craft ^
that they themselves conspire. ^

the ungodly does delight, ^
So does the wicked praise himself, ^
and does the Lord despite. ^

he sets all apart: ^
Nay, nay, there is no God, says he, ^
for thus he thinks in heart. ^

he does thy laws neglect: ^
And with a blast does puff against ^
such as would him correct. ^

lest mine estate should change: ^
And why? for all adversity ^
to him is very strange. ^

of fraud, deceit, and guile: ^
Under his tongue does mischief sit, ^
and travel all the while. ^

to slay the innocent: ^
Against the poor that pass him by, ^
his cruel eyes are bent. ^

lies lurking in his den: ^
If he may snare them in his net, ^
to spoil poor simple men. ^

he croucheth down, I say: ^
So are great heaps of poor men made ^
by his strong power his prey. ^

therefore I may be bold: ^
His countenance is cast aside, ^
he does it not behold. ^

the poor man's hope does rest: ^
Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord ^
the poor that be oppressed. ^

Lord do thou not abhor't? ^
To hear the wicked in their heart ^
say, tush thou car'st not for it? ^

and well do understand, ^
That friendless and poor fatherless ^
are left into thy hand. ^

then break the power for ever: ^
That they with their iniquity ^
may perish altogether. ^

as King and God alone: ^
And he will chase the heathen folk, ^
out of the land each one. ^

their prayer and request: Their hearts thou will confirm until ^
thine ears to hear be pressed. ^

and help them to their right: ^
That they may be no more oppressed ^
by men of worldly might. ^
PSAM XI. In Domino confide.
T. S.
I Trust in God, how dare ye then ^
say thus my soul until? ^
Fly hence as fast as any fowl, ^
and hide you in your hill. ^

and make their arrow pressed, ^
To shoot in secret, and to hurt ^
the found and harmless breast. ^

and clearly brought to naught! ^
Alas the just and righteous man, ^
what evil has he wrought! ^

most holy and most high, ^
And in the heavens has his seat ^
of royal Majesty. The poor and simple man's estate ^
considers in his mind: ^
And searches out full narrowly ^
the manners of mankind: ^

the righteous man will use: ^
But in his heart he does abhor ^
all such as mischief muse. ^

as thick as any rain: ^
Fire and brimstone and whirlwinds thick, ^
appointed for their pain. ^

does righteousness embrace: ^
And to the just and upright men ^
show forth his pleasant face. ^
PSALM XII. Salvum me fac.
T. S.
HElp Lord, for good and godly men ^
do perish and decay: ^
And faith and truth from wordly men ^
is parted clean away. ^
who so does with his neighbor talk, ^
his talk is all but vain: ^
For every man bethinketh how ^
to flatter, lie, and fain. ^
But flattering and deceitful lips, ^
and tongues that be so stout, ^
To speak proud words, and make great brags ^
the Lord soon cuts them out. ^

our tongues shall us extol, ^
Our tongues are ours, we ought to speak, ^
what Lord shall us control? ^

of poor and men oppressed: ^
Arise will I, now says the Lord, ^
and them restore to rest. ^

that from the earth is tried: ^
And has no less than seven times ^
in fire been purified. ^

Lord keep thy promise then: ^
And save us now and evermore, ^
from this ill kind of men. ^

of mischiefs manifold: ^
When vanity with worldly men ^
so highly is extolled. ^
PSALM XIII. Vsquequo Domine.
T. S.
HOw long with thou forget me, Lord, ^
shall I never be remembered? How long will thou thy visage hide, ^
as though thou were offended? ^

with care tormented be? ^
How long eke shall my deadly foes ^
thus triumph over me? ^

and hear me sore oppressed: ^
Lighten mine eyes lest that I sleep, ^
as one by death possessed. ^

behold I do prevail: ^
Lest they also that hate my soul, ^
rejoice to see me quail. ^

my hope shall never start, ^
In thy relief and saving health. ^
right glad shall be my heart. ^

and praises to him sing, ^
Because he has heard my request, ^
and granted my wishing. ^
PSALM XIV. Dixit insipiens.
T. S.
THere is no God, as foolish men ^
affirm in their mad mood: ^
Their drifts are all corrupt and vain, ^
not one of them does good. ^

the whole race of mankind: ^
And saw not one that sought indeed ^
the living God to find. ^

and truly there was none, ^
That in the world did any good, ^
I say, there was not one. ^

that all work mischief still? ^
Eating my people even as bread, ^
not one to seek Gods will? ^

great fear on them shall fall: ^
For God does love the righteous men, ^
and will maintain them all. ^
the doings of the poor, ^
to their reproach and shame: ^
Because they put their trust in God, ^
and call upon his Name. ^

and when will thou fulfill ^
Thy promise made to Israel, ^
from out of Sion hill? ^

such as were captive led: ^
Then Jacob shall therein rejoice, ^
and Isra'el shall be glad. ^
PSALM XV. Domine, quis?
T. S.
O Lord within thy tabernacle, ^
who shall inhabit still? ^
Or whom will thou receive to dwell ^
in thy most holy hill? ^

whose works are just and straight, ^
Whose heart does think the very truth, ^
whose tongue speaks no deceit. ^

in body, goods, or name: ^
Nor willingly does move false tales, ^
which might impair the same. ^

malicious wicked men: ^
But those that love and fear the Lord, ^
he makes much of them. ^

that keeps faithfully: ^
Although he make his covenant so, ^
that he does lose thereby. ^

his money and his coin: ^
Nor for to hurt the innocent, ^
does bribe or else purloin. ^

that here is to be done: ^
Shall never perish in this world, ^
nor in the world to come. ^
PSALM XVI. Conserva me.
T. S.
LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, ^
and do confess indeed ^
Thou art my God, and of my goods ^
O Lord thou have no need. ^

that in the world do dwell: ^
And namely to the faithful flock ^
in virtue that excel. ^

which run as they were mad: ^
To offer to the idol gods, ^
alas! it is too bad. ^

and offerings of that sort, ^
I will not touch, nor yet thereof ^
my lips shall make report. ^

of mine inheritance: ^
And thou art he that do maintain ^
my rent, my lot, my chance. ^

in beauty did excel: ^
Mine heritage assigned to me, ^
does please me wondrous well. ^

to understand the right: ^
For by his means my secret thoughts ^
do teach me every night. 8. I set the Lord still in my sight, ^
and trust him over all: ^
For he does stand on my right hand, ^
therefore I shall not fall. ^

do both rejoice together: ^
My flesh and body rest in hope, ^
when I this thing consider. ^

for Lord thou love me: ^
Nor yet wilt give thy Holy One, ^
corruption for to see. ^

for all treasure and store ^
Of perfect joy are in thy face, ^
and power for evermore. ^
PSALM XVII. E^^udi Domine.
T. S.
O Lord give ear to my just cause, ^
attend when I complain: ^
And hear the prayer that I put forth, ^
with lips that do not fain. ^

proceed always from thee: ^
And let thine eyes behold and clear ^
this my simplicity. ^

and yet could nothing find, ^
That I have spoken with my tongue, ^
that was not in my mind. ^

and paths perverse and ill, ^
For love of thy most holy Name, ^
I have refrained still. ^

stay me, Lord, and preserve: ^
That from the way wherein I walk, ^
my steps may never swerve. ^

surely thou will me aid: ^
Then hear my prayer and weigh right well ^
the words that I have said. ^

that put their trust in thee: ^
Declare thy strength on them that spurn ^
against thy Majesty. ^

the apple of thine eye: ^
And under covert of thy wings ^
defend me secretly. ^

and daily me annoy: ^
And from my foes that go about ^
my soul for to destroy. ^

so full are they and fat, ^
That in their pride they do not spare ^
to speak they care not what. ^

with craft me to confound: ^
And musing mischief in their minds ^
to cast me to the ground. ^

that would his prey embrace: ^
Or lurking like a Lions whelp, ^
within some secret place. ^

and cast him at thy feet: ^
Save thou my soul from the ill man, ^
and with the sword him smite. ^

out of these tyrants hands: ^
Which now so long time reigned have, ^
and kept us in their bands. ^

all worldly goods are rise: ^
That have no hope nor part of joy, ^
but in this present life. ^

with pleasure to their mind: ^
Their children have enough and leave ^
to theirs the rest behind. ^

behold thy gracious face: ^
So when I wake I shall be full ^
of thine image and grace. ^
PSALM XVIII. Diligam te Domine.
T. S.
O God my strength and fortitude, ^
of force I must love thee: ^
Thou art my castle and defense ^
in my necessity. ^

the worker of my wealth: ^
My refuge, buckler, and my shield, ^
the horn of all my health. ^

most worthy to be served: ^
Then from my foes I am right sure ^
that I shall be preserved; ^

and bound me every where: ^
The flowing waves of wickedness ^
did put me in great fear. ^

. were round about me set: ^
And for my death there was prepared ^
a deadly trapping net. ^

did pray to God for grace: ^
And he forthwith did hear my plaint: ^
out of his holy place. ^

he made the earth to quake: ^
Yea the foundation of the mount ^
of Basan for to shake. ^

when kindled was his ire: ^
And from his mouth came kindled coals ^
of hot consuming fire. ^

and bowed the heavens high: ^
And underneath his feet he cast ^
the darkness of the sky. ^

full royally he rode: ^
And on the wings of all the winds ^
came flying all abroad. ^

his hid and secret place: ^
With waters black and airy clouds ^
environed he was. ^

in brightness shall appear: ^
Then clouds consume, and in their stead ^
come hail and coals of fire. ^

disperse them here and there: ^
And with his often lightenings ^
he puts them in great fear. ^

and at thy chiding cheer, ^
the springs and the foundations, ^
of all the world appear. ^

to fetch me from below: ^
And plucked me out of waters great ^
that would me overflow. ^

that would have made me thrall; ^
Yea from such foes as were too strong ^
for me to deal withal. ^

in time of my great grief: ^
But yet the Lord was my defense, ^
my succor and relief. ^

whereas I might be free: ^
And kept me safe, because he had ^
a favor unto me. ^

so did he me regard, ^
And to the cleanness of my hands ^
he gave me my reward. ^

and in his paths have trod: ^
And have not sinned wickedly ^
against my Lord and God. ^

to his law and decree: ^
His statutes and commandments ^
I cast not out from me. ^

appeared before his face: ^
And did refrain from wickecness ^
and sin in any case. ^

as I have done aright: ^
And to the cleanness of my hands ^
appearing in his sight. ^

will thou be holy too: ^
And with the good and virtuous man right virtuously wilt do. ^

thy love thou will reserve: ^
And thou will use the wicked man, ^
as wicked men deserve. ^

in trouble when they lie: ^
And do bring down the countenance ^
of them that look full high. ^

that it shall shine full bright: ^
The Lord my God will make also ^
my darkness to be light. ^

discomfit, Lord, I shall: ^
By thee I scale and over-leap ^
the strength of any wall. ^

his word is purely tried: ^
He is a sure defense to such ^
as in his faith abide. ^

for other there is none: ^
Or else who is omnipotent, ^
saving our God alone? ^

is he that I do mean: ^
That all the ways wherien I walk, ^
did evermore keep clean. ^

in swiftness of my pace: ^
And for my surety brought me forth ^
into an open place. ^

to battle and to fight: ^
To break in sunder bars of brass. ^
he gave mine arms the might. ^

thy right hand is my tower: ^
Thy love and familiarity ^
does still increase my power. ^

the way where I should walk: ^
So that my feet shall never slip, ^
nor stumble at a balk. ^

my foes that my anoy'd: ^
And from the field do not return, ^
till they be all destroyed. ^

that they can rise no more: ^
For at my feet they fall down flat, ^
I strike them all so fore. ^

to war in such a wise, ^
That they be all scattred abroad, ^
that up against me rise. ^

my mortal enemies yoke: ^
And all my foes thou do divide ^
in sunder with thy stroke. ^

nor helped them with relief: ^
Yea to the Lord they called for help, ^
yet heard he not their grief. ^

I drive them under feet: ^
And sweep them out like filthy clay, ^
that sticks in the street. ^

that still in strife are led: ^
And thou do of the heathen folk ^
appoint me to be head. ^

and yet they shall me serve: ^
And at the first obey my word, ^
whereas mine own will swerve. ^

they will not see my light: ^
But wander wide out of the way, ^
and hide them out of sight. ^

most worthy of all praise: ^
That is my rock and saying health, ^
praised be he always. ^

revenged for to be: ^
And with his holy word subdued the people unto me. ^

and set me above those ^
That cruel and ungodly were, ^
and up against me rose. ^

to thee give thanks I shall: ^
And sing out praises to thy Name. ^
among the Gentiles all: ^

unto the King, I say: ^
To David thine anointed King, ^
and to his seed for aye. ^
PSALM XIX. Coeli enarrent.
T. S.
THe heavens and the firmament ^
do wondrously declare ^
The glory of God omnipotent, ^
his works, and what they are. ^

by every days success: ^
The nights likewise which their race run, ^
the self same thing express. ^

Where their sound is not heard: ^
In all the earth and coasts thereof ^
their knowledge is conferred. ^

a place of great renown: ^
Who like a bridegroom ready trimmed, ^
does from his chamber come. ^

who for to get a prize, ^
With joy does haste to take in hand, ^
some noble enterprise. ^

he compasses about: ^
Nothing can hide it from his heat, ^
but he will find it out. ^

how is his Covenant sure: ^
Converting souls, and making wise ^
the simple and obscure? ^

and glad both heart and mind: ^
His precepts pure, and gives light ^
to eyes that be full blind. ^

and does endure for ever: ^
The judgments of the Lord are true, ^
and righteous altogether. ^

than fined gold I say: ^
The honey and the honeycomb ^
are not so sweet as they. ^

to have God in regard: ^
And in performance of the same, ^
there shall be great reward. ^

the errors of his life? ^
Then cleanse me from my secret sins, ^
which are in me most rise. ^

prevail not over me: ^
And so shall I be innocent, ^
and great offenses flee. ^

my words and thoughts each one: ^
For my Redeemer and my strength, ^
O Lord, thou art alone. ^
PSALM XX. Exaudiat te Domine.
T. S.
IN trouble and adversity, ^
the Lord God hear thee still: ^
The Majesty of Jacobs God ^
defend thee from all ill. ^

his help at every need: ^
And so in Sion stablish thee, ^
and make thee strong indeed. ^

that now to him is done: ^
And so receive right thankfully; ^
thy burnt-offerings each one. ^

the Lord grant unto thee: ^
And all thy counsel and device, ^
full well perform may lie. ^

and our banners display ^
Unto the Lord; which thy requests ^
fulfiled has always. ^

I know well by his grace: ^
And send! him help by his right hand ^
out of his holy place. ^

and some in horses trust; ^
But we remember God our Lord, ^
that keeps promise i^^st. ^

and stand up steadfastly: ^

on thee when we do cry. ^
PSALM XXI. Domine, in virtute.
T. S.
O Lord how joyful is the King, ^
in thy strength and thy power? How vehemently does he rejoice ^
in thee his Savior? ^

his godly hearts desire: ^
To him nothing thou have denied, ^
of that he did require. ^

and blessings manifold; ^
And thou have set upon his head ^
a crown of perfect gold. ^

thereof thou made him sure; ^
To have long life, yea such a life ^
as ever shall endure. ^

thy benefit and aid: ^
Great worship and great honor both ^
thou have upon him laid. ^

that never shall decay: ^
And with thy cheerful countenance ^
wilt comfort him always. ^

in God for to prevail: ^
Wherefore his goodness and his grace ^
will not that he shall quail. ^

and those that thee withstand: ^
Find out thy foe^, and let them feel ^
the power of thy right hand. ^

in fiery flame and fume: ^
Thine anger shall destroy them all, ^
and fire shall them consume. ^

their fr^^t that should increase: ^
And from the number of thy folk ^
their seed shall end and cease. ^

against thy holy Name: ^
Yet did they fail and had no power ^
for to perform the (...). ^
a mark thou shall them set ^
in a most open place: ^
And charge thy bowstrings readily ^
against thine enemies face. ^

in thy strength every hour: ^
So shall we sing right solemnly, ^
praising thy might and power. ^
PSALM XXII. Deus, Deus meus.
T. S.
O God my God, wherefore do thou ^
forsake me utterly? ^
And helpest not when I do make ^
my great complaint and cry? ^

I do both cry and call: ^
I cease not all the night, and yet ^
thou hear not at all. ^

and holy place do dwell: ^
Thou art the comfort and the joy, ^
and glory of Israel. ^

had all their hope for ever: ^
And when they put their trust in thee, ^
thou did them aye deliver. ^

they called on thy Name: ^
And for the faith they had in thee, ^
they were not put to shame. ^

more like than any man: ^
An outcast whom the people scorn, ^
with all the spite they can. ^

me walking on the way: ^
They grin, they mow, they nod their heads ^
and on this wise they say; ^

his favor and his love: ^
Let him redeem and help him now, ^
his power if he will prove. ^

I came by thy behest: ^
Thou did preserve me still in hope, ^
while I did suck her breast. ^

with thee to have abode; ^
Since I was in my mothers womb, ^
thou have been e're my God. ^

in this my present grief: ^
Since I have none to be my help, ^
my succor and relief. ^

that be full strong of head: ^
Yea, Bulls so fat, as though they had ^
in Basan field been fed. ^

as though they would me slay: ^
Much like a Lion roaring out, ^
and ramping for his prey. ^

my joints in sunder break: ^
My heart does in my body melt, ^
like wax against the heat. ^

my tongue it cleaves fast ^
Into my jaws, and I am brought ^
to dust of death at last. ^

and wicked counsel eke ^
Conspire against me cursedly, ^
they pierce my hands and feet. ^

might all my bones have told; ^
Yet still upon me they do look, ^
and still they me behold. ^

in parts among them all: ^
And for my coat they did cast lots, ^
to whom it might befall. ^

from me at my great need: ^
But rather since thou art my strength, ^
to help me, Lord, make speed. ^

by thy might and thy power: ^
And keep my soul thy darling dear ^
from dogs that would devour. ^

me all in sunder shiver; ^
And from the horns of Unicorns ^
Lord safely me deliv'r. ^

thy Majesty record: ^
And in thy Church shall praise the Name ^
of thee the living Lord. ^

thou Jacob honor him: ^
And all ye seed of Israel ^
with reverence worship him. ^

he turns not awry ^
His countenance when they do call, ^
but grants to their cry. ^

I will therefore proclaim ^
Thy praise, and keep my promise made ^
for setting forth thy Name. ^

and those that do endeavor ^
To know the Lord, shall praise his Name, ^
their hearts shall live for ever. ^

and turn to him for grace: ^
The heathen folk shall worship him ^
before his blessed face. ^

the Lord shall have therefore: ^
And he shall be their governor, ^
and King for evermore. ^

shall feed and taste also: ^
And in his presence worship him, ^
and bow their knees full low. ^

of life by him shall taste: ^
My seed shall serve and praise the Lord, ^
while any world shall last. ^

that shall be born hereafter, ^
His justice and his righteousness, ^
and all his works of wonder. ^
PSALM XXIII. Dominus regit me.
W. W.
THE Lord is only my support, ^
and he that does me feed. ^
How can I then lack any thing, ^
whereof I stand in need. ^

the tender grass fast by: ^
And after drives me to the streams ^
which run most pleasantly. ^

then does he me home take: ^
Conducting me in his right paths, ^
even for his own Names sake. ^

yet would I fear none ill: ^
For with thy rod and shepherds crook, ^
I am comforted still. ^

in despite of my foe: ^
Thou have my head with balm refreshed; ^
my cup does overflow. ^

thy grace shall me defend: ^
And in the house of God will I ^
my life for ever spend.
Another of the same
by T. S.
MY shepherd is the living Lord, ^
nothing therefore I need: ^
In pastures fair with waters calm, ^
he sets me for to feed. ^

and brought my mind in frame ^
To walk in paths of righteousness, ^
for his most holy Name. ^

yet will I fear none ill: ^
Thy rod, thy staff do comfort me, ^
and thou art with me still. ^

my table thou shall spread: ^
Thou shall (O Lord) fill full my cup, ^
and eke anoint my head. ^

so frankly showed to me: ^
That in thy house for evermore ^
my dwelling place shall be. ^
PSALM XXIV. Domini est terra.
J. H.
THE earth is all the Lords, with all ^
her store and furniture: ^
Yea his is all the world, and all ^
that therein does endure. ^

above the seas to stand: ^
And laid allow the liquid floods, ^
to flow beneath the land. ^

ascend into thy hill? ^
Or pass into thy holy place, ^
there to continue still? ^

no spot there does defile: ^
His soul not set on vanity, ^
who has not sworn to guile. ^

shall place in blissfull plight: ^
And God his God and Savior ^
shall yield to him his right. ^

in seeking of his grace: ^
As Jacob did the Israelites, ^
in that time of his race. ^

the everlasting gate: ^
For there shall enter in thereby ^
the King of glorious state. ^

the strong and mighty Lord: ^
The mighty Lord in battle stout, ^
and trial of the sword. ^

the everlasting gate: ^
For there shall enter in thereby ^
the King of glorious state. ^

the Lord of hosts it is: ^
The Kingdom and the royalty ^
of glorious state is hi^. ^
PSALM XXV. Ad te, Domine.
T. S.
I Lift my heart to thee, ^
my God and guide most just: ^
Now suffer me to take no shame, ^
for in thee do I trust. ^

nor make a scorn of me: ^
And let them not be overthrown, ^
that put their trust in thee. ^

which harm them wrongfully: ^
Therefore thy paths and thy right ways ^
unto me Lord descry. ^

and tea^h me I thee pray: ^
Thou art my God and Savior, ^
on thee I wait always. ^

I pray thee, Lord, remember: ^
and eke thy pity plentiful, ^
for they have been for ever. ^

and frailty of my youth: ^
Remember not how ignorant ^
I have been of thy truth. ^
Nor after my deserts ^
let me thy mercy find: ^
But of thine own benignity, ^
Lord have me in thy mind. ^

his truth a perfect guide: ^
Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, ^
and such as go aside. ^

his precepts for to keep: ^
He will direct in all his ways ^
the lowly and the meek. ^

are truth and mercy both: ^
To them that keep his Testament, ^
the witness of his tro^h. ^

O Lord, I thee entreat, ^
To grant me pardon for my sin, ^
for it is wondrous great. ^

the Lord will him direct, ^
To lead his life in such a way, ^
as he does best accept. ^

in goodness dwell and stand: ^
His seed and his posterity ^
inherit shall the land. ^

know his secret intent: ^
And unto them he does declare, ^
his will and testament. ^

to him I will advance, ^
That plucked my feet out of the snare ^
of sin and ignorance. ^

to thee I make my moan: ^
For I am poor and desolate; ^
and comfortless alone. ^

are multiplied indeed: ^
Bring me out of this misery ^
necessity and need. ^

mine anguish and my pain: ^
Remit my sin and mine offense, ^
and make me clean again. ^

how they do still increase: ^
Pursuing me with deadly hate, ^
that fain would live in peace. ^

and eke deliver me: ^
And let me not be overthrown, ^
because I trust in thee. ^

me from mine enemies shend. ^
Because I look as one of thine, ^
that thou should me defend. ^

and send them some relief: ^
I mean thy chosen Israel, ^
from all their pain and grief. ^
PSALM XXVI Judica me, Domine.
T. S.
LOrd be my Judge, and thou shall see, ^
my paths be right and plain: ^
I trust in God, and hope that he, ^
will strength'n me to remain. ^

my ways to search and try: ^
As men do prove their gold with fire, ^
my reins and heart espy. ^

I durst behold always: ^
For of thy truth I tread the trace, ^
and will do all my days. ^

with men whose deeds are vain: ^
To come in house I do refuse, ^
with the deceitful train. ^

their deeds I do despise: ^
I do not once to them resort, ^
that hurtful things devise. ^

in works to walk upright: ^
Then to thine altar I make speed ^
to offer there in sight. ^

that does belong to thee: ^
And so declare how wondrous ways ^
thou have been good to me. ^

to me it does excel: ^
I have delight and would be near ^
wherein thy grace does dwell. ^

in sin that take their fill: ^
Nor yet my life among those men, ^
that seek much blood to spill. ^

their lives thereof are full, ^
And their right hand with wrench and wile ^
for bribes does pluck and pull. ^

my time and days to serve: ^
Have mercy Lord, and me defend, ^
so that I do not swerve. ^

it stands well and right: ^
Wherefore to God will I give praise ^
in all the peoples sight. ^
PSALM XXVII. Dominus illuminatio.
J. H.
THE Lord is both my health and light, ^
shall man make me dismayed? ^
Since God does give me strength and might ^
why should I be afraid? ^

begin with me to brawl, ^
And think to eat me up at length, ^
themselves have caught the fall. ^

my heart is not afraid: ^
In battle strong if they will try, ^
I trust in God for aid. One thing of God I do require, ^
that he will not deny: ^
For which I pray and will desire, ^
till he to me apply. ^

my life throughout may dwell, ^
To see the beauty of his face, ^
and view his temple well. ^

within his place most pure: ^
And keep me secret by his side, ^
as on a rock most f^re. ^

shall make me strong and stout, ^
My foes to foil and clean deface, ^
that compass me about. ^

give sacrifice of praise: ^
With Psalms and Songs I will apply ^
to laud the Lord always. ^

for which to thee I call: ^
Have mercy Lord on me oppressed, ^
and send me help withal. ^

I sue to have thy grace: ^
Then seek my face, say thou to me, ^
Lord, I will seek thy face. ^

nor suffer me to slide: ^
Thou art my help still to this day, ^
be still my God and guide. ^

and cast me off at large: ^
And then the Lord himself yet took ^
of me the care and charge. ^

and lead me on forth right: ^
For fear of such as watch for me, ^
to trap me if they might. ^

of them that be my foes: ^
For they surmise against me still, ^
false witness to depose. ^

this hope is fixed fast: ^
The Lord Gods good grace shall I see, ^
in life that aye shall last. ^

his will abide thou must: ^
And he shall ease and strength thy heart, ^
if thou in him do trust. ^
PSALM XXVIII. Ad te Domine
T. S.
THou art (O Lord) my strength and stay, ^
the succor which I crave: ^
Neglect me not lest I be like ^
to them that go to the grave. ^

that unto thee does cry: ^
When I lift up my hands unto ^
thy holy ark most high. ^

of wicked and pervert: ^
That speak right fair unto their friends, ^
but think full ill in heart. ^

as they deserve indeed: ^
And after their inventions, ^
let them receive their meed. ^

his Law, ne yet his lore: ^
Therefore will he them and their seed ^
destroy for evermore. ^

how great a cause have I, ^
My voice my prayer, and my complaint ^
that heard so willingly? ^

my buckler in distress: ^
My hope, my help, my hearts relief, ^
my song shall him confess. ^

our enemies to resist: ^
The health and the salvation ^
of his elect by Christ. ^

Lord bless, guide, and preserve: ^
Increase them, Lord, and rule their hearts, ^
that they may never swerve. ^
PSALM XXIX. Afferte Domino.
T. S.
GIve to the Lord, ye potentates, ^
ye Rulers of the world: ^
Give ye all praise, honor, and strength ^
unto the living Lord. ^

and honor him alone: ^
Worship him in his Majesty, ^
within his holy throne. ^

even as himself does please: ^
He does prepare the thunderclaps, ^
and governs all the seas. ^

and wondrous excellent: ^
It is most mighty in effect, ^
and most magnificent. ^

the Cedar trees so long: ^
The Cedar trees of Lebanon, ^
which are most high and strong. ^

or else the Unicorn: ^
Not only trees, but mountains great, ^
whereon the trees are born. ^

and shakes the wilderness: ^
It makes the desert quake for fear, ^
that called is Cades. ^

and makes the coverts plain: ^
Then in his Temple every man ^
his glory does proclaim. ^

ruling the raging sea. ^
So shall he reign as Lord and King, ^
for ever and for aye. ^

in virtue to increase: ^
The Lord will bless his chosen flock ^
with everlasting peace. ^
PSALM XXX. Exaltabo te Domine.
J. H.
ALL land and praise with heart and voice, ^
O Lord I give to thee: ^
Which did not make my foes rejoice, ^
but have exalted me. ^

in all my pain and grief: ^
Thou gav'st an ear, and did provide ^
to ease me with relief. ^

my soul from hell to save: ^
Thou did revive, when strength did lack, ^
and keptst me from the grave. ^
praise ye Saints that prove and see ^
the goodness of the Lord: ^
In memory of his Majesty ^
rejoice with one accord. ^

does last and flack again: ^
But in his favor and his grace ^
always does life remain. ^
Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore ^
shall lodge with us all night: ^
The Lord to joy shall us restore ^
before the day be light. ^

thus would I boast and say: ^
Tush, I am sure to feel none ill, ^
this wealth shall not decay. ^

had sent me strength and aid: ^
But when thou turn'dst away thy face, ^
my mind was sore dismayed. ^

to thee, O Lord of might: ^
My God with plaints I did apply, ^
and prayed both day and night. ^
^

if death destroy my days? ^
Does dust declare thy Majesty, ^
or yet thy truth does praise? ^

O Lord, I thee desire: ^
Do not this simple soul forsake, ^
of help I thee require. ^

into a cheerful voice, ^
The mourning weed thou took'st me fro, ^
and made me to rejoice. ^

shall sing unto thy praise: ^
My Lord, my God, to thee will I ^
give laud and thanks always. ^
PSALM XXXI. In te Domine.
J. H.
O Lord I put my trust in thee, ^
let nothing work me shame, ^
As thou art just deliver me, ^
and set me quite from blame. ^

to help me make good speed: ^
Be thou my rock and house of stone, ^
my fence in time of need. ^

thou art my fort and tower: ^
For thy Name sake be thou my guide, ^
and lead me in thy power. ^

which they for me have laid: ^
Thou art my strength and all my care ^
is for thy might and aid. ^

my spirit which is thy due. ^
For why? thou have redeemed it, ^
O Lord my God most true. ^

from things to be abhorred: ^
When they on trifles set their heart, ^
my trust is in the Lord. ^

I see it does excel: ^
Thou see when ought would me annoy ^
and know my soul full well. ^

that would me overcharge: ^
But thou have set me out of band, ^
to walk abroad at large.
The Second Part.

some pity on me take: ^
Mine eyes wax dim, my sight does fail, ^
my womb for woe does ache. ^

my years in woe are past: ^
My strength is gone, and through disdain ^
my bones corrupt and waste. Among my foes I am a scorn, ^
my friends are all dismayed ^
My neighbors and my kinsmen born, ^
to see me are afraid. ^

so am I now forgot: ^
As small effect in me they find. ^
as in a broken pot. ^

their threats my mind did fray: ^
How they conspired and went about ^
to take my life away. ^

not to be over-trod: ^
For I confess and still have said, ^
thou art my Lord and God. ^

O Lord is in thy hand: ^
Defend me from the wrath and rage ^
of them that me withstand. ^

and show thy joyful face: ^
And save me Lord for thy goodness, ^
thy mercy and thy grace. ^
The third Part.

for that on thee I call: ^
But let the wicked bear the shame, ^
and in their grave to fall. ^

which are addict to lies: ^
And cruelly with pride and spite, ^
against the just devise. ^

laid up full safe for them ^
That fear and trust in thee therefore, ^
before the sons of men. ^

from all proud brags and wrongs ^
Within thy place thou do them hide, ^
from all the strife of tongues. ^

on me his grace so far: ^
Me to defend with watch and ward, ^
as in a town of war. ^

when I was sore oppressed: ^
Lo, I was clean cast out of sight, ^
yet heard'st thou my request. ^

the faithful he does guide: ^
And to the proud he does repay ^
according to their pride. ^

be bold and have a lust: ^
For sure the Lord will take your part, ^
since ye in him do trust. ^
PSALM XXXII. Beati quo^um.
T. S.
THE man is blessed whose wickedness ^
the Lord has clean remitted: ^
And he whose sin and wickedness ^
is hid and also covered. ^

imputes not his sin: ^
Which in his heart has hid no guile, ^
nor fraud is found therein. ^

in silence and constraint: ^
My bones did wear and wast away, ^
with daily moan and plaint. ^

so grievous was and smart: ^
That all my blood and humors moist ^
to dryness did convert. ^

and all my sins discover: ^
Then thou, O Lord, did me forgive, ^
and all my sins pass over. ^

and seek thee in due time: ^
So that the floods of waters great ^
shall have no power on him. ^

do compass me about: ^
Thou art my refuge and my joy, ^
and thou do rid me out. ^

how thou shall walk aright: ^
And will thee guide as I my self ^
have learned by proof and sight. ^

as is the horse and mule: ^
Whose mouth without a rein or bit, ^
from harm thou can not rule. ^

sorrows and griefs sustain: ^
But unto him that trusts in God, ^
his goodness shall remain. ^

ye just lift up your voice: ^
And ye of pure and perfect heart, ^
be glad and eke rejoice. ^
PSALM XXXIII. Exultate justi.
J. H.
YE righteous in the Lord rejoice, ^
it is a seemly sight, ^
That upright men with thankful voice, ^
should praise the Lord of might. ^

in Psalms and pleasant things: ^
With Lute and instrument among, ^
that sounds with ten strings. ^

with courage give him praise: ^

his works and all his ways. ^

he has a great good will: ^
And with his gifts he does delight ^
the earth throughout to fill. ^

the heavens all were wrought: ^
Their hoasts and powers every one, ^
his breath to pass has brought. ^

on heaps within the shore: ^
And hid them in the depths to be, ^
as in a house of store. ^

fear God and keep his Law: ^
Ye that inhabit in each coast, ^
dread him, and stand in awe. ^

at once with present speed: ^
What he does will, is brought to pass, ^
with full effect indeed. ^

the Lord does bring to naught: ^
He does defeat the multitude, ^
of their device and thought. ^

they never slack nor swage: ^
The motions of his mind and will ^
take place in every age.
The second Part.

as God and guide is known: ^
Whom he does choose of mere accord ^
to take them as his own. ^

on men mortal by birth: ^

the dwellers of the earth. ^

man's heart. and does it frame: ^
For he alone does know the thought, ^
and working of the same. ^

shall naught prevail at length: ^
The man that of his might does boast, ^
shall fall for all his strength. ^

their sturdy steeds shall sterve: ^
The strength of horse shall not prevail, ^
the rider to preserve. ^

and watch to aid the just: ^
With such as fear him to offend, ^
and on his goodness trust. ^

may set their souls from dread: ^
And if that dearth their land oppress, ^
in hunger them to feed. ^

on God our strength and stay: ^
He is our shield us to defend, ^
and drive all darts away. ^

rejoicing in his might: ^
For why? in his most holy Name ^
we hope and much delight. ^

still present with us be: ^
As we always with one accord, ^
do only trust in thee. ^
PSALM XXXIV. Benedicam Domine.
T. S.
I Will give laud and honor both, ^
unto the Lord always: ^
And eke my mouth for evermore ^
shall speak unto his praise. ^

in soul and eke in voice: ^
That humble men and mortified ^
may hear, and so rejoice. ^

with me the living Lord: ^
And let us now exalt his Name, ^
together with one accord. ^

he answered me again: ^
And me delivered incontinent, ^
from all my fear and pain. ^

shall see his light most clear: ^
Their countenance shall not be dashed, ^
they need it not to fear. ^

unto the Lord did call: ^
Who did him hear without delay, ^
and rid him out of thrall. ^

his tents in every place: ^
To save all such as fear the Lord, ^
that nothing them deface. ^

that God is good and just: ^
O happy man that makes him ^
his only stay and trust. ^

above all earthly thing: ^
For they that fear the living Lord, ^
are sure to lack nothing. ^

and pined with famine much: ^
But as for them that fear the Lord, ^
no lack shall be to such.
The second part.

and to my words give ear: ^
I shall ye teach the perfect way, ^
how ye the Lord should fear. ^

and lead a blessed life? ^

from all deceit and strife. ^

and do the godly deed: ^
Inquire for peace and quietness, ^
and follow it with speed. ^

upon the just are bent: ^
His ears likewise do hear the plaint ^
of the poor innocent. ^

upon the wicked train. ^
And cuts away the memory, ^
that should of them remain. ^

the Lord does hear them so, ^
That out of pain and misery ^
forthwith he lets them go. ^

to such as be contrite: ^
He saves also the sorrowful, ^
the poor and meek in sp'rite. ^

that righteous men do suffer: ^
But out of all adversities ^
the Lord does them deliver. ^

their very bones always: ^
That not so much as one of them ^
does perish or decay. ^

which he himself has wrought: ^
And such as hate the righteous man, ^
shall scon^re brought to naught. ^

the Lord does save them sound: ^
And who that put their trust in him, ^
nothing shall them confound. ^
PSALM XXXV. Judica me, Domine.
J. H.
LOrd plead my cause against my foes, ^
confound their force and might: ^
Fight on my part against all those ^
that seek with me to fight. ^

thy self in armor dress. ^
Stand up for me, and fight the field, ^
to help me from distress. ^

mine enemies to withstand, ^
That thou unto my soul may say, ^
Lo, I thine help at hand. ^

that seek my soul to spill: ^
Let them turn back and flee with shame ^
that think to work me ill. ^

as wind does drive the dust: ^
And that the Angel of our God, ^
their night away may thrust. ^

and slippery like to fall: ^
And send thine Angel with thy might ^
to persecute them all. ^

in secret set their gin: ^
And for no cause have dig'd a cave, ^
to take my soul therein. ^

O Lord, destroy them all: ^
Let them be trapt in their own snare, ^
and in their mischief fail. ^

in God have joy and wealth; ^
That in the Lord I may rejoice, ^
and in his saving health. ^

my parts shall all agree: ^
O Lord, though they do seem full gay, ^
what man is like to thee? ^

that are both stout and strong: ^
and rid the poor from wicked men ^
that spoil and do them wrong. ^

to witness things untrue: ^
And to accuse me they devise ^
of things I never knew. ^

they quit me with disdain: ^
That they should pay my good with ill, ^
my soul does sore complain. ^

and clad my self in sack: ^
With fasting I did faint full sore, ^
to pray I was not slack. ^

I did my self behave: ^
As one that makes woeful cheer ^
about his mothers grave. ^

and gather on a rout: ^
Yea, abject slaves at me did toy, ^
with mocks and checks full slout. ^

that all good things deride, ^
At me do grin with great disdain, ^
and pluck their mouths aside. ^

why do thou stay and pause? ^
O rid my soul mine only dear, ^
out of these Lions claws. ^

before the Church always: ^
And where most of the people be, ^
there will I show thy praise. ^

which hate me for no fault: ^
Nor let them wink or turn their eye, ^
that causeless me assault.
The third Part.

their talk is all untrue: ^
They still consult, and would betray ^
all those that peace ensue. ^

in scorn and spite at me: ^
So, so, our hearts desire they say, ^
on him our eye does see. ^

hold not thine hand to mend: ^
Be not far off, nor me forsake, ^
as men that fail their friend. ^

defend me in my right: ^
Revenge my cause, my Lord, my God, ^
and aid me with thy might ^

my Lord God set me free: ^
And let them not their pride express, ^
nor triumph over me. ^

so would we have it be: ^
Let them not boast, O Lord, that they ^
have quite devoured me. ^

that joy when I do mourn: ^
And pay them home with spite and blame, ^
that brag at me with scorn. ^

which love mine upright way: ^
And they all times with heart and voice, ^
shall praise the Lord, and say, ^

for why? he does delight, ^
To see his servants prosper well, ^
that is his pleasant sight. ^

thy righteousness to praise: ^
Unto the Lord my God will I ^
sing laud and praise always. ^
PSALM XXXVI. Dixit injustus.
J. H.
THe wicked with his works unjust, ^
does thus persuade his heart: ^
That of the Lord he has no trust, ^
his fear is set apart. ^

to walk as he began: ^
So long till he deserve the hate ^
of God and eke of man. ^

his tongue no truth does tell: ^
Yet at no hand will he be taught, ^
which way he may do well. ^

his mischiefs to fulfill: ^
No wicked ways does he refuse, ^
nor nothing that is ill. ^

above the heavens high: ^
So does thy truth it self extend ^
unto the cloudy sky. ^

thy justice is expressed: ^
Thy judgments like to seas most deep, ^
thou sav'st both man and beast. ^

O God it does excel: ^
In trust whereof as in thy wings, ^
the sons of men shall dwell. ^

with plenty at their will: ^
Of all delights they shall be sped, ^
and take thereof their fill. ^

does ever flow from thee: ^
And in thy light we are full sure, ^
the lasting light to see. ^

let not thy grace depart: ^
Thy right'ousness declare and show ^
to men of upright heart. ^
Let not the proud on me prevail, ^
O Lord of thy good grace: ^
Nor let the wicked me assail, ^
to throw me out of place. ^

that wicked works maintain: ^
They shall be overthrown withal, ^
and never rise again. ^
PSALM XXXVII. Noli aemulari.
W. W.
GRudge not to see the wicked men ^
in wealth to flourish still: ^
Nor yet envy such as to ill, ^
have bent and set their will. ^

are cut and with'r away: ^
So shall their great prosperity ^
soon pass, fade, and decay. ^

to do well give thy mind: ^
So shall thou have the land as thine, ^
and there sure food shall find. ^

and look what thou would have, ^
Or else can wish in all the world, ^
thou need'st it not to crave. ^

on God with perfect trust: ^
And thou shall see with patience, ^
the effect both sure and just. ^

he will clear as the light: ^
So that the Sun even at noon day, ^
shall not shine half so bright. ^

on God see thou wait then: ^
Not shrinking for the prosperous state ^
of lewd and wicked men. ^

at least in any wise: ^
Their wicked works avoid and flee, ^
and follow not their Guise. ^

destroy both more and less: ^
But such as trust in him are sure: ^
the land for to possess. ^

no more the wicked train: ^
No not so much as house or place, ^
where once they did remain.
The second Part.

enjoy shall sea and land: ^
In rest and peace they shall rejoice, ^
for naught shall them withstand. ^

against the just conspire: ^
They gnash their teeth at him, as men ^
which do his bane desire. ^

the Lord laughs them to scorn: ^
For why? he sees the term approach. ^
when they shall sigh and mourn. ^

their bow eke have they bent, ^
To overthrow and kill the poor, ^
as they the right way went. ^

which was to kill the just: ^
Likewise the bow shall break to shiv'rs, ^
wherein they put their trust: ^

is better a great deal more, ^
Then all these lewd and wicked men's ^
rich pomp and heaped store. ^

God will it overthrow: ^
Where contrary he does preserve ^
the humble men and low. ^

the good men's trade and way: ^
And will give them inheritance, ^
which never shall decay. ^

when some are hard bestead: ^
When others shall be hunger bit, ^
they shall be clad and fed. ^

and enemy to the Lord: ^
Shall quail, yea melt even as Lambs grease, ^
or smoke that flies abroad. ^
The third Part.

and never pays again: ^
Whereas the just by liberal gifts, ^
makes many glad and fain. ^

the land for heritage: ^
And they whom he does curse likewise ^
shall perish in his rage. ^

and gives him good success: ^
To every thing he takes in hand, ^
he sends good address. ^

not utterly to quail; ^
Because the Lord puts out his hand ^
at need and does not fail. ^

yer did I never see ^
The just man lest, nor yet his seed ^
to beg for misery. ^

and lends whereas is need: ^
His children and posterity ^
receive of God their mead. ^

and virtue do embrace: ^
So shall God grant thee long to have ^
on earth a dwelling place. ^

and shows to his such grace: ^
That he preserves them always, ^
but stroys the wicked race. ^

inherit shall the land: ^
Having as Lords all things therein ^
in their own power and hand. ^

of matters wise and high: ^
His tongue does talk to edify, ^
with truth and equity. ^

his Lord does still abide. ^
So that where ever he goes or walks, ^
his foot can never slide. ^

the just man does beset: ^
By all means seeking him to kill, ^
if he fall in his net. ^
The fourth Part.

yet God would succor send: ^
Though men against him sentence give, ^
God would him yet defend. ^

he shall preserve thee then: ^
The earth to rule, and thou shall see ^
destroyed these wicked men. ^

and plho'd in high degree: ^
Flourishing in all wealth and store, ^
as does the Laurel tree. ^

and lo he was quite gone: ^
Then I him sought, but could not find ^
the place where dwelt such one. ^

how God does him increase: ^
For the just man shall have at length ^
great joy with rest and peace. ^

destroyed they shall all be: ^
God will cut off their budding race, ^
and rich posterity. ^

does come from God above: ^
Who in their trouble sends them aid ^
of his mere grace and love. ^

from lewd men and unjust: ^
And still will save them whilst that they ^
in him do put their trust. ^
PSALM XXXVIII. Domine ne.
J. H.
PUt me not to rebuke O Lord, ^
in thy provoked ire: ^
Nor in thy heavy wrath, O Lord, ^
correct me I desire. ^

thy hand does press me sore: ^
And in my flesh no health at all ^
appears any more. ^

thy wrath that I am in: ^
Nor any rest is in my bones, ^
by reason of my sin. ^

above my head are gone: ^
A greater load than I can bear, ^
they lie me sore upon. ^

as loathsome is to see: ^
Which all through mine own foolishness ^
betideth unto me. ^

in trouble and distress ^
that I go wailing all the day, ^
in doleful heaviness. ^

my flesh has no whole part, ^

I roar for grief of heart. ^

are open in thy sight: ^

mine eyes have lost their light. ^

stand looking on my woe: ^
And eke my kinsmen far away ^
are me departed fro. ^

and they that sought the way ^
To do me hurt, spoke lies, and thought ^
on mischief all the day.
The Second Part.

that cannot hear at all: ^

his mouth to speak withal. ^

is wholly set on thee: ^
O Lord, thou Lord, that art my God, ^
thou shall give ear to me. ^

triumph not over me ^
For when my foot did slip, then they ^
did joy my fall to see. ^

in place a woeful wight: ^
And eke my grievous heaviness is ever in my sight. ^

in humble wise confess: ^
And while I for my sinful deeds ^
my sorrows do express: ^

and mighty are also: ^
And they that hate me wrongfully, ^
in number hugely grow. ^

with evil do repay: ^
Because that good and honest things ^
I do ensue always. ^

be thou not far away: ^

my safety and my stay. ^
PSALM XXXIX. Dixi custodiam.
J. H.
I Said I will look to my ways, ^
for fear I should go wrong: ^
I will take heed all times that I ^
offend not with my tongue. ^

my mouth with force and might: ^
Not once to whisper all the while ^
the wicked are in sight. ^

but kept me close and still: ^
Yea from good talk I did refrain, ^
but sore against my will. ^

with musing, thought, and doubt: ^
Which did increase and stir the fire, ^
at last these words burst out; ^

which yet I have not past: ^
So that I may be certifi'd, ^
how long my life shall last. ^

in length much like a span: ^
Mine age is nothing unto thee, ^
so vain is every man. ^

in vain himself annoy ^
In getting goods, and cannot tell ^
who shall the same enjoy. ^

what help do I desire? ^
Of truth my help does hang on thee, ^
I nothing else require.
The second Part.

Lord quit me out of hand; ^
And make me not a scorn to fools, ^
that nothing understand. ^

no trouble might me move: ^
Because I knew it was thy work, ^
my patience for to prove. ^

I can them not withstand: ^
I faint and pine away for fear ^
of thy most heavy hand. ^

he waxes woe and wan: ^
As does a cloth that moths have fret, ^
so vain a thing is man. ^

regard my tears that fall: ^
I sojourn like a stranger here, ^
as did my fathers all. ^

my strength for to restore: ^
Before I go away from hence, ^
and shall be seen no more. ^
PSALM XL. Expectans expectavi.
J. H.
I Waited long and sought the Lord, ^
and patiently did bear: ^
At length to me he did accord, ^
my voice and cry to hear. ^

out of the mire and clay: ^
And on a Rock he set my feet, ^
and he did guide my way. ^

which I must show abroad: ^
And sing new songs of thanks always, ^
unto the Lord our God. ^

as people much afraid: ^
Then they unto the Lord will flee, ^
and trust upon his aid. ^

does in the Lord remain: ^
That with the proud does take no part, ^
nor such as lie and sain. ^

in greatness far do pass: ^
Thy favor toward us exceeds ^
all things that ever was. ^

thy works abroad to show: ^
To such a reckoning they do rise, ^
thereof no end I know. ^

I know thy whole desire: ^
With sacrifice to purge his sin ^
thou do no man require. ^

thou would not have at all: ^
But thou (O Lord) have open made ^
mine ears to hear withal. ^

I come a mean to be: ^
For in the volume of thy book, ^
thus is said of me: ^

For in my heart thy Law I find, ^
fast placed there to dwell. ^

in great resorts I tell: ^
Behold my tongue no time does cease ^
O Lord, thou know full well.
The second Part.

thy goodness as by stealth: ^
But I declare and have expressed ^
thy truth and saving health. ^

that no man should it know: ^
The trust that in thy truth I find, ^
to all the Church I show. ^

withdraw thou not away: ^
But let thy love and verity ^
preserve me still for aye. ^

am sore beset about: ^
My sins increase, and so come on, ^
I cannot spy them out. ^

the hairs upon my head: ^
My heart does faint for very dread, ^
that I am almost dead. ^

O Lord I thee require: ^
Make haste with aid to succor me, ^
O Lord at my desire. ^

that seek my soul to spill: ^
Drive back my foes, and them defame, ^
that wish and would me ill. ^

that would deface my name: ^
Always at me they rail and cry, ^
fie on him, fie for shame. ^

that seek to thee always: ^
That those that love thy saving health ^
may say, To God be praise. ^

oppressed and brought full low: ^
Yet thou, O Lord, wilt me restore ^
to health, full well I know. ^

my refuge, help, and stay. ^
Wherefore my God as thou art just, ^
with me no time delay. ^
PSALM XLI. Beatus qui intelligit.
T. S.
THE man is blessed that careful is ^
the needy to consider: ^
For in the season perilous ^
the Lord will him deliver. ^

And happy in the land: ^
And he will not deliver him ^
into his enemies hand. ^

the Lord will him restore: ^
And thou O Lord, wilt turn to health ^
his sickness and his sore, ^

have mercy Lord on me, ^
And heal my soul, which is full sad ^
that I offended thee. ^

and thus of me did say, ^
When shall he die, that all his name ^
may vanish quite away? ^
to visit me. ^
they ask if I do well: ^
But in their hearts mischief they hatch, ^
and to their mates it tell. ^

as though they would me charm, ^
And cast their wiles how for to trap ^
me with some mortal harm. ^

this sickness, say they plain: ^
He is so low that without doubt ^
he cannot rise again. ^

with me did use deceit: ^
Who at my table ate my bread, ^
the same for me laid wait. ^

and let me be preserved: ^
That I may render unto them ^
the things they have deserved. ^

to be beloved of thee, ^
When that mine enemies have no cause ^
to triumph over me. ^
me kept, ^
and maintained always: ^
And in thy presence place assigned ^
where I shall dwell for ay. ^

be praised evermore. ^
Even so be it (Lord) will I say, ^
even so be it therefore. ^
PSALM XLII. Quemadmodum.
J. H.
LIke as the heart does breath and bray ^
the well-springs to obtain, So does my soul desire always, ^
with thee, Lord, to remain. 2. My sold does thirst and would draw near ^
the living God of might: ^
O when shall I come and appear ^
in presence of his sight? ^

which from mine eyes do slide: ^
When wicked men cry out so fast, ^
Where now is God thy guide? ^

what freedom once I had? ^
Therefore my soul as at pits brink, ^
most heavy is and sad. ^
When I did march in good array, ^
furnished with my train, ^
Unto the temple was our way, ^
with songs and hearts most fain. ^

and fret'st thus in my breast? ^
Trust still in God, for him to praise ^
I hold it ever best. By him I have succor at need, ^
against all pain and grief: ^
He is my God which with all speed ^
will have to send relief. ^

does faint to think upon ^
The land of Jordan, and record ^
the little hill Hermon.
The second Part.

as clouds burst our their voice: ^
The stoods of evil that do fall, ^
run over me with noise. ^

and help at all alsayes: ^
Likewise by night I did not cease ^
the living God to praise. ^

to him with pure pretense: ^
O Lord thou art my guide and stay ^
my rock and sure defense. Why do I then in pensiveness, ^
hanging the head thus walk? ^
While that mine enemies me oppress, ^
and vex me with their talk. ^

with pangs to be abhorred: ^
When they cry out with stubborn hearts ^
where is thy God, thy Lord? ^

my soul with pain oppressed: ^
With thoughts why do thy self assail, ^
so sore within my breast? ^

and thou the time shall see ^
To give him thanks with laud and praise ^
for health restored to thee. ^
PSALM XLIII. Judica me, Domine.
T. S.
JUdge and revenge my cause, O Lord, ^
from them that evil be: ^
From wicked and deceitful men, ^
O Lord deliver me. ^

why put'st thou me it fro? ^
And why walk I so heavily, ^
oppressed with my foe? ^

and lead me with thy grace: ^
Which may conduct me to thy hill, ^
and to thy dwelling place. ^

of God my joy and cheer: ^
And on my harp give thanks to thee, ^
O God, my God most dear. ^

and frett'st thus in my breast? ^
Still trust in God, for him to praise? ^
I hold it always best. ^

against all pain and grief: ^
He is my God, which does always ^
at need send me relief. ^
PSALM XLIV. Deus auribus.
T. S.
OUr ears have heard our Fathers tell, ^
and rev'rently record. ^
The wondrous works that thou have done ^
in older time, O Lord, ^
did cast the Gentiles out, ^
and 'stroy'dst them with strong hand: Planting our Fathers in their place, ^
and gav'st to them their land. ^

the land of thy behest: ^
But by thy hand, thy arm, and grace, ^
because thou lov'dst them best. ^

Jacob in sundry wise: ^

as did against us rise. ^

they could not save me sound: ^

thou did our foes confound. ^

and praise thy holy Name: ^

but leavest us to shame. ^

and so were overtrod: ^
Our enemies spoiled and robbed our goods, ^
when we were spers'd abroad. ^
have us given to our foes, ^
as sheep for to be slain: ^
Amongst the heathen every where ^
scattered we do remain. ^

and as a thing of naught: ^
For profit none thou had thereby; ^
no gain at all was sought. ^

of us a laughing stock: ^
And those that round about us dwell ^
at us do scoff and mock.
The Second Part.

but for a common talk: ^
They mock, they scorn, they nod their heads ^
where e're they go or walk. ^

to hear these wicked men: ^
Yea so I blush, that all my face ^
with red is covered then. ^

such false reports and lies: ^
That death it is to see their wrongs, ^
their threatenings and their cries. ^
^

nor yet thy covenant brake: ^

nor yet thy paths forsake. ^

where dens of Dragons be: ^
And covered us with shade of death, ^
and great adversity. ^

and help of Idols sought, ^

for he does know our thought. ^

always are we slain thus: ^
As sheep unto the shambles sent, ^
right so they deal with us. ^

and leave us not for all: ^

and do forget our thrall. ^

and we now at last cast: ^
Our belly, like as it were glew'd, ^
unto the ground cleaves fast. ^
therefore for our defense, ^
and help us, Lord, at need: ^
We thee beseech for thy goodness ^
to rescue us with speed. ^
PSALM XLV. Eructavit cor meum.
J. H.
MY heart does take in hand ^
some Godly song to sing: ^
The praise that I shall show therein, ^
pertains to the King. ^

his honor to indite: ^
As is the pen of any scribe, ^
that uses fast to write. ^

thy speech is pleasant pure: ^
For God has blessed thee with gifts, ^
for ever to endure. ^

O Prince of might elect: ^
With honor, glory, and renown, ^
thy person pure is decked. ^

with meekness, truth, and right: ^
And thy right hand shall thee instruct ^
in works of dreadful might. ^

their hearts so sore shall sting, ^
That folk shall fall and kneel to thee, ^
yea, all thy foes, O King. ^

for ever shall remain: ^
Because the Scepter of thy Realm ^
does righteousness maintain. ^

and do the ill detest: ^
God, even thy God, has 'nointed thee ^
with joy above the rest. ^

thy clothes are all bespread: ^
When thou do from thy Palace pass ^
therein to make thee glad. ^

in fine and rich array: ^
At thy right hand the Queen does stand ^
in gold and garments gay.
The second Part.

incline and give good ear: ^
Thou must forget thy kindred all, ^
and fathers house most dear. ^

thy beauty fair and trim: ^
For why? he is the Lord thy God, ^
and thou must worship him. ^

with gifts full rich to see: ^
And all the wealthy of the land ^
shall make their suit to thee. ^

is glorious to behold: ^
Within her closet she does sit ^
all decked with beaten gold. ^

and many a pleasant thing: ^
With Virgins fair on her to wait, ^
she comes to the King. ^

and mirth on every side, ^
Into the palace of the King, ^
and there they do abide. ^

(O Queen the case so stands) ^
Thou shall have sons whom thou may set ^
as Princes in all lands. ^

all ages shall record: ^
The people shall give thanks to thee ^
for evermore, O Lord. ^
PSALM XLVI. Deus noster refugium.
J. H.
THE Lord is our defense and aid, ^
the strength whereby we stand: ^
When we with woe are much dismayed, ^
he is our help at hand. ^

though hills so high and steep ^
Be thrust and huried here and there, ^
within the Sea so deep. ^

that all the banks it spills: ^
And though it overflow the shore, ^
and beat down mighty hills. ^

his pleasant streams apace: ^
To fresh the City of our God, ^
and wash his holy place. ^

she can no whit decay: ^
All things against her that rebel, ^
the Lord will truly stay. ^
kingdoms fear ^
the people make a noise: ^
The earth does melt and not appear, ^
when God puts forth his voice. ^

to us he has an eye: ^
Our hope of health, with all our heart, ^
on Jacobs God does lie. ^

the working of our God: ^
What wonders he himself has wrought, ^
in all the world abroad. ^

which countries did conspire: ^
Their bows he broke, and spears each one, ^
their chariots burnt with fire. ^

I am a God most stout: ^
Amongst the heathen high and low, ^
and all the earth throughout. ^

he is our strength and tower: ^
On Jacobs God we do depend, ^
and on his ^ight and power ^
PSALM XLVII. Omnes gentes.
J. H.
YE people all, with one accord, ^
clap hands and eke rejoice: ^
Be glad, and sing unto the Lord, ^
with sweet and pleasant voice. ^

with wonders manifold: ^
A mighty King he is truly, ^
in all the earth extold. ^

unto out bondage thrall: ^
And underneath our feet he shall ^
the nations make to fall. ^

which we possess alone: ^
The flour'shing worship of Jacob, ^
his well beloved one. ^

with joy and pleasant noise: ^
The Lord goes up above the sky, ^
with trumpets royal voice. ^

sing praises to our King: ^

all skilful praises sing. ^

upon his holy throne: ^
The princes of the people have ^
them joined every one. ^

which is exalted high, ^
As with a buckler does defend ^
the earth continually. ^
PSALM XLVIII. Magnus Dominus.
J. H.
GReat is the Lord, and with great praise ^
to be advanced still: ^
Within the City of our God, ^
upon his holy hill. ^

it gladdeth all he land: ^
The City of the mighty King ^
on her north side does stand. ^

God is a refuge known: ^
For lo, the Kings are gathered, and ^
together they are gone. ^

they wondered, and they were ^
Astomish'd much, and suddenly ^
were driven back with fear. ^

for very woe they cry, ^
As does a woman when she shall ^
go travel by and by. ^

upon the Sea do break: ^
So they were stroy'd: And even as ^
we heard our Fathers speak. ^

we saw as it was told: ^
Yea, in the City which our God ^
for ever will uphold. ^

on thy good help and grace: ^
For which we do all times attend ^
within thy holy place. ^

for ever is thy praise: ^
And thy right hand, O Lord, is full ^
of righteousness always. ^

fulfilled be with joys: ^
And eke of Juda grant, O Lord, ^
the daughters to rejoice. ^

yea round about her go: ^
And tell the towers that thereupon ^
are builded on a row. ^

behold her towers there: ^
That ye may tell thereof to them, ^
that after shall be here. ^

for evermore is he: ^
Yea and unto the death also, ^
our guider shall he be. ^
PSALM XLIX. Audite haec omnes.
T. S.
ALl people hearken and give ear, ^
to that that I shall tell: ^
Both high and low, both rich and poor, ^
that in the world do dwell. ^

of many things right wise: ^
In understanding shall my heart ^
his study exercise. ^

the parable so dark: ^
And open all my doubtful speech, ^
in meeter on my harp. ^

or any careful toil: ^
Or else my foes which at my heels, ^
are pressed my life to spoil. ^

wherein their trust is most: ^
And they which of their treasures great ^
themselves do brag and boast. ^

his brothers death redeem: ^
Or that can give a price to God, ^
sufficient for him. ^

none can thereto attain: ^
Or that he might his life prolong, ^
or not in grave remain. ^

subject unto deaths bands: ^
And being dead, strangers possess ^
their goods, their rents, their lands. ^

and so determine sure: ^
To make their names right great on earth, ^
for ever to endure. ^

high honor, wealth, and rest: ^

as well as the brute beast.
The second Part.

to be most lewd and vain: ^
Their children yet approve their talk, ^
and in like sin remain. ^

so shall they into grave: ^
Death shall them eat, and in that day ^
the Just shall Lordship have. ^

shall fade, and quite decay: ^
When as from house to pit they pass, ^
with woe and well away. ^

from death and endless pain: ^
Because he will of his good grace ^
my soul receive again. ^

fear not I say therefore: ^
Although the glory of his house ^
increases more and more. ^

nothing shall he receive: ^
His glory will not follow him, ^
his pomp will take her leave. ^

the happiest under Sun: ^
And others likewise flatter him, ^
saying, all is well done. ^

as did his fathers old: ^
Yet must he needs at length give place ^
and be brought to deaths fold. ^

who does not in him trust: ^
But like brute beasts, so does he live, ^
which turned are to dust. ^
PSALM L Deus deorum.
W. W.
THe mighty God, the Eternal has thus spoke, ^
and all the world he will call and provoke: ^
Even from the east and so forth to the west, ^
From toward Sion, which place he likes best: ^
God will appear in beauty most excellent: ^
Our God will come before that long time be spent. ^

A great tempest shall round about him trace. ^

To judge his folk with equity and right: ^

My pact they keep, their gifts do not dissemble, ^

For God is judge of all things more and less. ^

List Israel, I will thee naught conceal; ^

For giving not all manner offerings to me. ^

Goats of thy fold, or Calf out of thy stall, ^

On thousand hills cattle are mine own goods. ^

All beasts are mine, which haunt the field and fountains. ^

For all is mine that in the world does well. ^

Or drink the blood of Goats and of the flocks? ^

And pay thy vows unto God ever living. ^

Then will I help, and thou shall honor me. ^

Why do thou preach my laws and hests abroad: ^

And hat'st to be by discipline reformed? My words I say thou do reject and
hate. ^

Thou runn'st with him, and so your prey do seek: ^
And art all one with bands of Belial eke. ^

And how thy tongue deceives, it is a wonder. ^

And how to put thy mothers son to shame. ^

Thou did me judge, because I staid so long, ^
Like to thy self: yet though I keep long silence, ^
Once shall thou feel of thy wrongs just recompense. ^

And fear not when he threatens with his word: ^
Lest without help I spoil you as a prey. ^

Says the Lord God, and he that walks this trace; ^
I will him teach Gods saving health to embrace. ^
Another of the same
by J. H.
THe God of gods, the Lord, ^
has called the earth by name: ^
From whence the Sun does rise, unto ^
the setting of the same. ^

his glory bright and clear: ^
The perfect beauty of his grace, ^
from thence if did appear. ^

to speak he shall not doubt: ^
Before him shall the fire wast, ^
and tempest round about. ^

the earth below likewise: ^
He will call forth, to judge and try, ^
his folk he does devise. ^

my faithful flock so dear: ^
Which are in band and league with me, ^
my Law to love and fear. ^

the heavens shall record, ^
That God is just, and all must bide ^
the judgment of the Lord. ^

Israel, to thee I cry: ^
I am thy God, thine help at need, ^
thou can it not deny. ^

thy sacrifice is slack: ^
Thou offerest daily unto me ^
much more than I do lack. ^

thy cattle young or old? ^
Or else so much desire to feed ^
on Goats out of thy fold? ^

in woods that eat their fills: ^
And thousands more of neat and kine, ^
that run wild on the hills.
The second Part.

in hills and out of sight, ^
And beasts that in the fields do lie, ^
are subject to my might. ^

what need I ought of thine? ^
Since that the earth with her great store, ^
and all therein is mine. ^

to eat it do thou think? ^
Or such a sweetness do I find, ^
the blood of Goats to drink? ^

with thanks to him apply: ^
And see thou pay thy vows always ^
unto the God most high. ^

when ought would work thee blame: ^
And I will sure deliver thee, ^
that thou may praise my Name. ^

which talk of God each day: ^
And yet their works are foul and vain, ^
to them the Lord will say. ^

my word once speak or name? ^
Why does thy talk my law allow? ^
thy deeds deny the same. ^

thy life thou art so slack: ^
My word the which thou do pretend, ^
is cast behind thy back. ^
The third Part.

by theft to live in wealth: ^
With him thou runn'st, and do agree ^
likewise to thrive by stealth. ^

that wives and maids defile, ^
Thou like it well, and waxest bold ^
to use that life most vile. ^

to slander and defame: ^
Thy tongue is taught to craft and lie, ^
and still does use the sa^e. ^

thy friends to thee so near: ^
With slander thou would needs defile ^
thy mothers son most dear. ^

as though I did not see: ^
Thou go on still, and so do think ^
that I am like to thee. ^

to strike when I begin: ^
Thy faults in order I will set, ^
and open all thy sin. ^

that have not God in mind, ^
Lest when I plague you in mine ire, ^
your help be far to find. ^

the sacrifice of praise, ^
Does please me well: and he shall see ^
to walk in godly ways. ^
PSALM LI. Miserere mei.
W. W.
O Lord consider my distress, ^
and now with speed some pity take: My sins deface, my faults redress, ^
good Lord, for thy great mercies sake. ^

from this unjust and sinful act: ^
And purify yet once again ^
my heinous crime and bloody fact. ^

me to acknowledge mine excess: ^
My sin alas does still remain ^
before my face without release. ^

committing evil in thy sight: ^
And if I were therefore condemned, ^
yet were thy judgments just and right. ^

that first I was conceived in sin: ^
Yea of my mother so born was, ^
and yet vile wretch remain therein. ^

the inward truth of a pure heart: ^
Therefore thy wisdom from above ^
thou have revealed me to convert. ^

I shall be cleaner than the glass: And if thou wash away my spot, ^
the snow in whiteness shall I pass. ^

that inwardly I may find grace: ^
and that my strength may now amend, ^
which thou have swag'd for my trespass. ^

for I have felt enough thy hand: ^
And purge my sins, I thee desire, ^
which do in number pass the sand. ^

and frame it to thy holy will: ^
Thy constant spirit in me let rest, ^
which may these raging enemies kill.
The second Part.

but speedily my torments end: ^
Take not from me thy spirit of grace ^
which may from dangers me defend. ^

which I was wont in thee to find: ^
And let me thy free spirit retain, ^
which unto thee may stir my mind. ^

I shall instruct others therein: ^
and men that are likewise brought low ^
by mine example shall flee sin. ^

forgive me this my bloody vice: ^
My heart and tongue shall then accord ^
to sing thy mercies and justice. ^

O Lord, which art the only key: ^
And then my mouth shall testify ^
thy wondrous works and praise always. ^

I would have offered many a one: ^
But thou esteem'st them of no price, ^
and therein pleasure take thou none. ^

O Lord, thou never do reject: ^
And to speak truth, it is the best, ^
and of all sacrifice th 'effect. ^

pour out thy mercies on thy hill, ^
and on Jerusalem thy grace, ^
build up the walls and love it still. ^

of peace and righteousness, I say: ^
Yea calves and many other things, ^
upon thine Altar will we lay. ^
Another of the same
by J. H.
HAve mercy on me, Lord, after ^
thy great abounding grace: ^
After thy mercies multitude ^
do thou my sins deface. ^

and cleanse me from my sin: ^
For I do know my faults, and still ^
my sin is in mine eyne. ^

offended in this case: ^
. And evil have I done before ^
the presence of thy face. ^

upright thou may be tried: ^
And eke in judging, that the doom ^
may pass upon thy side. 5. Behold, in wickedness my kind ^
and shape I did receive: ^
And lo my sinful mother eke ^
in sin did me conceive. ^

is pleasant unto thee: ^
And secrets of thy wisdom thou ^
revealed have to m^. ^

I shall be cleansed so: ^
Yea wash thou me, and so I shall ^
be whiter than the snow. ^

to hear the pleasant voice: ^
That so the bruised bones which thou ^
have broken, may rejoice. ^

Lord, turn away thy face: ^
And all my deeds of wickedness ^
do utterly deface. ^

unspotted in thy sight: ^
And eke within my bowels, Lord, ^
renew a stable sp'rit. ^

thy holy Sp'rit away: ^
The comfort of thy saving health ^
give me again I pray. ^

and I will teach therefore ^
Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall ^
be turned to thy lore.
The second Part.

from blood deliver me: That praises of thy right'ousness, ^
my tongue may sing to thee. ^

do thou, O Lord, unloose: ^
The praises of thy Majesty, ^
my mouth shall so disclose. ^

if that had pleased thee: ^
But pleased with burnt offerings ^
I know thou will not be. ^

delightful in Gods eyes: ^
A broken and an humble heart, ^
God, thou will not despise. ^

to Sion, and withal ^
Grant, that of thy Jerusalem ^
uprear'd may be the wall. ^

of justice, in that day ^
Thou shall accept, and calves they shall ^
upon thine altar lay. ^
PSALM LII. Quid gloriaris.
J. H.
WHy do thou tyrant boast abroad, ^
thy wicked works to praise? ^
Do thou not know there is a God, ^
whose mercies last always? ^

devises wickedly: ^
And like unto a rasor sharp, ^
it works deceitfully. ^

and wilt not walk upright? ^
Thou have more lust false tales to find, ^
than bring the truth to light. ^

in mischief, blood, and wrong: ^
Thy lips have learned the flattering style, ^
O false deceitful tongue! ^

and pluck thee from thy place: ^
Thy seed root out from off the ground ^
and so shall thee deface. ^
just when they behold thy fall, ^
with fear will praise the Lord: ^
And in reproach of thee withal, ^
cry out with one accord. ^

the Lord for his defense: ^
But of his goods his God did make, ^
and trust his corrupt sense. ^

shall spring and spread abroad: ^
For why? my trust all times has been ^
upon the living God. ^

to thee with heart and voice: ^
I will set forth thy Name always, ^
wherein thy Saints rejoice. ^
PSALM LIII. Dixit insipiens.
T. S.
THe foolish man in that which he ^
within his heart has said: ^
That there is any God at all, ^
has utterly denied. ^

a heinous work have wrought: ^
Among them all there is not one, ^
of good that works ought. ^

from heaven all abroad: ^
To see if any were that would ^
be wise and seek for God. ^

they are corrupted all: ^
There is not one does any good, ^
there is not one at all. ^

that they do feed upon ^
My people, as they feed on bread? ^
the Lord they call not on. ^

with trembling all dismayed: ^
Whereas there was no cause at all, ^
why they should be afraid. ^

has scatt'red all abroad: ^
Thou have confounded them, for they ^
rejected are of God. ^

and thou, O Lord, fulfill. ^
Thy promise made to Israel, ^
from out of Sion hill. ^

that erst were captive led: ^
Then Jacob shall therein rejoice, ^
and Israel shall be glad. ^
PSALM LIVE. Deus in nomine
J. H.
SAve me, O God, by thy great Name, ^
and for thy goodness sake: ^
Unto the strength (Lord) of the same. ^
I do my cause betake. ^

to me when I do pray: ^
Bow down thy self to me, and hear ^
the words that I do say. ^

and tyrants vex me still: ^
Which have not God before their eyes, ^
they seek my soul to spill. ^

the Lord is straight at hand: ^
With them by whom my soul is staid, ^
the Lord does ever stand. ^

for me that lie in wait: ^
And in thy truth destroy my foes ^
with their own snare and bait. ^

then I to thee shall make: ^
And praise thy Name, for therein still ^
great comfort I do take. ^

from them that craft conspire: ^
And now mine eye with joy does see ^
on them my hearts desire. ^
PSALM LV. Exaudi Deus.
J. H.
O God, give ear, and do apply ^
to hear me when I pray: ^
And when to thee I call and cry, ^
hide not thy self away. ^

and answer me again: ^
With plaints I pray full sore oppressed, ^
great grief does me constrain. ^

oppress me through despite: ^
And so the wicked sort likewise ^
to vex me have delight. ^

to charge me with some ill: ^
So in their hasty wrath and ire ^
they do pursue me still. ^

it pants in my breast: ^
The terrors and the dread of death ^
do work me much unrest. ^

that I therewith do quake: ^
Such horror whelmeth me withal, ^
that I no shift can make. ^

the swift and pleasant wings ^
Of some fair dove, that I may flee, ^
and rest me from these things. ^

to fly I would not cease: ^
And I would hide my self, and stay ^
in some great wilderness. ^

and not abide behind: ^
That I were quit and overpast ^
these blasts of boistrous wind. ^

their dev'lsh double tongue: ^
For I have spide their city full ^
of rapine, stri^^, and wrong. ^

do close her as a wall: ^
In midst of her is mischief stout, ^
and, sorrow eke withal. ^

her deeds are much too vile: ^
And in her streets there does remain ^
all crafty fraud an^ guile.
The second Part.

I might it well abide: ^
From open enemies check and blame: ^
some where I could me hide. ^

which friendship did pretend: ^
And did my secret counsel hear, ^
as my familiar friend. ^

in secret and abroad: ^
And we together often did walk ^
within the house of God. ^

and send them quick to hell: ^
For mischief-reigneth in the hall ^
and parlour where they dwell. ^

to him for help I flee: ^
The Lord will hear me by and by, ^
and he will succor me. ^

unto the Lord I pray: ^
When I so instantly have cried, ^
he does not say me nay. ^

though war be now at hand: ^
Although the n^^aber be full great, ^
that would against me stand. ^

both now and evermore: ^
Will hear when I to him complain, ^
and punish them full sore. ^

to turn will once accord: ^
For why? they will not God obey, ^
nor yet do fear the Lord. ^

which were in covenant knit: ^
Of friendship to neglect the bands, ^
they pass or care no what. ^

as butter are their words: ^
Although their words were smooth as oyl^ ^
they cut as sharp as swords. ^

and he shall nourish thee: ^
For in no wise will he accord, ^
the just in thrall to see. ^

that thirst for blood always: ^
He will no guileful man permit ^
to live out half his days. ^

in thee, O Lord, I trust: ^
I shall depend thy grace upon, ^
with all my heart and lust. ^
PSALM LVI. Miserere mei.
J. H.
HAve mercy, Lord, on me, I pray, ^
for man would me devour: ^
He fights with me day by day, ^
and troubles me each hour. ^

to swallow me outright: ^
To fight against me many rise, ^
O thou most High of Might. ^

with boasts and brags of pride: ^
I trust in thee alone for aid, ^
by thee I will abide. ^

O Lord I stick to thee: ^
I do not care at all assays, ^
what flesh can do to me. ^

they wrest them at their will: ^
And all the counsel that they take, ^
is how to work me ill. ^

close watch for me to lay: ^
They spy my paths, and shares have tied, ^
to take my life away. ^

thou God, on them wilt frown: ^
For in his wrath he does not let ^
to throw whole kingdoms down. ^

and on my tears do look: ^
Reserve them in a glass by thee, ^
and write them in thy book. ^

my foes away do start: ^
I well perceive it by the same, ^
that God does take my part. ^

to praise it I accord: ^
With joy I will declare abroad ^
the promise of (...) Lord. ^

as I before began: ^
The Lord he is my help and stay, ^
I do not care for man. ^

to God my vows always: ^
And I, O Lord, all times to thee ^
will offer thanks and praise. ^

and keep'st my feet upright: ^
That I before thee may ascend, ^
with such as live in light. ^
PSALM LVII. Miserere mei.
J. H.
TAke pity for thy promise sake, ^
have mercy, Lord, on me: ^
For why? my soul does her betake ^
unto the help of thee. ^

I set my self full fast: ^
Till mischief, malice, and like things, ^
be gone and overpast. ^

to whom I stick and stand: ^
I mean the God that will stand by ^
the cause I have in hand. ^

to save me from their spite: ^
That to devour me have affai'd, ^
his mercy, truth, and might. ^

all set on wrath and ire: ^
And with such wicked men I dwell, ^
that fret like flames of fire. ^

as sharp as I have seen: ^
They wound and cut with their quick tongue ^
like swords and weapons keen. ^

above the heavens bright: ^
Exalt thy praise on earth abroad, ^
thy Majesty and Might. ^

a privy cave and pit: ^
Wherein they think my Soul to snare, ^
but they are fallen in it. ^

in him I joy always: ^
My heart I say does well accord ^
to sing his laud and praise. ^

my lute, my harp, and string: ^
For I my self before the day, ^
will rise, rejoice, and sing. ^

the goodness of my God: ^
And show his praise that does excel ^
in heathen lands abroad. ^

as heavens all are high: ^
His truth as high as any Star, ^
that shines in the sky. ^

above the heavens bright: ^
Extol thy praise on earth abroad, ^
thy Majesty and Might. ^
PSALM LVIII. Si vere utique.
J. H.
YE rulers that are put in trust ^
to judge of wrong and right: ^
Be all your judgments true and just, ^
not knowing need or might. ^

in mischief to consent: ^
And where ye should true justice use, ^
your hands to bribes are bent. ^

have erred on this wise: ^
And from their mothers whom always ^
have used craft and lies. ^

of serpents do appear: ^
Yea, like the adder that is deaf, ^
and fast does stop her ear. ^

of one that charmeth well: ^
No, though he were the chief of choice, ^
and did therein excel. ^

within their mouths throughout: ^
The tusks that in their great jaw-bones ^
like lions whelps hang out. ^

as water runs forthright: ^
The shafts that they do shoot in haste, ^
let them be broke in flight. ^

and unto slime do run; ^
As one before his time that fell, ^
and never saw the sun. ^

to bushes big shall grow: ^
The storms of anger waxing strong, ^
shall take them ere they know. ^

that God does vengeance take: ^
And they shall wash their feet in blood ^
of them that him forsake. ^

that good men have reward: ^
And that a God on earth does dwell, ^
that justice does regard. ^
PSALM LIX. Eripe me.
J. H.
SEnd aid and save me from my foes, ^
O Lord, I pray to thee: ^
Defend and keep me from all those ^
that rise and strive with me. ^
Lord, preserve me from those men ^
whose doings are not good: ^
And set me sure and safe from them ^
that still thirst after blood. ^

they rage against me still: ^
Yea, for no fault that I did make, ^
I never did them ill. ^

when I no whit offend: ^
Arise and save me from their snare, ^
and see what they intend. ^

arise, and strike all lands: ^
And pity none that do rebel, ^
and in their mischief stands. ^

as hounds they howl and grin: ^
And all the city clean throughout ^
from place to place they run. ^

but in their lips are swords: ^
They 'greed my death, and then would say, ^
What, none does hear our words. ^

and laughed thereat apace: ^
The heathen folk thou do deride, ^
and mock them to their face. ^

O Lord, does come from thee: ^
My God he is my help at hand, ^
a fort of fence to me. ^

in great abundance still: ^
That I may see my foes in case ^
such as my heart does will.
The second Part.

lest it from mind do fall: ^
But with they strength drive them abroad, ^
and so consume them all. ^

confound them in their pride: ^
Their wicked oaths, with lies and wrong, ^
let all the world deride. ^

that naught of them remain: ^
That men may know throughout the world ^
that Jacob's God does reign. ^
^

as dogs they grin and cry: ^
Throughout the streets in every place, ^
they run about and spy. ^

but let them not be fed: ^
Nor find a house wherein they may ^
be bold to put their head. ^

thy goodness I will praise: ^
For thou art my defense and God, ^
at need in all affaies. ^

O Lord, I sing to thee: ^
Thou art my fort, my fence and aid, ^
a loving God to me. ^
PSALM LX. Deus repulisti.
J. H.
O Lord, thou did us clean forsake, ^
and scatt'redst us abroad: ^
Such great displeasure thou did take, ^
return to us, O God. ^

that it in sunder brake: ^
The hurt thereof, O Lord, restore, ^
for it does bow and quake. ^

the people that are thine: ^
And thou have given unto us ^
a drink of deadly wine. ^

a banner thou did show: ^
That they may triumph in the same ^
because thy word is true. ^

thy folk that favor thee: ^
That they thine help at hand may have, ^
O Lord, grant this to me. ^

this was his joyful tale: ^
I will divide Sichem by pace, ^
and mete out Succoths vale. ^

Manasses mine beside: ^
Ephr'im the strength of all my land, ^
my law does Judah guide. ^

ore Edom throw my shoe: ^
And thou Palestine ought to seek ^
for favor me unto. ^

unto the City strong? Or who to Edom will me guide, ^
so that I go not wrong? ^

thy folk, their land, and coasts? ^
Our wars in hand thou would not take, ^
nor walk among our hoasts. ^

from them that us disdain: ^
The help that hoasts of men can give, ^
it is but all in vain. ^

to take great things in hand: ^
He will tread down, and put to flight ^
all those that us withstand. ^
PSALM LXI. Exaudi Deus.
J. H.
REgard, O Lord, for I complain, ^
and make my suit to thee: ^
Let not my words return in vain, ^
but give an ear to me. ^

of all the earth abroad: ^
In grief and anguish of, my heatt, ^
I cry to thee, O God. ^

my woeful mind repose: ^
Thou art my hope, my fort and tower, ^
my fence against my foes. ^

for ever to endure: ^
Under thy wings, I know right well ^
I shall be safe and sure. ^

and does fulfill the same: ^
With goodly gifts will he reward ^
all those that fear his Name. ^

and so prolong his days: ^
That he from age to age shall reign, ^
for evermore always. ^

before the Lord for aye: ^
O let thy mercy, truth, and grace, ^
defend him from decay. ^

with praise unto thy Name: ^
That all my vows I may fulfill, ^
and daily pay the fame. ^
PSALM LXII. Nonne Deo.
J. H.
MY soul to God shall give good heed, ^
and him alone attend: ^
For why? my health and hope to speed, ^
does whole on him depend. ^

my rock, my health, and aid: ^
He is my stay, that no pretense ^
shall make me much dismayed. ^

use craft? sure ye must fall: For as a rotten hedge ye be, ^
and like a tottering wall. ^

to put him to the worse: ^
Ye love to lie; with mouth ye praise, ^
and yet your heart does curse. ^

on God my chief desire: ^
From all false seats me to defend, ^
none but him I require. ^

my health is of his grace: ^
He does support me, that no power ^
can move me out of place. ^

my souls desire and lust: ^
My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth, ^
God is my only trust. ^

ye folk with one accord: ^
Pour out your hearts to him, and say, ^
our trust is in the Lord. ^

on balance but a slight: ^
With things most vain do them compare ^
for they can keep no weight. ^

let vain delights be gone: ^
Though goods well got flow in with wealth ^
set not your hearts thereon. ^

which here to mind I call: ^
He spoke it often, I heard it well, ^
that God alone does all: ^

thy mercy does exceed: ^
So that all sorts with thee shall ^ind ^
according to their deed* ^
PSALM LXIII Deus, Deus meus.
T. S.
O God, my God, I watch betime, ^
to come to thee in haste: ^
For why? my soul and body both, ^
does thirst of thee to taste. And in this barren wilderness, ^
where waters there are none: ^
My flesh is parch't for thought of thee ^
for thee I wish alone. ^

thy glory, strength, and might: ^
As I was wont it to behold, ^
within thy Temple bright. ^

this life and wretched days: ^
My lips therefore shall give to thee ^
due honor laud and praise. ^

to worship thee always: ^
And in thy Name I shall lift up ^
my hands when I do pray. ^

which is both fat and sweet: ^
My m^uth therefore shall sing such songs ^
as are for thee most meet. ^

and eke all the night tide: ^

thou art my joyful guide. ^

thy right hand is my power: ^

them death shall soon devour. ^

their earkasses shall feed ^
The hungry foxes, which do run ^
their prey to seek at need. ^

that do profess Gods word: ^
For liars mouths shall then be stopped, ^
which have the truth disturbed. ^
PSALM LXIV. Exaudi Deus.
J. H.
O Lord, unto my voice give ear, ^
with plaint when I do pray: ^
And rid my life and soul from fear ^
of foes that threat to stay. ^

which in deceit do lurk: ^
And from the srowning face of them, ^
that all ill seats do work. ^

men whet and sharp their swords: ^
They shoot abroad their arrows keen, ^
I mean, most bitter words. ^

the upright man to hit: ^
The just un'wares to strike by craft, ^
they care nor fear no whit. ^

in counsel thus they cry: ^
The use deceit let us not dread, ^
what? who can it espy? ^

all times within their heart: ^
They all consult what feats to use, ^
each does invent his part. ^

when they think least upon, ^
God with his dart shall sure assail, ^
and wound them every one. ^

shall work themselves such blame, ^
That they which them behold their fall, ^
shall wonder at the same. ^

that God the thing has wrought: ^
And praise his mighty works, and tell ^
what he to pass has brought. ^

still trusting in his might: ^
So shall they joy with mind and voice ^
whose hearts are pure and right. ^
PSALM LXV. Te decet hymnus.
J. H.
THY praise alone, O Lord, does reign ^
in Sion thine own hill: ^
Their vows to thee they do maintain, ^
and their offerings fulfill. ^

and do thereto agree, ^
The people all both far and near ^
with trust shall come to thee. ^

that we shall fall therein: ^
But Lord forgive our great misdeeds, ^
and purge us from our sin. ^

within thy courts to dwell: ^
Thy house and temple he shall use ^
with pleasures that excel. ^

our health of thee does rise: ^
The hope of all the earth abroad, ^
and the seacoasts likewise. ^

and compast with thy power: ^
Thou make the mountains strong and stout ^
to stand in every shower. ^

and make their streams full still: ^
Thou do restrain the peoples rage. ^
and rule them at thy will. ^

shall dread thy signs to see: ^
Which morn' and evening in great mirth ^
do pass with praise to thee. ^

and thirsts more and more: ^
Then with thy drops thou do apply, ^
and much increase her store. ^

and so does cause to spring ^
The seed and corn which men do sow, ^
for he does guide the thing. ^

whereby her clods do fall: ^
Thy drops on her thou do distill, ^
and bless her fruit withal. ^

with fair and pleasant crop: ^
Thy clouds distill their dew apace, ^
great plenty they do drop. ^

full great increase to bring: ^
The little hills shall joy therein, ^
much fruit in them shall spring. ^

and cover all the earth: ^
The vales with corn shall so exceed, ^
that men shall sing for mirth. ^
PSALM LXVI. Jubilate Deo.
T. S.
YE men on earth in God rejoice, ^
with praise set forth his Name. ^
Extol his might with heart and voice, ^
give glory to the same. ^

in all thy works thou art! ^
Thy foes for fear shall seek to thee, ^
full sore against their heart. ^

shall praise the Name of God: ^
The laud thereof the world about ^
is showed and set abroad. ^

what things the Lord has wrought: ^
Mark well the wondrous works that he ^
for man to pass has brought. ^

therein a way they had: ^
On foot to pass both fair and dry, ^
whereof their hearts were glad. ^

his eyes all things behold: ^
All such as would him disobey, ^
by him shall be controull'd. ^

due laud and thanks always: ^
With joyful voice declare abroad, ^
and sing unto his praise. ^

and it preserve withal: ^
He stays our feet, so that no strife ^
can make us slip or fall* ^

if that they will abide: ^
As workmen do when they desire ^
to have their metals tried. ^

in prison to be cast: ^
And there with chains and setters strong ^
to lie in bondage fast.
The second Part.

on us to ride and reign: ^
Though we through fire and water run ^
of very grief and pain. ^

dispose it to the best: ^
And bring us out into a place, ^
to live in wealth and rest. ^

to offer and to pray: ^
And there I will my self apply ^
my vows to thee to pay. ^

in all my grief and smart: ^
The vows, I say, which I did make ^
in anguish of my heart. ^

of Oxen fat and rams: ^
Yea this my sacrifice shall be, ^
of Bullocks, Goats, and Lambs. ^

all ye that fear the Lord: ^
What he for my poor Soul has done, ^
to you I will record. ^

this mouth to him does cry: ^
And thou my tongue make speed apace ^
to praise him speedily. ^

in wicked works rejoice: ^
Or if I have delight to sin, ^
God will not hear my voice. ^

and what I do require: ^
My prayer he does well regard, ^
and grants my desire. ^

nor cast me out of mind: ^
Nor yet his mercy from me shut, ^
which I do ever find. ^
PSALM LXVII. Deus misereatur.
J. H.
HAve mercy on us, Lord, ^
and grant to us thy grace: ^
To show to us do thou accord, ^
the brightness of thy face. ^

the way to godly wealth: ^
And all the Nations on a row, ^
may see thy saving health. ^

give praise unto thy Name: ^
O let the people all abroad, ^
extol and laud the same. ^

let all rejoice with mirth: ^
For thou with truth and right do guide ^
the Nations of the earth. ^

give praise unto thy Name: ^
O let the people all abroad. ^
extol and laud the same. ^

great store of fruit shall fall: ^
And then our God, the God of peace, ^
shall bless us eke withal. ^

and then both far and near, ^
The folk throughout the earth always ^
of him shall stand in fear. ^
PSALM LXVIII. Exsurgat Deus.
T. S.
LEt God arise, and then his foes ^
will turn themselves to flight: ^
His enemies then will run abroad, ^
and scatter out of sight. ^

and wind blows smoke away: ^
So in the presence of the Lord, ^
the wicked shall decay. ^

shall heartily rejoice: ^
They shall be glad and merry all, ^
and cheerful in their voice. ^

who rides on the Sky: ^
Extol the name of Jah our God, ^
and him do magnify. ^

within his holy place: ^
That Father is of fatherless, ^
and judge of widows case. ^
both, ^
unto the comfortless: ^
He brings bondmen out of thrall, ^
and rebels to distress. ^

The Egyptians from among: ^
And brought them through the wilderness, ^
which was both wide and long. ^

heard were great claps of thund'r: ^
The mount Sinai shook in such sort, ^
as it would break in sund'r. ^

abundantly was washed: ^
And if so be it barren waxt, ^
by thee it was refresht. ^

thou have prepared that place: ^
and for the poor thou do provide ^
of thine especial grace.
The second Part.

to magnify his Name: ^
When as his people triumphs make, ^
and purchase bruit and fame. ^
with all their power ^
shall fly and take the foil: ^
And women which remain at home, ^
shall help to part the spoil. ^

your hue shall pass the Dove: ^
Whose wings and feathers seem to have ^
silver and gold above. ^

over Kings both high and low: ^
Then shall it be like Salmon hill, ^
(...) white as any snow. ^

and in height others pass: ^
Yet Sion, Gods most holy hill, ^
does far excel in grace. ^

and leap for pride together: ^
The hill of Sion, God does love, ^
and there will dwell for ever. ^

of warriors good and strong: ^
The Lord also in Sinai ^
is present them among. ^
on high, ^
and captive led them all: ^
Which in times past thy chosen flock, ^
in bondage kept and thrawl. Thou made them tribute for to pay, ^
and such as did repine ^
Thou did subdue, that they might dwell ^
in thy temple divine. ^

he pours on us such grace: ^
From day to day he is the God ^
of our health and solace. ^
The third Part.

salvat'on comes plain: ^
He is the God by whom we escape ^
all dangers, death, and pain. ^

and break the hairy scalp ^
Of those that in their wickedness ^
continually do walk. ^

my people and my sheep: ^
And all mine own as I have done, ^
from dangers of the deep. ^
them dip their feet in blood ^
of those that hate my Name: ^
And dogs shall have their tongues imbrued ^
with licking of the same. ^

thine enemies do deface: ^
And how thou go as God and King ^
unto thine holy place* ^

the minstrels follow after: ^
And in the midst the damsels play ^
with timbrel and with taber. ^

O Israel, praise the Lord: ^
And Jacobs whole posterity, ^
give thanks with one accord. ^

but Juda made their host: ^
With Zebulon and Nepthalim, ^
which dwelt about their coast. ^

so, Lord, make firm and sure, ^
The thing that thou have wrought in ^s ^
for ever to endure. ^
thy temple gifts will we ^
give unto thee, O Lord, ^
For thine unto Jerusalem ^
sure promise made by word. ^
The fourth Part.
Yea, and strange Kings to us subdued, ^
shall do like in those days: ^
I mean, to thee they shall present ^
their gifts of laud and praise. ^
He shall destroy the spear-mens ranks, ^
those calves and bulls of might: ^
And cause them tribute pay, and daunt ^
all such as love to fight. ^

and presents with them bring: ^
The Moors most black shall stretch their hands ^
unto their Lord and King. ^

give praise unto the Lord: ^
Sing psalms to God with one consent, ^
thereto let all accord. ^

above the heavens bright: ^
Yet by the fearful thunderclaps ^
men may well know his might. ^
the strength of Israel ^
ascribe to God on high: ^
Whose might and power does far extend ^
above the cloudy sky. ^

is dread for evermore: ^
The God of Israel gives us strength, ^
praised be God therefore. ^
PSALM LXIX. Salvum me fac.
J. H.
SAve me, O God, and that with speed, ^
the waters flow full fast: ^
So nigh my soul do they proceed, ^
that I am sore aghast. ^

whereas I feel no ground: ^
I fall into such floods, I say, ^
that I am like be drowned. ^

my throat is hoarse and dry: ^
With looking up my sight both fail, ^
for help to God on high. ^

my soul, with hate are led: ^
In number sure they are no less ^
than hairs are on my head. ^

they prosper and are glad: ^
They do compel me to restore ^
the things I never had. ^

thou Lord all times can tell: ^
And all the faults that I commit ^
to thee are known full well. ^

all those that trust in thee: ^
Let no man doubt or shrink away ^
for ought that chaneeth me. ^

that I do bear this blame: ^
In spite of thee they would me make ^
to hide my face for shame. ^

forsake me on a row: ^
And as a stranger they me call, ^
my face they will not know. ^

that it does pine me much: ^
Their checks and taunts at thee to hear, ^
my very heart does grutch.
The second Part.

yea if I weep and moan: ^
Yet in my teeth this jear is cast, ^
they pass not thereupon. ^

in sackeloth use to walk: ^
Then they anon will it pervert, ^
thereof they jest and talk. ^

that sit within the gate: ^
They have me ever in their tongue, ^
of me they talk and prate. ^

it is their chief pastime ^
To seek which way to work me spite, ^
of me they sing and rhyme. ^

that when it pleases thee: ^
For thy great truth thou will always ^
send down thine aid to me. ^

from drowning do me keep: ^
From such as owe me wrath and ire, ^
and from the waters deep. ^

and depth my soul devour: ^
And that the pit should me confound, ^
and shut me in her power. ^

as thou art good and kin^: ^
And as thy mercy is most dear, ^
Lord, have me in thy mind. ^

nor turn thy face away: ^
I am oppressed on every side, ^
in haste give ear, I say. ^

the same with aid repose: ^
Because of their great tyranny, ^
acquit me from my foes. ^
The third Part.

thou know, and thou can tell: ^
For those that seek and work the same, ^
thou see them all full well. ^

I seek for help anon: ^
But find no friends to ease my smart, ^
to comfort me not one. ^

too cruel for to think: ^
And gave me in my thirst withal, ^
strong vinegare to drink. ^

to take themselves therein: ^
And when they think full well to fare, ^
then trap them in the gin. ^

that they may nothing see: ^
Bow down their backs, and do them bind ^
in thraldom for to be. ^

that it on them may fall: ^
Let thy displeasure in thine ire, ^
take hold upon them all. ^

their offspring eke expel: ^
That none thereof possess the place, ^
nor in their tents do dwell. ^

on him they lay full sore; ^
And if that thou do wound the same, ^
they seek to hurt him more. ^

since they are all pervert: ^
That of thy favor and good will, ^
they never have a part. ^

of life, of hope, of trust: ^
That for their names they never look ^
in number of the just. ^
The fourth Part.

have been full sore oppressed: ^
Thy help shall give me such relief, ^
that all shall be redrest. ^

and show it with a song: ^
I will extol the same always, ^
with hearty thanks among. ^

(such mind thy grace has born:) ^
Than either Ox or Calf can be, ^
that has both hoof and horn. ^

it shall rejoice them sure: ^
All ye that seek the Lord, behold, ^
your life for aye shall dure. ^

the poor when they complain: ^
His prisoners are to him full dear, ^
he does them not disdain* ^

the sea, with flood and stream: ^
His praise they shall declare and show, ^
with all that live in them. ^

and Juda's Cities build: ^

her streets shall all be filled: ^
His servants seed shall keep the same, ^
all ages out of mind: ^

a dwelling place shall find. ^
PSALM LXX. Deus in adjutorium.
J. H.
O God, to me take heed ^
of help I thee require: ^
O Lord of hoasts, with haste make speed, ^
help, help, I thee desire. ^

that seek my soul to spill: ^
Rebuke them back with blame to fall, ^
that think and wish me ill. ^

and seek to work me ill: ^
And at my harm do laugh and cry, ^
so, so, we have our will. ^

in thee with joy and wealth: ^
Which only trust and seek to thee, ^
and to thy saving health. ^

in mirth and one accord: ^
All glory, honor, laud, and praise, ^
be given to thee, O Lord. ^

come, Lord, thine aid I lack: ^
Thou art my stay and help, therefore ^
make speed and be not slack. ^
PSALM LXXI. In te Domine.
J. H.
MY Lord, my God, in all distress, ^
my hope is whole in thee: ^
Then let no shame my foul oppress, ^
nor once take hold on me. ^

and rid me out of dread: ^
Give ear, and to my suit accord, ^
and send me help at need. ^

for aid all times resort: ^
Thy promise is to help always, ^
thou art my fence and sort. ^

and from their strength and power: ^
From men unjust, and eke from them ^
that cruelly devour. ^

thou Lord of hoasts art he: ^
Yea from my youth I had delight ^
still to depend on thee. ^

and I through thee was born: ^
Wherefore I will thee praise with mirth, ^
both evening and at morn. ^

much folk about me throng* ^
But thou. art now, and still have been ^
my sense and aid so strong. ^

thy glory and thy praise: ^
And eke my tongue shall not be slack ^
to honor thee always. ^

when age my limbs does take: ^
And when my strength does waste away, ^
do not my soul forsake. ^

to take me through deceit: And they against me do conspire, ^
that for my soul laid wait.
The second Part.

for God from him is gone: ^
Dispatch him quite, for to his aid ^
(I wis) there comes none. ^

O Lord, when need shall be; ^
But that in time of grief thou may ^
in haste give help to me. ^

all those that seek my life: ^
Oppress them with rebuke also, ^
that fain would work me strise. ^
14. But I will patiently abide ^
thy help at all assays: ^
Still more and more, each time and tide, ^
I will set forth thy praise. ^

that daily help does send: ^
But of thy benefits, O Lord, ^
I know no count nor end. ^

with thy good help, O God: ^
The saving health of thee alone ^
to show and set abroad. ^

and do instruct me still: ^
Therefore thy wonders to declare, ^
I have great mind and will. ^

thou did me keep and stay: ^
Forsake me not unto mine age, ^
and till my head be gray. ^
The third part.

to them that now be here: ^
And that our seed thy power may know, ^
hereafter many a year* ^

thy doings all may see: ^
Thy works are wonderful indeed, ^
O who is like to thee. ^

and yet thou did me save: ^
Yea thou did help and me restore, ^
and took'st me from the grave. ^

my dignity maintain: ^
Yea thou do make all grief to cease, ^
and comfort'st me again. ^

I will with viol sing: ^
My harp shall found thy praise always, ^
O Isreal's holy King. ^

when I shall sing to thee: ^
And eke my soul will much rejoice, ^
for thou have made me free. ^

and speak it daily still. ^
For grief and shame do them confound, ^
that seek to work me ill. ^
PSALM LXXII. Deus judicium.
J. H.
LOrd, give thy judgments to the King, ^
therein instruct him well: ^
And with his son, that princely thing, ^
Lord, let thy justice dwell. ^

and rule thy folk aright: ^
And so defend through equity ^
the poor that have no might. ^

unto thy folk give peace: ^
And eke let little hills apply ^
in justice to increase. ^

with aid, and make them strong: ^
And eke destroy for evermore ^
all those that do them wrong. ^

regard and fear thy might: ^
So long as fun does shine by day, ^
or else the moon by night. ^

like rain to fields new mown: ^
And like to drops that lay the dust, ^
and fresh the land new sown. ^

and all shall be at peace: ^
Until the moon shall leave to prime, ^
waste, change, and to increase. ^

from shore to shore throughout: ^
And from the floods within the land, ^
through all the earth about. ^

shall kneel to him full thick: ^
And all his enemies that rebel, ^
the earth and dust shall lick. ^

great gifts to him shall bring: ^
The kings of Saba, and Araby ^
give many'a costly thing.
The second Part.

in his good grace to stand: ^
And all the people of the world ^
shall serve him at his hand. ^

that unto him do call: ^
And eke the simple folk that have ^
no help of man at all. ^

that are with need oppressed: ^
He does preserve them evermore, ^
and bring their soul to rest. ^

from fraud, from wrong, from might: ^
And eke the blood that they shall bleed ^
is precious in his sight. ^

to him of Saba's gold: ^
He shall be honored as a King, ^
and daily be extolled. ^

of corn shall bear such throng: ^
That it like cedar-trees shall stand ^
in Libanus full long. ^

the fruits thereof shall pass: ^
In plenty it shall far exceed, ^
and spring as green as grass. ^

while that the sun is light: ^
And think them happy through the same, ^
all folk shall bless his might. ^

to Isreal's, God each one: ^
For he does every wondrous things, ^
yea he himself alone. ^

all times eternally: ^
That all the earth may praise the same, ^
Amen, Amen, say I. ^
PSALM LXXI^I. Quam bonus Deus.
T. S.
HOwever it be, yet God is good, ^
and kind to Israel: ^
And to all such at safely keep ^
their conscience pure and well. ^

my feet began to slide: ^
And ere I wist, even at a pinch, ^
my steps awry 'gan glide. ^

I grudged, and did disdain: ^
That wicked men all things should have ^
without turmoil or pain. ^

as if death should them smite: ^
Their bodies are both stout and strong, ^
and ever in good plight. ^

when other men be shent: ^
And with the rest they take no part ^
of plague or punishment. ^

their necks as does a chain: ^
And are even wrapped as in a robe, ^
with rapine and disdain. ^

their eyes oft-times out start: ^
And as for worldly goods, they have ^
more than can wish their heart. ^

boasting much of the wrong, ^
Which they have done to simple men, ^
and ever pried among. ^

they spare not to blaspheme: ^
And prate they do on worldly things, ^
no wight they do esteem. ^

to see their prosperous state: ^
And almost drink the self same cup, ^
and follow the same rate.
The second Part.

should know or understand ^
These worldly things, since wicked men ^
be Lords of sea and land? ^

in riches still increase: ^
Rewarded well with worldly goods, ^
and live in rest and peace. ^

my fantasy refrain: ^
And wash my hands with innocents, ^
and cleanse my heart in vain? ^

as subject to all blame: ^
And every morning from my youth, ^
sustain rebuke and shame? ^

misliking mine estate: ^
But that I should thy children judge, ^
as folk unfortunate. ^

this matter understand: ^
But yet the labor was too great, ^
for me to take in hand. ^

thine holy place; and then ^
I understood right perfectly* ^
the end of all these men. ^

upon a slippery place: ^
And at thy pleasure and thy will ^
thou do them all deface. ^

to see how suddenly ^
They are destroyed, dispatched, consumed, ^
and dead so horribly. ^

so shall their wealth decay: ^
Their famous names in all men's sight ^
that ebb and pass away. ^
The third Part.

my mind was much oppressed: ^

and in this point a beast. ^

thou hold'st me always fast: ^

to glory at the last. ^

but thee in heaven above? ^
And in the earth there is no thing ^
like thee, that I can love. ^

but God does fail me never: ^
For of my health God is the strength, ^
my portion eke for ever. ^

thou shall destroy each one: ^
And those that trust in any thing, ^
saving in thee alone. ^

and ever with him dwell: ^
In God alone I put my trust, ^
his wonders I will tell. ^
PSALM LXXIV. Vt quid Deus.
J. H.
WHy art thou, Lord, so long from us, ^
in all these dangers deep? Why does thine anger kindle thus, ^
at thine own pasture sheep? ^

which have been thine so long: The which thou have redeemed and brought ^
from bondage sore and strong. ^

remember it full well: ^
Thy pleasant place, thy mount Sion, ^
where thou wast wont to dwell. ^

and all thy foes deface: ^
Which now at pleasure rob and wast, ^
within thy holy place. ^

thine enemies roar, O God: ^
They set as signs on every wall, ^
their banners 'splaid abroad. ^

that on the hills do grow: ^
So shine the bills and swords of these ^
within thy temple now. ^

the goodly graven stones, ^
With axes, hammers, bills and swords, ^
they beat them down at once. ^

and eke in all this toil: ^
The house appointed to thy Name, ^
they raze down to the soil. ^

dispatch them out of hand: ^
then burnt they up in every part ^
Gods houses through the Land. ^

our Prophets all are gone: ^
To tell when this our plague shall end, ^
among us there is none. ^

and seize thine enemies strong? ^
Shall they always blaspheme thy name, ^
and rail on thee so long? ^

and hide it in thy lap? ^
Oh pluck it out, and be not slack ^
to give thy foes a rap.
The second Part.

and evermore have been: ^
Yea, thy good grace throughout the world ^
for our good help has seen. ^

thy might did make them dry: ^
And thou did break the Serpents head, ^
that he therein did dye. ^

of Whales that are so fell: ^
And gav'st them to the folk to eat, ^
that in the deserts dwell. ^

from rock both hard and high: ^
And eke thy hand has made likewise ^
deep rivers to be dry. ^

by thee they were begun: ^
Thou setst to serve us with their shine, ^
the moon and eke the sun. ^

of all the earth about: ^
Both summer-heats and winter-frosts, ^
thy hand has found them out. ^

thy foes that thee defame: ^
And how the foolish folk are set, ^
to rail upon thy Name. ^

the Turtle that is true: ^
Forget not always in thy power ^
the poor that much do rue. ^

thy foes possess the land: ^
All sad and dark, far worn and old, ^
our realm as now does stand. ^

nor yet return with shame: ^
But let the poor and needy aye, ^
give praise unto thy Name. ^

the cause that is thine own: ^
Remember how that thou blasphemed ^
art by the foolish one. ^

for the presumption high, ^
Is more and more increast of those ^
that hate thee spitefully. ^
PSALM LXXV. Confitebimur tibi.
J. H.
UN-to thee (God) will we give thanks, ^
we will give-thanks to thee: ^
Since thy Name is so near, declare ^
thy wondrous works will we. ^

convenient time I may: ^
The earth is weak, and all therein, ^
but I her pillars stay. ^

Deal not so furiously: ^
And unto the ungodly ones, ^
set not your horns on high: ^

your raised horns on hie; ^
And see that you do with stiff neck, ^
not speak presumptuously. ^

nor from the western side: ^
Nor from forsaken wilderness, ^
protection does proceed. ^

the righteous judge alone: ^
He puts down the one, and sets ^
another in the throne. ^

is in the hand of God: ^
And all the mighty wine therein, ^
himself does pour abroad. ^

that do remain of it; ^
The wicked of the earth shall drink, ^
and suck them every whit. ^

of Jacobs God therefore: ^
And will not cease to celebrate ^
his praise for evermore. ^

ungodly men will I: ^
But then the horns of righteous men ^
shall be exalted high.
GLORIA PATRI.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, ^
all glory be therefore: ^
As in beginning was, is now, ^
and shall be evermore.
PSALM LXXVI. In Judaea.
J. H.
TO all that now in Jewry dwell, ^
the Lord is clearly known: ^
His Name is great In Israel, ^
a people of his own. ^

to tarry there a space: ^
In Sion eke he has delight ^
to make his dwelling place. ^

the sword, the spear, and shield: ^
And brake the ray to overthrow ^
in battle on the field. ^

more might in thee does lie: ^
Than in the strongest of the world, ^
that rob on mountains high. ^

and they are fallen on sleep: ^
Through men of war no help can be, ^
themselves they could not keep. ^

when thou didst-them reprove, ^
As half on sleep their chariots stood, ^
no horsemen once did move. ^

what man the courage has ^
To bide thy sight, and does not dread ^
when thou art in thy wrath? ^

from heaven through the ground: ^
Then all the earth full sore afraid, ^
in silence shall be found. ^

in judgment for to speak, ^
To save the afflicted of the land, ^
on earth that are full weak. ^

shall turn unto thy praise: ^
Hereafter, Lord, do thou restrain ^
their wrath and threats always. ^

ye folk that nigh him be: ^
Bring gifts all ye that dwell abroad, ^
for dreadful sure is he. ^

from Princes great of birth: ^
And full of terror is his sight ^
to all that dwell on earth. ^
PSALM LXXVII. Voce mea.
J. H.
I With my voice to God do cry, ^
with heart and hearty cheer* ^
My voice to God I lift on high, ^
and he my suit does hear. ^

by night no rest I took: ^
But stretched my hands to him abroad ^
my soul comfort forsook. ^

my trouble then is more: ^
I spoke, but could not make an end, ^
my breath was stopped so sore. ^

that I always awake: ^
With fear I am so sore oppressed, ^
my speech does me forsake. ^

and often did think upon: ^
The times and ages that are past, ^
full many years agone. ^

once made thy praise to show: ^
And with my heart much talk I find, ^
my spirits do search to know. ^

cast off his people thus: ^
So that henceforth no time he shall ^
be friendly unto us? ^

for ever and a day: ^
Or is his promise now delayed, ^
and does his truth decay? ^

his mercies manifold? ^
Or shall his wrath increase so hot, ^
his mercy to withold? ^

the cause of this distrust: ^
Gods mighty hand can help all this, ^
and change it when he lust.
The second Part.

the working of the Lord: ^
Of all his wonders past and gone, ^
I gladly will record. ^

and what he did devise: ^
To tell his facts I will not spare, ^
and eke his Counsel wise. ^

and holy all abroad: ^
What one has strength to match the might ^
of thee O Lord our God. ^

thy goodness every hour: ^
And so do make the people know ^
thy virtue and thy power. ^

with strength and stretched arm: ^
The sons of Jacob that descend, ^
and Joseph's seed from harm. ^

the waters saw thee well: ^
And they for fear away did flee, ^
the depths on trembling fell. ^

did rain full plenteously: ^
The thunder in the air did crack, ^
thy shafts abroad did fly. ^

thy lightenings from above, ^
With st^shes great made men afraid, ^
the earth did quake and move. ^

thy paths in waters deep: ^
Yet none can there thy sleps espy, ^
nor know thy paths to keep. ^

as sheep on every side: ^
Through Moses and through. Aarons hand, ^
thou did them safely guide. ^
PSALM LXXVIII. Attendite populi
J. H.
ATtend my people to my Law, ^
and to my words incline: ^

and sentences divine. ^

even of our fathers old: ^
And which for our instruction, ^
our fathers have us told. ^

from them that should come after: ^
Who should Gods power to their race praise ^
and all his works of wonder. ^

how Israel should live: ^
Willing our fathers should the same ^
unto their children give. ^

that were not sprung up tho, ^
Should have the knowledge of the law ^
and teach their seed also. ^

in God that is above: ^
And not forget to keep his laws, ^
and his precepts in love. ^

rebelling in Gods sight: ^
And would not frame their wicked hearts ^
to know their God aright. ^

their neighbors for to spoil: ^
Shooting their darts the day of war, ^
and yet they took the foil? ^

the covenant that was made: ^
Nor yet would walk or lead their lives ^
accordine to his trade. ^

his counsel and his will: ^
And all his works most magnifick, ^
which he declared still.
The second Part.

did he himself disclose ^
In Egypt land, within the field ^
that called is Thaneos? ^

that they might pass at once: ^
And made the waters stand as still, ^
as does an heap of stones. ^

by day when it was bright: ^
And in the night when dark it was, ^
with fire he gave them light. ^

and gave the people drink, ^
As plentiful as when the deeps ^
do flow up to the brink. ^

that were both dry and hard: ^
Of such abundance, that no floods ^
to them might be compared. ^

their sin they did increase: And stirred him that is most high, ^
to wrath in wilderness. ^

like people of mistrust: ^
Requiring such a kind of meat, ^
as served to their lust. ^

in their unfaithfulness: ^
What? can this God prepare for us ^
a feast in wilderness? ^

and floods forthwith did flow: ^
But can he now give to his folk, ^
both bread and flesh also? ^

with Jacob and his seed: ^
So did his indignation ^
on Israel proceed. ^
The third part.

believe, and hope that he ^
Could always help, and succor them ^
in their necessity. ^

forthwith they brake in sunder, ^

a food of mickle wonder. ^

were fed at their request: ^

and brought in the South-West, ^

and fowls as thick as sand: ^

where all their tents did stand. ^

and all men had their fills: ^
Yet more and more they did desire ^
to serve their lusts and wills. ^

his wrath upon them fell: ^

and choice of Israel. ^

and still they did him grieve: ^
For all the wonders that he wrought, ^
they would him not believe. ^

and made their honor vain: ^
Their years did wear and pass away, ^
with terror and with pain. ^

they sought him by and by: ^

their help and God most high. ^

and flatter with the Lord: ^
And with their tongues, and in their hearts ^
dissembled every word. ^
The fourth Part.

to him, nor to his trade: ^
Nor yet to keep or to perform ^
the covenant that was made. ^

when they deserved to dye: ^
That he forgave them their misdeeds, ^
and would not them destroy. Yea, many, a time he turned his wrath, ^
and did himself advise; ^
And would not suffer all his whole ^
displeasure to arise. ^

and even as a wind, ^
Passing away, and cannot well ^
return by his own kind. ^

did they the Lord provoke? ^
How did they move and stir the Lord ^
to plague them with his stroke? ^

and tempted God est soon: ^
Prescribing to the holy Lord, ^
what things they would have done. ^

nor of the day when he ^
Delivered them out of the hands ^
of their fierce enemy. ^

(as they themselves beheld) ^
In Egypt, and the wonders that ^
he did in Zoan-field. ^

their waters into blood: ^
That no man might receive his drink ^
at river or at flood. ^

which did them sore annoy: ^
And filled their country full of frogs, ^
which did their land destroy. ^
The fifth Part.

unto the caterpiller: ^
And all the labor of their hands ^
he gave to the grasshopper. ^

so that they were all lost: ^
And not so much as wild fig trees, ^
but he consumed with frost. ^

the Lord their cattle smote: ^
And all their flocks and herds likewise ^
with thunderbolts full hot. ^

and in his fury strong, ^
Displeasure, wrath, and evil spirits, ^
to trouble them among. ^

and spared not the least: ^
But gave unto the pestilence ^
the man and eke the beast. ^

that up in Egypt came: ^
And all the chief of men and beasts ^
within the tents of Ham. ^

he did preserve and keep: ^
And carried them through wilderness, ^
even like a flock of sheep. ^

he brought them out of thrall: ^
Whereas their foes with rage of seas ^
were overwhelmed all. ^

of his own holy land: ^
Even to the mount which he had got ^
by his strong arm and hand. ^

and did their land divide: ^
And in their tents he set the tribes ^
of Israel to abide. ^

they stirred and tempted still: ^
And would not keep his testament, ^
nor yet obey his will. ^

ev'en so they went astray: ^
Much like a bow that would not bend, ^
but slip and start away. ^
The sixth Part.

with offerings and with fire: ^
And with their idols vehemently ^
provoked him to ire. ^

to kindle in his breast: ^
The naughtiness of Israel ^
he did so much detest. ^

o^ Shiloh, where he was ^
Right conversant with earthly men, ^
even as his dwelling place. ^

in bondage for to stand: ^
And gave the honor of his Ark ^
into his e'nmies hand. ^

wroth with his heritage: ^

maids had no marriage. ^

did perish every one: ^
And not a widow left alive ^
their death for to bemone. ^

like one that slept a Time: ^
And like a valiant man of war, ^
refreshed after wine. ^

he struck his enemies all: ^
And put them then unto a shame, ^
that was perpetual. ^

of Joseph did refuse: ^
As for the Tribe of Ephraim, ^
he would in no wise choose. ^

whereas he thought to dwell: ^
Even the noble mount Sion, ^
which he did love so well. ^

both sumptuously and sure: ^
Like as the earth which he has made ^
for ever to endure. ^

his people for to keep: ^
Whom he took up and brought away ^
even from the folds of sheep. ^

the Lord did him advance: ^
To feed his people Israel, ^
and his inheritance. ^

And prudently with all his power ^
did govern them indeed. ^
PSALM LXXIX. Deus, venerunt
J. H.
O God, the Gentiles do invade, ^
thine heritage to spoil: ^
Jerusalem an heap is made, ^
thy Temple they defile. ^

abroad to birds they cast: ^
The flesh of them that do thee fear, ^
the beasts devour and wast. ^

as water spilt they have: ^
So that there is not one of them, ^
to lay their dead in grave. ^

almost the world throughout: The enemies at us, jest and mock, ^
which dwell our coasts about. ^

against us ever sum: ^
And show thy wrath as hot as fire, ^
thy folk for to consume. ^

which did thee never know: ^
All Realms which call not on thy Name ^
consume and overthrow. ^

and Jacobs seed destroyed: ^
His habitation and his land ^
they have left waste and void. ^

with speed some pity show: ^
And aid us, Lord, in all assaults, ^
for we are weak and low.
The second Part.

on us declare the same: ^
Weigh not our works, our sins deface, ^
for honor of thy Name. ^

to us as people dumb, ^
In thy reproach, rejoice and say, ^
where is their God become? Require, O Lord, as thou see good, ^
before our eyes in sight; ^
Of all these folk thy servants blood, ^
which they spilt in despite. ^

the clamours, grief, and wrong, ^
Of such as are in prison cast, ^
sustaining Irons strong. Thy force and strength to celebrate, ^
Lord, set them out of band, ^
Which unto death are destinate, ^
and in their enemies hand. ^

as to blaspheme thy Name, ^
Into their laps with seven fold ^
repay again the same. ^

will praise thee evermore: ^
And teach all Nations for to keep, ^
for thee like praise in store. ^
PSALM LXXX. Qui-regis Israel.
J. H.
THou Shepherd that Israel do keep, ^
give ear and take good heed: ^
Which leadest Joseph like a sheep, ^
and do him watch and feed. ^

on Cherubims most bright: ^
Show forth thy self, and do not let, ^
send down thy beams of light. ^

Manasses eke likewise: ^
To show thy power do thou begin, ^
come, help us, Lord, arise. ^

convert us, Lord, to thee: ^
Show us the brightness of thy face, ^
and then full safe are we. ^

how long will thou, I say, ^
Against thy folk in anger swell, ^
and wilt not hear them pray? ^

their bread with tears they eat: ^
and drink the tears that they do weep, ^
in measure full and great. ^

to those that dwell about: ^
And that our foes do love a life, ^
they laugh and jest it out. ^

convert our hearts to thee: ^
Show forth to us thy joyful face, ^
and we full safe shall be. ^

thou brought a vine full dear: ^
The heathen folk thou did expel, ^
and thou did plant it there. ^

and set her roots full fast: ^
That it did grow and spring apace, ^
and filled the land at last.
The second Part.

with shade that from it came: ^
And eke the Cedars strong and stout, ^
with branches of the same. ^

her hedge plucked up thou have: ^
That all the folk that pass thereby, ^
thy vine may spoil and wast. ^

doth-dig and root it out: ^
The furious beasts out of the field ^
devour it all about. ^

from heaven look betime: ^
Behold, and with thy help sustain ^
this poor vineyard of thine. ^

whom thy right hand has set: ^
The same which thou did love so well, ^
O Lord, do not forget. ^

they burn it eke with fire: ^
And through the frowning of thy face ^
we perish in thine ire. ^

whom thou have kept so long: ^
And with the son of man whom thou ^
to thee host made so strong. ^

and saved us from shame: ^
, Then will we never fall from thee, ^
but call upon thy Name. ^

convert us unto thee: ^
Behold us with a pleasant face, ^
and then full safe are w^. ^
PSALM LXXXI. Exultate Deo.
J. H.
BE light and glad, in God rejoice, ^
which is our strength and stay: ^
Be joyful, and lift up your voice ^
to Jacob's God, I say. ^

some joyful Psalm to sing: ^
Strike up with harp and lute so sweet, ^
on every pleasant string. ^

with trumpets of the best: ^
As it is used to be done ^
at any solemn feast. ^

a statute and a trade: ^
A law that must be kept full well, ^
which Jacobs God has made. ^

when he from Egypt came, ^
That as a witness all his seed ^
should still observe the same. ^

to bring him from that land: ^
Whereas the speech which he had heard, ^
he did not understand. ^

the burden clean away: ^
And from the furnace set him free ^
from burning brick of clay. ^

I helped thee by and by: ^
And I did answer thee withal ^
in thunder secretly. ^

I did thee tempt and prove: ^
Whereas the goodness of the Lord ^
with mutt'ring thou did move. ^

and I assure it thee: ^
Regard, and mark my words full well, ^
if thou will cleave to me.
The second Part.

of any land abroad: ^
Nor in no wife bow to or serve ^
a strange or foreign god. ^

from Egypt set thee free: ^
Then ask of me abundantly, ^
and I will give it thee. ^

my voice when that I spoke: ^
Nor Israel would not obey, ^
but did me quite forsake. ^

in hardness of their heart, ^
To walk in their own counsels still, ^
themselves they might pervert. ^

the words that I did say: ^
And eke that Israel would regard ^
to walk within my way: ^

and bring them down full low: ^
And turn my hand upon all those ^
that would them overthrow. ^

as slaves should seek him till: ^
But of his folk the time and age ^
should flourish ever still. ^

and finest of the wheat: ^
And made the rock with honey drop, ^
that they their fills should eat. ^
PSALM LXXXII. Deus stetit.
J. H.
AMid the press with men of might ^
the Lord himself does stand, ^
To plead the cause of truth and right, ^
with judges of the land. ^

false judgment to award, ^
And have respect for love of meed, ^
the wicked to regard. ^

the fatherless and weak: ^
And when the poor man does contend, ^
in judgment justly speak. ^

of poor men in their right: ^
And rid the needy from the claws ^
of tyrants force and might. ^

in vain to them I talk: ^
They will not see, or ought discern, ^
but still in darkness walk. ^

that all things fall to naught: ^
And likewise laws both all and some, ^
for gain are sold and bought. I had decreed it in my sight, ^
as gods to take you all: ^
And children to the most of might ^
for love I did you call. ^

as men, and so decay. ^
O tyrants I shall you destroy, ^
and pluck you quite away. ^

and judge the world with might: ^
For why? all nations are thine own, ^
to take them as thy right. ^
PSALM LXXXIII. Deus qui similis.
J. H.
DO not (O God) refrain thy tongue, ^
in silence do not stay: ^
Withhold not, Lord, thy self so long, ^
and make no more delay. ^

how they do rage and cry: ^
And those that bear an hate to thee, ^
hold up their heads on high. ^

and craftily they inquire: ^
For thine elect to lie in wait, ^
their counsel does conspire. ^

and pluck those folk away: ^
So that the name of Israel ^
may utterly decay. ^

how they may thee withstand: ^
Against the Lord to take a part ^
they are in league and band. ^

the Ismaelites also: ^
The Hagarens and Moabites, ^
with diverse others more. ^

does Amalek conspire: ^
The Philistines against thee rise, ^
with them that dwell at Tire. ^

with them in league to be: ^
And does become a sense and aid ^
to Lot's posterity. ^

so serve them, Lord, each one: ^
As to Sit'ra and to Jabin, ^
beside the brook Kison: ^

and waste them through thy might: That they like dung on earth did lie, ^
and that in open sight.
The second Part.

like Zeb and Oreb than: ^
As Zeba and Zalmunna were, ^
the Kings of Midian. ^

in all the coasts abroad, ^
Possess and take into our hand ^
the fair houses of God. ^

as wheels that have no stay: ^
Or like the chass which men do cast, ^
with winds to fly away. ^

the mighty forests spills: ^
And as the flame does quite consume ^
the mountains and the hills: ^

upon their necks be laid: ^
And of thy stormy wind and shower, ^
Lord, make them all afraid. ^

to such rebuke and shame: ^
That it may cause them to inquire, ^
and learn to know thy name, ^

to shame and slander fall: ^
And in rebuke and obloquy ^
to perish eke withal. ^

that thou art called Lord: ^
And that alone thou do excel, ^
and reign throughout the world ^
PSALM LXXXIV. Quam dilecta.
J. H.
HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, ^
O Lord of hosts to me! ^
The Tabernacles of thy grace, ^
how pleasant Lord they be. ^

into thy Courts abroad: ^
My heart does lust, my flesh also, ^
in thee the living God. ^

and save themselves from wrong: ^
And eke the swallow has a nest, ^
wherein to keep her young. ^

have place to sit and sing: ^
O Lord of hosts, thou art, I say, ^
my God, and eke my King. ^

within thy house always: ^
For they all times thy facts do tell, ^
and ever give thee praise. ^

whose strength and stay thou art: ^
Which to thy house do mind the way, ^
and seek it in their heart. ^

they dig up fountains still: ^
That as a spring it all appears, ^
and thou do their pits fill. ^

no faintness there shall be: ^
And so the God of Gods at last ^
in Sion they do see. ^

and hear when I do pray: ^
And let it through thine ears proceed, ^
O Jacobs God, I say. ^

regard and so draw near: ^
Regard, I say, behold the face ^
of thine anointed dear. ^

is better to abide: ^
Than other where to keep or stay ^
a thousand days beside. ^

within the house of God: ^
Than in* the tents of wickedness ^
to settle mine abode. ^

will grace and worship give: ^
And no good thing shall he withold ^
from them that purely live. ^

and happy sure is he: ^
That is persuaded in his breast, ^
to trust all times in thee. ^
PSALM LXXXV. Benedixisti Dom.
J. H.
THou have been merciful indeed, ^
O Lord, unto thy land: ^
For thou restored'st Jacobs seed ^
from thraldom, out of hand. ^

thou did them clean remit: ^
And thou did hide the peoples sin, ^
full close thou coverd'st it. ^

that all thy wrath is gone: ^
And so did turn thee from thy rage, ^
with them to be at one. ^

thy people unto thee: ^
Put all thy wrath from us apart, ^
and angry cease to be. ^

but still proceed on us? And shall thy wrath it self extend, ^
upon all ages thus? ^

and quicken us, that we, ^
And all thy folk, may evermore ^
be glad and joy in thee? ^

thy goodness to our wealth: ^
Show forth to us, and do not spare ^
thine aid and saving health. ^

speaks to his people peace, ^
And to his saints, that never they ^
return to foolishness. ^

to such as do him fear: ^
Whereby great glory in our land ^
shall dwell and flourish there. ^

in one to take their place: ^
And peace shall Justice with kiss greet, ^
and there they shall embrace. ^

and flourish pleasantly: ^
So right'ousness shall show her face, ^
and look from heaven high. ^

to give us each good thing: ^
And through the coasts of all the land ^
the earth her fruit shall bring. ^

much like a guide or stay: ^
He shall direct his steps also, ^
and keep them in the way. ^
PSALM LXXXVI. Inclina, Domine.
J. H.
LOrd, how thine ear to my request, ^
and hear me by and by: ^
With grievous pain and grief oppressed, ^
full poor and weak am I. ^

and doings holy be: ^
And save thy servant, O my Lord, ^
that puts his trust in thee. ^

defend me eke withal: ^
For through the day I do not cease ^
on thee to cry and call: ^

that now with pain is pined, ^
For unto thee (Lord) I extol ^
and ^ist my soul and mind: ^

thy gifts of grace are free: ^
And eke thy mercy plentiful ^
to all that call on thee: ^

regard and give an ear: ^
Mark well the words that I do say, ^
and all my prayers hear. ^

to thee I do complain: ^
For why? I know and well do prove, ^
thou answ'rest me again. ^

with thee to be compared: ^
And none can do as thou alone, ^
the like has not been heard.
The second Part.

which thou did make and frame, ^
Before thy face on knees will fall, ^
and glorify thy name. ^

all power is thine own: ^
Thou workest wonders still in sight, ^
for thou art God alone. ^

shall in thy truth proceed: ^
O join my heart to thee so nigh, ^
that it thy Name may dread. ^

with all my heart, O Lord: ^
And glorify thy Name always, ^
for ever through the World. ^

is great, and does excel: ^
Thou set'st my soul at liberty, ^
out from the lower hell. ^

and heaps of men of might: ^
They seek my soul, and in no wise ^
will have me in their sight. ^

full slack and slow to wrath: ^
Thy goodness is full great, and eke ^
thy truth no measure has. ^

thy strength to me apply: ^
O help and save thine own servant, ^
thy handmaids son am I. ^

that all my foes may see, ^
And be ashamed, because (Lord) thou ^
do help, and succor me. ^
PSALM LXXXVII. Fundamenta ejus.
J. H.
THat City shall full well endure, ^
her groundwork still does stay ^
Upon the holy hill full sure, ^
it can no time decay. ^

his grace does there abide: ^
He loves them more than all the rest ^
of Jacob's tents beside. ^

in Sion and abroad: ^
Great things I say, are said of thee ^
thou City of our God. ^

and bear in mind the same: ^
And Babylon shall eke apply, ^
and learn to know thy Name. ^

with Ethiope likewise: ^
A people old, full long ago ^
were born and there did rise. ^

that diverse men of fame ^
Have there sprung up, and the high God ^
has founded fast the same. ^

through God's device appear, ^
Of Sion, that the chief of all, ^
had his beginning there. ^

there in great plenty be: ^
My fountains and my pleasant springs ^
are compast all in thee. ^
PSALM LXXXVIII. Domine Deus.
J. H.
LOrd God of health, the hope and stay, ^
thou art alone to me: ^
I call and cry throughout the day, ^
and all the night to thee. ^

unto thy sight on high: ^
Incline thine ear, O Lord, attend, ^
and hearken to my cry. ^

and does in trouble dwell: ^
My life and breath almost does yield, ^
and draws nigh to bell. ^

that in the pit do fall: ^
And made as one among those men ^
that have no strength at all. ^

from things that here remain: ^
It were more ease for me to be, ^
with them the which are slain. ^

whom thou have clean forgot: ^
The which thy hand has cut away, ^
and thou regard'st them not. ^

within the lower pit: ^
In places dark, and all obscure, ^
and in the depth of it. ^

full sore on me does lie: ^
And all thy storms against me rise, ^
my soul to vex and try. ^

and make them hate me sore: ^
I am shut up in prison fast, ^
and can come sorth no more. ^

I call to thee, O God: ^
Throughout the day my hand also ^
to thee I stretch abroad.
The second Part.

thy wondrous works of fame? ^
Shall dead to life again repair, ^
and praise thee for the same? ^

be preached in the grave? ^
Or shall with them that are destroyed ^
thy truth her honor have? ^

of all thy wonders wot? ^
Or there shall they thy justice know, ^
where all things are forgot? ^

do cry and call apace: ^
My prayer eke ere it be day, ^
shall come before thy face. ^

in grief that seeks thee? ^
And now, O Lord, why do thou hide ^
thy face away from me? ^

from youth this many a year: ^
The terrors which do vex me ill, ^
with troubled mind I bear. ^

full sore upon me fall: ^
Thy terrors eke do not assuage, ^
but me oppress withal. ^

as water at the tide: ^
And all at once with streams sull stout ^
beset me on each side. ^

and lovers every one: ^
Yea, and mine old acquaintance all, ^
out of my sight are gone. ^
PSALM. LXXXIX Misericordias.
J. H.
TO sing the mercies of the Lord, ^
my tongue shall never spare: ^
And with my mouth from age to age, ^
thy truth I will declare. ^

for evermore remain: ^
In that thou do the heaven stay, ^
thy truth appears plain. ^

a covenant and behest: ^
My servant David to persuade, ^
I swear and did protest. ^

and 'stablish it full fast: ^
And still uphold thy throne always, from age to age to last. ^

thy wondrous works, O Lord: ^
Thy Saints within thy Church on earth ^
thy faith and truth record. ^

in all the clouds abroad? ^
Among the sons of all the gods, ^
what one is like our God? ^

is greatly to be dread: ^
And over all that dwell about, ^
in terror to be had. ^

what one is like to thee? ^
On every side, most mighty Lord, ^
thy truth is seen to be. ^

thou rulest at thy will: ^
And when the waves thereof arise, ^
thou make them calm and still. ^

and thou have it destroyed; ^
Yea, thou thy foes with mighty arm ^
have scattered all abroad.
The second Part.

likewise the earth and Land: ^
The world, and all that is therein, ^
thou foundedst with thy hand. ^

thy self did make and frame: ^
Both Tabor mount, and eke Hermon, ^
rejoice and praise thy Name. ^

all might therein does lie: ^
The strength of thy right hand each hour ^
thou listest up on high. ^

thou have thy seat and place: ^
Mercy and truth are still with thee, ^
and go before thy face. ^

thy present power, O God: ^
For in the favor of thy sight, ^
they walk full safe abroad. ^

they joy and much rejoice: ^
And through thy right'ousness have they ^
a pleasant fame and noise. ^

in thee alone does lie: ^
Thy goodness eke that has us staid, ^
shall lift our horn on high. ^

the Lord to us does bring: ^
The Holy One of Israel, ^
he is our Guide and King. ^

in visions thou did show: ^
And thus then did thou say to them, ^
thy mind to make them know. ^

your King and guide to be: ^
And set him up whom I elect ^
among the folk to me. ^
The third part.

whom I have searched out: ^
And with my holy oil anoint ^
him King of all the rout. ^

with him for to remain: ^
And with mine arm also I will ^
him strengthen and sustain. ^

they shall not him devour: ^
Nor yet the sons of wickedness ^
on him have any power. ^

before his face in sight: ^
And those that hate him I will plague, ^
and strike them with my might. ^

shall still upon him lie: ^
And in my Name is horn eke shall ^
be lifted up on high. ^

upon the sea and land: ^
And eke the running floods shall be ^
embrace with his right hand. ^

on me, and thus shall say: ^
My Father and my God thou art, ^
my rock of health and stay. ^

of all on earth that springs: ^
His might and honor I will make ^
above all worldly Kings. ^

as I my self have told: ^
My faithful covenant to fulfill ^
my mercy I will hold. ^

for ever strong and sure: ^
So that his seed shall still remain ^
while heaven does endure. ^
The fourth Part.

and so begin to swerve: ^
And of my judgments have no awe, ^
nor will not them observe: ^

my statutes to them made, ^
And set all my commandments light, ^
and will not keep my trade. ^

their doings to amend: ^
And so will scourge them for their sin, ^
if that they do offend. ^

I will not take him fro: ^
Nor handle him with craftiness, ^
and so my truth forgo. ^

with all that I have spoke: ^
No word the which my lips have told: ^
shall alter or be broke. ^

and that perform will I: ^
With David I will keep promise, ^
to him I will not lie. ^

and eke his throne of might: ^
As does the Sun, it shall remain ^
^or ever in my sight. ^

for ever stands fast: ^
A faithful witness from on high, ^
so shall his Kingdom last. ^

and now thou changest cheer: ^
Yea, thou art wrath with thine elect, ^
thine own anointed dear. ^

Lord thou have quite undone: ^
And down upon the ground also ^
have cast his royal crown. ^
The fifth Part.

his walls thou do confound: ^
Thou beatest eke his bulwarks down, ^
and break'st them to the ground: ^

of comers by throughout: ^
And so is made a mock and scorn ^
to all that dwell about. ^

that him so sore annoy: ^
And all his foes that him devour, ^
lo, thou have made to joy. ^

that should his foes withstand: ^
To him in war no victory ^
thou giv'st, nor upper hand. ^

his throne, his joy and mirth, ^
By thee are overthrown, and cast ^
full low upon the earth. ^

his youth and lusty days: ^
And raised of him an ill report, ^
with shame and great dispraise. ^

for ever will thou turn? ^
And shall thine anger still always, ^
as fire consume and burn? ^

my time consumes fast: ^
Why have thou made the sons of men ^
as things in vain to wast? ^

and death shall never see? ^
Or from the hand of Hell his soul ^
shall he deliver free? ^

so often declared before, ^
Which by thy truth and uprightness ^
to David thou have swore? ^

that on thy servants lie: ^
The railings of the people all ^
born in my breast have I. ^

blasphemed have thy Name: ^
The steps of thine anointed one ^
they cease not to defame. ^

both now and eke for aye: ^
Through sky, and earth, and all the coasts, ^
Amen, Amen, I say. ^
PSALM XC. Domine refugium.
J. H.
THou Lord have been our sure defense, ^
our place of ease and rest: ^
In all times past, yea, so long since, ^
as cannot be expressed. ^

the earth or world abroad: ^
From age to age, and always still, ^
for ever thou art God. ^

to dust or clay, and then: ^
And then thou said return again, ^
again ye sons of men. ^

what is it in thy sight? ^
As yesterday it does appear, ^
or as a watch by night. ^

then is their life and trade ^
all as a fleep, and like the grass, ^
whose beauty soon does fade. ^

but fades by and by: ^
And is cut down e're it be night, ^
all withered, dead, and dry. ^

our might is much decayed: ^
And of thy fervent wrath and fume, ^
we are full sore afraid. ^

thou sett'st before thine eye: ^
Our privy faults, yea eke our thoughts ^
thy countenance does spy. ^

thereof does naught remain: ^
Our years consume as words or blasts, ^
and are not called again. ^

that we do live on mold: ^
If one see fourscore, surely then ^
we count him wondrous old.
The second Part.

the which we count upon: ^
Is nothing else but painful grief, ^
and we like blasts are gone. ^

what might thine anger has? ^
Or in his heart he does thee fear ^
according to thy wrath? ^

how long our days remain: ^
That then we may our hearts apply ^
true wisdom to obtain. ^

forth on in wrath proceed? ^
Show favor to thy servants now, ^
and help them at their need. ^

and then our joy shall be: ^
All times so long as life does last, ^
in heart rejoice shall we. ^

now also make us glad: ^
And for the years wherein full sore ^
affliction we have had. ^

and on thy servants light: ^
And show unto thy children dear ^
thy glory and thy might. ^

on us thy servants thus: ^
Confirm the works we take in hand, ^
Lord prosper them to us. ^
PSALM XCI. Qui habitat.
J. H.
HE that within the secret place, ^
of God most high does dwell: ^
In shadow of the mightiest grace, ^
at rest shall keep him well. ^

I to the Lord will say: ^
My God is he, in him will I ^
my whole affiance slay. ^

the which the hunter laid: ^
And from the deadly plagu^ and care ^
whereof thou art afraid, ^

and keep thee safely there: ^
His faith and truth thy fence shall be, ^
as sure as shield and spear. ^

to fear or be afright ^
of all the shafts that fly by day, ^
nor terrors of the night. ^

does walk in dark so fast: Nor yet of that which does destroy, ^
and at noon days does waste. ^

a thousand dead shall be: ^
Ten thousand eke at thy right hand, ^
and yet thou shall be free. ^

thine eyes shall well regard: ^
That even like to their desert, ^
the wicked have regard. ^

to stay my hope on thee: And in the highest I put my trust, ^
my sure defense is he. ^

with thee it shall be well: ^
Nor yet the Plague shall once come near ^
the house where thou do dwell. ^

with charge commanded he: ^
That still in all thy ways they shall ^
preserve and prosper thee. ^

still waiting thee upon: ^
So that thy foot shall never chance ^
to spurn at any stone. ^

the Adder fell and long: ^
And tread upon the Lions young, ^
with Dragons stout and strong. ^

I will dispatch him quite: And him defend, because that he ^
does know my Name aright. ^

an answer I will give: ^
And from his grief take him will I, ^
in glory for to live. ^

I will fulfill his time: ^
The goodness of my saving health, ^
I will declare to him. ^
PSALM XCII. Bonum est.
J. H.
IT is a thing both good and meet, ^
to praise the highest Lord: ^
And to thy Name, O thou most High, ^
to sing with one accord. ^

betime e're day be light: And eke declare his truth abroad, ^
when it does draw to night. ^

on lute and harp so sweet: ^
with all the mirth you can invent ^
of Instruments most meet. ^

in things so wrought by thee: ^
And I have joy in heart and voice, ^
thine handy works to see. ^

are all thy works throughout? ^
So deeply are thy counsels set, ^
that none can find them out. ^

this work to pass to bring: ^
And all such fools are nothing fit ^
to understand this thing. ^

as grass do spring full fast: ^
They when they flourish in their ill, ^
for ever shall be wast. ^

yea thou do reign therefore: ^
In every time eternally, ^
both now and evermore.
The second Part.

behold thy foes, I say: ^
How all that work iniquity ^
shall perish and decay. ^

shall lift my horn on high: ^
With fresh and new prepared oil, ^
thine oynted King am I. ^

shall see the fall and shame: ^
Of all that up against me rise, ^
mine ears shall hear the same. ^

as Date-trees bud and blow: ^
And as the Cedars multiply ^
in Libanus that grow. ^

and dwelling of our God: ^
Within his Courts they spring apace, ^
and flourish all abroad. ^

both fat and well be seen: ^
And pleasantly both bud and spring, ^
with boughs and branches green. ^

and upright in his will: ^
He is my rock, my hope, and trust, ^
in him there is none ill. ^
PSALM XCIII. Dominus regnavit.
J. H.
THe Lord as King aloft does reign, ^
in majesty most bright: ^
And he to show his strength and power, ^
has girt himself with might. ^

and shaped it so sure: ^
No night can make it move or fade, ^
at stay it does endure. ^

thy seat was set before: ^
Beyond all time that can be thought, ^
thou have been evermore. ^

they roar and make a noise: ^
The floods (I say) did enterprise, ^
and lifted up their voice. ^

though Seas do rage and swell: ^
The Lord is strong and more of might, ^
for he on high does dwell. ^

his household to defend: ^
For just and true they shall it take, ^
all times without an end. ^
PSALM XCIV. Deus ultionum.
J. H.
O Lord thou do revenge all wrong, ^
that office 'longs to thee: ^
Since vengeance does to thee belong, ^
declare that all may see. ^

the earth do judge and guide: ^
Reward the proud and men of might, ^
according to their pride. ^

with lifting up their voice? ^
How long shall wicked men, I say, ^
thus triumph and rejoice? ^

and proudly prate their fill: ^
Shall they rejoice that be so stout, ^
whose works are ever ill? ^

they spoil and vex full sore: ^
Against thy people they do rage, ^
still daily more and more. ^

and strangers they destroy: ^
They slay the children fatherless, ^
and none does them put by. ^

this talk they have of thee: ^
Can Jacobs God this understand? ^
tush, no, he cannot see. ^

some knowledge now discern: ^
Ye fools among the multitude, ^
at length begin to learn. ^

he needs of right must hear: ^
He made the eye, all things must then ^
before his sight appear. ^

and make them understand: ^
Shall he not then your deeds direct: ^
how can you escape his hand?
The second Part.

his heart he sees full plain: ^
The Lord (I say) man's thoughts does scan, ^
and finds them but vain. ^

whom thou do keep in awe: And through correction do procure ^
to teach him in thy Law. ^

in time of trouble sit: ^
When wicked men shall be suppressed, ^
and fallen into the pit. ^

his people for to take: ^
His heritage whom he did choose, ^
he will no time forsake. ^

to justice to convert: ^
That all may follow her with speed, ^
that are of upright heart. ^

against the cursed train? ^
Or who shall rid me from their hand ^
that wicked works maintain? ^

mine enemies to repel: ^
My soul and life had now been laid ^
almost as low as hell. ^

I am now like to fall: ^
Thy goodness, Lord, did so provide, ^
to stay me up withal. ^

and could no comfort find: ^
Then, Lord, thy goodness did me touch, ^
and that did ease my mind. ^

with wicked men to sit: ^
Which with pretense instead of law ^
much mischief do commit. ^

of righteous men and good: ^
And in their counsels they are rise ^
to shed the guiltless blood. ^

a strong defense or lock: ^
He is my God to whom I flee, ^
he is my strength and rock. ^

themselves for to annoy: ^
And in their malice they shall fall, ^
our God shall them destroy. ^
PSALM XCV. Venite exultemus.
J. H.
O come let us lift up our voice, ^
and sing unto the Lord: ^
In him our rock of health rejoice ^
let us with one accord. ^

to give him thanks and praise: ^
In singing Psalms unto his grace, ^
let us be glad always. ^

a great and mighty God: ^
A King above all Gods throughout, ^
is all the world abroad. ^

and corners of the land: ^
The tops of hills that are so steep, ^
he has them in his hand. ^

for he the same has wrought: ^
The earth and all that therein is, ^
his hand has made of naught. ^

before him let us fall: ^
And kneel to him with one accord, ^
the which has made us all. ^

for us he does provide: ^
We are his flock, he does us feed, ^
his sheep, and he our guide. ^

then harden not your heart: ^
As ye with grutching many a year ^
provoked me in desert. ^

my power for to prove: ^
My wondrous works when they did see ^
yet still they did me move. ^

and I to them did say: ^
They err in heart, and not believe, ^
they have not known my way. ^

was kindled in my breast: ^
That they should never tread the path ^
to enter in my rest. ^
PSALM XCVI. Cantate Deus.
J. H.
SIng ye with praise unto the Lord ^
new songs with joy and mirth: ^
Sing unto him with one accord, ^
all people on the earth. ^

praise ye his holy Name: ^
Declare and show from day to day ^
salvation by the same. ^

his honor round about: ^
to show his wonders do not spare ^
in all the world throughout. ^

and worthy praise always: ^
And he is to be dread of right, ^
above all Gods I say. ^

are Idols that will fade: ^
But yet our God he is the Lord, ^
that has the heavens made. ^

for aye before his face: ^
Both power and might likewise excel ^
within his holy place. ^

ye people of the world, ^
All might and worship, eke, I say, ^
ascribe unto the Lord. ^

the glory of his Name: ^
And eke, unto his Courts do go ^
with gists unto the same.
The second Part.

within his Temple bright: ^
Let all the people of the world ^
be fearful in his sight. ^

the Lord does reign above: ^
Yea, he has set the earth so fast, ^
that it can never move. ^

that rules with princely might: ^
To judge the Nations every one, ^
with equity and right. ^

the earth eke shall rejoice: ^
The sea, and all that is therein, ^
shall shout and make a noise. ^

that springs on the earth: ^
The wood, and every tree, shall sing ^
with gladness and with mirth. ^

and coming of his might: ^
When he shall justly judge the world, ^
and rule his folk with right. ^
PSALM XCVII. Dominus regnavit.
J. H.
THe Lord does reign, whereat the Earth ^
may joy with pleasant voice: ^
And eke the Isles with joyful mirth, ^
may triumph and rejoice. ^

and round about him beat: ^
Yea, right and justice ever dwell ^
and 'bide about his seat, ^

and go before his face: ^
Which shall his foes and enemies burn ^
abroad in every place. ^

and to the world appear: ^
Where at the earth did look and gaze ^
with dread and deadly fear. ^

and presence of the Lord: ^
They fled before that Rulers might, ^
which guides all the world. ^

his justice all abroad, ^
That all the world may see and know ^
the glory of our God. ^

as worship Idols vain: And eke to those that glory much ^
dumb pictures to maintain. ^

which they as Gods do call: ^
Shall feel the power of the Lord, ^
and down to him shall fall, ^

and Juda shall rejoice: ^
For at thy Judgments they shall sing, ^
and make a pleasant noise. ^

in all the earth abroad: ^
And art exalted wondrously ^
above each other God. ^

hate all things that are ill; ^
For he does keep the souls of his ^
from such as would them spill. ^

with pleasure for his part: ^
Great Joy with gladness, mirth and lust ^
to them of upright heart. ^

his holiness proclaim; ^
Be thankful eke with heart and voice, ^
and mindful of the same. ^
PSALM XCVIII. Cantate Domino.
J. H.
O Sing ye now unto the Lord, ^
a new and pleasant song: ^
For he has wrought throughout the world ^
his wonders great and strong. ^

he does his foes devour: ^
And get himself the victory, ^
with his own arm and power. ^

his saving health and might: ^
The Lord does eke his justice show ^
in all the heathens sight. ^

in mind he does record: ^
That all the earth has seen right well ^
the goodness of the Lord. ^

all people of the earth: ^
Give thanks to God, sing and rejoice, ^
to him with Joy and mirth. ^

give thanks to him with Psalms: ^
Rejoice before the Lord our King, ^
with Trumpets and with Shalms. ^

for joy both roar and swell: ^
The earth likewise let it begin, ^
with all that therein dwell. ^

and clap their hands apace: ^
And eke the mountains and the hills ^
before the Lord his face. ^

the world and every wight: ^
And rule the people mightily ^
with Justice and with right. ^
PSALM XCIX. Dominus regnavit.
J. H.
THe Lord does reign, although at it ^
the people rage full sore: ^
Yea, he on Cherubims does sit, ^
though all the world does roar. ^

is high and wondrous great: ^
Above all folk he does excel, ^
and he aloft is set. ^

for it is fearful sure: ^
And let them magnify the same, ^
that holy is and pure. ^

does love judgment and right: ^
Thou rightly rulest every thing, ^
in Jacob through thy might. ^

all honor to him do: ^
Before his footstool worship him, ^
for he is holy too. ^

as Priests on him did call, ^
When they did pray he heard them well, ^
and gave them answer all. ^

then did they labor still: ^
To keep such laws as he did make, ^
and pointed them until. ^

and answer'st them again: ^
Thy mercy did on them appear, ^
their deeds did not maintain. ^

within his holy hill: ^
For why? our God throughout the world ^
is holy ever still. ^
PSALM C. Jubilate Deo.
J. H.
ALl people that on earth do dwell, ^
sing to the Lord with cheerful voice, ^

come ye before him and rejoice. ^

without our aid he did us make: ^
We are his slock, he does us feed, ^
and for his sheep he does us take. ^

approach with joy his courts unto: ^
Praise, laud and bless his Name always, ^
for it is seemly so to do. ^

his mercy is for ever sure: ^
His truth at all times firmly stood, ^
and shall from age to age endure. ^
Another of the same
by J. H.
IN God the Lord be glad and light, ^
praise him throughout the earth: ^
Serve him, and come before his sight ^
with singing and with mirth. ^

he did us make and keep: ^
Not we our selvess, for we are his ^
own flock and pasture sheep. ^

give thanks within the same. ^
Within his Courts set forth his praise, ^
and laud his holy Name. ^

for evermore does reign: ^
From age to age throughout the world ^
his truth does still remain. ^
PSALM CI. Misericordiam.
N.
I Mercy will and judgment sing, ^
O Lord God, unto thee: ^

until thou come to me. And in the midst of my house walk, ^
in pureness of my sp'rit: ^

will set before my sight. I hate their works that fall away, ^
it shall not cleave to me: ^

none evil will I see. ^

his neighbor privily: ^
The lofty heart I cannot bear, ^
nor him that looks high. Mine eyes shall be on them within ^
the land that saithful be: ^
In perfect way who ^alketh shall ^
be servant unto me. ^

within my house to dwell: ^
and in my presence he shall not ^
remain that lies does tell. ^

the wicked of the land: ^
That I may from Gods City cut ^
the wicked workers hand. ^
PSALM CII. Domine exaudi.
N.
O Hear my prayer, Lord, and let ^
my cry come unto thee: ^

thy face away from me. ^

to hear me when I call: ^
For as the smoke does fade, so do ^
my days consume and fall. ^

my heart is smitten dead: ^
And withers like the grass, that I ^
forget to eat my bread. ^

my bones cleave to my skin: ^

such case now am I in. ^

lo, I am such a one: ^
I watch, and as a Sparrow on ^
the house top am alone. ^

mine enemies do me scorn: ^
And they that do against me rage, ^
against me they have sworn. ^

my hunger I have filled: ^
And mingled have, my drink with tears, ^
that from mine eyes have stilled. ^

thy wrath and thy disdain: ^
For thou have lifted me alost, ^
and cast me down again. ^

are like the fleeting shade: ^
And I am withered like the grass, ^
that soon away does fade. ^

remain in steady place: ^
And thy remembrance ever does ^
abide from race to race.
The second Part.

to Sion wilt extend: ^
The time of mercy, now the time ^
foreset is come to end. ^

thy servants do delight: ^
And on the dust thereof they have ^
compassion in their sp'rit. ^

the Lords most holy Name: ^
And all the Kings on earth shall dread ^
thy glory and thy fame. ^

again shall Sion rear: ^
And then when he most nobly in ^
his glory shall appear. ^

when he himself does bend: ^
When he does not disdain unto ^
their prayers to attend. ^

that after shall succeed: ^
The people yet uncreated ^
the Lords renown shall spread. ^

has looked down below: ^
And out of heaven has the Lord ^
beheld the earth also. ^

might hear the woeful cry: ^
And that he might deliver those ^
that sentenced are to dye. ^

the Lords most holy Name: ^
And in Jerusalem set forth ^
the praises of the same. ^

and kingdoms with accord: ^
Shall be assembled for to do ^
their service to the Lord. ^
The third Part.

abated in the way: ^
And shorter he did cut my days, ^
thus I therefore did say: ^

now take me not away: ^
Thy years endure eternally, ^
from age to age I say. ^

before all times have laid, ^
And, Lord, the heavens are the work, ^
which thine own hands have made. ^

but thou shall tarry still: ^
And they shall all in time wax old, ^
even as a garment will. ^

and changed they shall be: ^
But thou do still abide the same, ^
thy years do never flee. ^

continually endure: ^
And in thy sight their happy seed, ^
for ever shall stand sure. ^
PSALM CIII. Benedic anima.
T. S.
MY soul give laud unto the Lord, ^
my sp'rit shall do the same: ^
And all the secrets of my heart ^
praise ye his holy Name. ^

show not thy self unkind: ^
And suffer not his benefits ^
to slip out of thy mind. ^

and thee restored again: ^
For all thy weak and frail disease, ^
and healed thee of thy pain. ^

from which thou could not flee: ^
His mercy and compassion both ^
he did extend to thee. ^

and did prolong thy youth: ^
Like as the Eagle casts her bill, ^
whereby her age renew'th. ^

all such as be oppressed: ^
So that their sufferings and their wrongs ^
are turned to the best. ^

to Moses he did show: ^
His counsels and his valiant acts ^
the Israelites did know. ^

when sinners do him grieve: ^
The slowest to conceive a wrath, ^
and readiest to forgive. ^

though we be full of strife: ^
Nor keeps our faults in memory, ^
for all our sinful life, ^

the Lord does us regard: ^
Nor after our iniquities ^
he does not us reward. ^

'twixt earth and heaven above: ^
So is his goodness much more large ^
to them that do him love. ^
God does remove our sins from us, ^
and our offenses all: ^
As far as is the Sun rising ^
full distant from his fall.
The second Part.

unto their Children bear: ^
Like pity bears God to such ^
as worship him in fear. ^

our mold and fashion just: ^
How weak and frail our nature is, ^
and how we are but dust. ^

is like the withering hay: ^
Or like the flower right fair in field, ^
that fades full soon away. ^

do utterly disgrace: ^
And make that after their assaults ^
such blossoms have no place. ^

with his shall ever stand: ^
Their childrens children do receive ^
his righteousness at hand. ^

with all their whole desire: ^
And not forget to do the thing ^
that he does them require. ^

and footstool of the Lord: ^
And by his power imperial ^
He governs all the world. ^

praise ye and bless the Lord: ^
Which to obey and do his will, ^
immediately accord. ^

cease not to laud him still: ^
Which ready are to execute ^
his pleasure and his will. ^

praise ye his holy Name: ^
My heart, my mind, and eke my soul, ^
praise ye also the same. ^
PSALM CIV. Benedic anima.
W. K.
MY soul, praise the Lord, ^
speak good of his name: ^
O Lord our great God, ^
how do thou appear? ^
So passing in glory ^
that great is thy fame: ^
Honor and Majesty ^
in thee shine most clear. ^

thou have thee beclad: ^
Whereby all the ^
earth thy greatness may see: ^
The heavens in such sort ^
thou also have spread, ^
That it to a curtain ^
compared may be. ^

in the clouds full sure, ^
Which as his chariot ^
are made him to bear: ^
And there with much swiftness ^
his course does endure, ^
Upon the wings riding ^
of winds in the air. ^

as Heralds to go: ^
and Lightnings to serve, ^
we see also pressed: ^
His will to accomplish, ^
they run to and fro, ^
To save or consume things ^
as seems him best. ^

so firmly and fast, ^
That it once to move ^
none shall have such power. ^

for it made thou have: ^
Which by his own nature ^
the hills would devour. ^

the waters do fly: ^
And so give due place ^
thy word to obey: ^
At thy voice of thunder ^
so fearful they be: ^
That in their great raging ^
they haste soon away. ^

they then up ascend: ^
If thou do but speak, ^
thy word they fulfill: ^
So likewise the valleys ^
most quickly descend, ^
Where thou them appointed'st ^
remain they do still. ^

how far they shall run, ^
So that in their rage ^
not pass that they can: ^
For God has appointed ^
they shall not return, ^
The earth to destroy more, ^
which made was for man.
The second Part.

to strong streams or lakes, ^
Which run do full swift ^
among the huge hills: ^

their thirst oft-times slakes, ^
And beasts of the mountains ^
thereof drink their fills. ^

of fountains full fair, ^
The fowls of the air ^
abide shall and dwell: ^
Who moved by nature ^
to hop here and there, ^
Among the green branches ^
their songs shall excel. ^

the clouds he does use, ^
The earth with his works ^
is wholly replete: ^

he does not refuse, ^
But grass does provide them, ^
and herb for man's meat. ^

he made for man's sake, ^
His face to refresh, ^
and heart to make strong. ^

This great Lord did make: ^
Which trees he does nourish, ^
that grow up so long. ^

and make there their nest: ^
In firr-trees the Storks ^
remain and abide. ^

for wild Goats to rest: ^
And eke the rock stony ^
for conies to hide. ^

her season to run, ^
The days from the nights ^
thereby to discern: ^
And by the descending ^
also of the Sun, ^
The cold from heat always ^
thereby we do learn. ^

by Gods will and power ^
Then creep forth do all ^
the beasts of the wood: ^

their prey to devour: ^
But it is thou, Lord, ^
which give them food. ^

is up they retire: ^
to couch in their dens ^
then are they full fain: ^

as right does require: ^
Till night come and call him ^
to take rest again. ^
The third part.

are all thy works found? With wisdom full great ^
they are indeed wrought: ^
So that the whole world ^
of thy praise does sound: ^
And as for thy riches ^
they pass all men's thought. ^

which large is and broad, ^
Where things that creep swarm, ^
and beasts of each sort: ^

and some lie at road; ^
The Whale huge and monstrous ^
there also does sport. ^

thou do them relieve: ^
And thou in due time ^
full well do them feed: ^

the same for to give, ^
They gather full gladly ^
those things which they need. Thou openest thy hand, ^
and they find such grace, ^
That they with good things are filled we see: ^

if thou turn thy face: ^
For if thou their breath take, ^
vile dust then they be. ^

from thee does proceed, ^
All things to appoint, ^
and what shall ensue: Then are they created ^
as thou have decreed, ^
And do by thy goodness ^
the dry earth renew. ^

for ever shall last, ^
Who may in his works ^
by right well rejoice: ^

to tremble full fast, ^
And likewise the mountains ^
to smoke at his voice. ^

sing will I always: ^
So long as I live ^
my God praise will I: ^

my words shall him please: ^
I will rejoice in him, ^
to him will I cry. ^

consume in thine ire: ^
And eke the perverse, ^
them root out with shame: ^
But as for my soul now, ^
let it still desire, ^
And say with the faithful, ^
praise ye the Lords Name. ^
PSALM CV. Confitemini Dom.
GIve praises unto God the Lord, ^
and call upon his Name: ^
Among the people eke declare ^
his works to spread his fame. ^

and sing unto his praise: ^
And talk of all his wondrous works, ^
that he has wrought always. ^

rejoice with one accord: ^
And let the heart also rejoice ^
of them that seek the Lord. ^

of his eternal might: ^
And seek his face continually, ^
and presence of his sight. ^

keep still in mindful heart: ^
Ne let the judgments of his mouth ^
out of your mind depart. ^

his servant are the seed: ^
Ye his elect, the children that ^
of Jacob do proceed. ^

the mighty Lord our God: ^
And his most rightful judgments are ^
through all the earth abroad. ^

which he has made to his, ^
He has remembered evermore ^
to thousands of degrees.
The second Part.

with Abr'am long ago: ^
And faithful oath which he has sworn ^
to Isaac also. ^

that Jacob should obey: ^
And for eternal covenant, ^
to Israel for aye. ^

all Canaan land will give: ^
The lot of your inheritance, ^
wherein your seed shall live. ^

did very small appear: ^
Yea, very small, and in the land ^
they then but strangers were. ^

without a sure abode: ^
And while from sundry kingdoms they ^
did wander all abroad. ^

he suffered them to take: ^
But even the great and mighty Kings ^
reproved for their sake. ^

that mine anointed be: ^
Nor do the Prophets any harm ^
that do pertain to me. ^

of bread he 'stroy'd the store: ^
But he against the time of need ^
had sent a man before. ^

to live a slave in woe: ^
whose feet they hurt in stocks, whose soul ^
the Irons pierced also. ^

was known apparently: ^
The mighty word of God the Lord ^
his faultless truth did try. ^

from prison where he was: ^

did freely let him pass. ^

him Lord to bear the sway: ^
And of his substance made him have ^
the rule and all the stay. ^

the Princes of the land: ^
And wisdoms lore his ancient men ^
might cause to understand. ^

came Israel also. ^
And Jacob in the land of Ham ^
did live a stranger though. ^

in number made to flow: ^
And over all their enemies ^
in strength he made them grow. ^

his people did entreat: ^
And did his Servants wrongfully ^
abuse with false deceit. ^
The fourth Part.

and Aaron whom he chose. ^
He did command to go to them, ^
his message to disclose. ^

among them he did show: ^
And wonders in the land of Ham ^
then did they work also. ^

instead of brighter day: ^
And unto his Commission ^
they did not disobey: ^

he did their fishes slay: ^

where their King Pharaoh lay. ^

great swarms of noisome flies: ^
And all the quarters of the land ^
were filled with crawling lice. ^

instead of milder rain: ^
And fi'ry flames within their land ^
he sent unto their pain. ^

whereon their figs did grow: ^
And all their trees within their costs ^
down did he overthrow. ^

and Grasshoppers abound: ^

and fruit of all their ground. ^
The fifth Part.

eke deadly he did smite: ^
Yea, the beginning and first fruit ^
of all their force and might. ^

from Egypt land to pass: ^
And in the number of their Tribes ^
no feeble one there was. ^

when they did thence depart: ^
For terror and the fear of them ^
was fallen upon their heart. ^

a cloud he did display: ^
And fire he sent to give them light, ^
when night had hid the day. ^

to rain at their request: ^
And fully with the bread of heaven ^
their hunger he represt: ^

and waters gushed out: ^
And in the dry and parched ground ^
like Rivers ran about. ^

aye mindful was he though: ^
Which to his servant Abraham ^
he plighted long ago. ^

and his elect with joy, ^
Out of the cruel land where they ^
had lived in great annoy. ^

to them their fruitful lands: ^
The labors of the people eke ^
they took into their hands. ^

observe for evermore: ^
And faithfully obey his laws, ^
praise ye the Lord therefore. ^
PSALM CVI. Confitemini Domino.
PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, ^
his mercy dures for aye: ^

or all his praise display? ^

and justly do always: ^
With favor of thy people (Lord) ^
remember me, I pray. ^

vouchsafe to visit me: ^
That I the great fe-li-ci-ty ^
of thine elect may see. ^

a joyful mind possess: ^
And may with thine in-he-ri-tance ^
a glor'ing heart express. ^

have sinned every one: ^
We have committed wickedness, ^
and lewdly we have done: ^

have done in Egypt land: ^
Our fathers though they saw them all, ^
yet did not understand. Nor yet thy mercies multitude ^
did keep in thankful mind: ^
But at the sea, yea the red sea, ^
re-bel-led most unkind. ^

for honor of his Name: ^
That he might make his power known, ^
and spread abroad his fame. ^

and forthwith it was dried: ^
And as in wilderness, so through ^
the deep he did them guide. ^

of their despiteful foe: ^
And from the enemies hand he did ^
de-li-ver them al-so.
The second Part.

not one was left alive: ^

in song they did him give. ^

his works they clean forgot: ^
And for his counsel and his will ^
they did neglect to wait. ^

with sond and greedy lust: ^
And in the desert tempted God, ^
the stay of all their trust. ^

he suff'red them to have: ^
But wasting leanness therewithal ^
into their souls he gave. ^

at Moses they did grutch: ^
Aaron the holy of the Lord ^
so did they envy much. ^

and Dathan did devour: ^
And all Abirams company ^
did cover in that hour. ^

the hot consuming fire: ^
And wasting flames did then burn up ^
the wicked in his ire. ^

an Idol Calf did frame: ^
And there the molten Image they ^
did worship of the same. ^

that seedeth on the grass: ^
Thus they their glory turned, and all ^
their honor did deface. ^

unkindly they forgot: ^
Which many great and mighty things ^
in Egypt land had wrought. ^
The third Part.

most wondrous works had done: ^
And by the red sea dreadful things ^
performed long agone. ^

forgetful and unkind: ^
To bring destruction on them all ^
he purposed in his mind. Had not his chosen Moses stood ^
before him in the break: ^
To turn his wrath, lest he on them ^
with slaughter should him wreak. ^

that he behight to give: ^
Yea, and the words that he had spoke, ^
they did no whit believe. ^

they wickedly repined: ^
Nor to the voice of God the Lord, ^
they gave an heark'ning mind. ^

his strong revenging hand: ^
Them to destroy in wilderness, ^
e're they should see the land. ^

the nations with his rod: ^
And through the Countries of the world ^
to scatter them abroad. ^

adjoyn themselves also: ^
And ate the offerings of the dead. ^
so they forso^k him though. ^

his wrath they did provoke: ^
And in his sore enkindled wrath ^
the plague upon them broke. ^

the sinners vile to slay: ^
And judgment he did execute, ^
and then the plague did stay. ^
The fourth Part.

for righteousness that day: ^
And from thenceforth so counted is ^
from race to race I say. ^

they did him angry make: ^
Yea so far forth that Moses was ^
then punished for their sake. ^

that in impatient heat, ^
His lips spoke unadvisedly, ^
his servour was so great. ^

they slew the people though: ^

and learned their works also. ^

their ruin and decay: ^

did offer up and stay. ^

the guiltless blood they spilt: ^
Yea, their own sons and daughters blood ^
without all cause of guilt. Whom they to Canaan Idols then ^
offered with wicked hand: ^
And so with blood of innocents ^
defiled was the land. ^

of their own filthy way: ^
And with their own inventions ^
a whoring they did stray. ^

the Lords wrath kindled sore: ^
And even his own inheritance ^
therefore he did abhor. ^

he gave them for a prey: ^
And made their foes their Lords, whom they ^
were forced to obey. ^
The fifth Part.

oppressed them in their land: And they were humbly made to stoop ^
as subjects to their hand. ^

delivered them before: ^
But with their counsels they to wrath ^
provoked him evermore. Therefore they by their wickedness ^
were broughtfull low to lie: ^

he hearkened to their cry. ^

which he to them had swore: ^
And by his mercies multitude ^
repented him therefore. ^

before the sight of those, ^
that led them captive from their land ^
when er'st they were their foes. ^

save us, O Lord, we pray: ^
And from among the heathen folk, ^
Lord, gather us always. ^

of thy most holy Name: ^
That we may glory in thy praise, ^
and sounding of thy fame. ^

be blessed for evermore: ^
Let all the people say, Amen; ^
praise ye the Lord therefore. ^
PSALM CVII. Confitemini Dom.
Give thanks unto the Lord our God, ^
for gracious is he: ^
And that his mercy has no end ^
all mortal men may see. ^

with thanks shall praise his Name: ^
and show how they from foes were freed, ^
and how he wrought the same. ^

that lay so far about: ^
From East, to West, from North to South ^
his hand did find them out. ^

and strayed from the way: ^
And found no City where to dwell, ^
that serve might for their stay. ^

in these deserts so void: ^
That faintness did them sore assault, ^
and eke their souls annoyed. ^

unto the Lord for aid: ^
Who did remove their troublous state, ^
according as they prayed. ^

he led them like a guide: ^
That they might to a City go, ^
and there also abide. ^

confess his goodness then: ^
And show the wonders that he does ^
before the sons of men. ^

whom thirst had made to faint: ^
The hungry soul with goodness fed, ^
and did them eke acquaint. ^

where they on death do wait: ^
Fast bound to taste such troublous storms ^
as iron chains do threat.
The second Part.

they sought so to rebel: ^
Esteeming light his counsels high, ^
which do so far excel. ^

they then fell down with grief: ^
And none was found so much to help, ^
whereby to get relief. ^

unto the Lord for aid: ^
Who did remove their troublous state, ^
according as they prayed. ^

and from death's dreadful shade: ^
Bursting with force the Iron bands ^
which them before did lade. ^

confess his kindness then: ^
And show the wonders that he does ^
before the sons of men. ^

and brake them with strong hand: ^
he iron bars he sinote in two, ^
nothing could him withstand. ^

and cannot from them wend: ^
But heap on more to those they have, ^
because they do offend. ^

that none they could abide: ^
Whereby death had them almost caught, ^
as they full truly tried. ^

unto the Lord for aid: ^
Who did remove their troublous state, ^
according as they prayed. ^

which health did soon restore: ^
And brought them from those dangers deep, ^
wherein they were before. ^
The third Part.

confess his kindness then: ^
And show the wonders that he does ^
before the sons of men. ^

with thanks and also fear: ^
And speak of all his wondrous works ^
with glad and joyful cheer. ^

into the Seas descend: ^
Their merchandise through fearful floods ^
to compass and to end. ^

the Lords works what they be: ^
And in the dangers Deep the same, ^
most mavelous they see. ^

arises in a rage: ^
And stirs up the surges so, ^
as naught can them assuage. ^

the clouds they seem to gain: ^
And plunging down the depth until ^
their souls consume with pain. ^

now here, now there they reel: ^
As men with fear of wit bereft, ^
or had of Sense no feel. ^

unto the Lord for aid: ^
Who did remove their troublous state, ^
according as they prayed: ^

the sturdy storms to cease: ^
So that the great waves from their rage ^
are brought to rest and peace. ^

which they so much did crave: ^
And are by him in haven brought, ^
which they so fain would have. ^
The fourth Part.

confess his kindness then: ^
And show the wonders that he does ^
before the sons of men. ^

with praise extol his Name: ^
And where the Elders do convent ^
there let them do the same. ^

he does often change and turn: ^
And dries up as it were dust, ^
the springing well and bourn. ^

full barren does he make: ^
When on their sins which dwell therein ^
he does just vengeance take. ^

he makes fruits to bear: ^
With pleasant springs of waters clear, ^
though none before were there. ^

as he does freely choose: ^
That they a City may them build, ^
to dwell in for their use. ^

and vineyards also plant: ^
To yield them fruit of such increase, ^
as none may seem to want. ^

the Lord does bless them so: ^
Who does also their bruit beasts make ^
by numbers great to grow. ^

by the oppressors stout: ^
And minish do through many plagues ^
that compass them about. ^

which did them sore oppress: ^
And likewise caused them to err ^
within the wilderness. ^

out of his troubles deep: ^
And ofttimes does their train augment ^
much like a flock of sheep. ^

and also much rejoice: ^
Whereas the wicked and perverse ^
with grief shall stop their voice. ^

he may these things record? ^
For certainly such shall perceive ^
the kindness of the Lord. ^
PSALM CVIII. Paratum cor.
J. H.
O God my heart prepared is, ^
and eke my tongue is so: ^
I will advance my voice in song, ^
in giving praise also. ^

sweet melody to make: ^
And in the morning I my self ^
right early will awake. ^

still praised shall thou be: ^
And I among the heathen folk ^
will sing O Lord to thee. ^

above the heavens high: ^
and eke thy truth does reach the clouds ^
within the lofty Sky. ^

exalt thy self, O God: ^
And Lord display upon the earth ^
thy glory all abroad. ^

be set at liberty: ^
Help O my God with thy right hand, ^
and hearken unto me. ^

wherefore my joys abound: ^
Sichem I shall divide, and mete ^
the vale of Succoth ground. ^

Manasses mine shall be: ^
My head strength Ephraim, and law ^
shall Juda give for me. ^

on Edom will I throw: ^
Upon the land of (...) ^
in triumph will I go. ^

be guide to conduct me? ^
Or how by whom to Edom's land ^
conveyed shall I be? ^

had us forsaken quite? ^
And thou, O Lord, which with our hosts ^
did not go forth to fight? ^

when troubles do assail: ^
For all the help of man is vain, ^
and can no whit avail. ^

and worthy of renown: ^
He shall subdue our enemies, ^
yea he shall tread them down. ^
PSALM CIX. Deus laudem tuam
J. H.
IN constant silence do not hold, ^
O God, thy tongue always: ^
O God even thou I say that art ^
the God of all my praise. ^

on me disclosed be: ^
And they with false and lying tongues ^
have spoken unto me. ^

with words of hateful spite: ^
Without all cause of my desert ^
against me did they fight. ^

but then 'gan I to pray: ^

with hate they did repay. ^

to have the upperhand: ^
At his right hand eke suffer thou ^
his hateful foe to stand. ^

condemned be therein: ^
And let the prayer that he makes ^
be turned into sin. ^

let thou another take: ^

his Wife a Widow make. ^

to beg and seek their bread: ^
Wandering out of the wasted place, ^
where erst they have been fed. ^

catch all his goods and store ^
And let the strangers spoil the fruits ^
of all his toil before. ^

let there be none at all. ^
That on his children fatherless ^
will let their mercy fall.
The second Part.

for ever be destroyed: ^
Their name out-blotted in the age ^
that after shall succeed. ^

from Gods remembrance fall: ^
And let thou not his mothers sin ^
be done away at all. ^

let them remain for aye: ^
That from the earth their memory ^
he may cut clean away. ^

but did pursue with spite ^
The troubled man, and fought to stay ^
the woeful hearted wight. ^

betide unto him so: ^
And as he did not blessing love, ^
it shall be far him fro. ^

so it like water shall ^
Into his bowels. and like oil ^
into his bones befall. ^

to cover him for aye: ^
And as a girdle wherewith he ^
shall girded be always. ^

the guerdon of my foe: ^
Yea, and of those that evil speak ^
against my soul also. ^

deal thou I say with me: ^
After thy Name, deliver me, ^
for good thy mercies be. ^

I needy am and poor: ^
And e^^ within my pained breast, ^
my heart is wounded sore. ^
The third Part.

as does declining shade: ^
And as the Grasshopper, so I ^
am shaken off and fade. ^

enfeebled are my knees: ^
And all her fatness has my flesh ^
enforced been to leese. ^

to them was made to be: ^
And they that did upon me look, ^
did shake their heads at me. ^

mine aid and succor be: ^
According to thy mercy Lord, ^
save and deliver me. ^

Lord is thy mighty hand: ^
And that thou have done it, O Lord: ^
so shall they understand. ^

shall bless with loving voice: ^
They shall arise and come to shame, ^
thy servant shall rejoice. ^

that enemies are to me. ^
And with confusion as a cloak ^
eke cov'red let them be. ^

give thanks unto the Lord: ^
And I among the multitude ^
his praises will record. ^

will stand the poor man by: ^
To save him from the man that would ^
condemn his soul to die. ^
PSALM CX. Dixit Dominus.
THe Lord did say unto my Lord ^
sit thou on my right hand: ^
Till I have made thy foes a stool ^
Whereon thy feet shall stand. ^

the Scepter of his might: ^
Amid thy mortal foes be thou ^
the ruler in their sight. ^

and power they shall see: ^
Then hereby free-will-o^^'rings shall ^
thy people offer thee. Yea, with an holy worshipping ^
then shall they offer all. ^
Thy births dew is the dew that does ^
from womb of morning fall. ^

repent what he does say: ^
By the order of Mel-chi-se-deck, ^
thou art a Priest for aye. ^

that stands for thy stay. ^
Shall wound for thee the stately Kings ^
upon his wrathful day. ^

the place with bodies dead: ^
And over diverse countries shall ^
in sunder smite the head: ^

that runs in the way: ^
Wherefore he shall lift up on high ^
his royal head that day. ^
PSALM CXI. Confitebor tibi.
WIth hear I do accord, ^
to praise and land the Lord, ^
In presence of the just: ^

To search them such are bound, ^
As him do love and trust. ^

Also his right'ousness ^
It does endure for e-ver. ^

We still remember should: ^
His mercy fails never. ^

A por-ti-on full fair ^
He has up for them laid: ^
For this they shall well find, ^
He will them have in mind, ^
And keep them as he said. ^

His works to show them plain, ^
By lightning and by thunders: ^
When he the Heathens land ^
Did give in-to their hand, ^
Where they beheld his wonders. ^

Both judgment right and truth, ^
Where to his statutes tend: ^

For ever to endure, ^
Which equity does end. ^
Re-demp-ti-on he gave ^
His people for to save: ^

His promise not to fail, ^
But always to prevail: ^
His ho-ly Name be feared. ^

True wisdom would attain, ^
The Lord fear and o-bey: ^
Such as his laws do keep, ^
Shall knowledge have full deep: ^
His praise shall last for aye. ^
PSALM CXII. Beatus vir.
W. K.
THe man is blessed that God does fear, ^
And that his law does love indeed: ^

And bless such as from him proceed. ^
His house with good he will fulfill, ^
His right'ousness endure shall still. Unto the right'ous does arise ^
In trouble joy, in darkness light: ^
Compassion is in his eyes, ^
And mercy always in his sight: ^

He does by judgment things expend. And surely such shall never fail: ^
For in remembrance had is he: ^
No tidings ill can make him quail, ^
Who in the Lord sure hope does see. ^

For he shall see his foes down cast. ^

His right'ousness shall still remain: ^
And his estate with praise abide, ^
Though that the wicked men disdain, ^

And so consume his state to see. ^
PSALM CXIII. Laudate pueri.
W. K.
YE children which do serve the Lord, ^
praise ye his name with one accord: ^


Till it return where it begun, ^
Is to be praised with great same. ^
The Lord all People does surmount, ^
As for his glory we may count. ^
Above the heavens high to be, ^

Whose dwelling in the heavens are: ^
Of such great power and force is he. ^

Things to behold both here below, ^
And al-so in the heaven above. ^

And eke the paor which help none saw, ^
his only mercy did him move. ^

With Princes of great dignity, ^
that rule his people with great fame. ^

And with great joy her fruit to rear, therefore praise ye his holy Name. ^
PSALM CXIV. In exitu Israel.
WHen Israel by Gods address, ^
from Pharachs land was bent: ^
And Jacobs house the strangers left, ^
and in the same train went. ^

his holiness most bright: ^
So did the Israelites declare ^
his kingdom, power, and might. ^

as all amazed, did fly: ^
the roaring streams of Jordans flood ^
recoiled backwardly. ^

their strength did them forsake: ^
And as the silly trembling lambs, ^
their tops did beat and shake. What ailed thee, Sea, at all amazed, ^
so suddenly to fly? Ye rolling waves of Jordans flood ^
why ran ye backwardly? ^

why did your strength so shake? ^
Why did your tops, as trembling lambs, ^
for fear, quiver and quake? ^

and dread his mighty hand: ^
Before the face of Jacob's God, ^
fear ye both sea and land. ^

does cause main floods appear: ^
And from the stony flint does cause ^
gush out the fountains clear. ^
PSALM CXV. Non nobis Domine.
NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, ^
but to thy Name give praise: ^
Both for thy mercy and thy truth, ^
that are in thee always. ^

where is their God become? ^

he will, that has he done. ^

works of men's hands they be: ^

and eyes, and do not see. ^

and do not hear at all: ^
And noses eke they formed have, ^
and do not smell withal. ^

and feet, and do not go: ^
A throat they have, yet through the same ^
they make no sound to blow. ^

and those whose trust they be: ^

their help and shield is he. ^

their help and shield is he: ^

their help and shield is he. ^

and will us bless also: ^
On Israel and on Aarons house, ^
his blessing he will show. ^

the Lord will bless them all; ^
Even he will bless them every one, ^
the great and eke the small. ^

will multiply his grace: ^
To you and to the children that ^
shall follow of your race. ^

even of the Lord, I say: ^
Which ^ both the heaven and the earth ^
has made, and set in stay. ^

belong unto the Lord: ^
The earth unto the sons of men, ^
he gave of free accord. ^

set forth the Lords renown: ^
Nor any that into the place ^
of silence do go down. ^

from henceforth and for aye: Sound ye the praises of the Lord, ^
praise ye the Lord, I say. ^
PSALM CXVI. Dilexi quoniam.
I Love the Lord, because my voice ^
and prayer heard has he: ^

he bowed his ear to me. ^

about beset me round: ^
When pains of hell me caught, and when ^
I woe and sorrow found. ^

then did I call, and say, ^
Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, ^
I do thee humbly pray. ^

and just he is al-so: ^
And in our God compassion ^
does plen-ti-ful-ly slow. ^

all those that simple be: ^
I was in woeful mi-se-ry, ^
and he de-li-ver'd me. ^

return un to thy rest: ^
For largely, lo, the Lord to thee ^
his bounty has expressed. ^

my soul from deadly thrall: ^
My moistened eyes from mournful tears, ^
my sliding feet from fall. ^

of life will walk therefore: ^

for I was troubled sore.
The second Part.

that all men liars be: ^

his benefits to me. ^

I thankfully will take: ^
And on the Lord's Name I will call, ^
when I my prayers make. ^

that I to him behight: ^
Yea, even at this present time ^
in all his peoples sight: ^

the Lord does aye esteem ^
The death of all his ho-ly ones, ^
what e-ver men do deem. ^

I do my self confess, ^
Son of thy handmaid: thou have broke ^
the bonds of my distress. ^

a sa-cri-fice of praise: ^
And I will call upon the Name ^
of God the Lord always. ^

that I have him behight: ^
Yea even at this present time ^
in all his peoples sight. ^

and in the midst of thee, ^
O thou Je-ru-sa lem, [say, ^
wherefore the Lord praise ve. ^
PSALM CXVII. Laudate Dominum.
O All ye nations of the world, ^
praise ye the Lord always: ^
And all ye people e-very where ^
set forth his noble praise. ^

his truth endures for aye: ^
Wherefore praise ye the Lord our God, ^
praise ye the Lord, I say. ^
PSALM CXVIII. Confitemini Dom.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, ^
for gra-ci-ous is he: ^
Because his mercy does endure ^
for e-ver toward thee. ^

his mercy dures for aye: ^

his mer-cy dures for aye. ^

even now confess and say: ^
The mercy of the Lord our God ^
endures still for aye. ^

un-to the Lord I cried: ^
Which lovingly heard me at large, ^
my suit was not denied. ^

I will not stand in doubt: ^
Nor fear what man can do to me, ^
when God stands me about. ^

that help to succor me: ^
Therefore I shall see my desire ^
u-pon mine e-ne-my. ^

than in man's mortal seed; ^

or Princes in our need. ^

and compassed me round: ^
But in the name of God shall I ^
mine e-ne-mies confound. ^

they kept me in I say: ^
But through the Lord's most mighty Name, ^
I shall work their de-cay. ^

but yet in the Lord's Name ^
I quenched their thorns that were on sire, ^
and will destroy the same.
The second Part.

that I indeed might fall: ^
But through the Lord I find such help, ^
that they were vanquished all. ^

my joy, my mirth, and song: ^
He is become to me indeed, ^
a Savior most strong. ^

does bring to pass great things: ^
He causes voice of Joy and health ^
in righteous men's dwellings. ^

most mighty things to pass: ^
His hand has the pre-eminence, ^
his force is as it was. ^

to ut-ter and declare, ^
The Lord his might and wondrous power, ^
his works and what they are. ^

and has corrected me: ^
But has not given me o-ver yet ^
to death, as you may see. ^

of truth and righteousness: ^
That I may enter in-to them, ^
the Lord's praise to confess. ^

which shall not be so shut: ^
But good and righteous men always ^
shall enter in-to it. ^
The third Part.

because thou have heard me: ^
And art become most lovingly ^
a Savior un-to me. ^

the builders was refused: ^
Is now become the corner stone, ^
and chiefly to be used. ^

this was the Lord own fact: ^
And it is marv'llous to behold ^
with eyes that noble act. ^

which God himself has wrought: ^
Let us be glad and joy therein, ^
in heart, in mind, and thought. ^

we wish with one accord: ^

in the name of the Lord. ^

bind ye therefore with cord ^
Your sa-cri-fice to the Al-tar, ^
and give thanks to the Lord. ^

and render thanks to thee: ^
Thou art my God, and I will praise ^
thy mercy to-wards me. ^

for gra-ci-ous is he: ^
Because his mercy does endure ^
for e-ver toward me. ^
PSALM CXIX. Beati immaculati.
W. W.
ALEPH.
BLessed are they that perfect are, ^
and pure in mind and heart: ^
Whose lives and con-ver-sa-ti-ons ^
from Gods laws never start. ^
Blessed are they that give themselves ^
his statutes to observe: ^
Seeking the Lord with all their heart, ^
and ne-ver from him swerve. ^

nor do no wicked thing: ^
Which steadfastly walk in his way, ^
without a-ny wandering. ^

that with attentive heed ^
Thy noble and divine precepts ^
we learn and keep indeed. ^

my ways so to address: ^
That I might both in heart and voice ^
thy laws keep and confess. ^

whilst I thus set mine eyes: ^
And bend my mind always to muse ^
on thy sacred decrees. ^

and magnify thy Name: ^
When I shall learn thy judgments just ^
and likewise prove the same. ^

to keep thy laws most right: ^
Forsake me not for ever, Lord, ^
but show thy grace and might.
BETH. The second Part.

his life learn to amend? ^
If that he mark and keep thy word, ^
and therein his time spend. ^

and thus seeking abide: ^
O never suffer me, O Lord. ^
from thy precepts to slide. ^

thy words I have hid still: ^
That I might not at any time ^
offend thy Godly will. ^

and praise thee evermore: ^
Thy statutes of most worthy fame, ^
O Lord, teach me therefore. ^

and publish day and night. ^
The judgments all which did proceed ^
from thy mouth full of might. ^

please me no less indeed. ^
Than all the treasures of the earth, ^
which worldlings make their meed. ^

and thereto frame my talk: ^
As at a mark so will I aim, ^
thy ways how I may walk. ^

and on thy laws so set: ^
That nothing can me so far blind, ^
that I thy words forget. ^
GIMEL The third Part.

as may my life prolong: ^
Thy holy word then will I keep ^
both in my heart and tongue. ^

so open and make bright: ^
that of thy law and mavelous works ^
I may have the clear sight. ^

wandering now here, now there: ^
Thy word therefore to me disclose, ^
my footsteps for to clear. ^

and never is at rest: ^
But seeks to know thy judgments high, ^
and what may please thee best. ^

thou have destroyed each one: ^
And cursed are such as do not ^
thy hests attend upon. ^

which wicked men conspire: ^
For I have kept thy covenants ^
with zeal as hot as fire. ^

and did against me speak: ^
But then thy servant thought how he ^
thy statutes might not break. ^

and my hearts great solace: ^
They serve in stead of counselors, ^
my matters for to pass. ^
DALETH. The fourth Part.

and almost turned to dust: ^
Restore therefore my life again, ^
as thy promise is just. ^

with mercy thou did hear: ^
Hear now eft-soon, and me instruct ^
thy laws to love and fear. ^

thy precepts and thy lore: ^
Thy works then will I meditate, ^
and lay them up in store. ^

that it melts for grief: ^
According to thy word therefore, ^
haste, Lord, to send relief. ^

let thy grace me defend: ^
And that I may learn thee to love, ^
thy holy law me send. ^

I have chosen and found: ^
I set thy judgments me before, ^
which keep me safe and sound. ^

thy covenants to embrace: ^
Let me therefore have no rebuke, ^
nor check in any case. ^

where thy word does me call: ^
When thou have set^ my heart at large, ^
and rid me out of thrall. ^
HE. The fifth Part.

of thy statutes divine: ^
And it to keep even to the end, ^
my heart will I incline. ^

and I shall it obey: With heart and mind and all my might, ^
I will it keep I say. ^

guide me, Lord, I requite: ^
None other pleasure do I wish, ^
nor greater thing desire: ^

and covenants to embrace: ^
And from all filthy avarice, ^
Lord shield me with thy grace. ^

turn back mine eyes and sight: ^
Give me the sp'rit of life and power ^
to walk thy ways aright. ^

which thou have made to me: ^
Which am thy servant, and do love ^
and fear nothing but thee. ^

from me, O Lord, expel: ^
For thou do judge with equity, ^
and therein do excel. ^

thy laws to keep for aye: ^
Lord strengthen me so with thy grace, ^
that it perform I may. ^
VAU. The sixth Part.

let me obtain, O Lord: ^
Thy saving health let me enjoy ^
ac-cor-ding to thy word. ^

of lewd men and unjust: ^
For in thy faithful promises ^
stands my comfort and trust. ^

let e-ver still be pressed: ^
For in thy judgments wonderful ^
my hope does stand and rest. ^

does natural life preserve: ^
Yea, till this world shall be dissolved, ^
thy law will I observe. ^

and made free from all dread: ^
Because I sought how far to keep ^
thy precepts and ^hy (...). ^

as things of most great fame: ^
Even before Kings I will them blaze, ^
and shrink no whit for shame. ^

thy worthy hests and will: ^
Which evermore I have loved best: ^
and so will love them still. ^

which I have dearly sought: ^
And practice thy commandments ^
in will, in deed, in thought. ^
ZAIN. The seventh Part.

thy servant, Lord, remember: ^
For therein do I put my trust, ^
and confidence for ever. ^

when troubles me assail: ^
For were my life not by thy word, ^
my life would soon me fail. ^

still made of me a scorn: ^
Yet would I not thy law forsake: ^
as he that were forlorn. ^

showed to our fathers old: ^
Whereby I felt my joy surmount ^
my grief an hundred fold. ^

seeing how wicked men ^
Thy law forsook, and did procure ^
thy judgments who knows when? ^

thy statutes to exalt: ^
When I among the strangers dwelt, ^
and thoughts 'gan me assault. ^

by night, when others sleep: ^
As for thy law, al-so I kept, ^
and e-ver will it keep. ^

thy cov'nants sweet and dear ^
I did embrace and al-so keep ^
with reverence and with fear. ^
HETH. The eighth Part.

my comfort and my stay: ^
I have decreed and promised ^
thy laws to keep always. ^

in prefence of thy face: ^
As thou therefore have promised, ^
Lord, grant me of thy grace. ^

and tried my secret heart: ^
Which to thy statutes caused me ^
my feet straight to convert. ^

as they that slothful are: ^
But ha-sti-ly thy laws to keep, ^
I did my self prepare. ^

have made of me their prey: ^
Yet would I not thy law forget, ^
nor from thee go astray. ^

so great are and so high: ^
That even at midnight will I rise ^
thy name to magnify. ^

which fear thee in their heart: ^
And ne-ver will for love nor dread, ^
from thy commandments start. ^

do all the world fulfill: ^
O teach me how I may o-bey ^
they statutes and thy will. ^
TETH. The ninth Part.

so bast thou with me dealt: ^
For of thy grace in sundry sorts ^
have I thy Servant felt. ^

and give me knowledge sure: ^
For certainly believe I do ^
that thy precepts are pure. ^

I erred and went astray: ^
But now I keep thy ho-ly word, ^
and make it all my stay. ^

and giv'st most lib'rally: ^
Thine ordinances how to keep, ^
therefore, O Lord, teach me. ^

against me many a lie: ^
Yet thy commandments still observe ^
with all my heart will I. ^

as grease so are they fat: ^
But in thy law do I delight, ^
and nothing seek but that. ^

when thou didst-me correct: ^
For as a guide to learn thy law, ^
thy rod did me direct. ^

is dearer ma-ni-fold: ^
Than thousands great of silver and gold, ^
or ought that can be told. ^
JOD. The tenth Part.

to be thy cre-a-ture: ^
Grant knowledge likewise how to learn, ^
to put thy laws in ure. ^

when e-ver they me see: ^
Because I have learned by thy word, ^
to put my trust in thee. ^

I know the cause is just: ^
So when thou do correct me, Lord, ^
the cause just needs be must. ^

some comfort to me send: ^
As thou to me have pro-mi-sed, ^
so from all ill me shend. ^

and I shall surely live: ^
For Joy and con-so-la-ti-on both ^
thy law to me does give. ^

is me for to destroy: ^
But as for me thy hests to know ^
I will my self employ. ^

to me let them retire: ^
And such as do thy cov'nants know, ^
and them alone desire. ^

let on thy laws be bent: ^
That no confusion come to me, ^
whereby I should be shent. ^
CAPH. The eleventh Part.

thy saving health to crave: ^
And for thy words sake still I trust ^
my hearts desire to have. ^

thy word, and thus I say: ^
O when will thou me comfort, Lord, ^
why do thou thus delay? ^

so am I parched and dried. ^
Yet will I not out of my heart ^
let thy commandments slide. ^

before I see the hour, ^
That on my foes which me torment, ^
thy vengeance thou will pour? ^

thinking to make me sure: ^
Thus contrary against thy law ^
my hurt they do procure. ^

and causless they me grieve: ^
To thee therefore I do complain, ^
that thou might me relieve. ^

and brought me quite to ground: ^
Yet by thy statutes I abode, ^
and therein succor found. ^

for thy mercies excel: ^
And so shall I thy cov'nants keep, ^
till death my life expel. ^
LAMED. The twelfth Part.

thy word is stablisht sure: ^
And shall for all e-ter-ni^ty, ^
fast graven there endure. ^

as does the earth witness: ^
Whose groundwork thou have laid so sure, ^
as no tongue can express. ^

how all things persevere ^
According to thine Ordinance, ^
for all things thee revere. ^

my soul had comfort sought: ^
Long time e're now in my distress ^
I had been brought to naught. ^

in memory keep fast: ^
By them thou have my life restored ^
when I was at last cast. ^

for I am on-ly thine: ^
Save me therefore, for to thy laws, ^
mine ears and heart incline. ^

and thereto lie in wait: ^
But I the while con-si-de-red ^
Thy noble works and great. ^

at length which has not end: ^
But thy commandments and thy word ^
beyond all end extend. ^
MEM. The thirteenth Part.

do I bear to thy law? ^
All the day long I me-di-tate ^
on it with rev'rent awe. ^

my foes in po-li-cy: ^
For still I hold it as a thing ^
of most ex-cel-len-cy. ^

in knowledge I excel: ^
Because I do thy cov'nants keep, ^
and them to others tell. ^

the ancient men indeed: ^
And all because to keep thy laws, ^
I held it best to read. ^

from every e-vil way: ^
Because that I con-ti-nual-ly ^
thy word might keep, I say. ^

nor yet shrunk a-ny deal: ^
For why? thou have me taught thereby, ^
to live godly and well. ^

find I thy word always? ^
Doubtless no honey in my mouth ^
feel ought so sweet I may. ^

that ut-ter-ly I hate ^
All wicked and un-god-ly ways, ^
in every kind and rate. ^
NUN. The fourteenth Part.

so does thy word shine bright: ^
And to my paths where e're I go, ^
it is a flaining light, ^

my promises doubtless, ^
That I will keep thy judgments just, ^
and them in life express: ^

and brought me to death's door: ^
O Lord, as thou have promised, ^
so me to life restore. ^

most frankly I thee give: ^
Accept, and teach me how I may ^
after thy judgments live. ^

that dangers me assail: ^
Yet do I not thy law forget, ^
nor it to keep will fail: ^

to catch me at a bay: ^
Yet did I not from thy precepts ^
once swerve or go astray. ^

As mine own he-ri-tage: ^
And why? for therein I delight, ^
and set my whole courage. ^

thy statutes to fulfill: ^
Even so likewise un-to the and, ^
I will con-ti-nue still. ^
SAMECH. The fifteenth Part.

I do always detest: ^
But as for thy law and precepts, ^
I love them e-ver best. ^

my shield of strong defense: ^
Therefore have I thy pro-mi-ses ^
looked for with patience. ^

depart from me a-non: ^
For the Commandments will I keep ^
of God my Lord alone. ^

that death me not assail: ^
Nor let my hope abuse me so, ^
that through distrust I quail. ^

for ought they do or say: ^
And in thy statutes pleasure take, ^
will I both night and day. ^

as do thy statutes break: ^
For naught avails their sub-til-ty, ^
their counsel is but weak. ^

where e're they go or dwell: ^
Therefore can I as thy statutes ^
love nothing half so well. ^

as though it were benumbed: ^
For when I see thy judgments, straight ^
I am as one aston'd. ^
GNAIN. The sixteenth Part.

and give to all men right: ^
Resign me not to them that would ^
oppress me with their might. ^

in that thing that is good: ^
That proud men give me not the foil, ^
with-rage as they were wood. ^

thy help so much I crave: ^
And eke thy right'ous promise, Lord, ^
whereby thou will me save. ^

and favor to him show: ^
Thy statutes of most ex'lency ^
teach me al-so to know. ^

grant me to understand, ^
How by thy statutes I may know ^
best what to take in hand. ^

for truth is quite decai'd: ^
Thy law likewise they have transgrest, ^
and none against them said. ^

thy laws better than gold, ^
Or jewels fine which are esteemed ^
most costly to be sold. ^

and so them laid in store: ^
All crafty and mali-cious ways, ^
I do abhor therefore. ^
PHE. The seventeenth Part.

and full of things profound: ^
My soul therefore does keep them sure, ^
when they are tried and found. ^

they find a light most clear: ^
And very idiots understand ^
when they it read or hear. ^

to know thy commandment: ^
That I might guide my self thereby, ^
I sought what thing it meant. ^

behold me from above, ^
As thou art wont to behold such ^
as thy Name fear and love. ^

that I thy will may know: ^
And ne-ver let in-i-qui-ty ^
thy servant overthrow. ^

preserve and keep me sure: ^
Thy precepts then will I observe, ^
and put them eke in ure. ^

the Sun in his bright hue, ^
Let shine on me, and by thy law ^
teach me what to eschew. ^

of dreary tears that fall: ^
When I behold how wicked men ^
thy laws keep not at all. ^
TSADI. The eighteenth Part.

the wicked though they gru^ge. ^
And when thou do sentence pronounce, ^
thou art a right'ous Judge. ^

are two chief points most high: ^
And such as thou have in thy law ^
commanded us straightly. ^

and even pined away: ^
To see my foes thy word forget, ^
for ought that I do say. ^

as a-ny heart can deem: ^
And I thy servant nothing more ^
do love or yet esteem. ^

as one of base degree: ^
Yet do I not thy laws forget, ^
nor shrink away from thee. ^

for e-ver to endure: ^
Al-so thy law is ^^th it self, ^
most constant and most pure. ^

and brought me wondrous low: ^
Yet to I still of thy precepts ^
delight to hear and know. ^

does last for e-ver-more: ^
Then teach them me, for even in them ^
my life lies up in store. ^
COPH. The nineteenth Part.

now answer me, O Lord: ^
That thy commandments to observe ^
I may fully accord. ^

with most humble request: ^
Save me therefore, and I will keep ^
thy precepts and thy hests. ^

before the day wax light: ^
Because that I have in thy word ^
my con-fi-dence whole plight. ^

and ere they call I wake: ^
That by de-vi-sing on thy word, ^
I might some comfort take. ^

and pi-ty on me take: ^
As thou was wont so judge me Lord, ^
lest life should me forsake. ^

my death ma-li-ciously. ^
Which from thy law are far gone back, ^
and strayed from it lewdly. ^

for need does so require: ^
For all thy precepts true they are, ^
then help I thee desire. ^

not now, but long a-go: ^
That they remain for e-ver-more, ^
thou have them grounded so. ^
RESH. The twentieth Part.

con-si-der and be-hold: ^
De-li-ver me, for of thy law ^
I ever take fast hold. ^

with speed some succor lend: ^
From death (as thou have promised) ^
Lord keep me and defend. ^

from having health and grace: ^
Whereby they might thy statutes know, ^
they en-ter not the trace. ^

what tongue can them at-tain? ^
And as thou have me judged ere now, ^
so let me life ob-tain ^

and persecute me sore: ^
yet from thy laws I ne-ver shrunk, ^
nor went a-wry therefore. ^

when I these traitors fee: ^
Because they keep no whit thy word, ^
nor yet seek to know thee. ^

With heart most glad and fain: ^
As thou art good and grac'ous Lord, ^
restore my life again. ^

and so it has been ever: ^
Thy right'ous judgments are al-so ^
most true, and decay never. ^
SCHIN. The twenty first Part.

caussess-to make me crouch: ^
But all in vain, for of thy word ^
the fear did my heart touch. ^

I was merry and glad, ^
Than he that of rich spoils and prey, ^
great store and plenty had. ^

I hate most and de-test: ^
For why thy ho-ly law do I ^
a-bove all things love best. ^

singing with heart and voice: ^
Thy right'ous acts and wonderful, ^
so cause me to rejoice. ^

as do thy statutes love: ^
No danger shall their qui-et state ^
impair or once remove. ^

I look for at thy hand: ^
And therefore have I done those things, ^
which thou did me command. ^

which my soul most desired: ^
So much to them my love was bent, ^
that naught else I required: ^

I kept (thou know) aright: ^
For all the things that I have done, ^
Are present in thy sight. ^
THAU. The twenty second Part.

before thy face appear: ^
And as thou have me promise made, ^
so teach me thee to fear. ^

toward thee let find ac-cess: ^
And grant me, Lord, deliverance, ^
for so is thy promise. ^

af-ter most ample sort: ^
When thou thy statutes have me taught, ^
wherein stands my comfort. ^

and in this wise say shall: ^
Gods famous acts and no-ble laws ^
are just and perfect all. ^

and speedily me save: ^
For thy commandments to observe, ^
chosen, O Lord, I have. ^

for other I know none: ^
And in thy law and nothing else ^
I do delight alone. ^

thy Name to magnify: ^
And of thy judgments merciful, ^
let me the favor try. ^

much like a wandering shee^: ^
Oh seek me, for I have not failed, ^
thy commandments to keep. ^
PSALM CXX. Ad Dominum.
T. S.
IN trouble and in thrall, ^
unto the Lord I call, ^
And he does me comfort: ^

From Liars lips always, ^
and tongues of false report. 3. What, vantage or what thing, ^
Ge^tst thou thus far to sting, ^
thou false and flattering liar? ^

No less than arrows keen, ^
Or hot consuming fire. ^

Within these tents so black, ^
which Kedars are by name. ^
By whom the flock elect, ^
And all of Isaac's sect ^
Are put to open shame. ^

I came a peace to make, ^
And set a quiet life. ^

Causeless I was controlled, ^
By them that would have strife. ^
PSALM CXXI. Levavi oculos.
W. W.
I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, ^
from whence I do attend, ^
That succor God me send. ^

Which heaven and earth has framed, ^
and every thing therein named. 3. Thy foot from slip he will preserve, ^
And will thee safely keep: ^
For he will never sleep. ^

No sleep at all can catch, But his eyes shall ever watch. ^

The Lord eke does thee cover, ^
As at thy right hand ever. ^

Nor the Moon not half so bright ^
Shall with cold thee hurt by night. ^

And will thy life sure save: ^
And thou shall also have. ^

Wherev'r thou go in or out ^
God will thy things bring about. ^
PSALM CXXII. Laetatus sum
W. K.
I Did in heart rejoice, ^
to hear the peoples voice, ^
In offering so willingly: ^

And in the Lords house pray: ^
Thus spoke the people lovingly. ^

shall in thy gates ^bide. ^
O thou Jerusalem most fair, ^
which art so seemly set, ^
Much like a City near, ^
The like whereof is not elsewhere. ^

Are thither bent their way to take, ^
So God before did tell ^
That there his Is-ra-el ^
Their prayers should together make. ^

And that for this respect, ^
To set forth justice or-der-ly: ^
Which thrones right to maintain ^
To David's house pertain, ^
His folk to judge accordingly. ^

For Je-ru-sa-lem's peace, ^
Thy friends God prosper migh-ti-ly ^

And prosper thee throughout ^
Thy Pa-la-ces con-ti-nual-ly: ^

For my poor brethrens sake, ^
That comfort have by means of thee: ^

Thy wealth for to procure, ^
So much always as lies in me. ^
PSALM CXXIII. Ad te levavi.
T. S.
O Lord, that heaven do possess, ^
I lift mine eyes to thee: ^
, Even as the servant lifts his, ^
his master's hand to see. ^

some grace for to atchieve: ^
So we behold the Lord our God, ^
till he do us forgive. ^

and mercy in thy sight: ^
For we are filled and o-ver-come ^
with hatred and despite. ^

the rich and wordly wise ^
Do make of us their mocking stocks, ^
the proud do us despise. ^
PSALM CXXIV. Nisi quia Dom.
W. W.
NOw I-sra-el may say, and that tru-ly: ^
If that the Lord had not our cause maintained: ^

When all the world against us fur'ously ^
Made their uproars, and said we should all die. ^

And swallowed quick, for ought that we could deem: ^
Such was their rage, as we might well esteem. ^

So had they now our lives even brought to thrall. ^

Had long ago overwhelmed us in the deep. ^

From bloody teeth, and their most cruel voice, ^
Which as a prey, to eat us would rejoice. ^

Escapes away, right so it fares with us: ^
Broke are their nets, and we have escaped thus. ^

His Name has saved us from these ill men. ^
PSALM CXXV. Qui confidunt.
W. W.
SUch as in God the Lord do trust, ^
as mount Sion shall firmly stand ^
And be removed at no hand. ^
The Lord will count them right and just: ^
So that they shall be sure ^
For e-ver to endure. ^

Je-ru-sa-lem about do close: ^
So will the Lord do un to those, ^
Who on his godly will do wait: ^
Such are to him so dear, ^
They ne-ver need to fear. ^

By making wicked men his rod: ^
Lest they through grief forsake their God, ^
It shall not as their lot still be. ^

Whose hearts are true and right. ^

By crooked ways which they out sought, ^
The Lord will surely bring to naught; ^
With workers vile they shall a-bide: ^
But peace with Is-ra-el. ^
For evermore shall dwell. ^
Another of the same
by R. W.
THose that do put their confidence ^
Upon the Lord our God only, ^
And fly to him for their defense, ^
in all their need and misery. Their faith is sure still to endure, ^
Grounded on Christ the cornerstone; Moved with none ill, but stands still, ^
Steadfast like to the Mount Sion. And as about Je-ru-sa-lem, ^
The mighty hills do it compass, ^
So that no enemies come to them, ^
To hurt that Town in any case: ^
So God indeed in every need, ^
His faithful people does defend, ^
Standing them by assuredly, ^
From this time forth world without end. Right wise and good is our Lord God ^
And will not snffer certainly, ^
The sinners and ungodlies rod, ^
To stay upon his family: Lest they also from God should go, ^
Falling to sin and wickedness: ^
O Lord defend world without end ^
Thy Christian f^o^k through thy goodness. O Lord, do good to Christians all, ^
that steadfast in thy word abide: ^
as willingly from God fall, ^
And to false doctrine daily slide, Such will the Lord scatter abroad, ^
With hypocrites thrown down to hell, ^
God will them send pains without end: ^
But Lord, grant peace to Israel. Glory to God the father of might, ^
And to the Son our Savior, ^
And to the Holy Ghost, whose light ^
Shine in our hearts, and us succor: That the right way from day to day ^
We may walk and him glorify. ^
With hearts desire, all that are here ^
Worship the Lord, and say, Amen. ^
PSALM CXXVI. In convertendo.
W. W.
WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought, ^
from bondage great and also servitude extreme: ^
His work, was such as did surmount man's heart and thought: ^

: Our mouths they were with laughter filled then, ^
and eke our tongues did show us joyful men. ^

How that the Lord for them also great things had done. ^

Wherefore to joy we have good cause as we begun. ^

As to deserts the flowing rivers send. ^

A time will come, when they shall reap in mirth and joy. ^

For that their foes full often times did them annoy: ^
But their return with joy they shall sure see: ^
Their sheaves home bring, and not empaired be. ^
PSALM CXXVII Nisi Dom.
W. W.
EXcept the Lord the house does make, ^
and thereunto does set his hand, What men do build, it cannot stand. ^

Cities and holds to watch and ward, ^
except the Lord be their safeguard. ^

and so at night go late to bed, ^
Feeding with sorrow on dry bread, ^
Yet were your labor lost and worn: ^
But they whom God does love and keep ^
Receive all things with quiet sleep. ^

that men have heirs t'injoy their land ^
It is the gift of God's own hand: ^
For God himself does multiply, ^
Of his great li-be-ra-li-ty, ^
The blessing of posterity. ^

They grow in strength and activeness, ^
In person and in comeliness: ^
So that a shaft shot with courage, ^
Of one that has a most strong arm, ^
Flies not so swift, nor does like harm. ^

Furnished with such artillery: ^
For when in peril he shall be, ^
Such one shall never shake nor shiver ^
When that he pleads before the Judge ^
Against his soes that bear him grudge. ^
PSALM CXXVIII Beati omnes.
T. S.
BLessed ar^ thou that fear God, ^
and walk in his way: ^

happy art thou I say. ^

so does thy wife spring out: ^
Thy children stand like olive plants ^
thy table round about. ^

and he shall let thee see, ^

and her fe-li-ci-ty. ^

to thy great joys increase: ^
And likewise grace on Israel, ^
pro-spe-ri-ty and peace. ^
PSALM CXXIX. Saepe expugnaverunt.
Often they, now Israel may say, ^
me from my youth assailed: ^

yet never they prevailed. ^

and furrows long did cast: ^
righteous Lord has cut the cords ^
of wicked foes at last. ^

and turned back also: ^

which with'reth e're it grow. ^

enough to sill his hand: ^
Nor can he fill his lap, that goes ^
to glean upon the land. ^

to let his blessing fall: Nor say, we bless you in the Name ^
of God the Lord at all. ^
PSALM CXXX. De profundis.
W. W.
LOrd, to thee I make my moan, ^
when dangers me oppress: ^
I call, I sigh, plain, and groan, ^
trusting to find release. ^

for it is full due time: ^
And let thine ears aye be pressed, ^
unto this prayer mine. ^

our sins, and them peruse: ^
Who shall then escape and say, ^
I can my self excuse? ^

and turn'st us to thy grace: ^
That we with hearts most careful, ^
should fear before thy face. ^

my soul waits on his will: ^
For his promise is most just, ^
and I hope therein still. ^

waiting for him always, ^
More than they which watch and ward ^
to see the dawning day. ^

in the Lord put his trust: ^
He is that God of mercy ^
that his deliver must. ^

Isra-el from his sin: ^
And all such as surely have ^
their confidence in him. ^
PSALM CXXXI. Domine, non est.
O Lord I am not puffed in mind, ^
I have no scornful eye: ^
I do not ex-er-cise my self ^
in things that be too high. ^

even from his mothers breast: ^
So have I, Lord, behaved my self ^
in silence and in rest. ^

let him be all thy stay: ^
From this time forth for e-ver-more, ^
from age to age, I say. ^
PSALM CXXXII. Memento Dom.
REmember David's troubles, Lord, ^
how to the Lord he swore: ^

to keep for e-vermore. ^

nor climb up to my bed: ^
Nor let my temples take their rest, ^
nor the eyes in my head. ^

a pla^e to sit thereon: ^

an ha-hi-ta-ti-on. ^

there did we hear this sound: ^
And in the fields and forests the^^* ^
these (...) first were sound. ^

his (...) ^here: ^
Before his footstool to fall down. and worshi^ him in fear. ^

in to thy re^sing-place* ^
^oth (...) and the (...) of thy strength, ^
the presence of thy grace. ^

with truth and (...): ^
Let all thy Saints, and ho-ly men, ^
sing all with joy-ful-ness. ^

refuse not, Lord, I say, ^
The face of thine a-noin-ted Lord ^
nor turn thy face away.
The second Part.

and will not shrink from it: ^
Saying, the fruit of thy body ^
u-pon thy seat shall sit. ^

that I shall learn each one: ^
Then shall their sons for e-ver sit: ^
u-pon thy princely throne. ^

and loves therein to dwell: ^

I love and like it well. ^

her victuals every where: ^
And I will sa-tis-fie with bread ^
the needy that be there. ^

with my sal-va-tion: ^
And all her Saint; shall sing for joy ^
of my pro-te-cti-on. ^

of David for to bud: ^
For there I have ordained for mine ^
A lantern bright and good. ^

with shame for e-ver-more: ^
But I will cause his crown to shine ^
more fresh than heretofore. ^
PSALM CXXXIII. Ecce quam.
W. W.
O How happy a thing it is, ^
and joyful for to see, ^
Brethren together ^ast to hold ^
the band of a-mi-ty! ^

and that costly ointment, ^
Which on the Sa-cri-fi-cer's h^^d ^
by God's precept was spent. ^

but drencht his beard throughout, ^
And fi-nal ly it did run down ^
his rich at tire a-bout. ^

the dew of Hermon hill, ^
And Si-on with her silver drops ^
the fields with fruit does fill. ^

his blessings ma-ni-fold: ^
Whose hearts and minds without all guile ^
this knot do keep and hold. ^
PSALM CXXXIV. Ecce nunc.
W. W.
BEhold and have regard, ^
ye servants of the Lord, ^
Which in his house by night do watch, ^
praise him with one accord. ^

unto his holy place: ^
And give the Lord his praises due, ^
his benefits ^m^r^^e. ^

bot^ (...) and heaven frame, ^
Does Sion bless, and will conserve, ^
for evermore the same. ^
PSALM CXXXV. Laudate Dom.
O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, ^
praise him with one accord ^
O praise him still all ye that be ^
the servants of the Lord: ^

and be in the house of the Lord: ^
Ye of his Court and of his House, ^
praise him with one accord. ^

sing praises to his Name: ^
It is a comely and good thing, ^
always to do the same. ^

his very own you see: ^
So has he chosen Israel, ^
his people for to be. ^

the Lord is very great: ^
He is indeed above all gods, ^
most easy to entreat. ^

all that full well he wrought: ^
In heaven, in earth, and in the sea, ^
which he has made of naught. ^

he makes lightnings and rain: ^
He brings forth thee winds al-so, ^
he made nothing in vain. ^

in Egypt that took rest: ^
He spared there no li-ving thing, ^
the man nor yet the beast. ^

O Egypt void of vaunts: ^
On Pharaoh thy cursed King, ^
and his severe servants. ^

and did great acts and things: ^
He slew the great and migh-ti-est, ^
and chief of all their Kings. ^

and Og King of Bashan: ^
He slew also the Kingdoms all, ^
that were of Canaan. ^

an heritage we see: ^
To Is-ra-el his own people. ^
an heritage to be.
The second Part.

and thy memorial ^
Throughout all generations, ^
that are or ever shall. ^

his people all indeed: ^
And to his servants he will show ^
favor in time of need. ^

in all the coasts and lands, ^
Of silver and of gold they be, ^
the work even of men's hands. ^

and eyes that have no sight: ^

their mouths be breathless quite. ^

that so do set them forth: ^
And likewise those that trust in them, ^
or think they be ought worth. ^

see that ye praise the Lord: ^
And ye that be of Aarons house, ^
praise him with one accord. ^

praise ye likewise the Lord: ^
And ye that stand in awe of him, ^
Praise him with one accord. ^

the great praise of the Lord, ^
which dwells in Je-ru-sa-lem, ^
praise him with one accord. ^
CXXXVI. Confitemini Dom.
PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, ^
for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^
^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures forever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^
^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^

for his mercy endures for ever. ^
All that has breath praise ye the Lord, ^
for his mercy endures for ever. ^
Another of the same
by T. C.
O Laud the Lord benign, ^
whose mercies last for aye: ^
Give thanks and praises sing ^
to God of gods I say: ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

whose mercies aye do dure: ^

does work by his great power. ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure, ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

by his great wisdom high: ^
The heavenly firmament ^
did frame, as we do see. ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure, ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

of all the earth did siretch: ^
And on the waters-large ^
the same he did out-reach. ^
For certainly his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure, ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

for why? his love is aye: ^
Sun we see, ^
To rule the lightsom day, ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure, ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

which shines in our sight: ^
and Stars that do appear, ^
to guide the darksom night. ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

all Egypt smote he then: ^
The firstborn less and^more, ^
he slew of beasts and men. ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure, ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

his Israel forth brought: ^

and stretched arm has wrought. ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

which stood up like a wall: ^
through it to go ^
His chosen children all. ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

The proud King Pha-ra-oh, ^
With his huge host of men, ^
And Chariots eke al-so, ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

His people safe and sound: ^

Great Kings he brought to ground, ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

Kings mighty and of fame. ^

Se-hon the King by name, ^
For certainly, ^
his mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

O^ Basan King al-so: ^
he-ri-tage ^
He gave his people though. ^
For cer-tain-ly, ^
his mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

His servant dear, I say, ^
He gave the same to dwell, ^
And there abide for aye. ^
For cer-tain-ly, ^
his mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure, ^
e-ter-nal-ly. ^

in our most base degree: ^

In safety set us free: ^
For cer-tain-ly, ^
His mercies dure, ^
both firm and sure, ^
E-ter-nal-ly. ^

with food he does full fill: ^

to laud be it your will. ^
For cer-tain-ly, ^
His mercies dure ^
both firm and sure, ^
E-ter-nal-ly. ^
PSALM CXXXVII. Super flumina.
W. W.
WHen as we sat in Ba-by-lon, ^
the rivers round a-bout: ^
And in remembrance of Si-on, ^
the tears for grief burst out. ^

the willow trees u-pon: ^
For in that place men for their use ^
had planted man' a one. ^

said to us tauntingly: ^
Now let us hear your Hebrew songs, ^
and pleasant me-lo-dy. ^

his sorr'ful heart to sing ^
The praises of our loving God ^
thus un-der a strange King? ^

out of my heart let slide: ^
Then let my fingers quite forget ^
the warbling harp to guide. ^

be ti'd for e-ver fast: ^
If that I joy before I see ^
thy full de-li-v'rance past. ^

the cursed noise and cry, ^
That Edom's sons against us made, ^
when they razed our City. ^
Remember. Lord, their cru-el words, ^
when as with one accord ^
They cried, on, sack and raze their walls, ^
in despite of their Lord. ^

at length to dust be brought: ^
And happy shall that man be cali'd, ^
that our revenge has wrought. ^

that takes thy children young: ^
To dash their brains against hard stones, ^
that li'n the streets among. ^
PSALM CXXXVIII. Confitebor tibi.
THee will I praise with my whole heart, ^
my Lord, my God, always: ^
Even in the presence of the gods ^
I will advance thy praise. ^

will look and worship thee: ^
And praised in my thankful mouth, ^
thy ho-ly Name shall be. Even for thy loving kindness sake, ^
and for the truth withal: ^
For thou thy Name have by thy word ^
advanced o-ver all. ^

and thou have made al-so ^
The power of increased strength ^
within my soul to grow. ^

give praise to thee, O Lord: ^
For they of thy most ho-ly mouth ^
have heard the mighty word. ^

in singing shall entreat: ^
Because the glory of the Lord ^
it is ex-cee-ding great. ^

behold the lowly sprite: ^
But he (contemning) knows a-far ^
the proud and lof-ty wight. ^

do walk, yet shall I stand, ^
Renewed by thee, O my Lord, ^
thou will stretch out thy hand. U-pon the wrath of all my sees, ^
and saved shall I be. ^
By thy right hand, the Lord God will ^
perform his work to me. ^

Lord, do me not forsake: ^
Forsake me not, that am the work ^
which thine own hand did make. ^
PSALM CXXXIX. Domine probasti.
O Lord thou have me tried and known, ^
my sitting thou do know, ^

thou understand'st also. ^

thou compassest always: ^
And by familiar custom art ^
acquainted with my ways. ^

but known it is to thee: ^

thou lay'st thine hand on me. ^

Lord is thy cunning skill: ^
It is (...) high, that I the same ^
cannot attain until. ^

Lord whither shall I go? Or whither shall I fly away, ^
thy presence to escape fro? ^

lo, thou art present there: ^
In hell if I lie down below, ^
even there thou do appear. ^

and let me go and hide: ^
Even there where are the farthest parts ^
where slowing Sea does slide. ^

thy reaching hand me guide: And hy right hand shall hold me fast, ^
and make me to abide. ^

yet shrowed me from thy sight: ^
Lo, even also the darkest night ^
about me shall be light. ^

but ni^ht does shine as day^ ^
To thee the darkness and the light ^
are both alike always.
The second Part.

and thou have cov'red me, ^
When I within my mothers womb ^
enclosed was by thee. ^

and wondrously I am: ^
Thy works are mavelous, right well ^
my soul does know the same. ^

although in secret place ^
I have been made, and in the earth ^
beneath I shaped was. ^

saw me, for in thy book ^
Were written all, naught was before ^
that after fash'on took. ^

how dear are they to me: ^
And of them all how passing great ^
the endless number be. ^

more than the sand I see: ^
And whenever I awake, ^
yet am I still with thee. ^

O that thou would slay; ^
Even those, O God, to whom, depart, ^
depart from me, I say. ^

that speak full wickedly: ^
Those that are lifted up in vain, ^
being enemies to thee. ^

and that in earnest wise? ^
Contend I not against them all ^
against thee that arise? ^

even as my utter foes. ^

my thoughts prove and disclose. ^

in me there any be: ^
And in thy way (O God my guide,) ^
for ever lead thou me. ^
PSALM CXL. ^ripe me
LOrd save me from the evil man, ^
and from the cruel wight: ^
And from all those that evil do ^
imagine in their sprite. ^

their tongues, lo, they have whet ^
^

is adders poison set. ^

preserve me to abide ^
Free from the cruel man, that means ^
to cause my steps to slide. ^

and they have spread a net ^
With cords in my pathway, and gins ^
for me eke have they set. ^

Thou art my God alone: ^
Hear me, O Lord, O hear the voice ^
wherewith I pray and moan. ^

the strength that saves me: ^
My head in day of battle has ^
been covered still be thee. ^

the end of his desire: ^
Perform not ^s ill thought, lest he ^
with pride be set on fire. ^

the chiefest of them all: ^
Lord let the mischief of their lips ^
upon themselves befall. ^

them in consuming flame, ^
And in deep pits, so as they may ^
not rise out of the same. ^

be set in stable plight: ^
And evil to destruction still ^
shall haunt the cruel wight. ^

revenge and judge the poor: ^

dwell with thee evermore. ^
PSALM CXLI. Domine clamavi.
O Lord upon thee do I call, ^
Lord haste thee unto me: ^
And hearken, Lord, unto my voice, ^
when I do cry to thee. ^

directed in thine eyes: ^
And the up-lifting of my hands, ^
as evening sa-cri-fice. ^

set thou a watch before: ^
And also of my moving lips, ^
O Lord, keep thou the door. ^

incline thou not my heart: ^
With ill men of their delicates, ^
Lord, let me eat no part. ^

for that is good for me: ^
Let him reprove me, and the same ^
a precious oil shall be. ^
Such smiting shall not break my head, ^
the time shall shortly fall, ^
when I shall in their misery ^
make prayers for them all. ^

their Judges shall be cast: ^
Then shall they hear thy words, for then ^
they have a pleasant taste. ^

lo scattered are they found: ^
As he that heweth wood, or he ^
that diggeth up the ground. ^

do look up unto thee: ^
In thee is all my trust, let not ^
my soul forsaken be. ^

Lord, keep me from the snare: ^
And from the subtle gins of them ^
that wicked workers are. ^

together let them fall: ^
While I do by thy help escape ^
the danger of them all. ^
PSALM CXLII. Voce mea.
BEfore the Lord God with my voice ^
I did send out my cry: ^
And with my strained voice un-to ^
the Lord God prayed I. ^

to pour I did not spare: ^
And in the presence of the Lord ^
my trouble did declare. ^

my path was known to thee: ^
In way where I did walk a snare ^
they sli-ly laid for me. ^

but none there would me know: ^
All refuge failed me, and for ^
my soul none cared though. ^

my hope thou on-ly art: ^
Thou in the land of living art ^
my port'on and my part. ^

full low: de-li-ver me ^
From them that do me per-se-cute, ^
For me too strong they be. ^

from prison, Lord, bring out: ^
When thou art good to me, the just ^
shall press me round about. ^
PSALM CXLIII. Domine, exaudi.
LOrd, hear my prayer, hark the plaint ^
that I do make to thee: ^
Lord, in thy na-tive truth, and in ^
thy justice answer me. ^

O en-ter not at all: ^
For justified be in thy sight ^
not one that lives shall. ^

my life to ground has thrown: ^
And laid me in the dark, like them ^
that dead are long agone. ^

was mine accumbred sprite: ^
And in me was my troubled heart ^
amazed and afright. ^

thy works I me-di-tate: ^
Yea, in thy works I me-di-tate, ^
that thy hands have create. ^

do stretch my craving hands: ^
My soul de-si-reth af-ter thee, ^
as do the thirsty lands. ^

hide not thy face me fro: ^
Else shall I be like them that down ^
in-to the pit do go. ^

the morning hear and know: ^
For in thee is my trust, show me ^
the way where I shall go. ^

O Lord, de-li-ver me ^
From all mine e-ne-mies: ^
for I have hidden me with thee. ^

thou art my God, I say: ^
Let thy good sp'rit un-to the land ^
of mercy me convey. ^

a-live do thou me make: ^
And out of trouble bring my soul, ^
even for thy Justice sake. ^

O Lord, destroy them all ^
That do oppress my soul: ^
for I thy servant am, and shall. ^
PSALM CXLIV. Benedictus Dom.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, that does ^
instruct my hands to fight: ^
The Lord that does my fingers frame ^
to battle by his might. ^

de-li-ve-rer and shield: ^
In him I trust; my people he ^
subdues to me to yield. ^

thou hold so in prise? ^
Or son of man, that up-on him ^
thou think in such wise. ^

so pass his days to end, ^

the heavens and descend. ^

cast forth thy lightning flame, ^
And scatter them; thine arrows shoot, ^
consume them with the same. ^

O Lord, de-li-ver me: ^
Take me from waters great, from hand ^
of strangers make me free. ^

and sondness does entreat: ^
And their right hand is a right hand ^
of falsehood and deceit. ^

and singing will I be ^
On Viol and on In-stru-ment ^
ten-stringed un-to thee. ^

de-li-ve-rance to Kings: ^
Un-to his servant David help ^
from hurtful sword he brings. ^

whose mouth talks va^ni-ty. ^
And their right hand is a right hand ^
of guile and sub-til-ty. ^

whom growing youth does rear: ^
Our daughters as carved corner-stones, ^
like to a palace fair. ^

with sundry sorts be found: ^
Our sheep bring thousands, in our streets ^
ten thousands may abound. ^

that none do us invade: ^
There be no goings out, nor cries ^
within our streets be made. ^

such blessings are so stored: ^
Yea, blessed all the people are, ^
whose God is God the Lord. ^
PSALM CXLV. Exaltabo te.
THee will I laud, my God, my King, ^
and bless thy Name for aye ^ ^

and bless thee day by day. ^

his greatness none can reach: ^

praise, and thy power preach. ^

the beauty will record: ^
And me-di-tate upon thy works ^
most wonderful, O Lord. ^

thy fearful acts declare: ^
And I to publish all abroad ^
thy greatness will not spare. ^

break of thy goodness great: ^
And I aloud thy righteousness ^
in singing shall repeat. ^

and mer-ci-ful also: ^
Of great abounding mercy, and ^
to anger he is slow. ^

his mercy does exceed: ^
all thy works do praise thee, Lord, ^
and do thy honor spread. ^

the Kingdoms glory show: ^

of men thy power to know.
The second Part.

to spread his glorious praise: ^
Thy kingdom, Lord, a kingdom is ^
that does endure always. ^
And thy dominion through each age ^
endures without decay. ^

their sliding he does stay. ^

thou do them all relieve: ^
And thou to each sufficing ^ood, ^
in season due do give. ^

and bounteously do fill ^
All things whatsoever do live, ^
with gifts of thy good will. ^

his works are holy all. ^
he is that call on him, ^
in truth that on him call. ^

that fear him will fulfill: ^
And he will hear them when they cry, ^
and save them all he will. ^

that bear a loving heart: ^
But he them all that wicked are ^
will utterly subvert. ^

the praises of the Lord: ^
All flesh to praise his holy Name ^
for ever shall accord. ^
PSALM CXLVI. Lauda anima mea.
J. H.
MY soul praise thou the Lord always, ^
my God I will confess: ^

my tongue no time shall cease. ^

though they abound in wealth: ^
Nor in the sons of mortal men, ^
in whom there is no health. ^

to earth anon they fall^^ And then the counsels of their hearts ^
decay and perish all. ^

whom Jacobs God does aid: ^
And he whose hope does not decay. ^
but on the Lord is stayed. ^

the heaven high withal: ^
Which does his word and promise keep ^
in truth, and ever shall. ^

for such as suffer wrong: ^
The poor and hungry he does feed, ^
and loose the fetters strong. ^

the lame to limbs restore: ^
The Lord, I say, does love the right ^
and just man evermore. ^

and stranger sad in heart: ^
And quit the widow from distress, ^
and ill men's ways subvert. ^

O Sion, still shall reign: ^
In time of all posterity, ^
for ever to remain. ^
PSALM CXLVII. Laudate Dominum.
PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good ^
unto our God to sing: ^
For it is pleasant, and to praise ^
it is a comely thing. ^

he builds up alone: ^
And the dispersed of Is-ra-el, ^
does gather into one. ^

their sores up does he bind: ^

and names them in their kind. ^

his wisdom infinite. ^

to ground the wicked wight. ^

unto the Lord rejoice: ^
And to ou^ God upon the harp ^
advance your singing voice. ^

the earth prepares rain* ^
And on the mountains he does make ^
the grass to grow again. ^

young Ravens when they cry: ^

nor in man's legs does lie. ^

the Lord has his delight: ^
And such as do attend upon ^
his mercies shining light.
The second Part.

thy God, O Sion, praise: ^

wherewith thy gates he stays. ^

and in thy borders he ^
Does settle peace, and with the flower ^
of wheat he fills thee. ^

the earth he sends out: ^
And eke his word with speedy course ^
does swiftly run about. ^

like ashes he does spread: ^
morsels cast his ice, thereof ^
the cold who can abide. ^

and melts them again: ^
His wind he makes to blow, and then ^
the waters flow amain. ^

to Ja-cob he does show: ^
His statutes and his judgments he ^
gives Is-ra-el to know. ^

so dealt, nor have they known ^
his secret judgments, ye therefore ^
praise ye the Lord a-lone. ^
PSALM CXLVIII. Laudate Dominum.
J. H.
GIve laud un-to the Lord, ^
From heaven that is so high: ^
Praise him in deed and word, ^
Above the starry sky. ^

His Angels all, ^
Armies royal, ^
Praise him with glee. ^

Which are so clear and bright: ^
The same of you be done, ^
Ye glist'ring stars of light: ^
less ^
Ye Heavens fair, ^

His laud express. ^

All formed as we see: ^
At his voice did appear ^
All things in their degree, ^

To them he made ^
A law and trade, ^
For aye to last. ^

On earth ye Dragons fell: ^
All deeps do ye the same, ^
For it becomes you well. ^

Fire, hail, ice, snow, ^
And storms that blow ^
At his decree. ^

And trees that fruitful are: ^
The Cedars great and tall, ^
His worthy praise declare. ^

Yea birds fly-ing, ^
And worms creeping, ^
That on earth dwell. ^

With all their pompous train: ^
Princes and all judges, ^
That in the world remain, ^
Exalt his Name. ^
^

Old men and babes, ^
Do ye the same. ^

To be most ex-cel-lent, ^
Whose praise is far a-bove ^
The earth and fir-mament. ^

Exalt with bliss ^
The horn of his, ^
And help them all. ^

His praise and worthiness: ^
The children of Israel, ^
Each one both more and less: ^
And al-so they ^
That with good will ^
His words ful-fil; ^
And him o-bey. ^
PSALM CXLIX. Cantate Domino.
SIng ye un-to the Lord our God, ^
a new re-joy-cing song: ^
And let the praise of him be heard ^
his ho-ly saints a-mong. ^

that made him of nothing: ^
And let the seed of Si-on eke ^
be joy-ful in their King. ^

un-to his ho-ly Name: ^
And with the timbrel and the harp ^
sing praises of the same. ^

has in his people set: ^
And by deliverance he will raise ^
the meek to glory great. ^

let all his saints rejoice: ^
And now a-loud up-on their beds ^
advance their singing voice. ^

of God the mighty Lord: ^
And in their hands eke let them bear ^
a double edged sword. ^

the people with their hands: ^

their Lords in i-ron bands. ^

that written is before: ^
This honor all his Saints shall have, ^
praise ye the Lord therefore. ^
PSALM CL. Laudate Dominum.
YIeld un-to God the mighty Lord ^
praise in his Sanctuary: ^
And praise him in the firmament, ^
that shows his power on high. ^

his mighty acts always: ^
According to his exc'lency ^
of greatness give him praise. ^

of sounding Trumpets blow: ^
Praise him up-on the Vi-ol, and ^
up-on the Harp al-so. ^

Organs and Vir-gi-nals: ^

praise him with loud Cymbals. ^

of breathing, praise the Lord: ^
To praise the name of God the Lord ^
a-gree with one ac-cord. ^
The end of the Psalms of DAVID in Meter.

