Effigies Reverendi in Christo Patris D: Simonis Patrick Eliensis Episcopi.


A PARAPHRASE UPON THE BOOKS OF ECCLESIASTES AND THE SONG of SOLOMON. WITH
ARGUMENTS to each Chapter, and ANNOTATIONS thereupon.

By SIMON PATRICK D. D. Now Lord Bishop of Ely.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Luke Meredith at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCC.

To the Right Reverend Father in God and the no less Honorable HENRY, Lord
BISHOP of LONDON, one of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
WE see in Your Lordship such a plain and familiar Example of that Wisdom which
SOLOMON preaches in the Book of ECCLESIASTES, that I am invited thereby to this
boldness of prefixing Your Lordship's Name before the Paraphrase I have made
upon it, and upon the Book that follows it.

A Wisdom, which has raised Your Mind above the deceitfulness of Riches, and
of all Worldly Glories: a Divine Wisdom, which has raised You above your self;
and made the faithful service of God, and of the King, the sole scope of all
Your Endeavors.

It is a token surely of the Divine favor toward us, and ought to be reckoned
among the felicities of our Sovereign's Reign, that a Virtue so active and
laborious in doing good, is placed in such a wide and capacious Sphere, as that
wherein Your Lordship moves. From whence Your influences are no less powerful
than they are benign: stirring us up to industry, and quickening us, by Your own
great Example, to do our Duties uprightly and unweariedly in our several
Stations.

Some small service I hope I have performed in the Explication of these two
holy Books. In the first of which (according to the ancient Opinion) the
foundation is laid for a due progress unto the other: the Mind not being fitted
for such sublime thoughts, as lie hid under the Figures, in the Book of
Canticles, till it has learnt by the Ecclesiastes, the vanity of all earthly
Enjoyments; and, by looking down upon them with contempt, be disposed to value
heavenly Blessings. To this purpose Origin discourses in his Preface to the
Song of Songs.

Which is a Depth into which I have adventured to dive, though it has been
famous, as one speaks, for the shipwreck of many great Pilots: who went too
far, as I conceive, and sought for more there than is to be found; and
therefore miscarried. Which Rock I have carefully avoided; and steered my
Course by such a clear and certain Direction (which I thought I espied in other
holy Writings) that if I have kept my eye steadfastly fixed upon it, I am
satisfied has not misled me, but carried me to the right sense of this
admirable Piece of Divine Poetry.

Which I trust I have made so evident, that if the Readers will seriously
consider the Rise and Ground I have taken for my Exposition: even they who have
made bold to profane this Book with their wanton imaginations, will hereafter
look upon it with reverence.

If in any Part of this difficult Work, I have mistaken my way Your Lordship I
know has the Goodness, not only to pardon the errors of my weakness, but, to
accept of the sincerity of my endeavors to do Honor to the Holy Scriptures:
by representing them, to the best of my power, in their native Beauty, that is
simplicity, unto the eyes of those, who have the heart to make them their Study.

Praying God to continue Your Lordship a long Blessing to this Church, by Your
prudent, steady and obliging Conduct, in the Government of us, who have the
happiness to be under Your particular care; I remain,

MY LORD, Your most humble and dutiful Servant, S. Patrick.

THE PREFACE.
I. THis Book not carrying in the front of it the express Name of SOLOMON, it
has emboldned some to take the liberty of intitling other Authors to it.
Hezekiah, for instance, whom the Talmudists make to speak those Words in the
entrance of it, The words of the Preacher, etc. Or Isaiah, as R. Moses Kimchi,
with some other Jews, fancy: Or, to name no more, Zorobabel, whom Grotius (in
his Notes upon Chap. XII. 11.) conjectures to have appointed certain men to
make this Collection. For so he would have the word COHELETH translated, a
Collector; or Heaper up of Opinions, rather than a Preacher.

II. But there are so many passages in the Book which agree to none but
Solomon, that it is a wonder so great a man as Grotius should be led away from
the common Opinion, by such slight reasons, as I shall presently mention. For
instance, there never was any Body that could truly speak those words which we
read v. 16. of the first Chapter, but only Solomon. For neither Hezekiah, nor
Josiah, nor Zorobabel kept such great State, as he did, much less excelled him
in Wisdom. And who but he could boast of such things as are mentioned Chap. II.
v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. to represent the splendor wherein he lived, above all
that had been before him in Jerusalem? Or, on the contrary, Who had such reason
as he, to make that sad complaint (Chap. VII. 26, etc.) of the mischief he had
received by Women? And to omit the rest, those words in the last Chapter, v. 9,
10. can belong to none but him, who set in order many Proverbs, as appears in
the foregoing Book.

III. Which things are so convincing, that Grotius is forced to acknowledge
that Zorobabel caused this Book to be composed in the Name of King Solomon (for
he was no King himself, but a Governor under the King of Persia) repenting of
his former vain and sinful life. Which very acknowledgment carries in it a
plain solution of the principal Argument, whereby he was led to this odd
Opinion: Which is, that he finds some words in this Book, that are no where to
be met withal, but in Daniel and Ezra, and the Chaldee Interpreters. Which
makes it probable, he thinks, that it was written after their Captivity in
Babylon. But supposing Solomon to write here as a Penitent, after he had
frequented the Company of many Outlandish Women (of whom we read 1 Kings XI. 1,
2.) it need not seem strange to us that he had learnt the use of many of their
words. And so, notwithstanding this Objection, he may still be thought to have
been the Author of this Book himself: which the Hebrews generally conceive to
have been written by him, toward the end of his Reign; after he had tried all
manner of pleasures, even to an excess. Besides, in other Books of Scripture
there are words, for the signification of which we are fain to have resort unto
other languages; and particularly the Arabic; because they are not to be found
elsewhere in the Scripture: and yet, for all that, might be pure Hebrew,
according to the language which was then spoken, when such Books were written.

IV. But it is not fit to stay any longer, in the confutation of such a weak
reason as this; which has no force in it (though it be the best he has) to
make us think of any other Author of this Book, than Solomon. Who, if he did
not write it himself it is certain spoke the things contained in it: and calls
himself the PREACHER, because of the great gravity and dignity of the Subject,
whereof he treats; of which he was wont to speak frequently (Chap. XII. 9.)
desiring it might be understood and laid to heart, by the whole Congregation of
Israel; as the Word Coheleth seems to import; which in the Aethiopick language
signifies a Circle, or a Company of men gathered together, in the form of a
Circle, as Ludolphus has lately observed. For the scope of this Discourse is
concerning the chief Good or happiness of man: the great end he should propose
to himself all his life long. Which is not that, he shows, which men generally
follow: but that which is generally neglected. For most men mind nothing, but
just what is before them: which they will find at last, as he had done by sad
experience, to be mere vanity; utterly unable to quiet their minds. Which must
therefore seek for satisfaction in something else; and, after all their busy
thoughts, designs and labors come to this Conclusion, that to fear God and
keep his Commandments, is the happiness of man: who ought therefore to use all
the pleasures of this World (which is the only Good it can afford us) with a
constant respect to the future account, we must all make to God.

V. This, it appears by the beginning and the end of this Book, is the Scope of
it. Unto which they that will not attend, are wont to pick out here and there a
loose Sentence, which agrees with their desires; and then please themselves
with a fancy that they have got Solomon on their side, to help to maintain
their infidelity: Not considering what he asserts directly contrary, in other
places. Where he presses the greatest and most serious reverence to Almighty
God, IV. 17. V. 1, 2, etc. VIII. 12, 13. XII. 13. together with a remembrance
of the future Judgment, III. 17. XI. 9. XII. 14. Works of mercy and charity
also, whereby we may do good to others, XI. 1, 2, etc. and the contempt of
those frivolous pleasures, which draw our hearts from God and from good works,
II. 2. VII. 2, etc. All which plainly show, that those words which seem to
countenance men in their neglect of Religion, and open a Gap to licentiousness,
are only Opinions which he intends to confute, according to the method he had
propounded to himself in this Book. Wherein he first represents the various
ends men drive at; which in the very entrance of it (that men might not mistake
his meaning) he pronounces to be so vain; that he had not words significant
enough to express their vanity; and then, their different Opinions about God,
and his Providence, and their own souls: and what thoughts he himself had
tossed up and down in his mind; which at last came to that resolution I
mentioned before, wherewith he ends his Book. In the close of which, to give
the greater weight unto what he had said, he adds this: That these were not
only the result of his own thoughts, but the judgment of other Wise men, with
whom he had consulted.

Let no man therefore deceive himself (to use the grave words of Castalio) as
some, I wish I could say a few, have done: who not minding the end and drift of
this Book, but having met with some one place in it that seems to favor their
beloved lusts, lay hold on that Scrap alone; and with that endeavor to defend
their licentious course of life. As if they expected, they should find God just
such a Judge hereafter, as they are of themselves at present.

VI. To comprise all in a few words. The sense of the whole Sermon, as we may
call it, seems to be comprehended in this Syllogism,

Whatsoever is vain and perishing cannot make men happy;

But all men's designs here in this World are vain and perishing:

Therefore, They cannot by prosecuting such designs make themselves happy.

The Proposition is evident in it self; and needs no Proof. The Assumption
therefore he demonstrates in the six first Chapters, by an enumeration of
Particulars; as I shall show in the Argument before, or Annotations upon, each
Chapter: And then proceeds, in the rest of the Book, to advise men unto the
best course to make themselves happy; evidently proving all along from this
inconstancy and vanity of all things here, that he who wishes well to himself,
ought to raise his mind above them, to the Creator of the World: and, expecting
to give an account to Him, so to demean himself in the use of all earthly
enjoyments, that he devoutly acknowledge his Divine Majesty, fearing, and
worshipping Him, and doing his Will.

Such indeed is the dullness of Mankind, that, hearing all was but vanity, they
might condemn every thing as evil and hurtful; and declaim too bitterly against
this World. Which was so far from Solomon's intention, that having explained
the vanity of all our enjoyments here, and the vanity of humane cares,
solicitous desires and endeavors; he persuades all men to be content with
things present, to give God thanks for them, to use them freely with quiet
minds: living as pleasantly, and taking as much liberty, as the remembrance of
a future account will allow; void of anxious and troublesome thoughts, what
will become of them hereafter in this life.

VII. But it may not be amiss perhaps to give a larger account of this Sermon;
and let the Reader see in what method it proceeds. For many men imagine it to
be a confused Discourse, which does not hang together: and therefore have
explained this Book, only by giving an account of the meaning of each Verse; as
if it were a distinct Sentence, independent on the rest; like those in his
Proverbs. But Antonius Corranus, a most excellent person, in a small Discourse
of his upon this Book, written above an hundred years ago; has drawn such a
Scheme of it, as I believe will satisfy those who consider it, that Solomon
proceeds after an exact order, to deduce what he intended. And therefore I will
translate the sense of what he says, into English; which is to this purpose:

VIII. The design of the Author is to find out and to show, What it is, in
which the chief good and complete felicity of man does consist. As appears by
this, that reflecting upon various things in which men place their happiness;
at the end of his Discourse upon every one of them, he rejects them as utterly
insufficient for that purpose: but continues his search so far till at last he
finds it, and declares in the concluding Epiphonema, that he had been seeking
it, through the whole Discourse, saying, the sum of the matter is this, Fear
God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole of man.

Now there are two principal Parts of the whole Sermon, The first of which
contains a recital, and confutation, of men's false Opinions about their
Chiefest Good: the other teaches, in what our genuine, true and solid felicity
lies; both in this life, and in the next. In both he shows very deligently,
what is the end to which a man should direct all his Counsels, Studies and
Endeavors, what he ought to follow, as most desirable above all things; and
what to avoid, as the extremest of evils.

Of the first of these he treats in his VI. first Chapters; of the other in as
many more that follow. Which is both a perspicuous and exact method. For being
to treat of felicity, it was but fitting he should divide it into false, and
true; and then define aright what that true felicity is. For we must first shun
that which is evil, and then pursue that which is good: according to the
frequent admonitions we meet withal in the holy Prophets.

The first Part.
IX. Now the first part of his Sermon relies upon a Proposition, which no body
denies, viz. That vain, frail and troublesome things cannot make any man happy:
And such says he in the very first words of the Book, are all things here,
Vanity of Vanities; i. e. extremely vain.

Which Assumption it may seem hard to prove, if we consider what account blind
Mortals make of their own inventions, counsels, studies and labors, by which
they think to attain felicity. But to Solomon nothing was more easy; who
having made a full and long experiment of all enjoyments here, most evidently
demonstrates this by an enumeration of Parts, and that in an apt, perspicuous,
and compendious order. For he neither confounds the parts; nor too curiously
pursues them; nor mentions all the false Opinions of men about the chiefest
Good (which would have been too tedious, if like Varro he had told us of two
hundred, eighty five, and yet that he could not reckon all) but reducing the
most probable Opinions unto four principal Heads, he confutes them by various
Arguments; drawn chiefly from adjuncts and effects.

The first is of those who place Blessedness in the knowledge of natural
things, and in humane Wisdom, which begins at the 12th. Verse of the first
Chapter, and reaches to the beginning of the second. For in the precedent
Verses, he only lays a foundation for his Discourse, and plains his way to the
proof of what he intended.

The second is of those who place it in pleasure; which he dispatches, as
unworthy of a long confutation, in the three first Verses of the second
Chapter. But there being those of this Sect, who joining these two together,
pleasure and knowledge, imagine they will make up a complete happiness; he
spends more time in showing their Vanity; from the 4th Verse of the second
Chapter, to the 16th Verse of the third: interposing only a Parenthesis,
wherein he compares Wisdom with Folly; and from the effects of both shows how
much the former is to be preferred before the latter.

The third touches those who think Honors, Magistracies, and Power in the
Commonwealth, to be the highest of all Goods. In which number are they, who
seek to extend their Empire, though it be by a vast effusion of their own
Subjects blood; by which means also they establish their tyranny. when they
have acquired it. Which disputation reaches from the 16th Verse of the third
Chapter, to the 9th Verse of the fifth. Yet so, that from the beginning of the
fourth Chapter to the 13th Verse of the same, he inserts the miseries that grow
from such tyrannical administration; and the Vices which break in, upon the
impunity of evil Doers, and neglect of the Laws. Particularly, he gives us a
lively description, of Emulation, and Covetousness: two of the foulest and most
cruel pests of the Commonwealth. In the fifth Chapter also he inserts a
Discourse of that superstitious and vain Worship of God; in which some,
despising all other things, place their satisfaction: and most lamentably
applaud themselves in it. Which Disputation contains in it some excellent
Precepts of true Religion and Piety; which the Reader may find, in the first
eight Verses of the fifth Chapter.

After which follows the fourth Opinion of those who propound to themselves
Riches and Wealth as their last end: which if they can attain, they doubt not
they shall live very happily. Which extends it self from thence to the 11th
Verse of the sixth Chapter; where you have the general Epilogue of the first
Part, concerning false felicity.

The other Part.
X. Then follows the second, and most Elegant as well as useful part of the
Sermon. In which he teaches, that the felicity, for which men take so much
pains (every one going his own way to it) is not to be found any where, but in
a religious and serious fear of God: according to that of the Psalmist, Blessed
are all they that fear the Lord; that walk in his ways; and again, Blessed is
the man that fears the Lord; that delights greatly in his Commandments. For
other things; though they promise felicity, yet they cannot perform it; because
they have such a mixture of vanity, trouble and grief with them, as will not
suffer them to be absolutely good; and because, if they were sincere, yet they
being so uncertain that they may be lost before we dye, and at the best are
terminated within the narrow Bounds of this short life; they cannot give that
satisfaction and quiet of mind, which we desire. But the fear of God is such a
Good that it both gives true contentment, satisfaction and tranquillity of mind,
as long as we live; and when we die, fills us with a sure hope of a better
life: in which true and genuine felicity is accomplished.

For the sum of what can be said in this matter, may be reduced to this
Argumentation:

That which can make a man's mind quiet, still and calm, both in life and death;
that alone can make him happy;

Now this the Fear of the Lord can do for him, and this alone:

Therefore this, and nothing else, will make him a happy man.

The Proposition needs no Proof; For then we feel our selves happy, when our
minds are so quiet and well pleased; that they neither grieve, nor fear, nor
solicitously desire, nor vainly hope for uncertain things: but rest satisfied
in that excellent and most certain joy and hope, which arises out of a pure
Conscience.

The Assumption is proved from two effects of the Fear of God, viz. Wisdom and
Justice. The first of which teaches us what to follow, and what to fly: and
furnishes us with such caution, that we be not imposed on, in the choice of
that which seems to be good for us. The other instructs us to do our whole
Duty, toward God, toward our Neighbor, and toward our selves. In which two
all Religion and piety, together with satisfaction, tranquillity and felicity,
is contained.

And because effects are more known than their causes, and it would be
uncertain what he meant by the fear of God, unless he explained it by those
things wherein it consists; he begins his Disputation on this Subject with
those effects; and employs himself wholly in showing what are the Offices of
Wisdom and Justice: that he might inform us not only what is the Chief Good, to
which we ought to aspire; but by what ways and means we may come at it.

XI. Of Wisdom and Prudence therefore, which is conversant in the choice of
things; he treats in the first place; Chapter the Seventh: because no man can
act either righteously, or valiantly, or temperately, unless, by the benefit of
Prudence, he be before instructed what course is to be held in every one of
these, and of what force they are unto our happiness. He explains therefore its
various Offices in such Documents as these; That a good Fame is to be desired
above all things; That Death ought to be the Subject of our frequent
Meditations; That those things are to be avoided, which incite to pleasure, and
the contrary to be followed, which admonish us to be modest and sober; That
severity and gravity are to be preferred before mirth; Chastisements and
corrections to be willingly admitted; Flattery and soothing people to be
cashiered; Not to be too much disturbed at calumnies and reproaches; To take no
Bribes; To expect the issue and conclusion of things; To bridle anger, as an
Enemy to reason; To love the use of money, not money it self; and such like.
Unto which, last of all, he adjoins a brief commendation of Wisdom; rejecting
both the larger Explication of its effects, and its praises, to the end of the
ninth Chapter, and beginning of the tenth.

Now this first Part concerning Wisdom, is handled in the twelve first Verses
of the seventh Chapter.

XII. Then he enters upon the other, concerning Justice: which he divides into
that which respects God, and that which respects men. The former of which
(comprehended under the names of Religion, Piety, and Godliness) consists in
this: That in the first place, we conceive aright and judge well of God, and of
his Providence in the Administration of humane Affairs; and then that we pay
Him that Honor, Worship and Service, which is due unto His Divine Majesty.

This Discourse, which he touches upon from the 13th to the 16th Verse of the
VIIth Chapter he resumes again in the VIIIth Chapter, and pursues it from the
9th Verse of it, to the 13th Verse of the IXth Chapter.

As for that Justice which respects others, it is manifold. For it is either
toward men, or toward women: Which consists, in a manner, altogether in
shunning both the Extremes of it, and observing an (...), moderation or equity;
and has respect to their offenses, either against our selves or others: which
we are partly to correct, and partly to bear withal. Which is the sum of his
Discourse, from the 16th Verse, to the beginning of the VIIIth Chapter.

Where interspersing a few things, after his manner, in the praise of Wisdom,
he begins another Division of Justice: concerning the Duty of Subjects to their
Princes, from the second Verse to the eighth; and on the other side, the Duty
of Princes toward their Subjects: of both which, it may be fit to give a
larger account. For this Tractate is truly Royal, and worthy to be read
perpetually, in this most turbulent Age, both by high and low: That from hence
Subjects may learn to perform Obedience, and the greatest observance both in
word and deed toward their Princes; choosing rather to bear and suffer any
thing, than to attempt Rebellion against them; and Kings may also remember,
that they ought to govern their Kingdoms, according to the Rules of Law and
Equity, and not according to their own will and pleasure; God having committed
unto them the Scepter of Justice, Clemency, and Welfare of their Subjects; not
the Scepter of Cruelty, Tyranny, and Destruction.

In which this Wise King observing both Princes and People, to be too
negligent, and that thence arises a very great license in sinning, lest well
affected minds should be offended at this horrible corruption of manners; he
digresseth into a long, but very profitable and necessary Disputation of God 's
Providence, and the Economy of Justice. Which though the wicked deny, and
deride, because they see not such manifest difference, as one would expect,
made between the Good, and the Bad, in the Events that befall them both; yet he
advises all that fear the Divine Majesty not to be dejected and disheartened at
this; nor to search with too much curiosity into God 's secrets; but steadfastly
resolving, that it shall not be well with the wicked, though all things flow at
present according to their hearts desire, and that whatsoever the godly may
suffer now, they shall find at last that God is their Friend; to look upon
themselves therefore as happy men, both in the peace of their Conscience in
this World, and in a sure and certain hope of a better condition in the other.
Upon which account, he frequently inculcates this counsel, That they who are
studious to fear God, and do well, being secure of God's Administration and of
the event of things, should enjoy the present good things, which his Divine
Bounty bestows upon them; with cheerful minds, and with thanksgiving to Him.
This Discourse (which it must be confessed is not altogether so methodical as
some other) extends) from the 9th Verse of the eighth Chapter, to the 13th
Verse of the ninth.

And because he had shown, that the event of things is not in our own counsel
and in humane Wisdom, but in the hand of God, lest any body should be so weak
or perverse, as thence to conclude, That it is the same thing, whether we act
wisely or foolishly; he again makes a Digression into the praises of Wisdom;
showing how much it excells folly, from the effects of both. It begins at the
17th Verse, and reaches to the 4th of the tenth Chapter. Where he returns to
his Discourses, about the mutual Offices of Justice between one another; both
of Princes and Subjects.

And then in the six first Verses of the eleventh Chapter, he exhorts most
earnestly to Liberality, and Almsgiving; which is no small part of
righteousness. And with that he concludes the two effects of the Fear of God;
Wisdom and Justice.

XIII. The rest of the Work is his Peroration: in which he fully opens his
Opinion concerning the Chief Good: which he confirms to lie wholly in a truly
religious Fear of God. Which therefore he seriously exhorts every one to make
their study as early as is possible: before dull and unactive Old Age, and
Death it self, (both which he elegantly describes) come upon us, and, before we
think of it, oppress us.

This is the method of this most excellent Sermon: which I cannot but exhort
all men to study diligently, and with great intention of mind; both for the
Authors sake, and for the matter of it. Which he handles in such a manner, as
first to draw us from the desire and love of earthly things; and from the
perverse use of them: and then to lead us unto the true and lawful use of them,
without any offense to God, as well as without hurt to our selves. And he
teaches us how we may, without a preposterous solicitude and anxiety about
events, enjoy all things in the Fear of God; with tranquillity and satisfaction
of mind at present; and at last, by the same Fear of God and observance of his
Commandments, arrive at a never-dying felicity.

To conclude, He intersperses through the whole Discourse abundance of Common
Places, both Philosophical and Theological; which are so fitted to make us
every way more learned, more prudent, and more pious; that we shall find great
use of them in all the passages of our lives.

XIV. Thus that learned Spaniard concludes his Preface: which I have
contracted, that I might set before the Readers eyes in one short view, both
the design and the procedure of the Discourse. Of the former (the Design) there
is no doubt: and the latter is very regular, as it will further appear, in the
explication I shall give of it. Wherein I have not followed this Author
throughout, in every Part of this Division of the Book; because, though for the
most part I take it to be accurate enough; yet, I think, in several places I
had reason to differ from him; and take another way to make the connection more
easy and natural; and the sense thereby more clear and evident.

I beseech God, that the pains I have taken herein may not be in vain; but
prove an effectual means both to make the mind of Solomon in this Book better
understood; and to turn all our minds from these frivolous things, about which
now they are too much employed, unto the solid and full Good which here he
recommends to us. Who may be the better trusted in what he says; because he
had tried what satisfaction could be found in all manner of enjoyments here:
and it could not be objected to him that he disparaged the World, merely
because he could not get any share in it, or had not the liberty which was
necessary to enjoy it. For no man ever had greater plenty, or gave a greater
loose to his desires; but, after all the experiments he could make, came to
this resolution which he had better have taken at first; that Religion and
Virtue are the only things can make a man happy.

And perhaps, as God suffered St. Thomas to doubt of our Savior's
Resurrection, for the greater confirmation of our Faith; by the satisfaction he
at last received: so he let this great man go astray, that by his dear-bought
experience he might teach us this Wisdom; to keep the closer to God in faithful
obedience.

Which it will be a very great shame, it we do not learn, who live under the
instruction of a greater Master than Solomon; the Son of God himself. By whom
we are taught these things in a more effectual manner; not only by his
Doctrine, but by his whole life, and by his death: in which he declared the
greatest neglect and contempt of this World; and that his mind was wholly set
upon the other.

And what a blessed sort of Reformation would it be, if (as Erasmus somewhere
admirably speaks) we would all lay aside our dissensions, strifes, and
quarrels, and study the Lessons our Lord has taught us. Whose business it was
in this World, to form unto Himself a people that should wholly depend on
heaven, and placing no confidence in any Earthly support or comfort, should be
after another manner rich, after another manner wise, after another manner
noble, after another manner potent, in one word, after another manner happy:
designing to attain felicity by the contempt of those things, which are
vulgarly admired. A people that should be Strangers to filthy lusts, by
studying in this flesh the life of Angels; that should have no need of Divorce,
by being able to mend or to bear all manner of Evils; that should be wholly
ignorant of Oaths, as those who neither distrust, nor will deceive any body;
that make not the getting of Money their business, having laid up their
Treasures in Heaven; that should not be tickled with vain glory, because they
refer all to the Glory of Christ alone; be void of ambition, as disposed, the
greater they are, to submit themselves, so much the more, unto all men for
Christ his sake; that should be unacquainted with wrath, much more with
revenge, as studying to deserve well of those who deserve ill of them: that
should be so innocent in their behavior, as to force commendations even from
Heathens; that should be born again to the purity and simplicity of Infants;
that should live like the Birds of the Air, without care and solicitude; among
whom there should be the greatest concord, nothing different from that which is
between the Members of the same Body; in which mutual Charity should make all
things common; that whether there were any good thing, it should help to supply
him that wanted, or any evil thing, it should either be removed or mitigated by
the good Offices of others; who should be so wise by the teaching of the Holy
Ghost, so live according to the example of Christ, as to be the Salt of the
Earth, the Light of the World, like a City on an Hill, conspicuous to all the
Country round about; whose abilities, whatsoever they are, should make them
forward to help others; to whom this life should seem vile, Death desirable,
out of a longing for immortality; who should neither fear tyranny, nor death,
nor the Devil himself, relying upon the invincible power of Christ alone; who
should act in all things so, as to be ever prepared and ready for that last,
and most to be wished for Day, when they shall take possession of true and of
eternal felicity.

A PARAPHRASE ON THE Book of Ecclesiastes.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
In the eleven first Verses he lays the foundation of his following Discourses,
and makes his way to the proof of what he intends ( viz. That nothing here can
make us solidly happy) by showing how empty all things are; and how short a
time a man has to possess them; and that while it lasts he can only enjoy the
same empty things over and over again; till he be cloyed with them. And then v.
12. he enters into a particular consideration of the insufficiency of humane
Wisdom and knowledge alone, to give us full satisfaction: though this be one of
the very best things wherein men place their felicity. Which Discourse
continues to the end of the Chapter.

1. THE words of the preacher, the Son of David King of Jerusalem.

1. THese are the words of him, who thought the name of a Preacher, or Public
Instructor of Gods people (to whom he calls aloud in this Book, to mind what he
says concerning the supreme Good of Man) no less honorable, than that of the
Son of King David: whom he succeeded in his Throne; and reigned after him in
the holy City Jerusalem. See Annot. [a]

2. Vanity of vanities, says the preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

2. That Good of which you are all desirous, is not there to be found where you
seek it; for all things here below are so frail, so subject to change, and to
vanish, that I have not words to express how vain they are. This is the thing
which the Preacher first undertakes to prove, That they are mere emptiness,
more vain than Vanity it self; so full of trouble and care, as well as
extremely unstable, that to no purpose are all men's endeavors, who seek for
satisfaction from them; especially if they place their highest Good in them.
See Annot. [b]

3. What profit has a man of all his labor which he takes under the sun?

3. For proof of this, let every man survey himself; who consists of body and
of mind. And let him ask his mind, What great matter there remains, after all
its cares for the things of this life? What contentment he, or any man else in
all this World has reaped by his toilsome labors, and anxious thoughts,
wherewith he has rackt himself both day and night? Which have often ended in
disappointment; and when he has enjoyed his desires, this very thing has
spoiled his pleasures, that he could not long enjoy them. See Annot. [c]

4. One generation passes away, and another generation comes: but the earth
abides for ever.

4. For if they do not presently leave him, he in a short time must leave them:
his Body (the other part of him) being made out of the Earth; and therefore how
firm and solid soever it now seem, must be crumbled into Earth again. Which
continues for ever, to receive back those Bodies which come out of it: for no
Generation can abide as the Earth does; but follows the foregoing, as the next
that come after shall follow it, unto their Graves. See Annot. [c]

5. The sun also arises, and the sun goes down and hastes to his place where
he arose.

5. Out of which they cannot return and stand up in their former places, as the
Sun, that quickens all things, does: which in a constant and regular course
arises, and makes not more speed to go down, than it does to appear the next
morning, in the same Glory again. No; man dies, and appears here no more;
though if he should, it would be to dye again. See Annot. [d]

6. The wind goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North; it
whirleth about continually, and the wind returns again according to his
circuits.

6. Nor is the annual course of the Sun less certain than its diurnal; but it
comes back the next year at a fixed time, to the very same Point from whence it
moved this. Nay, the Winds, as fickle and inconstant as they are, whirling with
a mavelous swiftness round the Earth, return at last to the same Quarter from
whence they shifted (and some of them the very same months of the year) to
fetch the same compass, and run the same round they did before.

7. All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full: unto the place
from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.

7. The like Circle there is in Watery Bodies, for the Torrents and Brooks, that
the Rain makes, run into the Rivers, and so into the Sea, which nevertheless
does not swell beyond its Bounds, because it restores all back again to their
former places, by the Vapors which the Sun exhales, or by secret passages
through the Earth: Whilst poor Man alone (who is compounded of all these, of
the Earth, the Air, the Water, and such heat as the Sun administers) passes
away and comes to his place no more; but must be content to imitate these
things, only in their restless agitations.

8. All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.

8. Which is another thing, that increases his trouble; that in this short
life, which he cannot live over again when it is done, he can neither be quiet,
nor move with ease (as the things forenamed do) nor yet acquire satisfaction
with his perpetual motion; but tires himself even in his pleasures; and finds
all sort of business so laborious, that he himself is not able to tell how
tedious it is; and after all is done, he is no better pleased than when he
first begun. For the eye (for instance) and the ear, which are the noblest and
most capacious senses, having seen and heard all manner of things, are as
desirous of some new entertainment, as if they had enjoyed none at all, See
Annot. [e]

9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is
done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the sun.

9. But alas! the very same things (like the Sun, the Wind, and the Rivers)
come about again; and we are cloyed with seeing and hearing what has often
presented it self unto us already, or, at least, has been in times before us,
and will be again, in those that succeed us: There is nothing done now, but
(the persons being changed) will be acted over again in future Ages; to whom
the Sun can show nothing but what we have seen in these days, and others have
seen in the foregoing. And therefore it is vain for any man to expect that
satisfaction now or in future times, which none have found since the World
began: Men will always loath things present, as they have ever done; and long
for those which are a coming, which will ever give them the same satiety. See
Annot. [f]

10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it has been
already of old time which was before us.

10. Is any man able to contradict this and point us to the thing which is
altogether new, and has never been seen or heard before? It may appear perhaps
so to him; but that is to be imputed merely to the shortness of humane life:
which makes us ignorant of what has passed in former Ages (save only in a few
things, transmitted down to us by observing men.) For had we continued many
Generations, that which now seems new and unusual to us, would have appeared
familiar and of great antiquity, as really it is.

11. There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be any
remembrance of things that are to come, with those that shall come after.

11. They that went before us indeed, might have registered such things; but as
they observed little, so they have left the memory of less: nor will this Age,
or those that follow, be more careful; or if they should, Posterity will be as
negligent as former Ages have been, in preserving those Records: For we differ
nothing from our Forefathers, nor will the Ages to come excel this in which we
live; but still the vanity of man, and of all his projects and contrivances,
will continue to the Worlds end.

12. I the preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.

12. And let none imagine that I speak this only as a Preacher, in a zealous
passion, much less in a melancholy mood; but remember that I have long sat upon
a Throne, ruling over God's own peculiar people, in that City which is the very
School of Wisdom: where I wanted nothing either for the body or the mind; and
had both opportunity and ability to make trial of all things wherein men place
their happiness; and therefore may be believed, when I declare nothing but from
my own experience. See Annot. [g]

13. And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning all
things that are done under heaven: this sore travel has God given to the sons
of man, to be exercised therewith.

13. And being thus instructed with all the helps and assistances, that the
power of such a King could afford, I applied my mind, in the first place, and
set my Wits to work with all imaginable care and diligence, to search into the
nature of all Creatures here below; thinking I should be happy, if I could but
find out the causes, beginnings and progresses of things; especially the
counsels, contrivances and endeavors of Mankind, with the events of all their
actions. But, alas! I soon found that this was a tedious business, in which
when I had traveled a great way, I met with small satisfaction; nay, found it
to be the torture of the mind, unto which God has condemned mankind, as a
punishment for their vain curiosity, and gross negligence of heavenly Wisdom.
See Annot. [h]

14. I have seen all the works that are done under the sun, and behold all is
vanity and vexation of spirit.

14. And having now finished these Studies, and taken a serious view of all
that falls within the compass of humane knowledge, I cannot say that they have
given me any solid contentment; for we can know but little, and what we do know
of natural things does us small service: it puffs us up indeed like Wind, but
gives no nourishment; it fills us with Notions, but of little or no use; and
therefore vexes us at last, and breaks our heart to consider that we have spent
so much time and so many thoughts, which have even eaten up our Spirits, to so
little purpose. See Annot. [i]

15. That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is wanting,
cannot be numbered.

15. For as there are inexplicable difficulties in all sorts of knowledge, of
which no man can give an account; so, with all our study, we cannot get skill
enough, either to prevent misfortunes, or to remove out of the way that which
crosses our designs, much less to alter the nature of things (no, not so much
as in our own Constitutions) nor to redress the disorders in Government: the
defects in which, and in all other things and conditions, we are so far from
being able to supply, that we cannot number them; and yet the folly of Mankind
represents every thing to their desires, as if it were completely good, and
wanted nothing to make one happy. See Annot. [k]

16. I communed with mine own heart, Saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and
have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem:
yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.

16. I my self still persisted in my reach after knowledge, though I found it
so painful and so unsatisfactory: thinking within my self, that there was this
Good at least in it, that it had gotten me a very great Name, and raised me so
high in all men's opinion, that I was noted for the wisest person that had ever
been in these Parts of the World, there being no sort of knowledge, wherewith
my mind was not stored in great abundance. See Annot. [l]

17. And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I
perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.

17. And, as the nature of all knowledge is to excite a thirst after more, this
made me apply my mind more earnestly to comprehend, not only the greatest but,
the meanest matters; to mark, for instance, the actions and occupations of mad
men and Fools, as well as the motions of wiser persons: but I perceived, that
to be pleased merely with fame was to live upon Air; and it was an afflicting
thought to observe, how little the most of the World (though they thought
themselves very wise) differed from Lunaticks and distracted Folk. See Annot.
[m]

18. For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow.

18. So that, though knowledge be the most excellent of all other Earthly
Goods, being the Ornament of the mind which is the best part of us, yet this
also is insufficient for our happiness: because, after it has cost a man
infinite pains (and sometimes exhausted his spirits, and made him melancholy
and morose, nay thrown him into many Diseases) to acquire that little Wisdom he
can attain; which raises also more doubts than it can resolve, and meets with
troublesome opposition from various Opinions that clash against it; it cannot
but fill him with indignation to find folly generally applauded more than his
wisdom; and grieve his very soul to see that it is dangerous for a man to know
more than his Neighbors; and that he is so far from being able to remedy what
is amiss, that he is hated if he endeavor it; and rewarded with reproaches for
his care of the public good. See Annot. [n]

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1. The Wisdom, Virtue and Dignity of an Author making his Work more
valuable and regarded, Solomon (or he who composed this Book from what he had
heard him deliver, or found in his Writings) begins with his Quality; not
merely as a King, and as the Son of a Great King, and of a great people, in a
famous City: but, which was most of all considerable, as a public Instructor,
having ability and authority to inform all men where they should find that
happiness, which they ignorantly sought, but could not meet withal. This he
proclaims with a loud voice; desiring serious attention to such a weighty
Discourse, and that they would often recollect, as he had done (all which may
be the import of the word Koheleth See Preface, number. IV.
) how frivolous and trivial, all those things are, which most men pursue with
the greatest earnestness.

[b] V. 2. This is the Subject of this Book; to show how senseless it is to
place our happiness in these frail and inconstant things, that we enjoy upon
this Earth: which he not only pronounces, but proves to be mere emptiness. So
Vanity signifies; and what is consequent upon that, dissatisfaction, trouble
and affliction. See Psalm. LXXVIII. 33. And this, beyond what can be expressed:
for our Translators take it to be a word of the same import with Tohu; which is
used in the Hebrew language, when they would signify that of which they speak,
to be so trivial, that it is below less than nothing, XL. Isai. 17. And yet
Solomon is not content with this single word, but doubles it; to denote the
extreme dissatisfaction he found in all things, which made a show of affording
him contentment; but performed nothing of that which they seemed to promise. So
the Word Vanity is also used for that which is false, lying and deceitful,
LXII. Psalm. 9. and other places, where Idols are called Vanities.

[c] V. 3. Here begins the Proof of his Assertion; by considering first the
mind of man: which runs from one thing to another without any end: but finds no
satisfaction remaining after all its restless thoughts. And then the body of
man (V. 4.) which, as proud and lofty as it now looks, must moulder into Dust;
and the poorest person perhaps shall tread upon its Grave. For it cannot last
like the Earth, from whence it comes; which stands for ever, as a public
Theater, whereon men enter and act their Part, and then go off and never appear
again: and when they go (as some prettily rather than solidly gloss upon those
Words, The Earth abides for ever) they can carry none of it along with them,
but leave it all behind them, unto those that come after; who pass away also,
leaving the Earth where they found it.

[d] V. 5. The Sun also in a settled course, observes its times of rising and
setting: whereas man, when he goes down to the Earth, cannot like the Sun come
up again. So the fifth Verse seems to be most naturally connected with the
foregoing; and in like manner the sixth and seventh Verses are to be expounded.
There are many Interpreters indeed, who look upon the things mentioned in these
three Verses, only as Emblems of the instability of all humane Affairs, and of
the constant revolutions of the same miseries: which cannot be hindered by any
humane counsels, but will return after all the changes, whereby we think to
mend our selves. Upon which sense I have just touched in my Paraphrase, but not
followed it; because it does not seem to me to be the scope of these Verses. In
which man is represented, by four comparisons, with the Earth, the Sun, the
Wind, and the Sea, to be more subject to Vanity than other things.

[e] V. 8. Which having thus illustrated, he proceeds here more particularly to
consider, what he had said in general words (V. 3.) of man's vain endeavor to
satisfy himself in worldly designs and contrivances: in which he is tired, but
comes to no end of his desires. How should he? when his whole business here is
only to do and to enjoy the very same things over and over again: as all men
have done before us, and shall do after us, v. 9, 10, 11.

[f] V. 9. We may fancy indeed, that we have found some new thing: but this
conceit proceeds merely from our ignorance; as the Lord Bacon excellently
discourses in his first Book of the Advancement of Learning, Chap. 8.

Learning and Knowledge, says he, takes away vain and excessive admiration;
which is the very root of all weak counsels. For we admire things, either
because they are new, or because they are great. As for Novelty, there is no
man that considers things thoroughly, but has this printed in his heart, There
is nothing new under the Sun: nor can any man much admire a Puppet-Play, who
does but thrust his head behind the Curtain, and sees the Instruments and
Wires whereby they are moved. As for Greatness, we may say as Alexander, who,
after his great Conquests in Asia, receiving Letters of some small Fights or
Skirmishes in Greece, at the taking of some Bridge, or Fort, was wont to tell
his Friends, that it seemed to him, that they had sent him News of the Battles
of Homer 's Frogs and Mice: so, certainly, if a man consider the Universe, and
the Fabric of it, to him this Globe of Earth with the men upon it, and their
busy motions (excepting always the Divineness of Souls) will not seem much
more considerable than an Hillock of Ants, whereon some creep up and down with
their Corn, others with their Eggs, others empty: all about a very little heap
of Dust. And as Melancthon well observes, the same desires, the same counsels,
the same ends, the same causes of War, and calamitous events, return again:
according to that of Thucydides, While humane nature continues what it is, the
like mischiefs will happen; sometimes less, sometimes more direfully.

[g] V. 12. Thus having confirmed his main Propositions, by such general
Arguments as reach to all things in this World; he proceeds here to a more
particular proof of it, from his own proper experience. And designing (before
he declared his own Opinion of the Chief Good, and by what means it may be
attained) to confute the vain fancies of men about it; he reduces them, as I
have shown in the Preface, to four Heads. And observing that some place it in
knowledge, and curious inquiries into all manner of things, others in pleasure,
or in both these together; others in honor and power; others in riches and
heaps of wealth; he begins with that which is the most plausible. And
demonstrates, from the 13th Verse to the end of this Chapter, how little
satisfaction is to be found in the mere speculation of things; though a man
arrive at the highest degree of humane knowledge.

[h] V. 13, 14. Melancthon restrains these two Verses, to political Wisdom, in
the Government of Kingdoms. Which gives men a double affliction: first, in that
the Wisest men often err in their counsels; and secondly, that events sometimes
do not answer to the best counsels that men can follow. Examples of the first
are innumerable: Sometime they err through ambition, as Perdiccas, after
Alexander; sometime through a false opinion of Right, as Brutus; sometime,
through over-doing, busy headedness and inquietude of mind, as Pericles;
sometime through anger, as Marius. And how many ways good counsels have
miscarried, it is too long here to remember: because, it is here further
observable, that sometime more doubtfulness and uncertainty of mind what course
to take, is as great a torment to the mind as any other. Thus Pompey was first
perplexed in his Counsels, before he saw the disastrous event of his Error. To
conclude this; All Government is so full of cares, perplexities, and
impediments, that it made Demosthenes say, If he were to begin the World again,
he would rather die than be promoted to it. And Aeschines, that he was as glad
when he was rid of his Office, as he would have been to be delivered from a mad
Dog.

But this I take to be too straight a sense; though it be agreeable enough to
what he says v. 12. of his Kingly Office: and therefore I have enlarged it
further in my Paraphrase; though Greg. Nazianzen also seem to have a respect to
it, when he thus interprets this place Orat. LIII. p. 750. That all things here
below are possessed with an uncouth and execrable spirit ((...)) so that a man
cannot comprehend how absurdly all humane affairs are managed.

[i] V. 14. The word we translate vexation is found only in this Book, and is
capable of many senses, all pertinent to the scope of this place. For according
to the several Fountains from whence it may be derived; this Phrase may be
interpreted, either anguish of Spirit, or breaking of Spirit, or preying upon
the Spirits; or (in another sense of the word Spirit) feeding on the Wind or
Air: none of which I have neglected in the Paraprase.

[k] V. 15. The shortness of humane Wit, though never so much improved, is here
represented by two things: first, that it cannot remove what is inconvenient;
secondly, that it cannot supply what is deficient, in any condition of life.
Or, as others will have it, the first part of the Verse refers to the inability
of man to rectify that perverseness (as the Hebrew word we translate crooked
signifies) which he finds in himself or others; and the latter part, to the
small reach os humane understanding, which can attain but a very imperfect
knowledge, either of words, things, times, persons or actions; as some branch
out the innumerable Particulars of which we must be content to be ignorant.

[l] V. 16. I have not curiously distinguished between Wisdom and Knowledge,
either in this Verse, or in the 18th. But there may be this difference
pertinently made, That Wisdom directs a man, in the practical affairs of life,
unto that which is most fit for his purpose, according to the various
circumstances wherein he may be. It consists chiefly in a clear judgment, to
discern our true interest, and the proper means to compass it: together with a
presentness of mind, to obviate sudden accidents. And then Knowledge relates to
the speculation of natural things; in their causes and effects, their
properties and differences, and such like things.

[m] V. 17. Madness and Folly, may refer also to all the idle Speculations,
wherein men of Parts and Wit, sometimes not only employ, but applaud
themselves, as the first of those words seems to import in the Hebrew. This
trifling sort of Knowledge is notably described by Erasmus, in his Praise of
Folly.

[n] V. 18. If there be any difference to be made between Wisdom and Knowledge,
I have noted it above upon v. 16. As for grief and sorrow, they may be thus
distinguished, That the former, in the Original word, includes in it
indignation which is a sharp anger mingled with scorn; to find either our
Persons and Counsels contemned, or our Projects and well laid Designs defeated.
Such as was in Achitophel; whose penetrating Wit made his rage the greater, to
see his judicious advice rejected, and the whole Conspiracy utterly
disappointed. The other word (sorrow) properly denotes an extreme great trouble
and sickness of mind; and is sometimes applied to pains in the Body: which is
the effect too frequently of overhard study Melancthon understands the whole
Verse (as he did v. 13, 14.) of the trouble that wise men have, when they are
entrusted with Government, to see the confusions, errors, vices and calamities
of Mankind. And their afflictions are the greater, because they are not only
more sensible than other men of present evils, but foresee by the present those
that are future: and therefore are tormented with a sore pain and grief, both
for what they feel and for what they fear. For they know, that from the first
disorders, there commonly follow greater confusions: as when Pericles had once
stirred up a War, there followed the destruction of almost all the great Cities
of Greece. And it is too truly said by Pindar, that it is easy for any body to
disturb a City; but God alone can restore peace unto it.

This I take to be too limited a sense; but it is no small trouble to a wise
and prudent person, as Corranus excellently expresses it, to behold the
miserable disorders and confusions of humane affairs. For how is it possible to
avoid it, nay how can a man choose but be filled with indignation, to see
Justice, Equity, Probity, Fidelity, Integrity and Constancy, and all other such
like Virtues slighted and disregarded by mankind; and on the contrary,
Injustice, Baseness, Perfidiousness, Flattery, and such like Vices, possess the
World, and carry all before them? Or what man can, without vexation, observe
the preposterous judgment of mankind, which magnifies those things, that are
not only vain but hurtful and pernicious; and not only contemn but hate those
things, which are truly good for them; nay, alone desirable: No man can either
be wise alone to himself, in such a multitude of Fools and mad men, without the
greatest grief and indignation: nor can be accommodate himself, with an equal
mind, to the dotages of the common people; when he sees that which is better.

I shall conclude this Chapter with the Lord Bacon's Observation, concerning
this anxiety of spirit which arises out of Knowledge; in the beginning of his
Book of the Advancement of Learning.

Solomon, says he, does not pass this censure absolutely upon Wisdom and
Knowledge, but only sets forth the true Bounds, wherein humane knowledge is to
be circumscribed: which if we do not observe, it will prove very troublesome to
us and others. And those limitations are three. First, That we do not so place
our felicity in Knowledge, as to forget our mortality. Secondly, That we use
not our Knowledge to beget anxiety, but repose and contentment of mind: and
Thirdly, That we do not presume by the contemplation of Nature, to think our
selves able to comprehend the Mysteries of God. The first and the last of these
are plain enough; and therefore I shall only note what he says of the second:
that it is certain, no anxiety or perturbation of mind arises from Knowledge,
but by mere accident. For all Knowledge, and Admiration (which is the Seed of
Knowledge) is pleasant in it self: but when we fall to frame Conclusions from
thence, which, obliquely applied to our own affairs, beget either weak fears,
or immoderate desires, then arises that torment and trouble of mind, whereof
Solomon here speaks. For then Knowledge is no longer dry light, (which
Heraclitus was wont to say was the best) but moist light, steeped and infused
in the humors of the affections.

As for that Exposition which some have given of these words, that he
increases the number of his stripes (or wounds) who increases knowledge; but
makes no use of it, nor takes care that his obedience rise in some good
proportion with it; it is not the proper sense of the place, but rather an
accommodation of the words to another profitable purpose.

CHAP. II.
ARGUMENT.
Having passed his censure upon the first way men take to find satisfaction
(mentioned in the Notes upon v. 12. of the first Chapter) which without all
contradiction is the chief, and the best of the four; he proceeds here to
consider the second, which is the more common: most men immersing themselves in
pleasure, as their highest Good. Of which he was more capable to judge, than
any other man; because he denied himself no delights that he desired, and yet
did not plung himself wholly into them, but with a mixture of Wisdom, as he
tells us, v. 3. Whereby he soon perceived that they who leave the pursuit of
Knowledge, for the sake of bodily pleasure, change for the worse: For after he
had tried all sorts of things that could give him any pleasure, he went back to
Wisdom and Knowledge, as the better of the two, v. 12. And yet, after he had
considered that again the second time, he could not but confess, that there
were such great imperfections in it; that it could not make a man happy, as he
discourses in the following Verses. Of which I shall give a more paticular
account in the Annotations.

1. I Said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore
enjoy pleasure: and behold, this also is vanity.

1. BEing thus disappointed therefore in the expectations I had of happipiness
from much Wisdom and Knowledge, and beholding many men look jollily who had
none at all, I resolved to leave off those troublesome cares and labors, and
to follow my pleasures: saying to my self, Why do thou vex and torment thy
mind to no purpose? Let alone these crabbed Studies, which hasten Old Age, and
indulge thy self in all those sweet delights which Youth desires: Try what
satisfaction mirth and joy can give thee; and for that end, take no thought for
the future, but enjoy to the height the present Goods of this life: Which
accordingly I did; but believe me, though this promised much at first, it
performed little; but left me more void of contentment than it found me. See
Annot. [a]

2. I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What does it?

2. For the noise, the tumult, the indecent motions, and scurrilous jestings,
of men that let themselves loose to excessive laughter, and extragavant
merriment, appeared to me like distraction of mind: and considering how
unprofitable it is, I could not but with a passionate disdain put it from me:
saying of it, and of mirth, and dancing, and all the frolickness of mankind,
What is there in it, that thus bewitcheth them? Where lies the pleasure, that
thus inchants them, and puts them so beside themselves; that they think neither
of God, nor of any thing else that is worthy of them; but of this alone? See
Annot. [b]

3. I sought in mine heart to give my self unto wine (yet acquainting mine
heart with wisdom) and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that
good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven, all the days
of their life.

3. I deliberated therefore with my self about a middle course of life; which
should neither be altogether studious, nor altogether voluptuous, but a mixture
of both: and in pursuance of this counsel entertained my self freely, with all
the delights of feasting and banqueting; yet so, as not to lose my
acquaintance with Wisdom, but to keep my mind so intent upon it, that Folly
might not have its full swing; but find a check upon it, till I might make a
sufficient trial, whether herein lay, that so-much-desired Good which men
should propose to themselves, and prosecute all the time of their stay in this
World. See Annot. [c]

4. I made me great works, I builded me houses I planted me vineyards.

4. For which end, I raised, with exquisite Art, the most stately and majestic
works that could be contrived, for the pleasure of all the senses: As first of
all, I built my self a most magnifient Palace, and other goodly Houses; which
when I had elegantly adorned and sumptuously furnished, I proceeded to plant
about them, in a beautiful order, the choicest Vines (VIII. Cant. 11.) which,
besides the fragrant smell (II. Cant. 13.) and the lovely sight, wherewith they
entertained me abroad, afforded the most generous Wines for my table at home.
See Annot. [d]

5. I made me Gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of
fruits.

5. To which I added delicious Gardens, full of various Flowers, Herbs and
Plants for all the Seasons of the Year; and then spacious Forests and Parks, or
rather Paradises of Pleasure, wherein, besides other delights, were lovely
Shades and Coverts for all sorts of Beasts: nor were Orhards wanting stored
with all kinds of Fruit Trees, which either this, or other Countries could
afford. See Annot. [e]

6. I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that brings forth
trees.

6. And that nothing might be want-in to the perfection or preservation of
these places, I made with great charge, and no less Art, either Fountains, or
Cisterns, or Pools of Water: not only for delight and for Fish, but to serve
instead of Rain; to water the Flowers and Herbs, especially the young Nurseries
of Trees; that they might not die with Drought. See Annot. [f]

7. I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I
had great possessions of great and small cattle, above all that were in
Jerusalem before me.

7. All which requiring the care of a great many persons, I purchased Servants,
both men and women, in great abundance; of whom I had a multitude of Children
born in my house, whom I employed in looking after my other possessions, which
I had in Herds and Flocks of greater and lesser Cattle: which were so numerous,
that I killed every day for my Family ten Oxen crammed in the Stalls, and
twenty Oxen out of the Pastures, with an hundred Sheep (besides, Hearts, and
Roe-Bucks, and Fallow-Deer, and fatted Fowl, to say nothing of other provision,
1 Kin. IV. 22, 23.) and yet, such was the plenty, my Stock did not decrease,
because a new Brood grew up continually, in such abundance, as the like had
never been seen in our Country, before my days. See Annot. [g].

8. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and
of the provinces: I gat me men-singers and women-singers, and the delights of
the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.

8. By which and diverse other means (1 King. IV. 21. X. 21, 22, 23, etc. 2 Chronicles. IX. 24.) I laid up vast Treasures of Silver and Gold and Jewels, and all
that was choice and precious in other Kingdoms; especially in those Provinces,
which were subject unto me, which were great and many (1 Kin. IV. 24.) out of
whom I picked also the sweetest voices that could be found, both of Men and
Women; together with the rarest Songs and Hymns, composed by the best Masters
in the World; and all sorts of Instruments of Music: than which nothing is
more charming among the Children of men, either to lay them asleep when they
would go to rest, or to recreate their spirits when they are tired with
business; to banish melancholy when they are oppressed with sorrow, and to
augment their pleasure when they would be merry: being no less fit to wait upon
Feasts, than they that attend at the Table. See Annot. [h].

9. So I was great and increased more than all that were before me in
Jerusalem; also my wisdom remained with me.

9. Thus I was not only great in place, and power, and riches, but, by such
means as these, added splendour also to my greatness, and made it more
conspicuous and illustrious: and (which is still more glorious) I was not
greater in any thing than in Wisdom; which was not undermined by all these
pleasures, but, when they were in danger to dethrone my Reason, this settled it
again in its former State and Authority. See Annot. [i].

10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them, I withheld not my
heart from any joy: for my heart rejoiced in all my labor, and this was my
portion of all my labor.

10. And on the other side, my Wisdom did not lay such restraints upon me, but
that I took the liberty to please my eyes, and all my senses, with every thing
that fell within the wide compass of their desires: It did not deny me any joy
to which I had a mind; but taught me rather to reap this as the sweet fruit of
all my labors: there being nothing (it showed me) that came to my share of all
that I had gotten with so much care and diligence, but only the free enjoyment
of it; without which I had as good have been without it. See Annot. [k].

11. Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the
labor that I had labored to do: and behold, all was vanity and vexation of
spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun.

11. But then, after I had considered seriously, how small a thing this
pleasure was, how short, and how often interrupted, and laid in the balance
against it, all the time I had spent and the pains I had taken, in contriving
these magnificent Buildings, Gardens, Paradises, and all the rest; it seemed to
me as nothing: and I cannot but leave this Observacion behind me, That all this
is empty and unsatisfying to the Spirit of man; and there is also much vexation
and torment in it, to see how cross things go, many times, to our desires, how
negligent they are who should look after such great works as mine were; but
especially in this, that a man can reap so little benefit and so transient,
from such vast and long labors, v. chap. I. v. 3, 14. See Annot. [l].

12. And I turned my self to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for what
can the man do, that comes after the king? even that which has been already
done.

12. Wherefore I began to reflect upon my former thoughts, and to turn them
back again toward Wisdom, as the only Good of man (chapter I. 13, 17.) and
especially that Wisdom which moderates our pleasures, and keeps them from
running into madness and folly (and who is there that can give a better account
of this than I? who have had such advantages above any private man to know the
History of former times, as well as of my own; that I am confident, they who
come after can pass no other judgment upon things, than I do now.)

13. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness.

13. For I clearly discerned, that there is as wide a difference between Wisdom
and Folly; as there is between the light of the Sun, which beautifies the whole
World, and shows all things distinctly to us; and the darkness of the Night,
which wraps up all in dismal confusion, and hides even our dangers from us.

14. The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness: and
I my self perceived also, that one event happens to them all.

14. Whence it is, that a Wise man, having this light in his mind, looks before
him and round about him; which makes him cautious and well aware of dangers,
into which a blundering Fool, whose mind is blinded with the sottish love of
pleasure, falls rashly and inconsiderately: And yet with all his circumspection
(so imperfect are all things here, in which we place our happiness) the wisest
man is not able to avoid a great many calamities, which are common to the whole
race of mankind.

15. Then said I in my heart, As it happens to the fool, so it happens even
to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also is
vanity.

15. Which reflection made me sigh, and think with my self; if notwithstanding
this excellence of Wisdom above Folly, the very same Diseases, loss of Children
and Friends, and innumerable Casualties, happen unto me, even unto me who know
so much, that there do unto a Fool; to what purpose have I taken all this
pains, and studied so hard to be wiser than he? and upon this review of all
that Wisdom can, and cannot do for us, I concluded again the second time, that
there is a Vanity also in this; which makes it incapable of giving us full
satisfaction. See Annot. [m].

16. For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever;
seeing that which now is, in the days to come shall be forgotten: and how dies
the wise man? as the fool.

16. For as both wise and foolish are alike subject unto Death, so, when they
are dead, their Names live not long after them, but they and all their famous
achievements are forgotten; there being few of those things which are now
done, that will be so much as thought of in the next Generation; much less in
future Ages, when the Memory of them will be utterly lost, and cannot be
recovered: and is not this a lamentable Case, that a Wise man has no more
privilege than a Fool, either from Death, or, from its inseparable Companion,
Oblivion? See Annot. [n].

17. Therefore I hated life, because the work that is wrought under the sun is
grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

17. This put me quite out of love with life, because the toil and labor of it
is so great and grievous; and the pleasure it yields, either interrupted and
spoiled by many unforeseen accidents, or quite taken away by Death, which
leaves no footsteps of us behind us: for nothing is constant, or of long
continuance, nothing solid, nothing satisfactory here, but all our enjoyments
leave us as empty, as he is that feeds only upon the Wind; nay it torments us
to see that we must take great pains too, for such vain and fading things,
chap. I. 14.

18. Yea, I hated all my labor which I had taken under the sun: because I
should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.

18. And besides all this, there are other Reasons which made me despise all
those goodly Structures which I had erected, and those beautiful works which I
had contrived ( v. 4, 5, 6, etc.) because, as I cannot keep them long my self,
so I must leave them to I know not whom; to a Stranger, perhaps, who without
any pains of his, enjoys the fruit of all my labor.

19. And who knows whether he shall be a wise man, or a fool? yet shall he
have rule over all my labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I have
showed my self wise under the sun. This is also vanity.

19. Or if my Son succeed me in the possession of them, there is no man can
assure me, whether he will wisely preserve and improve what I have gotten, or
foolishly squander all away; in short, whether he will prove a worthy or an
unworthy Inheritor of my labors: And yet, such as he is, he must have an
absolute power over all that I leave, to dispose of it as he pleases; and
sottishly perhaps to waste in a little time, what I with prudent care and
diligence, have been heaping up all my life long. This is a great addition to
humane misery; and renders even the Study of Wisdom very vain, which cannot
find a remedy for these evils.

20. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labor
which I took under the sun.

20. Which are so great, that, instead of pursuing my designs for this World, I
turned my thoughts the quite contrary way; and, like one perfectly tired, I
concluded it best to leave off all further cares about any thing here;
despairing to reap any satisfaction from all my labors; particularly, to
attain any certainty what kind of mun he will be who shall inherit them.

21. For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in
equity: yet to a man that has not labored therein, shall he leave it for his
portion. This also is vanity, and a great evil.

21. For what has happened to others, may to me; who have observed a man no
way defective, either in wise contrivance, or prudent management, or upright
dealing, but as eminent for honesty, as he was for diligence; whose Estate fell
to the share of an idle person, nay, of an ignorant, silly, unjust and
ungrateful wretch; who prodigally consumed upon his lusts, that which cost him
no pains, not so much as a thought to acquire. This likewise it cannot be
denied is not only a dissatisfaction, but a torment, nay, a great torment, to
the mind of man.

22. For what has man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his heart
wherein he has labored under the sun?

22. Who may well say, To what purpose is all this toil of my Body, and these
solicitous thoughts and anguish of my mind? For all that a man can enjoy
himself of the anxious labors wherein he spends his days, amounts to little or
nothing; and what comfort has he in thinking who shall enjoy the fruit of them
hereafter?

23. For all his days are sorrows, and his travel grief; yea, his heart takes
not rest in the night. This is also vanity.

23. And yet, such is our folly, there is no end of our cares; for we see many
a man whose life is nothing but a mere drudgery; who never is at leisure to
enjoy any thing that he has, but still engaged in one troublesome employment
or other to get more: which he follows so eagerly, as if it were his business
to disquiet and vex himself, and make his life uneasy to him; being not
content with his daily toils, unless he rack his mind also with cares in the
night, which invites him to take some rest. This is so void of all reason, that
nothing can be imagined more vain and foolish.

24. There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and
that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor. This also I saw, that it
was from the hand of God.

24. Nor can any man reap the benefit of his labors, but by studying first to
free his mind from overmuch care and anxious thoughts: and then (instead of
heaping up perpetually for his Heirs) by allowing himself a moderate and decent
use, of all that he has gotten by his honest labors; cheerfully communicating
them with his friends and neighbors; and lastly (in order to these) by being
truly and devoutly religious, acknowledging God to be the Donor of all good
things: from whose bountiful hand proceeds even this power, both to enjoy all a
man has with a quiet, peaceable, and well-pleased mind, in the midst of all
the troubles of this life; and, in conclusion, to leave all, with the like
mind, unto those that shall come after him.

25. For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto more than I?

25. For the truth of which, you may rely upon my experience; who, when I could
have hoarded up as much as any other man, chose rather freely to enjoy the
fruit of my labors; and was as forward to spend, as ever I was to get: but
must acknowledge this to be the singular Grace of God to me; who preserved me
from that great folly of neglecting my self, for the sake of I knew not whom.

26. For God gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy: but to the sinner he gives travel, to gather, and to heap up, that he
may give to him that is good before God. This also is vanity and vexation of
spirit.

26. For this is a Blessing which God reserves for him whom he loves; whose
sincere piety he rewards, with Wisdom to judge when, and with Knowledge to
understand how, he should enjoy, and take the comfort of, all he has;
especially with inward joy, satisfaction of heart, and tranquillity of mind, in
this favor of God to him; whereby the troublesome affairs of this life are
tempered and seasoned: But he delivers up him that regards not God, to the most
cruel Tormenters, which are his own unsatiable desires, and anxious cares, with
busy labors and incessant pains, to increase his Estate without end, and to
heap up vast Treasures, which God disposes afterward to those who approve
themselves to Him, in a pious, just, and charitable life, with contented minds.

Now what a vanity and vexation is this also to a Sinner, to get Riches for
those to whom he never designed them? Nay, it is a sad thought to a good man
that if his Son be not virtuous, the Estate he leaves is not likely to prosper
with him. See Annot. [o].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1. Thus Themistocles, Lucullus and others (as Melancthon observes)
being wearied in their attendance upon public affairs, by many unprofitable
contentions, nay, by the ingratitude of the people, delivered up themselves
unto pleasures; as better than their ill bestowed pains.

[b] V. 2. Laughter] The censure he passes upon this makes it necessary to
expound it of such dissolute and frantic mirth, as I have mentioned in the
Paraphrase.

[c] V. 3. gave my self] The word in the Hebrew (as the Margin of our
Translation informs the Reader) imports something of extension; as in other
places of Scripture, Psalm. XXXVI. 10. because when men indulge themselves very
liberally in eating and drinking, the Blood boils and rises, the Veins swell,
and the Skin of the whole Body is distended.

Lay hold on] The word signifies not simply to apprehend; but to keep under
restraint what we have seized. As the Philistines are said to have taken David
(had him in their power) in Gath; in the Title of Psalm. LVI. Thus I have
expounded it here, as most agreeable to the sense of the place.

[d] V. 4. great works] includes all that follows, to the end of v. 8.
consisting, either in Buildings, or in Plantations, and Waterworks belonging
to them, or in his Household; or his Stock upon his Land; or his Exchequer, and
Magazines; or in things that were for mere state and magnificence, viz. Royal
Furniture; or in great variety of vocal and instrumental Music; to which some
add, a kind of Seraglio of the most beautiful Women that could be found: though
for this last there is no ground to think it here mentioned; but what lies in
two hard words, of which I shall give an account presently.

[e] V. 5. gardens] The Hebrew word Gennoth some will have to be properly
places for Flowers, Herbs, Sallets, and all manner of Fruit Trees: and
Pardesin, which we translate Orchards, to be only Woods, Forests, or Parks. Of
which there is no certainty; for this last word Pardesin is used but twice more
in the Holy Scripture; and in the first of those places, we translate it
Forests, II. Nehem. 8. and in the other, IV. Cant. 13. it signifies a place
were Pomegranates grew. And therefore it indifferently signifying either of
these, I have expressed both in the Paraphrase. And, if we judge of such places
by what the Greeks (from this word) call a Paradise, they were so large, as to
comprehend not only all sorts of Trees, both Fruit Trees and others (such as
Cedars, Cypress, etc.) but Fountains, and Fish Ponds, and Aviaries, and Walks,
for all kind of Beasts, both wild and tame: in short, whatsoever could make a
place pleasant, either by Nature or Art:

[f] V. 6. pools] The word Berecoth carrying in it the Notion of Blessing, some
Interpreters will have it to signify, places filled and supplied by the great
Blessing of Rain. But there is no reason for this limitation, it being as
capable to signify any Lake, or large hollowness in the Ground, or upon it,
for the reception of Water, either from the Clouds, or from Springs, or from
Rivers: which are beneficial for sundry uses, as I have expressed it in the
Paraphrase.

[g] V. 7. Though the word Bakar properly belong to Oxen and Cows; yet we well
translate it, the greater sort of Cattle, comprehending Camels, Asses, etc. In
like manner Tzon is commonly used for Sheep, but comprehends Goats also; and
therefore is well translated by us, the lesser sort of Cattle. All which both
great and small are comprehended under the general word Mikneh, which we
translate Possession.

[h] V. 8. peculiar treasure] The word Segullah signifies either the things
themselves that are rare and precious; or the place where such things are
reposited and kept, viz. a Treasury.

But the greatest difficulty in this Verse, and indeed in this Chapter, is to
tell what is meant by Siddah and Siddoth; which he calls in the Conclusion of
this Description of his Magnificence, the delights or delicious pleasures, of
the Sons of men. These Bochartus has probably conjectured to be most excellent
Composition in Music, or most elegant Verses, set by a rare Artist among the
Phaenicians, called Sido, to the most ravishing and melting Notes. And
therefore I have not so much as taken notice of their Interpretation, who
deriving these words from an Original signifying spoil and devastation,
understand hereby beautiful Women, taken captive in the Wars: of which the King
had the first choice, as he had of the rest of the spoil. For there were no
Wars in his time, till the latter end of his reign; and then he was rather
worsted, than victorious. Some indeed, to keep this sense, derive it from
Saddaim the Breasts or Paps; because no small part of Women's beauty (which they
would have to the delights here spoken of) consists in the fine shape and
decent position of this part of their Body. But this seems to be far fetched;
and therefore I have let it, and diverse other Interpretations, alone: and only
expressed the sense of our own Translation, which takes these for Musical
Instruments; and those of such extraordinary sweetness, that they left no part
of a man's soul untoucht, nor room for any other pleasure (so some derive it,
from a word signifying abundance) and had some regard to the LXX, who
understand it of such as waited upon him at the Table ( Cup-bearers, and such
like Officers) where Music also was seldom wanting, but made a part of the
entertainment of great persons; as I have expressed it in the Paraphrase.

[i] V. 9. my wisdom remained] For it was not the manner of Great Men, in
ancient time, to pass their Feasts only in eating and drinking, and, after the
sottish Custom now, to send the Cups going round, when all was taken away: but
to spend the time in pleasant, but learned, Discourses, or in telling Stories,
or propounding and resolving Questions; which might whet the Wit, and form men's
manners, or open the Secrets of Nature; and at the same time both refresh and
instruct the mind. As we see at Samson's Marriage Feast, he propounded a Riddle
to be unfolded, concerning the Generation of Bees, out the Carkase of a Lion.
In Plutarch's Symposiacks, there are abundance of such merry, and learned
Questions resolved. And Athenaeus in his Diepnosophists, has exerpt the Flower
of all Arts, and Authors, Poets, Philosophers, and Historians; in Virgil also
at the end of his First Book of Aeneids, Jopas is introduced singing a
Philosophical Song (at the Feast which Dido made) concerning the Motions of the
Moon and the Sun, and in short, of all that Atlas, that most famous Astronomer,
had taught. And in another place, Aeneas himself relates the Destruction of
Troy.

[k] V. 10. my portion] Though Wisdom thus bridled his pleasures, yet it did
not restrain him from such a free and plentiful enjoyment of them, that there
was no sort which he did not taste as highly of, as was possibly; without
making himself a mere Fool. This he calls his portion, by a Metaphor taken from
Inheritances; which being divided into parts, every one of the Children had his
part given him; or from Lots, which as they were used among Merchants, so
sometimes in the dividing of Inheritances: when the Heirs could not agree among
themselves, about the aequality of the portions which were set out for them.

[l] V. 11. I looked] Having considered the value of this portion, he could not
say it was much worth; but rather that there was very little in it: and
therefore he here prefers Wisdom much before all this pleasure: and still far
more before sottish and mad pleasure, v. 12.

And yet, for all that, after he had taken the benefits of Wisdom into a second
consideration, v. 13, 14; he could not but conclude again, that there is a
Vanity in that also. Which is threefold; as there are three ends for which men
study Wisdom. First, That they may provide for their safety and security:
Secondly, That they may commend their Names to Posterity; or Thirdly, That they
may leave to their Children, what their singular Prudence, and great diligence
has gathered together. But all these he shows are vain Designs.

[m] V. 15. hapned] For instance, he represents here, how all Mankind, Wise and
Fools, are alike liable to the same casualties, and many incoveniences, which
are common to every one of us in this life. Which the Lord Bacon (in his IV.
Book of the Advancement of Learning, chap. 2.) extends to such Considerations
as this; that in all times, Witches and old Women, and impostors, have been
Rivals and Competitors, in the reputation and opinion of the multitude, with
the ablest Physicians; and contended with them for the fame of Cures. Nay, the
impostor bears away the prize, and Virtue lies under the censure. Such is the
weakness and credulity of men, they prefer a Mountebank, or a Witch, before a
learned Physician: which the Poets observed when they made Aesculapius and
Circe, Brother and Sister; both Children of the Sun. And what follows from
hence, but that Physicians say to themselves, as Solomon in another case, It
befalls to me, as it does to the Fool; why should I labor to be more wise? It
discourages them, that is, in their Profession.

[n] V. 16. no remembrance] And then for the other two (mentioned above, k) he
observes how short-lived our memorial is, as well as our selves, v. 16, 17. and
that no man can be sure, who shall inherit his labors, or what kind of person
he shall be; wise or sottish, good or bad, v. 18, 19. Which he reflects upon
again in the following Verses, with a very heavy heart, that made him weary of
life, v. 20, 21. at least of the labor and toil of it, v. 22. the folly of
which he represents v. 23. And then concludes the Chapter, with a brief account
of the true way to enjoy all the happiness that this World can afford us: of
which we are utterly incapable, unless we have a sense of God, be devoutly
affected toward Him as the Author and Donor of all good things. Which I have
expressed so fully in the Paraphrase, of verse 24, etc. that I may be censured
for making it too long; and therefore shall not commit another error, in
enlarging it further here.

[o] V. 26. But only observe, that Wisdom and Knowledge in this Verse, do not
differ, as they may be thought to do, Chap. I. v. 16, 18. but relate; both of
them, to the same thing; only with such a distinction, as I have mentioned in
the Paraphrase: or, as others will have it, Wisdom relates to the acquisition
of the good things of this World, Knowledge to the use; from which prudent
fruition flows the joy he mentions together with them. Thus Corranus.

The last words of the Chapter, are referred by all Expositors, in a manner,
only to the condition of the Sinner, which immediately precedes: but since they
have a true sense, with respect to all men whatsoever, good and had, I thought
it best so to expound them; with regard to the whole foregoing Verse.

CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT.
Upon the mention of God's overruling Providence, in the latter end of the
foregoing Chapter, Solomon proceeds from thence to illustrate (in the first
part of this Chapter) both those things, of which he had discoursed before,
viz. first, the imperfection of humane Wisdom; which is confined to a certain
time or season, for all things that it would effect: which if we neglect, or
let slip, all our contrivances signify nothing. And secondly, That the utmost
perfection at which our Wisdom can arrive in this World, consists in these
things. First, In being contented with this order wherein God has placed all
things, and not disquieting our selves about that which it is not in our power
to remedy, or alter; at least, not for the present. Secondly, In observing and
taking the fittest opportunity of doing every thing; as the most certain means
to tranquillity: there being nothing that makes our mind more unquiet, than
striving against the stream) as we speak) and when the wind is against us,
laboring to bring about our ends, and to obtain our desires: and Thirdly, In
taking the comfort of what we have at present; and making a seasonable and
legitimate use of it: And lastly, In bearing the vicissitudes that we find in
all humane things, with an equal mind; because they are necessary and
unalterable.

These were the things he had suggested in the Conclusion of the former
Chapter; and the beginning of this may have relation to every one of them. And
since he had spoken before also (v. 9, 10, of the second Chater) concerning the
moderating of pleasures by Wisdom and of the study of Wisdom by seasonable
pleasures; I do not know but he may have respect unto that also: and therefore
I have begun with it, in the Paraphrase.

Castalio goes still further, and thinks the meaning of the first part of this
Chapter may be, that it is in vain to expect our happiness in this World: for
this is no more the time, and the place for it, than Seedtime is the Harvest.
But we must stay till the next life for it: which is the proper time for
complete happiness: here we must be content with a great many tears. Which is a
pious Meditation, but seems not to be the Scope of Solomon; and therefore I
have not touched upon it.

In short, He still continues to enlarge himself upon the two first things,
wherein men place their happiness; Wisdom and Pleasure: and comes not to the
third, till the middle of this Chapter; where I shall observe it.

1. TO every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven:

1. HOW vain an attempt it is, to obtain the forenamed tranquillity by fixing
our mind upon any one thing in this World; and how necessary it is, to let the
study of Wisdom, for instance, and the enjoyment of pleasure, labor and rest,
take their turns; God himself has shown us, by tying us to this order in the
course of things: which* whether they be natural, or depend upon our will, have
their certain, appointed seasons and occasions: upon which all our designs,
counsels and endeavors have such a dependence, that if we will not observe
them, we shall not only lose our labor, but miserably vex and torment our
selves to no purpose. See Annot. [a]

2. A time to be born, and a time to die: a time to plant, and a time to pluck
up that which is planted:

2. As for natural things, we see in our selves, that there is a stated time
for an Infants lying in the Womb, before it can be born; and the time afterward
for its growth, and stay in the World; beyond which a man cannot go, but drops
into his Grave: And so it is not only with other living Creatures as well as
man, but with Herbs, and Roots, and Plants, which we cannot fet and sow at all
times; but must take the proper Season, both for that, and for gathering the
Crop, when it is come to maturity; or else our pains are ill bestowed, and we
find to our sorrow that we have labored in vain.

3. A time to kill, and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to
build up.

3. And thus it is in the Diseases of our Body; there is a time when they are
so infectious, that they are incurable, or when it is so improper to administer
Physic, that it does no good, but certainly kills; whereas at another time,
those very remedies prove effectual means, to restore our health unto us: And
so it is in other Structures, as well as our own Bodies; there is a time when
it is more proper to break down a Building, than it is to raise it; and when
Houses are built, there are seasons for repairs, and sometimes for pulling them
down and erecting them anew, or else they will not stand. See Annot. [b]

4. A time to weep, and a time to laugh: a time to mourn, and a time to dance:

4. Other alterations, also there are in humane life, which sometimes naturally
move our tears; and at another time our laughter: any, there are times not only
for tears, but for the bitterest lamentations, which the Funerals of our
dearest Relations, or the public Calamities require; and again, there is a
time (at a Wedding suppose) which provokes us so naturally, not only to be
merry, but, to leap and dance for joy, that it would be as absurd then to
bewail our selves, as it is to dance about the dead Bodies of our Friends.

5. A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together: a time to
embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.

5. And in the Plantations which we make, there is a time when it is fit to
pick up Stones, and throw them out of our Vineyards, or Fields of Corn; and
there is another time, when it will be as necessary to gather up the same
Stones again, to make a Fence about those Vineyards or Fields, or to repair the
Highways; And as it is in these natural things, so it is in those that depend
upon our own disposal; there are Seasons proper for Husband and Wife to enjoy
the ends of Marriage; but there are other times, when they ought to refrain,
and deny themselves even these otherways innocent pleasures.

6. A time to get, and a time to lose: a time to keep, and a time to cast away.

6. In like manner, in our traffic and commerce one with another, there is a
time of gaining much; but there are other times, when a man must be content to
lose by his Commodities: sometimes also it is fit for him to lay up, and keep
what he has gotten; but at another time, it will be as fit for him to spend or
to give way to those that need it.

7. A time to rent, and a time to sew: a time to keep silence, and a time to
speak:

7. In direful disasters also, as when God is blasphemed, it becomes us to rend
our Garments; but after a certain time, it will be as becoming to sew up the
rent again: and, as on other occasions, the proper times for holding ones
peace, or for speaking, are to be abserved; so in great grief, it is to no
purpose to administer comfort, till the passion be a little over; and then
discourse will be as seasonable as silence was before, II. Job 13. IV. 1, 2.

8. A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.

8. To conclude, love it self may turn into hatred; so that they who are now
well-affected toward us, may prove our Enemies; or those in whose Company we
now delight, there may be reason hereafter to avoid: And the like turns there
are in public, as well as in private Affairs; there being just causes
sometimes for making War; and then, such a change in the state of things that,
it is greater Wisdom to conclude a Peace.

9. What profit has he that works, in that wherein he labors?

9. And therefore, why do we fancy any thing to be settled, fixed and constant,
here in this World; unless it be these opposite Changes? Or to what purpose is
all our labor and travail for any thing, out of the Season proper for it? And
what great matter is it that we then get; since we must expect another Season
to part with it? See Annot. [c].

10. I have seen the travail which God has given to the sons of men, to be
exercised in it.

10. For that which I have observed from all this is, That God has made it our
business to mark the times and seasons, that are fit for the doing all things,
which has great trouble and anxiety in it: and there is a further trouble,
that after we have done what we desired, we must submit to that time and
season, which will undo all again.

11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set the world
in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God makes from the
beginning to the end.

11. And, though we are not wont to be satisfied with this vicissitude of
things yet, God no doubt, has disposed them thus most wisely; and there is
such a beautiful order appears in several contrarieties (as for example, of
heat and cold, of day and night) that we may well conclude there is so in all
manner of events, though never so opposite; which God also has given us Wisdom
to discern, in part; having endued man with the understanding of the present
state of things, in the Age wherein he lives: yet as that is imperfect (it
being beyond our skill to know when our industry will succeed, and when a
change will come) so he is not able to find out what respect the present
changes have to the times that are gone before, and to those that are yet to
come hereafter; and so cannot give an exact account of the Government of God,
because he sees not the beginning, and the progress, and the conclusion of
every thing that comes to pass. See Annot. [d].

12. I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice, and to do
good in his life.

12. Wherefore long consideration and experience assure me, that, leaving these
fruitless enquiries and vexatious cares about the future, the only happiness
that is in our power, is to make the best we can of our present condition:
rejoicing that things are so well with us, and being solicitous for nothing in
this World, but to obtain a good hope in God, by living piously and virtuously,
and doing good to others with what we have; and this, not remisly and by fits,
but seriously and constantly, as long as we live. See Annot. [e].

13. And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all
his labor, it is the gift of God.

13. And if a man have arrived at so much happiness, as not to deny himself the
use of what he has at present, out of a vain fear of wanting in time to come;
but can so freely and cheerfully enjoy the fruit of his honest labors, as to
be well satisfied in the midst of all the inconveniences of this life; let him
not ascribe it unto his own Wisdom, but thankfully acknowledge the great
Goodness of God herein: For it is a singular gift of his, to be able with a
quiet and contented mind, to take the comfort of those Blessings, which God's
Bounty has bestowed on us, Chap. II. 24.

14. I know that whatsover God does, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put
to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God does it, that men should fear
before him.

14. And, on the other side, it is not only very foolish and vain, but a great
Plague, to be discontented that things go otherways than we desire; for,
certain it is, God has settled them by such an eternal and immutable Law, in
that course and order before described, ( v. 1, 2, 3, etc. in which nothing is
superfluous, nothing wanting) that it is not in the power of man, to make the
least alteration, one way or other: therefore we must alter our selves, and not
murmur that we cannot change the course of things; which God has thus
immoveably fixed, not to make us miserable, by fretting at it, but happy, by
reverent submission to the Divine Government; and humble patience under those
troubles, which we cannot honestly avoid; and a due care not to offend the
Divine Majesty; whose Will shall be done one way or other if not by us, yet
upon us. See Annot. [f]

15. That which has been, is now; and that which is to be has already been,
and God requires that which is past.

15. This alone is sufficient to silence all our unprofitable, as well as
undutiful, complaints, about that which has always been, and ever will be. For
we, in this present Age, are subject to no other Laws, than those by which God
has governed the World from the beginning; nor will the next produce any other
method, than that wherein He has already proceeded: but, though that which
succeeds thrust out what went before, it brings the very same things about
again; as constantly as Spring and Fall, Summer and Winter, return in their
Seasons.

16. And moreover, I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that wickedness
was there: and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there.

16. But, beyond all this, it is lamentable to consider, how that which God
has provided as a remedy for a great many evils which we bring one upon
another in this World, is quite perverted; and turned to be it self the
greatest evil of all other. The Power and Authority, I mean, which is committed
unto men of great Place, Wisdom, and Dignity: who lean so much to their own
affections, that I my self have observed nothing but corruption, in the
highest, as well as lowest Courts of Judicature: for, whether men's lives or
their estates were concerned, such unjust Sentences were pronounced (to the
condemning the innocent, and acquitting the guilty, etc.) that I could not but
conclude, There is nothing more dangerous, than for a man who has not that
fear of God before his eyes (which I now mentioned, v. 14.) to be advanced unto
honor, and entrusted with power. So vain are they that place their felicity in
these. See Annot. [g].

17. I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked: for
there is a time there for every purpose, and for every work.

17. For, so rooted is this impiety in the hearts of men, and such Arts there
are to defeat the best endeavors to redress it, I could bring my thoughts
about this matter, to no other issue but this (in which we must all be
satisfied) that there is a supreme Judge of all, who will in due time make that
difference between men and things, which we cannot do now; absolving and
rewarding the righteous, and condemning and punishing the wicked: for as there
is a time, I observed before, for all other things, so there is for this; they
that govern the World have their time now, for contriving and acting what
mischief they please; but He will take a time hereafter, of calling them to an
account, for the injustice they designed, as well as did in the Courts of
Judgment. See Annot. [h].

18. I said in my heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that God
might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are beasts.

18. But in the mean time, I could not but think the condition of Mankind,
especially of the poorer sort of them, to be very deplorable; which made me
fetch a deep sigh and wish to God, that He would be pleased to lay these Great
men open, and manifest to themselves and make them sensible, that they have no
reason to look down with so much contempt upon others; much less treat them
like Beasts, destined to the slaughter: for, were they stripped of their external
Pomp and Power, they are so far from excelling other men; that, in many
regards, they do not excel the very Beasts. See Annot. [i].

19. For that which befalls the sons of men befalls beasts, even one thing
befalls them: as the one dies, so dies the other, yea, they have all one
breath, so that a man has no pre-eminence above a beast: for all is vanity.

19. For, as the Beasts are subject to many accidents which they think not of,
so are all Mankind; who can no more foresee several things that happen to them,
than the Beasts themselves; or, if they herein differ from them, that they can
better defend themselves from some things that befall them; yet, there is one
thing, which makes them all equal; and that is, Death: For both Men and Beasts,
not only grow old, but die alike; and while they live, one sucks in no other
Air, than the other does; which when they can no longer breathe, a man remains
as much an unprofitable lump and putrid Carkase, as a Beast: and therefore
herein can pretend to no pre-eminence, above other inferior Creatures; but
they are both equally vain and perishing.

20. All go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.

20. And being dead, their Bodies are resolved into the same Principles, out of
which they sprang; so that herein they are both alike again: for Man, as proud
as he is, derives his Body from no higher Original, than the Dust; the very
same Dust of which the Beasts are made; into which they both, Men and Beast,
must return again at the last.

21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the
beast that goes downward to the earth?

21. As for the Spirit, which makes all the difference between the Beasts and
us, that is invisible; and where shall we find a man, especially among those
Great Persons (spoken of before) who seriously considers it? and believes that
the souls of all mankind, go to God that gave them (XII. 7.) to be judged by
Him (v. 17. of this Chapter,) whereas the Souls of Beasts perish with them? No;
herein they differ not at all from Beasts, that having buried their minds in
brutish pleasures, they have no more sense of a future life than they; but
imagine that their souls die together with their bodies.

So senselesly stupied are they, that trample upon the rest of Mankind; and yet
have such ignoble thoughts of themselves, that they imagine their very souls
are no longerliv'd than a Beast. See Annot. [k].

22. Wherefore I percieve that there is nothing better than that a man should
rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to
see what shall be after him?

22. And therefore (considering that our Bodies have no privilege above the
Beasts, and that Mankind are so liable to be abused by those who should protect
them, v. 16, 19, 20.) I was confirmed in my former Opinion (II. 24.) that it is
best for a man, herein also to imitate the Beasts; by enjoying freely the good
things God has blessed him withal, and taking all the comfort he can find in
them at present, without solicitous care about the future: For this is all he
can be sure of; it being in no man's power to secure him, he shall enjoy that
hereafter, which he makes no use of now; much less, when he is dead, can he be
brought back again, to take any pleasure in the fruit of all his labors, or
see what becomes of them.

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1. season] The Hebrew words Zeman and Gneth, signify either that point
of time, when things, being ripe, come forth of themselves, by the constitution
of their several Beings; as all natural things do: or that occasion which
serves our voluntary actions; and is fit for effecting what we design. The
Hebrews observe that Solomon here reckons seven opposite Seasons, of each sort:
as a complete demonstration, by induction, of the truth of this General
Proposition in the first Verse. Which bolds good even in Virtue it self: which
is not proper, but in its place. For Fortitude has not always been successful,
(as the Lord Herbert observes) nor Temperance safe; nor Justice opportune: the
fury and insolence of the outrageous people, having in some insurrections grown
to that excess; that is has been greater Wisdom to pass by a while, than to
punish them. And it is very apparent also in our Councels, when they are
conducted merely by humane Wisdom; which is not able, without a Divine
direction, to choose the most fortunate (as we call them) and happy Seasons for
undertakings. Brutus, Cicero, Hertius Pansa, all thought to restore the ancient
estate of the Roman Commonwealth (as Melancthon notes) but were deceived; and
after the same manner many are still, and will always be deceived. Then
businesses proceed, when we obey his Divine directions, and He assists: and yet
then sometimes more, and sometimes less difficultly.

[b] V. 3. kill] In the third Verse I have taken the liberty of following my
own Judgment in expounding the first part of it: which I have not referred to
punishing and sparing Offenders, as Interpreters do; but to the condition of
Diseases that are in our own Bodies. For, though the other be an excellent
sense, yet, this seems to be more agreeable to the Wise man's meaning. Because
he is hitherto speaking of things Natural; and the word heal also directs
rather to that sense, which I have given of killing, than the common one. The
same may be said of the next part of the Verse; there being a craziness in
Buildings, as well as in the Body of man: and some Weather so improper to raise
a Fabric, that the parts will not hang together; but that which cements them
moulders so fast away, that that time were better spent, in pulling down an
house, than in building it up.

As for the rest of the Calender or Ephemeris (as the Lord Bacon calls it)
which the Wise man has made of the diversities of times and occasions for all
actions; I need give no further account of it here, than I have done in the
Paraphrase.

[c] V. 9. What profit] Nor is it hard to expound the inference he makes in
this Verse, from the foregoing induction: which I have expressed as fully as I
could in the Paraphrase; and more largely in the Argument of this Chapter.
Gregory Nazianzen thinks, he only intends to reflect upon the great
inconstancy, as of all earthly things, so of humane actions (sometimes, for
instance, men are madly in love with a Woman, and in time they as much hate
her; now they are eager to get, and at another time they profusely spend,
sometimes they kill, and sometimes are killed, sometimes do nothing but talk,
and at another time have not a word to say, etc.) and therefore all his labors
are vain. But I have extended it further, with a respect to other things, which
the forenamed induction suggests to us.

[d] V. 11. world in their heart] There is greater difficulty in this Verse, if
we connect it with the rest of the Discourse; as we ought to do. Which I have
endeavored to explain by taking the word Haolam, the World; for the present
state of things, in this Age wherein we live (which is a genuine sense of it)
whereof God has given us some understanding; but not so perfect as to be able
to give an account, of the reason and scope of every thing, that we see happen
in this World; because we are ignorant of what went before, and of what will
follow after, when we had or shall have no Being here.

It is commonly understood of the works of Nature. And in this sense the Lord
Bacon (in the beginning of his Book of the Advancement of Learning) has
admirably expounded it; in this manner: In these words, He has placed the
world in man's heart, etc. Solomon declares not obscurely, that God has framed
the mind of man, as a Mirror, or Looking-glass, capable of the Image of the
whole World; and as desirous to receive it, as the eye is to entertain the
light: and not only delighted in beholding the variety of things, and the
vicissitude of times; but ambitious to find out and discover the immovable and
inviolable Laws and Decrees of Nature. And though he intimate, that this whole
Economy of Nature (which he calls, The work, that God has wrought, from the
beginning to the end) cannot be found out by man; it does not derogate from the
capacity of his mind, but is to be imputed to the impediments of Learning, etc.

There is one Interpreter (Corranus) who by Olam, World, understands the
Circular motion of things for the service of man. But I can find no such use of
the word any where; else, the sense would be elegant enough, which arises from
thence; viz. that this revolution being remote from our knowledge, and a secret
to us; who cannot tell, what day or hour it will be: we ought not to trouble
our selves about this; but make use of the present, and refer the rest to God.

Melancthon also has an unusual Interpretation; which is, that God made things
so, that we should sweetly enjoy them (that he understands by placing the World
in man's heart) but men make the use of them unpleasant, by their wandering
desires, by their vain solicitude, by their diffidence; which makes them long
after new things, and meddle with that which is unnecessary. Like M. Anthony,
who when he had gotten the most flourishing part of the Empire, could not be
content; but, out of an unquiet Nature, desired the whole, and so lost all.
This he makes the sense of the latter end of the Verse; which he thus
translates, Man cannot find out the Work of God, neither the beginning nor the
end of it Therefore, as I said just now, it is Wisdom to satisfy our selves
with what we have; for the present only is that, which is in our own power.

[e] V. 12, 13.] And so it follows in these two Verses; the sense of which
Gregory Nazianzen (Orat. LIII.) has thus briefly expressed, The greatest Good
of man, I persuade my self to be, (...), cheerfulness of mind, and beneficence,
or doing good to others: and this short pleasure alone the Divine indulgence
bestows upon us, if righteousness conduct all our Affairs.

[f] V. 14, 15.] And with this we must rest contented, for with all our
toilsome thoughts, we cannot alter the course of things: which God, he here
shows, has immutably settled; on purpose that we should be sensible of a power
above our selves. Which it is our Wisdom to stand in such awe of, as not to
contend with it, but submit unto it: that so we may obtain all the favor from
Him, which in such a state of things, as his Wisdom has appointed, can be
indulged to us. And here, I think, Melancthon has very pertinently observed,
that Solomon does not merely recite, the vain complaints and endeavors of
Mankind, after the manner of Philosophers and Poets: but lays down a Rule of
life, as the best remedy that can be found, for our Disease. Which, is not to
trust to our selves, nor to indulge our own curiosity and appetites; but to be
sensible of our own infirmities, to fear God, to obey his commands, to keep
within the Bounds of our vocations, to beg and expect the help of God, and to
acquiesce in his holy will and pleasure.

[g] V. 16.] Unto these things it is better for us to apply our selves, than it
is to endeavor to be great and mighty (which is another vain desire of man,
fansying he can thereby keep off many evils) for few can be at the top of all;
and so there must be still greater than we, by whom we may be oppressed: And
our vexation will be so much the greater, when with all our power we cannot
hinder it. As for those that are in the very highest places (if they have not
that fear of God before-spoken of, v. 14.) their power does but betray them, to
do the more mischief unto themselves and others; and thereby increase the
misery of Mankind. This seems to be the dependence between the foregoing Verses
and this. Wherein the Wise man passes to the consideration of the Third thing
(mentioned upon Chap. I 12.) unto which some aspire, as the highest happiness,
viz. Greatness, Power, and Honor. Which if a man be bad, make him so much the
worse himself, and the World by his means: and if he be good, will trouble him
very much, to find there are many abuses, which by all his power he cannot
remedy. For Solomon himself saw several gross impieties committed (as he tells
us in this Verse) even by them who were appointed to be the Guardians of men's
lives, liberties and enjoyments; which he, as great a King as he was, wanted
ability wholly to redress: but still they went on so confidently in their
wicked course of perverting Judgment, that he was fain to leave them to be
judged by the supreme Judge of all, God Almighty. And if it were so, in the
Reign of a good and wise King; what could be hoped for, in the Reign of those
who were impious and injudicious; as most of the Kings of Israel and Judah
were? For such pervert all things, by their covetousness, ambition or folly; so
that their Subjects can have no Justice, nor enjoy any tranquillity. And
besides, they permit (as he shows afterward, Chap. V.) many corruptions to
creep into the Divine Worship; and ridiculous rather than religious Ceremonies
to be introduced, etc. whereupon always follows a great decay of all moral
Virtue.

In short; this is a great part of the Vanity and misery, to which we are here
subject; that, as Melancthon well notes, there are many things done unjustly,
even under just Governors; because they are not able to look unto all things
themselves, but must manage them by other men: many of which are negligent,
others wicked, and swayed by depraved affections; and yet crafty enough to
cover their own guilt. Here is the only comfort, That God notwithstanding
preserves Government, and Political Order; and in his time will judge, even the
Kings and Judges of the Earth.

[h] V. 17.] The last words of this Verse, may, in my judgment, be thus most
literally translated out of the Hebrew: There is a time for (judging) every
purpose, and every work there, viz. in those corrupt Courts of Judgment: every
thing that has been transacted, in the Judicatures he had been speaking of.

[i] V. 18.] These words, which follow the former, are variously interpreted:
but they have a perspicuous sense, if they be taken in coherence with the
foregoing (as in reason they ought to be) without fansying, as some have done,
that they are spoken in the person of an Epicure. And so I have considered
them; as intended to take down the vain opinion those Great Men have of
themselves (which makes them tyrannize over their Inferiors) by representing
to them (or rather, desiring God would effectually represent to their minds)
how little they differ from Beasts: save only in that, which they do not at all
value, or regard, viz. their immortal spirits.

The word Lebaram, to manifest them, is commonly expounded of Gods manifesting
them unto others; but I have taken it for his showing them to themselves;
agreeable to the word that follows, Lireoth, that they might see, etc. The
whole may be thus translated -- that God would clear their minds, that they may
see, etc. For it comes from a Root which signifies such an accurate separation
of one thing from another; that the difference may be perspicuously discerned.

[k] V. 21.] And thus it seems also most reasonable to me, to expound this last
Verse, in connection with all the rest; and to understand the first word of it,
Who; concerning those persons mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse. Who
among those unrighteous Judges, etc.

CHAP. IV.
ARGUMENT.
Having considered the power, which many times falls into the hands of unjust
and cruel men; he now represents the miscrable estate of those that are subject
to them: as a further Argument of the vanity and vexation, unto which Mankind
are liable in this troublesome World. And having noted some of the principal
mischiefs of this sort (of which I shall give a distinct account in the
Paraphrase and Annotations upon it) he concludes the Chapter with some
Animadversions upon the condition of the greatest, nay, and the best of
Princes: who are not so happy, as the World is apt to think them.

1. SO I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the
sun: and behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had
no comforter.

1. BUT I have not yet done with the consideration of the miseries which
Mankind suffer; by the abuse of that power, which is necessarily placed in the
hands of some persons for the good of others (III. 16.) For, reflecting again
upon it, I observed the innumerable ways that were practiced in this World, for
the undoing of others; both by violence and exactions, and by fraud and
calumnies (as well as by unjust Decrees) whereby so many were crushed, that
nothing was to be seen or heard but the tears and cries, the sighs and groans
of such as lay in a desolate condition, and could find no relief; no, not so
much as of one to comfort them: For such was the greatness of their Oppressors,
who had gotten all power into their hands; that as they could not defend
themselves against them, so no body else durst express their compassion toward
them, much less plead for them; for fear of being served in the same kind
themselves. See Annot. [a].

2. Wherefore I praised the dead which are alreadly dead, more than the living
which are yet alive.

2. Which made me think it was better to be among the dead, who have made an
happy escape from all these calamities, than to remain still alive; either to
suffer under this tyranny; or to live in perpetual fear of it; or to behold
with great grief of heart (but without power to help them) what many miserable
Wretches endure.

3. Yea, better is he than both they, which has not yet been, who has not
seen the evil work that is done under the sun.

3. Or rather (for why should I compare the living with those, who, though they
now lie at rest in their Graves, have been heretofore very sorely afflicted?)
much more desirable, than either of these, is it not to have come into the
World at all: and so to have had no sense of the miseries, which the dead have
formerly felt, and the living now undergo.

4. Again, I considered all travel, and every right work, that for this a man
is envied of his neighbor. This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.

4. For, besides what they suffer from mighty Oppressors, they give one another
a great deal of trouble; Pride, Ambition, Emulation, Envy and Hatred reigning
so uncontroulably every where among all Orders and Ranks, all Trades and
Professions, that when a man has taken a great deal of honest pains, in some
useful work, and brought it to perfection; instead of gaining credit by it, and
being honored for it, his Neighbors look awry upon him: nay, he is maligned,
disparaged and traduced, by those, who either cannot or will not imitate (but
only carp at) his ingenious labors. So vain it is to endeavor to excel others
in Art or industry; which procure a man ill will, when he looks for thanks and
commendations: and such an affliction it is to a man's spirit, to labor hard
for an ungrateful World; who are tormented by that, which should please them;
and cannot see any worth in another, but they are vexed within themselves. See
Annot [b].

5. The fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh.

5. But see now (as a farther instance of the Vanity of Mankind) what use some
make of this: who are so absurdly foolish, as to be utterly discouraged and to
sit down in perfect idleness; because there are such oppressions on one hand
from those above them (v. 1.) and such emulations on the other hand, from those
that are equal with them, and under them (v. 4.) A wise resolution this! to do
nothing, because others do ill; not to satisfy ones self, because others will
be displeased: not to satisfy, did I say? nay, he is hunger-bitten, and eaten
up with cares how to live; he has not a Rag to his Back to cover his
nakedness; having reduced himself and Family, by his laziness, to extreme
penury.

6. Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with travel
and vexation of spirit.

6. And though he want not excuses for his folly, yet they are as idle as his
sloth: For he senselesly applies that common Saying to his purpose, One handful
with ease, is better than two without it. Which is very true, if rightly
understood; and may serve to reprove both him, and those from whom he learns
this folly: for as idleness and emptiness always go together (and therefore he
in vain expects to have so much as one handful without labor) so is a moderate
Estate gotten honestly with moderate diligence, and enjoyed hand-somely with
perfect contentment; better than the greatest Treasures gotten by oppression or
with infinite toil, and enjoyed with anxious thoughts and fretting cares, and
exposing a man either to the hatred or the envy of others. See Annot. [d].

7. Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.

7. Nor is this all the folly into which men fall, by the forenamed tyranny and
oppression (v. 1.) but, reflecting again upon this Subject, I observed another
extreme into which they run; no less void of reason, and of satisfaction than
the former.

8. There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he has neither child
nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labor, neither is his eye
satisfied with riches, neither says he, For whom do I labor, and bereave my
soul of good? This is also vanity, yea it is a sore travel.

8. For, as some grow idle, so others grow too scraping and penurious; it being
no rare thing to find a man that lives single, and alone, without so much as a
Companion, and has neither Child, nor Brother, nor Kinsman, to make his Heir;
and yet he sets no measures, either to his labors, or to his desires, but
toils and craves without end: and, which is still worse, as he can scarce find
in his heart to allow himself the necessaries, much less the pleasures of this
life, so it never comes into his mind to think, who shall be the better for all
this when he dies; and what a madness it is, both to rack his mind with cares,
and to pinch his Belly, and deny himself the comfort of what he has; for the
sake of he knows not whom.

This also certainly is not only a senseless and unprofitable folly; but one of
the greatest plagues and torments of humane life. See Annot. [e].

9. Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their labor.

9. How much wiser is he, who not only enjoys what he has himself; but takes
others into his Society, to partake of the good things, that God has given
him? For nothing is more comfortable than good Company; as nothing is more dull
and melancholy, than a solitary life: And besides, when two or more are
adjoined together in common counsel, and mutual help and assistance, they will
not only act more cheerfully; but more easily effect their design, and take the
greater pleasure in the fruits of their labor. See Annot. [f].

10. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is
alone when he falls: for he has not another to help him up.

10. Or if they have any ill success, or fall into danger, it will only make
the singular benefit of fellowship, the more plainly appear; because they will
relieve and rescue one the other: but lamentable is his condition, who has no
Friend, no Companion, to reach out his charitable hand to him, when he falls
(suppose in o a Pit; none to comfort him, when he is sick; none to testify his
innocence, when he is defamed; or, which is worse, to restore him, when by his
own imprudence or negligence, he falls into a sin.

11. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be warm
alone.

11. And therefore in the very beginning of the World, God did not think fit,
to let man be alone, but gave him an Help meet for him: and as two that lie
together in the same Bed, cherish one another, by their mutual hear, but it is
hard to be warm alone; so do they that are strong, undaunted, vigorous and
cheerful, infuse that courage and comfort, which Silver and Gold cannot give,
into those that are of a weak, timorous, dejected or melancholy spirit.

12. And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold
cord is not quickly broken.

12. To conclude, we are never more sensible of the benefit of Society, than
when we are assaulted by a powerful Enemy; whom we cannot resist alone, but by
the help of a Friend may be able to overcome: for as a great many Threads
twisted together, are not quickly broken, though a single one be soon snapt
asunder; so he that is surrounded by his Children, Friends and Neighbors, will
make a better defense, and hold out longer against those that invade his right,
than that wretched man can do (v. 8.) who by loving money alone, has deprived
himself of all such succors.

13. Beter is a poor and a wise child, than an old and foolish king, who will
no more be admonished.

13. But it is not Society alone will make a man happy, without Wisdom and
Virtue. For who are better attended, and guarded than Kings? and yet the
poorest man that is, if he be wise and good, is far happier than the wealthiest
Prince on Earth, who foolishly abuses his power: nay, the towardly Child of a
poor man, is much better than such a King, though his greatness be made more
venerable by his gray hairs: For, besides that Wisdom makes the poor Youth
contented with his condition, though never so mean, (a Blessing at which
Princes hardly arrive) it render wholesome admonition also acceptable to him,
when by his inexperience he falls into an error; but folly makes the other
impatient of all advice and counsel, and the older he is, the more obstinate;
because, as his Kingly Dignity, he fancies, authrizes him to do what he list,
so his Age gives him a privilege of knowing better than any body can tell him,
what to do. See Annot. [g].

14. For out of prison he comes to reign, whereas also he that is born in his
kingdom becomes poor.

14. By which means it comes to pass, that he who was born a mere Beggar, nay,
was as poor and abject as the vilest Slave, rises by his singular Prudence,
Counsel and Conduct unto a Throne: when he whose Ancestors were Kings, and
possessed his Dominions by an Hereditary right, is deserted by his Subjects,
and, through his folly and wickedness, falls into such contempt, that he not
only loses his Crown, but is reduced to the greatest poverty, in which he
spends a miserable life.

15. I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the second
child that shall stand up in his stead.

15. Or if this happen not, yet (such is the infelicity of good Princes) I have
seen a great King, left with nothing but the bare Title, and the outward State
of Royalty; the hearts and affections of all the Nobles, Gentry and common
people, from one end of the Kingdom to the other, enclining to his Son (or to
the next Heir) that is to succeed him; unto whom they do obeisance, as if he
were already upon the Throne, but neglect his old Father; who sees himself
robbed of those honors, in which he placed his happiness; and that by his own
Son, who would have been more dutiful, perhaps, if he had been a private man.
See Annot. [h].

16. There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been before them:
they also that come after, shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity
and vexation of spirit.

16. Nor is this a thing that will have an end, but a humor so rooted in all
Mankind; that, as in all preceding times (before this King and Son were born)
they have been weary of that, which they have long enjoyed; so this young
Prince, who is now followed with such applause, must not think that it will
last always: but they that come after will take as little delight in him, as the
present Generation does in his Father; and, when he grows old, court his Son
after the same fashion, as they now do him, being young.

From all which it appears, that happiness is not to be found in Honor and
Dignity; no, not in the very highest Pitch of it, which is the Kingly Power:
for there also is not only dissatisfaction, but many dangers, troubles and
vexatious cares, which very much disturb and perplex their Spirits. See Annot.
[i].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1. oppressions] There are more evils than one, that arise from the ill
administration of public Affairs. For they are either external or internal.
And the external are two; either from Superiors, or from Equals and Inferiors.
Those from Superiors he speaks of in this Verse, and calls by the general name
of oppressions. Which comes from a Root in the Hebrew, that signifies
indifferently to oppress (or rather to squeeze others, and utterly crush them)
whether it be by forcible violence, or by extortion in traffic, or by fraud,
circumvention and false accusation. If it refer to any one of these, more than
to another, it is to the last. And therefore the LXX. though they translate it
by several words, importing bearing down others by main strength, yet by none
so frequently, as by (...), to undo others by calumny.

[b] V. 4. envied] Those evils which come from Equals or Inferiors, he speaks
of in this Verse, and calls by the general name of Envy; which is a word in the
Hebrew, that signifies, when it is taken in an ill sense, all those vicious
affections, which are the causes, or the effects of envious emulation, at the
good qualities or prosperity of another person. Which St. James calls (...),
bitter zeal or envying, III. 14. and St. Paul is wont to express by two words,
(...) and (...), strife (or making bate) and envying, XIII. Romans 13. strife and
envying, e. i. contentious or factious emulation, I. Philip. 15. Envy and
strive, i. e. invidious contention.

[c] V. 5. foldeth his hands] Here he passes to those evils which I called
internal; which come not from others, but from our selves. For some (seeing the
forenamed oppressions; or the envy that attends upon men's industry and good
successes) grow idle and leave off all business (expressed here by folding the
hands, see VI. Prove. 10.) because it is to no purpose to get, what another may
presently take away; or if he keep, it raises him other Enemies, who grudge to
see him so happy.

By this means such a man brings himself to extreme poverty: so that Phrase,
Eats his own flesh, signifies. One that is ready to die with hunger: and
whose Wife and Children (called in Scripture a man's flesh) are in danger to
starve with him. There are other Explications of this Phrase, upon which I have
touched in the Paraphrase, which admirably express the folly of him, that
undoes himself, to avoid being undone by others.

[d] V. 6. better is an handful] Which though it be a very absurd resolution;
yet he wants not Apologies for it. Nay, as if he were the only Wise man (
sapientum octavus, wiser than seven men that can render a reason, as Bishop
Sanderson speaks) he utters Sentences (but it is like a Parable in the mouth of
a Fool, a Speech full of reason in it self, but witlesly applied) and says that
better is an handful with quietness, etc. Wherein he makes a show, of being the
most contented Soul that lives; but is far from it: desiring and coveting as
much, as the most toiling and moiling Wretch in the World; if he might but have
it, and never sweat for it.

Thus some understand this sixth Verse: which others take to be Solomon's
advice to the envious spoken of before, or to the covetous, spoken of
afterward, that they would be contented with their condition: moderate riches
having fewer cares; which a great Estate brings along with it, in abundance.
Unto all which I have had respect in the Paraphrase upon this Verse.

[e] V. 8. one alone] And as this is the fault on one side; so, on the other,
there are those who turn their thoughts altogether, to save what they can:
pinching themselves, by a penurious way of living; both that they may seem poor
and not worth the squeezing; and likewise, that they may have a secret reserve
of unknown Treasure, in case they be oppressed. This he describes here, by the
example of a man, who has neither Wife, nor Child, nor Friend, nor Companion;
but lives solitarily in a house by himself; where he spends little, and yet
thinks of nothing but getting riches: which he enjoys not at all, but only
looks upon them, and wishes still to see more.

One, not a second] is properly a man without an Heir, or a Successor; as v. 15.

[f] V. 9. etc.] Upon the occasion of the foregoing Observation, v. 8. (the
better to represent the folly of that sottish humor, he there describes) he
sets forth the benefit of Society, which Greg. Thaumaturgus here calls (...),
living in fellowship, and communion together. This he shows is profitable,
first, to procure us greater happiness; which is the Subject of this 9th.
Verse. Secondly, to preserve us in the enjoyment of that happiness, when we
have attained it: as he shows by three instances. First, To deliver us out of
dangers, v. 10. Secondly, To fortify us against them, v. 11. Thirdly, To repel
them, when they actually assault us, v. 12. Where is a Proverbial Saying, of a
triple Cord, or Thread; like to which there are many in other Authors: but I
forbear to fill this Paper with them, and leave those also who have a mind to
allegorical applications of these three things, to seek for them in other
Books. For my business is only, to give a brief account of the literal sense;
which is this in short: That a Companion will afford us his help and assistance
many ways; and, if there were no other benefit to be reaped from him, this
would be an exceeding great comfort; to have one, in our adversity, into whose
bosom we may exonerate our sorrows; which will be the lighter, if we see there
is any Body that sympathizes with us in our calamities.

[g] V. 13, 14.] And thus having represented the miserable effects of power
abused to oppression: which bereaves men of the sweetest comforts of life;
making them avoid Society: he returns to consider the wretched estate of such
Oppressors, though never so mighty. Both from their own folly, v. 13, 14.
(where that expression is very remarkable, he is made, or becomes poor in his
Kingdom, as Dr. Hammond well expounds it upon I. Matthew. not. a) and from the
fickleness and inconstancy of the peoples affections; which creates a great
many troubles even to good Governors, v. 15, 16. Where there are many
difficulties in the Hebrew texts; but not such as makes the sense obscure: and
an account is given of them by many Authors, and therefore I shall only note
what the Lord Bacon has observed, for the illustration of the 15th. Verse, and
what de Dieu has noted upon the 16th.

[h] V. 15.] This Verse sets out the vanity of the people; who are wont to
press and flock about the designed Successors of Princes; the root of which
Vanity, says the Lord Bacon (L. VII. Advanc. of Learn. Chapter 2. Parab. 20.) is
that frenzy in the minds of men, which inclines them, with too extreme an
affection, unto their own projected hopes. For the man is rarely found, that is
not more delighted with the contemplation of his future hopes, than with the
fruition of what he possesses. Another thing is, that novelty which is
pleasing to man's nature, and earnestly coveted: now in the Successor to a
Prince (called here his second, he that is next to him) these two concur; Hope,
and Novelty. Which make more men (as Pompey said to Scylla, and Tiberius
afterward touching Macro) adore the rising, than the setting Sun. And though
Princes perhaps, who are in present possession, be not much moved with this
fond humor, nor make any great matter of it (as neither Scylla nor Tiberius
did) nay they smile, it is possible, at the levity of men; and do not stand to
fight with Dreams (for Hope is but the Dream of a man awake) yet it cannot but
inwardly vex them, to see themselves slighted, even by those on whom they have
bestowed many benefits, merely in hope of receiving more from their next
supposed Successor. For they cannot reasonably expect more, perhaps, from him
that now reigns; and therefore they make timely applications to the next Heir.
He has done enough for them; and therefore they betake themselves to him, who
has yet done nothing. And besides, old men grow tenacious, morose and sour;
whereas Youth is commonly liberal, jocound, without care, and ambitious to do
great things; especially at his entrance upon the Kingdom. This, says another
learned Writer, makes the long life of Princes, and their power, troublesome
and grievous, both to Courtiers and people: of which they that live at Rome, do
not want ocular demonstration.

There is nothing more needful for the explication of this Verse, but only to
observe, that the Child or Youth, who is here called the second, does not
suppose another Child or Youth that is first: but only signify, that this
Youth is second in the Kingdom. Not second, in respect to another Son, but
second, in respect to his Father; who reigns before him; and when he dies this
Son succeeds him.

[i] V. 16.] The first words of this last Verse, L. de Dieu seems to me, to
have expressed better than any other Interpreter: they running thus, word for
word, in the Hebrew; There is no end to any people. That is, no end of their
fickleness, no bounds to their inconstancy; but one Nation is as subject to it,
as another. And as this Age follows the former, so the next will follow this;
in its levity and mutability. And therefore those young Princes, who are
transported with the acclamations of the people, do but feed upon Wind (as
some, I observed upon the first Chapter, translate those words, which we render
vexation of Spirit): For their applauses are like to their affections, as
changeable as the Wind; which will turn another way, to some other person, when
this present Prince grows old, or he rules ill, or the peoples fancy and humor
alters. And then it will indeed be a sore affliction to him, to see himself
despised, by those who formerly cried him up as if he had been their Darling.

It may be referred also, to the very Government it self; with which the
Israelites were not pleased. For when they were under Judges they desired a
King: and then they were not pleased with the Monarchy, but wished for the old
Aristocracy again: Though that in truth was the most exeellent Monarchy, which
they would not understand, under the immediate Government of God Himself.

CHAP. V.
ARGUMENT.
Under an ill Government in the State, Religion it self is commonly corrupted
in the Church. And therefore having set forth the miseries people endure, under
the oppressions of an abused Power, and the extremes of folly into which it
drives them; he begins this Chapter with a Correction of those errors that are
in Religion. Which is the only remedy indeed, the only comfort we have against
all the troubles to which we are subject in this World: but such is the Vanity
of Mankind, they spoil their very remedy, and take away all the Virtue of that,
which should be their support; turning it into mere Ceremony, whilst their
minds remain impure, and without any true sense of God. For they do not
consider that He, who is a pure mind Himself, must be better pleased with pure
thoughts and affections, composed to the observance of his Will, and
acquiescence in his pleasure; than with all the Sacrifices and Offerings in the
World, which the wicked may bring Him as well as the good.

To prevent therefore this new folly, into which men are apt to run, when they
intend to cure all the rest, Solomon shows all those who would attain true
tranquillity of mind; what they must do, and what they must avoid, in the
Worship of God. And about the middle of the Chapter, as I shall observe in the
Annotations, proceeds to consider the last of those four things, wherein men
place their happiness.

1. KEep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to
hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools for they consider not that they do
evil.

1. AND now, lest any man add to the affliction and torment of his Spirit, even
by that which is the only cure for it, let every one, who would be a true
Worshipper of God in whom alone lies the happiness we seek) take care to avoid
that negligence, which is observable in many people; and to opproach with all
reverence, both of Body and Soul, into his Blessed Presence; but do not think
to please Him with mere postures of Devotion; no, nor with Sacrifices and
Incense, without the Oblation of an obedient heart, disposed to do what He
would have thee: For the worst men in the World may be able to offer Him the
richest Sacrifices: but are very impious, as well as foolish, if they think He
delights in the fat and the Blood of Beasts (save only as testimonies of love
to Him, and acts of obedience unto his Will) for in that very thought they
offend Him and make no conscience what evil they do, while they believe their
Sacrifices atone for all. See Annot. [a].

2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy
words be few.

2. And, next to this, when thou make thy Prayers to God, or give Him
thanks for his benefits, deliberate with thy self beforehand, what it is fit
for thee to ask of Him, or to vow unto him; and let not any sudden passion,
make thee inconsiderately, either with thy mouth or in thy mind, desire what is
nor fit for thee to have; or promise what is not fit for Him to receive, or
thou art not able or willing to give. But remember, first, how infinitely great
the Lord and Governor of the World is, who comprehends all things; and then,
how little and vile thou art, who prostratest thy self before Him: and
therefore do not dare to speak to Him, as an Equal, whatsoever comes into thy
mind, much less to make Him large promises, which thou can not perform; but
let a sense of his Majesty, and of thy meanness, overcome thee into a profound
Reverence of Him; expressing it self rather in ardent sighs and groans, than in
abundance of words; which signify nothing, but want of a serious apprehension
of Him. See Annot. [b].

3. For a dream comes through the multitude of business, and a fools voice is
known by multitude of words.

3. It is so difficult, at the same time, to speak much and wisely unto God,
that a man, whose thoughts have been distracted with a great deal of
troublesome business in the day, is not more likely to be disturbed with
confused Dreams in the Night; than he who pours out abundance of words in his
Prayers, is in danger to vent a great many vain, unseemly, absurd (if not
impious) things, which are utterly unworthy of the Divine Majesty. See Annot.
[c].

4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it: for he has no
pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed.

4. Yet this is not his greatest danger; for such men having in a Fit of zeal
bound themselves to God in magnificent promises, are very loath to perform them,
when they are cool again. And therefore let me further advise thee, when in
great straits and difficulties, or after great Blessings received from Him,
thou art apt, out of abundance of devout affection, to vow what thou will do
for Him; to deliberate and consider, as I said, in the first place, what thou
art truly willing and able to give Him; and then, having once vowed it to Him,
be no less forward to perform, than thou wast to promise: For he is highly
offended with those, that Childishly trifle with Him, or rather impiously mock
Him with delusive promises, and do not keep their word with Him; as they are in
danger not to do, who delay to pay what they owe Him: and therefore let me
again advise thee, to be very faithful and cheerful too, in discharging such
Obligations speedily. See Annot. [d].

5. Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and
not pay.

5. For though the innumerable benefits He bestows on thee, may require some
such grateful return from thee; yet it is a less fault not to vow at all, than
having vowed, not to perform: the one being but a neglect, the other an
affront, nay, a contempt of his Majesty; who needs nothing indeed that thou
can give Him, but will not suffer a scorn to be put upon Him. See Annot. [d].

6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before the
angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and
destroy the work of thine hands?

6. Therefore do not hastily engage thy self in such Vows, as the weakness of
humane Nature, and thy fleshly refluctances, will not suffer thee to perform;
much less think of being absolved from the Obligations thou layest on thy self,
in the Presence of God, and of his only Angels, by such foolish excuses as
these; It was a mistake; I did not mind what I said; or that was not my
meaning: for this will but more increase thy guilt: and why should thou
farther incense the anger of the Almighty (who is too much provoked already, by
thy breach of Faith with Him) not only to defeat those designs, for the success
of which perhaps it was, that thou made thy Vows; but blast all thy
undertakings, and bring thy whole Estate to ruin. See Annot. [e].

7. For in the multitude of dreams and many words, there are also diverse
vanities: but fear thou God.

7. For all this folly, inconstancy and falsehood of Mankind, proceeds from the
want of a serious awful sense of God; in whose Worship and Service, they
therefore devise, after the manner of men in Dreams, a multitude of senseless
things; hampering themselves, for instance, in many Vows, from which they seek
afterward in vain to extricate themselves, and therefore plainly violate and
break: the Cure of which lies in an holy fear of offending God; with which
possess thy Soul, especially when thou come into his House; that it may
preserve thee from speaking much unto Him, and from vowing any thing, which is
either unworthy of Him, or so inconvenient to thy self, that afterward thou
shall not find in thy heart to make it good. See Annot. [f].

8. If thou see the oppression of he poor, and violent perverting of judgment
and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher than
the highest, regards, and there be higher than they.

8. And this also will preserve thee (if thou always preservest it in mind) from
being too much troubled at that abuse of Power, which began this Discourse
(III. 16.) when thou see, for instance, those who should vindicate and
protect the poor, become the Instruments of their oppression; so that even in
the Courts of Justice, to which they fly for relief, their Rights, and their
lives perhaps, are violently wrested from them: Be not dejected at this bold
license, which they take; but remember that these Great Men have one higher
than themselves; viz. the King; whom God has set over them, as well as over
others, to inspect their Doings, and to judge them: and if he neglect his Duty
too, there are higher than them all* viz. God, and his holy Angels; whom he
will employ to punish both them and him. See Annot. [g].

9. Moreover, the profit of the earth is for all; the king himself is served by
the field.

9. And now let us consider, how senseless the love of money is, which is the
cause of all this rapine and violent dealing. And this appears from the
fruitfulness of the Earth; which brings forth more than enough for all men's
necessities, if Husbandry be not neglected: an employment no less noble than
innocent; for Kings themselves, in former times, have not disdained to give
their mind unto it; nor is there any Prince now, who is not so much indebted to
it, that it ought to be one of his principal cares, to encourage, secure, and
protect it.

And yet, such is the vanity of Mankind, that, disregarding these Riches, which
lie not very deep in the Earth, all their business is, with incessant pains and
danger, to dig into its Bowels for Gold and Silver: which tempt them also to
oppress and squeeze the Poor, to pervert judgment, and do all manner of evil,
to extort their money from them. See Annot. [h].

10. He that loves silver shall, not be satisfied with silver; nor he that
loves abundance, with increase: this is also vanity.

10. And what can it do for him that sets his heart upon it, but only so
increase his desires, that they can never be satisfied? For, though necessary
things have certain Bounds set them by Nature, beyond which we do not desire
them; yet, Money and Riches and all unnecessary things are unlimited; and
therefore excite and endless appetite after them: which very appetite also
deprives him, who indulges it, of the fruit of all his abundance; for imagining
he parts with so much of his happiness, as he does of his Money, he has not
the heart to make use of it for his pleasure; nor scarce for his necessity.
This is another strange folly, or rather madness, which infests Mankind; and
miserably torments them. See Annot. [i].

11. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is
there to be owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?

11. But let us suppose that he uses his Riches; yet it is but a small portion
of them that he can enjoy; and as his Estate increases, the greater Family and
Retinue (if he will live like himself) he must maintain; who have a larger
share than himself, in the daily provision that is made by his expenses. And as
for the rest that is not expended (which he calls peculiarly his) he has no
other benefit from it, but only that it feeds and entertains his eyes: from
which he derives all the true pleasure he has above them, if he keep a good
House willingly, that he sees many continually supported by his Hospitality;
but this very thing, if he be covetous, is his torment, that he beholds so many
mouths, which eat at his Cost and Charges. See Annot. [k].

12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but
the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

12. And as he that tills his Ground, or serves him in any other labor, has
commonly a better appetite, and stronger digestion, and therefore more health,
than himself; so he sleeps soundly, and is recruited with new vigor against
the Morning, whether his supper be small or large: when his rich Master, if he
eat sparingly, has his head so full of cares and fears, or, if he cram
himself, has it so filled with unquiet vapors, that he cannot sleep a wink; or
tosses up and down so restlesly, that he is not at all refreshed by it, but by
his crudities prepares matter for many Diseases. See Annot. [l].

13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely, riches kept
for the owners thereof to their hurt.

13. And, besides all this, there is another thing which is very calamitous,
and may rather be called a grievous plague, than a mere affliction; that these
very Treasures which men have heaped up, and preserved, with a great deal of
care, from thence expecting their felicity, prove in the issue their utter
undoing: for I my self have seen some of these miserable men, murdered by
their Servants, or by Thieves, nay, by their own Children, that they might be
Masters of these Riches; which bring them also, perhaps, at the last, into the
same or the like destruction. See Annot. [m].

14. But those riches perish by evil travail: and be begets a son, and there
is nothing in his hand.

14. Or, if this happen not, these Riches perish (to their no small grief and
trouble) by fire; or shipwark; or bad Bargains; or ill Debtors; or those very
crafty practices whereby he seeks to increase his Estate; or by some other
misfortune, or misadventure: so that his Son, whom he thought to have left
possessed of abundance of Wealth, has nothing at all to support a wretched
life. See Annot. [n].

15. As he came forth of his mothers womb, naked shall he return to go as he
came, and shall take nothing of his labor which he may carry away in his hand.

15. These things indeed do not always happen, but this which follows does;
that, though he die possessed of all that he has gotten; yet, he cannot carry
one Farthing away with him: but in this, he and the poorest Wretch are both
alike, that as he came naked into this World, so he must be stripped again when
he goes out of it; and, though his labor has been great and his Estate no
less; yet, it is not in his power, to take along with him so much as a
Winding Sheet; but what others please to bestow upon him.

16. And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he
go: and what profit has he that has labored for the wind.

16. This is another grievous affliction and sore torment to Mankind,
especially to the Wealthy, that the things, on which they have set their
hearts, cannot accompany them into the other World; for as the richest man that
ever was brought nothing hither, so he can carry nothing thither; but must
leave all he has behind him: and then what advantage has he? what pleasure?
wherein does he differ from a mere Beggar? But in this only, that he has taken
a World of pains, to no purpose; for that which gives no satisfaction; and
which he can hold no more than he can the Wind.

17. All his days also he eats in darkness, and he has much sorrow, and
wrath with his sickness.

17. And as at Death he can find no comfort in all his Wealth, so he took as
little perhaps in his life; but dwelt obscurely, and, denying himself even what
he had, led such a sad, melancholy, and sordid life, that his Meat, and his
Drink, and the very light it self, gave him no pleasure: for such a man never
thinks himself happy, but when some hope of gain shines upon him; and
therefore, at other times; he pines, and grieves, and frets, and vexes himself,
at every thing, that makes and expense, or crosses his covetous desires and
designs; insomuch that the sickness of his Soul appears in his pale and careful
looks, and in his lean and meagre Body; which consumes and wastes, even by the
sorrow and sadness, the vexation and displeasure of his mind. See Annot. [o].

18. Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to eat and to
drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he takes under the sun,
all the days of his life, which God gives him: for it is his portion.

18. Behold therefore the truth of that Observation, which I have made more
than once (II. 24. III. 12, 13, 22.) and now repeat again; that it is best for
a man, and most becoming, freely to use and enjoy the Riches he has gotten by
his honest labors; both for the constant supply of all the necessities of
Nature, and for moderate delight and pleasure, for the entertainment of his
Friends, and the relief of his poor Neighbors; and this not for a Fit, but all
the time that God is pleased to continue him in this World: for this is all
that falls to his share, or that can truly be called his part, in the good
things of this life; and the only way to prolong his days, and enlarge his
portion in them. See Annot. [p].

19. Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given
him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion and to rejoice in his labor:
this is the gift of God.

19. And whosoever he be, whom God has blessed, not only with plenty and
abundance of Worldly Goods, but also, with such a noble and generous mind, that
he is not their Slave, but truly Master of them; being able to enjoy them
innocently, and to take his full share in them, and that with cheerfulness, and
delight in doing good to others: let him be very thankful to Almighty God for
so great and happiness; and acknowledge it to be a singular Gift of his Bounty,
wherewith he rewards his honest labors.

20. For he shall not much remember the days of his life: because God answers
him in the joy of his heart.

20. For he that is thus highly favored by God, will not think life tedious or
irksome; but (forgetting all his past toils, and taking no care for the future)
spend his time most pleasantly: because God has given him his very hearts
desire, and he has attained the scope of all his labors; in that inward
tranquillity of mind, or rather joy and gladness of heart, wherewith God has
compensated all his pains, and testified his extraordinary kindness to him.

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1.] To prevent, or cure that folly mentioned in the Argument of the
Chapter) he advises three things about the Worship of God. The first of them is
in this Verse; to look to the disposition of their mind, when they go to Gods
House. And this pious disposition of mind, consists also in three things:
First, in frequenting the House of God, the place where He is worshipped:
Secondly, in a reverent behavior there; suitable to the great thoughts we have
of God, and to the humble sense we have of our own meanness: expressed, by
keeping or observing the feet, i. e. taking care to put off their Shoes, or
Sandals, as the manner was in those Countries; and to go barefoot into the holy
places; answerable to which now is, uncovering the head in our Churches, etc.
as Mr. Mede well discourses, in more places than one, Book II. p. 441, 546. and
then, lastly, in a readiness of the Will to obey all the Divine Precepts as the
best of Sacrifices. For this is the Sacrifice of wise and good men; and all
other Sacrifices without this, are but the Sacrifices of Fools and wicked
people: who are able, many times, to furnish the Altar with more
Burnt-offerings, than the best of men. But they are such Fools as not to
consider, that this very thing increases their guilt; that they imagine God
will be pleased with the Sacrifice of Beasts* without the Sacrifice of
themselves; in entire obedience to his Will. So our Translation seems to
understand the last Clause of this Verse: which may be thus also translated,
For they make no conscience to do evil. It is no part of their Religion to
abstain from wickedness: but fansying by their Sacrifices they shall atone for
that, they do not fear to commit it. To this purpose Maldonate expounds it,
more plainly than any that I have read.

[b] V. 2.] Here he gives the second Advice; which is about Prayer, and about
Vows to God, or (as St. Hierom seems to take it, and to which Melancthon wholly
confines it) about the Doctrines we deliver concerning God: which should be
very well considered, before we affirm any thing of Him. The two first are most
proper to the place, especially the latter of them: both which I have
comprehended in the Paraphrase of this Verse.

[c] V. 3.] The reason for the foregoing Precept (of not using many words)
taken from the consideration of God's Greatness and our meanness (v. 2.)
together with the inforcement of it in this Verse, is thus explained by St.
Hierom. He requires us, that whether we speak or think of God, we should not
venture beyond our ability; but remember our imbecility; and that, as far as
the Heaven is distant from the Earth, so much do our thoughts fall short of the
excellence of his Nature. And therefore our words ought to be very moderate:
for as a man* that is full of thoughts, commonly dreams of those things,
whereof his head is full: so he that attempts to discourse much of the
Divinity, falls into folly. Or rather thus, Our words ought therefore to be
few; because even those things, which we think we know, we see through a Glass,
and in aenigmate; and we do but dream of that, which we fancy we comprehend.
So that when we have said a great deal (and to the purpose, as it seems to us)
the Conclusion of our Disputation is mere folly.

And so much, we may be certain, he suggests unto us, that in a multitude of
words spoken unto God (as I rather understand it) there must needs be many of
them, as idle as men's thoughts are in a Dream. For the third Verse sounds thus
in the Hebrew, For a Dream proceeds from (or by) a multitude of toilsome
business; and the voice of a Fool from (or by) the multitude of words. That is,
if a man have a multitude of cares in his mind, all the day, they will produce
strange, extravagant, or distracted Dreams in the Night: and, in like manner,
if a man utter abundance of words, without consideration and due weighing what
he says to God, many of them must needs be foolish; whether they be Vows, or
whether they be Prayers unto him (or whether they be Discourses concerning Him;
for we may refer it, if we please, to all.) And the sense will not much differ,
if that Preposition, which we translate from, be translated with; in this
manner, As Dreams come with a multitude of business ( i. e. bring before the
mind, in a confused manner, what we have been doing, or thinking of, all day)
so a Fools voice comes with a multitude of words, i. e. he utters a great deal
of incoherent, confused stuff, etc. Or thus, the voice of a Fool comes in a
multitude of words. And then the sense will run thus: As a multitude of
business tires a man, and makes him but dream at last about it (and therefore
he had better leave off, before he be unfit to attend it) so when a man
enlarges himself too far in his Prayers or Discourses of God) he does but
babble in a Conclusion; and therefore had better be shorter.

[d] V. 4.] And now follows the third Advice, about the performing of Vows that
have been made. Which is double; first, not to delay the performance, nor put
it off from time to time (which is the Subject of this Verse) lest we be
tempted, at last, not to perform our Vow at all; which is the second thing: of
which he speaks in the next words, ver. 5. and 6. where he cautions against
excuses, which men are apt to make for not being as good as their intentions.
Greg. Thaumaturgus has expressed both excellently, in a few words (alluding to
the Hebrew word (...) which signifies to complete) (...). A promise being made
by a Vow, let it receive its perfection (or completion) by performance: and
that with all speed, as soon as it is due. For a Vow is an imperfect sort of
thing till it be made good: it has only the beginning of a good thing, and
wants its finishing; which if it have not, it becomes ugly and odious. For God
loves not (that is, hates) to be so dealt withal, as if He did either not
understand, or not mind what we say to Him: or would put up that affront which
the poorest man cannot but resent. Who looks upon himself, as, not only abused
but, despised; when men give him fair words, which either have no meaning, or
deceive him when he depends upon them. This Solomon represents in the 5th.
Verse, as far worse, than promising nothing at all; in which men may be unkind,
but in this they are unjust.

[e] V. 6.] And he presses it further in this Verse; where by Malach Angel,
there are those that understand that particular Angel, which is supposed by
some (but cannot be certainly proved) to attend upon every particular person;
others understand the Priest, who is God's Minister: but I have followed Mr.
Mede (Book II. p. 438.) who takes Angel here collectively, for more than one
(as Tree is put for Trees, Leaf for Leaves, III. Genesis 2, 7.) which attended
upon the Divine Majesty in his house, where the Vow, he is here speaking of,
was made (ver. 1.) Which Angelical Ministry in God's house was represented to
the Jews, by filling all the Curtains of the Tabernacle with the Pictures of
Cherubims, XXVI. Exodus 36, 37; and by carving the inside of the Walls of
Solomon's Temple, with the same, 1. King. VI; and by the Ark of the Testimony,
being overspread with two mighty Cherubims (having their Wings lifted up, and
their Faces looking down toward it, and toward the Mercy-Seat) called the
Cherubims of Glory, i. e. of the Divine presence, IX. Heb. 5. And all to
signify, that where God's sacred Memorial is, there the Blessed Angels, out of
Duty, give their attendance. And therefore the LXX. I observe, in this place,
instead of before the Angel, have (...), before the face, or presence of God:
whose Ministers the Angels were, and before whom the Vows men engaged
themselves in, being made; they were Witnesses also and Avengers of their
excuses, or of their delays, to make them good.

As for the Vulgar Translation of those words [it is an error;] which is this,
there is no Providence; I have taken no notice of it; because it does not seem
to be the genuine meaning: for why should a man make any Vows; who believes no
Providence over him? Unless we will say, that he might alter his Opinion
afterward; and so we may put both senses together, thus: I was in an error,
there is no Providence; and therefore I need not trouble my self about my Vows.

[f] V. 7.] In these words he concludes his Discourse about Religion, with a
repetition (as some take it) of the third Verse: a little varied and enlarged.
Which may be thus paraphrased, according to our Translation: To sum up all
that concerns this matter; Since in a multitude of words, as well as Dreams,
there must needs be much vanity; therefore have a greater reverence of God,
than to speak any thing rashly, or to make larger promises to Him, than thou
art truly willing to make good.

In the Hebrew the words run thus: But from a multitude of Dreams (or when
Dreams are multiplied) both vanity and words are multiplied; therefore fear
thou God. Which may have this meaning; they do but merely dream of God, and are
not awakened to a lively sense of Him; who make either those vain excuses, or
those idle promises: of which thou may not be guilty, possess thy soul with
an awful dread of his Majesty. This is exactly agreeable to the Hebrew; if we
take vanities to relate unto the excuses of ignorance or error before
mentioned; and Words unto Promises: and by multitude of Dreams understand, a
great many conceptions concerning God; more like Dreams, than waking thoughts
of Him.

Interpreters explain the words many other ways; whom the learned Reader may
consult: I have followed my own conjectures: And shall also propound another
Translation of the words, which seems to me very natural and easy; which is
this: When, in abundance, Dreams, and vanities, and words, are multiplied; then
fear thou God. That is, have a great care of thy self, and let the dread of God
overawe thee lest thou offend, when thy head is hot and full of Dreams, and
vain imaginations; which dispose thee to speak abundantly.

[g] V. 8.] As the foregoing Verse concluded his Discourse about Religion; so
this concludes the Third General Head, whereby he demonstrates the vanity of
all things; begun III. 16. Which he here admonishes us, should not too much
disturb, much less quite astonish us: because God will set all right, in his
due time. So he began it, III. 17. and so he here ends it, in this Verse. Which
has some difficulty in the last part of it; which we translate, He that is
higher than the highest, etc. Word for word, High above the high observes. But
(...) in Hebrew, never signifies simply above; but always from above, or from
on high: and therefore so should be translated here, He that is high, from on
high observes. And then the only Question is, who is meant by the high;
whether God or his Vicegerent; the King here on Earth. I have expounded it of
the latter; because otherways the same thing must be said over again
immediately. Which is not unusual indeed in Scripture; but where there is no
necessity of it, and where the words will better bear another sense, they are
not to be so construed. And the last word of the Verse, will no way be so
plain; as by referring it, both to the high person mentioned before, and to all
his inferior Potentates and Judges; whom he observes from on high; that is,
from his Throne, or from his Seat of Judgment. Where he ought to call them to
an account, and examine any complaints that are made against them: or if he do
not both he and they are observed by the supreme Judge of all; and shall be
accountable to Him, whether they will or no.

[h] V. 9.] And now he seems in this next Verse, to make a transition to the
IVth. General Head (mentioned in the beginning) concerning the Vanity of those;
who place their happiness, in getting and heaping up a great deal of money.

It is an obscure Verse, both in its connection, and in some of its Phrases:
and therefore is diversely expounded by Interpreters. To help out the
connection, I have made bold to preface a little, and also to add such a
Conclusion, in my Paraphrase upon it, as I took to be most agreeable to what
follows, and to what went before. I have expressed also both senses of the last
Clause, which we render, the King is served by the Field; but may more
literally be translated, the King is a Servant (or is, addicted) to the Field.
For anciently the greatest persons did not think it below them to follow
Husbandry (whose just praises Cicero has given in his Offices, but especially
in his Book de Senectute) as we are taught by the Examples of Hiero,
Philometor, Attalus, Archelaus, Cyrus the younger in profane Story; and by the
Example of King Uzziah in Scripture, 2 Chronicles. XXII. 10. Which did not at all
abate their courage, or dull their Wits; but only made the one more patient of
toil and labor, and the other more solid and more serious. Whence it is that
we find the greatest Captains among the Romans, such as Camillus, Regulus,
Fabius, Cato, Cincinnatus, were fetched from the Plough: as Gideon among the
Israelites was from the Threshing-floor; and Elisha called to the high Office
of a Prophet, as he was driving one of the twelve Ploughs, his Father had going
in the Field.

And therefore Maldonate's Translation of these words is not to be despised;
who (and he alone, as far as I can find) thinks they are capable of being
rendered thus: By following Husbandry diligently, a man may grow so rich as to
become a King. Melancthon alone translates the whole Verse thus, The King in
the Earth, is above all for the Tillage of the Field. Where Solomon, says he,
distinguishes a King from a Tyrant. A Tyrant depopulates his Country, and lays
all waste; a good King cherishes his people, especially honest Husbandmen and
Farmers: and loves to see them thrive, together with all good Arts. The Vulgar
Latin, I suppose, aimed at something of this; though it be taken otherwise by
those that follow it. Agreeable to which is this memorable Passage in a Persian
Writer quoted by Mr. Pocock (in his Notes upon Abul Faragii p. 202, 203.) that
in that Country they kept a solemn Feast every Year; wherein the King descended
from his Throne, laid aside his Royal Apparel, threw the Veil from his Face,
and conversed with the most ordinary people, even with Country Swains and
Husbandmen: with whom he ate, saying; I am one of you; nor can the World
subsist without Tillage, which is performed by your pains; and that Tillage
subsists, it is owing to the King; so that neither of us, being able to subsist
without the other, we are, as it were, individual Brethren.

There are those that comprehend Pastorage, as well as Tillage, under these
words; because the ancient Patriarchs were Shepherds. But there is no need of
this; and Husbandry or Gardening was far more ancient: even as old as Adam; and
after the Flood we find Noah thus employed; as Isaac also was in succeeding
times.

[i] V. 10.] The latter end of this Verse, runs thus in the Hebrew Text: Who so
loves (viz. Silver) reaps no fruit of his abundance: i. e. does not enjoy it,
as St. Hierom expounds it; which is very often the miserable condition of
worldly-minded men.

[k] V. 11.] The latter end of this Verse also, is capable of contrary senses;
which I have expressed in the Paraphrase; but shall not give an account of
here, because I see these Annotations already grow too large. For which cause I
will not note particularly every thing that is observable in the following
Verses; but only touch upon some of them, under this Observation, That he seems
to demonstrate the vanity of that sort of happiness, which men place in Riches,
from Ten Considerations. The two first are contained in the tenth Verse, That
the desires of such men are unsatiable; and the more unsatiable they are, the
less they enjoy of what they have.

The third and fourth in the 11th. Verse, that if they will enjoy it, the more
they have, the more others must also have of it; and the pleasure of this is
very small; being no more, than to behold a great many people eat and drink at
their Cost.

[l] The fifth, v. 12th, That their Servants commonly sleep more sweetly than
they. For so Haofed (which we translate laboring man) signifies one that
serves; that undertakes work for another; or any way ministers unto him.

[m] The sixth, That their Riches expose them to the danger even of their life;
by poison, or by open violence, v. 13. Where the first words Raa chole, sore
evil, import such an evil as makes one sick, when he thinks of it; especially
when he fears it. For the Hebrew word Chalah always carries in it the Notion of
sickness and weakness; and that sometimes accompanied with pain and torment (as
in the case of Hezekiah, XXXVIII. Isai. 1.) and proceeding from a deadly wound;
as in the case of Ahab, 1 King. XXII. 34. It may therefore be translated here a
tormenting or a deadly evil, or an evil that disables a man, and makes him so
feeble and languishing, that he is unfit for any thing. For the LXX. frequently
render the Noun that comes from hence, (...): See v. 17. of this Chapter.

[n] And seventhly, Though they escape these dangers, there are many other ways
whereby their Riches may be lost; which seem to be included in that Phrase. v.
14. injan ra, an evil business, or matter. Which may signify, as well the way
of their perishing; as that they perish with the great grief and affliction of
him that loses them. Whether that way be, by their very merchandice in the way
of their trade; or by their own frauds and subtilties in traffic, whereby they
overreach themselves; or lastly, by other accidents, as we call them; such as
Fire, Storms, etc.

And then follows the 8th, That he leaves his Son a Beggar; which is no small
trouble to them both, he having bred his Son in expectation of an Estate, which
never comes to him; or if it do, neither Father nor Son can enjoy it longer
than their lives, v. 14, 15. Which is the ninth thing: if their Riches do not
leave them, they must leave their Riches, ver. 16.

[o] And whilst they live (which is the last, v. 17.) they spend their time,
perhaps, either in filthy lusts (as Gregory Thaumaturgus understands those
words, eats in darkness) with vile Harlots; or in wretched niggardice, and
such sordid penuriousness that the Miser even eats up himself; taking no joy,
no comfort in any thing that he possesses. So darkness signifies, being
opposed to light and Scripture: which denotes joy and gladness; and thus the
LXX. here explain it by adding a word, in darkness, and in mourning. It may
refer also to his dismal habitation (to which I have had respect in the
Paraphrase) in some bye place, where he hopes no body can find him; or in a
Room, whose Windows are shut up and barred for fear of Thieves.

The last Clause of this Verse, runs thus word for word in the Hebrew: Sorrow
is multiplied (or there is much sorrow) and sickness, and wrath: the force of
which I hope I have expressed in the Paraphrase: and shall only note, that the
first word sorrow (as was observed Chap. I.) includes in it indignation,
together with heaviness: and the next word sickness, includes in it pain and
anguish, as was observed before: and the last word (ketzeph) wrath, denotes the
highest commotion of that sort. For being applied to the Sea, it signifies such
a boiling rage, as makes it foam. There is another word indeed which we render
hot displeasure: but this is joined with it (XXXVIII. Psalm. 1.) as equivalent
to it, or the effect of it.

[p] From all which he concludes this Chapter, as he had done his Discourse
upon the foregoing Subjects, with this Meditation (which some call sententia
intercalaris) that the greatest Blessing a man can enjoy in this life: is, to
have an heart to use what God has given him, for his own honest pleasure; with
due acknowledgments to God, and charity to others, v. 18, 19.20. Where (v. 19.)
there are two words to express abundance of worldly goods, as I have
paraphrased them. The last of them nekasim is larger than the former,
comprehending all manner of Goods (Cattle and all) which a man gathers
together. For it seems, by a transposition of Letters, to be derived from kanas
to collect or gather (Chap. II. 8.) from which comes the Latin word census; the
revenues, which a man is esteemed to have, and accordingly is rated and pays
Subsidies.

CHAP. VI.
ARGUMENT.
The first ten Verses, at least, of this Chapter, are a continuation of the
same Argument he handled in the latter part of the foregoing: And therefore
ought to be connected with it. For they set forth the vanity of Riches, in the
possession of a covetous Wretch: who only increases the number of unhappy men
in this World; being never the better for any thing he enjoys, as he shows in
the Conclusion of the Chapter.

1 THere is an evil which I I have seen under the sun, and it is common among
men:

1. BUT alas! this Divine benefit, though above all others, is coveted by very
few: for I have observed this most wretched, miserable humor reigning among
Mankind; which, though it be the greatest mischief is grown so common, that it
has overspread the face of the whole Earth.) See Annot. [a].

2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof, but a stranger eats it: this is vanity, and it is an evil
disease.

2. When a man is blessed by God, with such abundance of Money and Goods, and
height of Honor, that he need not, unless he will, want any thing which his
largest desires can wish should administer to his pleasure; yet so great is his
ingratitude to God, and his uncharitableness to men, that for these and other
sins, God denies him the power to enjoy these Gifts of his Bounty; to which he
is a Slave, rather than their Master: for he possesses them, as if they were
not his own, but kept by him, for some body else; and those not his Children,
nor his Kindred, but a mere Stranger perhaps; who (either in his lifetime, or
after he is dead) devours all that he has saved. What can be more senseless
than this? Nay, what sorer Plague can infest Mankind? See Annot. [b].

3. If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that the days
of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good, and also that he
have no burial, I say, that an untimely birth is better than he.

3. Unless it be this, that one of this sort of men, being blessed also with
abundance of Children, and with an exceeding long life; yet thereby is made
only so much the more, and so much the longer miserable: being so solicitous
for Posterity that he has no heart to take the comfort of any thing he
possesses at present; no, nor so much as to take order for his decent Funeral,
when he is dead; but he goes out of the World without any notice that he has
lived in it. Of such an one I pronounce, That an Abortive, which came into the
World before its time, is not so despicable as he. See Annot. [c].

4. For he comes in with vanity, and departs in darkness, and his name shall
be covered with darkness.

4. For though in this they are both alike, that they come into the World to no
purpose; and go our of it so obscurely, that no body minds their departure; and
leave no memory behind them, that they have been in it; See Annot [d].

5. Moreover he has not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this has more rest
than the other.

5. Yet in this they differ, that an Abortive, having never seen the light of
the Sun, much less been acquainted with any thing in this World, had no desire
to enjoy that of which it was perfectly ignorant, and was as utterly insensible
of grief and pain, as it was of joy and pleasure: Whereas this man's unsatiable
desires, carrying him after every thing he sees, torment his Soul with anxious
thoughts, care and labor; which not only make him pine away with grief for
what he cannot get, but deprive him of the comfort of what he has. And how
much better is it, never to live at all, than to live only to disquiet a man's
self with restless solicitude of mind, and toilsome pains of body: for that
which he can neither keep, nor part withal, with any contentment?

6. Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet has he seen no good:
do not all go to one place?

6. Men are so fond of life indeed, that because the one lives long, and the
other not at all, they imagine the former to be incomparably more happy: but
let us suppose this covetous Wretch to live more than as long again, as the
oldest man that ever was; what is he the better for it, when his greedy
desires, not suffering him to enjoy his Goods, multiply his miseries equally to
his years? Which will expire also at last, and then, what are his Riches able
to do for him? can they privilege him from going down into the Grave, and
rotting there like the Abortive? See Annot. [e].

7. All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.

7. And while he lives, to what purpose is his restless labor? Seeing if he
desire only what is necessary, it is easily provided; and having Food and
Raiment, a man may be contented: and if he extend his desires further, they are
infinite; and therefore can never meet with any satisfaction.

8. For what has the wise more than the fool? what has the poor, that knows
to walk before the living?

8. For let a man be, otherways, never so wise as well as rich, yet if he
bridle not his desires he is little better than a Fool: and he that is poor,
but has so much understanding, as to know how to behave himself among men
suitably to his condition, and to be contented therewith, is incomparably the
wiser, and the happier man. See Annot. [f]

9. Better is the sight of the eyes, than the wandering of the desire: this is
also vanity and vexation of spirit?

9. It being much better to enjoy what a man has at present, than to live upon
the hopes of that which, his ravenous desires continually pursue: which sure,
is a very foolish thing, and another great part of the miseries of humane life;
that men are still craving more, when they know not how to use what they have
already; and neglecting what they possess, wish for that, which perhaps they
cannot get; or if they do can give them no more satisfaction than what they
possess. See Annot. [f].

10. That which has been, is named already, and it is known that it is man:
neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.

10. And what if a man have already arrived at great renown (as well as Riches)
still it is notorious, that he is but a man, made out of the Dust: and
therefore weak, and frail, and subject to many disastrous events; which it is
not possible for him, by his most anxious cares, to prevent; or, by his Power
and Wealth, to throw off when he pleases. See Annot. [g].

11. Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?

11. And since there are so many things, and of great consideration, that add
to the natural uncertainty which attends all worldly enjoyments, what can a man
promise himself from all his cares? and how frivolous are his hopes? And how
senseless are they, when they will not suffer him to enjoy any thing, for fear
of diminishing that heap, which they would fain increase? See Annot. [h].

12. For who knows what is good for man in this life, all the days of his
vain life which he spends as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be
after him under the sun?

12. For (beside all that has been said) there is this great mischief will
still remain, that if he should attain his hopes, he cannot tell, whether it
would not have been better for him to have been disappointed: for alas! what
man is there that has skill enough to know, whether that eminent station (for
instance) to which he aspires, will prove so good for him, as the private
condition wherein he is? and the same doubt may be made of all other things,
which he desires in this short life: which passes away insensibly, but very
swiftly; and ends in the like uncertainty, what shall become of a man's Family
and Possessions, which he leaves behind him, when he departs our of this World.
See Annot. [i].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1. common] Covetous Wretches, it seems, were no rare Creatures in those
days, but the Nation of the Jews abounded with them; being of the same humor
they are now, scraping up Riches by right or wrong, which they scarce ever
enjoy. But I have expressed also the other sense of the word Rabba, which
signifies great (VI. Genesis 5.) as well as many or frequent.

[b] V. 2. riches, etc.] He describes in this Verse the ridiculousness, as well
as the misery, of this penurious humor; by the example of a man who wants
nothing, and yet wants all that he has: being like one that stands up to the
Chin in Water; but fears to take a sip to quench his thirst. For to those two
words, riches and wealth (mentioned in the 19th. Verse of the foregoing
Chapter) he here adds a third, to express the greatest plenty, viz. glory.
Which is more comprehensive than the other; including in it all those goodly
things, which may do a man credit, and raise him to a splendid condition in
this World. For so Laban's Sons call the ample Possessions which Jacob had got
in their Fathers service, all this glory (XXXI. Genesis 1.) or substance, as some
render it: which made him (as we now speak) a substantial man; for it denotes
any thing that has weight in it, and makes a man to be valued.

Evil disease] That which was called Raa choleh, a sore evil, Chap. V. 13, 16.
is here called choli ra, an evil disease, sad sickness, or grievous torment.
Which is only an inversion of the words, the same sense being still preserved.

[c] V. 3 days of his years, etc.] He seems to represent in this Verse an
higher degree of that evil disease, by the example of one, who has not only
great store of money, and lands, and honor; but also abundance of Children;
and such firm health, that he lives to a great Age. Which is expressed by two
Phrases which we translate thus, live many years, so that the days of his years
be many: but to avoid tautology, the latter Clause should be thus translated,
and the days of his years be abundantly sufficient: so many, that he cannot
reasonably expect, or desire more. For thus rab signifies in many places, where
we translate it enough, XXIV. Genesis 25. straw and provinder enough: XXXIII. Genesis
11. I have enough, my Brother. And yet this man thus abundantly provided for a
long happiness, does no good either to others, or to himself, with what he
possesses: but grutches even the expenses of a Funeral, after he can hold his
Riches no longer. So I understand those words, he have no burial. Which are
generally understood, I confess, of lying neglected, without any interment:
which the Hebrews (every one knows) looked upon as a great Judgment: (see XXII.
Jer. 19.) and so Anton. Corranus glosses upon these words; By the just Judgment
of God, such Wretches, who would not feed the poor while they lived, become the
Food of Dogs, or Crows when they are dead.

[d] V. 4. he comes in] is born. With vanity] or in vain, to no purpose. Which
some refer to the covetous Wretch, others to the Abortive, before-named: But I
have referred to both. For this makes the clearest sense; if in the next Verse
(v. 5.) we suppose that he compares these two together, and prefers the latter
before the former; as he plainly does in the conclusion of it.

[e] V. 6. sees no good] To see is to enjoy as the Phrase is used in many
places: particularly XX. Levit. 17. XVII. S. John 24. And the sense of this
Verse is, That the life of a covetous man is so far from making him happier,
than he who never lives at all; that if he should live as long again as
Methusalem, he would only be so much the more wretchedly miserable. For when he
has tired himself with labor, he has not taken one step toward
satisfaction: which he might have had with less pains, if he had taken the
right course to it, ver. 7.

[f] V. 8. what hath] There is so great a difficulty in this Verse, that I did
not know how to connect it with the foregoing; but by taking the latter part of
the Sentence, as if Solomon had said, What comparison is there between him (viz
the man before named) and the poor that knows how to walk before the living? i.
e. the poor man who has so much skill, as to know to live well, is infinitely
to be preferred before him; whose Wisdom still leaves him such a Fool, that it
does not restrain his superfluous appetites. And this suits well with the next
words (v. 9.) where the sight of the eyes, being opposed to the wandering of the
desire; it is reasonable to take it for the fixedness of a man's mind, to rest
satisfied in what is before him: that is, in things present.

Or the words may admit of this construction (which is come into my mind, since
I wrote the Paraphrase) What excellence is there in the Wise man (that is, in
the opinion of the wretch beforementioned, there is none) more than in a Fool,
especially if he be poor, etc. That is, to all other miseries of these rich
Churls, this is commonly added, That they are very ignorant of what is most
truly valuable; having no esteem of the wisest man in the World, no more than a
of a Fool. Nay, they prefer a rich Fool, before a poor Wise man: who knows how
to carry himself so decently, that he is not afraid to appear before any man
living. This is a great sottishness (v. 9.) and breeds no less sorrow; to be
led by blind Appetites, and not by Reason and Judgment. For so the first words
of the ninth Verse, may be interpreted: Better it is to understand aright, than
to follow after ones desires.

[g] V. 10. That which has been] The sense that I have given of the beginning
of this Verse (taking the first word for an Interrogation, and name for renown,
as is common in Scripture) seems to me to be the most simple; and most
agreeable to the whole Discourse. And it is that which Melancthon has
expressed in these words, Although a man grow famous, yet it is known that he
is but a man; and he cannot contend with that, which is stronger than himself.
That is, he cannot govern events. But I shall mention two other
Interpretations, which some give of it. One is this, As he was made at first,
so his Name was given him; i. e. the Name of Adam, signifying that he was taken
out of the Earth, and therefore mortal. The other is this; He that has been,
his Name is called already; that is, his memory is abolished together with
himself. This is Maldonate's sense; but is not agreeable to the Hebrew Phrase,
his Name is called; for that in the Scripture signifies rather the contrary,
viz. fame, and honorable mention, as I have expressed it word for word out of
the Hebrew, in the Paraphrase. The common Interpretation may be found in all
commentators, which is this; that God has appointed what every man shall be;
whether rich or poor, etc. and therefore it is in vain for them to contrive, as
they do, to be other than what they are: For it is to endeavor to alter that
which is immutably settled by the Almighty.

[h] V. 11. seeing there be] This Verse sums up all this matter about Riches;
or, as others will have it, the whole foregoing Discourse, concerning all those
four things, wherein men place their happiness: wherether Wisdom, Pleasure,
Honor, or Wealth. Which draw so many, and so great (for the Hebrew word
includes both) inconveniences along with them; as sufficiently demonstrate a
man is still to seek for the satisfaction of his desires, if he look no further.

And so they would have the last Verse, to be an Introduction to the following
Discourse in the next Chapter: where he shows, wherein that true and solid
happiness lies, which Mankind vainly pursue in the forenamed enjoyments. But I
have connected it with what goes before in this Chapter: as the Particle (for)
in the beginning of it, shows it ought to be.

CHAP. VII.
ARGUMENT.
Having discoursed, in the foregoing part of this Book, of the vain courses men
take to make themselves happy; be now seems to proceed to prescribe the best
remedies that can be found, against that vanity to which we are subject: by
setting down many wise Precepts for our direction, and conduct, support, and
comfort in a troublesome World. Where, it is confessed that, our happiness can
be but imperfect; yet so much we may attain as to be well satisfied, and not
vex our selves that we cannot make things more certain and constant; nor
dispose men to be more just and equal to us than they are.

And if we examine the following Particulars, we shall find they are
comprehended in this General Direction; the change of our mind, thoughts and
opinions: which must be quite altered; so that those things which now look like
Paradoxes, must be judged the greatest Wisdom. Such are all the Doctrines that
begin this Chapter (quite opposite to the common Opinions of the World) that a
good name is to be preferred before precious Ointment, and the day of ones
death, before ones birthday: mourning before feasting; sadness before
laughter; rebukes before commendations; the end of a thing before the beginning
of it; a patient suffering spirit, before a stout haughty mind; Wisdom before
riches, etc. These and such like are the Maxims of true Wisdom and Piety, which
must be learnt; in order to the settlement of our minds in peace and
tranquillity: notwithstanding the vanity that is in all things.

1. A Good name is better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the
day of ones birth.

1. BUT, though there be such uncertainty in all other things, yet a Good Name,
which a man gets by a virtuous life, is lasting and durable: And as the
Conscience of well-doing gives a greater pleasure to the mind for the present,
than the most fragrant Ointment can do to the senses of voluptuous men, so the
fame of it will remain after he is dead; and he will still live in a good
report, when all those sensual joys expire, like the vapor of the Ointment,
which is soon dispersed and lost after it is poured out: And therefore if we
would be happy, we ought to order our life in such a manner, that Death, which
Fools and wicked men fear, may be welcome to us; and only let us out of the
troubles, into which we are brought at our birth. See Annot. [a].

2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of
feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his
heart.

2. And, that it may befriend us, it is our Wisdom to think often of it; and
consequently, choose rather to converse with things that will make us serious,
than with those which will make us merry: to go, for instance, into the Company
of those, who are mourning for the dead, rather than of those, who are feasting
for joy that a Child is born into the World: For in the midst of those
pleasures we are apt to be dissolute and to forget our selves: but that sad
spectacle enclines us naturally to be considerate, and disposes our mind to
humility, modesty, gentleness, sobriety and charity: when, in one we see the
fate of all; and we follow him to his Grave, who a little while agone, perhaps,
was as vigorous and strong as our selves, See Annot. [b].

3. Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the
heart is made better.

3. Sadness, therefore, and sorrow, is much more profitable for us than mirth
and jollity (as we see in those severe and stern rebukes, which make men
sorrowful for their faults) because that grief which makes a man look sadly,
whether it be for his own sins, or other men's calamities, is apt to do his Soul
good; by giving him a right understanding of God, and of himself, and of all
things else. See Annot. [c].

4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools
is in the house of mirth.

4. Whence it is, that Wise men affect to think of such things, when they do
not see them, as show them how vain all our worldly enjoyments are: but Fools
seek all occasions to put by such thoughts, and to divert themselves with
merriment and pleasure. See Annot. [d].

5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the
song of fools.

5. And he that would be in the number of these wise men, must look upon this
as one of the first steps toward it, to lend an obedient ear unto the reproofs
of him who is truly wise and virtuous: which, though never so sharp and rough
are to be infinitely preferred before the smooth praises and commendations of a
great many Fools? nay, ought to sound more gratefully in our ears, than the
most delicious Music, Songs and Jests, of all the merry Companions in the
World. See Annot. [e].

6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool:
this also is vanity.

6. These jolly Fellows indeed make a great noise and show; as if they were the
only men that enjoy this World: but alas! their mirth and joy is but for a
spurt, and then ends in heaviness: like the crackling of Thorns, which
sometimes blaze under a Pot, as if they gave a mighty heat; but leave the Water
in it, as cold as they found it.

All there jollity therefore is mere vanity. See Annot. [f].

7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad, and a gift destroys the heart.

7. And there is the greater need to be well instructed, and therefore to
hearken to the wise (v. 5.) because there are other things besides vain
pleasures and flatteries, to disturb and unsettle our minds if we be not well
fortified against them. For the better any man is, the more he is in danger to
suffer from slanderers, Revilers, and all sorts of injurious persons: whose
violence sometime is so great, that unless a man be provided with more than
humane Wisdom (and it be deeply rooted in his heart) it will not only miserably
disquier, but even distract him. Nor is this his only danger; but that Power
and Authority, which raises him above the former, may expose him to another;
unless he be armed with great integrity: for his mind may be corrupted by Gifts
and Presents to do injustice unto others; which he hates should be done to
himself. See Annot. [g].

8. Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and the patient in
spirit is better than the proud in spirit.

8. And he will be the better able to resist them both, who is so wise as to
look, not merely to the beginning of them, but attend to their conclusion: For
that which seems grievous at the first appearance, in the issue proves very
advantageous; and on the contrary, that which promises fair at first has a
deadly farewell with it; and therefore it is much better to endure patiently,
and humbly wait to see the issue, than to be provoked by pride and disdain,
hastily to precipitate events; for he that scorns to wait and attend upon the
leisurely progressions of things, commonly undoes himself and his Affairs, by
his fierce and violent attempts presently to compass his desires. See Annot.
[h].

9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of
fools.

9. It is another Point therefore of that Wisdom, which must make us happy, to
repress the motions of anger that we seel in our selves, and not suffer them,
without great deliberation, to have any effect: for anger is an enemy to
counsel and advice, and is indeed the property of Fools; who, out of weakness
of mind, and shortness of thoughts, are familiarly transported with it, upon
the slightest causes; and not easily appeased again, as wise men are when they
chance to be incensed.

10. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better than
these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.

10. It is Wisdom also to correct in our selves, that complaining humor, which
is apt to be ever finding fault with the present times, and commending the
foregoing Ages, as far better and happier than the present. For perhaps it is
not true; and thus much is certain, that he is foolishly inconsiderate, who
imagines, that then there was no evil, and that now there is no good: or if it
be true that there was more good in those times, let us not murmur and repine,
asking why we are cast into a troublesome Age, full of oppression, suppose, and
violence and wrong (v. 7.) but rather submit to the Providence of God;
considering, that there is no Age so bad, as to hinder us (which is the
principal point of Wisdom) from being good: and therefore let us do our Duty;
believing God has such reason for suffering the times to be as they are, that
we have no reason to quarrel at them; or to call in Question his Wisdom,
Goodness or Justice. See Annot. [i].

11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that
see the sun.

11. Yet do not think that Wisdom or Virtue consists in despising Riches; but
only, in using them well when we have them, and in being contented without
them; for as we cannot be happy by Riches alone, without Wisdom, so we cannot
be completely happy with Wisdom alone, without Riches: For he has a vast
advantage to do good every way, who is Rich as well as wise; it giving him an
authority, even to speak more freely than other men; and making what he speaks
to be more regarded: but, of the two, Wisdom and Virtue must always be
preferred; which can do greater things, and bestow nobler benefits upon
Mankind, than Treasures alone can do. See Annot. [k].

12. For wisdom is a defense, and money is a defense: but the excellency of
knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to them that have it.

12. For as Wisdom, for instance, contrives many ways, whereby a man may
innocently defend himself from danger; so can Money ofttimes purchase his
protection and safety: but herein is the pre-eminence of Wisdom, that when
neither of them can shelter a man, nor stave off the calamity that invades him,
it marvellously supports, revives, and comforts the Souls of those who are
Owners of it, under all the evils, which it could not help them, by honest
means, to avoid. See Annot. [l].

13. Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight which he has
made crooked?

13. And in order to it, the highest Piece of Wisdom is, to live in a serious
sense of the Sovereign Power of God; and to consider, that as he has settled
all things in Heaven and Earth, in an unchangeable course, so nothing comes to
pass without his Providence: with which it is in vain to struggle, when he is
pleased either to cross us in any of our private designs; or to send any
public calamity, which by all our Art and Power we can neither avoid, nor
remedy. See Annot. [m].

14. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider:
God also has set the one over against the other, to the end that man should
find nothing after him.

14. No, we ought rather to accommodate our selves to the present state of
things; and when we are in prosperity, to enjoy God's Blessings cheerfully,
with thankful and charitable hearts; but so soberly also, as not forgetting
that affliction may come: and when it does, let us take it patiently,
considering, among other things, that there may be a change to a better
condition again: For as both the one and the other come from God, so he has
ordered they should have their turns, in such due season, and balanced one with
the other with such exactness, that the meanest man has no reason to complain
of him; nor the greatest to fancy himself more than a man; who cannot invent
any means, to dispose things otherwise, much less, better, than God has done.
See Annot. [m].

15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just man that
perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his
life in his wickedness.

15. I know what may be objected to this (having, all my life long, made
Observations upon all manner of things, in this troublesome World) and it seems
very hard that a just man's integrity, should not be able to preserve him; but
he is therefore, perhaps, destroyed, because he is better than others; when a
wicked man escapes, nay is countenanced and encouraged; or suffered to prolong
his days in (and perhaps by) his wickedness) See Annot. [n].

16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise: why should
thou destroy thy self?

16. But besides other things which may be replied to this (as that good men
are sometimes removed from, and wicked reserved unto, future evils) it must be
noted also, that some pious men are more strict and rigid than they need, and
not so prudent as they ought to be; but unnecessarily expose themselves to
danger: And therefore it is good advice, in order to a safe and quiet passage
through this life, to be temperate in thy zeal, and not to over-do; either by
extending thy own Duty beyond the Divine Commandment; or by correcting the
inveterate vices of others, and opposing the vulgar Opinions, too severely or
unseasonably; whereby they are only exasperated and enraged, but not at all
amended: for why should a man bring a mischief upon himself, without any
benefit unto others? See Annot. [n].

17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why should thou die
before thy time.

17. And on the other side, let not impunity tempt any man to presume to grow
enormously wicked; and so foolish as to embrace and follow the lewdest
Opinions: for this may awaken the public Justice against him, even for the
common safety; or the Divine vengeance, nay his own excessive wickedness, may
cut him off, before he come to the natural term of his life. See Annot. [o].

18. It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea also from this
withdraw not thine hand: for he that fears God, shall come forth of them all.

18. This Advice is so profitable, that he who loves himself will not only
apprehend it, but take fast hold of it and diligently observe it; never
departing from either part of it, but while he wisely manages himself to
decline dangers, honestly and faithfully perform his Duty: for nothing can do a
man such service in this, as a true fear of offending the Divine Majesty; which
will preserve him both from rash and heady forwardness, and from consulting
merely his own private safety and interest. See Annot. [p].

19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more than ten mighty men which are in the
city.

19. And this pious prudence, which proceeds from the fear of God, will be a
stronger Guard and security, to him who is endued with it, both against all
inward fears and all outward dangers, than a multitude of valiant Commanders,
and all their Troops are, to defend a City, when it is besieged by its Enemies.
See Annot. [p].

20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not.

20. Though this must always be understood, when we thus discourse that no man
is either so perfectly wise, or completely virtuous, as never to mistake and
commit a fault; but sometimes the best of us may slip into a sin,
notwithstanding all our caution and care; and thereby fall into danger. See
Annot. [q].

21. Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear thy
servant curse thee.

21. The consideration of which frailty of Mankind, is useful many ways; not
only to abate our severity in censuring or chastising public Offenders, but to
teach us gentleness toward those, who do us private injuries: and therefore
not to regard (for instance) every word that is spoken against us, but rather
to dissemble our knowledge of it; first, because otherwise we shall have no
quiet; for perhaps we may chance to overhear our own Domestics speaking
slightly of us; which we may easily pass by and overlook, but cannot take
notice of without great disturbance. See Annot. [r].

22. For oftentimes also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self likewise
have cursed others.

22. And secondly, Because if thou examinest thy own life, thou will find this
fault is so incident to humane Nature, that thou thy self perhaps have been
guilty of it many a time; and done as much by others, that are thy Betters, as
thy Servant does by thee.

23. All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise, but it was far
from me.

23. For my part, I cannot exempt my self from the guilt of great errors: for
though I have not only studied to be wise and virtuous, but made a trial of the
excellence of all these Rules, which I have now delivered; and resolved also
that I would strictly observe them, and never, in the least, swerve from them;
yet, alas! I fell far short of these holy purposes. See Annot. [s].

24. That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?

24. That which I have done already, in time past, is far from the Wisdom,
whereby I intended to have acted; and who can tell, when he once sinks below
himself, how much deeper and deeper he shall be plunged in sin, till he cannot
find his, way out again?

25. I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and
the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness
and madness:

25. Notwithstanding which I did not cease my endeavors, but diligently looked
every where, and viewed every Corner, even of my heart; making the most
exquisite search after the surest means to attain that Wisdom and Virtue, which
I desired and labored for above all things; and to be settled, upon firm
Gounds, in my holy resolutions: for which end, I likewise endeavored to
understand, what is the very height of folly and wickedness; even that
wickedness which besots a man's mind, nay turns his brain; and not only
infatuates him, but makes him act as if he were distracted.

26. And I find more bitter than death the woman whose beart is snares and
nets, and her hands as hands: whosoever pleases God, shall escape from her, but
the sinner shall be taken by her.

26. And I found at last, that nothing so destroys a man's understanding,
nothing leads him into so many dangerous errors, and makes him quite forget
himself, as that filthy lust which carries him to a Harlot; who brings him into
so many grievous mischiefs, that he had better die than be acquainted with her:
for she is made up of wicked Arts and wily devices, and does nothing but
contrive how to ensnare and entangle him, that approaches her; whom she holds
so fast by her charms, that he remains her Prisoners for ever, without a
wonderful Grace to deliver him: which he has little reason to expect, when he
considers, that it is commonly some other great offenses against God, that
betray him into these Snares; from which, he who approves himself sincerely
unto God, finds so much favor with Him, as to be preserved. See Annot. [t].

27. Behold, this have I found (says the preacher) counting one by one, to
find out the account:

27. Behold then the result of my most serious thoughts, which I publicly
proclaim to all, and would have it diligently observed; that, having distinctly
considered all things, one by one, I find nothing so dangerous (and therefore
nothing so much to be avoided by him, that would be steadfastly wise and good,
v. 23.) as the conversation of Women; especially those that are of a lewd
inclination.

28. Which yet my soul seeks, but I find not: one man among a thousand have I
found, but a woman among all those have I not found.

28. And where to meet with any of them, with whom it is safe to have Society,
I am still to seek, though very desirous to find: for though here and there I
have found a truly honest Man, among those multitudes that attend upon me in my
Court, yet I cannot say that among all my Acquaintance of the other Sex (and I
have a great many, 1 King. XI. 1.) I have met with so much as one, that is what
a Woman should be; modest, plain-hearted, humble, sincerely virtuous, without
guile, hypocrisy and dissimulation. See Annot. [u].

29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright; but they have
sought out many inventions.

29. Only observe this, that I do not herein accuse (far be it from me) the
Creator of the World; for I am assured of nothing more than this, That, as God
made all other things very good in their several kinds, so, he made both Men
and Women in perfect integrity; with a clear understanding to judge aright, and
with an honest will, inclined to do accordingly; prescribing them also no other
Rule of life, but such as was just and good: but they, affecting to be greater
than God intended, and to have more liberty than He allowed, raised scruples
and doubts, questions and disputes about their Duty; inventing many ways to
shift it off; and so depraved themselves, by following their own vain fancies,
and false reasonings, rather than his blessed Will. See Annot. [x].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Among all the Maxims of true Wisdom and Piety, which are to be learnt, for
the settlement of our mind in peace and tranquillity, notwithstanding the vanity
that is in all things, Solomon recommends to us in the first place; the care of
that, which men foolishly lose; by minding nothing but heaping up Wealth, or
pleasing themselves in a voluptuous life, etc. viz. to acquire a good Name.
Which nothing but a virtuous use of all things, can bestow upon us; and when we
have it, will give us a singular delight at present, and embalm our memory when
we are laid in our Graves.

Which good Name (as Melancthon observes) consists in two things: in the
approbation of our own Consciences judging aright; and in the approbation of
other men, who also rightly judge. Both which are required by God; that we
should do right things, and that others should approve of what is rightly done.
Unto which they are bound, for two Reasons; that the difference of Virtue and
Vice may be made the more conspicuous; and that others may be taught by
Examples. He requires therefore that infamous persons be cast out of Society,
and that they be honored, whose manners are without infamy. Now since such
approbation is a Divine Ordinance, it is manifest we may desire this Glory;
and, by the same reason, that we must avoid all scandal, and take care that we
may be commended.

Which Solomon here compares to a precious Ointment, because nothing was more
grateful and refreshing in those Eastern Countries: and therefore used not only
in Feasts, but at other times, when they were weary or languishing; for
comforting the brain, recreating the spirits, chearing the countenance,
suppling the joints; and for other services tending to health, as well as
pleasure. Which made Ointments to be held in the greatest price and estimation;
and to be mentioned among the Treasures of Kings, 2 King. XX. 12. XXXIX. Isai.
2. Suitable to this is that of Pindar, A Bath of warm Water does not so refresh
the tired Bones, as Glory. And this of Thucidydes, that Honor is the
nourishment and food of an old man; who lives upon the reputation he has
gotten by worthy Deeds, which will make Death not unwelcome to him. So the
latter part of this Verse must be understood, with reference to a well-spent
life; for otherways it would be only a discontented Saying, like that of the
Heathen, The best thing is not to be born, the next best to die presently. Unto
which Doctrine (as Melancthon well speaks) the Church is a Stranger.

I cannot well pass over this Verse, without observing, what all Interpreters
note; an elegant Paranomasia (as they call it) that is, a near affinity both in
the Letters and in the sound, of these two Hebrew words Schem Name, and Schemen
Oil or Ointment: as there is afterward, v. 5, 6. between three other words,
Shir a Song, Sirim Thorns, and Sir a Pot. Which being found also in several
other parts of the Bible, it shows that such allusions are not unseemly, nor
ought to be censured as affectations; if they be sparingly used, and wisely,
gravely and decently scattered in a Discourse; not fulsomely, upon every
occasion, obtruded.

[b]. V. 2.] Now the Wise man knowing that nothing stirs us up more powerfully
to a religious life, than the frequent remembrance of our mortality (which
alas! we are not willing to think of) he next advises him that would be happy,
to embrace all occasions that may put him in mind of it. The Meditation of
Death, being as was anciently said, the very Abridgment of all Philosophy. All
the Precepts of Wisdom, they thought, were comprised in this; and therefore no
wonder Solomon not only begins with it, but presses it so largely as he does in
the following Verses: to the end, that we may make our life not only a
Meditation, but an Exercise of Death; which in the Christian Language is called
Mortification. In short, the thoughts of Death will, without any other Teacher
(if we keep it always in mind) instruct us in all those Virtues, which will
procure us a Good Name; some of which I have touched in the Paraphrase. And the
more healthful we are, the more we had need to charge our selves with the
thoughts of it; because that is apt to make us forget it. So I have taken chai,
not merely for living; but lively, vigorous, lusty and flourishing, as we
translate it truly XXXVIII. Psalm. 19.

[c] V. 3.] In the Explication of this Verse, I have touched upon another sense
of the first word of it, (...): which signifies not only sorrow, but anger or
indignation also: by which some expound this Verse. And understand thereby,
either the anger of God afflicting men for sin, or the angry reproofs that are
given Sinners: which are better for them than prosperity, or to applaud and
humor them in their folly. But this is mentioned v. 5. and therefore I take it
not to be intended here.

The truth of the latter part of this Verse is admirably explained by St. Paul
in the 2 Corinthians. VII. 11. As for the Phrase I shall only note, that an ill
look is an exact Translation into our Language, of the Hebrew Phrase, which is
here translated sadness of the countenance. Now a man may look ill not only by
sickness, but, by reason of any other thing that afflicts him (as we find in
the Case of Nehemiah, II. 2.) some of which I have expressed in the Paraphrase.

[d] V. 4. heart] the thoughts, affections, and delight.

[e] V. 5. rebuke) The word includes roughness, and severity in it; and is
opposed to the smooth flatteries of those, that seduce to sin. So I have
understood Song (not excluding the common sense of the word, which I have also
expressed) for as the first part of Wisdom, is for a man to be able to give
good advice to himself and others; and the next part of it, to take such advice
when it is given: So it belongs to the first part, to see a man's own faults and
reprove himself for them; and to the second, to receive such reproof willingly
from others, and to abhor to be flattered and soothed, as if he had no faults
at all.

[f] V. 6.] This comparison between rebuke and flattery, Corranus thinks is
continued also in this Verse; upon which he paraphrases in this manner; As
Thorns put under a Pot, and kindled, make such a crackling, as if they would
set the whole house on fire, and by their noise raise an expectation of the
greatest flame; but presently end in smoke and vapors: so senseless Flatterers
make a great buzzing in men's ears, and blow up their minds, extolling them to
Heaven with their Praises; but in truth make them not one whit the better, etc.
But I do not see how the word laughter can be well applied to this; and
therefore I have omitted it, and only thought fit here to mention it.

[g] V. 7.] The connection of this Verse with the preceding, is a little
obscure; unless we translate it, as Maldonate does (following Munster) A Wise
man despises calumny, and a mind that can be corrupted with Gifts: Which is an
excellent Admonition, and well suited to Solomon's purpose. But no Interpreters
besides them take the word jeholel in the signification of despising (except
Forsterus, who takes it for making one despised, translating it thus, Calumny
makes even a Wise man inglorious) but rather in the sense of giving
disturbance, or making mad, as we translate it. Though a great many by Oschek
(which raises this disturbance in a Wise man) understand that sort of
oppression, which comes from calumny. Particularly Melancthon, herein follows
the Vulgar; showing what a most pestilent mischief this is, in all Governments:
whereby such excellently deserving persons as Palamedes, Aristides, Cimon, and
Themistocles were oppressed. The fountain of which Vice, is pride, envying the
glory of others; and, that they may lessen it, misrepresenting their counsels
and actions: Which sophistical depravation of other men's words, and deeds, is
called Calumny.

But I have not confined the sense to this; the Hebrew word Oschek signifying
all sorts of oppressions, as I have noted before, either by fraud or by force.
And the easiest sense of the Verse seems to me, that which I have expressed in
the Paraphrase; by connecting it with Ver. 5. as a reason why we ought to
hearken even to the rebukes of the Wise; that we may acquire a good habit of
mind, able to hold out against oppression on the one hand, and bribery on the
other: which none can do, who is not very virtuous.

And in this Exposition I have taken Wise as St. Hierom does; not for one that
is perfect, but for a Proficient: who has not yet settled wise Principles in
his mind.

It is possible also that Solomon may have respect to the oppressions which men
generally endure, in a State illgoverned. Which raises a just indignation, and
holy warmth of zeal in the best of men: but if care be not taken to repress the
violence of that perturbation, which this is apt to give us, it may turn into
fury; and make us behave our selves toward our Superiors, as men out of their
Wits.

[h] V. 8.] I have connected this Verse with the foregoing; though it may be
taken alone by it self. And the word dabar, signifying either speech or thing,
some (following the Vulgar) interpret this of the care that ought to be taken,
in the Epilogue or close of an Oration (as St. Hierom speaks) rather than in
the beginning or Preface to it; that, as we are wont to say, we may come off
well, and leave a sting in the minds of those that hear it. But this is so wide
from the Wise man's purpose, that I do not think fit to set down an excellent
Discourse of the Lord Bacon's, upon this sense of the words, Lib. VIII. de
Augm. Scient. Parab. 10.

And if we expound it of things, it is but a dilute sense to say, that a thing
perfected is better than a thing begun. Others therefore take it to be the same
with that, Finis coronat Opus: which is true, but does not complete the sense;
unless we understand it in this manner; that the Conclusion of all things is to
be expected, before we judge of them. For whilst they are growing and coming
on, they appear with a quite different face, from what they have, and when they
are gone and shall be no more.

In the latter part of the Verse, patient in Spirit, is properly one that is
long before he grow angry, or fall into any passion; who is opposed to proud in
spirit, because it is high-mindedness (as the word signifies) which makes men's
passion rise and swell hastily. It may have relation to the former part, and be
expounded in this manner: A patient man and slow to anger dispatches business
better, than a proud, huffing and blustering Spirit: whose passion so disorders
his mind, and indisposes it for the management of Affairs, that he seldom
brings them to a good issue.

Or thus, A proud man is a Boutefeau, who begins the fray: but the patient in
spirit is the man that must end it (if ever it be well ended) and that is much
the better work, and the greater honor to him, who is employed in it, and
effects it.

Or, which is still clearer, we ought to attend to the end of a thing with
patience: because it cannot be known what it will prove, nor whither it tends,
in the beginning: and we should be the more prone to be patient in spirit, if
we would expect the issue of every thing. Thus Corranus paraphrases upon the
words most excellently; but a little too long. It is no small part of Wisdom,
to judge of things, and of business proposed to us, slowly and maturely, etc.
for we see frequently that inconsiderate men, finding a thing very hard and
difficult in the beginning, and never thinking how profitable and pleasant the
issue may prove, immediately despond; and out of an impatience, shall I say, or
rashness of mind, desist from the most excellent Enterprises; and many times
betake themselves to worse. From which rashness, and inconstancy he will be
very far removed, who endued with Divine Wisdom, waits for the desired and
happy Conclusion of his Affairs. And unto this nothing contributes more, than a
slow, constant and patient mind, that can endure labor and pains: which
steadfastly and quietly considering how fruitful the end may be which he
affects, will not suffer himself by any difficulty, trouble or weariness which
he meets withal in the beginning, to be drawn from his purpose. Far different
from those, who out of a proud, arrogant humor, think it is baseness, and
unbecoming a gallant man, to attend upon the flow and leisurely progresses of
things, and to expect their events.

Thus he; which sense I have not neglected in my Paraphrase; but comprised it,
among the rest; and it is thus, in part, expressed more briefly by a wise and
good man in that Age; when he told his Friend (who was undone because he would
not mind it) that he was like an unskilful Player at Tennis, ever running after
the Ball; whereas an expert Player, will stand still to observe and discern,
where the Ball will light, or where it will rebound; and there with small
travel will let it fall on his Racket, or on his hand.

[i] V. 9, 10.] These two Verses depend on the foregoing showing that anger is
inconsistent with Wisdom; and so is murmuring and repining at the hardship we
meet withal in evil times. And therefore, as the same Corranus well glosses,
let us not throw the causes of our anger upon the times; but blame our selves,
who at all times, if we want meekness of Wisdom, shall grow angry upon the most
frivolous occasions; and not only let loose the Reins of our anger, but of all
other Vices.

But I think this advice, v. 10. is not merely to be restrained to this, but
extended unto all sorts of discontent, which are apt to make us complain of our
present condition; and so to admire what is past, as not to mind what is
present: as if they had nothing but what was good, who lived before us; and we
nothing but what is naught, in these days. Whereas, they complained just as we
do now; and that of Thucidydes was true then, as it ever will be, (...). the
present is always burdensome. Because, as Melancthon observes, we have a
feeling sense of present incommodities; but know what was heretofore only by
report: and so we praise those ancient times, but do not like our own; which
may be as good. This we are sure of, that all times have their troubles: and it
is the part of a wise and good man, to bear them, and not to increase them by a
foolish Cure. According to that Saying, (...): let not one evil be remedied by
another. And that of Pythagoras, (...): What portion of things fall to thy
share, take it; and do not grumble, nor be vexed at it. And remember, as
Corranus glosses again, that a truly wise man is never so transported with
admiration of ancient times, as to despise the present; crying out those were
the Golden, these the Iron Ages: nor will he solicitously enquire into the
causes of what was then and what is now; when this is certain, that Virtue is
the only cause of happiness, and Vice of infelicity; which, in what time soever
we fall, always produce the same effect. And to imagine that the ancient times
had no evil in them, and ours no good, is the conceit of man that judges
inconsiderately. For our eyes ought not to be so fixed upon the present
calamities of our days, as blindly to overlook all the good: nor is the ancient
felicity to be so admired, as not to remember, that they also conflicted with
many Tempests, and perhaps greater than we, as their frequent complaints of
their times do abundantly testify. He therefore that is wise and fears God,
will make account (as the truth is) that it is in our own choice, by his Grace,
whether the times shall be good or bad; for if he live well, they cannot be bad
to him; as on the contrary, they cannot be good, if he live wickedly.

I am the longer in these Observations, because they are things of mighty
moment: but most of the rest I shall contract, as much as is possible.

[k] V. 11.] Most take this Verse, as denoting their happiness, who have
Riches, as well as Wisdom; which commonly is despised without Wealth. But the
words may bear another construction (which I have not neglected, because it
agrees well with what follows) that Wisdom is equal to an Inheritance; nay,
much to be preferred before it. For they may be thus translated, Both Wisdom
and an Inheritance are profitable for men in this world; but especially Wisdom.
Or, as Maldonate renders the last Clause, Et Residuum est videntibus Solemn, and
there is a remainder to those that see the Sun. That is, when all things in
this World fail us, the fruits of Wisdom only remain with us.

[l] V. 12.] This is further explained in this Verse: Where it will be needless
to do more than barely observe, that the word we render defense is shadow in
the Hebrew; which in their Language signifies protection, and comfort, XIX.
Genesis 8. For this cause, they come under the shadow of my Roof; i. e. that they
might be secure from violence. XIV. Numb. 9. Their shadow (i. e. protection) is
departed from them.

[m] V. 13, 14.] Here follows an admirable Advice, to comply with our present
condition, and suit our mind unto it: Because we cannot bring things to the
bent of our own mind, and therefore had better study to conform our mind to our
condition, whatsoever it be; whether prosperity or adversity. Into which the
Divine Wisdom has divided our life, and so proportioned them one to the other;
that none can justly find fault with his Divine disposal; nor, all things
considered, tell how to mend them, and order them better.

So I have understood the last Clause of v. 14. in which is the only
difficulty: find nothing after him. Which Words (after him) some refer unto
God, and make the sense to be, that after Him (or beside Him) a man shall find
nothing certain: and therefore it is best to depend upon Him alone. Which I
have not taken notice of in the Paraphrase, and therefore mention here. Others
refer after him unto man; and that two ways (which it may be fit just to set
down) Some translate it thus, For this end, that man may find out none of those
things; which shall befall him hereafter: and so, being perfectly ignorant of
what is to come, neither presume in prosperity, nor despair in adversity.
Others thus (which is Maldonate's Gloss) that man losing in time of adversity,
what he had gotten in prosperity, might not adhere too much to the things of
this World. Melancthon alone interprets find nothing, in this sense, that he
might not betake himself unto unallowed courses: but in prosperity keep himself
within the Bounds of his vocation, and not be carried beyond it by vain
curiosity; and in adversity expect the help of God, in the use of such remedies
as he has ordained.

[n] V. 15.] This Verse may be either joined with the precedent, or with the
following: I have connected it with both, in my Paraphrase upon it, and v. 16.
where I have attended to the Scope of the Wise man in this Chapter; and
accordingly interpreted that and the 17th. Verse; which will admit of several
other Expositions.

They are commonly expounded of Public Justice; which ought to be, neither too
rigid, nor too remiss and negligent. Insomuch that Melancthon's words are, non
dubium est; there is no doubt he speaks of Political Justice, which governs the
things of this life: and consists in a mean, between cruelty and negligence.
Too much severity becomes cruelty; as it was in Aurelian: and too much
indulgence confirms men in wickedness, as it was in the days of Arcadius. A
good Governor, like Augustus, takes a middle course; and does not seek that
middle with too much subtilty: but rather, as in God, lets mercy prevail over
judgment. The like admonition, says he, is subjoined about Wisdom: for, as too
much severity becomes cruelty, so too much Wisdom, that is subtilty, becomes
cavilling sophistry, and cheating. And thus he interprets ver. 17. that a
Magistrate should not tolerate enormous Vices.

Doctor Hammond alone, as far as I have read, makes the 16th. Verse, Be not
righteous overmuch, etc. to be the Objection of a Wordling; who takes that for
excess of Duty, which brings any damage, or worldly destruction upon him. Which
is answered, says he, in v. 17. Be not wicked overmuch, etc. that is, the
fears, and from thence the prudential (but oftentimes very impious) practices
of the Worldling, are the more probable Bath, to the most hasty ruins, Vid.
Answ. to Cawdry, Chap. 2. Sect. 2.

But this is not coherent, in my Opinion, with the rest of the Chapter; and
therefore I have followed rather the Opinion of Gregory Nazianzen: who
interprets it of heat and zeal, more than needs, without reason and discretion:
Which, as it makes all the Schisms in the World, so produces a great many other
evils. And the same passion, says he, is both about righteousness, and about
Wisdom: (...) etc. vid. Orat. XXVI. p. 446.

I shall omit other Interpretations (which are collected by del Rio; and more
copiously by Hackspan Lib. 2. Miscellan. c. 1.) and mention only that of
Grotius: who expounds it of a vain affectation of Justice and Wisdom. Which
Interpretation is in part followed by the Lord Bacon L. VIII. de Augment.
Scient. C. 2. Parab. 31.) whose Discourse upon the Words, I shall not send the
Reader to seek, but set it down entirely; because it is very useful. There are
times, says Tacitus, wherein great Virtues are exposed to certain ruin. And
this fate befalls men eminent for Courage, or Justice; sometime suddenly,
sometime foreseen afar off. But if Prudence be also added to their other
accomplishments; that is, if they be wary and watchful over their own safety;
then they gain thus much, that their sudden destruction proceeds from counsels
altogether hidden and obscure; by which both envy may be avoided, and their
ruin fall upon them unprovided. As for that nimium (overmuch) which is set
down in the Parable (since they are not the words of some Periander, but of
Solomon, who now and then notes the evils in men's life, but never commands
them) it is to be understood, not of Virtue it self (in which there is no
nimium) but of a vain and invidious affectation, and ostentation thereof.

A Point something resembling this, the same Tacitus intimates in a Passage
touching Lepidus; setting it down as a Miracle, that he had never been the
Author of any servile Sentence, and yet remained safe in such cruel times. This
thought, says he, often comes into my mind; whether these things be governed
by Fate; or whether it lies also in our own power, to fleer an even course,
free both from danger and from indignity, between deformed flattery, and abrupt
and sullen contumacy.

[o] V. 17.] There are those, who by all tirsha understand not, Be not too
wicked; but, Be not too busy; make not too great a stir, and bustle about the
things of this World (especially in dangerous times) do not destroy thy self,
by too much toil and labor; or by too much stirring, when it is better to be
quiet and sit still. Of which I have taken no notice in the Paraphrase; and
therefore mention it here. For though the word be not used commonly in this
sense, yet it is its original signification. And the Advice of the Son of
Syrach is something to this purpose, VII. Ecclus 6, 7.

[p] V. 18, 19.] The foregoing Advice He looks upon as so useful, that he
presses it further here, ver. 18. and promises more security from such a
religious prudence, as teaches us moderation, and yet keeps us strict to our
Duty; than from the greatest Armies that men raise for their defense, ver. 19.

For (as Melancthon observes) Alex. Pheraeus was slain by his Wife, and his
Brethren; though he lay in an high Tower, well garrisoned, to which none could
ascend but by Ladders. And the Father of Alexander was slain in the midst of a
public Pomp, his Princes and his Guards looking on; as Julius Caesar also was
in the Senate.

Ten mighty men] every one knows is, in Scripture Phrase, as much as many
mighty men. And so Bochartus interprets that difficult place, XI. Numb. 31.
where, speaking of the vast quantity of Quails that came into the Camp, Moses
says, he that gathered least, gathered ten homers; that is, says the
forenamed Writer, many heaps: for so he thinks homer should be there
translated, as it is in some other places, L. I. de sacris Animal. Cap. XV. p.
106. Part. 2.

[q] V. 20.] Here he seems to limit what he had said before, with this
exception; that no man can be always so wise, and cautious, as never to offend.
Which Melancthon truly calls Politica sententia: and refers to lapses in
Government; like that of Josiah; who was a very good Prince, but perished by
engaging rashly in an unnecessary War. And therefore the Character of a
Governor, as well as of a man, must be fetched from the constant strain, and
bent of his actions; and not from particular facts. For he is a good Governor
that always intends to do right, though he sometimes miscarry (as David and the
forenamed Josiah) and he is an ill Governor, who has no such design, but
quite contrary; though sometime he do well, as Cambyses. The difference
therefore must be taken from their perpetual will and inclination.

There are those who connect this Verse, with the next rather than the
foregoing: but I have referred it to both, and not unfitly I think; as may be
seen in the Paraphrase upon v. 21.

[r] V. 21.] Which the Lord Bacon (L. VIII. C. 2. Parab. 4.) refers principally
to vain curiosity; and thus discourses upon it. It is a matter almost beyond
belief, what disturbance is created by unprofitable curiosity, about those
things that concern our personal interest: That is, when we make a too
scrupulous inquiry after such Secrets, which once disclosed and found out, do
but cause disquiet of mind; and nothing conduce to the advancing of our
designs. For first there follows vexation and disquiet of mind: humane Affairs
being so full of treachery and ingratitude, that if there could be procured a
Magical Glass, in which we might behold the hatreds, and whatsoever malicious
contrivances are any where raised up against us, it would be better for us, if
such a Glass were forthwith throne away and broken in pieces. For things of
this nature, are like the murmurs of the leaves of Trees, which in a short time
vanish. Secondly, This curiosity loads the mind too much with suspicions, and
ungrounded jealousies: which is the most capital Enemy to counsels; and renders
them inconstant and involved. Thirdly, The same curiosity does sometime six
those evils which otherways of themselves would pass by us and fly away. For it
is a dangerous thing to irritate the consciences of men; who, if they think
themselves to ly undiscovered, are easily changed for the better; but, if they
perceive themselves to be detected, drive out one mischief by another. And
therefore it was deservedly esteemed the highest Wisdom in Pompey the Great;
that he instantly burnt all Sertorius's Papers, unperused by himself, or
suffered to be seen by others.

Some take this Verse to speak of those, who willingly lend their ears to
Informers and Detractors; who will bring them what is said abroad, whether true
or false. And therefore, says Solomon, since there is no man but who offends
sometimes, not thou thy self excepted, do not hearken unto those who reckon up
other men's faults; lest thou hear thy own, from those that are of thy Family.
Thus Maldonate.

[s] V. 23.] Here he seems to resume his Discourse, in the beginning of the
Book, concerning the shortness of humane understanding; and the difficulty of
finding the truth and the reason of things. But no account can be given, why he
thus starts from his Subject, on a sudden, without any coherence. And therefore
I have endeavored to give another account of this, and the following Verse:
Which I have so interpreted, that they may be knit to the foregoing. I cannot
say that herein I have followed any Guide, but my own Judgment: which led me to
think this to be a continued Discourse. But they that dislike my connection,
must rest satisfied (as far as I can see) with that of Corranus (which has
more color for it, than any other) who takes this Verse to be a Preface to
what the Wise man had to add concerning the subtle Arts of Women to draw men
in, if they be not exceeding cautious. Their wits being so versatile, their
cunning so sly, and their allurements so many, that he professes he found them
inexplicable; though he had spared no pains to penetrate into them. This he
makes the sense of ver. 23, 24, 25.

[t] V. 26.] And then, in this Verse, Solomon gives an account of the danger
they are in; who suffer themselves to be ensnared by the Arts of naughty Women
(who are so numerous, that he advises him, who would be good, to be very
cautious how he enters into familiarity with that Sex) who have brought sore
calamities upon the greatest men; such as Samson, David and Paris, and many
other besides Solomon himself. The next Verse I have made to relate to that.
The two words we translate snares and nets (to which he compares her heart, i.
e. her invention, devices, etc.) both signify nets. Only the former signifies
the Nets of Hunters; the latter, the Nets (or Draggs rather of Fishermen,
(XXVI. Ezekiel. 5.) as the LXX. distinguish them. The former indeed is applied
also to Fishes, in this Book, IX. 11. and therefore the truer difference
perhaps is, that the former signifies finer, the latter courser, but stronger
Nets: such as cannot be broken, but will certainly destroy; as the Root, from
whence Cherem comes, denotes. Both these words are in the Plural Number to
denote, the vast multitudes that they catch; and the innumerable ways they have
to entangle them, and hold them fast.

[u] V. 28.] Gregory Thaumaturgus interprets this Verse altogether of their
Chastity; after this manner: I have found a chaste man, but never a chaste
woman: And, indeed, of that he is speaking, which makes this sense not
unreasonable: though I have not so restrained it, nor do I think this is to be
looked upon, as the true Character of Women, in General, in all Ages, and
Countries; but of such only as Solomon was acquainted withal; and of those in
that, and the neighboring Nations; especially of Women there excelling in
beauty, which commonly betrayed them to their ruin, and to the ruin of
others; without an extraordinary Grace to preserve them.

[x] V. 29.] In the beginning of this Verse, Melancthon thinks, Solomon speaks
not of the first creation of man, but of the Rule of men's actions, which God
proposed to them: The sense being, as if he had said, God instituted a good
Order how men should behave themselves in all things; but they contrive how to
go beyond their Bounds. As David, for instance, had many Wives of great beauty;
but he would not be content without another man's. Antony. had a great power,
but he would be a Monarch: which is the fault of many other Great Men.

This I have not altogether neglected; and also taken notice of de Dieu's
Interpretation of the last words of the Verse, Men sought out the thoughts of
the great or mighty: taking Rabbim for Magnates. That is, not contented with
his own condition, he affected to be like the Angels, nay like God.

Maimonides refers it to the evils and miseries man draws upon himself, here in
this World: understanding by cheschbonoth (inventions) man's foolish reasonings,
whereby he precipitates himself, into all the evils he endures. For he thinks
he wants this and that, when he does not: and he thinks this and the other
thing makes him miserable, which has no hand in it. But we may say as Malachi
does (I. 9.) this has been by means of your own selves; and as this Wise man
elsewhere (Prove. XIX. 3.) The foolishness of man perverteth his way; and his
heart fretteth against the Lord. More Nevochim, Pars III. Cap. 12.

The common Editions of the LXX. may be corrected out of Epiphanius Haeres.
XLIX. who quotes this Verse thus -- (...) (in the common Editions, even in the
Polyglott Bible, it is (...), most absurdly) (...) According to which I have,
partly, framed my Paraphrase, taking (...) to refer to the Understanding, and
(...) to the Will: But I have attended also to the common reading, in the
latter end of the Verse; which is, not (...), but (...)

CHAP. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter the Wise man pursues the design of the former. Wherein he
having given several Advices, as a proper remedy for the vanity and trouble we
find in all things (the principal of which are seriousness, mindfulness of our
mortality, integrity, meekness, patience, prudence, in not exasperating men
when we can avoid it, caution in conversation with Women) he now adds several
other of no less moment; which have respect not only to private, but also to
public persons. And they amount to this (that I may give as short a Summary as
I can of the Chapter) to show how happy we all should be, if both Subjects, and
Princes also would be advised and considerate. But if they be not, good men
should make themselves less miserable, by not being either too much disturbed
at it, or giving any public disturbance; much less by disbelieving Providence,
though they do not see the World governed, as they would have it, to the
encouragement of the good, and the punishment of the bad: but to enjoy what
they can honestly, in the present condition wherein they are: and be contented
and submit to the Divine Government (though we do not understand it) when any
alteration comes: and not add this affliction unto all the rest, anxiously to
enquire into those things, of which we are not able to give an account.

1. WHO is as the wise man? and who knows the interpretation of a thing? a
man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness of his face shall be
changed.

1. THere is no man so happy, as he that is wise enough to understand, and to
live by these Rules: But let that man remember also, that as true Wisdom gives
the greatest comfort, confidence and courage to himself, so it is apt to make
him kind and gentle unto others; And therefore let no man pretend unto it,
unless it dispose him unto such Virtues: For the deeper insight he has into
men, and business, and things, and the better able he is to solve all doubts
and difficult Cases, and thereby satisfy both himself and other men; the more
friendly, courteous and affable should he be to all; and the more humble, meek
and gentle also: Which is far more Majestical, and will gain him greater
reverence, than austerity, surliness, and pride. See Annot. [a].

2. I counsel thee to keep the kings commandment, and that in regard of the
oath of God.

2. And let no man think I have respect merely to my self, in what follows,
because I am a King; but look upon this as a principal Point of Wisdom, both
for his own, and for the public safety; to live in dutiful Obedience to the
Kings Edicts, and Commands, which do not thwart the Laws of God: and that, not
merely for fear of his displeasure, and the penalty of the Law, if it be broken
or neglected; but out of respect to God, whose Minister he is; and whom his
Subjects called to witness unto the sincerity of their hearts, when they swore
true faith and allegiance to him. See Annot. [b].

3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing, for he
does whatsoever pleases him.

3. Let not thy passion transport thee to show the least disrespect to him,
much less to refuse his Commands unmannerly, or to do any thing that may throw
thee out of his favor; but, if thou have offended him, let thy next care be
not to persist obstinately in thy error, but to humble thy self and beg his
pardon: not imagining thou can flee so fast from his anger that it shall not
reach thee; for his power is so large, that it will, one time or other, lay
hold on thee and punish thee. See Annot. [c].

4. Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What
do thou?

4. For the Kings Commands are backed with Power; so that, if he give Sentence
against thee, his Officers are ready to do Execution immediately: never
examining whether it be right or wrong; but holding themselves obliged to do as
he bids them. And indeed who may question him, or call him to an account, that
has no Superior? Or who can control him, that has all the power of the
Kingdom in his hands? See Annot [d].

5. Whosoever keeps the commandment shall feel no evil thing: and a wise man's
heart discerns both time and judgment.

5. Therefore, not only for Conscience sake, but, for thy own safety and
security yield obedience to the Kings Commandment; for so thou shall avoid the
trouble both of thy mind and of thy body: And if thou pretendest to Wisdom,
show it, not in opposing him and contending with him but, in a prudent
declining what thou can not honestly do; and in observing and taking the
fittest Season, and in the most inoffensive and winning manner, to insinuate
good advice, when the King commits an error. See Annot. [e].

6. Because to every purpose there is time, and judgment; therefore the misery
of man is great upon him.

6. For want of which sort of prudence men suffer very much: because there is a
certain season for, and a certain manner of, doing every thing; which if it be
not understood (and it requires no small pains to be able to discern it) or not
embraced, it is not only impossible to be done, but many and great
inconveniences ensue upon that oversight, or neglect. See Annot. [f].

7. For he knows not that which shall be: for who can tell him when it shall
be?

7. For no man can be sure that the like opportunity will return again: future
things being so much in the dark, that neither he, nor any one else can inform
him what shall be hereafter; or when that will come, which in the course of
things may probably be expected. See Annot. [g].

8. There is no man that has power over the spirit to retain the spirit:
neither has he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that
war, neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.

8. But let no Prince, though never so great, presume hereupon to abuse his
Power to Tyranny, because he has no Superior to control him; but remember
these things following. First, that though he command over men's bodies, yet he
has no dominion over their minds and spirits; nor can he hinder them from
thinking what they please, no more than he can the Wind, from blowing where it
lists: and next, that he cannot command them long; for Death will come, and
irresistibly seize on him, as well as on the meanest man: nay, he cannot rule
the Chances of War, nor promise himself certain Victory in the day of Battle:
or if he have had a great while good success, yet neither his policy, nor his
power, shall be able always to defend him from the vengeance that will be
taken, of the injustice, cruelty, and impiety which he exercises in his
Government. See Annot. [h].

9. All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is done
under the sun: there is a time wherein one man rules over another to his own
hurt.

9. There is no reason therefore to be so much as ambitious of great power; for
in the view I have taken of all manner of things in this World, which I have
weighed also and considered duly, I have observed that sometime unlimited power
breaks it self in pieces: and the Dominion to which a man is promoted, ends in
his own ruin, as well as theirs whom he pillages and tyrannically governs. See
Annot. [i].

10. And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of
the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had so done: this is
also vanity.

10. And, among other things, I also observed such wicked men carried to their
Graves, who had been honored as gods while they lived, because they were God's
Ministers, and sat in the Judgment Seat, in that very place where He himself
is present; but were no sooner gone, but they were forgotten, in that very City
where they had enjoyed such high Authority: so vain is the Pomp wherein Great
Men live, and wherein they are buried; which vanishes together with them, and,
if they were not good in their place, is no more remembered. See Annot. [k].

11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

11. But these Observations move not vain men, who look no further than their
present prosperity. For though God has pronounced a dreadful doom against all
wicked men, and especially those that abuse their Power unto tyranny over
others; yet because execution is not presently done upon them, but they live in
all earthly splendour, both they, and others also, by their example, grow more
audaciously presumptuous in their wickedness; and think of nothing but doing
mischief, by rapine, and all manner of iniquity in the World. See Annot. [l].

12. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet
surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before
him:

12. Not considering or believing this, which I am assured of, as an undoubted
truth, that though such a powerful Sinner commit innumerable spoils upon his
poor Subjects, and no harm befall him a long time; yet, as God will make those
good men an amends whose reverence to his Majesty makes them choose rather to
suffer than to sin; and, notwithstanding all their oppressions, maintain their
integrity, and continue in awful obedience unto Him, and unto their Governors:
See Annot. [m].

13. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his
days, which are as a shadow; because he fears not before God.

13. So he will take a time to punish that impious Tyrant because he despises
God and his Providence, and fears not his Divine vengeance: Nor are we without
Examples of such men, who have hastened their own ruin; and by their violence
shortened their Reign; and vanished away suddenly, like a shadow.

14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there be just men
unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked: again, there be
wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous: I said
that this also is vanity.

14. Such Examples, indeed, do not deter them from wickedness, because they see
Instances on the other side (which is an afflicting consideration) that
virtuous men sometimes fall into such miseries, as the wicked rather deserve to
suffer; and, on the contrary, those impious men enjoy all the prosperity, which
one would think, belongs only to the righteous: This, I have acknowledged
already, is the lamentable condition of things, and a great part of the trouble
of this World; to which I have given the best satisfaction I could, III. 17. V.
8. See Annot. [n].

15. Then I commended mirth. because a man has no better thing under the sun,
than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of
his labor, the days of his life, which God gives him under the sun.

15. And must again commend that advice wherewith I concluded one of these
Discourses (III. 22.) that this ought neither to discourage a man in virtuous
proceedings, nor make him careful and solicitous about events; but only move
him, in the fear of God (of which I just now spoke, v. 11.) to be merry whilst
he may: For there is nothing better, than soberly and freely to enjoy the
present good things, which the bounty of God bestows upon us; with thankfulness
to Him, and charity to others: For when a man, by his pains and labor, has
gotten a great Estate, this is all that he can call his; God having only lent
him what he has, for his present use, while he tarries here in this life; and
then he must resign it unto others, and give an account, how he has used it,
unto Him. See Annot. [o].

16. When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is
done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night sees sleep
with his eyes.)

16. In this therefore rest satisfied, and do not trouble thy self with curious
inquiries, Why things are administered with such inequality, as is
beforementioned: for I have traveled, as much as any Body, in that
disquisition, and, with great application of mind, have made a most diligent
search into the causes and reasons, of the whole management of affairs here in
this World (my mind being one of those, that is as eager and greedy of
Knowledge, as others are of Riches; for which they toil all day, and take
little rest in the night.) See Annot. [o].

17. Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the work
that is done under the sun: because though a man labor to seek it out, yet he
shall not find it; yea further, though a wise man think to know it, yet he
shall not be able to find it.

17. But this was all the satisfaction at which I could arrive, That the
Providence of God, without all doubt, governs every thing in this World; but
why He suffers the wicked to prosper, and the virtuous to be oppressed by them;
why he does somerime speedily cut off a wicked Tyrant, and sometimes defer the
execution so long, that he lives to do a World of mischief, and yet goes
perhaps to his Grave in peace (v. 10.) it is impossible to give a full account:
For there is little or nothing that any man can know of the secrets of his
counsels, or indeed of any other of his Works; which are inscrutable by us,
though a man take never so much pains to find them out; nay, though the wisest
man in the World make it his constant business, he will be still forced to
confess his ignorance; and the height of his knowledge will be to know, that
God's ways are past finding out.

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] V. 1.] To the advices he had given in the foregoing Chapter, he now adds
some new ones; the first of which is this; that the Wisdom which will make us
happy in this World, must not make us morose and supercilious, severe and
rigorous; but kind and benign, gentle and easy. And the more we know, the more
humble we ought to be: and, by the very cheerfulness and pleasantness of our
countenance, invite others to us; and not by our frowning, forbid them, or make
them afraid to approach us.

This I take to be the meaning of the first Verse; in my Paraphrase upon which,
I have had respect to several acceptations of the several Words, which it will
be too long here to give an account of. They that will consult Interpreters
will find how they vary; and therefore I shall only mention the Exposition of
Melancthon upon the latter part of the Verse (which is not commonly known)
which following the LXX, he thus translates: Wisdom is the light of a man's
countenance; but a pertinacious (or impudent, obstinate) person is worthy of
hatred. Which he explains in this manner, that Wisdom which can judge aright,
when severity is profitable, or when lenity will do best, when it is fit to
make War, when to be quiet; brings a man great gladness; but a pertinacious
person, who is stiff and obstinate in his Opinion; and will not hearken to
those that give him good counsel, but follows the motions of his own anger and
obeys his passions, destroys himself and others. As the pertinacious humor,
for instance, of Pericles and Demonsthenes was most pernicious unto all Greece.

[b] V. 2.] This pertinacious humor shows it self ofttimes, in opposing the
Sovereign Authority: whereby men create to themselves and others, great
troubles in this World. And therefore Solomon advises men in the next place
(desiring them not to dislike the counsel because a King gives it) to live in
dutiful subjection to their Prince; as a singular means of leading a happy
life. For it is hard to say, whether the Prudence and Justice of a Sovereign,
in ruling well; or the humble and peaceable spirit of the people in complying
with the established Orders; contribute most to the public Welfare. Certain it
is, that it is much safer and easier (as well as more honest) to submit and be
quiet, than to contend and unsettle the peace of Kingdoms; though Princes do
not govern as they ought.

Melancthon makes this Verse to contain two Precepts (as the LXX also seems to
do) in this manner: Observe the Commandment of the King; and the word of the
Oath of God. A Sentence, says he, exceeding worthy of consideration and
remembrance: in which he commands us to observe the Command of the King; but
with this restriction, that we observe the Law of God, and do nothing contrary
unto that. For he calls the Law the Oath of God; because God made the Sanction
of it, in promises and threatenings with an Oath. But this Interpretation wholly
neglects one word in the Hebrew, viz. al: and it draws both dibrath and
shebuath Elohim from their ordinary and usual sense, to a meaning that is
forced and strained. For which reason another Exposition is not natural; which
makes this indeed one Precept; but instead of taking the latter part of it for
an obligation to observe it, turns it into a restriction of it; in this manner:
Keep the Kings Commandment, but according to the Oath of God; that is, as far
as Religion and the Faith we owe to the great Lord of all will suffer.

This is true, but not the true sense of the Hebrew word for Oath; which some
would have relate to the Covenant made with God in Circumcision; which is still
further off from the business than the Notion which Melancthon had of it. Our
Translation is the plainest and most literal; be obedient to the King, and that
in regard (or because of the matter) of the Oath, to which God is a Witness,
and a severe Revenger of the breach of it. From which a modern Interpreter does
not much vary: whose words it will not be unprofitable to set down in this
place; which run thus in English. Regard the Kings mouth, i. e. Do whatsoever
comes out of his mouth; whatsoever he commands and appoints, out of that
Authority which he has by Divine Ordinance: and chiefly the intention of the
Oath of God (so he translates the latter part of the Verse) "that is the Oath
whereby every one cites God as his Witness and Judge, that with a good
Conscience he will obey the King; because God has so commanded. Thus Joh.
Coch. Which Oath is either tacit the very being in the condition of a Subject,
carrying with it (as the late Primate of Armagh speaks) by implication, a
silent Oath of Fidelity and due Obedience) or express, in the direct Form of an
Oath, which Princes have, for their better security, been wont to exact of
their Subjects. There is an ancient Form, still remaining in Vegetius, of the
Oath wherein the Soldiery bound themselves to the Christian Emperors: By God,
and by Christ, and by the holy Ghost, and by the Majesty of the Emperor;
which, next after God, was to be loved, and honored. L. 2. Cap. 5. Where he
adds this remarkable reason for it; because to him, when he has remarkable the
Name of Augustus, faithful Devotion is to be performed, and all vigilant
service paid, as unto a present and corporeal God. The violation of which Oath,
though made to an Heathen Prince, how heinously God takes; even as a despising
of an Oath made to himself, and a breach of his own Covenant, those terrible
threats do sufficiently demonstrate ( XVII. Ezekiel. 12, 13, 14, etc. especially
v. 19.20.) Which are denounced against Zedekiah, who rebelled against the King
of Babylon; who had made him swear by God, 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 13.

Some of the Pharisees were the first that we read of, who would not take this
Oath of Allegiance: but (as Josephus tells us, L. XVII. Antiq. Cap. 3.)
boasting themselves to be the most exact Observers of the Law of God, and
therefore the most in his favor (while they were full of inward pride,
arrogance and fraud) dared openly to oppose Kings, and presumed by their
motions to raise War against them, and annoy them: refusing, says he, to take
the Oath, when all the Jews had sworn to be faithful to Caesar. Of this Sect,
he adds, there were above six thousand: who were so far from lessening their
crime by this refusal, and making what they did against his Authority to be no
Rebellion: that it heightened it very much, and was in it self a piece of
Rebellion: they having a natural Allegiance unto him, by being born his
Subjects.

There are some who from the beginning of this Verse, argue this Book not to be
Solomon's: because he says of himself, I observe the mouth (i. e. Commandment)
of the King. So they translate the first words: which the LXX translate as we
do; and so do the Chaldee, the Syriack, and Arabic Interpreters. For though
the Hebrew word be (...) Ego I; it signifies nothing to this purpose; because
he does not say I observe, but simply I; do thou observe. There being a
distinctive Note between (...) I and what follows: showing that it is a short
Form of Speech, to be supplied by some such word as this, I say, or I command,
or counsel; or rather charge thee. And the reason perhaps why the principal
Verb was omitted, might be as the learned Primate of Ireland, Usher,
conjectures) because no word could be found significative enough to express the
deepness of the Charge.

Some may think that I have dilated too much upon this Verse: but they may be
pleased to consider how useful, if not necessary it is, at this time, when men
begin again to plead the lawfulness of resistance. Which is so plainly
condemned in this Place, that the most learned Assertors of the Old Cause, were
extremely puzzled to make it agree with their Principles in the late times of
Rebellion. There is one who (in his Book called Natures Dowry Chap. 21.) calls
in the assistance of a great many Hebrew Doctors to help him to another
Translation of the words; and yet after all is forced to acknowledge that our
English is right enough: and is content to admit it, with this Proviso, that
the King manage well the affairs of the Commonwealth. As much as to say, do
what they would have him.

[c] V. 3.] The first word in this Verse is capable of several senses, which I
have endeavored to express in the Paraphrase. For it originally signifies such
a passion and perturbation (particularly that of anger and terror) as makes a
man precipitant in his motions: being translated sometimes by (...), and
sometimes by (...) in the LXX: And the meaning of the Wise man is, that in
pursuance of the foregoing counsel (v. 2.) we must take care, if we desire to
live happily, to suppress our passions; and not to show the least discontent
with the Government: especially not hastily and rashly to fling our selves (as
we speak) in a fume, out of the Kings presence, on any occasion: much less
receive his Commands with impatience; or, which is worst of all, incur his just
displeasure by sullen disobedience. For though we may think to escape the
effects of it, we shall find our selves deceived: Princes having long arms (as
the Phrase is) to reach those that offend them; though they flee never so far
from them. This is the sense of v. 3.

[d] V. 4.] And it is further enlarged in this Verse: where Symmachus
translates the first words thus, (...), for the Command of the King is
authoritative; carries such authority with it, that it will be executed. For
the word Shilton (from whence learned men have not unfitly derived the Titles
of Sultan and Sultan) denotes such a power as over-powers, and cannot be
resisted: like that of Death (v. 8.) to which all must submit.

And so it follows, in the end of this Verse, Who may say unto him, What do
thou? i. e. first, Who has any authority to call him to an account? as much as
to say, none has, but God alone. According to that of an eminent Rabbi (quoted
by the forenamed Primate in the entrance of his Book about Obedience) No
Creature may judge the King, but the Holy and Blessed God alone. To allow the
people (either collective, or representative) to have power to do it, is to
make them Accusers, Judges and Executioners also, in their own cause; and that
against their Sovereign. Nor secondly, Can any man safely attempt it; but he
shall meet with punishment either here or hereafter. Which is no new Doctrine,
but the same with that of St. Paul (as Luther here honestly notes) they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation; which none shall be able to
avoid. Therefore it is safest simply to obey Magistrates. Which he repeats
again upon v. 7. A man cannot do better than simply to obey. So Preachers,
says he, should exhort the tumultuous and seditious. For judgment, vengeance,
or punishment, is ordained and decreed by God, to all the disobedient: which
none shall escape. And thus much the Author of Natures Dowry is forced to
acknowledge from the evident light he saw in this place; that the scope of the
words is, that as we tender our own safety, we ought not to withstand the
Magistrate in his Edicts, which are consonant to the Word of God. And it is
Wisdom, says he (out of Elisha Gallico an Hebrew Interpreter) in a private
man, when the Magistrate enjoins what is repugnant to God's Will, to remove out
of his Dominions, rather than contest with him. Which some conceive to be
imported by the word telec (go out, or go away) in the foregoing Verse.

[e] V. 5.] From whence he again concludes it is the most prudent course, as
well as most honest, to comply with those that have authority over us, in a
dutiful obedience, or humble submission. So I have expounded the word
Commandment, for the Commandment of the King before mentioned. Which if we do
not oppose, it is the way to preserve us from knowing sorrow; as we speak, very
agreeably to the Hebrew Phrase in this place; if by evil thing we understand
the evil of Punishment, rather than of sin Many indeed by Commandment
understand the Precepts of God; which if we keep we shall not fall into any
Evil practices; particularly, not into Rebellion. Which is a good sense, and
the Reader may follow which he pleases: for the latter part of the Verse will
agree with either. Wherein he suggests that the wisest thing we can do, when
Princes require any thing grievous unto us; is not to rebel; but, to watch the
fittest opportunities to petition for redress: and that after such a manner as
may not give offense: So I have expounded time, and judgment, in this, and in
the next Verse.

[f] V. 6.] For the truth is, a great part of the happiness of our life,
depends upon our discretion in observing and choosing, the fittest opportunity
for every thing, and the right manner of doing it. Especially when we have to
do with Kings, and Great Persons: concerning whom the Wise man may still be
thought to speak; both in this, and in the following Verses.

[g] V. 7.] If the Hebrew reading would bear it, the Vulgar Translation (which
the Syriack follows) of this Verse, has given an excellent reason, why a man
is at such a loss to discern what is fit for him to do upon all occasions
(especially how to direct his behavior toward Kings) Because he knows little
of what is past; and less, or rather nothing, of what is future. For Prudence
consists in the remembrance of things past, consideration of things present,
and foresight of things likely to come hereafter.

Luther refers it wholly to the miserable condition of a Rebel, in this
manner, He desires various things and hopes for mighty matters by his
disobedience, but is lamentably deceived. For of the very impunity which he
promised himself, he cannot be secure; but in an hour when he thinks not of it,
Judgment overtakes him and he perishes in his disobedience. In short, the
wicked contemns present obedience; and minds not future punishment. The Wise
man acts quite otherways; and remembering what mischiefs attend upon the
rebellious, is studious therefore to be obedient.

[h] V. 8.] Hence he takes occasion to give some good Advice to Princes
themselves (which seems to me the plainest sense of this Verse) not to abuse
their Power, because none can withstand them, or so much as question them: but
to remember how weak they are upon many accounts; and therefore ought to be
moderate in their Government, if they intend to live happily. For otherwise
they must expect their peoples hatred; which they cannot hinder, no more than
they can Death, which is not in their power to resist And if they be engaged
in. War, they will find their Subjects assist them so coldly, that it may
endanger the loss of their Crown. So that Clause may be understood, which we
translate, there is no discharge in War (the word that being not in the
Original) that is, it will be too late then to discharge their Subjects from
the heavy burdens, whereby they have oppressed them; when they have need of
their service against an Enemy. Or, as I have expressed it in the Paraphrase,
they cannot command what success they please in War; but the event will be
dubious: taking the word Mislachat for a Dart, a Javelin, or such like Weapon;
which we cannot direct and guide in that confusion, so as certainly to hit the
Mark at which it is thrown. So the Targum translates it, Nor do the Instruments
of Arms profit. Or we may take it for a Commission to raise Forces (it being
but once more used in the Bible, LXXVIII. Psalm. 49. and there the Mislachat of
evil Angels, seems to be a Company of Angels, sent with a Commission to do the
Execution there mentioned) which is too late to issue in the day of Battle, if
he be beaten: or, if he be not, yet let him not flatter himself (which is the
sense of the last Clause of the Verse) as if he should always escape; for the
Divine Justice will one day lay hold on him, and punish him.

Thus, with reference to Princes, the LXX seem to understand this Verse: who
having said v. 4. (...), the King commands with Authority, thus translate the
first words of this, (...), but no man (no not the King himself) has authority
in all things; for example, not over the spirit of a man. But this Verse also
may be expounded (as some Interpreters understand it) to be a continuance of
the foregoing Discourse; in this manner; that no man can bridle the wrath of
the Prince (by spirit understanding anger) or hinder the irruption of it. And
it is in vain also for men to seek to save themselves from the Sentence of
Death which he has pronounced against them: for if they should wage War with
him, it is not likely they would overcome or escape in the day of battle; or,
if they did, they would meet some time or other with a just punishment for
their Rebellion. Which is the meaning of the last Clause (if the words be thus
taken) Wickedness that is, Rebellion) shall not deliver those that are the
Authors of it.

[i] V. 9.] This, and the following Verse, agree very well with that Exposition
which refers v 8. to Princes: who sometimes are advanced to rule over others,
to their own hurt. So we translate the last words of this Verse; which Luther
(who is not alone in that Opinion) will have still to belong to Subjects, over
whom a Prince is sometimes placed to be a Scourge unto them. Notwithstanding
which, says he, the Kings Commandment is to be observed, and Sedition not to
be moved. Which he repeats again (so full he was of this Doctrine) The Wise man
here grants that there may be evil Governors, to punish their Subjects; and
yet these also are to be tolerated.

[k] V. 10.] This Verse I have taken wholly to belong to wicked Rulers; because
all the ancient Translations do so, as well as our English. Though most of the
modern Interpreters will have the first part of the Verse to refer unto wicked
Governors, and the latter part unto good; whose memory is abolished, when the
other (so bad is mankind) are extolled and honored: For which I see no reason,
but look upon it as contrary to the design of the Wise man, in this place; and
therefore I have rejected it.

The place of the Holy] may be expounded diverse ways; but it seems to me most
natural, to take it for a Periphrase of the Place of Judgment (mentioned III.
16.) in which the Judges sustained the Person of God: who was in their
Assembly, and judged in the midst of them, LXXXI. Psalm. 1. Whence the
Judgment Seat was called the place of the holy, i. e. of God the Holy one of
Israel: whom the Jews now constantly call by the Name of the Holy, that most
Blessed one. St. Hierom understands it of the Temple (but then it must be
translated, not the place of the holy, but the holy place, which is not
agreeable to the Hebrew) and expounds the words thus, The wicked buried, who
were esteemed Saints in the Earth; and while they lived were thought worthy,
Princes in the Church, and in the Temple of God. I have sometimes thought that
the words might, according to this sense of the holy place, be thus word for
word rendered out of the Hebrew (if the Grammarians will permit Holy here not to
be a Substantive) I saw the wicked buried, and they (that is, such as attended
their Funeral) came, and even out of the holy place followed. That is, the very
Priests waited on the Hearse, to do them the greater honor. Or thus, The
Funeral Pomp reached from the very Temple, to the Place of Burial.

[l] V. 11.] From hence he takes occasion to show what is the very root of men's
malicious and incurable wickedness. And the first thing to which he ascribes it
is, their thriving a long time in evil courses; which makes them hope this
prosperity will continue to the end of their days. And if they can but live
splendidly; they care not what becomes of them when they die. Now though there
be a pithgam a Decree, a definitive Sentence (as the word signifies) passed
against them; yet nothing being done upon it, so soon as we expect; it both
hardens the heart of those Sinners, and mightily discourages better men: who
hereupon grow angry, or flag in their Duty: to both which Luther would have
what follows referred.

But it properly belongs to the Evildoers, who upon the suspense of the
Judgment passed upon them, sin on with great confidence; and have nothing else
in their thoughts but malicious contrivances. Both which may be denoted by this
Phrase, their heart is filled in them to do evil.

[m] V. 12, 13.] Yet this is not to be understood, he here shows, without
exception; but sometimes the Divine Justice proceeds to quick execution. Which
is a thing noted by Heathens themselves, that God cuts Tyrants short; and
suffers them not to ravage so long, as they hope to do. And thence they exhort
them to moderation; according to that of Stesichorus, quoted by Aristotle in
his Rhetoricks (as Melancthon here observes) Do not injure any man, for the
very Grasshoppers will chirp it in the Fields. That is, the Poor, who are
oppressed, send out their Complaints, and move God to punish such Tyrants.

[n] V. 14.] Here he discovers the other root of men's incurable wickedness,
viz. the examples they see of, those who live virtuously, and yet live
miserably. Which proves a great scandal to those who admire worldly things too
much: and makes them angry, at least, to behold how all was given heretofore,
for instance, to wicked Priests, and now godly ones have scarce bread to put
into their mouths. They are the words of Luther, who observes that Soldiers
have better Pay, than many of Christ's Ministers; who are to lead his People,
and conduct them unto Heaven.

[o] V. 15.] Notwithstanding which, the Wise man advises him that would live as
happily, as the state of things here will permit, not to grow sullen at this
(v. 15.) much less to doubt of God's good Providence; nor to be disturbed,
though we are not able to give a reason, why virtuous men suffer very much,
when the wicked at the same time escape. Which I take to be the meaning of the
two last Verses; which I have referred to our ignorance of this particular
matter; as St. Hierom also does, whose words are these: He that seeks the
causes, and reasons of things, why this or that is done, and why the World is
governed by various events; why one man is blind and lame, and another is born
with eyes and sound; one is poor, and another is rich; this man is noble, that
inglorious; he gets nothing by his enquiry but only this, to be tormented in
his own Questions, and to have his Disputations instead of a Rack; and yet not
find what he sought.

That word in the Hebrew which we translate because though, is found only in
this place; but from the I. Joshua 7. (where it is found in composition) the
Doctors conclude it signifies, for that, or because of; and so the meaning here
is, that a man shall not be able by all the labor and pains he can take; no
though he be a Wise man that is thus laborious, to discover the reasons of
things, and give an account of the difference which he observes, in the Divine
Dispensations.

CHAP. IX.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter begins where the foregoing ends; the Wise man proceeding still to
justify what he had observed, about the most puzling Question in the World:
Why the good and bad fare all alike, without any constant visible distinction?
His resolution, cautions, remedies, about this matter, will appear so plainly
in the Paraphrase and Annotations, which I shall annex to it, that I will give
no large account here of this Chapter; but only note that the sum of it is
this: That the confusion of things here below, should not move us to
discontent; much less incline us to irreligion: but rather dispose us, with
thankfulness and sobriety, to enjoy freely that portion of good things, while
we have them, which God has given us. Neither slackning our diligence, nor
trusting to it alone; but depending on Gods wise Providence, which,
notwithstanding that seeming confusion, governs all events: disappointing many
times the most likely and applauded means; and again succeeding the most
unlikely and contemptible. Which should move us to commend our selves and
concerns unto God; and then, above all things, to value and study true Wisdom
and Prudence, in the management of all Affairs: as far excelling mere power, of
which we are foolishly ambitious.

1. FOR all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that the
righteous, and the wise, and their works are in the hand of God: no man knows
either love or hatred, by all that is before them.

1. THis is no rash Assertion, for I Solomon affirm again (VIII. 16.) I have
deeply considered all that belongs to this matter, with earnest desire and
endeavor to give a clearer account, and fuller resolution of it, than this,
which is all I can say: that though good men and prudent are under the care of
God (which must satisfy them in all events) by whose special Providence, both
they and their undertakings and affairs, are approved, directed, governed and
defended; yet (such a Secret there is in it) they prove sometimes so
unsuccessful, that no man can know by any thing that befalls them, or others,
how God stands affected toward them: but will conclude very falsely, if he
judge that God loves him who has all that his heart desires; or that he hates
him, who is sorely afflicted. See Annot. [a].

2. All things come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and to
the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean: to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner:
and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.

2. For there is no certain and constant distinction made between one man and
another, in the destribution of things in this World; but they all fare alike,
especially in public calamities: a righteous man, for instance, perishes in a
Battle as well as the wicked; he that keeps himself pure and undefiled dies in
a Pestilence, as well as the filthy and unclean; he that worshippeth God in
sincerity and truth suffers by Storms, Shipwracks and Inundations, etc. as well
as a profane person or an Hypocrite; and on the contrary a Blasphemer of God,
nay a perjured Wretch prospers and thrives, as much as he that dreads the holy
Name of God, and dare not rashly, much less falsely, take it into his mouth. See
Annot. [b].

3. This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that there is
one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and
madness is in their heart while they live, and after that, they go to the dead.

3. This (it must be acknowledged) is one of the most grievous things in this
lower World, that all things being thus blended together without any
distinction, some draw from thence this lewd and wild Conclusion, That there is
no difference between Virtue and Wickedness; and therefore take the greatest
license to do evil confidently and boldly all their life long: pursuing their
own lusts and passions so furiously, that they hasten their end; and Death,
which spares no Body (but is the most common of all other things) seizes on
them, before they think of it. See Annot. [c].

4. For to him that is joined to all the living, there is hope; for a living
dog is better than a dead lion.

4. But who would choose to be a Companion of these mad men, who run themselves
so fast out of all hope? which still remains (in the midst of all our changes
here) as long as a man remains in the number of the living; but is lost when he
is dead: in which respect the meanest and most contemptible person here in this
World, has the advantage of the greatest King, when he is gone out of it. See
Annot. [c].

5. For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing,
neither have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is forgotten.

5. For while men live and are well, they have sense and relish of such things
as they possess; and, knowing they must die, are taught thereby to use them
with a sober freedom: because when they are gone from hence they become perfect
Strangers to all things here, and can no longer enjoy and benefit of their
labors (IV. 9.) the fruit of which falls into the hands of other men, who
never so much as think what is become of them.

6. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished; neither
have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the sun.

6. Nor does it then signify any thing, whether a man was loved, or hated, or
envied by them; but all these passions are so extinguished with them, that no
body courts their favor, nor fears their ill will or displeasure: for, though
they have been never so powerful, they have nothing more to do with us here in
this World; nor can we, if we would, transmit any of our enjoyments to them, in
the place where they are.

7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart;
for God now accepts thy works.

7. And therefore shaking off both all anxious cares, and also all perplexing
thoughts about God's Providence (v. 1.) excite thy self, by the remembrance of
Death, to a cheerful enjoyment of those good things present, which thou justly
possessest: use them while thou have them, with a well-pleased, contented, nay
joyful mind; believing, if thou have approved thy self to God in the rest of
thy Works, it is very acceptable to Him, that thou should thus rejoice in his
love; who has made all things here for the service of man, and blessed thee
with a comfortable portion of them. See Annot. [d].

8. Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.

8. For which reason, do not live either sordidly or sadly; but, at all
seasonable times, entertain thy self and thy Friends liberally, with such
pleasures as may recreate and refresh thy spirits, after thy honest labors:
for innocent mirth, suitable to thy condition, is as becoming those that are
good, as the filthy delights of men lewdly voluptuous are abominable. See
Annot. [e].

9. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou love, all the days of the life of
thy vanity, which he has given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity:
for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which thou take under
the sun.

9. Flee therefore Adultery and Fornication, but solace thy self exceedingly
with thy own Wife; and, loving her with the most tender and constant affection,
take all the comfort her Society can afford: for it is the greatest God has
provided for Mankind, in this troublesome life; and therefore both seek for
such an one as thou can love; and, when thou have her, delight thy self in
her Company with such unalterable kindness, as may help to sweeten the
afflictions to which we are subject in this World: for thou can reap no other
fruit of all thy toil in this life, but to take an innocent pleasure, with
tranquillity of mind, in such good things as these, which the Providence of God
bestows upon thee. See Annot. [f].

10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.

10. In which, that thou may take the sincerest pleasure, let it not make
thee slothful, much less dissolute; but dispose thee rather to be vigorously
industrious, in doing all the good that is in thy power: for which end, lay
hold on every occasion that presents it self, and improve it with the utmost
diligence; because now is the time of action, both in the employments of the
Body and of the Mind; now is the season of studying either Arts and Sciences,
or Wisdom and Virtue; for which thou will have no opportunities in the place
whither thou art going, in the other World: Which is designed for rest from our
present labors; and for the reward of them. See Annot. [g].

11. I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men
of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens
to them all.

11. But do not presume merely on thy own industry, though never so great, for
good success in thy undertakings, nor fancy that nothing shall interrupt thy
pleasures, but look up unto God, and leave all to his Providence: For (to
return to what I said about events, v. 1.) I have observed that they do not
depend upon our Will and Pleasure, but upon his: we being apt to think, that he
who, for instance, can run swiftest, will certainly carry away the prize; and
that he who has the greatest Forces will win the Victory in a Battle; when it
falls out quite otherwise, that both of them lose the day: And more than that,
the Wise and the Learned in their Profession, cannot sometimes get their bread,
but men of greatest reach are poor, and ingenious Artists not at all regarded,
or encouraged, according to their deserts; for there are certain seasons,
wherein by various accidents which unexspectedly start up, all men's nimbleness,
strength, valor, wit, cunning and dexterity, prove ineffectual. See Annot. [h].

12. For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil
net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.

12. For no man can foresee many evils that befall him, no not the time of his
death; which surprises him unawares, when he thinks no more of it, than the
silly Fish, or Birds do, of the Net or the Snare, wherein they are caught to
their destruction: nay, as they are entangled, when they swim or fly securely,
in hope to catch their prey; so do men perish by those very counsels and
actions, from whence they expected the greatest advantages; and are undone, by
some sudden and unavoidable mischief that seizes them, when they thought
themselves at the top of their hopes. See Annot. [i].

13. This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great unto me:

13. But though events be not in our power, being overruled by a higher
Providence, we ought not therefore to imagine, there is no use of prudent
counsel and forecast: for that sort of Wisdom, which we call Political, how
mean soever it may seem in some men's eyes, is with me of greater price than
Wealth and Riches. And this single Observation shows that I have reason for it:
See Annot. [k].

14. There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came a great
king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it:

14. There was a City of small Circuit, ill fortified, and manned by a very
small Garrison; against which a mighty King with numerous Forces, made his
approaches: and, having entrenched his Army, and drawn a strong Line about it,
and raised his Batteries, doubted not to take it speedily, or to have it
surrendered into his hands.

15. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered
the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man.

15. When by a strange Providence of God, there unexpectedly appeared a Wise
man, but he so poor that no body minded him, who saved the City from this
imminent danger; and that not by Money, for he had none; nor by Arms, for the
Besiegers were far superior in strength: but merely by his wise counsels,
contrivances, strategems and conduct, wherein he excelled the greatest
Warriors: And yet, O foul ingratitude! his Citizens, who ought to have
recorded his Fame, and preserved it to all Posterity, soon forgot their
Deliverer; and, because he was poor, regarded him after this memorable service
he had done them, no more than they had done before. See Annot. [l].

16. Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless, the poor man's
wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.

16. Which notwithstanding ought not to discourage worthy men from serving
their Country; for Wisdom and Counsel, from such Examples as this, will be
preferred by all judicious and virtuous persons, as well as by me, before mere
power and strength: Because ungoverned Forces destroy themselves, when a little
Force, under skilful conduct, archieveth the greatest things: and therefore it
ought to be highly valued, in the most obscure person, though the senseless
Multitude (as if Wisdom borrowed all its credit from him that possesses it)
despise the counsel of a poor man; and oft-times suffer this punishment of
their folly and ingratitude, that, shutting their ears to his wholesome advice,
they fall into many and great calamities. See Annot. [m].

17. The words of wise men are heard in quiet, more than the cry of him that
rules among fools.

17. An intolerable fault this is. For the modest speeches of the meanest wise
man, delivered gently, and without noise, are far more worthy to be heard, and,
if they meet with a patient ear, and a serene mind, free from the tumult of
pride and passion, will be more regarded, and prove more efficacious, than the
most clamorous, and imperious Language of a powerful Fool: as appears by what
the poor man propounded for the saving of the City, which prevailed more, in
their distress, than the furious outcries of the greatest Commander, swaggering
among his Troops of ignorant Soldiers. See Annot. [n].

18. Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner destroys much good.

18. I cannot therefore but again commend Counsel, and wise Conduct, and prefer
it before the greatest Forces, and all manner of warlike Preparation; for it
sometimes saves whole Armies, nay Countries, from destruction, which have been
utterly ruined by the rash boldness and forwardness, or other error, of some
mighty man; who has overthrown wellsettled Kingdoms and States, and brought
them into many miseries: for it is a known thing, that many have been undone by
the fault of one; as by one man's prudence, many have been delivered. See Annot.
[o].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1. Though Solomon had often, and thoroughly considered that
Question, mentioned in the Argument of this Chapter; yet he could come to no
resolution about it, but this: That it ought not to shake our belief of God's
love to virtuous men (which is expressed in that Phrase, in the hand of God;
wherein are included all the effects of his kindness and care) and that we must
not judge men to be good or bad, by what befalls them in their outward estates.
So those words are most naturally interpreted, A man knows not love or
hatred, etc. Which some indeed refer unto men, not unto God, in this sense: No
man knows certainly what is best for him, in this World; and consequently
cannot tell what he should desire, and what deprecate, of all the things that
are before him. For those things, which he hates and is averse unto, may be as
good for him as those which he loves, and wishes to enjoy. To this purpose
Maldonate. Or thus, No man knows whether that which he loves, or that which he
hates shall befall him; but all things are before them: that is are appointed
how they shall be, antecedent to the will of men. Thus Eben Ezra. And there are
those who interpret that Phrase before them, in this manner: They see the good
and evil which befalls them, but cannot foresee it till it come upon them. And
some join both together thus, Neither the favor nor disfavour of men, neither
their approving or opposing what we do, is any certain mark that we are good or
bad.

But I have followed that sense which seemed to me most simple and most
coherent with the rest of the words. As for that Doctrine which many great
Writers in the Roman Church have built upon this Text, that no man can be
certain whether he be in the favor of God or no, while he is in this life;
Melancthon truly calls it, Interpretatio Monachorum; the Interpretation of the
Monks; who distorted the words of Solomon, and wreathed them to their own
dotages. For it is madness, says he in another place (in his Treatise of Good
Works) to say, that we know not whether Murderers and Adulterers are worthy of
God's hatred,

[b] V. 2.] For this next Verse plainly shows, that he speaks of such notes of
God's favor or hatred, as men are very desirous he would make; by putting a
difference between good and bad men, in external things. Which he is not
pleased to do; but they are sick, or lose their Goods, their Children or
Friends, all alike. Which is more particularly true in public calamities as
St. Cyprian excellently discourses, both in his Book to Demetrian, and in his
Book de Mortalitate. In the former of which he acknowledges, that good and bad
men being in this World, as in one and the same house; whatsoever befalls the
house must necessarily befall the Inhabitants; who cannot be well, when the
common Air wherein they all breathe is infected; nor have a good Crop, when
there wants Rain to make the Earth fruitful. "Only herein (says he to the
Pagans) we are not compares and aequales vobis, alike and undistinguished from
you: that we do not grieve as you do, in these common calamities; we are not so
impatient; nor make such outcries, and complaints: but a courageous and
religious patience quiets our mind, and makes us thankful to God. Viget apud
nos speirobur, etc. the strength of Faith is vigorous among us; and the
firmness of hope: and a mind erect in the midst of the ruins of a decaying
World: together with an immovable Virtue; a constantly joyful patience; and a
Soul always secure of her God. So that she may say with the Prophet (III.
Habakk. 17, 18.) Although the fig tree should not blossom, neither should fruit
be in the vine, etc. yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation.

The difference of the several expressions used here in this Verse, for good
men and bad, I have explained, as well as I could, in the Paraphrase. And they
that would see Examples of the same event to every one of the opposite persons,
may look into the Hebrew Commentators, or into Mercer, and there find them.

[c] V. 3.] In this and the following Verses, he shows the ill use men make of
the foregoing Observation; and their folly therein. For, imagining God loves
all men alike, because they find the same things happen to them all, they run
into such an excess of wickedness, with such a frantic liberty, as brings them
speedily to their Graves: whereby they lose what they would have kept, and what
they desired and hoped still to get. Thus I have interpreted v. 4. in which
there is exceeding great difficulty; both because of the various reading of one
word, which we translate joined to; and the uncertainty whether Solomon here
deliver his own Opinion or the Opinion of the Epicures: whom some think he here
introduces, and making a Speech which reaches to v. 11. which is the sense of
Greg. Thaumaturgus among the Greeks; and of several Latin Writers, who herein
follow some of the Hebrews: whose Wise men say (as we read in Maimonides his
More Nevochim, part. II. Cap. 28.) that some sought to smother the Book of
Ecclesiastes, because its words savor of Heresy. From which imputation that
they might free it, they took such words as they thought looked that way, to be
the Sayings of carnal men. But there is no need to have recourse to this way of
Exposition (as St. Hierom acknowledges) which I have not followed: because
there seems to me to be an easy and plain sense of the words, in coherence
with the foregoing. And in the expressing of that sense I have neglected
neither the Writing, nor the Reading, as* the Hebrews speak: but taken notice
of the sense of the word we translate joined to, as it is in the Text, and as
it is in the Margin of the Hebrew Bibles.

There are many other ways of explaining it, and the whole Verse; but I shall
not trouble the Reader with any of them, save only with Melancthon's (which I
do not find taken notice of by any of the latter Interpreters) who translates
the words thus: What therefore is to be chosen? in one that is alive there is
hope; and a living Dog, etc. In answer, says he, to those who being disturbed
at the confusion of things, asked, Must we then choose to labor, when we meet
with no rewards? Solomon replies, By all means follow your Calling, and commend
events to God: there is hope while a man lives that he may come to something;
and although thou can not be a Lion, yet be content to be a meaner Creature,
though it be but a little Dog. Thou art not able to be such a Captain as
Scipio; yet thou may be like to Fabius. Why do we seek for Lions, such
Heroical Captains, and Governors, a Gideon, Samson, and David? Let us use such
as we have, who though they be not like those Lions, yet may be like small
Dogs. And let them do something in their places; and pray to God they may be
Vessels of mercy. In which consideration, says he, Solomon stays long; saying
in the following Verses, that the dead are gone from the Government of this
World; and therefore we must use those that are present, follow our Calling,
rest in God by Faith and a good Conscience, whatsoever the events be.

As for those that fancy the Wise man would here contradict himself in what he
said Chap. IV. 2, 3. unless we take these words for the Opinion of other men,
they may be easily answered; that both are true in different respects. There he
speaks with respect to the troubles of life; and here with respect to the
advantages of it: The chief of which is, hope of bettering our condition, when
it is never so miserable. Which may be extended to the mind, as well as our
outward concerns: there is hope men may live to see their follies, correct
their mistakes, amend their lives, and recover the favor of God: which is
irrecoverably lost when they are gone from hence. In short, he seems to say the
same that the Heathen meant, in the Fable of Pandora's Box: in which Hope alone
remained, after every thing else that was good, was flown away. And there are
the like Sayings in Theocritus and Euripides: which may be found in Erasmus's
Adages, Chil. 2. Cent. 4. Adag. 12.

[d] There is little difficulty in the following Verses; where there are
several passages which show, that Solomon is not representing the sense of
those who believe nothing after this life; but has respect only to the state
of men here in this World, as he says expressly in the conclusion of v. 6. And
in the Seventh verse plainly supposes the man to whom he directs his Discourse
to be religiously affected, and to govern himself in his pleasures, with a
regard to God, and the censure that He will pass upon his actions in another
place: and thereupon advises him to a cheerful use of all manner of good things
in this life.

[e] For I take white garments do not to denote a magnificent and spendid way
of living; but only a neat, clean and pleasant (both white garments, and
anointing the head, being opposite to the habit of Mourners, which was sad and
sordid) in which there can be no danger, if it do not hinder serious business;
but rather be a refreshment after it, and a preparation to renew it, as it
follows, v. 10.

The Essenes (as Josephus tells, L. II. (...). Cap. 7.) went in white; though
they would not use any Ointments, which seemed to them too voluptuous. The
pleasure indeed of them was great (as I shall show upon I. Cant. 2.) and was by
many abused, and made too expensive and costly: but not therefore to be
refrained altogether by sober people; who forbear them in times of mourning (2 Samuel XIV. 2.) and fasting (VI. Matthew. 17.) but used them in Feasts and in times
of joy, XLV. Psalm. 7. XCII. 10. VII. Luke 37, etc.

[f] V. 9.] Here is a new Proof, that this is not the Speech of Voluptuaries;
for they love not to be confined to a Wife; as Solomon here advises his happy
man to be: making her his Partner in all the joys and comforts he has; as she
will be in his grief and sorrows.

The Hebrew Phrase see life, or lives, in the Plural Number, is well translated
by us live joyfully (or very joyfully) for chajim includes in it all the
conveniences and pleasures of life, XXXIV. Psalm. 13. and to see is to enjoy, as
was noted before.

[g] V. 10.] Here Gregory Thaumaturgus imagines the Speech of the Profane,
Atheistical Crew concludes; and glosses in this manner upon it: (...), etc.
Thus vain men talk, but I say unto you, etc. (as it follows in the rest of the
Chapter) Which is not at all agreeable, in my opinion, to the words of this
Verse: wherein there is a very serious advice to be diligent in all that we
have to do in this World: which is not the way of sensual men, who love not to
think of work, contrivance (or thought) knowledge, and wisdom. The difference
between which words, I have expressed in the Paraphrase; and shall only add,
that they seem to comprehend our whole business here in this World. For action
is employed in some work or other; to which we must bend our thought, and
devise how to do it; and for that end learn Sciences, but especially study
Wisdom (unto which Sciences are an entrance) that we may both accomplish what
we design, and know how to use the fruit of our labor.

[h] V. 11.] But after all that we can do, he advises to a faithful dependence
upon God and his good Providence: and not upon our own strength or Wisdom. By
which Advice he reproves that old Saying, Faber quisque Fortunae suae; Every
man makes his own Fortune: "Which (as the Lord Bacon speaks in a Discourse,
touching helps to the intellectual Powers: we ought to look upon as an insolent
and unlucky Saying: except it be uttered as an hortative or spur to correct
sloth; and (I may add) to excite us to watchfulness, in laying hold-of all
opportunities, and neglecting no occasions of doing our selves good. For
otherwise, if it be believed as it sounds, and a man enters into an high
imagination that he can compass and fathom all accidents, and ascribes all
successes to his own drift and reaches, and the contrary to his errors and
sleepings, it is a profane Speech, and it is commonly seen that the
Evening-Fortune of that man is not so prosperous, as of him that, without
slacking his industry, attributes much to Felicity and Providence above him.

Yet this is not the same Doctrine with that neither, which says, Vitam
Fortuna regit, non Sapientia; Fortune, not Wisdom, governs the life of man.
For, as Melancthon observes upon the conclusion of this Book, there is much
difference between Philosophical, and Ecclesiastical Sayings. The Church, in
such Sayings as this, confirms Providence, and admonishes us to have God in our
thoughts; whether events be answerable to our desires, or not. But profane
Writers, in such Sayings as that now mentioned, leave out Divine Providence,
and take no notice of it; but only of a blind Power, which troubles all things
that are wisely designed.

It is no impertinent inference which Corranus makes from these words, That all
the things which the swift, the valiant, and the rest of the persons here
mentioned seek, being their end, of which they frequently miss; it is an
Argument that the happiness of man consists not either in Fame, or Victory, or
eating and drinking, or riches, or the favor of others; but in contentment
with such things as we have, and God shall think good for us, in his wise
Providence.

[i] V. 12.] Which has given us many Examples of men, who incited by false
persuasions, and foolish hopes, dreamt of good events; when in the midst of
their course, they were oppressed with great calamities. Thus Melancthon
glosses upon these words in ver. 12. and instances in Marius, Pompeius, and
Julius Caesar. Which he explains more largely, in his Review of the first
Chapter of this Book, a little before he died. Where he observes how Cato, and
Marcellus were disappointed when they hoped for Victory in a good Cause: and
Brutus and Cassius, when they hoped by the treacherous slaughter of Caesar, to
have restored the Form of the old Republic: and Antony, when he thought by
oppressing Augustus, to make himself Monarch of the World. All which verifies
the old Saying (which he remembers in his Notes upon the Proverbs) (...). Vain
men are abused by their own desires, which lead them to make false accounts,
and fills them with vain expectations. And it teaches us the truth of those
Divine Sayings, The way of man is not in himself. Except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it, etc. Examples of which we have in
Saul, who hoped to have left the Kingdom to his Posteritys and in David
himself, who thought once of having Absalom for his Successor. But Solomon here
teaches us to consider, how infinitely the wise Providence of God excels our
greatest wit and cunning, and can more easily overreach all our Counsels, and
overturn our well-laid designs, than we can out-wit the silly Birds and Fishes.

[k] V. 13, etc.] Which should not discourage wise and regular Proceedings; but
only make us refer our selves unto God: who, as He thus disappoints the most
probable hopes, so, at other times makes men successful, when they have no hope
at all. As Solomon here shows in the following Observation, v. 13, 14. Upon
which St. Hierom glosses in this manner: It has been often seen, that a small
City and few Inhabitants, being beset by an Army of innumerable Enemies, and
besieged so straightly, that they were in danger, if not otherways, to perish by
Famine; were, on a sudden, contrary to all mens-expectation, delivered by a
mean person, who having more Wisdom than all the wealthy, great, powerful and
proud Citizens, thought of a way to save them, when they gave themselves for
lost; and effected that also, of which they utterly despaired. And yet, O the
ungrateful forgetfulness of Mankind! after the Seige was raised, after the
liberty of their Country was restored, there was no body thought of this poor
man, no body gave him thanks for their safety: but all honored the rich, who
in their danger could do them no service.

[l] V. 15.] Which sets forth, as the Lord Bacon observes upon this Verse (L.
8. de Aug. Scient. C. 2. Parab. 21.) the depraved and malignant Nature of
Mankind. Who in extremities and straits, commonly flee to men of wisdom and
courage; whom before they despised: but so soon as the Storm is over, they
become unthankful Wretches to their Preservers. Machiavel, not without reason,
propounds the Question, Whether should be most grateful to well-deserving
persons, the Prince or the People? but in the mean time he taxes them both of
ingratitude. Though this does not arise merely from the ingratitude of the
Prince, or the people alone; but there is added too often to this the envy of the
Nobility: who in secret repine at the event, though happy and prosperous,
because it proceeded not from themselves. For which cause they extenuate the
merit of the act, and depress the Author.

Thus Themistocles was served (as Luther here observes) who having performed
great things for his Citizens, was basely requited by them. Nay, David himself
was soon forgotten, who had been the greatest Benefactor to Israel: ten of
whose Tribes soon renounced all dependence on his house, and fell off quite
from their subjection to it. So that to do good to the World, says he, is to
throw away the benefits we bestow; or to cast Gold into Dung, and Pearls before
Swine. And therefore it is best to enjoy what we have, and to mind our present
business; casting away care of the future. For as Phaedria says in Terence, It
is better my benefits should be lost, than I should be lost together with them.
And not to be moved from our Duty by the Worlds ingratitude, is an Advice he
often repeats, very profitably, in this Chapter: that we may be like to our
heavenly Father, who does good to the evil and to the unthankful.

[m] V. 16.] The beginning of this Verse may be illustrated out of Dion
Prusaeus (Orat. 2. de Regno) who observes that Agamemnon wished rather for ten
such grave Counselors as Nestor, than so many valiant Youths as Ajax and
Achilles, (...) Where he shows also how great the power of Oratory is to subdue
men's minds.

[n] V. 17.] Yet it must be added, that the best and safest Counsels, cannot be
so much as heard or regarded, though never so wise, till peoples straits have
made them humble, sad and serious; as Aben Ezra expounds this 17th. Verse: The
words of the Wise are despised by the people, when they are in prosperity, but
when they are in distress (almost famished by such a Seige as is
beforementioned) and silenced by fear and grief; then they listen greedily and
diligently. Which Melancthon expresses better; The words of the Wise are heard
by the silent: i. e. by such as do not rage with any desire; but seek the
truth, and what is wholesome for them. This, and another obvious sense of the
Words, I have expressed in the Paraphrase; but have taken little notice of
this, which seems not so near the meaning: that it is better to hearken to wise
men, who persuade to peace, than to tumultuous spirits, who incite silly people
unto War.

He that rules among Fools, is an Hebraism for a great Fool: or we may
understand it of one whose authority sways much among Fools, or of a foolish
Commander. And St. Hierom expounds it of a bawling Orator or Preacher.
Whatsoever Declaimer, says he, thou see in the Church, by the inticement and
Elegance of words exciting applauses, moving laughter, or stirring up the
people to affections of joy; know that it is a sign of folly both in him that
speaks, and in them that bear him: for the words of the wise are heard in quiet
and moderate silence, etc.

[o] V. 18.] All Authors furnish us with abundance of Examples of the truth of
the last Clause of the last Verse: but I shall only briefly mention a little of
Melancthon's Gloss upon the place. There are Vessels of wrath, and Vessels of
mercy. The Vessels of wrath are unhappy men, who bring destruction upon
themselves and others, though sometimes they be great and wise persons:
According to that of Solon, Commonwealths are overturned by great and excellent
Wits. Such were Ahaz, Zedekiah, Cataline, Anthony and others. And in the
Church, Samosatenus, Arius, Manichaeus, and many other pernicious Doctors. Of
all which Solomon says, One Sinner destroys much good, (...). The Vessels of
mercy are such men, whose course is salutary to themselves and others; such a
poor man in the City was Jeremiah; by whose counsels, if they had been
followed, Jerusalem might have been saved from destruction. Let us therefore
pray to God, with continual groans, that we may be Vessels of mercy; and that
He would preserve us from being the Pests and Furies ((...)) of mankind:
driving a violent course to our own and others ruin.

CHAP. X.
ARGUMENT.
The sum of this Chapter is, That, as true Wisdom and Virtue is the only thing
that can give us tranquillity: so that part of it which teaches us to govern our
tongue, and to behave our selves dutifully toward our Governors (though they
do not manage things to our content, nor to the general good) conduces more
unto it, than men are willing to believe. For this is, in a manner, the scope
of the whole Chapter, to make every one sensible of the great Blessing of
Government; especially of good Government: and that therefore they ought to
bear with all manner of grievances; as a less mischief than the want of
Government, by Rebellion against it. Which begins, in undutiful Discourse: the
folly and danger of which he admirably represents; with many other things
tending to our present peace and settlement.

1. DEad flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor: so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor.

1. AND the Wiser or better any man is, so much the more cautious ought he to
be, in all his words and actions; if he mean to preserve that credit, esteem
and authority in the World, which give him great advantages of doing good. For
as dead Flies, though very small Creatures, falling into a Pot of Ointment, and
bursting there, corrupt that precious Composition, which the Apothecary has
made with excellent Art; so that it turns the Persume into a stink: in like
manner does a small error, or miscarriage blemish him, who was highly valued
for his Discretion and Virtue; and the least sordid action destroys his
reputation, who was honored for his noble way of living. See Annot. [a].

2. A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fools heart is at his left.

2. It is hard indeed to be thus circumspect; but herein a truly Wise man's
worth is discovered, that his judgment never fails him in the greatest
difficulties: wherein he not only resolves aright, and takes things by the
right handle; but is ready also in the execution of what he designs, and
manages his Affairs with ease, and with dexterity: whereas a Fool both mistakes
in his aim, and fumbles also in the easiest business; which he handles so
awkerdly, and untowardly, that it commonly miscarries. See Annot. [b].

3. Yea also when he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom fails him,
and he says to every one that he is a fool.

3. And though he would dissemble his folly, and endeavor to seem wise, he is
so far from his aim; that in every thing he does, whether great or small, he
openly betrays his want of judgment: nay, by his very gate and behavior, as
well as by his words and actions, he tells every Body (as plainly as if he said
it in so many words) that he is a Fool: Which appears in nothing more, than in
his holding all for Fools, in comparison with himself. See Annot. [c].

4. If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for
yielding pacifieth great offenses.

4. But a man's Wisdom has seldom a greater trial, than when his Prince is
angry with him, and perhaps treats him hardly; which incenses a Fool, and makes
him leave the Court, if not grow factious and rebellious: But it is better and
safer Advice to keep in the station, wherein thou art, and to do thy Duty
faithfully; with a patient, but yet pensive spirit: For nothing so appeases a
Princes offended mind, as to give way to his fury by mild and gentle words, and
by modest, humble and submissive behavior; whereby a man also prevents a World
of sins, into which he throws himself, if he yield unto disloyal thoughts. See
Annot [d].

5. There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error which
proceeds from the ruler.

5. And there are worse evils than this, that a wise and good man must
patiently bear withal; particularly that great error, which Princes, it must
be acknowledged, either through ignorance, imprudence, surprise, easiness and
being imposted upon by other men's false representations, subtilties, or ill
affections, are too frequently guilty of: whereby they derive many mischiefs
upon all their people; for which they must answer, as if they were committed by
themselves. See Annot. [e].

6. Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place.

6. In advancing I mean (which I have too often observed) the most witless,
careless men, and of base condition; or suffering such who are noted for
nothing but their folly, and their vices, to creep up to the most eminent
Dignities and Offices: and in the mean time depressing noble persons, or making
no account of them, though endowed no less with all excellent Qualities, than
with Riches and Honor. See Annot. [f]

7. I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants upon the
earth.

7. By the like senseless folly, I have observed mere Slaves, that deserved not
the meanest Office in a private Family (being sitter to be kept under by every
Body, than to be entrusted with the smallest power) appear in the greatest
state, by reason of their high preferment: and men of great Families, or of
singular worth and merit altogether slighted; nay, forced to wait upon them, as
if they had been their Lacqueys. See Annot. [g].

8. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it; and whosoever breaks an hedge, a
serpent shall bite him.

8. Which foul indignities, notwithstanding, a wise and virtuous person should
choose rather to wink at, and patiently endure, than think of moving any public
disturbance; for such counsels are extremely hazardous, and commonly end in the
ruin of those that give them: according to that known Proverb among us, which
admonishes us how dangerous it is, to pursue our own desires and passions
violently (especially against Kings and Princes) whereby men, in a heat,
forgetting their own contrivances, have run themselves into that very ruin, as
Hunters do into the Pit, which they prepared for others: and that other common
Saying, which warns us not to overthrow the well-setled Laws and Customs of
Church or State; for that is like the breaking down a Hedge: wherein as a
Serpent many times lurks which gives him that attempts it a deadly bire; so
they frequently draw upon themselves their own destruction, who pull down the
ancient Government. See Annot. [b].

9. Whosoever removes stones, shall be hurt therewith: and he that cleaves wood,
shall be endangered thereby.

9. We abound with 9. We abound with Proverbs to this purpose: Which teach us
that the giving public disturbance, by invading the Rights of others
(especially of Kings) and endeavoring to change the Form of Government, is
like removing the Boundaries of Lands; which raises great troubles or like the
taking much pains to pull down a Building without judgment; some of the Stones
of which fall upon him that meddles with it, and crush him in pieces. Such is
his folly also that fancies he can mend every thing that is amiss, and form and
square the people exactly according to his Rule: which proves just like an
unskilful Workmans cutting a knotty Piece of Wood; who only makes Clefts and
Chips (as the other does Factions and Rents) and in the issue gives a grievous
gash to himself. See Annot. [i].

10. If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to
more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.

10. This is sufficient to show, how unprofitable all our endeavors are
without true judgment. For as a rusty Tool, though managed by the strongest
man, is so far from effecting his desires, that it only tires his arm, unless
he file and whet it, to recover its edge: so all the power in the World rather
hurts than advantages him, that has it, unless it be guided and directed by
Wisdom and Prudence; which can do far more, than violence and force, to correct
the errors of Kings, and mend the faults of their Government. See Annot. [k].

11. Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no
better.

11. But of all other men he is the most dangerous, who spits his Venom
secretly against his Governors; slandering and traducing all their actions in
his private Discourses, and thereby enraging peoples minds against them; and
giving them a more grievous wound than if they were stabbed with a Weapon: For
that may be prevented, or healed afterward, but this is like the biting of the
most deadly Serpent, which stopping its ear to all enchantments, poisons both
inevitably, and incurably. See Annot. [l].

12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious: but the lips of a fool will
swallow up himself.

12. See here again the wide difference between a Wise man and a Fool. The
former of which by his virtuous Discourse wins every ones (especially his
Princes) favor; and does good to those with whom he converses: but the other
by his ill tongue, not only hurts his Neighbor, but, plunges himself into
endless troubles; out of which he cannot deliver himself, nor can any Body him.
See Annot. [m].

13. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and the end of his
talk is mischievous madness.

13. And the more he talks, in the greater Danger he is: For, though he begin
only with senseless and impertinent stuff, he heats himself before he has done
into a rage; and then minds not either how injurious his Discourse is unto
others, or how mischievous unto himself.

14. A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and what
shall be after him, who can tell him?

14. No, though he be admonished of it he cannot desist. For he abounds with
words, and while he thinks to mend the matter, he makes it worse; adventuring
to talk not only of things Civil, but of things Sacred; and not only of things
present, but of things past also, nay, of things to come: In which wiser men
than he have little or no skill; and yet the less he knows, the more consident
and bold he is; when he does not so much as foresee the evil he is bringing
upon himself, by his foolish prating. See Annot. [n].

15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knows
not how to go to the city.

15. Which is the more intolerable, because he torments himself and others with
fruitless pains about the abstrusest matters; when he knows not the most
trivial, that are as plain as the Highway: For if he be engaged in any common
business, he only tires himself with toil and labor, but is never the nearer:
like a silly Traveller, who, being ignorant of the Road, goes about, if not
through dangerous, yet through troublesome Paths; and the further he goes,
perhaps is the further off from the place he intends. See Annot. [o].

16. Woe to thee O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the
morning.

16. What a miserable condition then, is that poor Country in, which abounds
(as most places do) with a great many of these Fools? And besides, has the
unhappiness to fall under the Government of a Child: whose Tutors, Counselors,
Guardians, and Protectors, who have the management of all Affairs in his
minority, are so given to their pleasure, that they can find no time to mind
seriously the public business; nor take any care to infuse Principles of
Wisdom and goodness into their young Princes mind, but let him remain a Child
as long as he lives. See Annot. [p].

17. Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy
princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.

17. And, on the contrary, the happiness of that Nation is inexpressible, whose
King is not only of an illustrious Family, descended from the most ancient
Nobility; but, having had ingenuous and liberal Education, does not degenerate
from their Heroical Virtue: which teaches him to place such Officers under him,
in their several stations, as make pleasure wait upon business; which they
first dispatch, and then refresh themselves; not to excess, but to fit
themselves to return to their business again. See Annot. [q].

18. By much slothfulnss the building decays, and through idleness of the
hands the house droppeth through.

18. Being sensible that, as through the negligence and gross carelessness of
the Master of a Family, the House falls to decay; and, for want of timely
reparation, the Rain gets in and rots the Roof, and then the Supporters, and at
last the very Foundation of it: so by that laziness and sloth, which is the
effect of luxury and riot, Kingdoms themselves go to wrack; and seasonable
remedies not being applied to public disorders, the whole Government by
degrees grows out of frame, and is in the end dissolved. See Annot. [r].

19. A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes merry: but money answers
all things.

19. For these idle and dissolute persons, among other mischiefs, consume the
public Treasure, by their vast expenses in Feasts, and all manner of
merriment; which serve indeed for their present pleasure, but waste that which
should make it lasting, and is of most universal use to support the Princes
Crown and Dignity: And therefore when the Exchequer is exhausted, these men are
tempted to fill it by the most grievous oppressions; nay Law and Justice, and
every thing else, is sold; Virtue it self is of no price, but money alone is
valued, and bears all the sway: which is another way, of bringing all to utter
ruin. See Annot. [s].

20. Curse not the king, no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich in thy
bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter.

20. But notwithstanding all this, as I advised thee before, not to rise up in
Rebellion against thy Sovereign (v. 8. etc.) so now let me add, that it is very
foolish, as well as wicked, to be provoked by this ill management, so much as
to speak an opprobrious word of him, or of his Government, or Ministers: Nay,
entertain not so much as a thought of it, though it may be done never so
secretly, where none but thy Wife, or most intimate Friend, are admitted: For
it is not safe to trust any Body with so dangerous a Secret, which it is most
likely will not always be concealed; but, as it is certainly known to God, so,
will be carried by some undiscerned means or other, with such swiftness to the
Princes ears, as if the Bird that sat in the Window, or passed by when the
words were spoken, had flown away immediately with the report of them. See
Annot. [t].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] He seems, in the first words of this Chapter, to prosecute what
he had said in the last Clause of the foregoing; showing how much good one Fool
may spoil, by the great mischiefs that ensue one foolish action: whereby a man,
otherwise famed for Wisdom, utterly loses his reputation. So most Interpreters
understand the latter part of the Verse; which Melancthon, following the
Vulgar, interprets quite contrary; that a little folly, or rather folly for a
little while, is better than Wisdom and Glory: That is, seeming folly, like
that of Fabius, who was condemned for his slow proceedings, and thought a
cowardly Fool; is better than Wisdom which makes a glorious show, but does not
conduct things so safely as that Captain did.

But this Exposition agrees not at all with the Similitude, whereby Solomon
illustrates what he here says concerning Folly. Which is that of dead, or
rather venomous Flies (for the Hebrew Phrase Flies of death may better be
translated deadly, than dead Flies) which though very little Animals, yet
falling into a Pot of precious Ointment, spoil it all when they putrefie: and
not only take away the delicate scent, but turn it into a filthy, noisome
stink. For a Fly is observed to be both foedum and foetidum Animalculum;
especially some sort of them, which seem here to be particularly denoted by the
Word Zebube: being not merely bred out of filth, and delighting to live in it,
but leaving behind them such a humor as is very offensive to the smell, and
kills those Creatures into whom they thrust their snouts. From whence the God
of the Ekronites had his Name of Baal zebub (2 Kings I. 2.) which if it were
given him by his Worshippers, signified his power to destroy those venomous
Flies which infested the Inhabitants of that Country: if by the Israelites,
expressed their contempt of him, as a mean, and a filthy, sordid Idol. For
therefore St. Hierom thinks the Prophet Isaiah compares the Egyptians to a
Fly, VII. 18. not only because they were a weak people, but propter sordes
Idololatriae, by reason of the sordid filthiness of their Idolatry: which was a
great reproach to their famed Wisdom: and made them vile, even in the opinion
of Pagan people.

I cannot here omit the reflection, which the Lord Bacon has made upon these
words (L. VIII. de Augment. Scient. C. 2. Parab. 11.) that the case of men
eminent for Virtue, is very hard, and miserable; because their errors, though
never so small, are by no means pardoned. But as in a pure Diamond, of great
luster, the very least speck or smallest cloud strikes the eye, and affects it
with a kind of trouble; which in a grosser Stone would scarce be observed: so
in men of singular abilities, the least infirmities are presently espied, and
become the matter of men's discourse, and are perstringed with a heavier
censure; which in men of meaner parts or rank would either pass without notice,
or easily procure pardon. Therefore a little folly in a very wise man, a small
sin in a very honest man, and a slight indecency of manners in a man of courtly
and elegant behavior, much derogates from their fame and reputation. So that
it would not be the worst course for excellent persons, if they would mingle
some absurdities (so it may be done without guilt) with their actions: that
they may maintain a kind of liberty to themselves, and confound the Notes and
Characters of smaller defects.

[b] V. 2.] From hence Solomon takes occasion to represent more largely, how
much men suffer by their folly, and what advantages Wisdom gives them: and
treats of both, with respect, not only to men's private, but to the public
good. And first he shows what a difference there is between a wise man and a
Fool, in the management of any business. So I have interpreted this Verse,
which may be also thus paraphrased, A Wise man always takes honest courses; but
a Fool turns into bye ways. Thus Greg. Thaumaturgus glosses; A Wise man is his
own Leader and Conducter to the best things; but a Fool inclines to the wrong
side, nor will his folly ever lead him to any thing that is excellent. Which
St. Hierom expresses in this manner; A Wise man always thinks of the World to
come, which leads to the right hand; but he that is a Fool, only of the present
World, which lies on the left. And quotes a famous Passage of Lactantius (which
I find in his Institutions, L. VI. Cap. 2.) concerning the Letter Y, unto which
the Pythagoreans resembled the course of humane life. In which there is a time,
when a Youth finds his way cleft, as that Letter is; into two parts or ways;
and he stands doubting unto which he should incline. If he be so wise as to
take the right hand way, he is happy; if the other, he is miserable. Which
sense Grotius follows; the right hand is the way of Virtue; the left, the way
of Vice. Unto which we may reduce that of the Chaldee Paraphrast, The heart of
the wise inclines to the Law of God, which was given from God's right hand; the
Fool to Silver and Gold, which are the gifts of the left.

But if this had been the sense, it would have been more proper to have said,
the Wise man's heart is on the right hand; not on his right hand; which is much
different: and therefore I have omitted this in the Paraphrase (though I
thought good to mention it here) and taken no notice of many other Glosses;
particularly that of Melancthon's, which seems something nearer to the sense:
The wise man has power over his affections (the right hand being the
strongest, and the instrument of action in most men) and can moderate them, as
occasion requires: but a Fool is under the Government of his passions; and is
hurried that way, which his anger, ambition, grief, and other blind affections
drive him.

I will add this that the meaning may be: A Wise man has his Wisdom always at
hand; to direct him what to do, in public or in private business; whether he
have to do with Friends or Enemies; in adversity, as well as in a prosperous
estate (his mind being just like the right hand, which we use readily, upon all
occasions, for all manner of actions) but a Fool is to seek; and knows not
which way to turn himself, etc. Which is much to the same purpose, with what I
have said in the Paraphrase.

[c] V. 3.] And agrees with what follows, in this Verse, the first Words of
which signify as much as, Moreover, a Fool is so silly, that he cannot hide
it. For though the rest of the Diseases of the mind may be covered by
artificial Discourse, as the blemishes of our Bodies are with our Garments;
only folly cannot be dissembled, but will appear to all, in every motion of him
whose weakness it is.

There is another sense of the last Words of the Verse, beside that in our
Translation; which I have not neglected: because the Words will bear the sense
of the Vulgar; viz. He says every Body is a Fool. Which St. Hierom interprets
thus, He judges all men by himself. Symmachus thus, He fancies himself the only
Wise man. The LXX (as St. Hierom observes) seem wide from the sense, who
translate it thus: All that he thinks is very vain. Maldonate understands it
differently from them all, in this manner: In that wherein he himself offends,
he reprehends others.

[d] V. 4.] And then Solomon proceeds to give a particular instance of this
Folly and Wisdom; especially in the Public State and Government. Where it is
great folly for a Governor to carry himself haughtily, and furiously; but if
he do, it is no less folly in his people to oppose him with the like passions;
and not rather to be patient and peaceable: which is the sense of v. 4. Which
some take for a Counsel to Governors; others to the Subject. They that
understand it as Counsel to Governors, translate it some of these ways: If the
spirit of a Governor come upon thee, that is, if thou art fitted for
Government, and advanced unto Dignity, behave thy self humbly; and administer
all things with great lenity: for that is the best way, to heal public
Distempers. Or thus, If thou art made a Prince, discharge this Office
diligently, and with vigilance: for if thou art remiss and careless, it will
make thee fall into great errors. Or, as some will have it, in this manner,
Thou have a desire to be in authority, suppress it; or if it be offered thee,
accept not of it: a private life is better; and less subject to the occasions
of sin and danger. And some translate it thus, If thou art in singular favor
with the Governor, keep thy station notwithstanding; and be not ambitious of
Preferment, etc. Which is Counsel unto Subjects; and by ruach (spirit) of the
Ruler, most do not understand his favor, but his anger: and then also it may
be taken in a different sense from that in our Translation (making it still an
Advice to him that is in Authority) that if anger come upon him, he should
reflect, and consider the station wherein he is; lest this passion make him act
undecently, and transport him into great sins.

But the greatest part of Interpreters, taking the Verse to be Counsel to a
Subject, in case he incur the displeasure of his Prince, I have followed that
sense; which is almost agreeable to the coherence. And I have interpreted that
Advice, not to leave his place, as most do, for not quitting the Duty of a
Subject: but have taken in also the most ingenious Interpretation of the Lord
Bacon. Who makes this a Political Advice to Courtiers; not to relinquish their
Place and Office, nor to retire from the execution of their Charge, as many do
when they see their Prince angry with them. Which arises partly out of an
impatience of disgrace; partly lest they should make the wound bleed afresh, by
coming into the presence; partly that their Prince may see how sorrowful, and
humble they are: which makes them think fit to withdraw themselves from their
employments; nay, to resign perhaps the Offices and Dignities themselves into
the Princes hands.

But Solomon disallows this way of Cure, as hurtful and prejudicial; and that
upon very good grounds. For first this course, does too much publish the
disgrace it self: from whence both Enemies and Enviers grow more bold to hurt;
and Friends more timorous to help. Secondly, By this means it comes to pass,
that the wrath of the Prince, which, if it had not been made public, would
have died perhaps of it self, becomes now more fixed: and having begun to
overthrow the man, is carried on to his utter ruin. And lastly, this retiring
savours something of a malignant humor; that is fallen out with the times:
which heaps the mischief of indignation, upon the mischief of suspicion.

The proper Precepts therefore for a Cure, are these; which he thinks are
contained in the last Words, Pliant demeanor pacifies great offenses. First,
Above all things not to seem insensible or not so affected, as in Duty he ought
to be; for the Princes displeasure; either through stupidity or a stubbornness,
and pride of spirit. That is, Let his countenance be composed, not to a sullen
and contumacious, but to a grave and modest pensiveness; and in all manner of
employments, let him show himself less pleasant and cheerful than he was wont
to be. Which, it may be expedient also that, some Friend or other should
represent to the Prince; and insinuate seasonably, with what sensible grief he
is inwardly afflicted. Secondly, Let him carefully avoid all, even the least
occasions, whereby either the thing it self, which was the first cause of the
indignation may be revived; or the Prince apprehend a new occasion to be
displeased with him again, or, upon any account whatsoever, to chide him before
others. Thirdly, Let him with all diligence seek, on the other side, all manner
of occasions, wherein his service may be acceptable to his Prince; that both he
may show a prompt and forward affection to redeem his forepast offense; and his
Prince may understand, what a good Servant he is likely to lose, if he thus
cast him off. Fourthly, Let him sagaciously either lay the fault upon others;
or insinuate, that it was committed with no ill intention, in himself; or
remonstrate their malice who accused him to the King, or aggravated his fault,
more than it deserved. To conclude, Let him be diligent and watchful in all
things, and intent uponthe Cure.

There is another Great Man, of our own, who seems to take this for an
Admonition, not to be false-hearted, by flinching from our station, when mighty
men frown upon us. In an upright course (says Bishop Sanderson, in his Sermon
upon 1. Cor. VII. 24. Sect. 46.) Fear not the face of man, neither leave thy
place, though the spirit of a Ruler rise up against thee: patience will conjure
down again that Spirit in time, only if thou keep thy self within thy Circle.
But I look upon this, which agrees not with the latter part of the Verse, as an
accommodation only of these Words to his present purpose; and not as intended
for the proper sense of them.

[e] But of all other follies, this is the most mischievous, of which Princes
themselves are sometimes guilty: in preferring (as it follows v. 6, 7.)
unworthy men (who are so unfit to govern others, that they cannot govern
themselves) to the highest Dignities, and perhaps trusts: and at the same time
neglecting, if not depressing men of worth and honor, of Noble Families, and
sometime of Heroical Virtue. Which is more provoking, because more pernicious,
than the personal displeasure (before mentioned v. 4.) which they express
toward any private man. For it is an universal grievance, and as if the Ruler
himself should give order for all the mischief which they do (as some expound
that Phrase as an error) And yet notwithstanding, it is the wisest course not
to be exasperated by it, to make any tumults and seditions; but to be patient
and quiet, v. 8.9. So I have expounded these Verses, in connection one with
another: for though there are those who by Ruler here understand the Devil; who
thrusts the worst men into the best Places (as may be seen in St. Hierom's
Commentaries) and others understand God who permits this; yet the whole
Discourse is still to the same purpose. that senseless persons get into power;
being more acceptable many times at Court (as Melancthon glosses) than the wise
and good. According to the ancient Verses,

(...).
(...).
This World takes the greatest pleasure in bad men: the Flatterer fares best in
the first place; and next him the Sycophant and false Accuser. In the Roman
Story, there are many instances of men preferred merely for their Vices, of
others only for money: some of which are collected by Joannes Filesacus, L. 8.
Selectorum Cap. 15.

[f] V. 6.] I mentioned Vices (in the foregoing Annotation e) because folly, in
the holy Language, comprehends that; as well as silliness or incapacity to
manage affairs, and mindlesness, negligence and sloth: which are both denoted
in the Hebrew Word (...) in this place: Where the Abstract (as they speak)
being put for the Concrete; we are to understand idle, ignorant and senseless
men; and that in the highest degree: and, being opposed to rich, they are also
supposed to be men of mean extraction, or condition. For which reason the rich
also are to be understood not simply men of Estates, or great Birth; but of
excellent education; noble endowments of mind; and attentive unto business, etc.

[g] V. 7.] The sense of this Verse is not different from that of the former;
but the same thing is set forth in both, by two illustrations: one taken from
their Place and Dignity; the other from the Equipage (as we now speak) wherein
they appear, upon their advancement. For to ride belonged unto Great Persons:
as to go on foot, unto Inferiors. And to ride on Horses in Solomon's time, was
much more stately than to ride on Mules, which were used by Great Men in
David's time (2 Samuel XIII. 29. 1 King. I. 33.) or on Asses, in former Ages, X.
Judge. 4.

[h] V. 8.] Yet it is as senseless, to be enraged, by this preferment of
senseless and unworthy men, into rebellion; as the Wise man here shows by
several Proverbial Sayings. In the Application of which to this purpose, I have
the approbation of Melancthon: who expounds the last Words of v. 8. and the
first of v. 9. concerning the punishment of those; who go about to change the
ancient Laws, and the Form of Government. And it is more agreeable to the
Phrases of breaking hedges, and removing landmarks, or such like things; than
to apply it unto the mischiefs that Princes bring upon themselves and their
Countries, by such imprudent promotions, as are beforementioned: though that
be true also; that such disorders give great disgust, and are the occasion of
dangerous commotions. Which commonly are most fatal, notwithstanding, to those
that are so foolish as to advise, contrive, and excite them. Who bring that
mischief on themselves which they intended should wholly have fallen upon
others; as Solomon here shows by two Similitudes. One taken from the Pits
dug for the intrapping Foxes, Wolves and such like Creatures; or, as others
will have it, from those that undermine the Walls of Towns, and often perish in
the Mines wherein they themselves have long wrought. Agreeable to that old
Saying which Aristotle mentions (in his third Book of Rhetoricks, Cap. 9. out
of Democritus Chius (...). The other from a Breaker of an Hedge, or Fence or
Wall (for so we translate this Word XXII. Numb. 24.) or any partition (so the
LXX. there translate it by the Word (...)) whereby men's grounds were separated,
and kept in several: in which enterprise he meets with his deaths wound from a
Serpent. Which were wont to lurk in Rocks (XXX. Prove. 19.) and in Holes of the
Earth (XI. Isa. 8.) as well as in the bottom of Hedges, or old Walls (as the
Wise man here intimates) and in other dry places, where there was no water,
VIII. Deuteronomy. 15. There were Water-Serpents also, IX. Amos 3. of which men were
in less danger.

[i] V. 9.] There is great variety of judgments concerning the sense of this
Verse: But that which I have given I am sure is not improper; which in short is
this: That they who out of love with novelty will not let things alone in their
place, but be altering and changing, though thereby they make great rents and
distractions; do not only give themselves a great deal of trouble, and disturb
the quiet of their own mind; but run the hazard of ruining themselves, together
with whole Kingdoms and Churches. Therefore that Saying of Pindar, quoted by
Melancthon, should always be in peoples minds: It is easy to disturb a
Government; but God alone can settle it again.

The Phrases are sufficiently explained in the Paraphrase: only I think fit to
note that the Word which, following the LXX, we translate endangered, is by
Forsterus translated aspergetur, that is, hurt by the shivers of it.

[k] V. 10.] There is no less variety, but rather greater, in the
interpretation of this Verse: Wherein he seems to return to the commendation of
Wisdom. And it may still refer to what went immediately before; as I have
applied it, in the latter end of my Paraphrase. In which I have not varied from
our Translation; if after those Words put to more strength, these be
understood; but all in vain: And so the Words may be translated out of the
Hebrew, If the iron be blunt, and he (that cutteth with it) do not whet the
edge; it will overcome all the force he uses: that is, will not cut as he would
have it. And so the meaning of the Verse is excellently expressed by the Lord
Bacon (in his Preface to the second Book of the Advancement of Learning) These
words, says he, insinuate, that a wise election of the means, does more
efficaciously conduce unto the accomplishment of any enterprise; than any
inforcement or accumulation of endeavors. For as the Saying is, Claudus in via
antevertit Cursorem extra viam. A lame man in the way, will outrum a Post out
of the way.

But though I take this to be the true sense; yet I shall here mention some
others, that the Reader may choose which he thinks most congruous. Some take
that Word chajalim, which we translate strength, for Forces or Armies; and make
the sense this; Where an Army is governed by Wisdom, it prevails though it be
defective in Weapons: For Wisdom does more to set things right (i. e. does more
to make up the want of Arms) than Arms can do to get the Victory alone. Others,
who translate the former part of the Verse to the same sense that I have done,
translate the last part thus: the excellence of industry, is Wisdom. That is,
Wisdom in this excels all other Tools that thy are blunted by use; but it is
sharpened thereby. And therefore they, the more they are used, give them that
employ them the greater labor; but this; the more it is exercised, gives us
the less: Thus Maldonate. Some in this manner, If iron be blunt, it must be
sharpened; and so must the Sword of Justice (when by the negligence of Officers,
it has lost its edge, and the Earth is filled with violence, with thefts and
adulteries, etc.) be resumed and whetted by the Magistrate, to the severe
punishment of such wickedness.

Melancthon seems to express the sense of the Vulgar: as Iron being blunted, is
not sharpened without great labor! so the Companion of great diligence, is
Wisdom: or Wisdom cannot be attained without great industry. Which others, that
follow that Translation, express thus more largely: As a Knife or such like
Instrument, having lain long rusty, cannot without much whetting be sharpened
again: so the mind that is grown dull by long sloth and negligence, requires
great labor, study and exercise, to restore it to its former vigor. Which may
be applied to Government that is decayed, and cannot, without a wonderful
diligence and prudence in those that have the management of things, be
recovered.

There are those who look upon it only as an Admonition what may be done by
mere industry and pains-taking, though a man have not much wit, nor be much
befriended by others; and yet gets up wonderfully in the World.

[I] V. 11.] In the Exposition of this also there is much variety; according as
the Hebrew Phrase Master of the tongue, is expounded, either of a mere Babbler,
and loose Talker; or of a Backbiter and Slanderer. I have taken it in the
latter sense; as St. Hierom, in the Vulgar Edition, does. And the former part
of the Verse, may either signify a Serpent that is not enchanted; or that
cannot be enchanted, by any means. For some such sort of Serpents there were,
as Bochartus observes (L. 3. de sacr. Animal. C. 6. Part. II.) and as appears
out of Jer. VIII. 17. and other places of holy Scripture. Unto which, I think,
the Backbiter and Detracter may be best compared: for nothing will restrain his
virulent humor: nor defend one from the mischief which he does in secret. I
have connected this Verse also with the precedent matter; as it may be, though
we should take the Words in the common sense: which is this; that as a Serpent
will bite, if he be not charmed; so will he do mischief that talks much, if he
govern not his tongue with great Wisdom. Or, as others interpret the latter
part of the Verse, a man's words though never so eloquent (for so the Word
lachasch is used, III. Isai. 3.) will do no good, to pacify a Princes mind; if
he be not charmed at the very first, before he have fixed his anger.

Others take this Verse separate from the rest, and understand no more by it,
than this; that a Calumniator is like a Serpent, that bites secretly; without
so much as giving warning by its hissing. So Melancthon; who truly observes,
that calumny is a most grievous Pestilence; which rages and destroys whole
Countries. For it first kindles Dissentions; and thence arise Confusion of
Religion, Wars and Desolations. Or, according to our Translation. A Babbler can
no more refrain from blurting out his own or others Secrets, than a Serpent, if
he be not charmed, can do from biting. Which may be referred also to the matter
foregoing, in this manner: He that gives himself a liberty of talking of every
thing, blurts out even the Secrets, and the Vices of Princes; whereby he not
only makes himself odious, but procures his own destruction.

[m] V. 12.] The three following Verses, may be also referred to the same
matter; and the latter part of this, is capable of another sense, than that in
our Translation; which is this: That a Fools lips subvert all that a wiser man
has said. So St. Hierom expounds it. There would be less harm in folly, says
he, if it would be content with its own rustic ignorance: but it affects to
contradict the dictates of Wisdom, and to affront prudent persons; nay to
supplant and overthrow them; whereby it becomes exceeding wicked.

[n] V. 14.] And it is in vain to hope to amend this; Because, as Solomon here
observes, a Fool thinks himself in this very thing to be wise and learned; that
he is able to multiply words; though they be never so confused, without head or
foot (as we speak) and he say the same thing over and over again, in a Round;
as the LXX seem to understand the Word holleloth madness (in the foregoing
Verse) which they translate (...), as if it were from the Hebrew Word, which
signifies a dance. Melancthon understands these three Verses, as if they
expressed the difference between wise Counselors or Teachers; and such as are
foolish, but fancy themselves very wise: though they direct their Counsels and
Instructions, merely by their own, or others blind affections. So Mardonius
persuaded Xerxes, unto his unhappy War; and Pompey had such like Instigators:
but they were ignorant men, or considered not what had been before. So he
expounds this Fourteenth Verse: They who by foolish counsel, or pernicious
Doctrine, undo themselves and others, regard not former Examples; nor have any
prospect of future punishments.

[o] V. 15.] He refers also this Verse (where I have put two senses together)
unto the same thing. These perverse wise men, says he, make a great bustle to
no purpose; and, endeavoring to reform many things, bring lamentable events
upon themselves and others: because they are ignorant of the sense of Mankind;
and consider not the weight of business; nor discern what it fit to be done.
Which is comprehended in these Words, They know not the way to the City; or to
the Court: But are like the Shepherd, says he, who coming to Court, had a
Looking-Glass bestowed on him; in which contemplating himself, he fell into
admiration of his own beauty: and thereby grew so insolent, that he was not
only thrown out with disgrace, but broke his neck.

[p] V. 16.] From hence Solomon takes occasion to admonish us, that the misery
or welfare of a people, depends very much upon the King that governs them. Who
if he be a Child must be governed by others: and if they prove bad, as commonly
they are, all things go to wrack. This seems to be the sense of this Verse:
where by a Child I understand a Prince to whom the Scepter falls in his
minority: though it may be taken (as Jo. Forsterus expounds) for one that is
rerum imperitus, unskilful in business (as in I Jer. 6.7. III. Isai. 4.) and I
have not omitted the common Interpretation, which understands it of such a weak
Prince, as is wholly governed by his passions, and lets the worst of men govern
him. Who, like Children, think all is well, if they may but play, and follow
their pleasure. Which they take so greedily that they are drinking, when they
should be at Council; dancing, when they should be judging Causes. So Jo.
Drufius, I remember, expounds eating in the morning, in his Annotations on XVI.
Numb. 5. where he applies that place of Jeremiah XXI. 12. to illustrate this:
and observes that the morning is the time of Judgment and Counsel; as the
evening is for mirth or compotations. According to that of Socrates, In the
Morning Counsel, in the Evening Conversation. And that of the Hebrews, Non
iudicant in hora Ebrietatis; they do not sit to judge in the hour of drinking;
i. e. in the Evening. Which is so prejudicial to Government, that there was a
Law among the Carthaginians, that no Magistrate whatsoever should drink any
Wine at all, (...), that Year in which they bare any Office,etc. as we read in
Plato, L. 2. de Legibus, p. 674. Edit. Serrani. And he admirably represents
what the mischief of it is, when a mere Youth governs, who is not able to
undergo so weighty a Charge; in the next Book, page 691.

[q] V. 17.] And on the other side, the felicity of a Nation is unspeakable,
when it is under the care of a gallant Prince: whom he calls ben chorim. Which
may either signify his Descent, or the excellent Qualities of his own person:
or rather both, one who inherits the Virtue of his Ancestors. Who though they
should chance to leave him but a Child, yet entrust him with such wise and
faithful persons; that they infuse into him the spirit of his Heroical
Predecessors: which makes the people willingly submit unto him. For as Plato
observes, that Parents every where have the power of governing their Children:
so next to this it is consonant, (...), that generous persons (who do not
degenerate from the Virtues of their Noble Ancestors) should govern those that
are mean and base, L. III. de Legibus, p. 690. Whence the Babylonian Princes
are called by this Name, XXXVI. Isai. 12. where the Chaldee has been herin,
the sons of ingenuous and free men; or the sons of Heroical Persons. For hence
comes the name of Heroes: and thence Bacchus is called by the name of Liber, i.
e. a Prince or Noble Man, as Bochartus rightly observes in his Canaan, L. I.
Cap. 18. And so the LXX. translate ben chorim in this place, (...): Which Word
they elsewhere translate (...) Nobles, V. Nehem. 7. VI. 17. and (...), XXXIV.
Isai. 12. It is vulgarly derived from the white garments, or robes of fine
linen, wherein such great Persons appeared: but it is more likely to be of some
Foreign Original; and may be best translated illustrious persons.

[r] V. 18.] I have referred this and the next Verse, unto the same matter. And
this represents, how necessary it is to be very diligent and careful to make up
the smallest Breaches, and correct the beginning of Disorders; by showing what
ruin attends upon supine sloth, remissness and negligence. Which is expressed
in two most significant Words; the first (slothfulness) implying such a
sluggish temper, that a man will move neither hand to any Work: the other
(idleness) such a remissness and listlessness, as there is in a man that is
asleep: when his hands hang down (as the Phrase is XII. Hebr. 12.) which seems
to be the import of shiphluth in this place; coming from a Word that signifies
humble, and dejected.

[f] The next Verse represents the vast power of money: which therefore a
Prince should be sure to have at command; because it commands all other things.
As he finds, when he is in want of it; and is thereby tempted to squeeze his
people unjustly; or to set all things to sale: which is another way of
expounding that Phrase, Money answers all things. I cannot omit here to note,
that it would not be absurd, if this Verse should be connected with v. 17. to
signify the happiness of a Nation, whose Prince taken care that his people
want not provision ( bread and wine in the Language of the Hebrews signifying
all that is necessary for humane life) but especially that the money of the
Nation, whereby all things are purchased, be not exported.

[t] V. 20.] But whatsoever negligence, or profuseness and waste there be; it
should not provoke any wise or good man, to speak contemptuously of his
Sovereign, or of his Ministers: if he consider merely how unsafe it is, to make
such reflections on him. For there are no ears so faithful, no place so secret,
as that they may be trusted with such Words: the ears of Kings, according to
the old Saying, being as long as their arms. That is, they can as easily
discover crimes, as punish them: they have Spies on purpose every where; or men
to ingratiate themselves, will turn Accusers; or loyal persons, may, some way
or other, come by the knowledge of it, and think themselves bound to let their
Sovereign know, who are his Enemies.

Thus most Interpreters, and the most learned understand this Verse; And
therefore I have followed no other Interpretation in my Paraphrase. For thus
that admirable person, S. Bochartus glosses upon these Words (Epist. qua
respond. ad 3. Quaest. p. 37.) The true mind of Solomon is, that Kings do not
want their (...), Emissaries and curious Observers; by whom they learn what is
most secret. Which was the reason that Midas was represented by the Poets with
Asses ears; because he had those that listened and hearkened in all parts of his
Kingdom: and brought him News of every thing, that was but whispered by his
Subjects.

And thus St. Hierom, the simple sense is, that we take care we be not overcome
by anger and fury, to speak evil of our Prince, or detract from him: for he may
some way or other hear it, contrary to our expectation, and make us suffer for
our ungoverned tongue. That 's the meaning, says he, of the last part of the
Verse; which is an Hyperbolical expression, like that, in common speech, when
we say: The Walls that are conscious to what you speak will discover it. Nay,
this very Proverbial Hyperbole is used in good Authors, for a thing very
secret, Unless some Bird saw it. So Aristophanes in his Comedy which has its
Name from Birds.

(...).

None ever set eye upon my Treasure, unless perhaps some Bird.

And Suidas cites this Verse out of the same Poet (which more illustrates the
sense I have given of this Phrase in the Paraphrase.)

(...).

None sees me, unless the Bird that passes by.

But I am not satisfied whether Solomon had not respect to something else; and
intimated that some Prophet might make the discovery: as Elisha did of many
things spoken in the Kings own Bedchamber, 2 Kings VI* 9. The Chaldee
Paraphrase, by that which has Wings, understands the heavenly Ministers: and
so many of the Hebrews: about which, though they talk many fabulous things, yet
the meaning may be, the Angels shall, one way or other, bring it to light, and
give occasion to the discovery. For, as a great man of our own observes (Bish.
Tailor, L. III. Duct. Dub. Chapter 3. Rule 3. n. 3.) the Government of the other
World reaches strangely even unto us; and we speak not a word in vain, but by
the Divine Providence it is disposed to purposes that we understand not. And
therefore it is not safe to speak evil of Magistrates, in our private houses;
lest the Angel that attends us order it so, that it pass into publication. But
as for the King (who is above the rich or mighty) call him not accursed in thy
heart: Which being a thing that can only be perceived by God, who is the
Searcher of the heart; it shows that, as Angels take care of the rich, the
wise, the mighty and noble: so Kings are the peculiar care of God, etc.

And indeed, as the same Bochartus adds, it appears from hence that Solomon
does not deterr us from this sin, by the mere fear of danger; for he lays a
restraint not only on our words, but on our thoughts: which are known only unto
God. And if we may not in thought detract from him, how much less speak a
reproachful word of him; or move rebellion against him.

I shall only add two things more, and conclude this Chapter with a notable
Discourse of Martin Luther: first, that some of the Hebrews who take the Angels
to be here meant, thereby understand the Devil: as our Savior by the Fowls of
the Heaven understands (...), the evil one, XIII. Matthew. 4. But especially
Night-birds, they say (who may seem here to be meant, where he speaks of the
Bedchamber) denote the Devil and his Angels. Whence that Proverb among the
Arabians, Speak where there is no Night-Bird; that is, where no Creature hears.

Secondly, The last words of the Verse, are capable of this sense (if we
distinguish between Bird of the Air, and that which has wings: taking the one
for Angels, and the other for men; who minister to Kings as Angels do to God)
that the Angels will report our blasphemy in Heaven; and some or other will be
found to reveal it, and carry the News of it to the King upon the Earth.
Gregory Neocaesariensis suggests the former part of this: who thus expounds the
Words, Swift and winged Messengers carry all to the only rich and great King;
discharging both a spiritual and rational Ministry.

It will not be unuseful, much less unseasonable, in such an unruly Age as
this, to let the Reader understand how deeply the first Reformers of Religion
laid this Precept to heart; by transcribing some of Luther's Admonitions, in
his Annotations, on this Verse.

The worse and the more malignant, says he, the World is, the more studious
and laborious Solomon teaches us to be, in the doing our Duty. Particularly, in
honoring Magistracy; because it is a Divine Ordinance, and the better part of
the World: by which God manages all things under the Sun. But the ungodly begin
their wickedness, chiefly in the contempt of Magistrates; when they bear how
God blames and reproves them in the holy Scriptures. But it belongs to the
Divine Office to find fault with Magistrates and to rebuke them. And therefore,
though thou hear it, yet do not imitate it. For thou art not God; nor the
Ordainer, no nor the Reformer and Restorer of the Divine Ordinance. But as God
reproves them, so thee also, in the holy Scriptures; that thou may do thy
Duty, and not meddle with what belongs to them. Whereas thou forgetting the
Beam in thy own eye, beginnest to spy the Mote in another man's: correcting thy
Superiors, by whom thou rather art to be corrected. And if thou should
sustain their Office, would offend more than they do, and not do so much
good, as is performed by them. The meaning therefore of Solomon is this; I have
spoken much of Princes, how they undo the World; but do thou reverence them,
notwithstanding that; for they are not an humane Ordinance, but a Divine. Saint
Peter indeed calls the King an humane Creature; because he is assumed from
among men, but his authority is Divine: And though Princes be bad, they are to
be honored because of this Ordinance of God. Why then will thou speak evil of
those, who are vexed with so many and such great cares and labors for thy
peace* if they be good? and if they be bad and foolish, their own impiety is
mischief enough to them, and brings them into sufficient danger. Bear with them
then, and compassionate them; rather than rail upon them, and revile them, etc.

Yes, will some answer; but we may say what we please of their Ministers. Not
so, says the Wise man in this place, Curse not the rich, i. e. men in great
Authority under the King. For (as the same Luther discourses upon the first
Verse of this Chapter) just as we see Flies fall into a Pot of excellent
Ointment, and there dying and corrupting, spoil it all: so when excellent
Counsel is given in the Kingdom, in the Senate, in War; behold there comes some
mischievous Knave or other, and utterly dashes it, so that it has no effect.
But as we are compelled to endure those poisonous Flies; so we must be content
to suffer these pestilent Counselors.

CHAP. XI.
ARGUMENT.
As Obedience to Governors, and patience under ill Government are the means
(he shows in the foregoing Chapters) to preserve peace and quietness; which are
the great blessings of humane life: so in peaceable, quiet and easy times
nothing contributes more to our happy living, than the constant exercise of
Charity, in Works of Mercy; which make us beloved both of God and man. Upon
which therefore the Wise man here insists largely; in the six first Verses of
this Chapter: and then presses men to it by the consideration, that there is no
pleasure like this, while they live; and that as they cannot keep what they
have long, but Death will rob them of all: so they must give an account of what
they have enjoyed; and therefore had best make such an use of it, as will stand
them in stead at that time. This I take to be the sum of this Chapter.

1. CAST thy bread upon the waters: for thou shall find it after many days.

1. NOW, having shown how thou ought to behave thy self toward those above
thee, look down a little upon those below thee; and believe that nothing is
more profitable (though the World think otherways) as well as obliging, than to
be kind and charitable unto all men; but especially, to the poor, miserable
people, though they be not so good, perhaps, as they ought to be; but will
ungratefully forget all thy benefits, and never think of them more; or, at
least, are never likely to make thee any return, no more than if thou did sow
thy Seed on the Sand or in the Sea: let not that discourage thee; for when thou
think not of it, God will requite thee, either in this World, or in the
next; nay, there may come a time, when some of those who have been relieved by
thee, may do thee service. See Annot. [a].

2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what evil
shall be upon the earth.

2. Give therefore unto others some part of the good things, which God has
given thee; and give very liberally, and be not weary neither of well-doing;
but though there be a great many Suitors that solicit thy Charity extend thy
bounty to them, rather above than beneath thy ability: for thou know not how
calamitous the times may shortly be, and then the good thou have done, will
stand thee in greater stead than all the Goods thou enjoyest: which perhaps may
be taken from thee, and leave thee nothing to do good withal; but make thee an
Object of other men's Charity; which no person has greater reason to expect,
than he who, when he had wherewithal, has been kind to others in that
condition. See Annot. [b].

3. If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and if
the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north; in the place where the
tree falls, there it shall be.

3. Look up to the Heavens, and imitate the Clouds; which are not filled with
moisture for themselves; but pour it down freely and plentifully upon the
thirsty Earth; even upon the barren as well as upon the fertile Soil, without
any difference: and look upon the Earth and learn from the Trees to be fruitful
in good Works, while thou art alive; for then thou art dead, none can raise
thee up again to exercise that Charity which now thou neglectest; no more than
a Tree can be made to bear when it is cut down, but which way soever it falls,
whether to a cold or to a warmer Quarter, there it remains for ever, without so
much as Leaves. See Annot. [c].

4. He that observes the wind, shall not sow: and he that regards the
clouds, shall not reap.

4. And do not put off thy Charity till another time; under a pretense that now
the times are hard, or thou shall be better able hereafter, or may find
fitter Objects for it, and do more good with it: For as he that will not sow
till the Wind blow from a favorable Quarter, may let the Seeds time pass over;
and he that will not reap, because he is afraid of every Cloud that threatens
Rain, may lose his Harvest; so they that will do no good, till the times be
just as they would have them, or till they find objects against whom there lies
no exception, will never want reasons to excuse their Duty, and defer it till
they have no opportunity for it. See Annot. [d].

5. As thou know not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do
grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou know not the works
of God, who makes all.

5. Trust God for all such things as those, and do not rely upon thy own
understanding, which comprehends very little of what is before thee; for
instance, whence the Wind comes: what makes it blow and cease; how the Soul
comes into the Body and departs out of it; how the Body it self is formed in
the Womb; by what power; and how it goes to work, hardening some part of the
Matter into Bones, and softning others into Flesh, etc. And therefore much less
art thou able to comprehend the Providence of God, who disposes all things;
and know for instance, whether it will be a dear Year or a cheap; whether thou
and thy Heirs, shall live or die; lose or keep an Estate; particularly, what
strange ways God has to blast, or to bless all thy Designs; making thy Estate
dwindle by saving, and grow wonderfully by giving away bountifully: Which seems
to diminish; but, by means as secret as the growth of a Child in the Womb,
increase and enlarge it. See Annot. [e]

6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand:
for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether
they both shall be alike good.

6. Let nothing therefore discourage thee, from taking all opportunities, to
give thy Alms incessantly; early and late; when thou art young, and when thou
art old; when things smile upon thee, and thou art in a declining condition;
for thou know not which will hit to do the most good unto others, and to
bring the greatest Blessing back upon thy self; or whether all may prove alike
beneficial unto both. See Annot. [f].

7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the sun.

7. Let no live of thy own pleasure, make thee regardless what becomes of other
men: for though, it is true, life is full of delight when we are in a
prosperous estate, and we are entertained with great variety of pleasure, when
we look about us, and behold all the good things, the Sun shows the bounty of
Heaven has provided for us; yet, believe it, there is no satisfaction
comparable to that of having done abundance of good, with that which he bestows
upon us. See Annot. [g].

8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember
the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is vanity.

8. If God therefore should bless a man with an healthful Body and a very long
life, I do not forbid him to take the comfort of it; but advise him rather, (as
I have done often) with a mind free from solicitude and carefulness, to enjoy
all the innocent pleasures it can afford him: only let them be tempered with
these two reflections. First, that as the fairest Sun that ever shone will set,
and the Night follow it; so the most merry life will have an end, and then we
must lie down in our Graves, longer than we have lived, without the least
glimpse of these joys: and secondly, that while we live, nothing which we
expect hereafter can give us more contentment, than what we enjoy at present;
and will slide away also as fast, and leave us altogether unsatisfied, unless
we have done some good with it. See Annot. [h].

9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment.

9. And there is one thing, above all other, which if the most Childish Youth
would consider, and always carry in mind, I might give him full liberty, to be
as jocund and merry as his frolic Age enclines him; to banish melancholy
thoughts; and, while he has the briskest taste of them to invent all manner of
pleasures for his entertainment; denying himself nothing that he desires, and
gratifying all his senses: It is this, that he must give a strict account of
all his actions unto God; who will deal well with him, if he have kept himself
within his Bounds, and enjoyed only lawful pleasures, with thankful
acknowledgments unto Him, but will punish him for all his extravagances, and
forgetfulness of Him, with torments infinitely greater than all his sinful
delights. And this, be it known to thee, whosoever thou art that read this,
is a certain truth. See Annot. [i].

10. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh;
for childhood and youth are vanity.

10. And therefore by the thoughts of this, I advise thee also, to suppress and
banish that fierceness, rage, sadness, fretting and vexation, with all such
like perturbations of mind, unto which, in the heat of thy blood, thou art
subject, when any thing crosses thee (suppose when thou art only reproved for
thy faults) and let no filthy desires, which then are strong, and would plunge
thee in all wickedness, stay with thee: For, if such care as this be not taken
to lay restraints upon him, there is nothing more senseleslly foolish, rash,
inconstant and forward to ruin it self, than Man in his Childish Youth: when
he is in the dawning, as we call it, of his days, and comes first acquainted
with the pleasures of this World. See Annot. [k].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] Charity being the Subject of his Discourse in the first six
Verses of this Chapter (as was observed in the Argument) he begins with the
proper object of it: those who, as our Savior speaks (XIV. Luke 14.) are not
likely to recompense us again. Thus this first Verse (about which there are
various conceits) I think may be most naturally expounded. And it is a very
ancient Exposition, as appears by the Words of Gregory Thaumaturgus; which are
these in English: It is just to communicate unto others, etc. for, though for
the present it may seem to be lost, (and thrown away, as we speak) like the
bread that is cast upon the water; yet, in process of time thy love to Mankind
will appear not to be unprofitable and without fruit. And after the same manner
Greg. Nazianzen in aftertimes (Orat. XIX. page 298.) speaking of the
liberality of his Father to the Poor; says, He proceeded upon this Maxim: That
it is much better, for the sake of those who may be worthy, to give to those
who are unworthy, than for fear of bestowing our Charity upon the unworthy, let
worthy people want it. To which that seems (says he) to belong, which we read
in Solomon [Cast thy bread upon the water] Which is not thrown away and quite
lost, in the account of him that justly estimates things; but is sent thither
where all that we do is laid up; and shall in due season meet us again, though
we think not of it.

And, to strengthen this, it is observed by some, that water, in Scripture
signify, great affliction and misery, XVIII. Psalm. 17. LXVI. 12. And therefore
the sense of the Proverb is not, of sowing in a fertile Ground, by the Rivers;
or in a Soil well watered, from whence men naturally expect a fruitful Crop (as
some expound it) but of sowing (i. e. giving alms) there, from whence we expect
no fruit; no more than if we threw the Seed in a rapid River; in which it is
carried away, no body knows whither, and seems utterly lost.

And so it may be applied also to ungrateful people; as I have touched in the
Paraphrase: and I shall not trouble the Reader with other Expositions, which
may be found in most Commentators; only naming this of Maldonate (which agrees
well enough with that which I have followed) give to the poor, whose miseries
are so great that their faces are all wet and besmeared with tears. And though
there be many of them, be not sparing, if thou art able to receive them; for
waters signify sometime a multitude of people, in the Scripture Language. But
that is the sense of the next Verse; and therefore upon the face of the waters,
is as much as upon those, who will be gone presently, like the Waters of a
River; and never bring any thing back to us, to reward us: if they do, is more
than could be expected.

As for the Word Bread it signifies any benefit, whereby the poor may be
supported: especially all sorts of Food ( 1 Samuel XIV. 24. where it comprehends
honey, and every thing that was edible) more particularly, that Food which is
made of Corn, III. Genesis 19. and from thence signifies Corn it self, of which
Bread is made, XXVIII. Isai. 28. And so St. Hierom here expounds it; agreeable
to what I said above, of sowing seed in the Water.

[b] V. 2.] And as in the first Verse he has respect to the quality of the
persons, unto whom we are to give; so here to the number of them, and the
quantity of our Alms: which is expected perhaps by a great multitude. Yet let
not that damp it (says he) out of a fancy that it will undo us, to relieve
them all: but, if we be able, let us help them; and though more still come when
we have extended our Charity according to our utmost ability, let us rather go
beyond it (as the Apostle says the Macedonian Christians did, 2 Cor. VIII. 3.)
than let miserable Creatures perish. Thus Greg. Nazianzen seems to understand
these Words Seven, yea eight. Seven is a complete number; eight added to it
denotes somethings above that which we account perfection. His Words are these,
that his Father gave not only, (...), out of his superfluity: but (...), out of
his necessaries: according to the prescription of Solomon, Give a portion not
only to seven; but if an eighth came, he was not here sparing: but much more
ready to give, than others are to get. In short, he means give most liberally
(...), as Greg. Thaumaturgus here expresses it, not sparingly, but profusely, I
omit other Glosses upon the Verse; and the Criticism which some make upon the
Word portion: which they think alludes, to what was sent from Feasts unto the
poor, or those that were absent; of which there is no certainty. I will only
note, that here again Solomon contradicts the Vulgar Principle upon which
covetous Wretches move; and directs the quite contrary. They think all is lost,
that is given away in Charity: no such matter, says the Preacher (v. 1.) the
fruit of it will be found hereafter, beyond what can be imagined. O, says the
covetous man again, I know not what will be hereafter: now I have enough, but
in the latter end of my life I may want; and therefore it is best to save
whilst I may. No, says the Preacher, for that very reason, give; because thou
know not what may be hereafter; when that may be taken away from thee, which
now thou will not bestow upon needy people, etc.

[c] V. 3.] In this Verse, he illustrates both the Duty, and the reason of it.
The former by the Clouds, which are a fit Emblem of Charity: the second, by the
Trees; which can bring forth Fruit no longer than they continue joined to their
Root; from which being separated, they bear no more, nor can be fixed to their
Root, as the Clouds may be filled with Water, again. So I have interpreted the
latter part of this Verse: which Grotius understands as if it meant no more
than the foregoing: Do good to men without distinction; like him who, when he
cuts down a Tree, regards not which way it falls. I omit other Interpretations,
and shall only mention Maldonate's Gloss upon this Verse, which is ingenious
enough. He urges us, says he, to do good, while, we live, by two Reasons.
First, From the profit of it, because we shall receive more than we give; like
the Clouds, which receive from the Earth but a thin Vapor; which they return
to it in most copious Showers. The second, From the impossibility of being in a
capacity to do good when we are dead; for then, like a Tree, we must continue
as we are when Death seizes us* and never be restored to our former condition
again. Corranus alone (as far as I can find) expounds the latter part thus, in
his Annotations: A Tree in what place soever it is planted, there abides, and
brings forth Fruit: and so ought we to help others by all manner of means: in
whatsoever place or time we live. And he takes North and South, for all Parts
of the World. If any think fit to apply this, unto the unalterable condition
wherein we must remain in the other World (like a Tree cut down, which if it
fall toward the North, cannot change its positure, and turn to the South) they
cannot follow a fitter Gloss upon the Words, than this of Luther's. If the Lord
find thee in the South; that is, fruitful and rich in good works, it will be
well: but if in the North; that is, barren, of good works, it will be ill with
thee. Howsoever thou art found, so thou shall be judged; and so thou shall
likewise receive.

[d] V. 4.] And then follows here an Admonition to take the first opportunity
of doing good; and not to deferr it because now it may seem unseasonable, and
we fancy it may do better another time. Which the Lord Bacon extends unto all
other things, as well as Alms. There is no greater, or more frequent impediment
of action (says be, in the Conclusion of the First Chapter of the VIIIth. Book
of Advancement of Learning) than an overcurious observation of decency; and of
that other Ceremony, attending on it, which is too scrupulous election of time
and opportunity. For Solomon says excellently, He that observes the Wind,
etc. We must make opportunity, oftener than find it.

And thus that great Prince Xerxes (otherwise not very prudent, speaks very
discreetly in Herodotus (L.VII.) Be not fearful of all things; nor consider
every thing minutely: for if in the considertion of business, thou will weigh
every thing alike, thou shall never be able to do any thing. And thus
Melancthon understands this place, As events are not in our power (which he
takes to be the meaning of v. 3.) so he that will have certain and
circumscribed events (that is, such and such things come to pass) before he
act, will never attempt any thing.

And so a great Divine of our own expounds it; If we will suspend our
resolution, till we can bethink our selves, of something free from all
inconveniences; in most of our deliberations, we shall never resolve upon any
thing at all: God having so tempered things, that every commodity has its
incommodiousness, every convenience some inconvenience attending it; which many
times, all the wit, and industry of man is not able to sever. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermon upon 1 Corinthians. X. 23. p. 245.

Saint Hierom also elegantly accommodates these Words to negligent Pastors; who
will not preach, but when the people are very desirous to hear; and there is a
fair Gale breathing to favor their design. And gives this Advice to us, Do not
say, this is a fit time, that is unprofitable: for we are ignorant, what is the
way, and what is the will of the Spirit, which dispenses all things.

[e] V. 5.] In this Verse he seems to pursue the same Metaphor of the Wind,
which blows uncertainly; and no body knows whence, nor from what causes. And
therefore from our ignorance of that, and indeed of all other things, which we
are here conversant withal; of our own Soul, for instance, (which our
Translators understand by the Word Ruach, Spirit) and of our own Body or of
that vis formatrix, how it goes about its Work, to make this Body of ours in
the Womb, which may possibly be meant by Spirit, XXXIII. Job 4. CIV. Psalm. 30.)
Solomon persuades us not to presume to know how God intends to order the course
of this World, in his overruling Providence; and therefore to do our Duty, and
leave events to Him.

[f] V. 6.] Imitating the Husbandman (with which Metaphor he began this
Discourse, and now concludes it) who not knowing which will prosper, sows both
early Corn and late. So Symmachus understands this Verse, to be an allusion to
those that sow some very forward Seed; which perhaps may hit, when that which
is sown at the ordinary time does not: Or perhaps both may succeed and bring
forth Fruit, to their great enriching. Others take morning and evening, only to
signify all times.

[g] V. 7.] I have continued this Verse with the foregoing; and supposed (what
all Interpreters do in the third and fourth Verses) that the comparison is
imperfect: there being only the (...) (as Hermogenes speaks) the Proposition of
the Sentence, and the (...)(that which answers unto it) left to be made by the
Reader: Which I have supplied from the sense of the whole foregoing Discourse
in this Chapter.

Others think a new Discourse here begins for the Conclusion of the whole Book;
and that after all he had said of happiness, he advises every one to think of
another life, and not expect to find it in this.

Or, as some understand him, his meaning is, Now you have seen, wherein
happiness does not, and wherein it does consist; therefore do not either
imagine there is none at all here in this World, or that it is greater than
really it is: But take a middle course, which I have shown you, and look upon
this life as having pleasure in it, but not absolutely perfect; yet such as our
condition will permit; begun here, and to be completed in another World.

[h] V. 8.] The beginning of this Verse I have expounded according to the
Hebrew, where the Words run thus, as St. Hierom himself translates them, If a
man live many years, let him rejoice in all these things, etc. And the latter
part of the Verse, I have supposed, contains two Motives to moderation in our
present enjoyments, and to make us think of doing some good with them, as the
highest pleasure of all. Because they will have an end, when we can no longer
enjoy them; and because, while we have them, they run away apace, as all that
follows will do; and leave us empty and dissatisfied, unless we have made a
good use of them: upon which we may reflect, when they are gone, with some
pleasure.

[i] V. 9.] To those Motives, he here adds the most considerable thing of all:
which is expounded two ways by Interpreters. Some taking these Words as a
permission, under such restraints as he mentions in the end of the Verse:
others, as ironically and sarcastically (as the Greek Phrase is spoken; by way
of mockage, and bitter scoff. The two first Phrases ( rejoice, and let thy
heart cheer thee) incline to the former way; being commonly used in a good
sense: the two last (walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thy
eyes) unto the other way, being commonly used in a bad. Therefore the scope of
the place, and the coherence must determine it. And as the LXX and St. Hierom
go the first way; so it agrees best, in my opinion, with what went before; and
therefore so I have paraphrased it. And considering that they are two different
Words in the beginning of the Verse, which we translate as if they were the
same (viz. young man, and youth) I have not done amiss, I think but expressed
them more significantly, by these Words, childish youth. And so they are
distinguished in the last Verse; where that Word which here we translate youth,
we more truly translate childhood: which goes before youth.

[k] V. 10.] Here I have followed the judgment of St. Hierom; who under anger
(or grief) comprehends all the perturbations of the mind: and under evil of the
flesh, all the hurtful pleasures of the Body. And accordingly I have expounded
the whole Verse, with respect to the danger Youth is in, by the fiery motions
of both sorts: the former of which incline men to imitate the Wild Beasts; the
other sink them, into the condition of the dullest Brutes.

The word we here translate youth signifies the peep of day, in our Language;
the appearing of the morning: and therefore is to be understood of our entrance
upon the most pleasant time of our life. Which, as well as childhood, is but
vanity; that is, presently vanishes (as some will have it) and will be soon
gone: or rather, Childhood and Youth, signifying all that is done in that Age
of our life; the meaning is, it is an Age of great levity, folly and
indiscretion, etc.

And therefore, as Luther observes, the great care of mankind should be to
season Youth with right Opinions and a good sense of things; and then it is not
to be denied all pleasures, of which it is very desirous; much less shut up
from the very sight of them, for it abbhors solitude. And this is to begin at
the wrong end of Education; which must be applied first to the mind, not to the
Body: And when the Mind is well tinctured, the Body will be easily governed.
That is, neither follow filthy pleasures; nor be carried away with furious
passions, etc. The benefit of which will be unspeakable; for they that live
pleasantly and quietly in Youth, are likely to arrive at and enjoy a
comfortable Old Age.

Some begin the XIIth. Chapter at this Verse, and others begin it with the
foregoing: but I have followed our Translation, and the most Interpreters.

CHAP. XII.
ARGUMENT.
He continues his Advice to young men, (begun in the two last Verses of the
foregoing Chapter) wishing them to season their minds with such an early sense
of God, and of their obligations to Him, that it might govern them in all their
ways; and be a comfort to them in Old Age, which (by a long description of it)
he shows will be a melancholy time at best. After which Discourse, he concludes
the Book, with a brief sum of the scope and design of it; inserting something
concerning the Author, which might dispose the Reader to attend the more
heedfully, unto the conclusion of the whole matter.

1. REmember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days
come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them:

1. THE best Counsel therefore that I can give ever man is this, That he would
awaken, and preserve in mind perpetually, an awful sense of God; unto whom he
is so deeply indebted that he received his very Being from Him; and therefore
let him apply himself faithfully and affectionately to his service, in his most
vigorous Age, as soon as ever he can consider that he is not his own, but
God's, who formed him in his Mothers Womb, took him thence, and brought him up
to be a man: Do not deferr this weighty business, till thou art sick, or all
thy faculties so broken by the infirmities of Old Age, that though it last
several years, yet they shall prove flat and dull, irksom and redious to thee:
and no pleasure at all left in them, but only the remembrance of a
well-spent-life; without which, instead of thanking God, thou will be apt to do
nothing, but complain; or groan under the weight of one evil or other that
falls upon thee. See Annot. [a].

2. While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars be not darkened, nor
the clouds return after the rain:

2. For what joy can a man have, or what misery can he be without (and
therefore what folly is it not to think of God before that time) when the
natural heat and vigor is quite spent, and all the powers and faculties of
Soul and Body in such a languishing condition, that he is altogether unfit for
the Offices of piety; particularly for the acknowledgment of God's benefits,
the very remembrance of which is slipped out of his mind, or he has but a dull
perception of them: being no more sensible of the benefit of the Sun it self,
when it gives the brightest light, than he is of the Moon or the Stars; but the
day is as sad, and as full of pains and heaviness to him, as the night: and
there is no end of them, no intermission; but they succeed one another, as the
Clouds do in a rainy Season, when one is no sooner emptied, but another is
gathered, and ready to discharge it self in Showers. See Annot. [b].

3. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those
that look out of the windows be darkened.

3. Is this a proper time to be alloted to the service of God, when a man
cannot serve himself? his hands being struck with a Palsy, and made unable
either to feed or defend his Body; his feet bending under the weight of it,
having lost their power to support him; his teeth likewise so rotten, or worn
away, or fallen out, that they cannot thew his Meat; and the sight of his eyes,
which were wont to show him things at a great distance, now so failing him,
that he cannot know one man from another, though they stand hard by him. See
Annot. [c.]

4. And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding
is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of
music shall be brought low;

4. Is this the time to gain acceptance with God, when he is despised by men;
and excluded the public Assemblies, because his voice is so low, that no Body
can hear him? Nay, his Lips look as if they were closed, and fall so inward,
that he can but mumble, by reason of the loss of his Teeth, the weakness of his
Lungs, and the defect of other Instruments of Speech: Nor can he recruit
himself as he was wont by rest; for sound sleep departs from his eyes, and he
wakes as early as the Birds, but is not pleased at all with their Songs: his
hearing being so dull and flat, that he is not moved by the best Music in the
World; though he listen and incline his ears unto it, with never so much
diligence. See Annot. [d].

5. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in
the way, and the almond-tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a
burden, and desire shall fail: because man goes to his long home, and the
mourners go about the streets:

5. For joy and all such pleasant passions being fled away, melancholy fear
alone remains; which makes him scarce dare to tread in the Highway, much less,
(his head is so giddy) to go up a Pair of Stairs; nay, he thinks himself unsafe
in the strongest Fortress: Such is the feebleness of Old Age, which looks
venerably by its Gray Hairs, but they are an early sign of approaching death;
and are made contemptible by his crumpled Shoulders, Hips and Back: which as
they are of themselves a sufficient Load, so are relieved and supported by no
bodily pleasures; the very desires of which now fail him: for there is but a
very short step between him and his Grave; unto which if he be carried with the
usual Solemnities, it is all his Friends can do for him. See Annot. [e].

6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.

6. Remember therefore thy Creator, while the noble Faculties of sense and
motion remain entire, and are strong and lively; for the time will come (and
that will be very unfit for this, or indeed any other business) when they will
be totally disabled: the Nerves, for instance, will shrink up and be
dispirited; the Brain it self, and all those precious Vessels wherein it is
contained, be of no use at all unto thee: For the very Fountain of Life, the
Heart, will fail, and the Veins and Arteries no longer carry the Blood round
the Body; but the motion will cease, by the decay of that power, which now
thrusts it forward in a contitinual Circulation. See Annot. [f].

7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it.

7. And then, what remains, but that the Soul and Body being parted, they go to
their several Originals? The Body, though now so fair a Fabric, to the Earth out
of which it was taken (according to that ancient Doom passed upon it, Dust thou
art, and unto dust thou shall return) but the Soul unto God, to be judged by
him, according to what it has done in the Body, since He sent it thither. See
Annot. [g].

8. Vanity of vanities, says the preacher; all is vanity.

8. And if this be the Conclusion of all our labors, I have reason to conclude
this Book as I began it, and listen I beseech you again, to him, who proclaims
nothing to you but what he has proved in this Discourse; that there is no
solid satisfaction to be found in any thing here below; where all things are
both full of care and trouble, as well as uncertain and perishing: and
therefore it is the height of folly, to take great thought for this present
life; and to lay up nothing for the life to come. See Annot. [h].

9. And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people
knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many
proverbs.

9. Perhaps you may still think otherwise; and therefore I have this now to add
(and so shall sum up all I have said) that I am as likely to judge aright, as
another man; being endued with Wisdom from above, by an extraordinary gift of
God (1 Kings III. 12. IV. 30, etc.) whose Goodness also I have imitated, in
communicating my knowledge freely unto others: Nay, (knowing that by sloth or
envy the greatest Wisdom may be lost) the more I understood, the more diligent
I was in informing others; Nor did Divine illuminations make me either neglect
my own Studies, or other men's inventions, but I listened unto all from whom I
might hope to learn any thing; and both weighed what they said, and also made
an exact search into things my self: of which, that not only the present Age,
but Posterity also might reap the benefit, I have gathered together, and aptly
disposed and fitted to all capacities, abundance of excellent pithy Sentences,
for instruction in Wisdom and Virtue (1 Kings IV. 32.) See Annot. [i].

10. The preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was
written was upright, even words of truth.

10. Thus I, that preach these things, have employed my pains, in seeking (with
no less diligence than covetous men do for money) both the most pleasant, and
the most useful, and most certain Knowledge: and having found what I sought, I
may safely affirm that, Nothing is said by me, but what ought to be most
acceptable, being apt to give the greatest contentment and delight: Nothing
written by me, but what I found in the Divine Writings, or is so exactly
agreeable thereunto, that it is a straight and faithful Rule of life: there is
nothing frivolous, or doubtful in them; but they contain the most solid Wisdom,
as sure and true as truth it self. See Annot. [k].

11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of
assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

11. And there is the same power in them (as there is wont to be in all the
acute Sayings of those that are wise and good) to excite and stir up the minds
of slothful men to the practice of Virtue; that there is in a Goad to prick the
dull Ox forward, to draw the Plow: Nor do they only sting and move the mind
for the present; but are apt to stick as fast in the memory, as Nails do when
they are driven into a Board: and to collect also the thoughts, affections, and
resolutions unto one certain end; especially when they are fastened by the
skilful hand of those who rule the Assemblies of God's people; and are ruled
themselves by one and the same supreme Governor, whose Holy Spirit directs
them all. See Annot. [l].

12. And further, by these, my son be admonished: of making many books there
is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

12. Therefore, my Son (or whosoever thou art that shall read these things,
whose happiness I wish as my own) be advised by me, and not only believe these
things, but rest contented with such useful Knowledge; and do not trouble thy
self, either in composing or reading many Books: For all that is needful to
instruct men how to be happy, may be comprised in a few wise Precepts, and if
thou extendest thy desires beyond this, thou may turn over infinite Volumes,
which are increasing continually; and serve only to distract thy mind, and tire
thy spirits, and impair thy health; but yield little profit, after the expense
of a great deal of pains and time. See Annot. [m].

13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

13. Let us draw up all then, that can be said in this matter, into as small a
compass as is possible: If thou would be happy, preserve in thy mind such an
awful sense of God, as to have a greater regard to Him, both as thy Creator and
Governor, and as thy Judge, than to any thing in this World; and, dreading his
displeasure, not only worship Him religiously, but observe all His
Commandments: For, as unto this all men are bound, so in this consists all
their Duty, and their whole happiness; and therefore they ought to make this
their main business, and employ their best endeavors in it. See Annot. [n].

14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

14. As they would with all seriousness, did they but believe and remember,
what is most certainly true, That, though now the wicked and the good sometimes
fare alike, yet, there will be a notorious distinction one day, made between
them; when God (whose knowledge nothing can escape, and out of whose memory
nothing can slip) will pass an exact Sentence upon every thing we do here in
this World, though never so secret and known to none but Himself: and then no
evil thing, though only designed and never actually committed, shall go
unpunished; and no good thing, though only heartily intended for want of power
to accomplish it, shall be unrewarded. See Annot. [o].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] From the consideration of what he had said in the Conclusion of
the foregoing Chapter, that Youth is attended with folly, and folly attended
with destruction (as Greg. Thaumaturgus excellently explains those Words) he
begins this with the most weighty Lesson: which ought to be perpetually
inculcated, and beaten into the mind and memory of young men, viz. That they
would reflect so far as to consider, who gave them their being; and what, upon
that account, they owe unto Him: who as He is the sole Author of all things
that give us any delight; so He is of all the abilities and faculties, which
make us capable to take pleasure in them; and the sole Disposer likewise of all
opportunities, that bring us and those Delights together.

All this may well be comprehended in the Word Creator (if this place be
compared with XL. Isai. 28. XLV. 7.18. LXV. 17, 18.) Which being in the Hebrew
a Word of the Plural Number, some from thence draw the Mystery of the Holy
Trinity: which I cannot certainly, say is here intended, because it is very
ordinary in the Scripture to put the Plural for the Singular; especially when
God is spoken of. Thus when the Israelites had made the golden Calf, they said,
These are thy Gods, O Israel, etc. (so we translate it, XXXII. Exodus 4.) as if
there had been more Gods than one in that Calf. But it should be translated,
This is thy God, O Israel; as appears by what follows, which brought thee out
of the land of Egypt: signifying they worshipped in this Image Him, who had
wrought that great deliverance for them. And thus Jonathan there understands
it; and Theodoret upon 1 Book of Kings, Quest. 10,

More places, like to this, are observed by Bochartus (L. II. de Animal. Sacr.
C. 34. P. 1.) in whom the Learned Reader may find many such Latin Words, that
are only of the Plural, not Singular Number. And I will only mention one
remarkable place, (which he might have added) 1 Samuel XXVIII. 9. where the Woman
says, she saw Gods ascending out of the Earth: and Saul thereupon asks her,
What form is he of? understanding she saw a single person.

But what ever becomes of this, we Christians (to whom this Mystery is now
plainly revealed) ought when we read such places as these, to think of the
obligations we have unto God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
into whose Name we are baptized. And not only to consider such things as are
abovementioned; but to be moved and affected with them (for that is here
included in the Word Remember) according unto their weight and importance.

And to do this betime, the first thing we do; because the days of our youth,
are our best and choicest days (as the Word in the Hebrew signifies; whence in
2 Samuel VI. 1. where David is said to gather all the chosen men, the LXX has
(...), the young men in Israel) in which we are apt to take the greatest
delight in our selves, or in any thing truly delightful: our spirits being then
most fresh, lively and vigorous. So that the measure of our delight, whether in
our selves or in any thing without us, being then truly taken, it would
constrain us unto an equal delight in Him who is the Author of both and unto a
correspondent gratulation for them. Whereas, if we deferr this remembrance till
Old Age come upon us, when life grows a burden, and the wonted delights of it
are either irksome or insipid (unpleasant, or without all taste or relish) our
thankfulness for them will be but faint; our gratulation worthless; our
Devotion cold and lumpish: as Dr. Jackson excellently glosses upon these Words,
B. XI. upon the Creed, C. 33. Which, he had expressed long before, more briefly
in his Treatise of Faith, Chap. 8. p. 125; thus, The Inventory of what we have
received from God in our Creation, should be taken in those days wherein we
most delight; because then the Characters of his Blessings bestowed upon us,
and their true worth, are most fresh and sensible in all our faculties: well
knowing, that if we deferr this Survey till Old Age, in which life it self
becomes a burden, our return of thanks for fruition of it, and the unpleasant
appertinencies, will be but wearyish. And plainer still in his II. Book upon
God 's Attributes, Chapter XI. p. 95. Then the Prints of God's Creative Power, are
most fresh in our Nature; and might transmit a fairer Copy, and truer estimate
of the Creator's Goodness unto Old Age, than Old Age can take any, etc. Which I
have repeated the oftener, in several forms of speech, in hope that one or other
of them may touch the heart of young men, and excite them by frequent
reflection upon the present comforts of health and strength, upon the activity
of their Body, the quickness of their sense and spirit, to ingross them deeply
in their memory; before the evil days come.

So Solomon calls our decrepit Old Age; both because they are void of all
pleasure, as he says in the following Words; and because they are attended
likewise with so many inconveniences and miseries, that it is hard to number
them. But he gives us some account of them, in his admirable Description of
decrepit Age, v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6: which abundantly confirms that speech of Cicero
in his Book de Senecture, that Old Age proves so odious unto most men, ut Onus
se Aetna gravius dicant sustinere, that they complain of a load that lies
heavier than Mount Aetna upon them.

[b] V. 2.] These infirmities he demonstrates to be very great, because
decrepit Age consists in the universal decay of the whole frame of Nature:
Which I take to be the meaning of the Sun, the light, the Moon and Stars, being
darkened. For as in a Body Politic, the extinction or falling down of these
signifies, in the Prophetical Language, the subversion of that frame of
Government (as, to omit abundance of other places, may be seen in what Isaiah
says concerning Egypt, XXXII. 7, 8.) so the darkning of these in the Natural
Body of man, signifies, in my judgment, its total decay and nearness to a
dissolution: the tumbling (as we speak) of an Old Man into his Grave; like a
ruinous old house which can stand no longer; for so the Metaphor is carried on,
v. 3. And then the return of Clouds after the Rain, refers to the dismal
condition a man is in at that time: when one trouble treads upon the heels of
another: which is no sooner gone, but the like, or a new one, comes in its
room. And so the Words may be translated, The Clouds return, and after that the
Rain: that is, there is a succession of misery, of grief, pain, or weakness,
drawing on one another. There are some who apply the darkning of Sun, Moon and
Stars, to the mind of man (as one would think, indeed, he should say something
of that; and all the following description belonging wholly to the Body, we
must find it here or not at all) but still I conceive that he intends only in
general, to signify the failing of the mind in all its faculties and powers;
without a respect to some particular distinct faculty in each of these Words.
But they who think the inward powers are here intended, are not content to rest
in such a general meaning; but will have something in particular signified, by
every one of them. And then they do but guess, which gives me the liberty to
interpose my conjectures also: that by the Sun may be meant the Soul it self;
by the Light, its Understanding; by the Moon, the Will; by the Stars, all the
Nations in the Mind and Memory, with all the affections and passions in the
Will: just as Sun, Moon, and Stars, in Joseph's Dream, signified his Father,
and Mother, and Brethren. And so the sense of this Verse is, the Mind of man
grows feeble in all its powers; the Understanding dimsighted, the Memory
forgetful; the Reason weak and childish (giving such a feeble light, that it
can neither direct our selves nor others) the Will listless in all its desires,
dull about our greatest concerns, wavering and inconstant in all its
resolutions, etc.

But I judge it more reasonable, as I said, to rest in the Interpretation first
mentioned (which I am sure is agreeable to the holy Language in other places)
that hereby is only represented in general, the universal decay of the
faculties of the upper part of man, his Soul. Which sense I have comprehended
together with the other in my Paraphrase: and not neglected this, in which
others acquiesce, that these Words signify the miseries an Old man feels, both
night and day. As for those who hereby understand the dimness of the eyes, it
being expressed afterward, v. 3. I have taken no notice of their sense: But
another there is, which is worth mentioning. For the meaning may be, There is
nothing but darkness: i. e. a most uncomfortable condition; like that, when the
Heavens are clouded day and night (as they were in St. Paul's Voyage, XXVII.
Acts 20.) and when one Cloud has spent it self in the Tempest, another
immediately succeeds it.

[c] V. 3.] As in the foregoing Verse he gave a general description of the
decay of the whole Body (and of the internal faculties of the mind together
therewith) so here he enters into the Particulars. And conceiving the Body to
be like an House or Tabernacle (unto which it is frequently compared, not only
in the Scripture, but all other Authors) he resembles the Shoulders, Arms and
Hands, to the Keepers of the House: because by them we defend our selves from
dangers; administer both Food and Physic; exercise all manner of Arts and
Manufactures (as we call them) as long as they have any strength remaining in
them. Which Old Age takes away, the Nerves, Tendons and Ligaments so flagging,
that these Keepers quiver and shake ( tremble we render it) and grow so useless
that we can no way help our selves or others with them.

And then he compares the Thighs, Legs and Feet, to strong men: they being the
Supporters and Pillars, as it were, of the whole Fabric, which hold it up;
till Old Age quite disables them for this Office, and makes the Knees bend,
under the burden of the Body alone.

The Reason of which follows; in that the Grinders fail, etc. in which Metaphor
he compares the Teeth in the Jaws above and below, to the upper and nether
Millstone. For they by cutting, breaking and chewing of the Meat, prepare it
to be dissolved in the Stomach, and turned into nourishment (as the Corn is
ground between those Stones into Meal, and so prepared for making Bread, and
other such like uses) but in time drop out of their: Sockets; or are broken, so
that they can grind no longer.

And the like decay we find in the sight of the eyes; which he means by those
that look out of the Windows. All those Coats, Humors, and Nerves, that make
up the eyes: which are set in two holes (as the Word is) or hollow places in
the Forehead (like the Windows in the house) and have a round hole also in the
midst of them, called the Pupil of the Eye (like a Casement) through which all
things are transmitted to the inward sense of Seeing. Until the Skins, and the
humors also, grow too thick; and the very Figure of the Eye, as some have
observed, be changed, by the dryness of the Chrystalline humor: and then the
house is darkened. Aristotle in his Problems (Sect. 31. Quaest. 14.) expresses
it thus, in short, (...), etc. when men grow into years, their sight grows
dull, because in the eyes of Old men, the Skin is both hard, and also rugged;
so that their sight is obscured.

[d] V. 4.] this Verse has greater difficulty in it, especially in the
beginning, and the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the
grinding is low. But the LXX suggest an unexceptionable sense of this Passage,
in my Opinion, which is; that they are shut out of all public meetings,
because of the lowness of their voice, which formerly was as loud as a Mill.
And there is little reason to doubt, but by doors are meant the lips (it being
a frequent expression in Scripture) and by the lowness of the sound of
grinding, the lowness of the voice, from the loss of teeth, or the weakness of
respiration; in short, from the defect there is in the Organs of Speech.

Nor do I see why Maldonate's Translation may not be allowed, which is still
more simple (and therefore I have taken notice of it, in my Paraphrase) the
lips are shut without (so (...) may be translated, foris, extrinsecus) that is,
they sink and are compressed; when the voice grows weak and tremulous, because
of those that grind; that is, by the falling of the teeth. Thus he. But it may
more exactly be translated thus, by the falling low of the voice, of which the
teeth are the principal instruments. And the whole, I have sometimes thought,
may not incongruously be translated in this manner: His lips are shut in his
mouth (for the mouth is the street or highway into this house of which Solomon
is speaking) by the falling down of the voice of grinding; i. e. the voice that
is made by grinding the Air, as it were between the teeth, and the roof of the
mouth, etc.

It might be referred to the eating meat, seldom, because of his bad digestion
(the Meat being ground in the Stomach, as in a Mill) if the word voice or sound
would agree to this. Which renders Dr. Smith's Interpretation, very difficult,
in my judgment. Who by doors understands all the inlets and outlets of the
Body; and by streets, the open ways and Passages in the Body; in which the
matter of nourishment is conveyed, and passes, without let or molestation:
and by shutting these doors, the ceasing from their use: and by grinding, the
digestions and concoctions in the Stomach, Bowels, Mesentery, Glandules, etc.
(all which is well enough, though perhaps too Philosophical:) and by the voice
of these concoctions, the natural symptoms, significative of digestions; all
those indications, which demonstrate the work of Nature to proceed aright.
Which seems to me very far fetched, and too great a straining of the Word voice
or sound: however, I have here mentioned it, that they who are pleased with it,
may follow that Interpretation, which is very ingenious.

The next Passage in this Verse is easier; though it is uncertain, whether he
mean that the chirping of the least Bird wakes him; or that he wakes early,
when the Birds do. For tzippor signifies all kind of Birds, great and small;
and may be interpreted of the Cock as well as any other: and the meaning be, He
gets up at the Cock-crowing. This last seems most probable, because being thick
of hearing (as the next Passage signifies) it cannot be supposed, that the
least noise disturbs him. Though I confess the meaning may be that a small
noise wakes him sooner, than Thunder would have done in his young days.

The daughters of Music, if it refer to the Parts of the Body, I take not to
be those Organs of it, which make Music; but which receive it, being made. For
the Hebrews call that the Son of a thing; which is fitted or designed for that
of which it is said to be the Son. Thus an Arrow is called the Son of the Bow
or Quiver, XLI. Isai. 19. III. Lament. 13. and Wheat called the Son of the
Threshing floor, XXI. Isai. 18. and so the Daughters of Music, may be those
parts where Music is entertained. Yet there is one Objection against this,
which lies in the Word all: which cannot properly be applied to the ears;
because there are but two of them: and we never say all the ears, but both the
ears. Which makes some think, that hereby we are rather to understand all sorts
of Music; which are made either by instruments or voice. But to this it may be
answered, that the Word all, refers to the several parts of the ear, in which
the sound is formed: both the winding channels in the outward part; and the
Tympanum, and the three cavities, and as many little bones in the inward part;
together with the auditory nerve it self. All which are manifestly contrived on
purpose, to receive sounds: which are born here, and so may be called their
Daughters: which in Youth are brisk and spritely; but are humbled (as the LXX
translates it) and flat in Old Age.

There is no necessity, I acknowledge, of interpreting this Passage thus
(though it seem most agreeable to the rest of the description) because it may
be translated, the daughters of a song: that is singing women, are not valued
at all, by old men: They account them nothing worth; and would not give, as we
say, a Farthing for them. Old Barzillai confesses this imperfection, 2 Samuel
XIX. 35. Which place Saint Hierom thinks may very well explain this.

[e] V. 5.] And it is attended with a greater, which is the passion of fear:
unto which Old Age is very subject from defect of Spirits; weakness of
imagination, as well as of Bodily Organs; which are unable to resist any
dangers; which Old men also are apt to apprehend greater than they really are.
For as their heads turn giddy, if they ascend to any high place, so they
tremble in the plain way; for fear of a Stone, a Clod, an Hole, any unevenness,
by the rising or depression of the Earth (for so Grotius thinks the Words may
be expounded, though the ancient Interpreters do not favor it, He is afraid to
stumble at the rising or falling of the Earth) or he fears he may be pusht down
by others, if he do not fall of himself; in a word, he knows not what he may
meet withal, and therefore fears.

Or it may be expounded, as Maldonate takes it, He never thinks himself safe,
though he be in an high Fortress. Or, dreads an high Wall, though never so
firm; lest it should fall upon him. There are some that expound the first Words
of this Verse thus, He is afraid of Spirits, and separate Souls: of those
excellent Beings which dwell in the Regions above. That is, he is
superstitious; which I look upon as forced.

The next Part of this Description, which we translate Almond-tree flourish,
most Interpreters take for his head growing hoary, or white, like the Blossoms
of the Almond-tree. Which though it make an Old man look venerably, yet brings
the tidings of approaching Death: and is as certain an indication of it, as the
Almond-trees blossoming is of the Spring; or (as others will have it) of its
speedy production of fruit: For it flowered, they say, in February, and showed
its Fruit in March; and thence had the name of shached in Hebrew; from its
forward blooming, and hasty ripening into Fruit. And, to strengthen this
Interpretation, some have observed that an Almond was anciently called by the
Greeks, (...); that is, the head: from some resemblance which that Fruit has
to it. What that resemblance should be, I do not understand; unless it be in
the Figure of the Brain: which the Scull being removed, appears like the Shell
of the Almond, when the Husk wherein it is enclosed, is peeled away. For thence
Herodianus of Alexandria (as I find in Athenaeus, L. II, Cap. 12.) derives the
common Greek Word (...) for an Almond; because next to the green Rind, (...),
it has, as it were, a great many clefts, and looks as if it were scarified.

I see no apter Interpretation than this, unless it be that which I shall
mention below (when I have explained the rest of this Verse) or we understand
it, as St. Hierom says some did, of the Huckle-bone; which, by the wasting
away of the flesh of the Buttocks, appears, nay thrusts out it self; and makes
their very sitting or lying down uneasy to them. And I find an Arabic Word of
this sound, which signifies a kind of Boat: and may possibly be the Original of
the Latin Word Scapha.

And this would agree well with the next Words, the Grasshopper shall be a
burden: Which seem to be a description of his stooping under the burden of Old
Age; his Shoulders, Hips and Back all bunching out; which is a load great
enough for him, without any other. In short he can scarce bear himself, as
Melancthon expounds it: Which Avenarius thinks is a literal Translation of the
Words, the Grasshopper or Locust shall burden it self; that is, says he, his
gibbous back. Which is better than their Gloss, who make it to signify, he can
scarce bear the weight of a Grasshopper or Locust. The LXX translate it, the
Locust shall be made fat; i. e. e. swell, bunch out, or be burdensome: Which
aptly denotes the knotting of the Joints (like those of the Locust) and the
rising up of the Vertebrae (or any such thing in the Body of man) which make
his back resemble that of a Locust. And so Jo. Forsterus excellently translates
it, ut in curvo incedat dorso, sicut cicada, that he goes crooked in the back,
like a Grasshopper. Luther also had this in his mind (though he did not fully
explain it) when he thus glossed upon these Words: Such an Old man is like a
Locust: for his Bones stick out, and his Body is shrunk up; so that he is a
mere Image of Death.

And then the next signifies no more than this, That the greatest bodily
pleasures fail; and the member that serves those pleasures is relaxed and
flaggs. For the Word haavijonah (which we translate desire) signifies either
the Fruit of a Shrub, which the LXX take to be Capers (though avionoth signify
the Berries of Laurels, Myrtles, and indeed of all the lesser sort of Trees) or
that desire which it is supposed (according to Avicenna) to excite; or that
Knob in us, which something resembles that Fruit.

There is one Interpretation of these three last Clauses which seems to me not
at all constrained, but apt enough (only it does not make them all relate to
the parts of the Body, as the rest do) which is that of de Dieu; from whom
Junius before him did not much differ. It is this, Though the Almondtree
flourish, and the Locust be loadened with fat (i. e. though the pleasures of
the Spring appear and come on apace, making all things else to swell with joy)
it does not invigorate his blood, nor make it rise, to stir up his desire, etc.

The reason is, he is just upon the point of leaving all things here, and going
to his long home. Which signifies either the place to which all men go ( domum
seculi, the house of the whole World, whether all mankind have ever gone, and
must go) or the place from whence he came; as Forsterus expounds domum seculi
sui, his old house, out of which he first came forth (thus we translate the
Word olam, VI. Jer. 16.) or that where they must long abide, even till the
resurrection of the dead.

For their Friends there leave them; and can do nothing more, but mourn for
them: as it follows here, The Mourners go about the Streets. That is, are
preparing for the Funeral; ready to accompany the Hearse: or, they already
bewail him, as a dead Corpse rather than a living man; or, when he is dead, can
only give him a solemn Funeral, and openly bewail him; not only at home, but in
the Streets. For which purpose they sometimes hired Mourning-men, and Women;
who are the Minstrels we read of, IX. Matthew. 23. For Josephus says (L. III. C.
15. of the Wars of the Jews) that when Joppa was taken, and he reported to be
slain, (...) etc. there were many Minstrels hired at Jerusalem, who began to
make lamentations in a doleful tone. But Gierus in his Treatise of the mourning
of the Hebrews (p. 320.) thinks Solomon does not here mean the mourning of
those that accompanied the Corpse to the Grave, nor their walking about in
mourning Apparel; but the sad lamentations, which their grief sometimes moved
them to make, in the very Streets: when they were weary with mourning at home,
or put thereby into an extravagant passion; like that which the Jews supposed
Mary the Sister of Lazarus to fall into, when she rose up hastily and went out
of the house, XI. John 31.

[f] V. 6.] Now we are come to the most difficult Verse of all; in which the
Wise man describes this house as falling down: that is, enumerates the evils,
which immediately forego Death; of which he would have us think frequently,
while the house is in good condition: For those Words Remember thy Creator, St.
Hierom thinks are here again to be repeated; or ever, that is, before Death
seize on thee, and pull down this earthly Tabernacle and lay it in the dust.

First, by loosning the silver cord. Which some fancy signifies all the
humors of the Body; which are, as it were, the Thread of life; which the
Destinies were said to spin out, for a certain time, and then cut off: Others
understand by it, the string of the tongue: and Gaspar Sanctius (upon VII.
Cant. 5.) the Urine, whose Stream, he fancies, resembles a silver Thread, which
is then broken, when it distills by drops; as it frequently does in Old men. But
the best of the Hebrew Writers by this Cord understand the Spinal Marrow (that
is, the Pith of the Backbone) others the Nerves; others the outward Coats of
the Nerves, etc. And there is little reason to doubt, but the Marrow down the
Back, continued from the Brain, as it were, in a String or Cord, unto the very
bottom of it; together with the Nerves arising from it; and the Filaments,
Fibers and Tendons that proceed from them, are the thing here intended. Which
Melancthon saw long ago; the Nerves, says he, and Ligaments are here meant;
which have literally the power of Cords, both to unite and tie together, and
also draw. But no Body, that I know of, has explained this so well as our Dr.
Smith (in his (...)) who has also solved that doubt, why they are expressed in
the Singular Number: because, though there be many of them; yet, they are the
continuation of one and the same thing (the Fibers being nothing else, but the
Nerves divided and dispersed; and the Nerves nothing else but the Marrow in
like manner separated, as so many Arms and Branches of the same Tree) they are
all one in their Original, the Brain; they are all one in their continuation,
for a long space in the Spine; all one in their use, to convey the Animal
Spirits, and to be the Instruments of motion.

This Cord is called Silver, because of its color; being not only white, but
also shinning bright and resplendent; and that when it is taken out of the
Body, after Death. I omit other Reasons.

It is loosned (shrunk up, or contracted, or removed as others translate it)
when it is no longer full of Spirits: and so the Body becomes void of sense and
motion, either in part or in whole.

The second step to a dissolution, is by breaking the golden Bowl: and as the
former related to the Rivulets, as one may say, of sense and motion; so this to
the Fountain: viz. the Head, and all contained in it: The Membranes, for
instance, especially that which the Ancients, from the great esteem and
reverence they had for it, call Pia Matter. Which is that part which deeply
insinuating it self, into all the anfractuous passages of the Brain (as Doctor
Smith speaks) and being firmly annexed thereunto; keeps every part thereof in
its proper place, and due texture: so that whatsoever is performed within the
whole compass of the Brain (whether the making Animal Spirits, their exercise
therein, or their distribution therefrom) is principally done by the help of
this Membrane. Which therefore may well be called gullath; that part of the
Head which is the Spring of all the motion that comes from thence. And so we
translate the Plural of this Word, XV. Josh. 19. and both Forsterus and
Avenarius understand the Singular here.

And it is called golden Bowl (like that IV. Zachar. 2, 3. from whence the Oil
was conveyed by Pipes unto the Lamps) for such Reasons as gave the other the
name of silver Cord. For instance, in respect of the color; not only because
that most precious and deep-coloured Liquor of life, is abundantly contained in
the Vessels of this Membrance; but chiefly because the Membrane it self is
somewhat of a yellowish color; and tends more toward that of Gold, than any
other part whatsoever does. But especially, in respect of its excellency and
universal use: for it being the instrument that does depurate the best of
Blood, clarifies and exalts the Vital Spirits, and so prepares them for
animality (as they speak) to what should it be likened, but to that most
perfect, best-concocted, and most exalted Mineral of Gold?

Now the breaking of this Bowl is its losing its use; not being able to retain
its Liquors (as a Bowl is useless when it is broken) or as Dr. Smith explains
it; in the extremity of extreme Old Age, it can no longer continue its
continuity; but by reason either of its natural dryness, shriveling into it
self, or of preternatural moisture, imbibing excrementitious humors, till it
be over-full; it oft-times snaps asunder, and so recurrs ( i. e. runs back, as
the Hebrew Word signifies) into it self; from whence the Brain must necessarily
subside, and all the Part serving unto Animal motion be suddenly and
irrecoverably dashed in pieces. So Avenarius judiciously translates this
Passage, That yellow Membrane which contains the Brain, be trodden down.

The third step is, the breaking of the Pitcher at the Fountain. Which is
variously interpreted; some; understanding hereby, the inability of the Bladder
to retain the Urine; others by Fountain understand the Liver, and by the
Pitcher, the Bladder of Gall; or the Veins; which is the most common Opinion.
But Dr. Smith rather takes it for the heart: which is indeed the Fountain of
Life; and has two distinct Cavities, the right and the left: out of which
proceed those Veins and those Arteries; which carry the Blood through the whole
Body, and bring it back again to the heart, in a perpetual Circulation.

And if by Pitcher we understand the Veins, which are the receptacle of the
Blood (and the Hebrew Word signifies any containing Vessel, particularly the
Widows Barrel in which was her Meal, 1 King. XVII. 14, 16. as well as a Barrel
of Water in the next Chapter XVIII. 33.) then by the Fountain must be
peculiarly understood the right Ventricle of the heart; which is the Original
from whence the Veins have their rise. For so the Hebrew Word signifies, not
only a Fountain, but a Spring; from which Waters bubble up and burst forth (as
we translate it, XXXV. Isai. 7. XLIX. 10.) in a running Stream: and therefore
is so to be translated here, the Spring or Original, viz. of the Veins, which
proceed from thence. Which induced Commentators to take the Fountain here for
the Liver: which they would not have done, had they understood, as we do now,
that the Veins do not arise from thence, as their first Original; but from the
right Ventricle of the Heart. And they are spoken of in the Singular Number (as
the Nerves were before) because they are all of one and the same nature,
original and use.

Now the breaking of this Pitcher into shivers (as the Hebrew Word signifies)
is the utter failing of the Veins; their ceasing quite from their natural
action and use. When they can no longer carry back, nor conveniently convey
unto the heart that Liquor, which they properly contain: but the little Blood
which remains in the cold Body of man, near his end is congealed, and stagnates
in his Veins.

And so I proceed to the last thing, the Wheel broken at the Cistern. Where by
the Wheel some understand the Lungs; which, by their continual motion, do
thrust out the Breath from them, and draw it in again to them: resembling the
Wheel of a Well, now drawing up the Bucket to it self; anon letting it down
again into the Well. Melancthon, by Cistern understanding the Stomach (the Word
signifying, says he, a profound Cavity) takes the Wheel for the Guts adjoining
thereunto: which are wrapped about one another, in a kind of Circular form; and
make the Mesentery look like a Wheel. Which Grotius seems also to have had in
his mind. But, taking it for granted that a Wheel, being an Instrument of
Circulation, is the Hieroglyphick of something that goes, and makes, a round in
us, I think Dr. Smith's conjecture is most probable; that hereby is meant the
great Artery, with all its Branches: which is the great instrument of rotation
or circulation in the Body of man; and so evidently thrusts the Blood forward,
that we perceive its Pulses, forcing the Blood along its Cavity, in the Wrists,
the Temples, and other Parts of the Body. Without which Instrument to compel
it, the Blood that naturally tends home to the heart, would go no further.

And then the Cistern from whence this Wheel forces the Liquor, and conveys it
through all the Parts, is the left Ventricle of the Heart: to which this great
Artery is annexed, and from whence it arises. For a Cistern is a Vessel made
on purpose to receive a due proportion of Water, and to keep it till the time
of use; and then conveniently to pass it into Vessels that are prepared to
receive it from thence. And such is the left Ventricle of the Heart; which in
its Diastole, as they call it, receives the Blood that is brought into it from
the Lungs: and then, keeping it there a little, does in its Systole pass due
proportions thereof, into the great Artery, to be dispensed as was said before.
And, for this end, there are little Valves or Falling doors placed, at the
entrance and at the going out of this Cistern; which are like Cocks to let in,
and to let out; and, by their opening or shutting, give convenient passage, or
stoppage to the Liquor; which continually runs that way.

And so the breaking or shaking in pieces (as Forsterus translates the Word) of
this Wheel, is the ceasing of the Pulse so he in another place translates it,
trodden down, i. e. suppressed by the decay of the instruments of Pulsations;
which can no longer perform that work. Which being absolutely necessary for the
preservation of life, the ceasing of it is death.

[g] V. 7.] And so the Body, made of a mouldering substance, being no longer a
fit habitation for the Spirit (and therefore deserted by it) which held the
parts of it together, shall crumble again into the Earth, out of which it
originally came: according to that Sentence passed upon Adam in the beginning,
Dust thou art and unto dust shall thou return, III. Genesis 19. This Body was no
better in its first Principles: and though now we are very fond of it, as if it
were some goodly thing; yet, when the Spirit leaves it, it will appear to be
indeed but Dust.

But the Spirit, the nobler part of man, being of an higher Original, shall
return to God, who sent it into the Body; to be disposed of by Him, according
to the Sentence that he should pass upon it. For the Chaldee Paraphrase's
Explication of the latter part of this Verse is very apposite, It shall return,
that it may stand in judgment before God. For Elohim (the Word here for God) in
the Hebrew Language signifies a Judge. As in the place abovementioned, 1 Samuel
XXVIII. 9. There is a Sentence not much unlike to this, I have observed in
Plutarch's Consolatory Discourse to Apollonius upon the death of his Son: where
he alleges, amongst a great many other, this Saying of Epicharmus, (...).

[h] V. 8.] And now, having thus demonstrated his first Proposition, he
elegantly repeats the Exordium or entrance of his Book, as is here observed by
St. Hierom, whose Words are so significant, that I cannot but translate them;
as an excellent Gloss upon this Verse: For since all the labor of mortal man (
of which Solomon has disputed in this whole Book) amounts to this, That the
Dust returns to its Earth, and the Soul returns thither from whence it was
taken: it is an excess of vanity to labor for this world; and to gather
nothing for the future: where he is to live for ever, and to be judged
according to his behavior here.

This only may be added, That here he enters upon the Conclusion of his
Discourse; and divides it into two Parts, as he had done the foregoing Book.
First, He sums up what he had said in the six first Chapters, concerning the
false ways men take to happiness, in this Verse: which he backs by several
serious Considerations, in those that fol ow, unto Verse 13. Where secondly he
sums up what he has said from Chap. VII. to this place, concerning the true
way to happiness; which lies only in a due regard to God and his Commandments.

[i] V. 9.] The first Word of this Verse is variously translated: and the whole
Verse applied by Interpreters, either to confirm what was said before,
concerning the false methods men take to happiness (as if he had said, I have
done when I have told you, that you may believe me; who am sufficiently able to
inform you, and not think to meet with better information, from other men's
Writings, or from your own experience) or as an introduction to what he intends
to say, ver 13, 14. concerning the right method to be happy. Which he prepares
the Reader to attend unto, and receive into his mind; first, by asserting his
own great Authority in this Verse (who the wiser he was, the more desirous he
was both to teach, and to learn) And then, the weighty Doctrine which he
taught, v. 10. And the great usefulness of it, v. 11. The like to which they
would find no where else, v. 12. It is not very material which of these ways we
take; but I have had respect to both, in my Paraphrase: where I have expressed
the sense so fully, that I cannot think fit to enlarge any further upon this
Verse. But only note, that Luther, and he alone I think, expounds the first
Words thus (not absurdly, nor disagreeing with the Hebrew Text) There remained
nothing to the Preacher, but that he was wise, etc. He understood and taught
aright, and took a great deal of pains; which was a great satisfaction to
himself) but he saw little or no success of it in others, who would not be
governed by his Advice, etc.

[k] V. 10.] This Verse runs thus, word for word, in the Hebrew, The Preacher
carefully sought to meet with desirable words; and the writing of uprightness;
and the words of truth. Where writing may refer both to what he read in others,
whether Divine or Humane Authors; and to what he wrote himself (and so I have
expounded it in the Paraphrase) which he commends from three Heads, pleasure,
or delight; usefulness, and certainty.

Some fancy that Solomon wrote a Book called Catub Jascher (the Writing of
Uprightness) or Jascher dibre emeth (the upright Words of Truth) of which, as
there is no certainty, so I see no probable grounds to assert it. Only we know
he wrote a great many more Books than we have, 1 King. IV. 32, 33. 2 Chronicles.
XXXV. 4. And see Josephus L. VIII. Antiq. C. 2.

[l] V. 11.] Some connect this with the foregoing Verse in this manner, The
Preacher sought to find out the words of the Wise, etc. And so the Words run
exactly in the Hebrew. But we may take this Verse by it self, supplying the
Word are, as we do in our Translation; and look upon it as a commendation of
these wise Words: which does not in the least alter the sense. I have had
respect to both; and comprehended also, in my Paraphrase, two of the
Interpretations, which one difficult Phrase is capable of, viz. Masters of the
Assemblies.

Which may be translated diverse ways, more literally out of the Hebrew than we
do; who add the Word by before them, which is not in the Original. For the last
Words, which we translate Masters of Assemblies, may be attributed to Nails, in
this manner: As Nails fastened, whereby things are joined together, ( Nails
being the Instruments of gathering or bringing those things together, which
were separate) or thus, retaining the Words of our Translation, the Masters of
Assemblies are as fixed Nails: or the Masters of Collections, such judicious
Authors as make excellent Collections of Apophthegms and smart Sayings, Stick
in the Mind as Nails do in Planks. Or the Principal, the choice Collections (
viz. of Wise men, mentioned in the beginning of the Verse) are as, etc. or it
may, in the same sense, be connected (not with Nails, but) with the Words
following: the Masters or Authors that collect wise and pithy Sayings, have
their Gifts from one and the same Shepherd.

So ungrounded is the fancy of Grotius; who from hence conjectures, that there
were several persons appointed by Zerobbabel (whom he takes for this one
Pastor) to collect the Sentences of this Book, and put them out under the name
of Solomon. Who himself may rather be thought to be this one Pastor or King:
who employed (if we interpret the Words this way) many persons to make
Collections: of which he afterward made use as he saw cause.

This seems to be certain, that he here gives the reason of this concise and
sententious way of Writing: because such acute Sayings, not only stir up and
quicken slothful minds for the present (as a Goad stimulates the dull Ox to
labor) but penetrate deep and stick fast in the memory; collecting also the
thoughts, affections and resolutions, to one certain Point or Scope; and
gathering together a great deal of sense into a few Words. As those Words baale
a syppoth, Masters of Assemblies, or Authors of Collections may, I have
sometimes thought, be understood. Such a Collector was that Great Man Julius
Caesar; who gathered a Book of Apoththegms; and showed by that, he thought it
more honorable unto him, if he changed himself, as it were, into Tables and
Codicils, in which the prudent and grave Sayings of others were registered; than
to have his own Words hallowed like Oracles, as some vain Princes, corrupted by
flattery, have affected. Though diverse of his own Speeches, as the Lord Bacon
observes (L. I. de Augm. Scient. C. 7.) are truly such as those which Solomon
here describes, full of vigor and efficacy: insomuch, that by one word alone
he appeased a mutiny in his Army.

But, after all that may be said on this Subject, since I find not only the
Vulgar, but the LXX making out the sense by adding the Word per and (...) (as
we do the Word by in our Translation) before Masters of Assemblies; I have in
the Paraphrase followed that Interpretation also.

[m] V. 12.] And in this Verse have adhered to the same Translation, which
understands the first Words, as if he had said: Beyond these things do not
trouble thy self. For so they may be translated exactly, and what is above, or
more than them (that is, the the words of the wise, beforementioned) my Son, be
warned, or be enlightened: observe these well, and trouble thy self no further.
Be content with a few good Precepts of the Wise; and do not involve thy self in
many Books. For what is necessary may be learnt without much labor, out of a
short Book: if men will be wiser than they need they will but trouble
themselves to no purpose. There being no certainty of most things; no
satisfaction when we go beyond the known and acknowledged Principle, and
Precepts of Virtue: but what one man asserts, another confutes; and when we
think we have written excellently, another Writer starts up and discovers
abundance of errors; and so Volumes are multiplied without end: and we are led
into long disquisitions, without any satisfaction to the mind, but with much
weariness to the Body, and great loss of precious time; which had better be
spent in digesting and practicing, such short, useful, and necessary
Instructions as these.

He does not absolutely condemn many Books, for there are not a few of the
Divine Writings; and about the same thing: but Books about needless things; and
that dilate too much upon things necessary; rather tiring, than instructing.
And he condemns the levity of those that are always reading, but never
meditating: running over such a Book as this presently, and then going to
another, not so profitable; and never returning to this again.

So I take it in short, Content thy self with this Book, and such like; and do
not turn over many Authors, to learn how to be happy. For goodness and truth
are included in certain Bounds; but wickedness and lies, sine fine sunt, are
without end, as St. Hierome here notes. Who observes also, that perhaps he
advises us, to study brevity; and to mind the sense more than the words:
directly contrary to the Philosophers and Doctors of the World, who to assert
their false Opinions, use abundance and great variety of Words; but the Divine
Scripture, brevi Circulo coarctata est, is confined to a small Circle; and as
much contracted in Words, as it is dilated in sense.

The Hebrew Word bahag, which we translate study, Aben Ezra says, in the
neighboring Languages, signifies reading; and so we translate it in the Margin.

[n] V. 13.] To teach us to contract our labors into as small a compass as we
can, he sums up, in a few Words, the sense of his whole Discourse in this
Book; which he calls the conclusion or end of the matter; of all that can be
said on this Subject: the whole sense of the Sermon, succinctly delivered; unto
which therefore every one should confine his endeavors. It is this, to work
his Soul unto such a due regard of the Divine Majesty (standing in awe of him
as his Lord, Overseer and Judge) that he take care to observe all his
Commandments: without which all Religion is vain and fruitless.

And these two things (the fear of God (or devotion) and obedience) he commends
from two Arguments. The first of which is in this Verse; that they are things,
which concern all Mankind, one as well as another; of which if they be careful,
they have done enough to make themselves immortally happy.

For those Words, this is the whole, or the all of man, may be expounded four
several ways: either this is all the duty of man, or the duty of all men; or
the whole happiness of all men; or their whole business; unto which therefore
they should devote their whole selves; that is, all their strength. For
according as St. Hierom understands it, to this Man was born: that he
understanding God is his Creator, should worship him with fear, and honor and
observance of his Commands.

And the fear of God being implanted in our minds, we shall not fail to worship
Him, and call upon Him, and expect all good things from Him, and give Him
thanks for them: And, as the best expression of our thankfulness, keep his
Commandments, and be obedient to all his Precepts: both in subduing our sinful
Appetites and Passions, and in exercising Charity toward our Neighbors. Which
will make us true in word and deed; faithful in all our Contracts; liberal to
the Poor; observant of our Governors; in short, make us observe all the
directions of this Book, in order to our happiness.

[o] V. 14.] Here is the second Argument, why we should seriously intend these
things; because the Lord and Judge of the World, will one day call us to an
account for what we do here; and pass an impartial Sentence upon every action
of our life, even against every Secret (as some expound these Words al col
alam) or upon all secret as well as open actions. Which are all known to Him,
though now He seem to take no notice of them; and shall then not only be
brought to light, but with an apparent distinction between good and evil: the
difference of which, shall be certainly and notoriously manifested; by the
severe punishment of the one, and the bountiful remuneration of the other.

I will imitate therefore (says Melancthon) the example of Solomon; and in the
Conclusion recite the sum of this Book. He intended to assert Divine
Providence; and to refute the Objections against it. which are these; There are
great confusions in humane life; a vast multitude of ungodly men, and but few
that acknowledge, and fear God: and, which is worse, the wicked flourish in
honor and riches; but the pious are afflicted, and ofttimes killed by the
worst of men, etc. therefore all things seem to be carried by Chance. Unto
which Solomon answers: Though for the most part, such be the confusion of things,
yet be thou ruled by God's Word; and hold the Opinion of his Providence with a
firm Faith. Do not fall from God, because of these Scandals; nor cast away his
fear, or thy confidence in Him; nor desert thy vocation: but oppose these two
things to these confusions; There will come a Judgment, when God will take away
these confusions and make an exact distinction: for the wicked shall be thrown
into everlasting punishment; but it shall be well for ever with the righteous.
And in this life also, God moderates these confusions: for he punishes heinous
wickedness; supports Government, preserves Governors, and Order, and Polities
in the World. Nay, this is a testimony of God's presence, that when the
infirmity of humane Nature is so great, and so many are no better than mad and
furious; yet God preserves his Church: and, I may add, we have such good Books
as these for our direction into Truth, and encouragement in Piety.

THE END.
THE SONG OF SOLOMON PARAPHRASED. WITH ANNOTATIONS.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Luke Meredith at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCC.

THE PREFACE.
THat this Book was composed by SOLOMON is no more doubted, than that he was
the Author of the two foregoing.

And that it was always looked upon as an Holy Book, treating of some Spiritual
and Divine matter, appears from its being placed among the rest of that kind.
Nor has it been doubted of by any considerable number of men, either among
Jews or Christians, but only by a few singular persons; who ought (as Theodoret
speaks in his Preface to this Book) to have looked upon those blessed Fathers,
who placing this Song among the Divine Writings, took it to be fit for the uses
of the Church, as men of greater judgment, and more spiritual than themselves.
And they ought likewise to have considered (as he adds) that we have, in
effect, the testimony of the Holy Ghost it self, for its. Divine Authority:
Ezra, a man excelling in Virtue and full of the Holy Spirit, having thought
this worthy of a room among those Sacred Volumes, which he gathered together,
after their return from the Captivity of Babylon.

And accordingly, a great many holy men have illustrated it (as he further
notes) with their Commentaries and Interpretations, or have adorned their
Writings with its Sentences: such as Eusebius, Origin, Cyprian, (who wore the
Crown of Martyrdom) (...), and others that were more ancient than these, and
nearer to the times of the Apostles.

It is unnecessary to mention those that followed after in future times, who
all took this for a spiritual Book: let us only consider, whether these things
being so, it be reasonable for us, to despise so many and such great persons,
nay the Holy Spirit it self, and to follow our own private Opinions; nor
harkening to him that said, The thoughts of mortal man are vain, and our
devices are but uncertain, IX. Wisd. 14. or rather of St. Paul, I. Romans 21.
They became vain in their imagination, and their foolish heart was darkened.

II. Nor does it seem hard, either to find out what that spiritual matter is,
of which the Wise man here treats (especially, since all Christian Writers have
from the beginning applied this Song to Christ and his Church) or to give an
account of the rise and Original of such sublime contemplations: which I take
to be this.

The great Prophet David having plainly foretold that a far more glorious King
than his Son Solomon, should one day arise (as we read in the Song he made at
his Marriage, Psalm. XLV.) and likewise more expressly prophesied of his
Divinity, Royal Majesty, Priesthood, etc. (Psalm. CX.) and again resumed this
Argument, just before his death, when he caused his Son Solomon to be crowned
and to sit upon his Throne (Psalm. LXXII.) it stirred up the longing desires of
Solomon after the coming of this most illustrious Prince; and made him study to
have, at least, as clear a sight of Him, as was possible to be attained, afar
off. And that he might stir up the same desire in the whole Nation, after his
appearing; he cast his Meditations on this Subject into a Song, in the form of
a Pastoral Eclogue: In which several persons being introduced who speak their
Parts, it may be called a Dramatick Poem. And so it is styled by S. Greg.
Nazianzen, in his XXXI. Oration; where he quotes a passage, (...) (as his Words
are P. 503. Edit. Paris.
) out of this Bridal Interlude and Song. For a Drama, as the Greeks teach us,
consists in the change of persons: some of which enter; others come to them;
others withdraw; till the whole Work be completed, by this shifting and
alteration of the Persons.

Now the Persons which compose this Song, are the Bridegroom, the Bride, the
Virgins attending on her, and the Youths attending on him: to whom some add the
Sister of the Spouse mentioned Chap. VIII; and the Watchmen and Daughters of
Jerusalem, who are introduced in their turns. For example, first, the Bride,
and her Companions, comes in and says, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, etc. Then the Bridegroom appears, and says, v. 8. If thou know not,
O thou fairest, etc. After which he seems to withdraw himself, leaving the
Bride and her Companions alone upon the Stage (while he sits at his repast, v.
12.) who thus speak to her, We will make the Borders of Gold, etc. And then she
speaks again, v. 13. and he returns and speaks, v. 15.

How many Parts there are in this Drama, is not agreed. Some make ten; others
make but seven Colloquies, or interlocutory passages, in this sacred Dialogue,
as they call it. About which I do not think fit to dispute; but shall take
notice of as many as I can observe, in the Argument or Annotations upon each
Chapter.

As for the Phrase, it is wholly Allegorical, in expressions borrowed chiefly
from the Fields and Woods and Gardens: as I shall show in their proper places,
when we meet with them. And such were the fittest that could be found,
supposing he would use Poetical Words; to set forth the ardent desire he had,
and would excite in others (as I said before) to have a sight of that great
Shepherd of the Sheep, who would make all the World happy.

III. And none need wonder that he speaks wholly of this glorious King; for so
does his Father David in the CXth. Psalm, which can be applied to no other
person whatsoever: and so does the Prophet Isaiah in aftertimes, in his LIII.
Chapter. Which though some have endeavored to accommodate first to another
person, yet they have failed in their attempt; and never could find any in whom
it was so literally fulfilled as in our Blessed Savior. Who alone was there
intended; as He seems to me to be here also, in this present Song of Solomon's.

Where it need not seem strange neither to any one, that he is compared to a
Bridegroom, and the Church to a Bride, who does but reflect upon the XLV Psalm;
and observe how Solomon does only follow the Metaphor, wherein his Father David
had represented this Mystery: and observe withal, that it is the common
Language of the Prophets, who compare Jerusalem and Zion (under which names is
comprehended the whole Church of the Jews) to a Virgin, called frequently the
Virgin-Daughter of Sion, etc. whom God had espoused unto himself.

IV. But, for the fuller Explication of this, it may be fit to note, that the
profoundest of the Hebrew Divines, whom they now call Cabbalists, having such a
Notion as this among them, that sensible things are but an imitation of things
above, conceived from thence, that there was (for instance) an Original pattern
of that love and union, which is between a Man and his Wife here in this World
This they expressed by the kindness of Tipheret to Malcuth: which are the Names
they give unto the invisible Bridegroom and Bride in the upper World. And this
Tipheret (i.e. Beauty or Ornament) they call also by the Name of the Adam on
high, and the Great Adam, in opposition to the terrestrial or little Adam here
below. As Malcuth (i. e. Kingdom) they call also by the name of Cheneseth
Israel, i. e. Congregation of Israel; who is united, they say, to that
Celestial Adam as Eve was to the terrestrial. Which heavenly Adam or Tipheret
they call likewise the Sun, and Malcuth the Moon: and make the former an active
Principle, the latter a passive; or, as their Phrase is, Tipheret is but the
Masculine power which influences Malcuth; who is but the recipient of those
influences. So that, in sum, they seem to say the same that the Apostle Saint
Paul does, when he tells us, that Marriage is a great Mystery; but he speaks
concerning Christ and his Church, V. Ephesians. 32. For the Marriage of Tipheret
and Malcuth (or Cheneseth Israel) is the Marriage of Christ, the Lord, from
Heaven, with his Spouse the Church, which is the whole Congregation of
Christian people. Which was represented in the conjunction of Adam and Eve, and
of all other men and women descended from them, when they are joined together
in holy Matrimony; insomuch that those Divines, called Cabbalists, have formed
this Maxim about this matter; that wheresoever in the Scripture we read of the
love of Man and Wife, there is mystically designed the conjunction of Tipheret
and Cheneseth Israel.

Now if this Notion (of which the Learned Dr. Cudworth has long ago wrote a
peculiar Discourse) was so ancient among those Doctors, that they had it before
the times of Christ; it gives the plainest account, why John the Baptist uses
the word Christ and Bridegroom, as if they were in a manner synonymous, and of
the same import, III. Joh. 28, 29. and why Christ himself compares the whole
business of his heavenly Kingdom (called by the people in St. Mark XI. 10. the
Kingdom of our Father David) to a Marriage, or Marriage Feast, which a King
made for his Son, Matthew. XXII. 2, etc.

V. And this is one Argument of its being a very ancient Notion among them,
that Idolatry and false Worship in the Church, is constantly expressed in the
Scriptures, under the name of spiritual fornication, and going a whoring from
God: whom therefore the Church was to look upon as her Husband. And so he
taught the Children of Israel to do, by using this form of Speech throughout
the whole Prophetical Writings, LIVE. Isai. 5. LXII. 4, 5. III. Jerem. 4.20.
XXXI. 32. II. Hosea 2, 7. and many other places. Nay, the very Words of the
Apostle to the Ephesians, seem to suppose some such mystical sense, which was
current in that Nation, of those Words of Adam the first man, II. Genes. 23,
24. This now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, etc. therefore shall a
man leave his father and mother and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall
be one flesh. Which the Apostle takes, as if they had been spoken of Christ,
and his love to his Church, as any one may see that will read V. Ephesians. 29, 30,
31, 32. For these are not in the account of the Cabbalists, two distinct
senses: but one and the same sense, different only as the matter and the form
of the same thing: which form, say they, lies latent under the matter, whereby
we are led unto it, as the main thing comprehended in it.

Thus Archangelus Burgonovensis speaks, in his Preface to the Explication of
some select Aphorisms of those Divines, gathered by Mirandula, who observes
also (p. 91. of his Book) that as immediately after the Fabric of the World
was reared, Matrimony followed, as the Emblem of God's great love to those that
should believe on Him; so this World shall end in the Sacrament of Marriage:
St. John shutting up all the Mysteries of the holy Scripture in the Revelation,
with these Words, Let us be glad and rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his Wife has made her self ready, XIX. Rev. 7. Which, if it be the
voice of the heavenly Host, agrees with what the Hebrew Doctors say (in Perke
Elieser, Cap. 12.) of the Marriage of Adam and Eve: that the Angels rejoiced at
it, and with music and dancing attended upon the Wedding.

VI. All which things put together show how naturally the thoughts of David
were led, at Solomon's Marriage, to sing concerning Christ and his Church; and
the thoughts of Solomon afterward to sing more largely of the wonderful love of
the same heavenly Bridegroom, in this Song of Songs; that is, most excellent
Song. For so it may be truly called both in regard of its Subject matter; and
in regard of the manner of its composure: this Parabolical way of writing, by
Figures and Similitudes, being in many regards (as the forenamed Cabbalistical
Doctors discourse) the best of all others. First, because it is taken from
things sensible, by which both learned men and ignorant may be instructed.
Secondly, because such Narrations very easily imprint themselves on the mind: a
Parable (say they) being instead of an artificial Memory. And thirdly, because
all our knowledge has its rise from sense, and therefore symbolizes much with
sensible Parables. And fourthly, it is very delightful to contemplate how the
Parable agrees with the spiritual things, which are thereby figured. Unto which
(says that Archangelus beforementioned) the Doctrine of St. Paul is
conformable, when he says, The invisible things of God from the creation of
the World, are seen by those that are made, And lastly, what is there more
evident, than that all visible things declare God to be love? whose praise
Solomon celebrates in this Song. For by love, (as the same Author discourses
out of Boethius and others) the Heavens are joined together, and the Elements
agree in composition, Animals cohabit, Cities are preserved, and all Kingdoms
supported and replenished. Which made Pherecydes Syrus say, that God was
transformed into love, before He made the World. And because God created all
things in love, he also embraces all things with the same love; and would have
us to love; which is the sum of all that He exacts of us: that being knit
together by mutual love, we may in conclusion be united with Him in love; that
so all things may be one, as they were in the beginning.

Of this love, Solomon (say they) treats throughout this whole Song; nay, it is
the Subject of all the Book of God. According to that of David, LXII. Psalm. 11,
12. God has spoken once, viz. to the whole people of Israel, when he gave the
Law at Mount Sinai; yea, twice have I heard this, from the Prophets, that is,
who say the same with the Law, that power belongs to God, also unto thee, O
Lord, belongs mercy: for thou renderest to every man according to his work.
Which they expound in this manner, Thou can send good or evil influences upon
us; by the union of Tipheret and Malcuth, a good influence; by their
separation, a bad. For when Israel does well, then it receives good influences
from above; that is, from Tipheret: for such is the order (says one of their
Aphorisms) which is constituted in the Archetypal World, that all good
influences proceed from Tipheret. And then these two Principles are united,
when we observe God's Precepts; but when we transgress the Law, the one is
separated from the other; that is, Tipheret does not send influences upon
Malcuth for our good; but another Principle interposes and sends anxiety and
trouble. Now Love is the union of these two Principles: the love of Man and
Wife signifying in Scripture the Union of Israel and Tipheret: which Union
Hosea speaks of, when he says, II. 19, 20. I will betroth me unto thee for
ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in loving kindness, and in mercies: I will even betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.

Thus that sort of Divines discourse; very agreeably to the sense of this Book.
Which represents the Heavenly Bridegroom, appearing in the greatest Beauty; and
sometimes in most familiar communication with his Spouse the Church: but at
other times withdrawing his glorious presence, and absenting himself from her.
Who is represented therefore after the same manner, like to the moon (unto
which they compare Malcuth) sometimes full of his heavenly light, sometimes
illuminated only in part, and sometimes obscure and dark. Which will appear
more at large, in the Explication of the several parts of this Book.

VII. The time of whose writing cannot be certainly known: but it is very
probable, but is was not long after Solomon was seated on his Throne: and had
both the Prophecy of his Father David fresh in his mind; and was also strongly
affected with the wonderful love of God to himself. He being filled then
likewise with incomparable Wisdom from above; such Wisdom, that it brought the
Queen of Sheba to discourse with him, having heard the fame of Solomon, because
of the name of the Lord, 1 Kings X. 1. That is, as some of the Hebrews expound
it, because she understood that the Wisdom which was in him, was not merely
natural, like that of the Philosophers and Eastern Sages, but Divine and
heavenly, by a special inspiration from above: whereby he was enabled to answer
the hardest Questions.

At that time, when these Celestial Gifts were newly poured into him (which the
Cabbalists call the Unction of the Holy Ghost, or the Sacred Name, of which
Solomon speaks, say they, when he says, in the beginning of this Song, Thy Name
is as an Ointment poured out) we may well conceive his mind shined in its
greatest purity and clearness: and, enjoying the sweetest and most perfect
peace and tranquillity, was the fitter for such Divine Meditations as these,
which are the Subject of this Holy Book. The sense of which seems to be
expressed in the 2 Corinthians. XI. 2. Where St. Paul (who was not rude in
knowledge, v. 6. but mightily versed, as that Word knowledge signifies, in the
Mysteries of the Old Testament) puts the Church of Corinth in mind of his
solicitous concern for them in these words, I have espoused you to one Husband,
that I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ. For of that one Husband
alone; and of that pure Virgin and no other; and of their espousals, love and
uninion, is this incomparable Song of Solomon's to be understood, and expounded.

A PARAPHRASE ON THE SONG of SOLOMON.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
There are four Principal parts of this Chapter: First, the Bride comes in
expressing the desire of all Israel, nay, of all Nations, to see the Messiah.
Who, next of all, is brought in (v. 8.) testifying his love to all those that
seek after him. And then (all her Attendants having, with one voice, made a
noble resolution, not to be unworthy of such love, v. 11.) She speaks again,
and declares her mavelous satisfaction in the knowledge and love of Him, v.
12. Which is the third part. And lastly, they both conclude with mutual
gratulations and praises, v. 15, 16: and, accompanied with the symphony of all
their Attendants, v. 17. commend the excellency of their habitation.

1. THE song of songs, which is Solomon's.

1. THE most excellent of all the Songs that Solomon (or any other person) ever
composed: representing the ardent desire which was in him, and which he
endeavored to excite in all the people, to enjoy that great blessing of the
Messiah. See Annot. [a].

Spouse.
2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better than
wine.

2. With the thoughts of whom his mind being wholly possessed, he burst forth
into this most passionate strain of affection to Him, saying, in the name of
them all, O that He would come and speak to us by himself, and not merely by
his Prophets; who have told us so much of Him, that I cannot but wish to
converse familiarly with him, and receive the words of his own mouth (those
words of Grace, XLV. Psalm. 2. which will ravish all men's hearts) and all other
expressions of his incomparable love: Which is to be preferred infinitely
before the most delicious pleasures, that this good Land wherein we live
affords; yea, before the very Sacrifices, and the Wine that is poured out upon
the Altar unto God. See Annot. [b].

3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured
forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

3. By whom Thou art so highly exalted, far above all other Kings and Prophets;
and the fame which is already spread of Thee (XLV. Psalm. 8, 9.) and of the
knowledge which Thou shall impart unto the World, is so sweet, so grateful and
delicious, that for this cause all truly pious and holy souls (XLV. Psalm. 14.)
are in love with thee, and long to see thee. See Annot. [c].

4. Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
than wine: the upright love thee.

4. Appear then in thy Power, Majesty and Glory, and by thy mighty Grace and
love attract me and all my people to thee: which will make the whole World most
readily and cheerfully devote themselves unto thy service. And, methinks, I
behold this King in his Royal splendour, as if He were already come; nay, He
has made me understand the secret Mysteries of his Kingdom; which give me a
taste of that great joy, wherewith we have been told (XLV. Psalm. 15.) all
Mankind shall enter into thy Society: And it is but reason that we should all
resolve with the highest satisfaction of mind to rejoice and triumph in thee,
and never to think of thy love, and the blessings we expect from thence, but
with a pleasure beyond all other: and the better judgment any men have, and the
more upright-hearted they are, the more perfectly will they love thee and thy
unspotted righteousness. See Annot. [d].

5. I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar,
as the Curtains of Solomon.

5. And do not take offense, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, at his kind reception
of all Nations into his Kingdom, but hear their Answer to you, when you upbraid
them with Idolatry, and all manner of impurity: which is the same with that of
a lovely Shepherdess, when tanned by lying much abroad in the Fields. My
complexion indeed is dark and swarthy; but my features and proportions are
comely and beautiful: though I seem as rustic as the Skins of the Tents,
wherein the wild Arabs dwell; yet I am as amiable as the fine Linen, which
makes the Curtains of the Apartment of King Solomon. See Annot. [e].

6. Look not upon me because I am black, because the sun has looked upon me:
my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept.

6. Do not despise me therefore, by considering only my outward hue, though it
be exceeding black; since it is not naturally so, but contracted by being
exposed to the Sun: for my Brethren and Sisters, who should have been more
kind, did me the greatest injury, and made me a Slave to the meanest
employments, in which I could not preserve my beauty; because I was like one
that being set to keep other men's Vineyards could not look after his own.

(Which is a lively Emblem of the Gentiles, who are descended from the same
parents with your selves, and though by worshipping the Sun, and by other
Idolatries, they are become odiously polluted; yet, shall be cleansed by
becoming the Subjects of Christ: who will pity them, as seduced by false
Teachers, and neglected by you; which made them embrace any Religion, rather
than the true.) See Annot. [f].

7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make
thy-flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that turns aside by the
flocks of thy companions?

7. But let us all join together, professing our most hearty affection to Him,
and beseech Him with one voice, saying, O Thou whom I love above all things,
instruct me in thy heavenly Doctrine, and make to understand, not only where we
may learn thy will, but also enjoy thy true Religion in quiet and peace: For we
are weary of wandering uncertainly after those who pretend to thy Spirit, but
mislead such as are guided by them. See Annot. [g].

Bridegroom.
8. If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flock, and feed the kids beside the shepherds tents.

8. Unto which his Answer is, Thy desire of true knowledge has already made
thee most amiable in my eyes (XLV. Psalm. 11.) and therefore what thou
understandest not I will teach thee. Forsake those vain Religions (XLV. Psalm.
10.) by which thou have been deluded, and enter into the holy Assemblies of
those pious Souls that worship me: and bring thy young Converts, to be
instructed by those Pastors, whom I will authorize in my Church. See Annot. [h].

9. I have compared thee, O my love to a company of horses in Pharaohs chariots.

9. Where they shall grow in strength, and increase in number; and under the
conduct of those Great Men, who shall guide and lead them, speedily subdue all
Mankind unto my obedience (XLV. Psalm 4.) for I have likened thee, whom I love,
to those victorious Armies of a mighty King, which trample all opposition
triumphantly under their feet. See Annot. [i].

10. Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.

10. And then will the very outward face of the Church look most beautiful, by
those various Orders of spiritual Gifts, wherewith I will enrich her: which
shall make her appear like a lovely Bride, when she is decked with all her
Jewels and Ornaments that add luster to her beauty. See Annot. [k].

Chorus of Virgins.
11. We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.

11. Unto which all her Members shall contribute by their unanimous resolution,
to lead such a life as may adorn their Religion; and make the Church shine in
such splendour and Glory, that She shall not come short of Royal Majesty, XLV.
Psalm. 13. See Annot. [l].

Spouse.
12. While the king sits at his table, my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof.

12. Whereby she shall become fit for the affections of her great Lord, when He
sits upon the Throne of his Glory; acknowledging his Bounty in all the benefits
and Ornaments He has bestowed upon her (IV. Philip. 18.) and making manifest
the sweet and fragrant odor of his knowledge in every place: (2 Cor. II. 14.
compared with XLV. Psalm 8.) See Annot. [m].

13. A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto me; he shall lie all night
betwixt my breasts.

13. From which knowledge every pious Soul shall derive the greatest
refreshment, comfort and strength; and therefore love Him above all things, and
resolve never to let Him slip out of their minds: but to preserve the
remembrance of Him most carefully, night and day, in their very hearts; as the
most precious Cordial, in all conditions, unto their Spirits. See Annot. [n].

14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the Vineyards of Engedi.

14. And indeed there is nothing of such price, nothing so delicious among us
for our bodily pleasure, but ought to put us in mind how much more inestimable
that knowledge is, which Thou, O Lord, who deservest all our love, vouchsafest
for the comfort and satisfaction of our Souls. See Annot. [o].

Bridegroom.
15. Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair, thou have doves
eyes.

15. Such shall be the language of those who are acquainted with his worth,
which shall increase their mutual affection unto each other; and move Him to
give his Church more sensible testimonies of his love, and repeated assurances
how amiable her purity and modesty, her innocence and simplicity, as well as
her decent order and comely Government, is in his sight. See Annot. [p].

Spouse.
16. Behold thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is green.

16. And what can this love of his produce, but new admiration in her, of Him
and of his love, bursting forth into such expressions as these; yea, rather
thou art most amiable and lovely (XLV. Psalm 2.) not I; whose beauty, and
goodness, is but a weak reflection of thy incomparable perfections: which move
Thee to communicate thy self in the most delectable Graces, unto all those that
love Thee: who making one Body with Thee, may say, We feast together most
sumptuously, and are entertained every day with those delights, which grow
there only, where Thou vouchsafest thy gracious presence. See Annot [q].

17. The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of firr.

17. Who have promised to dwell with us, in the several Churches of thy Saints;
which are as so many living Temples dedicated to thy service: and being
protected and defended by Thee, shall remain so stable and firm, that they
shall last for ever. See Annot. [r].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1. Song of Songs] every one knows is an Hebraism for the most
excellent Song; as Holy of Holies is the most Holy; and King of Kings, the
greatest King. And though the most natural meaning seems to be, that this is
the most excellent of all the Songs that Solomon made, (which were very many, 1
King. IV. 32.) both in its structure and composure, and in regard of the
Subject whereof it treats, yet since the Chaldee Paraphrase, and abundance of
Christian Writers, think it called the most excellent Song, with respect
likewise to all the Songs that had been formerly made by any Prophetical
person, as those, XV. Exodus V. Judge. 1 Samuel II. etc. (because they celebrated
only some particular benefits, this the immense love of God, not only toward
that Nation, but toward all mankind) I have not neglected that in my
Paraphrase.

which is Solomons] The Hebrew Words are so contrived, that they may either
signify concerning Solomon (i. e. Christ) or of which Solomon was the Author.
Which, I doubt not, is the first and literal meaning; because so the LXX
expound it; and so the same Phrase is understood by all, in the Titles of those
Psalms, which are called Psalms of David. But it may be observed further, that
here are none of his usual Titles added, as there are in the Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes; where he is called Son of David, King of Israel, and King in
Jerusalem. Of which if any reason is to be assigned, this seems the most
probable, that those Titles, which have respect only to his temporal estate,
greatness and dignity, he wholly forgot, when he was rapt in contemplation of
that Celestial Prince, the Prince of peace; in comparison with whom all others
are not worth the naming; and whose Character was best expressed by the name of
Solomon alone: He being the great Peacemaker and Reconciler of God and man.

[b] V. 2. Let him kiss me] Solomon speaks this in the person of the Virgin
Daughter of Sion; that is the Church. Whom he here introduces in the most
passionate strain, wishing for some token of love, which is expressed under the
Metaphor of a kiss. But there is no mention at all made of the Name, condition,
or beauty of the Person whose love is desired; nor any account given of the
beginning or progress of this desire: but he makes her burst out on a sudden,
and abruptly into these Words, Let him kiss me, etc. that he might the more
artificially describe the nature and force of Divine love: Which, when it
possesses the mind, snatches it so from it self, that it is wholly in him that
it loves. It thinks of nothing else, seeks nothing, wishes nothing, speaks of
nothing but this alone: and imagins that every Body else thinks of the same,
and knows of whom it speaks.

It is just such a beginning as that of the LXXXVIIth. Psalm: where the
Psalmist enters upon the description of the loveliness of Mount Sion and Mount
Moriah, in this manner, His foundation is in the holy Mountains.

kisses of his mouth] As a kiss given to another, was a token of love and
kindness, friendship and familiarity in those Countries (it being their manner
to salute their Guests whom they invited to their house, VII. Luke 45.) so many
kisses were a token of abundant love, and excessive affection; as appears from
what is there said by our Savior of the Woman, who had not ceased to kiss his
very feet. And therefore the beginning of this Verse may be thus paraphrased,
Let Him declare his love unto me, in the most familiar and most ample manner.

Of which matter I have noted something elsewhere Mensa Mystica.
; and therefore shall only add here, That in the Mystical Divinity of the
Cabbalists these are the Words of Malcuth the Spouse, speaking to her Tipheret
the Bridegroom: beseeching Him to influence her with the gift of the Holy
Ghost, or with Binah, as they speak; that is, understanding, and intelligence:
which is called by them the mouth of the Sephirot or emanations of light.

better than wine] Wine was the highest Entertainment for those Guests
beforementioned; and therefore used by the Hebrews to express the greatest
pleasure. There was a portion of it also to be poured out on the Altar, in
their Offerings to God: and so may comprehend their Sacrifices, which were the
principal part of their Religion. Unto both which I have had respect in the
Paraphrase.

[c] V. 3. savor of thy good ointments] Ointments also were not wanting at all
their Entertainments: with which some were wont to anoint their whole Heads; or
at least their Nostrils: which they looked upon as conducing much to health, as
well as pleasure. According to those famous Words of Alexis the Poet, in
Athenaeus his Diepnosophists, L. II. Cap. 7.

(...)
(...).
Of which Ointments there were exceeding great variety: four he mentions in
that place, which were in common use: but a vast number more in his XVth Book,
Chap. 11. out of Apollonius Herophilus. Who shows, in a Book on purpose about
it, that several Countries afforded Unguents, that were most excellent in their
kind. As the best of Roses was made at Phaselis and some other places; the best
of Crocus came from Soli in Cilicia; that of Spikenard from Tarsus, etc. (...)*
etc. Syria anciently (though not in his time) afforded excellent of all sorts,
especially of one, which he there names.

Now to this use of Ointments some think Solomon here alludes; but I rather
think he has respect to his Fathers Words, XLV. Psalm. 8; and intended hereby
to signify the glorious Offices of the Messiah, whose very Name (signifying
anointed) carried in it all that could be desired: He being anointed by God to
be the great Deliverer and Savior of his people. And these first Words of the
Verse, the LXX seem to me to have most rightly understood (whom I have
therefore followed) who translate them thus; The smell of thy Ointments is
above all Spices: taking to vim, which we translate good for the best of
ointments.

therefore do the Virgins love thee] The attractive power of sweet Ointments
(to which Solomon here alludes) is notably declared in that which Basil (Epist.
ad Julittam) relates of the manner of catching Doves. Which was by breeding up
one tame, and then (...), anointing her Wings with Ointment, they let her flee
away, (...), etc. and the sweet odor of the Ointment drew abundance of Pigeons
after her: which She brought to the Coat of her owner. See this further
explained in the Next Note d.

[d] V. 4. Draw me] In the beginning of this Verse I suppose he comprehends all
the Nation of the Jews, as persons conjunct with him, in these Words, Draw me.
And then speaks in the name of all other people. We will run after thee. For so
the Hebrew Writers themselves by Virgins (in the foregoing Verse) understand
those, who out of Paganism came into the Church, and embraced the true
Religion: such as Jethro, and Rahab; who having heard of the Miracles in Egypt
and in the Wilderness, joined themselves to the people of God. And indeed
wonderful ardent was the love of those, who came from Gentilism unto Christ:
such as the Woman of Samaria, IV. Joh. the Centurion, VIII Matthew. the
Canaanitish Woman, XV. Matthew. who had such faith, as was not found in Israel.

the king has brought me, etc.] Here now he seems on a sudden to have had a
glance of the Messiah the great King of Israel: and in the Spirit of Prophecy
to have beheld a glimpse of those things, which eye had not seen, nor ear
heard, neither did they enter into the heart of man. Which I understand here by
the Word chadarau, which we translate chambers: wherein he alludes to the
Chambers of the Temple (1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 11.) but especially to the most secret
place of it; into which no man might enter but the High Priest alone: till
Christ came and made way for us into the holiest of all, which was typified by
it.

the upright love thee] The two last Words of this Verse being capable of
various Translations; I have expressed the sense so largely as to comprehend
them all in my paraphrase. And shall only add, that the whole Verse may be
understood after this manner, that the first Words draw me are the voice of the
Spouse; the next, we will run after thee, the Words of the Chorus of Virgins.
And then she speaks again, the King has brought me into his Chambers; and then
they again express their joy at it in the following Words, we will be glad and
rejoice, etc. This came into my mind since I wrote the Paraphrase, and seems to
be the plainest account of this Verse.

[e] V. 5. I am black, etc.] The principal Mystery of the Kingdom of Christ,
being the calling of the Gentiles into fellowship with Him (which is oftener
called a Mystery in the New Testament than any one thing whatsoever) Solomon
seems to speak of that in this Verse: having beheld, in the rapture wherein he
was, the Gentiles flocking to Him, not without the great displeasure of the
Jews. Who contemned, and would have excluded them, as people incapable of his
love: unto which the Gentiles are here introduced, making their Answer to the
Exceptions of the Jews, in these Words: I am black, but comely, etc. The
literal sense of which, and of the next Verse, I have expressed so fully in the
Paraphrase, annexing the spiritual sense at the end, that I do not think fit to
enlarge upon it here. But desire the Reader to take notice, that the Word
Sechora, which we translate black, denotes such a duskishness as is in the
Morning, (called Sechar in the Hebrew) when some little light begins to appear,
and the darkness to fly away. Which aptly represents the condition of the
Gentile World, when they were upon the point of receiveing the knowledge of
Christ. Which this wise King Solomon might well foresee would be imparted to
them; by observing a Type of it in his own Marriage, as well as in the
Marriages of other Great Men in former times. Which plainly showed the Jews, if
they would have learnt it, that there was no reason they should except against
the conjunction of the Gentiles with themselves; in the spiritual Marriage of
both, in one body, unto Christ. For Isaac married Rebecca a Gentile, and the
Daughter of an Idolater, as appears from her Brother Laban, who was no better,
XXXI. Genesis 19, 30, etc. And this man's Daughters Jacob married: whose Son Judah,
the Prince of their Tribes, took to Wife a Canaanite (XXXVIII. Genesis 2.) as
Joseph did an Egyptian (XLI. Genesis 45.) nay, Moses himself, their great
Deliverer and Lawgiver, married an Ethiopian (or Arabian) Woman (XII. Numb.
1.) and notwithstanding the anger of his Brother and Sister at this Marriage,
would not be divorced from her. Naasson also, a Great Man of the house of Judah
married Rahab of Jericho, and had by her Booz: who took Ruth the Moabitess to
Wife, by whom he had Obed the Grandfather of David. And indeed, the very first
Institution of Marriage having (as I have proved in the Preface) a mystical
intention in it, which St. Paul unfolds in the V. Ephesians. these Marriages may
well be looked upon as Emblems of the uniting all sorts of people with Christ,
in one Body of the Church.

[f] V. 6.] Here they seem to give an account how they came to degenerate, and
lose their Original Beauty; by false Prophets and Prophetesses, in the Gentile
World, who led them to Idolatry: particularly to the Worship of the Sun, which
was the most ancient of all other IV. Deuteronomy. 19. XXXI. Job 26.) and spread it
self as far as the Sun shines. For it was the Sun whom one Country worshipped
under the name of Baal; another under the name of Moloch; another of Chemosh;
and others of Mithras and Osyris. Which last was the name given to it by the
Egyptians: among whom the Sun was worshipped in the famous City of Heliopolis
(which took its name from thence) not far from the Land of Rameses; where the
Children of Israel dwelt while they lived there, XLVII. Genesis 11. and so were
more easily infected with that Idolatry.

[g] V. 7.] This Verse I take to be the voice of the whole Church, longing to
be acquainted with his Doctrine; which is compared to food, as his Disciples
are to Sheep: Whom Shepherds were wont, in those Countries, to lead into cool
Shades at Noon, that they might not suffer by the heat. Unto which Solomon here
alludes; representing all pious Souls as afraid also of wandering from the true
Shepherd, and falling, like Sheep that go astray, into the hands of Strangers.
All which Metaphors are largely pursued by our Blessed Savior, in one of his
Parables (X. John) as comparisons familiarly known to his Disciples; who found
them here first used in this Holy Book.

[h] V. 8.] To the foregoing Petition, He here returns his Answer. Which needs
no other Explication, than what I have given of it in the Paraphrase: unless we
observe a difference between Flocks and Kids. The latter of Which signifies the
Goats young ones; and so may represent the new Converts of the Gentiles who
formerly lay under an ill Character, and did male olere, as they speak, smell
rank of many foul Superstitions. But I am not willing to meddle with such
niceties.

[i] V. 9. company of horses, etc.] This Comparison may convince us, that
Solomon does not aim at any single person in this Song (either Pharaoh's
Daughter, or a beautiful Shunamire, or any other Woman or Virgin, who would
very absurdly be compared to a Troop of Horses) but at a great many united in a
Body: i. e. the whole Company of Believers in the Messiah; who may very fitly
be resembled to the Horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh. Whose Kingdom, in those
days, abounded with the most excellent Horses: which were famous for their
strength, and fitness for service: as may be seen by the provision of them
Solomon made for himself from thence, 1 King. X. 28, 29; and the great number
which came from thence against Jerusalem, in his Sons days, 2 Chronicles. XII. 3.
Long after which, we read of their great force, XXXI. Isai. 1. XLVI. Jer. 4, 9.
and consequently, the Body of Christian people, that is the Church, being
compared to a company of them, is set forth thereby as very powerful, and
prevailing over all Opposers.

[k] V. 10] The means of which, is here represented to be by the power of the
Spirit; wherewith Christ has endued his Church. For the manner of Bridegrooms
being to present their future Bride, with Jewels, or some other rich Gifts
(suitable to their quality and ability) Solomon alludes to them, as I take it,
in this Verse; and points at the Gifts which his Father foretold (LXVIII. Psalm.
18.) Christ would dispense, when he ascended up on high to his Throne of Glory:
whereby several Orders of admirable men were constituted in the Church, 1 Corinthians. XII. 28, etc.

[l] V. 11.] And the design of all those Gifts, was to make men truly virtuous,
which seems to be intended in this Verse (for love and good works are compared
to Gold in the language of Christ himself, III. Revel. 18.) which is the voice
of all those that attended upon the Bride.

[m] V. 12.] That which makes the greatest difficulty in this Book, is the
frequent change of the persons that speak: and it is doubted here, whose
Language this is. I take it to be the Bride her self, that here again
gratefully acknowledges his benefits, and endeavors to make all the World
sensible of them.

sits at his Tablt] The King sitting at his Table, signifying his rest and
joy after all his labors; I have therefore expounded it of the Throne of his
Glory: unto which our Blessed Savior being advanced, He received power to
prefer others; whose honor and dignity is expressed by these two things,
eating at his Table, and sitting by him upon Thrones; which was the same thing
in our Saviors own Language, XIX. Matthew. 28. compared with XXII. Luke 29, 30.

Spikenard] It is observed by Pliny that the most fragrant Nard comes from the
Spikes of a very small contemptible Shrub: which may well be looked upon as an
Emblem of the sweet odor of the Gospel; wherewith such mean and despicable
persons, as the Apostles were of themselves, filled all the World by their
preaching: together with the extraordinary holiness of their lives, which
recommended their preaching very much to all observing men. So the Cabbalists
expound this fragrancy in the Ancient Book Zohar. Where R. Juda says, When
good works are multiplied in the World, then the Cheneseth Israel (i. e. the
Congregation of Israel, the same with Malcuth in their language) exhales rich
in tovin, good odours, i. e. most sweet and fragrant odours, being blessed by
the holy King, etc. Which Words the Scholiast expounds thus, She exhales sweet
odours to her Husband Tipheret, and is most acceptable to Him: the lower World
(as his Words are) being by this means married to the higher.

[n] V. 13. a bundle of myrrh, etc.] The Church deriving the greatest comfort
and satisfaction, from his sitting on the Throne of his Glory; resolves here to
keep Him perpetually in mind, and in her most hearty affections: which is
expressed by Myrrh tied up in a little Bag, and put into the bosom, as the
manner was in those Countries, to corroborate the heart, and exhilarate the
Spirits.

The bosom of all chaste Women is inaccessible to any hand, but that of their
Husband: and therefore here signifies the careful preservation of his memory;
and of the Doctrine he has deposited in his Church.

[o] V. 14. Cluster of Camphire] Nothing more puzzles Interpreters, than these
Words, which we translate Cluster of Camphire. For our Camphire was unknown to
the Ancients; and does not grow in Clusters, but is the resinous substance of a
Tree in Borneo, and in China: And therefore is far better translated in the
Margin of our Bibles; Cypress. But by Cypress is not to be understood the Tree
which bears that name among us; but a far more Aromatic Plant in the East;
which was a kind of Ligustrum or Alcharma; called by Pliny, Cyperus, and
sometimes Cyprus: which produced a most sweet Bush of Flowers, and also
Berries, not much different from the fragrancy of Spikenard. Whence it is
likely the famous Island Cyprus took its name: because here (as at Ascalon in
Judea, and on the Banks of Nile) the best, that is, the most odoriferous Cyprus
grows. Thus both Stephanus and Eustathius; the Island Cyprus has its name,
(...), from the Flower of Cyprus growing there: as Bochart shows in his Canaan,
L. I. C. 3. Of which Flowers, or of the Seed, was made that Omtment, which
Pliny calls the Unguent Royal.

But there is one that thinks these Words may be translated, precious Cluster,
or Cluster of great value; to be bought at any rate: because Copher denotes the
price of any thing, that is purchased or redeemed. Such was the Balsam that
came from these Shrubs: which grew at Engaddi (in the Plains of Jericho) after
the manner of Vines; and therefore called, as Bochartus has shown, the
Vineyards of Engedi. And thus the ancient Hebrew Doctors, by dividing the first
Word (...) have found out the Mystery of the Messiah in these Words. Which they
understand, as if he had said, My beloved is unto me (...) them an that
propitiates all things.

[p] V. 15. Behold] This and the following Verse, contain the mutual
expressions of their love. First, of Christ to his Church, in this Verse: and
that not only in regard of her inward purity, but of her external Order; both
which were remarkable: and therefore the Word behold is repeated.

doves eyes] The eyes show more than any part else, the inward affections of
the Mind: and Doves eyes are the Emblems of simplicity, candor, sincerity, and
purity.

[q] V. 16.] Here follows the expression of the Churches love to Christ: whom
she acknowledges to be the Fountain of all that is in her.

our bed is green] By Bed I understand their Table; about which they sat on
Beds strewed with Flowers, or such fragrant Greens as were in season.

[r] V. 17. our house, etc.] This last Verse I take for a description of
particular Churches: by the Roof or covering of which I understand their
protection. And it being made of Cedar and Firr there seems to be an allusion
to the Temple; in the Fabric of which these were employed, as most durable and
incorruptible. Others take that Word we translate Firr to signify Cypress:
which is still nearer to the sense I have given of this Verse. Which sense will
not seem at all forced, unto those who consider that not only the whole Body of
the faithful, which is the Church Universal, but the parts of it, or single
Churches, such as that at Ephesus, are represented by the Apostle, as an holy
Temple, an habitation or dewlling place of God: which is built upon Christ, and
with Him makes up one House of God, II. Ephesians. 20, 21, 22.) Nay, every
particular faithful person is not only a living stone, as St. Peter speaks in
that Building, but is called also a Temple of God; who dwells in holy Minds by
his Spirit, 1 Cor. III. 16, 17. VI. 19. So that the Bride and the Chorus of
Virgins, might well, both with respect to Christ and to one another, use the
Style of Our House, in this description of his Dwelling place.

CHAP. II.
ARGUMENT.
Here begins a new Colloquy, which has two principal Parts. In the first of
which the Bridegroom owns the praises to belong unto Him, which had been
bestowed upon Him, in the Conclusion of the foregoing Chapter, v. 1, 2. and the
Bride again declares her high admiration of Him, and satisfaction in Him and
his love; as infinitely surpassing all other enjoyments, and deserving greater
love to Him, than could be expressed (v. 3, 4, etc.) With which Ecstacy of love
He declaring Himself to be highly pleased, v. 7. then follows the second Part
wherein she sets forth the wonderful power of Divine love to enlighten their
mind, and to obtain the favor of illuminations from above. For now she speaks
(v. 8, 9, etc.) as if she saw Him, and beard his voice, inviting her to partake
of the Blessings, which his appearing brought to Mankind. The secure possession
of which she also hears him promising to her, v. 14, 15. and thereupon promises
Him most faithful obedience, v. 16, 17.

Bridegroom.
1. I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the valleys.

1. I Am indeed the Fountain of all true delight and pleasure: the Rose of
Sharon being not more grateful to the smell, nor the Lily of the Valleys to the
sight, than the knowledge of me is to the mind of those who are acquainted with
me. See Annot. [a].

2. As the lilie among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

2. Whereby thou, my dearly Beloved, art become not unlike to me; appearing in
such luster and beauty among the Nations of the World, as the Lily does among
the Thorns that grow in desert places. See Annot. [b].

Spouse.
3. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the
sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet
to my taste.

3. And Thou appearest far greater and more lovely in my eyes, than the
greatest Princes of this World; who are no more to be compared with Thee, than
the wild Trees that bring forth nothing but Leaves, or only harsh or insipid
Trash, with the goodly Apple Tree, when it is laden with its beautiful and
pleasant Fruit. Who can express the satisfaction which his protection affords!
Under which I have constantly enjoyed a sweet repose; pleasing my self in the
delightful thoughts of the blessed Fruits of his coming among us, and of what
He has purchased for us. See Annot. [c].

4. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.

4. Which administers the highest joys to those who taste of them; and has
entertained, or rather feasted me, with such delicious hopes, that I cannot but
glory in this, that I am listed under his Banner whose Motto is Love: whereby
He has overcome, shall I say, or overpowered my heart, to submit my self
wholly unto his wonderful love. See. Annot. [d].

5. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love.

5. Under the weight of which, who can support himself, when it sensibly
touches his heart? I faint, I languish, I die, when I am deeply affected with
that love: which overwhelms my spirit; and makes me call for a greater Power
than my own to enable me to bear the thoughts of his mighty love. See Annot.
[e].

6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.

6. And whence should I have that power but from Himself? who then communicates
most of the Grace of his Holy Spirit to us (which is the greatest token of his
love) when he sees our hearts fullest of love to Him. See Annot. [f].

Bridegroom.
7. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

7. In which He would have us take an uninterrupted pleasure, saying; I
beseech, I charge you (all you that are her Companions) I conjure you by all
that is dear to you; not to discompose, or give the least disturbance to that
love: but let it enjoy its satisfaction, to the height of its desires. See
Annot. [g].

Spouse.
8. The voice of my beloved! behold, he comes leaping upon the mountains,
skipping upon the hills.

8. Which Words of Grace can come from none but Him, who is worthy of all our
love: whom, behold, I see, though He be afar off: I see with what delight He
comes surmounting all difficulties and discouragements, to do the Will of God,
XL. Psa. 7, 8. See Annot [h].

9. My beloved is like a roe, or a young heart: behold, he stands behind our
wall, he tooketh forth at the windows, showing himself through the lattise.

9. The swift motion of the Roes and wild Goats is but a weak Emblem of his
readiness to come down to us. And, though He do not yet actually show Himself
among us, I see notwithstanding something of Him; and behold Him approaching
nearer and nearer to us: like one, that resolving to be our Guest, does not
presently enter; but first stands behind the Wall of our House; then looks in
at the Window, and through the Lattises or Grates; whereby He is still more
fully discovered. See Annot. [i].

10. My beloved spoke and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come
away.

10. And I hear his voice (who is worthy of all our love) calling unto us to
meet Him with our most forward desires, saying; Awake thou, who art most dear
unto me, thou who art most beautiful in my eyes; arise and stay no longer, but
come away from these dark representations of me.

11. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.

11. For now that dismal time is past, wherein ignorance, error, and
wickedness overflowed the World, as Floods do the Earth in the Winter-Season:
those cloudy and uncomfortable days are over, wherein you could see and enjoy
but little of me. See Annot. [k].

12. The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.

12. All the tokens of a new World appear, and invite thee to come and partake
of those joys and pleasures which the nearer approaches of the Sun of
righteousness produces: Who makes all manner of Blessings spring up in such
abundance that it causes the heavenly Host to sing for joy; and therefore
cannot but fill all Mankind with joyful Hymns unto Him. See Annot. [l].

13. The fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender
grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.

13. And for this especially, that their dead hopes are revived, and they
receive the earnest and beginnings of that future bliss: the expectation of
which is our greatest comfort in this life, and the consummation of it our
highest happiness in the next: And therefore I say again, Awake, and stir up
thy desires, thou who art most dear unto me, thou who art most lovely in my
eyes; arise, and go, and take possession of those inestimable benefits. See
Annot. [m].

Bridegroom.
14. O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely.

14. And be not afraid of those who, seeking to destroy thee, force thee to
flee, like an innocent Dove, to hide thy self and seek for safety in Holes of
the Earth, in Caves, and Dens and secret places; but from thence look up unto
me, and call upon me, with praises and thanksgivings, and I will save and
deliver thee; for I love thee inseparably, who art most amiable in my eyes,
whose prayers and praises I delight to hear, and to behold my own Image that is
formed in thee. See Annot. [n].

15. Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines: for our vines
have tender grapes.

15. And therefore I require all those that act by authority from me, and to
whom I have committed the care of my Church, to use their early diligence also
to discover and confute the sophistry of Deceivers, who craftily insinuate
their false Doctrines into weak and incautious Souls; and thereby seduce those
who are newly converted, or but infirm in the Faith. See Annot. [o].

Spouse.
16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the lilies.

16. Unto which I hear the Church reply, I will preserve my fidelity to Him,
who is my only Beloved as I am his; I will have nothing to do with those
seducing Spirits, but adhere to Him alone: whose Dwelling is not among subtle
and crafty, but with simple and candid Souls. See Annot. [p].

17. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: turn my beloved, and be
thou like a roe, or a young heart upon the mountains of Bether.

17. Only let Him be pleased to vouchsafe his gracious presence with me, and to
enlighten me more and more; till we have a full knowledge of Him and of his
Will, (XIII. Romans 11, 12.) and the light of it scatter all the shadows of the
law: Let my Beloved also make haste to succor and relieve me in all
difficulties and distresses; and show the same readiness for my preservation,
that he did (v. 9.) for my first salvation. See Annot. [q].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] There is so little ground to apply the several Parts of this
Song, to the several Ages of the Church, till the end of all things, that I
cannot think fit to follow such Interpretations. But shall pursue the Method I
have begun, and observe that the Messiah is here introduced, as owning the
Praises which the Church had bestowed upon Him, in the Conclusion of the
foregoing Chapter. And that in such Phrases, as are becoming a Pastoral;
borrowed from Flowers and Trees (under which Shepherds delight to sit and eat
the Fruit) and from such Creatures as frequent the Fields and Woods, etc.

I am the rose] And in this Verse He first compares Himself to a Rose: which is
still one of the goodliest things to which a great Prince can be likened in
those Eastern Countries. As appears from a Letter, written by the great Mogul
in the Persian Tongue, to K. James, sent by Sir Tho. Roe: wherein he thus
complements his Majesty of Great Britain, As upon a Rose in a Garden, so are my
eyes fixed upon you: God maintain your Estate, that your Monarchy may prosper,
etc. But it was chiefly prized by Shepherds, and Shepherdesses; and accounted
by them (...), as Philostratus speaks, the Plant of Love. Insomuch, says he,
that if the great King have his Diadem on his Head, the Soldier his Helmet, as
the greatest Ornament; beautiful Youths should have Chaplets of Roses, (...),
as near of kin to them both in sweetness and in ruddiness. And Achilles Tatius
(L. 2. (...) etc.) thus commends this lovely Flower. If Jupiter would set a
King over the Flowers, it would be the Rose that should reign over them: being
the Ornament of the Earth, the splendour of Plants, the Eye of Flowers, the
blushing Beauty of the Field; or refulgent brightness, etc.

of Saron] i. e. The most excellent Rose: For such were the Roses of Saron; as
may be gathered from hence: That the Rose, according to Pliny's Observation,
delights in dry places; and will not thrive in fat and unctuous Soils, in rich
Clays, or Grounds well watered, but in those that are lean, full of rubbish,
etc. Now such was the Soil about Saron; as we learn from the Mischneh in the
Title Sota, Chap. VIII. where they that built a Brick House in Saron are said
to have been deprived of the benefit of that Law, XX. Deuteronomy. 5. Upon which
Passage R. Solomon glosses, that the Earth thereabout about was unfit for
making Bricks; being so dry and crumbling that the Houses that were built of
them, had need to be repaired twice in seven years. Insomuch, that the
Jerusalem-Talmud says, The High Priest prayed by name for the Saronites, upon
the Day of Expiation, that their Houses might not be converted into their
Graves.

Lily of the valleys] By this Lily we are not to understand such as we call
Lilium convallium, or May-Lily: but some more noble and fragrant Flower; being
joined here with Roses: As it is in several Poetical Fragments (quoted by
Athenaeus L. XV. C. 8, 9.) with Violets, Marjoram, and diverse other sweet
Flowers. Insomuch that he says the Corinthians called the Lily by the name of
Ambrosia: and he tells us out of Nicander, that it was esteemed (...), the joy
and delight of Venus, because of its beautiful color: And smell also, I
suppose; for in the XIIth Chapter of the same Book, he quotes a Passage out of
Theophrastus, who, treating of sweet Ointments made of Flowers, mentions (...),
that of Lilies, as well as that of Roses.

But notwithstanding all this, the Lily being vulgarly celebrated only for its
beautiful color, I have taken notice of that alone in the Paraphrase.

[b] V. 2. As the Lily, etc.] They that believe in Christ partaking of his
Excellencies, He here compares the Church to a Lily (i.e. to Himself) as much
excelling all other people who were not Believers (for Daughters signify
people in the Hebrew Language) as the Lilies do Thorns, which grow in desolate
places. For the Word we translate Thorns, is wont to be joined together with
those which signify Nettles and Brambles, XXXIV. Isai. 13. IX. Hosea 6.

[c] V. 3. As the Apple Tree, etc.] To this the Church here replies; and
expresses her reciprocal affection, in such Words as may be applied to signify
his pre-eminence over all other gods; whom they were wont to worship under
Trees, as we read in XII. Deuteronomy. 2. 1 Kings XIV. 23. LVII. Isai. 5. and many
other places.

I sat down under, etc.] In the latter Part of this Verse and in those that
follow she turns her Speech to her Companions and Attendants; relating the
satisfaction and joy she took in his love.

[d] V. 4. He brought me, etc.] Which is set forth by a Banquet, whereby (it is
well known) the Hebrews are wont to represent the joys, even of the other
World. And what greater joy have we here than to think of the stupendous love
of God our Savior toward us? which cannot but subdue our hearts to love Him
entirely. So I have paraphrased the latter part of the Verse (his Banner over
me was love) taking in two senses of which the Words are capable. The most
obvious is that Love was the Inscription in his Banner: the other that He
conquers only by Love; a Banner displayed supposing an Armed Force marching
under it. Delherrus in his Electa, L. 3. C. 9. has not unfitly glossed upon
the Words, thus; The Banner of our Lord is his love which he has publicly
declared to us, that He might draw us to Himself: by which also when we are
come to Him, He retains us with Him; and strengthens us by the same, when we
fight with our spiritual Enemies. And that we may always look upon it and never
quail, He carries it over us; that is, renders his love most familiar to us. He
that knows not this Banner, can be none of his Soldiers; and he that deserts
it, is undone, unless he presently return to it. So that as the Roman Legions
had their several names (one of which was called the Pious, and another the
Faithful, another the Thundering, another the Victorious, etc.) in like manner
the Christian Band may be called Amoris Legio, the Legion of Love.

[e] V. 5. Stay me with flagons, etc.] This Verse is a description of one
falling into a swound, by the abundance of her love: In which case Cordial
Spirits are wont to be called for, to revive such persons, and keep them from
fainting quite away. Comfortable smells also are wont to be administered to the
Nose; which is the meaning of calling here for fragrant Apples, Oranges,
Citrons, etc. (as well as Wine) which are all comprehended under the name of
tappuach in the Hebrew: which is a Word that in its very Original imports an
exhalation, or odour-breathing from that which is so called. By all which the
Church is represented to be so marvellously affected with the love of Christ,
as to be even oppressed under the weight of Divine Benefits: and at a perfect
loss, what to think of them; having little or nothing to return for such
infinite obligations.

[f] V. 6. His left hand, etc.] This is a representation of the tenderest
affection of an Husband to his Wife, when he sees her in danger to faint: and
being applied to Christ and his Church sets forth his readiness to succor us,
in all our needs, by the power of his Spirit. I go not about to divine what is
distinctly meant by the left hand, and what by the right (which I look upon as
too great a curiosity in Interpreters) but take them both to express one and
the same thing. And the hand of the Lord signifying oft-times in Scripture, the
power of the Spirit, I have applied them to that.

[g] V. 7. I charge you, etc.] It is dubious whether this Verse be the voice of
Christ or of the Church. I take it to be his; who is the good Shepherd,
represented in this Pastoral Song. Which, suitable to its nature, is still full
of Rural Similitudes, taken from the Roes and the Hinds: which are most amiable
Creatures (as has been observed upon VI. Proverbs) with which not only
Shepherds, but the greatest Persons in the World have delighted themselves. And
that Word which we well translate I charge you, I take to be only a solemn form
of earnest beseeching and entreaty (which all persons are wont to make by those
things that are dearest to them) not an adjuration, which it is not lawful for
any to make, but only by God. I have contented my self therefore with this
simple Paraphrase of that Passage; and sought for no mystical Interpretation,
as the manner is, which may be found in most Interpreters. Who, among other
things, by Roes and Hinds understand the Angelical Powers: to which the
Cabbalists apply these Words, and would have them to signify as much, as I
adjure you by the Tribunal of Justice whence the wicked are punished.

[h] V. 8. he comes leaping, etc.] To the same sort of Creatures, and to young
wild Kids, he alludes in this verse. For they are numbered among those
Creatures, which are most nimble, in running, jumping and leaping, even to the
tops of Mountains; as Bochartus has largely shown: demonstrating that what we
translate young Heart, v. 9. is the young wild Goat. I seek therefore for no
Mystery here neither; but take the Words to be a description only of our Lord's
alacrity and cheerfulness, to come down from the Heavens (which may be meant by
Mountains) to dwell among us, who live here below upon the Earth. Yet I shall
note, that they seem to be most ingenious, who hereby understand his passing by
Angels (for so some translate the Words, skipping over the Mountains) and
leaping, as it were, over their heads, to take upon Him the nature of Man.

[i] V. 9.] In like manner, it is a very ingenious conjecture, that his
standing behind the Wall, in this Verse, may be applied to his showing Himself
in those days only in the Law of Moses (which was the Wall of partition between
the Jews and us) and his looking through the Window, or in at the Window, etc.
to his showing Himself then in Figures and Prophecies, which they had of Him;
by which He was known but obscurely to them. But I have not meddled with this in
the Paraphrase.

[k] V. 10, 11. lo the winter is past, etc.] In these Verses Solomon represents
his voice speaking to them by the Prophets (though He himself was not come) and
calling them to Him, as if He was just appearing. For by the Winter and the
Rain, I understand with Theodorer, (...), the time before his coming: when the
Gentile World was buried in Dismal darkness; and the Jews themselves saw things
only through Clouds: and neither of them had much of the warmth of the Divine
Love.

[l] V. 12. The flowers appear, etc.] And then here follows a description of
the Spring: which is set forth by three things; the appearing of the Flowers,
which had lain as if they had been dead; the singing of Birds; and the voice of
the Turtle. Which, as Aristotle observes (L. VIII. Histor. Not. C. 3.)
disappears in Winter, and comes forth again when the Spring is a little
advanced: and therefore is here very properly mentioned in the last place,
among the Notes of the Spring. Which being the time of all other most welcome
to Shepherds, for the feeding of their Flocks, and for all manner of pleasures,
represents, as the same Theodoret conceives, (...), the joyful time after our
Saviors coming. When a new World appeared, and there was a greater abundance
of Divine Blessings, especially of the Spirit, poured forth: which the Chaldee
Paraphrast takes to be meant by the voice of the Turtle. Which is a kind of
Dove; in the form of which the Holy Ghost descended at our Savior's Baptism.
And then the singing of Birds may be applied to the Songs of the heavenly Host,
at his Birth. Others will have this Turtle to have been the Figure of John the
Baptist; which is also pat enough: But I have only touched upon such things, and
do not think fit here to enlarge upon them. But conclude this Note, with this
Observation, that Benjamin Tudelensis, in the Conclusion of his Itinerarium
expressly applies these Words to the coming of the Messiah: saying, that they
cannot be gathered to their own Land, till that time of the singing of Birds
come, and the voice of the Turtle; and till they come who preach glad tidings,
saying always the Lord be praised. R. Alschech also applies the voice of the
Turtle to Elias glossing thus, The voice of the Turtle also has it not been
heard in our Land, by the means of the Prophet? according to that which is
said, Behold I will send to you Elias the Prophet, IV. Mal. 5.

[m] V. 13. The fig tree puts forth, etc.] After the Springtime, here
follows a description of the entrance of Summer: of which the putting forth
green Figs, and the blowing of the Vines, nay the knotting of the Grapes, were
a sign. In the end of which the Harvest coming, hereby is denoted, says the
same Father (Theodoret) (...), the World which we expect hereafter: unto which
I have applied this Verse. Where, it may be observed, that Fig Trees and Vines
are fitly joined, for they were wont to be planted together, XIII. Luke 6, 7.

[n] V. 14. O my Dove, that art in the Clefts, etc.] Some of the Hebrew
Writers, whose sense the Chaldee Paraphrast expresses, refer this to the people
of Israel flying from Pharaoh, like a Dove before the Hawk that is ready to
seize her: but may be better referred to the Church of Christ in danger to be
torn in pieces by her Pagan Persecutors, and by the Jews themselves; as it was
in the beginning of our Religion. Which forced Christians to hold their
Assemblies under ground, in obscure places (where they sung Hymns to our
Blessed Lord before the break of day) and made the Church perfectly like a
Dove, who, being in fear of ravenous Birds, flies into Clefts of Rocks, and to
secret Holes in steep places, to preserve her self.

The Church is so often compared by Christ to a Dove in this Book, that it is
fit to give some account of it. And Bochartus de Sacr. Animal. p. 11. L. I. C.
4. takes this to be the principal, if not only reason of it; to signify her to
be his only Beloved: and that He alone also is most dear to her. For in Doves
there is a wonderful love (observed by many Authors) between those that are
once paired: who never part, but keep faithful the one to the other. And so are
a fit Emblem of the Church, whom the Apostle says he had espoused to Christ as
a chaste Virgin, 2 Cor. XI. 2.

let me see thy Countenance] that Word which we translate countenance or
aspect, may be rendered shape or fashion: denoting all the comely proportions of
the Church, by her likeness to her Lord Christ.

[o] V. 15. Take us the Foxes] Foxes abound in Judea, and are observed, by
abundance of Authors, love Grapes, and to make great devastations in in
Vineyards. Insomuch that Aristophanes in his Equites compares Soldiers to
Foxes; spoiling whole Countries, as they do Vineyards. Now the Prophet Ezekiel
comparing false Prophets to Foxes, XIII. 4. it has bed all Interpreters (in a
manner) to understand by Foxes in this place, Heretics: who appeared very
early in the Church, and therefore are compared to young Foxes: in regard of
their known craft and subtilty, windings and turnings, shifts and evasions;
whereby the more simple sort especially, and such as were newly converted
(compared here to tender Grapes, as the Church it self is to a Vine) were in
danger to be undone, unless a timely care was taken to prevent it. And
therefore this Verse seems to be an Answer to the Churches Prayers, flying to
her Lord for refuge. Who seeing her danger not to be greater from Tyranny, than
from false Teachers, calls upon his Companions; that is, the Apostles, Bishops,
and Pastors of the Church to look after them, and to take them in their
craftiness. And that whilst they were young; in the beginning, that is, of
their appearance in the World: because their vain bablings were apt to increase
to more ungodliness, and their words did eat as a Gangrene, etc. 2 Timothy II. 16,
17. Especially when the Church was but newly planted, and those Seducers
applied themselves chiefly to such as had but newly received the Faith, or to
weak and unsettled people: who were easily caught by them, unless great care
were taken to discover their frauds, and to confute their Sophistry.

Which was the taking of these Foxes, as Theodoret expounds it: And St. Bernard
also; who observes that he says take to us the Foxes: that is, Sibi and
Sponsae, to Himself, and to his Spouse. As much as to say, if it be possible,
let them be reconciled to the Catholic Church, and brought back to the true
Faith. If that could not be, then other methods succeeded; and the Apostles
delivered up such dangerous Deceivers unto Satan (which was a punishment that
included in it bodily affliction) that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy I. ult.

[p] V. 16. My beloved is mine, etc.] As the former Verse was his Answer to the
Churches Prayers; so this is the Churches acknowledgment to Him for his care:
together with a profession of such firm adherence to Him, as suits with the
name of a Dove which he had bestowed on her, v. 14.

he feedeth] To feed, viz. his Flock, is to have his abode among them. See VI.
2.

[q] V. 17. Until the day break, etc.] All that she desires further, is only
his gracious presence with her; which she begs in this Verse He would vouchsafe
her upon the Mountains; that is, those steep places mentioned before, v. 14.
(where the Church was fain to Worship Him in great secret, because of the
present danger) especially while any Disputes and Controversies remained about
the Jewish Ceremonies which were a great disturbance to the Church; as well as
the afflictions and persecutions she endured, which are compared to the night
and darkness, as the other to shadows.

turn, my beloved] The Word turn does not suppose Him absent: but only that He
did not immediately attend, or show the regard He had to her Prayers in
distresses.

like a Roe] See Chap. VIII. v. ult.

mountains of Bether] Bether is the same with Bethel, these two Letters, r and
l, being easily and often changed, as Bochartus has observed (in his Geograph.
Sacra, Part. 2. L. I. C. 33.) in many instances. As for Example, an Island in
the Persian Gulf, is indifferently called Tyrus and Tylus: and Tavila in Spain
is the same with Tabira: and Caralis in Sardinia the same with Calaris, etc. In
another Work indeed of his de sacris Animal. he takes mountains of Bether for
Mountains full of Clefts. Which would agree well with what went before, v. 14;
and might be handsomely applied to the State of the Church, when there were
many breaches and rents in it: but the other plainer and more literal.

CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT.
Here begins the third of those interlocutory Discourses, which compose this
famous Song: part of which only is contained in this Chapter. In which the
Bride and her Companions speaks all; but one Verse, which seems to be spoken by
the Bridegroom. For whose coming she still longs; and is introduced full of
solicitude about it. Which proved not in vain but was gratified with so much
satisfaction in the hope of it, that, as He takes care it should not be
disturbed, so all her Companions rejoice exceedingly in it. For those are the
two parts also of this Chapter. In the first of which she testifies her earnest
desire to find Him; who filled her with joy, when she had got a sight of Him
(in the four first Verses:) in the second, they that attended on her (after He
had renewed his former charge, v. 5.) are transported with joy, to behold the
multitude of his Followers; and the greatness of his Royal Glory. Which is the
sense of the rest of the Chapter.

Spouse.
1. BY night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I
found him not.

1. MAny have been my thoughts about Him, who (by what the Prophets have
foretold of Him) is become the Beloved of my Soul. But though I have sought Him
in the greatest retirements, and when my mind was most composed, and that one
night after another; though with a diligent search I have sought Him in all the
holy Books; yet I can find no more than predictions and shadows of Him, which
assure me He will come; but cannot bring me to the sight and clear knowledge of
Him. See Annot. [a].

2. I will rise now, and go about the city, in the streets, and in the broad
ways I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not.

2. Whereupon I resolved to leave these private Studies, and to go abroad and
consult with others: And there is no place which I have not frequented, where I
thought I might learn any thing of Him. For I have fetched a compass round the
whole City of Jerusalem (which is the holy City, the joy of the whole Earth)
and there is not one Street, not any place of public resort, but I have gone
into it, and inquired after Him, both in the lesser and greater Assemblies; I
enquired of all the holy men I could meet withal: but could meet with no more
tidings of Him; whom my Soul longs to see; because I love Him above all things.
See Annot. [b].

3. The watchmen that go about the city, found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him
whom my soul loves?

3. But in the midst of these anxious thoughts there was some satisfaction
presented to me, from some of those great Ministers of God, who watch for the
good of others; and employ themselves every where to direct his people: of whom
I made the same enquiry if they could tell me any thing of Him, who had engaged
my affections so much, that I could not often enough profess my love unto Him.
See Annot. [c].

4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my sold
loves: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.

4. For I received such illuminations from them, that I had not long left their
Company, before I saw this Beloved of my Soul, as if He had been actually
present with me; Which transported me with such joy, that I could not think of
parting with such a sight, but took fast hold of Him; to keep Him with me, till
I had shown unto all that wait for Him, what I had been so happy as to find my
self. See Annot. [d].

Bridegroom.
5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love.

5. And here again I heard Him graciously renew the Charge He had given before
(II. 7.) to all my Companions, saying, I conjure you by all that is dear to
you, not to discompose, or give the least disturbance to this love; but let it
enjoy its satisfaction, to the height of its desires. See Annot. [e].

Companions.
6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh, and frankincense; with all powders of the merchant?

6. And now, what is this that we see? Who is this goodly person? or rather
this Crowd of people coming up out of desolate places, in one Body, to Mount
Sion: and appearing like the Pillars of Smoke which arise from the Altar of
Burnt Offering; and no less acceptable to God, than the sweet odours that
ascend from the Altar of Incense, in the Holy place? See Annot. [f].

7. Behold, his bed which is Solomon's, threescore valiant men are about it, of
the valiant of Israel.

7. Behold the love which the great King has to her having prepared all things
for her reception into Society with Himself: of whose Royal person and
happiness Solomon himself in all his Glory, is but a Figure. Who is
magnificently attended indeed, and strongly guarded in his Palace, by a number
of valiant persons that encompass him night and day, in his Bed, and in his
Throne: but are not comparable to the power, and force, and multitude of that
heavenly Host, which secure the Church in her enjoyments, and take care of her
continual safety. See Annot. [g].

8. They all hold swords, being expert in war: every man has his sword upon
his thigh, because of fear in the night.

8. Who are all unanimously bent, and in a constant readiness (like that Guard
of valiant men about Solomon, with their Swords drawn in their hands) being no
less skilful than able to succor and defend his people, from all the assaults
of their invisible Enemies; who seek to destroy them, by raising terrible
persecutions against them. See Annot. [h].

9. King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.

9. But all in vain; for, as King Solomon has caused a Chariot of the choicest
Cedar to be made for him, and for his Royal Spouse, to appear in publicly,
when he makes his progress through the Kingdom; so does this far greater King
ride on prosperously (XLV. Psalm. 4.) by the means of such Instruments as He
himself has formed, and enlarges the Borders of his Church, by the preaching
of his everlasting Gospel. See Annot. [i].

10. He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the
covering of it of purple; the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem.

10. Unto which the magnificence* and riches of that Chariot is not worthy to
be compared; though, be Pillars of it being of Silver, the Back, the Sides, and
the Seat being of Cloth of Gold, the Curtains and Covering of it being of the
brightest Purple, the Carpet also under the feet being curiously wrought with
the most lovely Figures, by the Daughters of Jerusalem, they make it very
inviting to all Spectators: For what is this to the wonderful love of God, and
to the Riches of his Grace, in his great and precious promises (far dearer to
all good Souls than thousands of Gold and Silver) which the Gospel calls us not
only to behold, but to enjoy? See Annot. [k].

11. Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals; and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.

11. Make this then a Festival Day, and let no Domestic cares hinder you from
bearing a part in the public joy: but as all the Daughters of Jerusalem went
out to behold the Glory wherein King Solomon shone, when he appeared in State,
with that Royal Crown, which his Mother put upon his head, on his Marriage-day,
that day which completed all his joys (XLV. Psalm. 15.) So let all the people of
God every where admire and extol the surpassing Glory of that great King, who
shall appear to be crowned with Glory, Honor, and Joy by God Himself; on that
happy day, when he shall publicly own His Church, and give her the highest
testimony of His endless love, XIX. Revel. 6, 7, 12. See Annot. [l].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] The beginning of this Chapter might be connected with the
foregoing, and applied to the State of the Church under affliction; if the
following Words would suit with that Exposition, which they do not, in my
Opinion: For He had desired to hear her voice, v. 14. of the second Chapter,
and now she cannot find Him. Therefore I incline to think, that the very same
thing is again represented in other Words (after the manner of the Prophets;
particularly of Isaiah, who over and over again, in several schemes of speech
foretells their restoration from the Captivity of Babylon, and, under that
shadow, their greater salvation by Christ) viz. the earnest desire of the
Church for the coming of Christ: which Solomon expresses by the passionate
longings he found in himself to see that blessed day.

By night] And so by night, may be understood that dark time, which was before
his appearing; when good men sought for Him, and had many Dreams and Visions
about Him: but could meet only with the shadows and images of Him; which
signified Him to come, but did not exhibit his very presence to them. Of which
neither the Temple, nor the Sacrifices, nor the sacred Books, could discover
any thing clearly: but was represented here to Solomon in a Vision he had of
Him, and of the Church which was espoused to Him, after he had sought a long
time, and groped every where after Him, in that dark night wherein they lived.
So, as I said, the night may be expounded: for such a dismal condition were
they in, just when He appeared, IV. Matthew. 16. I. Luke 79.

on my bed] This is expounded with strange variety by Interpreters: some
understanding hereby the bed of affliction, others, the bed of ease and
pleasure, others, of weakness and infirmity, etc. But I have taken both bed and
night, in the most simple sense, to signify the time and place, for most
composed thoughts: according to the meaning of IV. Psalm. 4.

[b] V. 2. I will rise now] To rise up signifies more active diligence, than
before had been used.

go about the City] By the City may be understood Jerusalem; that is, the whole
Church of the Jews, whereof it was the Head; and therefore the Figure of the
Church of Christ in future times, LXII. Isai. 5, 6, 7. XII. Hebr. 22.

in the streets, etc.] Schevakim, which we translate Streets are the lesser
thorow-fares in the City, or the Streets of lesser Cities: as Rechoboth, are
the greater, wider Streets, or rather the Streets of the Royal, Capital City:
signifying here his search both in the lesser and the greater Assemblies of
God's people.

[c] V. 3. The Watchmen that go about, etc.] By Watchmen I understand the
Prophets, and such like excellent persons who instructed the people (III. Ezekiel.
17. XXXIII. 6, 7.) of whom he asks, if they saw Him, whom he sought after. From
which Word I gather that he speaks of such, as were anciently called Seers: of
whom he says he was found; that is, they showed him something of the Messiah.

[d] V. 4.] For so it follows here in this Verse, that not long after his
Discourse with them, he found Him whom his soul loved, i. e. came to the
knowledge; or had a sight and enjoyment of Him. In which Vision (looking upon
Him as actually come) he endeavors to retain Him, and to bring Him into the
Temple, there to show Him to all the pious Worshippers of the Divine Majesty.
For that is literally the House of my Mother: As Cheder Corathi (the Chamber of
her that conceived me) I take to be the inward part of that House; or the most
Holy place.

[e] V. 5.] And there He expresses his affection to him (that is, to the
Church, whose passionate desires Solomon here represents in the four foregoing
Verses) in the same Words, as He had done before in the foregoing Chapter, ver.
7. where this Verse is already explained.

[f] V. 6. Who is this, etc.] Here begins a new Vision, which he had of
multitudes of people gathering unto Christ, like a Cloud of Smoke: which fills
his Companions with great admiration. For it is their voice, which we read in
this Verse: where the Word zoth may be translated either what, or who: and by
the Wilderness may be understood the forlorn condition, wherein men were
before, not only in Gentilism, but even in the Jewish Estate. Which made it
more wonderful, that the Church should come thus richly adorned (expressed here
by the Perfumes of her Garments) to be brought in State and Pomp to the King's
Palace; there to be espoused to Him. But all that gave up themselves to Him
becoming thereby an holy people, were highly esteemed by Him: and therefore
compared here to the Pillars of Smoke (as I take it) that went up every day
from the Altar of Burnt-offering, at the Temple, before mentioned; and ascended
in a strait Line, like a firm Pillar, that was not in the least moved from its
uprightness, though the Wind blew never so boisterously. So the Jews report in
Pirke Avoth, C. 5. and in other Books: where these are reckoned among the ten
Miracles which were seen in the Temple: that the greatest rain never put out
the fire; and the most vehement winds never dispersed, or in the least bent the
smoke: but it went up steadfastly to heaven. And how acceptable such persons
were to Christ, is further represented by the sweet Perfumes which were burnt
upon the Altar of Incense. For Solomon, I conceive, here alludes (in the last
Clause of this Verse) to that composition, which God ordered to be made of
sweet Spices for his own service at the Tabernacle: which none might presume to
imitate, or make use of in other places, XXX. Exodus 34, 35, etc.

[g] V. 7. Behold his bed, etc.] And here is further represented in the same
Vision, the happy condition of the Church (signified by the Bed of Solomon) in
Society and fellowship with Christ: of whom Solomon was a Type, both in his
Royal Person, and State and Marriage (as appears from Psalm. XLV.) whose Bed or
Throne (for the Thrones of the Eastern Kings, were in the form of a Bed or
Couch, wherein more persons than one might sit, III. Revel. 21.) was secured by
the most valiant men in the Kingdom. Who are said to be threescore a
determinate Number being named (as the manner is) for an undeterminate. Though
some conceive that Solomon doubled the number of that Band of mighty men, which
was in David's time, which consisted of thirty, 2 Samuel XXIII. 13, 23. In the
end of which Chapter, v. 39. we read also of thirty and seven persons, who were
of great note for their valor. To whom if we add the eleven Princes mentioned
in 1 Kings IV. beginning: and the twelve great Officers, which had the care of
making provision for his household in the several Provinces, v. 7. they make
just this Number of LX. And may be looked upon as a Figure of that strong Guard,
which is about the prosperity and happiness of the Church: which is defended by
Angels, who are mighty ones indeed, and very numerous (LXVIII. Psalm. 17.) and
all ministering Spirits for those that are Heirs of salvation, I. Heb. ult. nay,
the most mighty of the heavenly Host, it may be easily proved (if this were a
place proper for it) are the Guardians and Protectors of Christianity.

[h] V. 8. because of fear in the night] And do all of them unanimously oppose
the spiritual wickedness, i. e. wicked Spirits, in high places; who seek to
destroy the Church ( VI. Ephesians. 12. and may be meant by the terror of the night,
as the Hebrews expound the XCI. Psalm. 5. and being the Rulers of the Gentile
World stirred them up to persecute Christianity, as destructive to their
Kingdom of darkness.

[i] V. 9. made himself a chariot] But, in spite of all they could do, Christ
is here represented, under the Type of Solomon, as carrying his Church
triumphantly through the World (for the Word appirjon, which is never elsewhere
used, seems to signify an open Chariot, in which Solomon, and, perhaps, his
Queen, rode, to be exposed to the view of every one, in the Streets of
Jerusalem) who beholding her, and the love of Christ to her, were thereby
invited to become Members of his Church.

Most Lexicographers derive this Word appirjon from a Root which signifies to
fructify; and therefore will have it to signify a Bed. But Avenarius I think
more probably has derived it from two Words; which give it the signification
of something carried on Wheels: and therefore must denote, at least a Chariot
having a Bed or Cushion in it.

the wood of Lebanon] is Cedar; denoting the perpetuity of the Gospel: the
preaching of which is the Chariot here mentioned. So Theodoret, by the (...)
(as the Greek translates it) (...), etc. let us understand, says he, the holy
Apostles, who carried the name of the Lord before the Gentiles, and Kings, and
the Children of Israel, etc. These were literally made and formed by Christ
Himself: whereas the Chariot wherein Solomon rode, he could only command or
direct others to make.

[k] V. 10.] The description of the richness of this Chariot of Solomon's,
follows in this Verse: in which we are not to seek, I think, for something in
the Gospel answering to every part of it; but only to look upon it as setting
forth the great splendor of it, and the riches of that Grace, which God
vouchsafed to men therein.

The particular parts of the Chariot I have described as well as I could in our
Language; and inserted in my Paraphase another Translation of the last Word
mibbenoth: which signifies as well from or by, as for, the Daughters of
Jerusalem. The most ingenious of which it is likely were employed in working
that Foot-cloth which lay at the bottom of the Chariot, with elegant Figures:
of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, perhaps, and all their innocent courtships. So
that Phrase may be interpreted, paved with love: but I have contented my self
in the Paraphrase to say only, with lovely Figures.

Some think they find in this Chariot, an imitation of that Seat, whereon God
Himself sat between the Cherubims; with which they have compared it: But I
cannot be persuaded that Solomon would be so audacious.

[l] V. 11.] Nor do I see any foundation for the fancy of the Hebrews in Seder
Olam Rabba, Cap. XV. (which the Chaldee Paraphrase touches upon) Where they
make the day of Solomon's Espousals, to be the next day after the Feast which
he held seven days, for the Consecration of the Temple, 1 Kings VIII. 66. Which
was the day of the gladness of his heart indeed; but cannot be called his
Espousals. Which was not the day of his Coronation neither; for then he did not
ride in a Chariot, but upon his Fathers Mule; and was not crowned by his
Mother, but anointed by Zadock the Priest and Nathan the Prophet, 1 Kings I.
33, 34.

the day of his espousals] therefore was the day when he took Pharaoh's
Daughter to Wife; at which time, it was the manner to crown married persons:
and his Father being dead, it was done by his Mother. Of this Custom mention is
made by many Authors; which the learned Reader may find in Bochart his
Geographia Sacra, Part, 2. L. 1. C. 25. Where he applies that Passage in
Ezekiel unto this, XVI. 8, 12. When I looked upon thee, behold, thy time was
the time of love (i. e. thou wast fit for marriage) I entered into a Covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine; and I put a Jewel in thy forehead, etc. and
a beautiful Crown upon thy head. For the Misneh informs us, that this Nuptial
Grown was in use among the Jews, as well as other Nations.

All which I do not see how it is any other way applicable unto Christ, than I
have expressed in the Paraphrase. The Church indeed her self may be said to be
his Crown and Joy, in that sense wherein St. Paul says the Thessalonians were
his, 1 Thessalonians. II. 19. But this is not to put a Crown upon Him; and the Church
can in no sense be called his Mother, especially since She is his Bride. And
therefore herein Interpreters strain too much; who ought, I think, to have
ascribed that to God the Father in the mystical sense, which is ascribed unto
Bathsheba in the literal.

CHAP. IV.
ARGUMENT.
The first seven Verses of this Chapter I take to belong to the foregoing: and
they are the Words of the Bridegroom, who praising the incomparable beauty of
his Spouse, and assuring her she should still appear more lovely and
illustrious, concludes the third Scene, as some call it, of this Dramatick
Poem. And then begins a new representation at the eighth Verse; which continues
to the second Verse of the fifth Chapter, and composes the IVth part of this
Song. Wherein the Bridegroom expresses his love to his Spouse, his esteem of
her, and joy in her in Words of greater dearness, and higher kindness, than
have been hitherto used. Which she prays may be continued; and he graciously
grants, inviting all to partake in their joys.

Bridegroom.
1. BEhold, thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair, thou have doves eyes
within thy locks; thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from mount Gilead.

1. GReat is thy Beauty, O my Beloved, admirable is thy beauty, and worthy of
all men's contemplation. Whom I can like to nothing better than to a pure and
chaste Virgin 2 Cor. XI. 2.) whose modest eyes fixed only upon Him to whom she
is espoused, sparkle within her Locks, when she is unveiled: and who appears to
want none of those comely Ornaments, which are wont to set off the natural
beauty of the face. See Annot. [a].

2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which came up from
the washing: whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among them.

2. Part of whose grace lies in the sweetness of the mouth, full of white and
even teeth; none of which stand out, or are longer than the rest, but all
closely set both above and below in exact order and equality: being firm and
sound also, without any breach, or want of so much as one of them. See Annot.
[b].

3. Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy
temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.

3. To which add fine and delicate lips, of a bright and lively Crimson-colour;
with a sweet and charming voice; and cheeks that appear of as pure a white and
red, when the Veil is off, as the Blossoms of Pomegranates. See Annot. [c].

4. Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon there
hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

4. And all this upon a goodly Body, of a proper and tall stature; whose round
and well-formed Neck resembles that lofty Structure of the Tower of David,
which may be a Pattern of all other neat and elegant Buildings; and is not more
adorned with the Shields and Bucklers of his Worthies, which hang there in
great abundance, than it is with Pendants, and a Necklace of Pearl, and other
Jewels, which have been the Treasure of mighty Princes. See Annot. [d].

5. Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which feed among
the lilies.

5. Below which the two Breasts rise up, purely white, exactly round, of a just
size and equal bigness: which put me in mind of two young Kids, that being
formed together, and brought forth at the same time, are so perfectly like,
that none can know the one from the other; the tops of whose heads I have seen,
at a distance, appear like the Teats of these Breasts, as they fed in the same
Field among the Lilies. See Annot. [e].

6. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

6. Such as this is the beauty of my Church, as will be seen more fully, when
the Night of Persecution is gone which hides it from the eyes of worldly men:
though in the mean time she is most lovely in mine; and no less precious than
the Mountain and the Hill, from whence are fetched the most excellent Perfumes
and the richest Spices. See Annot. [f].

7. Thou art all fair, my love there is no spot in thee.

7. To say all in one word, Thou, my Love, art the perfection of beauty: there
being a most admirable harmony between the several Orders, Estates, and Degrees
of men in the Church; and not the least spot or blemish (V. Ephesians. 27.) to be
found in its constitution. See Annot. [g].

Bridegroom.
8. Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: look from the
top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the lions dens, from the
mountains of the leopards.

8. And now that all the World may see I have espoused, nay married thee unto
my self (XXI. Rev. 2.) come from those horrid Mountains whither thou have fled
for safety (II. 14, 17.) where, though I was present with thee; yet, thou wast
not free from danger, but exposed to the rage and cruelty of furious and
troublesome men: Come, I say, and dwell there no longer; but look down from
thence, and behold the goodly heritage, and the pleasant state that I have
prepared for thee. See Annot. [h].

9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou have ravished my
heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

9. Thou have strongly engaged my affection; thou have indeared thy self unto
me, my tenderly beloved Spouse; thou have entirely possessed thy self of my
heart, by that lovely unity which I see between thy Pastors, and between the
people that live in holy obedience to them. See Annot. [i].

10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is thy love
than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all Spices.

10. Thy love to me and my Commandments, O how amiable is it! how does it
indear thee unto me, my beloved Spouse! How much more delicious is that love,
which thy Members have one for another, and for all men, than the best
entertainments the World can give! How much more grateful are the rest of thy
Virtues, than the odours of the richest Spices, even of those that are burnt at
the Altar. See Annot [k].

11. Thy lips O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

11. Nor are thy words less pleasing than thy deeds, the Honey that drops of it
self from the Comb, being not more sweet, sincere, and pure, than thy Doctrine,
O my beloved Spouse: which is the delicious Food of young and old, of weak and
strong, and most powerfully recommended to their affections by the famed
holiness of thy life; which like the strong Perfumes that come from the
Aromatic Plants of Libanus, fill all places with the delightful scent thereof.
See Annot. [l].

12. A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse: a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed.

12. For as a Garden well planted, watered and defended abounds with all sort of
Flowers, and with variety of pleasant Fruit; so does my well-beloved Spouse, by
the singular care and special Providence of God over her, with all the fruits
of righteousness; admitting none to her Mysteries, but those who are pure and
holy, and washed from all their defilements. See Annot. [m].

13. Thy Plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, camphire,
with spikenard.

13. Which makes the several orders and Ranks of thy young Novices (such is the
exemplary purity of their lives) look like the young Setts of Pomegranates, and
other odoriferous Fruit: such as the Cyprus, and Spikenards, which are growing
up into a Paradise. See Annot [n].

14. Spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of
frankincense, myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.

14. Planted only with the like precious Herbs, Shrubs and Trees to those now
mentioned; as Saffron, sweet Cane, Cinnamon, with those that yield
Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, and the choicest Spices: which are not more
serviceable to our health or pleasure, than that rare composition of Graces,
which is visible in the Church, make her Members acceptable unto God, and
useful unto men. See Annot. [o].

15. A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.

15. Whose Virtues are preserved in life and vigor by that heavenly Doctrine,
which flows from me as plentifully and perpetually, as Waters do from those
Springs that break out of the high Mountain Libanus: which run continually a in
large Stream; and, supplying all the Gardens in the neighboring places, keep
them fresh and flourishing. See Annot. [p].

Spouse.
16. Awake, O north wind, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the
spices therefore may flow out: let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits.

16. O let not then the inspirations of the Holy Spirit, and its manifold Gifts
be wanting unto me; but breathe perpetually upon me, as the North and the South
Wind do upon this Garden: and then shall I be a Paradise indeed; and not only
fill the World with the sweet odor of the knowledge of Christ; but take the
boldness to invite Him, the Beloved of my Soul, to come and reap the delightful
Fruits (v. 13.) of his own care and labor. See Annot. [q].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] Behold, thou art fair] The Lord of the Church is here
introduced, describing the beautiful estate of it, under the person of a lovely
Virgin: whose elegant features are particularly represented to raise admiration
and love in others, and to give the Church the comfort of being so amiable in
his eyes, whom no beauty can please but that which is Divine. And they are
represented, by comparisons borrowed from the Country: which was most suitable
to a Bucolick, or Pastoral Poem: as, I have already said, this is.

thou have doves eyes] And first her eyes are compared to those of a Dove (for
such Reasons as are suggested in the Paraphrase) when they are unveiled: as
those Words mibbaath letsammatech may be translated (of which, see v. 3.) unto
which I have had respect in my Paraphrase, as well as to our Translation where
this Phrase, is rendered, within thy locks.

thy hair, etc.] Then the hair of this Virgins head, is compared unto that of
Goats, as the next Passage is to be translated, by repeating the Word hair, in
this manner; Thy hair is like the hair of a Flock of Goats. Thus the people of
Israel are said to have brought for the service of the Tabernacle, scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats; that is, Goats hair, as we truly translate it, XXXV.
Exodus 23. And in the next Chapter, v. 13. he made Curtains of Goats (where we
supply the Word hair) for the Tent over the Tabernacle, according as he had
been ordered, XXV. 4. XXVI. 7. Upon which Passages Abarbinel observes, that
Moses makes no mention of Wool, either of Lamb or Sheep; because that was vile
and contemptible in those Countries, in comparison with the hair of Goats:
which was wont to be shorn not only there, but in other places; for Aristotle
observes the same of the Goats of Cilicia. And some of them had a Wool, as we
may call it, so fine, that it was almost as soft as Silk: which was that the
Women spun for the use of the Tabernacle, XXXV. Exodus 26. To this sort of hair,
perhaps, there may be an allusion in this place, in regard of its softness, as
well as length and thickness; which is a great commendation of hair in men and
women.

But there was also a courser or harder sort, with which they made Locks and
Ornaments for the Head; when they were bald, or would appear very fine: as
Braunius has observed, in his Book about the Priests Garments, L. I. C. 9.

And in general it may be observed of hair, that it was always accounted a very
great Ornament: which made Philostratus, in a Letter of his to a Youth whom he
loved, beseech him by no means to cut it off, (...), there being no less beauty
in a good Head of hair, than in Gold, in Silver, in Pendants, and such like
Ornaments. Which he illustrates by what it contributes to the greatness of
several other Creatures, as the Lion, and Horse, etc. and was notably expressed
by Lycurgus, when he gave this reason, why he ordered in his Laws that his
Citizens should take care of the growth of their hair, because it made
beautiful persons more comely, and deformed more terrible; as Plutarch relates
in his Apophthegms.

that appear from mount Giled] Galaad was a Mountain fit for Goats to brouze
on, as may be seen in Bochart: who shows these last Words of this Verse, should
be thus translated: that ascend from Mount Gilead, to the higher parts, that
is, of that Mountain, or of that Country.

I should have adventured to compare the Apostles and Prophets to these two
eyes; who being illuminated by the Holy Ghost (represented by a Dove) and
having no other aim, but sincerely to make Christ and his religion known in the
World, resembled the eyes of Doves (see Chap. II. v. 14.) but I did not know to
what the Locks and the Hair could be handsomely applied; and therefore I have
looked upon these, and the rest that follow, only as parts of those things that
make up together a perfect beauty. Theodoret has made the aptest application,
that I can find, which is this: that hair signifying what is superfluous, the
meaning may be (if there be any of every particular in this Description) that
even in humane things, and worldly Affairs, wherewith we cannot but be sometime
perplexed, the Church behaves her self laudably and preserves a decorum.

[b] V. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep] Here follows a description of
the Teeth; which are a great part of the beauty of the mouth, as that is of the
face. And their beauty consists in their whiteness; in their evenness and just
proportions; and in their closeness and firmness: so that there be none
wanting, nor any Gap between them. Which are all here expressed, and said to be
like a Flock of Sheep come from the washing, in respect of whiteness; and as
equal as if they had been exactly polished and fitted for their places, in just
proportion, by an Artificer (so the Word we translate shorn signifies) they
that are below also answering to those above, as if they were Twins. And none
of them miscarry (so that which we translate barren should be rendered) i. e.
drops out of the mouth: which is as much as to say, there is a perfect number,
as well as order of them.

Now the Teeth being the Instruments whereby we chew our Meat, they may be
looked upon as an apt Emblem of the inferior Pastors in the Church: who prepare
Christian Doctrine for the people. Which Application, though I have not
adventured to make in my Paraphrase (because I take these five first Verses to
mean no more, but only to set forth the loveliness of the Church in general, by
the Figure of a Virgin, of a most accomplished beauty) yet, I shall here note,
for the help of those whose thoughts lead them that way, that the Virtues of
such Pastors are, candor, purity, order, concord, exact agreement among
themselves, one of them not seeking ambitiously to overtop the rest.

[c] V. 3. Thy lips, etc.] In the beginning of this Verse there is no great
difficulty: it being certain that Schani (the color of the lips) signifies
some very bright and resplendent color; which strikes the eyes sharply (as it
originally seems to import) viz. either Scarlet, as we translate it, or
Crimson, or Purple: such as the Poets call Coral Lips. Whose fineness is here
compared to a Thread; and is another great part of Beauty: as a sweet accent of
the Voice also is; nothing being more ungrateful than a tone that is coarse and
clownish.

If any list to apply these particularly to something in the Church; the Lips
may be thought to signify the Teachers in the Church, who delivered the
Doctrine they had learnt from the higher Ministers; who had prepared it for
them; and, by them, for the people. And then the voice signifies their
excellent manner of preaching: insinuating into the hearts of those that heard
them; being accompanied with great modesty and humility, though full of
authority and power. Unto which only the last Clause of this Verse can be
applied; which is this,

thy Temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate, within thy locks.

Where two or three Words puzzle Interpreters. First, that which we translate
Temples; which are not reckoned as a part of the beauty of the face, especially
being covered by the Locks: and why they should be likened to a Slice of a
Pomegranate, is hard to tell. Grotius therefore, by the Temples understands the
Cheeks (as the Vulgar does) which in regard of their redness, are like to the
Grains or Kernels within a Pomegranate. So the Chaldee indeed interprets the
other Word, a piece of a Pomegranate: when he thus glosses, They are
replenished, ( viz. just and pious men to whom he applies it) with Precepts, as
a Pomegranate: i. e. as a Pomegranate is with Kernels or Grains with which it
abounds, and to which that Interpreter, no doubt, has respect.

But our learned Dr. Castle has out of the Neighboring Languages more
clearly explained both these Words, and the last also; and has made them all
easy and natural, by showing that the whole Clause is thus most exactly
translated: as the Flower of the Pomegranate, so are thy Cheeks without a Veil.
So he translates the last Words, which we met withal before, v. 1. mibbaath
letsammatech not within thy locks; but without a Veil. That is, when thy veil
is laid aside, thy Cheeks appear of a most lovely color; for such is that of
the Pomegranate-Flower; the purest white and red, most exactly mixed. V. Orat.
in Schola Theolog. p. 37.

[d] V. 4. Thy neck is like, etc.] The neck being compared to the Tower of that
goodly Fortress, which David made upon Mount Sion, which overtopt all the rest
of the Buildings of the City of Jerusalem, denotes, among other things, the
tallness of the whole Body.

built for an armoury] This Tower is said to be built letalpijoth (for an
Armory we render it) which the LXX knew not what to make of, and therefore
retain the Hebrew Word: and others do but guess at its meaning; having no
certain Root, from whence to fetch its Original. Aquila translates it
Fortifications; but Symmachus translates it heighths: which last I have
followed, adding another signification also derived from alaph, to teach or
instruct.

thousand bucklers] This Tower it seems was adorned with the Shields and
Bucklers of those mighty men mentioned 1 Samuel XXIII; and such like Worthies:
With which Grotius ingeniously compares those precious Stones, which are wont
to be the Ornament of the Neck. But what answers to this in the Body of the
Church, I know not; unless we admit the Opinion of R. Solomon and others of
that Nation: who will have this to be the place where the Sanhedrim had a Room
called in their Language Liskath haggazith, the Chamber or Parlour of square
Stones (which some Interpreters have thought to be the meaning of built
letalpijoth with square Stones) where Judgment was administered, and their
Discipline preserved. Which was the strength and support of the Nation, as the
General Council of the Apostles and Elders, mentioned Act. XV. was of the
Christian Church: who settled all doubts and Controversies, as future Councils
were to do, and thereby maintained the Church in order and peace. From which
Theodoret does not much differ, when he says the Church has many Shields,
whereby it is defended. For thou art armed with all the Weapons of the Spirit
(says he paraphrasing upon these Words) whereby thou easily woundest thy
Enemies, etc. and sometimes do refel them by the Prophets, sometimes by the
Apostles; and layest open their weakness.

[e] V. 5. Thy two breasts, etc.] The two Paps rise upon the Breast, like
Lilies from the Ground: among which if we conceive two red Kids feeding, that
were Twins and perfectly alike, they appeared like the Nipples or Teats upon
the Paps, to those that beheld them afar off. Thus Bochart explains this
Comparison: which sets forth the exact proportion, and the pure complexion of
the Breasts; unto which, most think the Two Testaments, the Old and the New,
very aptly answer in the Christian Church, just as R. Solomon hereby
understands the two Tables of Stone in the Jewish. But they forget that this is
a description of the parts of the Church (not of things belonging to it) and
can be applied to nothing, that I can think of, but the two Orders of
Preachers, that were, one among the Jewish Christians, and the other among the
Gentiles, as Gregory the Great expounds it. Who thinks these are called Twins,
because of their perfect agreement and concord in the Christian Doctrine:
though one of them bent their endeavors most toward the conversion of the
Jews, and the other of the Gentiles. And indeed they that taught the first
Rudiments of Christian Doctrine, went forth by Pairs, as we read Luke X. where
Christ is said to send them forth by two and two; to admonish them how
necessary their concord was; and that they had need to be assistant, all they
could, one to the other in such a difficult Work.

[f] V. 6. mountain of myrrh, etc.] Here now the description stops, and
proceeds no further to the lower Members of the Church: which are not
particularly commended, but it is only intimated that, in conjunction with
their Guides and Directors, they made up a beautiful Body; though for the
present obscured by the Night of persecution, as the first Words of this Verse
may be applied. Which Body might be well compared to a Mountain of Myrrh, and
Hill of Frankincense, that is, to Mount Moriah and Jerusalem, say the Hebrews
(and so the Church is called the New Jerusalem in the Revelation) where the
sweet incense made of these and other Spices (XXX. Exodus 34.) were continually
burnt in the Temple.

I know it is commonly thought that other Mountains (afterward mentioned, v.
8.) are here meant: about which I shall not dispute. But only observe that
these two, Myrrh and Frankincense, were among the most precious Spices of those
Countries (and therefore here mentioned) as appears by what we read in
Athenaeus (L. I. Diepnosoph. C. 3.) who, speaking of the noble Entertainments,
which were made by several persons that overcame in the Olympicks, tells us
that Empedocles, being a Pythagorean, and eating no Flesh, when he won the
Prize, caused an Ox to be made of Myrrh and Frankincense and other precious
Spices, which he divided among the Spectators. And (Cap. 8.) he puts these two
among those things, which were accounted (...), delicacy. And Hermippus
relating what places were most famous for several things, says -- (...) that
Frankincense came out of Syria, Cap. 21. The Verses also of Archestratus (L.
III. p. 101.) make mention of Syria, and say these were used for Perfumes at
Feasts. The same I observe in other places of that Author; and therefore have
made the allusion here only to the preciousness of these things; which were no
where so excellent as in those Countries. And I have taken this Verse to be
still in praise of the before-described Beauty: for it is evident, from the
following Verse, he had not yet done with that matter.

[g] V. 7. Thou art all fair, etc.] And here, to comprehend all that could be
said, he enlarges the commendation which he began withal, v. 1. and concludes
in these Words that there was no defect in any part: but altogether they made
up a complete Beauty without the least speck of deformity. Which is not to be
applied to every particular person in the Church: but, as I have taken it in
the Paraphrase, to the admirable Constitution of the whole, in which there was
no imperfection.

[g] V. 8. Come with me from Lebanon, etc.] Here now begins a new
representation; as appears by this that the Style wherein the Bridegroom speaks
is altered; she who hitherto has been called his Love or Friend, being now
called his Spouse, and never before: though very frequently in the following
part of the Song. Which has moved Interpreters, I suppose to use this name
throughout, rather than the other: as the higher and most excellent Title.

Theodoret therefore here begins his Third Book, very judiciously: and we may
look upon this as a description of the Church, coming out of the state of
persecution: and receiving greater testimonies of her Savior 's love than
ever. For coming from the top of high Mountains, where there were Lions Dens,
and where Leopards inhabited; cannot well signify any thing else, than coming
from places where they were in danger to be devoured by their Persecutors: who
are compared to Lions in many places of Scripture.

As for the Mountains themselves, they are well-known where they were. Only
Amana some have fansied to be, that Mountain in Cilicia, called Amanus: which
is reckoned among the highest; and joined by Aelian with Libanus and Carmel. We
read also that there were Tigers and Panthers, etc. in this Mountain; which
has been brought to countenance this Opinion. But Judaea and the Neighboring
places, being the Scene of this Poem, we are not to go so far off as Cilicia to
seek for Amana: for as Senir and Hermon were but parts of the same Mountains;
so Amana was a part of Libanus, as Bochartus has observed in his Canaan, L. I.
C. 5. And though the lower parts of this Mountain Libanus were very pleasant;
yet the top of it, which is here spoken of, was horrid, and inhabited with wild
Beasts. From whence the Spouse is invited to come into more delightful and
secure places: for she is compared presently after to a Garden or Paradise, v.
12, 13, etc. And it is no wonder Solomon should have the state of the Christian
Church in trouble, thus represented to him: it being very suitable to the state
of the Church of the Jews, when it was first formed; being then pressed by
Pharaoh, and many other Enemies afterward, before they came to Canaan.

[i] V. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, etc.] The first Word of this Verse
libbavtini (which is not to be found any where else) signifies some
extraordinary motion in the heart. And is translated by some, Thou have wounded
my heart; by the LXX (which we follow) thou have taken away my heart: but may
as well be translated, Thou have taken possession of my heart; and deeply
engaged my affection. Which is expressed by the addition of another name for
her, whom he called Spouse in the foregoing Verse; and here also calls Sister.
Which is only a Word of tenderness and indearment, used by Husbands to their
Wives; as appears by the Book of Tobit; where Raguel calls his Wife Edna, his
Sister, VII. 16; and Tobias call; Sara by the same name, after he had married
her, VIII. 4, 7.

one of thine eyes, etc.] All the difficulty here is, what may be thought to be
meant by one of her eyes, and one chain of her neck. Some take eyes to signify
Faith and Charity; others the Church of the Jews and Gentiles; and then one eye
must signify one glance, one look of thy eyes: but nothing pleases me better
than the old Interpretation of Alcuinus, who by the Word one understands
oneness or unity: and by the eyes (as v. 1.) the Pastors and Guides of the
Church: And by the one wreath of hair about the neck; the pious unity of the
people subject unto them.

It may be interpreted also, the least glance I have of thee and of thy beauty,
mightily engages my love to thee: for the eyes are the very Seat of Love, as
abundance of Authors express it.

[k] V. 10. How fair is thy love] The love or rather loves (as it is in the
Hebrew) which is here extolled; may signify our love to God, and unto one
another. And Ointments, be applied, to all the Graces which flow from thence.

[l] V. 11. Thy lips distill, etc.] That which distills from the lips, as Honey
from the Comb, can be nothing but pure and most delicious Doctrine; delivered
in such a manner, as to invite all to taste of it. For this by all sort of
Authors is compared to Honey; and made Xenophon be called the Attick, and
Sappho the Pierian Be: because of the sweetness of his Orations, and of her
Poems. Whence the rare Eloquence of Plato, is said to have been predicted by
Bees, which came and sat in his mouth, when he was an Infant: which is reported
also, by no mean Authors, of Pindar, Lucan, and St. Ambrose.

honey and milk are under thy tongue] This signifies the same thing; for these
were anciently the Food of Infants; and may denote that the Church has
instruction for all sorts. So wide from the truth is the Exposition of the
Doctors in Maimonides ( porta Mosis, p. 83.) that this Milk and Honey being
said to lie under the tongue, signifies the concealment of such truths as are
very sweet, till men be fit to receive them.

the smell of thy garments] Garments, wherewith we are clothed, signify, in
the New Testament, our whole Conversation: and their Perfume therefore denotes
not only the excellency of the Christian life; but its being known also every
where.

like the smell of Lebanon] From the Trees in the Forest of Lebanon came many
sweet Spices; particularly Frankincense; from which some think it took its name
of Lebanon; though others think rather from laban, white, because of the Snow
that lay perpetually upon the top of this Mountain.

[m] V. 12. A garden enclosed,] in the Forest about this Mountain Lebanon,
Solomon built himself an house; which we find described, 1 Kings VII. 2, etc.
unto which, no doubt, there belonged a Garden, with Springs, and Fountains, or
Receptacles of Water; and all sorts of Trees, and Plants, and Flowers, that
might make it delightful. Unto which, I conceive, he has respect in this, and
in the following Verses.

I know that very good Authors think he here describes a perfect Virgin; like a
Garden newly enclosed, in which no Seed has been sown: as the Doctors speak in
Perke Eliezer, Cap. 21. which has made some Christian Writers apply this to
the care of the Church, to preserve her self pure and undefiled, etc. But it is
more agreeable to what goes before, and follows after, to expound it as
Theodoret does of the Church bringing forth not only the fruits of godliness
and Virtue, but all sorts and variety of Fruit: like an excellent Garden: and
therefore guarded by the singular care and Providence of her Lord and Owner,
from Tyrants and Heretics; who like wild Beasts, or Thieves would destroy or
deflower her.

a spring shut up, etc.] The same meaning has a Spring shut up, and a Fountain
sealed; that the Waters may be preserved from dirt and filth: which cannot be
thrown or fall into them, to trouble them and make them muddy, when they are so
secured; but they flow purely. And, indeed, in the Prophetical Language the
flourishing condition of the Church, after it has been in affliction, is set
forth by the planting of a Wilderness, with all sorts of the best Trees; and by
making Fountains break forth, and Waters flow therein, XLI. Isai. 18, 19. LI. 2.

The LXX (according to the Vatican Copy, and that which Theodoret follows) and
the Vulgar Latin, take the second comparison here, to be the same with the
first; reading it thus, A Garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, a Garden
enclosed, etc. (just like v. 9. and v. 11.) reading, it seems, in the Hebrew
Began a Garden, where we now read Gal a Spring. But this does not at all alter
the sense, and therefore need not trouble the Reader.

It is possible that in the last Words of the Verse, a Fountain sealed, there
may be a description of the Christian Font, or Baptism: to which none were
admitted, but such as sincerely renounced all wickedness; resolving and
promising to lead a holy life. Which sense Theodoret may be thought to have
expressed, when he says, the Church is compared to a Fountain sealed, (...),
as not lying exposed to all Comers, but only to those who are worthy. Though
his next Words seem to confine this Passage to the Mysteries, in the other
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood. Which they only that are already
initiated in the Christian Church can partake of; and not all they neither: but
such only as do not after their initiation wallow again in filthiness; but live
accurately, or purify themselves by repentance if they fall into any sin.

St. Cyprian makes use of this Verse, to prove the Unity of the Church; not
only in his Book upon that Subject, but in several of his Epistles; saying, If
the Church be a Garden enclosed, and a Fountain sealed; how can any man enter
into that Garden, or drink of that Fountain who is not in the Church! etc. v.
Epist. 69, 74, 75. Edit. Oxon.

Cotovicus, in his Itinerary, says that there is a Fountain three Miles from
Bethlehem Southward, called by this name of Fountain Sealed: to which he went,
and was told that water still runs from thence in Pipes to the place where
Solomon's Temple stood. But he himself intimates, that herein he follows an
uncertain report.

[n] V. 13. Thy plants, etc.] By these Schelachim, young Plants or Shoots and
Siens (as the Word signifies) we may well understand those whom the Apostle
calls (...). who had newly received Christianity: and are here represented as a
goodly Nursery of Pomegranates. A Fruit in that Country very delicious, and no
less useful many ways: for it was of a grateful smell, and had a winy Juice,
very refreshing; and therefore much desired in those hot places. Theodoret also
thinks that hereby is set forth, the great variety of Christians in the Church;
or, as his Words are, the many Orders of Christians that shall be saved. For
there is one Order of Virgins; another of Widows; another of married people; as
there are also, rich and poor, Masters and Servants, etc. who all have their
several places and stations in one and the same Church; as the Grains of the
Pomegranate lie in their several Cells, and distinct Closets (as they may be
called) and yet are all contained in the same Shell; and all compose one Body.

Camphire] Of Copher, which we translate Camphire; see Chap. I. v. 14. Where it
is joined with Nard, as it is here. Of which (i. e. of Nard) there were several
kinds; and therefore a Word of the Plural Number is here used; as a Word of the
Singular in the beginning of the next Verse: which we in English express by the
same Word Spikenard in both places.

[o] V. 14. Saffron, Calamus, etc.] Most of the names of these fragrant Shrubs
or Trees, which we read in the Hebrew Text, are the very same with those now in
use in our, and most other Languages. The first of them Carcom (Saffron) being
not much different from Crocus: from whence that Mountain in Cilicia called
Corycus had its name; where the best Crocus in the World then grew. The next
Canna (which we translate Calamus) is a sweet Cane or Reed. Cinnamon also
retains the same name: as do Myrrh (which grew only in the midst of Arabia
among the Sabaeans) and Aloes, which dropped from a Shrub in those Countries; and
was reckoned among the prime Spices, as the last Words of this Verse are very
well translated.

Chief Spices] In the Hebrew the Words are the top or the head of Aromaticks:
which signifies the most excellent Spices. Just as the top of Myrrh, XXX.
Exodus 23. signifies the best and purest Myrrh; and the top or head of Oil,
CXLI. Psalm. 1. the most excellent Oil. I shall only note further, that
Frankincense, Myrrh, Calamus, Cinnamon (called there (...)) are thus joined
together by an ancient Poet in Athenaeus, L. IX. Cap. 15. Where Mnesimachus, in
a Poem of his called Hippotrophos making a description of a great Supper, which
was a Marriage Feast; says at the end of it,

(...)
(...) (it should be (...) I suppose) (...), etc.
Where (...) (the attribute of smell) which we commonly translate venerable,
and is so rendered in the ancient Glossary, signifies most excellent. For by
that Word the LXX translate the Hebrew negidim, VIII. Prove. 6. excellent or
princely things. And so noble was the smell which these Spices gave, that the
Poet says it shaked the Nostrils, i. e. strongly affected them: and stirred up
in the Brain a brisk sense of pleasure.

I do not think fit to seek for any thing in the Church, particularly answering
to every one of these excellent Spices, as Interpreters do: but look upon them
only, as representing in general the incomparable Virtues of the Church; and
its acceptableness unto God. Or, that there are in the Church all things
necessary to salvation: for rare Unguents, and other Compositions, were made of
the Blossoms, Fruit, or Seeds of these Shrubs; conducing much to health and
long life.

[p] V. 15.] A fountain of gardens, etc. This Verse Theodoret judiciously
connects with the foregoing; after this manner: (...) and it (i. e. this
Paradise or Orchard, as we translate it) has also a Fountain.

A Fountain of Gardens, and Well of living Water, are the same thing; as
Bochartus has observed in his Canaan, L. I. C. 18. Where he shows that Beer
which we translate Pit or Well, signifies a Fountain, as much as Maajan.
Libanus abounds with such Springs (as all great Mountains do) and particularly
there is at the foot of it, an excellent Spring; which grows presently into a
River; that waters the whole Plain between that and Tripolis, with a good
Stream; whereby the Vineyards, Oliveyards, Fig-yards, and Gardens, which there
were very numerous, were all supplied. Unto which Theodoret compares the
Evangelical Doctrine* (according to that of our Blessed Savior's, IV John 10,
14.) only he adds also the Law; making Fountain and Well in this Verse, two
distinct things; and by the latter imagining the Law to be denoted; because
things lay there deep and secret, as in a Pit.

[q] V. 16. Awake, O North Wind, etc.] The same Great Person thinks the
North Wind is here commanded to arise, merely that it might be gone (as being
pernicious to Fruit) and give place to the South Wind, which is only invited to
come and blow upon the Garden, with its soft, benign and gentle breath. But
most Interpreters take it otherways: And some imagine that these two, being the
most vehement Winds in those Countries, are called upon to blow; that by their
strong shaking of the Aromatic Plants, they might make them send forth their
odours the more plentifully. But it seems more reasonable to think, that these
two Winds were most profitable in their turns, for these two purposes. First,
the North Wind was useful to close the Pores of the Trees, and shut up their
Effluviums; that they might not spend themselves too much, and be exhausted by
perpetual evaporations. And then the Southwind coming in due season, opened and
relaxed them again: making the Aromatic Gums drop freely; and the sweet odours
fly more actively abroad.

And if this Garden to which Solomon here alludes, had the same situation,
which the Maps and Charts give to that at Jerusalem (which they place on the
East Side of the City, having the Wall on the West) these two Winds here
mentioned, were those, which alone were desirable. The East being biting and
blasting not only in Egypt, XLI. Genesis 6. but in Judaea also, XIX. Ezekiel. 12. and
in Assyria, IV. Jonah 8. And therefore they defended their Fruits against it,
that they might not be exposed to it.

let my beloved come, etc.] There is no doubt but this conclusion of the
Chapter, is the voice of the Spouse; praying her Beloved to favor and prosper
his own Plantation, for his sake as well as for hers: that he might not lose
what He himself had designed, and so happily begun and settled in such beautiful
Order; but take the pleasure of seeing it grow to perfection.

CHAP. V.
ARGUMENT.
The first Verse belonging (as was said before in the Argument of the fourth
Chapter) to the foregoing representation; a new one begins ver. 2. which
continuing to the end of this Chapter, makes the fifth part of this Pastoral.
Wherein is represented how soon our Spirits flag, and grow weary of the most
heavenly delights; nay, how drowsy the best minds sometimes are, and how
insensible of God's love. For the Spouse is introduced (v. 2, 3.) as in a
slumber; and not so ready, as formerly, to comply with his gracious motions. At
which the Bridegroom takes not such distaste, as to leave her in that dullness;
but awakes her out of it, to such a lively sense of her negligence; that she
applies her self to seek his favor with greater earnestness than ever, v. 4,
5, 6. The sense of which, though she could not presently recover (v. 6, 7, 8.)
yet she expresses the greatest passion for him, and the highest admiration of
him: in a rare description which she makes (v. 10. to the end of the Chapter)
of his beauteous excellencies and perfections.

Bridegroom.
1. I Am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; I have gathered my myrrh
with my spice, I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, I have drank my wine
with my milk: eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

1. I Am well pleased to see the fruitfulness of my Garden, and therefore have
not denied thy request, my tenderly Beloved Spouse; but am present in it, and
have brought it to such perfection that it has produced many excellent
persons, more precious than Myrrh, and all the Spices before-named: with whose
services I am not only well pleased, but rejoice in the purity of their
Doctrine; and of their lives; inviting all that bear any love to me, both in
Heaven and in Earth, to rejoice and to be exceeding glad together with me. See
Annot. [a].

Spouse.
2. I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocks,
saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

2. I heard these gracious words, though I was not perfectly awake, and knew it
was his voice, and not the voice of a Stranger (X. Joh. 5.) which called upon
me, and that with importunity (III. Rev. 20.) saying, Give me free admission
into thy best affections; why do thou delay, who art so very dear to me, so
entirely beloved by me, who have consented to love me above all things, and to
keep thy self holy and undefiled by loving me alone: which I have long desired;
and taken much pains, and endured great hardships to win thy love. See Annot.
[b].

3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

3. But so stupidly dull, and drowsy was I at this time, that I did not answer
his kindness, as it deserved: but made unmannerly excuses, and desired I might
not be disturbed, now that I was taking my repose and could not without
difficulty leave my Bed, and my beloved rest; the sweetness of which I had
begun to taste. See Annot. [c].

4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were
moved for him.

4. And yet such is the kindness of Him who is worthy of all love, He did not
presently leave me to my self, but first raised me out of my slumber, by
letting me know He was not well pleased with me; and making me sensible of the
danger of such delays: which put me in such a commotion, that I was in great
anguish of mind, and even quivered and shaked with fear, and grief, and sorrow.
See Annot. [d].

5. I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet, smelling mirrh, upon the handles of the lock.

5. Whereby I was not quite dejected; but only excited to shake off my sloth,
and to make the more haste to acknowledge his Goodness, and embrace his
gracious motions to me: unto which I applied my self with zealous endeavors,
resolving to entertain Him with the most ardent love, and with the highest
expressions of my esteem of Him and of his favor. See Annot. [e].

6. I oponed to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone:
my soul failed when he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him; I called
him; but he gave me no answer.

6. But, though I thus repented of my negligence; yet, see the lamentable
effects thereof; for, when I had thus disposed my heart, and set it wide open
to receive his Commands, my Beloved had withdrawn his gracious presence, and
was gone quite away out of my sight: Which made me even sink down and die with
fear, that I should not recover Him again; especially when I called to mind
those many words of Grace: wherewith he made his Addresses to me; calling me
(v. 2.) his Sister, his Love, his Dove, his undefiled: with which I was now
affected too late; for I sought Him diligently, but could not find Him; I
beseeched and entreated Him to return, but received no Answer from Him. See
Annot. [f.]

7. The watchmen that went about the city, found me, they smote me, they
wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

7. This, though it was very bitter to me, yet, did not utterly discourage me,
but still I continued to seek Him every where, as I had done heretofore (III.
3.) but they who formerly instructed me, and directed me unto Him, now fell
upon me with grievous reproofs, nay, reproaches for my fault; which cut me to
the very heart: nay, they whose Office it was to preserve the City of God in
peace and safety, exposed me to open shame, and the foulest disgrace. See
Annot. [g].

8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love.

8. So I turned my self to those of my Neighbors and familiar Acquaintance,
who were awakened by my cries to come an see what the matter was; and conjured
them, as they would answer it to God, that if they met with my Beloved, they
would let Him know -- what shall I say? what shall I desire you to tell Him?
but that I do not enjoy my self, now that I want his Company; nor can be well,
till I recover his love again. See Annot. [h].

9. What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women?
what is thy beloved more than another beloved; that thou do so charge us?

9. And some of them had so much compassion upon me as to interest themselves
so far in my sorrows, as to enquire into the cause of them: and how they might
be assistant unto me in their cure: for they asked me, Wherein does thy beloved
excel other excellent persons? He is very lovely, no doubt, because beloved of
thee, who art the most amiable of all other Women; but what is his
pre-eminence, wherein do those, who are worthy of the greatest love, fall short
of Him? that thou art thus solicitous about Him, and layest such a severe
charge upon us, to assist thee in thy search of Him. See Annot. [i].

10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

10. To whom I replied, My Beloved, is that great Son of David, of whom you
have heard: who is of a Princely form, having admirable Beauty and sweetness
mixed with equal Majesty and brightness; dazzling the eyes of those that behold
Him; chosen by God to do the greatest things; and bring all Nations into his
obedience, See Annot. [k].

11. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a
raven.

11. And therefore wears a Crown of pure Gold upon his head: from whence his
curled Locks hang down upon his Brow; which are of such a shining black, that
they add an excellent Grace and Greatness to his Royal Beauty. See Annot [l].

12. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with
milk, and fitly set.

12. His Eyes are sparkling; and yet mild; like those of milk-white Doves, when
they are highly delighted, as they sit by the Rivers side, or other places
where there is abundance of water. See Annot. [m].

13. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lilies
dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

13. The lovely Down also upon his Cheeks is no less grateful; rising there
like Spices, when they first appear out of their Beds; or like the young Buds
of Aromatic Flowers in the Paradise before-described: where the Purple Lilies
are not more beautiful than his Lips; from whence flow Words more precious and
more pleasant, than the richest and most fragrant Myrrh. See Annot. [n].

14. His hands are as goldrings set with the beryl: his belly is as bright
ivory overlaid with sapphires.

14. And as He has the Majesty of a Prince, so He has the compassion of a
Priest: and therefore clothed with such a Vest as the High Priest wears, when
he ministers before God, and is adorned with the Ephod; unto which the
Breast Plate, with all its precious Gems, is constantly annexed. See Annot. [o].

15. His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

15. His Thighs also are covered with fine Linen, which makes them look like
Pillars of the whitest Marble; over which the holy Robe is thrown, with golden
Bells at the bottom of them: all which are so contrived for Beauty and Glory,
that his aspect, when He appears in these flowred Vestments, is no less stately
and great, than the Forest of Lebanon; whose goodly Cedars do not more excel
all other Trees, than He does all other men. See Annot. [p].

16. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved,
and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

16. So you would say, as well as I, if you did but hear Him speak, or if He
did but breathe upon you; and, to say all in one word, there is nothing wanting
to make him the Desire of all Nations; nor any thing in Him, but what is
desirable: and therefore do not wonder, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, that I am
thus concerned about Him, and restless till I find Him; for this is the true
Portraicture of my Beloved, this is the Character of Him, who by owning me for
such, gives me leave to call Him, My Friend. See Annot. [q].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] Unto that invitation, which is made by the Spouse in the latter
end of the foregoing Chapter the Bridegroom here gives an answer: and testifies
his acceptance, by coming to taste the Fruit of his Garden, nay, to make a
Feast in it; of which He calls his Friends and Companions, after the manner of
those Countries, to be partakers. His receiving Fruit from his Garden is
expressed in these Words, I have gathered my Myrrh, with the rest of the Spices
mentioned in the former Chapter. Then follows the Feast, (which they always
made when they gathered the Fruits of the Earth) in these Words, I have eaten
my Honey comb with my Honey, etc. Which is put instead of all other things,
because it was one of the greatest entertainments of those Countries. As
appears from hence, that it was among the Presents sent to Joseph when Viceroy
of Egypt, XLIII. Genesis 11. and brought to David by the Great men of the Country,
as part of his provision, while he dwelt among them in his Banishment, 2 Samuel
XVII. 29. and is mentioned also by Homer as the entertainment which Hecamede
gave Nestor and Patroclus; before whom she set green or fresh Honey.

And as that comprehends all Royal Dainties that were to be eaten, so Wine and
Milk all the Liquors at the Feast: whereby is represented the joy He took in
the Fruit of his Garden. In which joy he would have all good men, and Angels
themselves (XV. Luke, 7, 10.) to participate in the highest measure; that their
joy, as our Lord speaks, might be full. For that is the meaning of Drink, yea
drink abundantly, O Beloved.

I have not adventured to be very particular in specifying the things, to which
these expressions may be applied; but have only mentioned the Evangelical
Doctrine, and the Good Works of Christians. If by Myrrh and Spices, any special
thing be designed, I should think it is the Martyrs; who offered up themselves
most acceptable Sacrifices unto Christ, and made greater joy in Heaven, than
the mere repentance of a Sinner could do. And the joy that Christ took in such
victorious Souls, as laid down their lives for Him, nay, did but heartily
entertain his Doctrine; is expressed by their feasting with Him, III. Revel. 20.

The last Words, Eat, O Friends, drink, etc. may soberly be applied to the
Eucharist: where we feast with Christ on his Sacrifice, and He feasts with us,
beholding our love to Him and one to another.

[b] V. 2.] Here now begins a new Scene or Part of this Pastoral Song. Wherein
Solomon represents himself as having lost that clear sight of the Messiah,
which he had in the foregoing Vision, Chap. III. 4 (for they could not always
keep up their minds to such a pitch of contemplation.) But falling into a
trance, thought he heard his voice (though he saw not his person) speaking to
his Spouse. Whom Solomon conceives to be in the same condition, wherein he then
was himself; and to hear those Words spoken, v. 1. between sleeping and waking.
So the first Words of this Verse signifies, I sleep, but my heart waketh: the
same with those of Baalam, XXIV. Numb. 4. falling (asleep) but having my eyes
open. In which condition the Greeks describe their Saturn; of whom they say,
(...), sleeping he saw, and waking he slept.

She having therefore but an imperfect sense of his kindness to her, and
presence with her, He awakens her to attend more lively to his love; which He
was desirous more fully to discover; and therefore calls upon her by more names
of endearment than ever. For here are four put together, the following rising
still higher than the foregoing. And he represents (after the manner of Lovers)
what He had suffered to gain her affection: which seems to me to be the meaning
of the last Words, My head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of
the night. Wherein He is represented as a beautiful Nazarite, having bushy
Hair, and many Locks (as Samson had) who having traveled all night to visit
her, was thereby very wet. For there were two sorts of Dew: the Morning Dew
which was soon gone, VI. Hos. 4. XIII. 3. and that Dew which fell in the Night,
and lay long, and wet those, who were in it, very much: Whereby is signified in
Scripture, hardships and great afflictions, IV. Dan. 25.

There are those indeed who by Dew understand the Evangelical Doctrine, by
which innumerable Souls were begotten unto Christ, as David prophesied, CX.
Psalm. 3. But this is not agreeable to what follows; and their reason for this
Exposition is not true, that Dew is always taken in a good sense: for I have
shown the contrary; and the dropping of the Prophets (a Metaphor taken from
Dew) is their prophesying against a place, and threatening Judgments to come
upon it, XXI. Ezekiel. 2. VI. Amos 16. which makes me think that Solomon here
rather alludes to the last Verse of the CXth Psalm (if he had that Psalm in his
eye) which predicts the troubles and afflictions of the Messiah, by drinking of
the Brook in the way.

If this Exposition of this difficult Verse be not allowed, it may be supposed
that the Messiah is here represented as coming in the person and condition of a
poor man, to beg entertainment, and having not where to lay his head (as our
Lord speaks) was thereby exposed to the cold Air, etc. Which will make this a
commendation of Charity to the Church; showing also the danger of neglecting it.

[c] V. 3.] And then this Verse agrees perfectly with what we read in the
Parable, XI. Luke 7. Where the good man of the house was unwilling to be
troubled, even by his Friend, that came to beg his assistance, when he was
going to compose himself to rest. But I take it to be a description of the
dullness, which is sometimes apt to creep upon the most excellent minds: who,
in some tempers, are so listless as not to be much affected with the best
motions that are made to them. Of which infirmity Solomon having had many
Examples in the History of his own Nation, might well conceive the Spouse her
self to be backward to entertain the Grace which was offered to her.

There are no difficulties in the Words; which signify plainly, that she
having composed her self to rest, and being half asleep, was unwilling to be
disturbed. For going into Bed, she had put off her clothes, and washed her
feet; as the manner was, that no filth which they had contracted in the day
time (they wearing Sandals only, not Shoes, as we do) might foul the Sheets:
and it would have been a trouble to do all this over again; which is the
meaning of the last Words. How shall I defile them? i. e. I cannot easily
persuade my self to it.

I shall only therefore set down the pious note of Theodoret upon these Words.
Let us learn from hence, what mischief sloth and laziness does, and in what
troubles and pains it engegeth us. For the Spouse here excusing her self, and
not being willing presently to rise to the Bridegroom, is compelled a little
while after, not only to rise and run to the door, but to run through the City,
and wander about the Streets, and fall among the Watchmen, and by them to be
wounded; and after all could scarce find her Beloved: to whom if she had
presently hearkened, and obeyed his heavenly call, she had avoided all these
inconveniences.

There are those, not only among us but also, in the Romish Church, who apply
all this laziness to the State of the Church after the time of the Great
Constantine. For which I see no warrant; but think we may rather apply it to
those Churches, who, presently after our Savior's departure to Heaven, left
their first Love, and grew cold, as we read in the second and third Chapters of
the Revelation. For it seems probable, by the VIth Chapter of this Book in the
beginning of it, that here he speaks of particular Societies, not of the whole
Body of the Church.

[d] V. 4.] Yet, such is the infinite Goodness of the Divine Nature, he
immediately represents the Messiah, as not provoked by this neglect, wholly to
cast off his Spouse: but rather stretching forth his hand to awaken her out of
this security. For so it follows, He put in his hand by the hole; i. e. at the
Window, or Casement; as if he would draw her out of her Bed: or, as it may be
interpreted, in a threatening manner, to punish her for her sloth. For so
putting forth the hand signifies, to do some execution, 1 Samuel XXVI. 9, 11, 23.
Which agrees with what follows, that presently she was mightily moved thereby,
and more than awakened, being full of solicitude, and fear, and grief and
trouble. Which shows indeed, that she did not intend to deny, but only to delay
Him: and yet He took this so ill, as to put her in great fear of some danger
from it (as our Savior does in his Letters to the Churches, II. Revel. 5, 16,
22, 23, etc.) For the Word Bowels signifies the affections, and passions; and
the Hebrew Word hamu, which we translate was moved, signifies made a noise, or
was tumultuous: and therefore denotes the passion of trouble and grief, and of
fear also; nay, of great fear and perplexity. For so St. Hierom here renders
it, My Belly trembled; as he does in VII. Ezekiel. 16. where it is applied to
Doves (to whom the Spouse was here compared, ver. 2.) and we translate it
mourning; but it should be rather trembling like Doves. For that is their
nature, XI. Hos. 11; all Authors observing them to be exceeding timorous: and
therefore so it may be translated here, I was so full of trouble, that I
quivered like a Dove.

Others by putting forth the hand understand the touches He gives by his Holy
Spirit: which does not contradict what I have said; threatenings being employed
by Him for that purpose.

[e] V. 5.] And having had this glance of Him (whose voice only she heard
before, v. 2.) she starts up immediately, and endeavors to correct her error.
And is here represented as making such haste to open the door, that she broke
the Vessel of myrrh, which she snatched up, when she rose; intending therewith
to anoint, and refresh his head, which was wet with Dew. Or rather her hands
shaked in that panick fear wherein she was: and so she spilt some of the Myrrh,
and it ran about her Fingers. By which is denoted the great speed she made to
shake off her sloth, now she saw her danger; and the fear that came upon her,
lest she should lose her Beloved: to whom she now resolved to express the
greatest affection imaginable. For it was not barely Myrrh (which was one of
the most excellent Spices, XIX. Joh. 39.) but the most precious Myrrh which she
took up to carry to Him. So mur ober signifies; which we well translate
sweet smelling Myrrh: but, word for word, is current Myrrh. Either in that
sense wherein Money is called current, XXIII. Genesis 16. as some fancy; or, as
Rasi thinks, because the Spirit, that is the odor of it diffused it self round
about the place where it was; that is, was exceeding fragrant: or, as Bochart
will have it, was that which wept (as they speak) and dropped from the Tree of it
self; which as it was the most unctuous, so was the richest and best for all
manner of uses. See his Phaleg, L. II. C. 22. And besides this, Theophrastus
observes that out of Myrrh, being beaten, there flowed an Oil, called (...),
which was very precious: as I find in Athenaeus L. XV. C. 11. And accordingly
the Chaldee and Aquila translate ober in this place, choice Myrrh; Symmachus
(...) the prime, from whom the Vulgar, the most approved Myrrh.

[f] V. 6.] But notwithstanding her repentance, she was thus far punished for
her sloth, that her Beloved absented himself from her, for a time: and she
could not hear the least tidings from Him, or notice of Him. Which cast her
into such an excess of grief and fear, that she swooned away, and was like a
dead Body (so that Phrase my Soul went forth signifies to die, XXXV. Genesis 18.
XLII. 28. and other places.) And recovering her self again was extremely
troubled, by the reflections she made upon his kindness, and her insensibleness
of it. For which she asked his pardon, and sought his favor; but could receive
no tokens of it.

[g] V. 7.] I take Watchmen here in a good sense, as before (III. 3.) unto
which I refer the Reader. And only observe, that to find a person, signifies
sometimes in Scripture Phrase, as much as to fall upon him, as we speak; and
that on a sudden, I. Judge. 5. XXI. Psalm. 8. CXIX. 143. X. Isai. 10. And so I
have expounded it here; and referred the smitting and wounding her, to the
reproaches they cast upon her. For there is a smiting with the tongue, as well
as with the hand; and that not only by Enemies unjustly, XVIII. Jer. 18. but by
Friends out of love and charity, CXLI. Psalm. 5. For there is not a greater
kindness, than sometimes even to upbraid us with our faults. Which is further
expressed by taking away her Veil from her; as much as to say, exposing her to
shame: a Veil being thrown over Women's faces for modesty-sake, as well as in
token of subjection, XX. Genesis 16. And so St. Hierom in his Epistle to Laeta,
takes this Veil or Pallium, as he calls it, to be pudicitiae signum, a sign of
chastity: and therefore to take it away, was to represent her as an impudent,
whorish Woman. Greg. Nyssen adds that it was (...) (Hom. XII. upon this Book)
the Nuptial Veil; which, together with the face, covered the whole Body: and
therefore to be disrobed of it was the greater reproach; because it was to
disown her to be his Spouse, as she professed her self.

[h] V. 8.] This Verse is very plain, expressing the admirable temper of a true
Penitent: who leaves nothing unattempted to recover the favor of her Lord (for
finding no comfort from the Watchmen, she implores the help of all good people)
and yet does not complain of what she suffered, nor of the harshness of those,
who should have helped to restore her; and not dealt so severely with her
(according to that of the Apostle, VI. Gal. 1.) but only bewails the loss of
his presence, and represents that, notwithstanding, she had not lost her Love
to Him; but rather that it was so great, she could not live without Him.

It must be confessed that there is no necessity of reading those Words which
we translate that ye tell him, by an Interrogation, What will you tell him? as
the Hebrew seems to import (for the Particle mah does not always denote that)
but it adds much to the life of the speech, and represents her passion to the
height, if we so translate it; as I have taken it in the Paraphrase.

[i] V. 9. In this Verse the Daughters of Jerusalem reply to her; and being
touched with a pitiful concern for her (whose admirable beauty discovered it
self to them, in this wretched condition wherein they saw her) they desire to
have a Character of her Beloved: that they might be the better able to know
Him, if they met Him; and be the more excited to help her to seek for Him, when
they understood his deserts.

[k] V. 10.] In this part of the Character, which now follows of Him, Solomon
seems to me, to have had his eye upon the Person of his Father David, 1 Samuel
XVI. 12. whose very aspect promised much, and showed that he was born to rule.
And whether we translate the first Words, white and ruddy as in our Bible; or
as Bochartus, white and shining, or glistering (making adom not to signify
ruber, but rutilus, and the whole to be as much as sum candidus, exceeding
fair and of a pure complexion) it matters not. For it only signifies, in my
opinion, the Majestic Beauty of his aspect: which David himself had also
described in those famous Words, XLV. Psalm. 2. Thou art fairer than the
Children of men.

And then, in the latter part of this Verse, he has respect, as I take it,
both to what they sang of his Father David, after he came from his Victory over
Goliath, 1 Samuel XVIII. 7. and to what David himself sang of this great Prince,
in that XLVth Psalm. 3, 4, etc. and more largely, CXth Psalm. 2, 3, 5, 6. Which
all relate to the conquest of the World unto Him: and is signified in this
expression of his being chief (or lifting up the Standard) over ten thousands;
that is, over great multitudes or Armies, III. Psalm. 6. The LXX translate it,
Chosen out of ten thousand: unto which I have had respect also in the
Paraphrase. As for mystical significations; some think by white and ruddy is
meant his Divine and humane Nature: others, only his humanity, etc. (as may be
found in Interpreters) but I have not dared to meddle with them. And shall but
just mention the fancy of the Cabbalists, who understand hereby the effects He
works in us. For sometimes He dispenses Himself in Mercy and Kindness; and
then, say they, He is white: sometimes in the zeal of Justice, and with Anger;
and then He is red.

[l] V. 11.] Now being thus represented as a King, He is next described as
having a Crown upon his head. So I understand Cethem (which we translate Gold)
as Rasi does: who takes it for a Diadem: and, indeed, in other places of
Scripture it signifies some precious Ornament, as XXV. Prove. 12. Now this Crown
upon the head is said to be such an one, as David had mentioned before, XXI.
Psalm. 3. of pure Gold. In the Hebrew of Paz; which Bochartus (both in his
Phaleg, L. II. C. 27. and in his Canaan, L. I. C. 46.) shows was the Island
anciently called Taprobana: in which the footsteps of this Word Paz remained in
Prolemy's time. Who mention in that Island the River Phasis; and the Creek, or
Bay, Pasis.

The same excellent Person, in his Book of Sacred Animals (Par. 2. L. 2. C.
10.) shows that, in the latter part of this Verse, we are to understand by
kevjzoth (Locks) the Foretop, or the Hair coming down the Forehead; which is
expressed in the next Word, taltalim, hanging down. And this Foretop is only
mentioned, because little else appeared, when the head had the Crown on it.

This Hair is said to be as black as a Raven; because such shining black Hair
was accounted Majestic, and much affected in those Countries: insomuch that
they endeavored by Art, to make their Hair of this color; and, as Pliny
informs us, employed the Eggs, the Blood and the Brain of Ravens for that
purpose. They looked upon this colored Hair also as a token of courage and
fortitude; and with a pure clear complexion, it was very lovely.

There are several mystical applications made of this: which I had rather the
Reader, who has a mind to them, should seek in others, than find here.

[m] V. 12.] The plainest meaning of this Verse, is that of the LXX and Vulgar
Latin: which is to the same effect with that I have set down in the
Paraphrase. For washed and sitting do not referr unto the eyes, but unto Doves:
who love to sit, nay to tarry (as the Word imports) by River-sides, and other
places which abound with Water; and are then so pleased, that their eyes appear
very quick and lively. And such piercing eyes, adding much to Majesty, they are
here made a part of this glorious Persons Character.

washed with milk] signifies Doves as white as milk: which are most lovely; and
when they have washed themselves, look as if they had been in Milk.

As for the common sense which the Hebrews give of this Verse, and which most
modern Interpreters follow; Bochartus, in the beginning of his Second Part of
Sacred Animals, seems to me to have evinced, that the Hebrew Words will not
bear it. But it is fit to mention it, and it amounts to this; that his eyes
were clear and white and full set (or set in perfection, as Aben Ezra here
interprets the Word milleth) like a Diamond or Precious Stone in a Ring:
neither too much depressed, nor too prominent; but handsomely filling the
Sockets. And if this were the natural Interpretation of the last Phrase,
Joscheboth al milleth, sitting or dwelling by fullness or fillings; I should
think there might be an allusion to the Precious Stones in the Pectoral of the
High Priest, which are said to be set in their fillings, XXVIII. Exodus 17, 20.
But this Phrase does not referr, as I said to eyes, but to Doves; that sit by
places abounding with water; or, as Avenarius will have it, ad vas plenum
Lacte, by a Vessel full of Milk.

The mystical application of these eyes to the Doctors of the Church, seems
impertinent; because they are described before in the eyes of the Spouse, IV.
1. Rather therefore his exact care and providence over the Church, which
nothing can escape, may be hereby represented: for He sees into the very heart
and reins, as He himself affirms, II. Revel. 18.23.

[n] V. 13.] This Verse is so difficult, that it is a hard matter to give an
account of it. The plainest seems to be this; that by cheeks we are no to
understand those that are smooth; but wherein the hair begins to grow: which
added much, in those days, to the goodliness of any man, and was looked upon as
a token of vigor, strength and courage. And it may aptly be compared to the
Flowers, or the sproutings and buddings of Plants and Trees. So I understand
Migdaloth (which we translate Flowers) to signify Buds, putting forth like
little Towers.

The Lips may seem unfitly compared to Lilies: because white Lips are not
beautiful. But Almonazir has observed out of Dioscorides, Theophrastus and
Pliny; that there were Lilies of a Purple color. And besides, I find in Pliny
(L. XXI. C. 5. mention made of a Lily, (which he calls rubens Lilium, which was
much esteemed, he says, in Syria) He shows there also a way how to make Purple
Lilies.

There are those who think Solomon compares the Lips to Lilies, only in regard
of their fineness, and delicate softness: thick, blubber-Lips, being very
unhandsom, and a sign, also they say, of dullness, and making the speech less
grateful. And indeed, Eloquence is sometimes described by Lilies; and may be
here meant.

Concerning sweet smelling Myrrh, see v. 5.

And thus far we have only the description of an amiable, gracious Majesty:
which is much advanced by a sweet voice and eloquent speech. The mention of
which, may well put us in mind of what is said of our Savior, IV. Luke 22.
compared with XLV. Psalm. 2.

[o] V. 14.] If we understand the first Part of this Verse to be meant of the
hands, it is thus to be interpreted, He has Golden Rings on his Fingers (as
before he is said, v. 11. to have a golden Head, i. e. a Crown of Gold upon it)
set with the Chrysolith: as Tarsis (which the LXX here do not translate) it is
most probable signifies. And then the latter part of the Verse sounds thus,
word for word; his Belly is of polished Ivory, covered with Sapphire: i. e. is
purely white streaked with blue Veins. But, who sees not that though this be
ingenious, yet it is not true? For the Body is no where covered (as the Word
here is) with Veins: which must needs signify more than streaked here and
there. And besides, it is not only against the Rules of decency, but against
the very scope of this Discourse, to fancy that any of those naked Parts of
the Body are here described, which are not commonly exposed to every Bodies
view. For the Spouse is desired to tell, by what marks this person might be
discovered, v. 9. now He could not be known by any of those parts which lie
concealed and hidden from all men's eyes, being industriously covered. And
therefore no such hidden parts are here represented; because He could not
thereby be known and distinguished.

I conclude therefore, that now she proceeds to describe the habit of this
Great Person. And Solomon having in his mind the Idea which his Father had
given him of the Messiah, in the CXth Psalm, (where He is said to be a Priest
as well as a Prince) represents Him in the habit of the High Priest. Who, among
other noble Vestments, had an Embroidered Coat; the Sleeves of which, the
Hebrews tell us, came down to his very Wrists; nay, as Maimonides says, as far
as to the hollow of his hand. Which I take to be here meant by his hands (which
comprehend the Arms and Shoulders) that is, the clothing of those Parts. And
these Sleeves, as well as the whole Coat, were embroidered (as you read,
XXVIII. Exodus 4.) to make the High Priest appear the more glorious. And if you
ask what this Embroidery was, the Hebrews tell us, that part of it consisted in
a kind of oilet holes, finely wrought. And R. Solomon Jarchi expressly says
upon that Text, that they were holes made in golden Rings, in which were fixed
Precious Stones, etc. (as is afterward said of the Stones of the Ephod, v. 11.)
Which so fully explains these Words, His hands are as Gold Rings, set with the
Beryl, that I need seek no further. Though I have sometimes thought, that the
Ephod it self might be here intended: which being fastened upon the Shoulders
(which in order, after the head, eyes, cheeks and lips, come to be here
described, and are comprehended, as I said before, under the name of his hands)
hung down before and behind to the bottom of the back: and had two golden
Rings, unto which the Breast Plate was fastened, as we read XXVIII. Exodus 27,
28. Maimonides says it had four Rings: two above, at the Jewel-Buttons; and
two below, about the Girdle of the Ephod. Which was one of the principal
Ornaments of the High Priest, when He ministered: the other, and the greatest of
all, was the Breast Plate hereunto annexed; and, as they say, was to be
inseparable from the Ephod.

Now this Breast Plate is meant, as I take it, in the latter part of this
Verse. Where under that Word which we translate Belly, and properly signifies
Bowels, is comprehended the Breast, and all: Which this CHOSCHEN, as the
Hebrews call it, covered: and as it covered those parts, so was it self
covered, or overlaid with twelve Precious Stones. The Sapphire, which was the
tenth, is only here mentioned; but it is usual in Scripture, to touch only upon
one thing in a History, when the whole is intended. And besides, it is evident
from the foregoing part of this Verse, that more must be understood, when one
alone is mentioned: for Rings are spoken of in the Plural Number, and said to
be filled with Tarsis; which must therefore denote more Stones than one; as
Sapphire does all the rest of the twelve, which could not be mentioned in so
short a description. Or Sepphirim here, in the Plural Number, may signify
Stones as precious as the Sapphire. Certain it is the Chaldee Paraphrast
thought there was some respect here to the High Priest's Breast Plate; for he
mentions all the Stones therein, one by one. Which may make this Interpretation
of mine to seem less strange. And I conceive the Sapphire to be here mentioned
rather than any other; because it is of the color of the Heavens, and fittest
to represent the sublime Dignity in which He is now described. For the Pavement
under the feet of the God of Israel, when He appeared unto their Nobles at
Mount Sinai, was of this color, XXIV. Exodus 10. and so was the Throne of God
in the Firmament, which Ezekiel saw, I. Ezekiel. 26.

Nor need it seem strange that the Belly, upon which this covering was, is said
to be of polished Ivory (when there is no mention of any such thing in the Law)
for it only denotes that it was as shining and bright as that: and may possibly
relate to the Tunick or Coat of fine Linen, wherein the High Priest was to
minister XXXVIII. Exodus 39. XXXIX. 27.) especially upon the great day of
expiation, when he was not to put on his Robe, nor his fine Linen Coat, with
any Embroidery, but of fine Linen alone, XVI. Lev. 4.

The LXX seem to think it was the Breast Plate it self (which indeed was very
shining) for they translate it (...): which shows they meant some covering of
the Belly which was hollow; as the Breast Plate was. Which I doubt not is the
covering of Sapphires here mentioned: it being set, as you read, with twelve
large Precious Stones, wherein were engraven the names of the twelve Children
of Israel. And was the most precious part of all the High Priest's habit; and
therefore more commonly called by the Jews an Ornament, than a Garment, or any
part of his Vesture: the whole of which was contrived for Glory and for Beauty,
XXVIII. Exodus 40. i. e. that God might be served most magnificently.

[p] V. 15.] Next in order follows the description of the Thighs; that is, of
the Garments upon the Thighs: which were the very first that the High Priest
put on, when he went about to clothe himself for his Ministry. And are here
said to be made of Schesch: which is a Word common to fine Linen, and to pure
white Marble (so the LXX twice translate it Parian Marble, I. Esth. 6. 2 Chronicles
XXIX. 2.) which the Breeches of the Priest resembled, being made of Byssus, or
pure fine Linen; a thing of great price in those Countries, as appears both by
Pliny and Pausanias. The latter of which Authors in his Eliaca, mentions this
among the rare things (which were worthy of admiration) in that Country; and
says, It was not inferior to the Byssus of the Hebrews. Who were ordered to
make this part of the Priest's Garments of twined fine Linen, XXXIX. Exodus 28.
which rendered them the more substantial; and made them sit the fuller and
stiffer, like Pillars. For the Hebrews say they were made of six-thread Byssus:
and that they came down to the Knees; where they were not gathered at the
bottom, but sat open.

Below which Breeches came down the holy Meil or Robe, upon the Skirts whereof
hung round about Bells made of pure Gold, XXVIII. Exodus 34. Which may possibly
be the Basis of fine Gold, here mentioned, to which the Femoralia, or Garments
on the Thighs, reached. Some refer all this only to his stately gate, and
Princely motion: others to his strength and firmness (which lies much in the
Thighs) and his ability to march against his Enemies, and pursue them. And then
the Sockets of fine Gold are his Sandals, bound upon his feet with golden
Ribbands, or something of that nature. The Reader may choose which he thinks
most probable, for the explication of the first Part of this Verse, His legs
(or thighs rather) are as pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine Gold.

Now if my conjecture be allowed, then the latter part of the Verse will not be
hard to explain. For this and all the rest of his habit being contrived for
Beauty and Glory, as was said before from XXVIII. Exodus 40. it made the High
Priest appear with an unusual Majesty: the riches of these Vestments being not
easily to be valued. And so his countenance, or rather his aspect, his whole
appearance (as the Hebrew Word may signify) was as stately as Lebanon. Which
was one of the goodliest Sites in those Countries both for Cedars; and many
other things: especially after Solomon had made his Garden there, of which we
read in the foregoing Chapter, ver. 15, 16.

Unto which lovely Forest and Garden, the appearance of the High Priest may be
the better compared; because there were Flowers, as well as Pomegranates, if we
may believe Philo (in his third Book of the Life of Moses) wrought in the
bottom of the holy Robe. Which the LXX also affirm in express Words; that there
was (...), a flowery Work, as well as Pomegranates and Bells in the Hem of the
Meil, XXVIII. Exodus 34. And indeed the Pomegranates being made of Wool of
diverse colors, they themselves might look like diverse sorts of Flowers. And,
besides this, it is to be observed that several other parts of the High
Priest's habit are peculiarly commanded to be made of a Work called Choscheb,
which we translate cunning work. Thus the Ephod is ordered to be wrought,
XXVIII. Exodus 6. and the Girdle of it, ver. 8. and the Breast plate, v. 15.
Which some translate artificial, others ingenious work: and all agree to have
consisted in certain beautiful Figures of Flowers, and Animals; and in variety
of colors. The Girdle moreover is ordered to be made of a Work called rokem,
which we translate needlework, ver. 39. because it is thought not to have
differed from the former, save only in this; that the other things were only
woven curiously, but this also curiously wrought with the Needle. The Jews give
another difference; that this was wrought so that the Figures appeared on both
sides, the other only on one. About which I shall not trouble my self, but only
take notice that Josephus (in his third Book of Antiquities, Chap. 8.) explains
this Work thus, Flowers were woven in this Girdle, with Scarlet, Purple, Blue,
etc.

And if Flowers, and (as others say) Animals, then in all probability, Trees
also were wrought in these Priestly Vestures: which made the fuller
representation of a Forest. Among which that of Lebanon was the principal, and
indeed the most beautiful place in all those Countries, which made the Prophet
express the Glory of the Church in these Words, The Glory of Lebanon shall be
given to it, XXXV. Isai. 2. see also XIV. Hos. 5, 6, 7.

Some think that hereby only the tallness of his Stature is denoted; which was
always looked upon as a Princely thing, as it was in Saul.

As for mystical applications of these two Verses, there are none to be sought
for, if I have given the true sense of them, but such as relate to the
excellency of Christ's everlasting Priesthood; and its pre-eminence above the
other, as much as the Cedar excells all the Trees of the Forest.

[q] V. 16.] There is little difficulty here. For mouth (Hebrew palate, which
is within the mouth) can signify nothing but either his words which come from
thence, or his breath. And words being mentioned before, v. 13. the latter is
probably here intended. Which is said to be sweetness, nay sweetnesses:
denoting the perfect soundness of the internal parts; as the foregoing
description sets forth the excellent shape, and stately Vesture of the outward:
It is applied by Interpreters, to the purity of Christ's affections and
passions: but may be, as well, to his breathing upon his Apostles, when He bid
them receive the Holy Ghost. Which concluded, in a manner, what He did upon
Earth, as it does his description in this place. For she finding his Praises to
exceed all her thoughts, sums up all in a breath; and comprehends his whole
Character in this: that He is all over lovely; attracting all men's affections;
not only those that saw Him, but those that heard of Him too.

CHAP. VI.
ARGUMENT.
In the foregoing description, the Spouse expressed such an unfeigned affection
to Him (which she again confidently asserts in this sixth Part of the Song, v.
3.) that it not only mightily moved her Companions to join with her in the
search of Him, but invited the return of the Bridegroom again. Who graciously
declares the like affection unto her (from v. 4. to the 11th) in such Words as
showed that his kindness remained unalterable; and that He delighted in none
but her: as incomparably more amiable, even by their own confession, than all
those Beauties whom the World most admires. With which kindness she is so
ravished, that it snatches her away from the dearest Friends she had, though
very desirous of her Company, ver. 12, 13.

Companions, or Daughters of Jerusalem.
1. WHither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

1. THese are high commendations indeed, which thou give to thy Beloved,
which make us in love with Him, as before we were (IV. 9.) and still are with
thee, O thou most lovely of all other Women: whither do thou think He has
betaken himself? He is not quite gone away, sure, but only diverted into some
retirement; which way did He go? And where do thou guess He has hidden
Himself, that we may go along, and enquire Him out, with thee? See Annot. [a].

Spouse.
2. My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in
the gardens, and to gather lilies.

2. I heard my Beloved say, that He was gone down into that Garden, which He
himself has planted (V. 1.) there He delights to be, among those pious
persons; whose Virtues make them like to the Garden-Beds, that are full of
Spices: He is always present in every part of this happy Company; and has
fellowship with them; and is daily adding more and more pure and sincere Souls,
who are without all guile, unto their Society. See Annot. [b].

3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: he feeds among the lilies.

3. Of which I being a Member, hope I may still say, that He has not cast me
out of his favor; but still retains a kindness for me: because I am steadfast
and faithful in my love to Him; who takes a constant care of such as study to
resemble Him. See Annot. [c].

Bridegroom.
4. Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as
an army with banners.

4. It is true, O my Beloved Friend, who art still dear unto me and most
amiable in my eyes: I have not lost my esteem of thee; for I see thou have not
lost thy affection to me: nor that lovely, that decent and comely order, which
makes thee not only beautiful, but venerable; nay, amazes all Beholders, or, at
least, strikes them with great admiration of thee. See Annot. [d].

5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a
flock of goats that appear from Gilead.

5. Thou needst not look so earnestly, and with such care and solicitude, upon
me, as if I had forgotten thee: for I see the same sparkling Beauty in thy
eyes, which I did before (IV. 1.) and it no less affects my heart (IV. 9.) thou
want none of those Ornaments which I formerly commended, but retainest them
all, notwithstanding the discomposure, in which thou have been. See Annot. [e].

6. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep, which go up from the washing, whereof
every one bears twins, and there is not one barren among them.

6. The same I say also of thy Teeth, which are still white and clean; even set
both above and below; firm and sound also; without any breach, or want of so
much as one of them. See Annot. [f].

7. As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.

7. And to be short (and not to repeat every thing again) I see the same fresh
color in thy Cheeks; which makes thee look as lovely how thy Veil is off (V.
7.) as thou did in the first blooming of thy Beauty. See Annot. [g].

8. There are threescore queens, and forescore concubines, and virgins without
number.

8. Wherefore, though other Kings and Princes of these Countries, have a great
many Queens, and more Wives, of an inferior Rank, and Virgins that attend them
without number: whose Beauty they highly admire; See Annot. [h].

9. My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother, she
is the choice one of her that bare her: the daughters saw her, and blessed her;
yea, the queens and the concubines, and they praised her.

9. I have one only, and none other, whom I entirely love; and that is thy self
alone: who preservest an inviolable faith and affection to me, and therefore
art dearer to me, than an only Daughter (and she the most accomplished person
and perfect beauty) is to her Mother: Whom all other persons at last shall
admire; the Queens themselves beforenamed, calling thee Blessed and wishing all
prosperity to thee; and they of the next degree shall praise thy excellencies,
and confess their own imperfections; See Annot. [i].

10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as
the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?

10. Saying, What an astonishing Beauty is this, that appears like a clear
Morning after a dark Night, and increases in luster more and more; looking as
bright as the Moon when it is at Full, nay, as splendid as the Sun, when it
shines in its strength: and no less dazles our eyes, and amazes our thoughts,
than the Glorious Host of Heaven; or an Army here on Earth, when it stands in
Battalia's with all their Colors displayed? See Annot. [k].

11. I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, and
to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded.

11. Only this I expect from thee, that thou bring forth fruit proportionable
to my care of thee, and kindness to thee: for to that end I went down before
(V. 1. VI. 2.) and now go again into my Garden (which I have not neglected to
dress and prune and water) to take a view in what condition it is; and in what
forwardness the several sorts of Fruit are, which I justly look to receive in
their due seasons. See Annot. [l].

Spouse.
12. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Ammi-nadib.

12. Alas! what am I, that I should receive such praises, who am not worthy of
thy care? But they have put such motions into my soul, as make me aim at the
highest perfections; and make all the haste I can likewise to attain them: And
therefore I must, for the present, take leave of you, O my Friends, who have
kindly assisted me, in the search of my Beloved. See Annot. [m].

Companions.
13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return that we may look upon thee;
what will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two armies.

13. Let us have thy Company again, O thou fairest, and most accomplished of
all the Daughters of Jerusalem. Come back again, come back, that we may behold
thy wondrous perfections. And if any ask, What is that you would see? What
would you enjoy in her happy Society? Our Answer is, such a Divine presence, as
appeared to Jacob, when he saw the Angelical Choires; which made him cry out,
This is God's Host, and call the name of that place, Mahanaim. See Annot. [n].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] The Daughters of Jerusalem (mentioned V. 8.) here justify what
the Spouse had said in the Conclusion of the former Chapter: And declaring
themselves in love with Him whom she had described, are desirous to join
themselves to her Company, and go in quest of Him. In order to which, they
would know, Whither she thought He was gone, when He went from her.

[b] V. 2.] Unto which she replies in this Verse, and seems to tell them, in
his own Words, what she had heard Him say about that matter, V. 1. And it
signifies, that He was still in his Church, and in every part of it; though
sometimes they were not sensible of it. For so Theodoret well observes, here is
distinct mention made of a Garden and of Gardens. i. e. of the Catholic
Church, which is but one, and of the several parts thereof. For sometimes St.
Paul mentions only the Church in the Singular, Number, and sometimes the
several Churches, even in the same Nation (as in the Epistle to the Galatians,
I. 1.) and in the same Province, or City, 1 Cor. XIV. 34.

He is said here to go down into his Garden, with respect to the Mountains
mentioned IV. 8. And to feed, in the Hebrew, is either to do the Office of a
Shepherd to his Flock; or relates to his Communion with his people, mentioned
Chap. IV. 16. V. 1. Which may be the meaning also of gathering Lilies: or, as
Theodoret will have it, by this last Clause, is to be understood, his gathering
holy and pure Souls, that are like Him, and joining them unto his Church. And
so the Arabic Translation is, to gather together the Lilies; following the
Septuagint, who translate it, (...). And indeed I find the Hebrew Word lakat
signifies to collect things into an Heap or Bundle; as Stones, XXXI. Genesis 46.
Manna, XVI. Exodus 27. Fruit, XIX. Lev. 9. Silver, XLVII. Genesis 14.

The whole denotes, that Communion with Him is only to be sought in his Church:
especially in that part of it, which preserves the Order, wherein He has
disposed all things (like the Walks and Beds in a Garden) and keep themselves
also in the purity of his Religion.

[c] V. 3.] Now she seems to have so perfectly recovered her self out of the
slumber wherein she had been, as to have regained her former sense of Him, and
of her interest in Him: repeating those Words which we met withal before, Chapter
II. 16. Of the latter part of which [he feeds among the Lilies] I think fit
here further to note, that to feed may relate either unto Himself, or unto
others: for there are Examples of both. Of the former, XLI. Genesis 2. I. Job 14.
Of the latter, XXIX. Genesis 7, 9. XXXVII. 12. I take it here rather in this
latter sense, and suppose it signifies his doing the Office of a Shepherd: and
that he is said to feed among the Lilies, as in the Revelation, to walk in the
midst of the seven Candlesticks, i. e. there to have his conversation, to take
up his abode with them, etc. as He often says in the Gospel of St. John (XIV.
23.) that He would with those, who love Him and keep his Commandments.

And such persons are here compared to Lilies; which being a name given by
Christ to Himself, Greg. Nyssen and Theodoret hereby, not unfitly, understand,
such as are conformed to Christ their Head, and have his Image wrought in their
Souls, in righteousness and true holiness. For, says the former of them,
(...), etc. whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, etc. (see IV. Philip. 8.) (...), these are the
Lilies in which Christ delights.

[d] V. 4.] And now we must conceive, either that they went to the Garden
together, and there found Him; or that He hearing this hearty profession of
unmovable love to Him, meets them: and, to revive her drooping Spirits, falls
again into a new commendation of the Spouse; in the very same terms as before,
and in some higher.

And first He compares her to Tirzah, which was a beautiful Situation, in the
Country of Ephraim; and therefore made choice of after these times, by
Jeroboam, for the Seat of his Kingdom: and so continued till the Building of
Samaria, as we read 1 King. XIV. 17. XV. 21, 23. and several other places: to
which add XII. Josh. 24. The very original of the Word signifies; as much as
Urbs amabilis, or a City that pleases one: and therefore chosen by one of the
ancient Kings of Canaan for the place of his residence.

And lest this should not be high enough, He next compares her to Jerusalem;
which was the most lovely place in the Territories of Judah, and indeed of the
whole Country. For which cause, as it had been the Seat of one of the Kings of
Canaan, so the Royal Palace of David, nay the House of God himself, was
afterward there built: and is called by Jeremiah in his Lamentations, the
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth, II. 15. It is mentioned by
Pliny likewise, L. 5. C. 14. as the most famous City in the East.

And as she had commended Him before not only for his Beauty, but Majesty: so
He does here, in the last place, call her terrible as an Army standing in
Battalia's; striking an awe, that is, into Beholders. So I think it is to be
expounded, as referring still to the goodliness of her aspect, and not to her
being invincible, inexpugnable, and striking terror into her Enemies; as some
interpret the whole Verse. Every part of which seems to me to be a new proof,
that Solomon speaks not in this Book of one single person (whom some fancy the
Shulamite, others Pharaoh's Daughter; whom others take for one and the same)
under the name of the Spouse: but of a Body or Society of men; for none else
can be fitly compared to Cities, nay to great Armies drawn up under their
Banners. Which last part of this Verse may be applied to the comely Order,
which Christ appointed in his Church; which, while it was preserved, made the
Church very venerable in the World. So Theodoret (...), etc. For they are
astonished who behold thy Order, there being nothing disorderly, nothing
uncertain or undetermined, nothing confused and indistinct: but all (...),
orderly appointed, and judiciously determined.

Some refer this terribleness, as we translate it; to the gravity, or rather
severity of her countenance: which forebad all wanton approaches to so great a
Beauty.

[e] V. 5.] In this and the following Verses, He seems to descend to a
particular description of the several parts of her Beauty: as He had done
before, Chap. IV. 1, 2, etc. And He does it in the very same Words, for the
most part, to assure her that He had still the same Esteem of her and kindness
for her: and that, notwithstanding what had happened, it had not altered her so
much, as to abate any thing of his affection; or to make her appear otherwise
in his eyes than she had done. This seems to me to be the true reason of this
repetition: others are given by Theodoret and other Authors.

And first He begins with the commendation of her eyes, as He had done IV. 1.
(though in other Words.) For so the first Clause of this Verse may be
translated, turn thine eyes toward me: the Hebrew Phrase, signifying not only
to turn ones self from another, but sometimes to turn toward them; as 1 Chronicles.
XII. 23. And then we are to conceive that He speaks to her, as one ashamed to
look upon Him; whom she had so much disobliged: and bids her take more
confidence, for He was still in love with her.

If we follow the common Translation, I take the sense still to be the same:
that she need not trouble her self any further; for she had prevailed in her
suit to be restored to his favor. The looking of the eyes toward one, is as
much as entreating and petitioning: which He tells her she might cease, by
bidding her turn her eyes away from Him.

But it is most ordinarily taken for an amorous expression: as if He had said,
her eyes were so bright and dazzling, he could not bear the passion they excited.

Of the latter part of the Verse, see an account upon Chap. IV. 1.

[f] V. 6.] There is no difference between this Verse and that in IV. 2. but
only in one Word; which alters not the sense. And as harechelim, sheep was to
be fetched from hence to supply the sense there: so another Word, hakketzuboth,
even shorn, is to be fetched from thence to supply it here.

[g] V. 7.] This is also exactly the same with the latter end of the third
Verse of the IVth Chapter. The LXX have also the first part: but they might as
well have added all that there follows; which is here omitted.

[h] V. 8.] Here, most think, Solomon alludes to the number of his own Wives;
who were fewer, they suppose, in the beginning of his Reign (as Bochartus
himself gathers from these Words, in his Epistle to the now Bishop of
Winchester, p. 126.) and that then he composed this Song, before he let the
Reins of his lust so prodigiously loose, as afterward we read he did, 1 King.
XI. 1, etc. But it is not at all likely that he had so many as are here
mentioned, while his mind was filled with such Divine raptures as these: And
therefore I suppose he alludes to the custom of other Princes in the East; who,
besides their principal Wives that were solemnly espoused and endowed, had also
another sort who were neither: and yet were Wives, called by the Hebrews
Philagshim, Concubines. And such a difference the Romans anciently made between
her whom they called Matrona, who was only taken in marriage; and her whom they
called Materfamilias, who was taken also to order and govern the Family, and
whose Children inherited. As may be seen in Aulus Gellius, L. XVIII. C. 8.
where he confutes Aelius Melissus, a conceited Grammarian, who had started
other, ungrounded Notions of these Words.

And then threescore and fourscore, are only a certain number for an uncertain;
not the precise number of these Wives and Concubines. Theodoret thinks by these
are mystically intended, several Ranks of Christians in the Church: some more,
some less perfect: But they discourse better, in my Opinion, who rather
accommodate these to the several sorts of Heretical and Schismatical Churches:
some of which gloried in the multitude of their Followers, and in their wealth
and splendor: but Christ has only one Catholic Church, more glorious than
them all put together; as it follows here in the next Verses. And thus, in
effect, R. Solomon Jarchi, and some other Hebrew Expositors, understand these
Words, with application to themselves. Abraham and his Posterity, say they,
till the Descendants from Israel were threescore in number (compared here to
Queens.) The Sons of Noah and their Descendants unto Abraham were fourscore
(compared to Concubines.) The rest who came from Cham, Ishamael and Esau, could
not be comprehended under a certain number. And so the meaning is, Whatsoever
kindness God had for the rest of Abraham's Posterity or of Noah's (not to
mention Cham, Ishmael and Esau) yet I have chosen, says God, my people Israel,
whom I have espoused to my self, by Circumcision, and by the Law, and by
Sacrifices, etc.

[i] V. 9.] This Verse needs not much Explication: wherein the Spouse is
opposed to all the forenamed Beauties: who are constrained to confess her
pre-eminence. The Hebrew word for one, signifies also only: and an only
Child, is as much as a beloved Child: As appears by this, that (...) only
begotten, and (...) well-beloved, are Words of the same import in the New
Testament. And if such an only Daughter be also barah ( choice we translate it,
or) pure, as the Word originally imports; free from all blemish (that is, a
perfect Beauty) it makes her still more dearly beloved.

It is in vain to enquire here, who is the Mother intended in this place: for
his love is only compared to the love of a Mother toward such an only
Daughter: who has engrossed, as we speak, all the excellent qualities that are
in any other person. Which forced the Daughters to admire her (so saw her
signifies; they looked upon her with admiration) and the Queens to bless her;
and the Concubines to proclaim her praises. Thus it is most likely the latter
part of this Verse should be interpreted, the Daughters saw her, and the Queens
blessed her, and the Concubines they praised her. For though the Jews now have
otherwise distinguished the Words, by their Accents; yet Maimonides I observe
distinguishes them, as I have done, in his Preface to Seder Zeraim.

St. Cyprian from this and such like places of this Book (IV. 8, 12. V. 1.)
proves there is but one only holy Catholic Church; making this Observation
(Epist. 75. Edit. Oxon.) we see one person every where mentioned, and no more;
because the Spouse also is one, etc.

[k] V. 10.] This some take to be the beginning of a new part of this Song; and
Theodoret in particular here begins his IVth Book of Commentaries upon it: but
I look upon these Words, as the praises and commendations, which the Queens and
Concubines, beforementioned, bestow upon the Spouse; with admiration and
astonishment at her transcendent Beauty.

They need no explication, being of known signification; only it is fit to
note that, to make the Elegy more magnificent, the speech grows and increases.
For though the morning be very beautiful and agreeable to every eye; yet the
Moon is still more bright; and the Sun far brighter than that: but all the host
of heaven (which I take to be meant in the last Words) still more wonderful and
amazing. For there being a gradation in this place, and all the other
expressions relating to the heavens, it is reasonable to think that this does
so too: and that we are to understand by it the Armies or Host of Heaven (as
the Scripture calls the Stars) rather than Armies upon Earth. However, I have
put both into the Paraphrase; but have not meddled with mystical applications:
They that desire them, may look into the Commentaries of three Fathers, where
this Verse is applied to the four Degrees of Christians that are in the Church.
Others, with more reason, apply it to the progress which the Church her self
made in splendour and greatness: being at first like the morning, when the day
breaks, after a long night of ignorance: and then the light of Christian
Knowledge advanced, till the Church appeared like the Moon (whose paleness may
serve for an Emblem of the terrors, which persecution struck into their
hearts) till, in the issue, it dispersed all mists, and conquering all
opposition, shone like the Sun: and then was settled in Constantine's time like
a well-ordered Army, which beat down all Idolatry.

They that would see more of these applications may look into Commenius's Book
de Bono Unitatis; in the Beginning whereof there are applications of these
things, both unto the Church in general, and unto particular Churches.

[l] V. 11.] This seems to be the voice of the Bridegroom declaring what
returns He expected to his love. The Word agoz which we translate Nuts (of
which there were several kinds, some very rich, as the Pistick) is found only
here: and by some is translated shorn or cut; which I have not omitted in my
Paraphrase. And beibe hannachal (Fruits of the Valley) the LXX translate Shoots
by the Brook, or River, where Plants are apt to grow best: which is very
agreeable to the Original. The rest of the Words are common: and the whole
Verse signifies that He went to look after the fruits of all sorts. The
mystical applications may be found in all Interpreters.

[m] V. 12.] The meaning of this Verse seems to be, that the Spouse, hearing
such high commendations of her self, both from Him, and from the persons
mentioned, v. 10; with great humility says, that she was not conscious to her
self of such perfections (for so the first Words sound in the Hebrew, I did not
know it, or I did not think so) but is excited thereby to make the greatest
speed to endeavor to preserve this Character He had given her; and to go along
with Him into his Garden (which she had neglected before, V. 2.) there to give
a good account of her proficiency. For which end she seems on a sudden, to take
leave of her Friends (who had been so charitable, as to go along with her to
seek Him) that she might, for some time, enjoy his Company alone: Which is the
ground of their calling upon her to return, in the next Verse. This is the best
account I can give of these two last Verses.

It is supposed Ammi-nadib was some great Captain who pursued his Victories, or
advantages very industriously, with very swift Chariots.

[n] V. 13.] This Verse is the voice of her Companions or Friends; some of
which wish for her coming back, that they might enjoy her Company again, and
see how she was improved: and the rest ask what they expected to see in her? to
which the other reply in the last Words, as it were the company, etc.

The repetition of the Word return, four times over, expresses their vehement
affection to her, and their desires to have her Company again: whom they called
Sulamith; as much as to say Jerusalamith. For the name of that place, formerly
was Salem, which carries peace in its signification; or, as others will have
it, perfection: for Shalam in the second Conjugation, signifies to finish, or
perfect. And is a fit name here for the Church, the New Jerusalem; built by
Christ Himself. This seems to me a great deal more probable than the conjecture
of Menochius, (L. III. de Repub. Hebr. C. XXI. n. 14.) who, because Wives, when
they were married, took the name of their Husband, thinks the Spouse from
Solomon had the name of Sulamith: which Aquila translates (...), pacifick, i.
e. Salomonidem. The Reader may follow which he likes best. Solomon seems to me
not to have had respect to his own Spouse in this Song.

To see or look upon her, signifies to enjoy her happy Society; and the benefit
of her excellent Virtues and perfections. Whom, in the two last Words, He seems
to me to compare unto the Choices of the heavenly Hosts. For the Word Mechola
does not signify any kind of Company; but of such as dance or sing: as may be
seen in XV. Exodus 20. XXXII. 19. XI. Judge. 34. XXXI. Jer. 4. V. Lament. 15. and
many other places. Which show that it signifies both Chorea a Dance, and Chorus
the Company that dances: and so the LXX here translate it, (...) Choires. And
Mahanaim (which we translate two Armies) may as well be a proper name as
Ammi-nadib in the Verse foregoing: and relates to the appearance of Angels to
Jacob, XXXII. Genesis 2. as a token of God's special presence with him; and most
lively sets forth the far more glorious presence of God, now in the Christian
Church. Or if we interpret it Armies or Hosts, as we do; still it may signify
the Armies above in the Heavens; either the Stars or the Angels, called the
Armies in Heaven, XIX. Rev. 14. and Army of Heaven, IV. Dan. 35.

CHAP. VII.
ARGUMENT.
Here begins, as I take it, a new part (which is the VIIth) of this Song; and
reaches to Verse the eleventh. In which the Spouse is represented returning
again, as they desired in the end of the foregoing Chapter: and, appearing in
greater luster than before, the Company of Friends who attended her, praise her
beautiful perfections; in such a description as was made of them, Chap. IV.
though varying from it in several things (Which is the sum of the first nine
Verses.) Of which perfections she modestly acknowledging her Lord to be the
Author, and assuming nothing to her self (v. 10.) is excited thereby only to do
the more good, and to labor to extend his Empire over more hearts; who were
not yet subject to Him, v. 11, etc. Where the VIIIth part of this Song begins,
and continues to the fifth Verse of the next Chapter.

Companions, or Daughters of Jerusalem.
1. HOW beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O princes daughter! the joints of
thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.

1. AND now that she appears again, like the Daughter of the great King, in all
her Royal Apparel (XLV. Psalm. 13.) who can choose but admire the beauty of the
meanest thing belonging to her! The very shoes of thy feet are most lovely;
and so are all the Ornaments of thy Thighs, which were made by no common or
careless Artist, but by one that has herein shown the best of his skill. See
Annot. [a].

2. Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wants not liquor: thy belly is
like an heap of wheat, set about with lilies.

2. Which other excellent Artists have equalled in that part of thy Vesture,
which covers the middle of thy Body: in the very Center of which is a Fountain;
within a curious Work, rising up like a Heap of Wheat, encompassed round about
with Lilies. See Annot. [b].

3. Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.

3. Above which, thy two Breasts rise up so purely white and exactly round, and
every way of such just proportions, that two young Kids, which were formed
together and brought forth at the same time, are not more like one another, or
more lovely than they. See Annot. [c].

4. Thy neck is as a tower of ivory, thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon,
by the gate of Bath-rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which looks
toward Damascus.

4. Thy Neck also lifts up it self, with the same or greater Beauty, wherein we
before beheld it (IV. 4.) being no less smooth and purely white, than it is
straight, and well-shap'd. And the famous Pools, at the great Gate of Heshbon
also, are not more quiet and clear than thy eyes: which are as pure and free
from all perturbation, as they are fair and large: between which thy
well-proportion'd Nose rising up, adds as much Beauty and Majesty to thy Face,
as the Tower of Lebanon (whose top shows* it self above the Trees) does to that
noble Forest. See Annot. [d].

5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like
purple; the king is held in the galleries.

5. And now that we take a view of thy head, we seem to be come to the top of
Mount Carmel; which is not more richly adorned by Nature, than its excellent
form is by Art: which has contrived the most Royal Ornaments for it, and made
thee an object fit for the King's affection; who beholding thee from his
Palace, is fixed in contemplation of thy Beauty. See Annot. [e].

6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!

6. Which cannot be described, but only admired, and constrains all to say: O
how happy art thou! and how happy are they who are acquainted with thee! For
what Beauty is like to that, or what pleasures comparable to those; which thou
impartest to them that are in love with thy delights. See Annot. [f].

7. This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of
grapes.

7. Whose tall and upright Stature adds much to all this Beauty; and makes thee
resemble the goodly Palm Tree: within whose Boughs those Clusters hang, to
which we may compare thy Breasts between thy Arms. See Annot. [g].

8. I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof: now also thy breast shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of
thy nose like apples:

8. Which seem to be stretched out to receive us into thy embraces, and invite
me and all my Company, with a joint resolution, to say, We will take hold of
the Boughs of this Tree; we will get up into it and taste of its Fruit: And now
shall be happy indeed, and enjoy those sweet delights which flow from thy
Breasts, and from the Breath of thy Mouth; far more refreshing and comfortable,
than the choicest Fruit, that this good Land affords. See Annot. [h].

9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak.

9. For the richest and most generous Wine, which when we have tasted. we say,
Let it be sent to the best of Friends, is not more comfortable to the bodily
Spirits, though it be so powerful as to make Old men brisk, nay, to enliven
those that are at the point of Death, than thy words are to raise and restore
the Souls of those, who imbibe the sense of them into their minds. See Annot.
[i].

Spouse.
10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.

10. If there be any thing in me that is pleasing to you, and deserves such
praises, ascribe it all to Him from whom I received it: for, as I have often
said, I am his entirely, and He is pleased to be entirely mine; having espoused
Himself unto me with great desire, XLV. Psalm. 11. See Annot. [k].

11. Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field: let us lodge in the
villages.

11. And O that He (without whom I can do nothing) would accompany me in the
charitable design I have, to go and visit other people, besides you, O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem! Let us go, my Beloved, unto those poor despised people
that live in the Fields and Country-Villages: let us, not only go to them, but,
dwell among them. See Annot [l].

12. Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourish,
whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there will I
give thee my loves.

12. Let us diligently visit the Vineyards, that have been newly planted there;
and bestow our utmost care upon them: let us see if they give any hope of good
Fruit; in promoting which, I will give Thee a proof of my extraordinary love.
See Annot. [m].

13. The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.

13. And Behold the happy success of such care and diligence! the most
excellent Fruit is already ripe, and meets us with its refreshing smell; there
is nothing so choice and so pleasant, but it grows every where; and is at the
very Gates: and that in great plenty and variety, both of this Years Fruit and
of the last: which shall all be reserved for thy uses, and employed for thy
honor, O my Beloved, from whom it all comes; and for the good and profit of
those that belong to Thee. See Annot. [n].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] They who earnestly solicited the return of the Spouse, in the
conclusion of the former Chapter, seem now to have a view of her again; and
praise her perfections in a new method; beginning at the feet, and so upward
(whereas before, Chap. IV. her description was from the head and so downward)
because they saw her in motion; when she went away, and now at her return to
them. Whom they call the Princes Daughter, alluding, I take it, to XLV. Psalm.
13, 14. and conceiving her as that Royal Bride, whose clothing is there
represented as very glorious. And accordingly they admire her very Shoes or
Sandals (by whose shape the beauty of the feet was discerned) which were wont
to be set with Gemms; as we learn from many Authors; I shall name none but the
Book of Judith (because what Greek or Roman Writers say about their own Shoes,
is not material) where Sandals are mentioned as a part of the bravery, wherein
she set forth her self, to deceive Holofernes, X. 4. And with these she is
said, in her Song, to have ravished his eyes, XVI. 9. See also III. Isai. 18.

Now the Feet not being here considered as naked, in all reason we ought not to
expound the next Words of the naked Thighs (the discovery of which had been
immodest) but of the clothing of them round about. For so that Word we
translate Joints is expounded by others, the circuit; or, as the LXX, their
whole proportion or model: which was as fine, as the Ornaments that adorned
them. So Chelaim signifies: which R. Solomon here observes is an Arabic Word,
denoting not Jewels (as we translate it) but the fine attire and trimming,
wherewith Women deck themselves, to set off their beauty.

Which agrees with what follows, The work of the hands of a cunning Workman.
Where Workman also signifies, not any Artificer, but a Goldsmith, who (as
Bochart has observed) made Wires, Laces, Wreaths, Rings, and such like little
Ornaments of Gold and Silver, as Women used.

The Chaldee Paraphrase applies all this, to the peoples going up three times a
year to the public Feasts: as R. Solomon before-named, expounds also that
place in LII. Isai. 7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet, etc.
Which, with more reason others apply, to their return into their own Country,
out of Captivity; and the Christian Writers apply to the Apostles, going
through the World to preach the Gospel. Whose stedfastness herein, may be also
here represented: though I see not why it may not as well be applied to
Christians going cheerfully to worship God in their public Assemblies.

[b] V. 2.] The Garments, I doubt not, of these Parts are still described in
this Verse. For what resemblance has the Belly it self of any person (which it
had not been seemly neither to describe) unto an heap of Wheat set with Lilies?
And they seem to me to have had in their eyes, that Apparel of wrought Gold,
mentioned XLV. Psalm. 13. and represent that part of it which covered the Belly,
to be of raised or embossed Work, resembling an heap of Wheat. By which it is
possible may be meant, many Sheaves of Wheat embroidered round about (as the
Kings Daughters raiment was, XLV. Psalm. 14.) with Flowers, especially with
Lilies. And then this was a Figure wherein Harvest was represented: which is no
unlikely conjecture; for anciently nothing was more honorable than to follow
Tillage or Pasturage. From whence it is, that we find in the latter end of
Homer's 18th Iliad, that the device contrived by Vulcan in Achilles's Shield,
were Reapers, cutting down ripe Corn: and the King himself standing in a furrow
and providing a Dinner for them.

Now in the very midst of this Work, I conceive there was a Fountain: which I
take to be the meaning of the first Words of the Verse, Thy Navel is a round
Goblet, which wants not Liquor: that is, a great Bowl or Basin, was wrought
in the Center of the Embroidery; full of Water, which ran continually from
above into it. Or, a Conduit, running with several sorts of Liquors, into a
great Bowl. Unto which the Word hammazog importing a mixture) seems to incline
the sense.

The Word agan, which properly signifies (...), as the LXX translate it, a
great Bowl or Basin; is used by the Chaldee Paraphrast for a receptacle of
Water, in Fountains or in Ditches. As in IV. Judge. 11. where the Valley or
Plain of Agannaja, of Bowls, which was in Kedesh, is interpreted by Kimchi, the
Field in which were many Pits or Trenches, like to Bowls, full of Water.

This seems to be a plainer Interpretation, than that of Zanchez; who fancies
this to have been some Jewel, that hung down from her Girdle upon the Navel;
which was of this form, round like the Moon. And the Chaldee Paraphrast
understood it to be of this Figure, when he applies it to the Head of their
School, who shone in the knowledge of the Law, like the Circle of the Moon: and
seventy Wise men round about him, like a Heap of Wheat.

What is the mystical meaning of this Hieroglyphick Vesture (as it may be
called) is very hard to say. It may be applied to the two Sacraments, which the
Church administers to her Children: the Font in Baptism being represented by
the former; and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper by the other part of this
Figure.

[c] V. 3.] This Verse has been explained before, IV. 5. I only observe, that
the Chaldee Paraphrast applies these two Breasts to the two Messiahs, whom they
foolishly expect; the Son of David, and the Son of Ephraim: who shall be like
Moses and Aaron, etc. Which I mention, because it shows that the Jews have an
Opinion, that the Messiah is discoursed of in this Book; and that these Words
are to be applied to the Leaders of the Church, such as Moses and Aaron. Of
which see in the place before-named.

[d] The Tower, to which the Neck is here compared, in all probability is the
same with that, IV. 4. where it is called the Tower of David: and here the
Tower of Ivory; because of its smoothness and whiteness. And the Phrase is
varied, perhaps, to express an increase of Beauty: for (...) we meet withal in
Anacreon, in a description of extraordinary handsomeness.

In like manner the Eyes are here compared to Pools; for (...), the shining
moisture of the eyes, is commended as very beautiful, by many Authors.
Particularly by Plutarch, who commends this in Pompey, and in Alexander: And by
Philostratus in his Epistles very frequently: Thou seem to me (says he,
Epist. (...)) to carry Water, as it were from the Fountain of thy eyes, (...),
and therefo reto be one of the Nymphs.

Among Pools, those fair ones at Heshbon were much celebrated; which were in
the very entrance of the City, hard by the Gate called Bath-rabbim; because it
opened toward the way that led to Rabbah, the Metropolis of the Children of
Ammon: which made the more people pass in and out at it. For Heshbon we find in
XXI. Numb. 24, 25, etc. was the principal City of Sihon, whose Country bordered
upon the Ammonites: and it fell to the share of the Gadites, who desired this
Country because it abounded with Pasturage, and was excellently watered: there
being many Rivulets and Brooks in its Neighborhood, from whence the Pools of
Heshbon were supplied. Which were remarkable for their purity and serenity, or
quietness: and therefore fitter to represent the composed, settled eyes of a
modest Virgin.

Whose gravity and Majesty, I suppose, is also set forth in the next Words by
comparing her Nose to that Tower which was in Lebanon; and appeared at a
distance among the Trees, especially on that side which looked toward Damascus)
as the Nose in the Face, does among the Locks of Hair, that fall upon the
Cheeks.

A large, but well-proportioned Nose, was always accounted a considerable part
of Beauty: and an indication, it was generally thought, of greatness of mind
and height of spirit. Some add, that it is a token of sagacity and prudence:
and the Nose being the instrument of smelling, they apply it to the great
judgment and foresight of the Doctors of the Church; who, they think, may be
hereby intended. For as the Chaldee Paraphrast applies this whole Verse to the
Sanhedrin, who governed the Affairs of that people (who were as full of Wisdom,
says he, as a Pool is of Water) so Christians generally by Eyes understand the
Guides and Governors of the Church. Who may the better be compared to the
Pools of Heshbon; because it was, after the Conquest of Canaan, one of the
Cities of the Levites (XXI. Josh. 39.) whose Office it was to instruct the
people. And such being called by the Jews Rabbim, and in the Singular Number
Rabbi, and Rabbuni, some have fansied that they are also denoted in the name of
the Gate of Bath-rabbim. For bath (daughter) signifies people, or inhabitants;
who were taught by those Great Men (as Rabbim signifies) what was Law and
Judgment in the Gates of their Cities. Damascus also being a great Enemy to
Israel, and noted for Idolatry, they suppose, the Nose being turned toward the
Watchtower looking that way; is an Emblem of the care that Christian Doctors
should take that their people be not seduced to Idolatrous Worship. We do not
read any where in Scripture of this Tower: but that it was a Watchtower the
Word zophe here intimates: which we translate looks; but signifies looking
like a Watchman.

[e] V. 5.] It appears from the very Phrase, Thine head upon thee, that they
mean the covering of the head. And this being a description of her utmost
perfections, it denotes, I conceive, the Crown or Garland which she wore (as
ready for her Nuptials) resembling the top of Carmel. Which was another
beautiful Mountain in that Country, whose Head was covered with great variety
of Flowers and Trees. Certain it is, that as it was a rich and fruitful, so a
very pleasant and lofty place XXXV. Isai. 2. II. Jer. 7.) and therefore fitly
chosen to set forth the Dignity and Majesty of the Spouse.

But there is no necessity, it must be confessed, to interpret this of the
Mountain Carmel: but the Words may be translated, Thy head is like a pleasant
fruitful Field. For so the Word Carmel (from the goodliness, perhaps, of that
Mountain) signifies in many places, XVI. Isai. 10. XXXII. 15. XLVIII. Jer. 33.
where joy and gladness is said to be taken micarmel from Carmel: which we truly
translate from the plentiful (or pleasant) Field. For there the Prophet speaks
of Moab, in which Country Carmel it self was not. And this is an illustration
of Beauty in other Authors: who compare the head of a delicate Woman unto a
fair Meadow or Field. As Philostratus writes to his Wife, (...), etc. Thy Head
is a large Meadow full of Flowers; which are never wanting in the Summer, and
disappear not in the midst of Winter. And in the same manner Achilles Tatius,
L. I. says of his Clitophon and Leucippe, (...), etc.

The next Word dallath is never used any where for Hair; but should rather be
translated the Hair-lace: that wherewith the Hair, and all the Ornaments
belonging to it, were tied up. This Hair-lace is said here to be of a purple
color, i. e. it was rich and noble. For this was the Royal Color, and
therefore called here the Purple of the King (as the Vulgar Latin takes it,
joining the latter part of the Verse with this) tied up in folds, hanging down
like canals; that is, hanging loose upon the shoulders (as some expound it) it
waved up and down: imitating the frizzles and curls of the water in Canals.
Others referr the two last Words to Purple; lying in Canals, to receive a
deeper tincture, by being doubledied. Vid. Menoch. de Repub. Hebr. L. I. C. X.
n. 6.

But the LXX make the last Words a distinct Sentence, as we do, in this manner;
The King is tied or bound in his Walks. That is, when he walks in his Palace
Royal, and beholds her beauty, he stands still, and cannot take his eyes off
from her; being captivated with it, and tied as fast to her, as the Hair of her
Head is to the Lace that binds it.

The former part of this Verse is applied by the Chaldee Paraphrast to the King
(the Head of the people) who shall be just like Elias; who was zealous for the
Lord of Hosts, and slew the false Prophets upon Mount Carmel: and the latter
part of it to their poor, who shall be clothed by him in Purple; as Daniel was
in Babylon, and Mordecai in Shushan.

[f] V. 6.] This Verse may be taken either for a commendation of love, which
had thus adorned her and raised her to this pitch of happiness: or of her, who
is called love, in the abstract; to express more vehemently how lovely she was,
and what pleasure they took in beholding her Beauty.

The first Word fair may relate to the rare composition of the whole Body: and
the next Word pleasant, or sweet, or comely (as some translate it) to her
graceful motion, gesture, and sweet conversation. And the sense, in short, is
this: O how desirable, do the pleasures which thou impartest, make thee.

Theodoret's Note here is very pious; that we become thus beautiful and lovely
(though deformed before) by delighting in Charity; and making doing good, our
highest pleasure.

[g] V. 7.] This Verse is a reflection upon the whole foregoing description; as
appears by the first Word zoth, this: As if they had said, to all this thy
stature is proportionable. Which is compared to the Palm Tree; because it
shoots up straight as well as high: and therefore sets forth that part of
loveliness, which consists in tallness. Which was always thought a great
addition to Beauty; and was one reason why Women wore Ornaments upon the very
top of their Heads, as well as high Shoes, to make them appear the taller. The
noblest Palm Trees of all other, were in Judaea (especially about Jericho) as
Pliny writes, L. XIII. C. 4. From whence it was that in future times, it became
an Emblem of that Country: as we find in that Medal of the Emperor Titus, with
a Captive Woman sitting under a Palm Tree, and the Inscription of Judaea Capta.

Our learned Countryman, Sir Tho. Brown (in his Miscellan. Tracts, p. 78.)
has ingeniously observed that they speak emphatically, when they say they will
go up to take hold of the Boughs of this Tree. For it must be ascended, before
one can come at the Boughs which it bears only at the top and upper parts. But
the Trunk or Body of it is naturally contrived, densis, gradatisque corticum
pollicibus, ut orbibus (as Pliny there speaks) with Rings in the Bark, orderly
disposed, like steps, whereby it may be very easily climbed.

And the Clusters, to which the Breasts are here compared, some think, are
nothing but the Fruit of this Tree, viz. Dates: for it is not expressed in the
Hebrew what Clusters these were; the Word Grapes being added by our Translators
of the Bible.

Who supposed, as others do, that Vines ran up the Palm Tree in those
Countries: which agrees well with what follows in the next Verse, where the
Clusters of the Vine, are mentioned, as a fit Emblem of her Breasts. Which were
described before, v. 4; but now mentioned again: to show that they looked not
merely at the Beauty, but the usefulness of that which is meant thereby. And
Theodoret makes this pious Observation upon it, That though the Church be
described as sublime, and reaching up to Heaven (as his Words are) yet she
accommodates her self to the weakest and lowest Souls: stretching out the
Breasts of her Doctrine to all that need it. For the Bunches of the Palm Tree,
says he, hang down very low. Which must be understood, not of their hanging
down near the Earth, but below the Boughs: which are all at the top, and very
high. For which reason Menochius (L. VII. de Repub. Hebr. C. VIII. n. X.)
thinks it not to be true, which Aben Ezra here notes; that the Vines in
Palestine were joined unto Palm Trees; because the Palm Tree has not Boughs
fit to support the Branches of the Vine:

[h] V. 8.] I take this Verse to be still the voice of the same persons, though
in the Singular Number (as appears from the mention of the Beloved, v. 9; which
shows it is not He that speaks here, but some other person) For one spoke in
the name of the rest; (as Daniel did in the name of his other three Brethren,
II. Dan. 30, 36.) or the whole Choire is considered but as one person: who
desire to have fellowship and communion with the Church in her Benefits. Of
which having tasted, they say, now also thy Breasts shall be as Clusters of the
Vine; that is, now we shall enjoy those delicious pleasures beforementioned,
v. 6.

That which we translate Nose, in the last Clause of the Verse, the Vulgar
translates countenance (or mouth rather) agreeable enough to the Hebrew; and
most agreeable to the rest of the Words. For that which is smelt is the breath,
coming out of the mouth: compared to the fragrancy of Citrons, Oranges,
Peaches, or other sorts of tappuach; which is a name (I observed above, II. 5.)
common to all such Fruits, as well as those we peculiarly call Apples: and
indeed signifies any Fruit, that has a fragrant odor breathing from it.

And this may be thus mystically expounded, And now shall we delight to hang
upon the Breasts of the Church, and the Breath or Spirit of the Apostles;
sweeter than Grapes, or the smell of any other Fruit.

[i] V. 9.] Which is further explained in this Verse. Where the roof of the
mouth, i. e. the Words which come from thence, it compared to the most
excellent Wine: which was so choice, that it was fit only to be presented to
him, to whose love they owed all they had (or so delicious, as our Translation
has it, that it went down glibly) and so generous, that it put spirits into
those who were quite spent with Age; nay, raised those who were, in a manner,
dead. So this Character of the best Wine runs word for word, in the Hebrew: It
goes straight to my Beloved, and causes to speak, the lips of old people, or
of those that sleep: that is, are dead. For this Word Jeschenim, our
Translators thought, may either signify, old men, or men asleep: though exact
Grammarians will not allow it; but make a great difference between jeschenim
and Jeschanim. The first of which (which is the word here) they say, never
signifies old men, but only Sleepers.

But if we wave this nice distinction, the Words may also be thus translated --
which makes men speak with the lips of the ancient, i. e. Sentences, or most
excellent Sayings. I omit other Glosses, which may be found every where.

[k] V. 10.] Here now the spouse, after long silence, puts an end to their
Encomium: modestly acknowledging there was nothing in her that could deserve
it; but only as she was His, who could not be praised enough.

The Words, in effect, we have met withal twice before, II. 16. VI. 3. For the
meaning of the latter part, his desire is toward me, is no more than this (as
Mr. Mede has observed upon XI. Dan. 37.) He is my Husband. Only there seems to
me, to be an allusion here to XLV. Psalm. 11. ( the King shall greatly desire
thy beauty, etc.) unto which Solomon as I take it, has a respect all along in
this Poem.

[I] V. 11.] And now she turns her self from them to Him (beginning a new part
of this Song) and being augmented with these new Companions, who had joined
themselves unto her; she desires Him (without whom nothing could be effected)
to go along with her into the Fields and Villages; that is, to those places,
which were not yet become his Garden, of which they had been speaking hitherto.
Or they were but preparing for it, by the culture He had begun to bestow upon
them: which, from the following Verse, seems to be the meaning.

Cepharim, Villages, are opposed in Scripture to Cities, 1 Samuel VI. 18. and
signifies small Towns, and Hamlets, as we speak, 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 25. VI. Nehem.
2. And the Word Nalinah, let us lodge; signifies to tarry, and to make ones
dwelling or abode in a place, XCI. Psalm. 1. and may be applied to the settling
of the Gospel in those Regions, where it was but newly planted. So Theodoret
glosses; Let us now take care of the meanest and most abject Souls, that have
lain long neglected; which are Tropically called, the Fields and Villages. Most
apply it to the Gentile World, in this manner, We have stayed long enough in
the City of Jerusalem, and in Judaea; let us go now to the Heathen, etc. I pass
by other Applications, which may be found in Interpreters; and only add this
Note of my own, That the Gospel was first preached in Cities mostly, and from
thence spread it self in time into the neighboring Villages: in which Idolatry
lasted so much longer than in Cities, that they gave the name of Paganism to it.

[m] V. 12.] This Verse supposes those Fields (v. 11.) not to have been quite
uncultivated; but that there were Vineyards (that is, Churches, in the Mystical
sense) planted in them. And her desire is, that He would accompany her, in
visiting them early; that is, very diligently, as the Word signifies in many
places. Thus in the XXXIX. Ecclus. 5. it is said of a just man, that he will
give his heart to resort early to the Lord that made him. Which is suitable to
what the Psalmist says, V. Psalm. 1. and Jeremiah XXI. 12. XXV. 2, 3. Thus
Theodoret here expounds it, It behooves us to use all sitting diligence, in
visiting those that have already received the preaching: whether they bring
forth more than Leaves; and especially, whether any Beginnings of Charity
appear among them. For so he expounds, if the pomegranates bud forth. And this,
says he, is the greatest expression of love to Him: which He makes the meaning
of the last Words, there will I give thee my loves. For what care we bestow
upon them, He accounts as done to Himself: according to his own Words, in as
much as you have done it to one of the least of these, ye have done it unto me.

The Vines may signify the lesser sort of people; and the Pomegranates the
greater.

[n] V. 13.] The Word Dudaim is found only here, and in the XXX. Genesis 14. Where
we read how Jacob's Wives contended for them, as a most precious, that is, a
rare and delicious Fruit. For none can imagine they strove about that now
called by us Mandrakes; which are of a stinking smell, and very offensive; or
about any ordinary Flower, such as Violets or Jasemin (by which some-expound
this Word) which they might have sent out their Maids to gather easily every
where. Ludolphus therefore in his late Ethiopick History (L. I. C. IX. n. 23.)
has happily conjectured that it signifies the Fruit which the Arabians call
Mauz or Muza (called by some the Indian Fig) which in the Abyssine Country is
as big as a Cucumber; and of the same form and shape, Fifty of which grow upon
one and the same Stalk; and are of a very sweet taste and smell: From which
cognation (as he calls it) of a great many upon the same Stalk, he thinks it
took the name of dudaim. Which some derive from dod, either as it signifies
love, or a breast; with which they fancy this Fruit to have had resemblance.

So the sense of this Verse is, that they found more there than they expected:
or, that by her care the most excellent Fruit was produced from people of the
best rank (who may be understood by this most rare sort of Fruit) and that,
every where: so that they needed not to be at the trouble to go far to gather
it. For at their very Gates there where Megadim, all precious Spices (mentioned
before, IV. 13. V. 1.) and those both new and old (a Phrase for plenty and
variety) which as a faithful Steward, she says, she had laid up for Him; with
the same care that we do the most precious Treasure. So the Word zephanti (I
have laid up) is used, XVII. Psalm. 13. CXIX. 11.

At the gates] may also signify as much as just ready to be gathered; or to be
brought home.

Some apply new and old, to the knowledge of the Old and New Testament, by
which Idolatry was vanquished, and true Religion planted in the World: and they
think our Lord Himself alludes to this place in those Words, XIII. Matthew. 52.
where he speaks of a wise Scribe that bringing forth out of his Treasures
things new and old. Others apply new and old, unto those Virtues, that flow
only from Faith, Hope and Charity; and those that are planted in us by Nature.
But I think it may most aptly be accommodated to the spiritual Gifts, which
were newly bestowed upon the Church by the Holy Ghost, after our Lord went to
Heaven; and the temporal Blessings, which they enjoyed before: which were now
all reserved for Him, to be employed in his service. And so these Words seem to
me to have a respect unto the CX. Psalm. 3. where it is said, In the day of his
power, they should be a people of free will Offerings. For when men give up
themselves to God sincerely, they readily devote all they have to his uses;
when He has occasion for it. And thus the first Christians at Jerusalem did;
who brought all their Goods into his Treasury: and other Nations afterward made
plentiful Oblations, as need required; thereby fulfilling another Prophecy,
LXXII. Psalm. 10.15. Unto which Megadim may have respect: for such precious
things as Silver and Gold, as well as the excellent Fruits of Trees, are called
by this name; as may be seen, XXXIII. Deuteronomy. 13, 14, 15, 16.

CHAP. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
The first four Verses belong to the end of the foregoing Chapter; wherein the
Spouse continuing her ardent desire to see his Kingdom enlarged, He agreees to
it. And then begins (v. 5.) the ninth and last part of this Song; in which all
the persons speak in their turns. Her Friends admiring her new advancement; and
the Spouse declaring the mighty power of love, whereby she had attained it, and
hoped to keep it, and was made desirous to propagate it unto those that wanted
it, v. 6, 7, 8. Which the Bridegroom favors, v. 9. and they all promising
greater industry in his service, He testifies his acceptance of it, and she her
longing to see all this accomplished, v. 10, 11, etc.

Spouse.
1. O That thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother; when I
should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yea, I should not be despised.

1. AND now, having finished this Blessed Work, I hope to enjoy more intimate
fellowship with thee. I cannot but wish, at least, to be made so happy as to
have thy gracious presence always with me: and, by familiar acquaintance and
conversation, to be so united with thee, that I may not be ashamed openly to
own my love; but look upon it as an honor to make a public profession of my
relation to Thee. See Annot. [a].

2. I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house, who would instruct
me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate.

2. Whereby I would carry the knowledge of Thee from place to place, till I had
introduced Thee into the acquaintance of my nearest Kindred: which would
enlarge my knowledge, and make new Discoveries to me; and cause no less joy
unto Thee, and unto all the World, to see them give entertainment to Thee. See
Annot. [b].

3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.

3. And, thanks be to his Goodness, I I feel Him communicating the power of his
Spirit to me: which is the greatest token of his love; and then works most
strongly in our hearts, when he sees them fullest of love to Him. See Annot.
[c].

Bridegroom.
4. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
love until he please.

4. Who, with his wonted care, or rather with a more earnest concern than ever,
repeats his charge to my Companions; saying, I conjure you to take heed, lest
you discompose, or give the least disturbance to this love: but let it enjoy
its satisfaction, to the height of its desires. See Annot. [d].

Daughters of Jerusalem.
5. (Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?)
I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

5. And who can choose but admire at the power of Love! which has advanced her
to such a degree of Greatness, that it astonisheth those that behold it, and
makes them say, Who is this, that out of a low condition, is raised to such
familiarity with her Beloved, that she leans upon his Arm; being made one with
Him, and enjoying all manner of happiness in his love? Which I have excited
toward me, says she, by the pains I took in thy service, when I labored in
the Country-Plantations (VII. 11, 12.) such pains, as thy Mother felt, when she
traveled with thee, and brought thee forth out of her Womb. See Annot. [e].

Spouse.
6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love is
strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

6. Place me therefore hereafter so near unto thy heart, that I may never slip
out of thy mind; but constantly receive fresh marks and tokens of thy love and
favor: Deny not this Suit, which proceeds from most fervent love; which can no
more be resisted than Death, and is as inexorable as the Grave; especially when
it flames to the degree of jealousy, and is afraid of losing what it loves:
Then it incessantly torments the Soul, if it be not satisfied; it wounds
incurably; it burns and rages with such a violent and unextinguishable heat, as
I feel in my Breast, now that it is mightily moved by the Lord. See Annot. [f].

7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned.

7. Though Fire may be quenched, yet Love cannot; no, not by the greatest
difficulties, nay, troubles and sufferings: which though they come pouring in
continually, are so far from being able to suppress it, that they cannot abate
it; no, nor translate it to any other, from the person it loves: For, as it is
inestimable in it self, so it cannot be purchased by Money; nor will they whom
it possesses, part with it for the greatest Estate that they might enjoy
without it; but perfectly scorn and reject such proffers. See Annot. [g].

8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our
sister in the day, when she shall be spoken for?

8. And as for those that want it, or in whom it is but just kindled, it makes
us very solicitous what we shall do for them: particularly for one that is as
dear to us as a Sister; but of a small growth in this most desirable quality;
and therefore not capable of that happiness which we enjoy: What shall we do
for her, when it shall be said, The time is come that she should be disposed of
in Marriage; and yet it shall be said withal, that she is not fit for it? See
Annot. [h].

9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be
a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar.

9. We will not despair of her; nor cast her off; but be both patient with her,
and do our utmost to make her such as we desire: Let her but be faithful and
constant, and we will do for her, as we do for a Wall that is low; which we
pull not down, but build up higher, and adorn also with fair and goodly
Turrets: or as we do with the Door of a noble House; which, if it be too weak
or too mean, we spare no cost to mend it, but enclose in a Case of Cedar. See
Annot. [i].

Little Sister.
10. I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as one
that found favor.

10. And our labor, I foresee, will not be lost; for I hear her say, I am such
a Wall; and my Breasts rise and grow big like such Turrets: I am no longer of a
low and despicable Stature, nor unmeet for his love; but from this time forth I
shall be acceptable unto Him, and find such favor with Him, as to enjoy all
the happiness which He imparts to those that are most dear unto Him. See Annot.
[k].

11. Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto
keepers: every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of
silver.

11. Which I will endeavor to answer by my best diligence in his service; and
from thence still promise my self a greater increase of happiness: For though
Great Persons let out their Lands to others; as King Solomon does the Vineyard
he has in Baal-hamon unto several Tenants, from every one of which he receives
a vast revenue, besides the gain which they have to themselves as a reward of
their labor; (v. 12.) See Annot. [l].

12. My vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou, O Solomon, must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.

12. Yet I will not commit the Vineyard which I am entrusted withal, to the
care and management of other persons; but cultivate it my self, with my utmost
Industry: my own eye shall be ever upon it, and I will let nothing be wanting
for its improvement; and therefore, if he receive so much profit, beside the
benefit that acrues to others, what Fruit may not I expect from a far better
Soil than his, and from far greater pains and providence that I will use about
it? See Annot. [m].

Bridegroom.
13. Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice:
cause me to hear it?

13. Which coming to the ears of her Beloved, He said to her in the presence of
all that waited on her, Thou have taken up a worthy resolution; nothing can be
more acceptable to me than that thou fix thy habitation in thy Vineyard; nor
can thou possibly be better employed, to thy own as well as my content, than
about the Gardens (VI. 2.) committed to thy Charge: and therefore ask what thou will of me, and I tell thee before all thy Companions, who are Witnesses of
what I say, I will do it for thee. See Annot. [n].

Spouse.
14. Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe, or to a young heart upon
the mountains of spices.

14. I have nothing to desire but this, that Thou, who art my only Beloved,
would come and accomplish all these things: Make all the speed, that is
possible, to come and save us, and perfect thy loving kindness to us; such
speed as the swiftest Creatures make to save themselves from danger: Let
nothing hinder this; but by thy love, which makes all things sweet and easy,
overcome the greatest difficulties in thy way to us. See Annot. [o].

ANNOTATIONS.
[a] Verse 1.] This Verse, at first sight, looks like a repetition of the same
desire wherewith he began this Book; that they might be so happy as to see the
Messiah appear, though it were but in his infancy; which would transport them
with joy, etc. And thus the Chaldee Paraphrast interprets it, of the time when
the Messiah shall be revealed to the Congregation of Israel.

But if we consider what follows, it will be more reasonable to connect it with
what went before: and to take it for a most ardent expression of love to the
person before-spoken of; with a desire to have more intimate familiarity with
him; such as a Sister has with a Brother, when he is a sucking Child; whom, if
she met in the Street, she would not be ashamed to take out of his Nurses Arms
into her own, and openly kiss; and not imagine she should thereby incur any
reproach or contempt.

This seems to be the most literal sense of the Words; which may be applied to
the open profession of Christianity, with the greatest confidence and security;
nothing being more innocent and harmless, than the love and service, wherein it
engages its Disciples to their Lord and Master Christ. Who the more obedient
any person is to God's commands, holds that man or woman the dearer to Him;
even as dear, as a Brother, Sister, or Mother, XII. Matthew. 50. Which (says
Grotius upon that place) is the mystical sense of the Song of Songs. See more
in my Preface.

[b] V. 2.] This dear Lord (i. e. the knowledge of Him) she desires here to
carry still further: till she had brought Him into the house, that is, into the
Family of her Mother. Which may be applied unto the design of God, to awaken
the Jews to believe on Christ, by bringing in the fullness, that is a vast
number, of the Gentiles, XI. Romans 25. Which the Apostle says there, v. 15.
would be life from the dead: Unto which the last Words of this Verse may be
accommodated.

For after she had said she would lead him, or bring him down; and then bring
him into the house of her Mother; she adds, thou shall teach, or instrust me.
Which agrees with what the Apostle there writes, v. 12. that if the fall of the
Jews was the riches of the Gentiles; that is, enriched them with the Treasures
of Divine Wisdom and Knowledge, how much more would their fullness enrich them?
If we referr this Clause (as we do) to Mother before-named, the best sense I
can make of it is this, By whom I was educated and instructed. And then follows
her making Him drink of spiced Wine (that is, making a great Feast for Him, IX.
Prove. 2. where the most excellent Wine made the chiefest part of the
Entertainment) such Wine as makes those who are asleep to speak, VII. 9. Which
effect, the receiving of the Jews again will produce; as the Apostle tells us,
when he says, it shall be life from the dead: i. e. a most powerful Argument
to enliven the most stupid Souls, and move them to believe in Christ.

Certain it is that Harekach, spiced or Aromatic Wine, denotes its fragrancy
or delicious odor; whereby the best Wines are discerned, as much as by their
taste: and the Word we translate Juice signifies every where, Must or new
Wine: whereby the Prophets set forth something that works with greater power
and efficacy than ordinary, IX. Zach. 17. And here, I doubt not, relates to
something new and unusual: and, in the mystical Application, may signify a
greater fullness and power of the Spirit, than had been in former days; working
like new Wine in the hearts of those that received the Gospel.

All this is said to be done to Him, because, as Theodoret noted before, what
is done to his Members, he takes as done to himself.

[c] V. 3.] Who is here represented, as immediately condescending to her
desires, and fulfilling her wishes: vouchsafing a new supply of the power of
the Spirit, to support and comfort her in those labors of love for his names
sake. Which were so great, that she is represented here, as spent and fainting
away. So she had been before, Chap. II. 6. where see the meaning of these Words.

[d] V. 4.] This Verse has also been twice used before; with no difference
from what we read here, but that now the mention of Hinds and Roes is left out;
and yet he charges them with greater vehemence than ever. For the Hebrew Phrase
here signifies, as much as what do you do? why do you stir, etc. that is, by no
means; take heed how you disturb her. See II. 7. III. 5.

[e] V. 5.] This seems to be the voice of her Companions, or Daughters of
Jerusalem, mentioned in the Verse before (and begins the last part of this
Song) admiring the new change they saw in her. For she was represented before
as coming out of the Wilderness (III. 6.) but not leaning upon her Beloved; as
she is here. Which signifies her advancement unto a state of greater dearness
to Him, and familiarity with Him.

The Word mithrappeketh, is not found elsewhere, and therefore variously
translated by Interpreters. But most agree that it signifies, either closely
adhering, or leaning, relying, and recumbring, as they speak: which L. de Dieu
has shown is the use of the Word in Neighboring Languages. But there are
those who think it imports something of pleasure (and therefore the Vulgar
takes in that sense with the other; as I have in the Paraphrase) and translate
it flowing with the delights. For she having been in the Fields and Villages,
visiting the Vineyards and other places (VII. 11, 12, 13.) is now introduced as
coming back from thence, into the Royal City. Which being seated on high, in
comparison with the Plains out of which she came, she is said to ascend, or
come up: but that she might not be tired with the Journey, is represented as
leaning upon the arm of her Beloved (or as some will have it, lying in his
bosom, as St. John did in our Saviors) and laden with the delicious fruit
beforementioned (VII. 13.) Which excited the admiration of all that knew her,
when they beheld the Grace of her Lord toward her; together with her own
Beauty, Riches, Ornaments, and Happiness.

The latter part of the Verse, all the Greek Fathers take to be the voice of
the Bridegroom; and so do many of the Latins. But some of them, and all the
Hebrew Writers take them to be the Words of the Spouse; because thee is of the
Masculine Gender. Which soever way we take them, the sense is very hard to
find. If we go the first way, the most natural sense seems to be, that He puts
her in mind of the poor and mean condition, out of which He had taken her, into
a state of the greatest friendship with Him: that she might not be vainly puffed
up, with the acclamations which were made to her.

But I have followed the Hebrew Points, in my Paraphrase, and understood the
Words of stirring up his love toward her, when they were looking after the
Plantations mentioned, VII. 11, 12. Which was excited by the care and pains she
took in that business; like the pains of a Woman in travail: unto which Saint
Paul compares the solicitude and care he had about the Galatians, that Christ
might be formed in them. IV. 19.

Certain it is that chibbelah is a Word which relates to the pangs of
travailing Women, and therefore the LXX translate it (...): so that if I have
not conjectured amiss about the rest, my interpretation of the last Words is
natural enough. For Caph similitudinis (as they call it) is frequently omitted
in the Scripture, and to be supplied by the sense. Twice in this very Book it
is wanting, I. 15. VII. 4. thy eyes are Doves, that is, as Doves: and in XVII.
Prove. 21. and in his Father David's Psalms very often, XI. Psalm. 1. How say you
to my soul, flee a bird, i. e. as a Bird, to your hill: and to omit other
places, CXIX. 119. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth, dross, i. e.
as or like dross.

In like manner I take the last Words of this Verse, there (viz. I stirred thee
up) as thy mother travailed in birth with thee, there, I say, like her that
brought thee forth: i. e. by such pains as these I raised up thy love to me.

As for what is said by many Interpreters, concerning Eve's eating the Apple in
Paradise, and thereby ruining all mankind; there is no reason to think, either
that she is the Mother here meant, or that Tappuach denotes an Apple, rather
than Orange, Citron or such like Fruit.

[f] V. 6.] These Words also, according to the Hebrew Points, are the Words of
the Spouse; beseeching her Beloved to keep her always in his mind, as one very
dear to Him. For that was the end of having the Name, or the Picture of a
beloved person, engraven on a Seal, or Jewel, and wearing it next the heart, or
upon the arm; that it might testify their great esteem of such persons, and
the constancy of their affection toward them, and that they desired they might
never slip out of their memory. See XXII. Jer. 24.

Some think here is an allusion to the High Priest; who carried the names of
the Children of Israel, engraven in Precious Stones, not only upon his Breast,
but upon his Shoulders also; as may be seen, XXVIII. Exodus 11, 12, 21. and
this, for a memorial before the Lord continually, v. 29. (Which Interpretation
may be confirmed by the Words of the Son of Syrach, XLV. Ecclus. 11. who says,
Aaron was adorned with Precious Stones, graven like Seals) And they think
withal, that Seal upon the heart relates to the inward affection; and Seal on
the arm, to the outward expressions of love and esteem.

And then follows the reason of this Prayer; which proceeded from the vehemence
of her love, which was grown to the height of jealousy (which is nothing but
the highest degree of love) lest she should lose Him, as she had been in danger
before, V. 6, etc.

This love is said to be as strong as death: which is admirably expressed by
Maximus Tyrius, Dissert. X. -- wild Beasts are not terrible to it, nor fire,
nor precipices, nor the sea, nor the sword, nor the halter, (...), etc. but
even the most unpassable difficulties are got over by it; the hardest things
are presently mastered; the most frightful easily surmounted, etc. it is every
where confident, overlooks all things, overpowers all things, etc. But none
express this, like St. Paul, VIII. Romans 35, 36, 37, etc.

There is no difficulty but in the last Clause of the Verse (for as strong as
death, signifies it to be insuperable; so cruel as the grave, denotes it not to
be moved by prayers, and entreaties, or any thing else.) Where the Word
reschapeha should not be translated, the coals thereof, but the arrows thereof
are arrows of fire. That is, it shoots into the heart, wounds it, and burns
there; nay, inflames it vehemently by the wounds it gives; as the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Hammond has observed upon LXXVI. Psalm. 3. And so the LXX seem here
to understand it, when they translate it (...), its Feathers, or Wings,
wherewith it flies, are Wings of fire. Which Wings or Arrows of Fire, are said,
in the last Words of all, to be a most vehement flame, or rather it should be
thus translated, which are the flames of fire of the Lord. So the Hebrew Word
seems to signify, being compounded of three Words, fire, flame, and the Lord:
denoting mighty and exceeding scorching flames. Such compositions are not only
to be found in other parts of the Bible (II. Jer. 31.) but in the Punick
language also as Bochartus shows in his Canaan, L. II. C. 15.

Some translate it, Such flames are kindled only by the Lord. And then, if
there be an allusion to the Breast Plate of the High Priest, in the beginning
of the Verse, I fancy the conclusion may allude to the fire that went out from
before the Lord ( IX. Lev. 24. and devoured the Sacrifices, as Love does all
manner of difficulties. This Fire was to burn perpetually upon the Altar, and
never be suffered to go out, VI. Levit. 12. and therefore the best Emblem of
love that could be found.

[g] V. 7.] For it is unextingnishable as it here follows, Many waters cannot
quench love. Which is a Metaphor, whereby profane Authors also have set forth
the mighty, unconquerable power of love. -- (...); etc. What new kind of
conflagration is this? (says Philostratus in one of his Epistles) I am ready
to call for water, and there is none to bring it, (...), for a Quencher for
this fire, is the most impossible to be found. If one bring it from the
Fountain, or if he take it out of the River, it is all one; for the water it
self is burnt up by love.

By many waters are sometimes meant, in Scripture, many afflictions (as is very
well known) which they that love, frequently endure, before they can accomplish
their desire. But though there should be an inundation of them, we are here
told, they cannot overwhelm, or overflow it; as the Word we translate drowned
signifies: but it will still live and be uppermost, and prevail.

And such is its constancy, and satisfaction also which it has in its own
pleasures, it regards not riches at all; but will rather be poor with one whom
it affects, than enjoy great possessions with another person. Nay, it despises,
and that with disdain, the offers of a man's whole Estate; if that condition be
imposed, of forsaking its love. Others may laugh, perhaps, at such persons;
but, it is all one, they smile at them again. So Theodoret and the LXX
understand the latter part of this Verse, if a man give away all his substance
in Charity, they will extremely despise him. That is, says he, they that spend
all they have, and their very lives, for the love of God, are set at naught by
those that want such love. Other Interpretations of these Words I have
expressed in the Paraphrase.

[h] V. 8.] Here is another property of Divine love, which makes us solicitous
for those that want it; or have but the beginnings of it, and may be in danger
to lose them. And this seems to be the Speech of the Spouse to her Companions,
who were all troubled for a Sister (that is, some Church) which was of a small
growth, and had no Breasts; that is, was not ripe for Marriage. For all have
Breasts; but they do not rise and swell, till they are of such an Age, that
they may be called Women, XVI. Ezekiel. 7. They enquire therefore what they should
do for her, in the day when she shall be spoken for? that is, demanded in
marriage. Or when there shall be speech concerning her; that is concerning this
defect of hers.

[i] V. 9.] Here He returns an Answer to that Question: which is, that He and
they will take the greater care for her; to raise her stature, and to bring her
to perfection. For where there are good beginnings, we are not wont to forsake
them: but rather to add to them and improve them. As for example, the Wall of a
Building which we esteem, we do not suffer to fall to the ground, but
strengthen and raise it: nay, adorn it sometimes and beautify it with Towers
and Pinnacles; which we stick not to gild, that they may appear more
gloriously. Or if it be a Door of a House, which we value, we let it not decay;
but rather case it with Boards of Cedar, to make it more durable, as well as
neat and handsome: for Cedar is not apt to putrefie.

This seems to me the most simple Exposition of these Words; and I do not think
fit to trouble the Reader with that vast variety, which may be found in
Interpreters. But only add, that they may very naturally be applied unto a
Soul, or a Church in a state of imperfection; but built upon Christ the
Foundation: in this manner, Let her but be firm and constant, like a Wall, in
her love to me, and I will not abandon the care of her; let her but exclude all
other, and open to me alone, and she shall never want any thing necessary to
her perfection: for I will richly adorn her, and make her like the House of God
Himself; which is lined with Cedar.

[k] V. 10.] And then this Verse, may be thus applied (being her Answer) I am
resolved to do what thou requirest (to be steadfast and faithful) and already
perceive the reward of my fidelity, etc. For these Words plainly relate to the
foregoing, as I have expressed it in the Paraphrase: unto which I shall add
nothing; for if that be admitted, there is no difficulty in them. It being
known to every Body, that shalom, peace, signifies all manner of happiness in
the Hebrew Language: which is included also in our English Word favor, whereby
we here translate it. For it signifies all the good things, that may be
expected from the favor He bears to any person

[l] V. 11.] And being thus favored by Him, she now promises her diligence (in
this and the next Verse) to do Him the best service, and to make the greatest
improvements she could of the Talents committed to her. For though Solomon (she
here says) let cut his Vineyard, which he had in Baal-hamon, a place near
Jerusalem, as Aben Ezra tells us (which is followed by most Interpreters, few
thinking it to be near Engaddi) where abundance of people had Vineyards, and he
a very large one: for it being let to several Fermers, every one paid him a
thousand pieces of Silver, i. e. Shekels (as much as to say, it brought him in
a vast revenue yearly; for a thousand is a Sum of perfection, CXLIV. Psalm. 3.
V. Micah ^. and other places, and the number of Farmers or Tenants, though not
expressed, some think, to be ten) yet she takes up another resolution; which
she expresses in the next Verse.

[m] V. 12.] Where she says she will her self look after the Vineyard
committed to her trust; and not leave it to the care of others. Which seems to
be the meaning of the first Phrase in this Verse, My Vineyard which I have is
before me, i.e. is under my eye (as we speak) and special care. Thus God's
Judgments are said to be before David, XVIII. Psalm. 22. that is, He took great
care never to swerve from them.

It amounts also to the same sense, if we take this Phrase to signify as much,
as it is in my power, XLVII. Genesis 5. XL. Jer. 4. For then the meaning is, she
kept it in her own hand, or occupation; and did not farm it out to others.

And then the last part of the Verse signifies, that if Solomon made such a
profit of his Vineyard, as that before-named (besides two hundred Shekels;
which each of the Farmers got over and above for their pains) though he did not
dress it himself; what would be the increase, that she was likely to make by
her own care and diligence in the business. That is, it was incredible what
fruit she would reap by her pains: according to that of the Son of Syrach,
XXIV. Ecclus 31, etc. I said I will water my best Garden, and I will water
abundantly my Garden-Bed, and lo, my Brook became a River, and my River became
Sea, etc.

This seems to me the most natural sense of these two difficult Verses; which
Almonazir suggested to my thoughts. And that Solomon, not any other person, is
here intended, Maimonides himself agrees; who in his Treatise of the Foundation
of the Law, C. VII. has these Words: Wheresoever you meet with the name of
Solomon, in the Book of Canticles, it is holy; as the rest of the names there
are: save only in that place, a thousand are to thee, O Solomon, etc. Others
also add that place, III. Cant. 7. Behold the Bed which is Solomon's, etc. Where
the Masters say, it is a common name, as well as here.

These two Verses are ingeniously applied by some, to the far greater increase
of knowledge and goodness in the Church, than in the Synagogue: that is by
Christianity, than by Judaism.

[n] V. 13.] This Verse, according to the Hebrew Points, is the voice of the
Bridegroom: who seems to commend the resolution she made, in the foregoing
Verse. And he calling her the inhabitant of the gardens (which are the same
with the Vineyard before mentioned) it signifies her perpetual care about their
prosperity. In recompense of which He bids her, before they finish this
interview, to ask what she will of Him, and it shall be done for her. Which, in
short, is the sum of what the same Almonazir has long ago conjectured to be
the sense of this place.

[o] V. 14] Unto which she returns her Answer, in these Words; and so shuts up
this Song. Which seems to me to conclude as it begun; with a desire that the
Messiah would come, and make good all those things, that had been represented
in these raptures.

The Word berach, which we translate make haste, is twice translated by the LXX
(...), to go or run through, to the very end. XXVI. Exodus 28. XXXVI. 32. And no
doubt, denotes here most vehement and restless endeavors, in a speedy course:
like that of a Roe Buck, or wild Goat rather; whose agility, both in running
and jumping is celebrated by all Authors, and said to be such as is scarce
credible.

The young heart (called here opher) is still more swift and nimble than the
old: the exceeding great fear wherein it is, adding Wings (as we speak) to its
feet. Whence Xenophon says, there is nothing comparable to their swiftness,
when the old ones are absent, and they are pursued by Dogs: (...), etc. then
there is no speed like to that of such young Hearts, as his Words are quoted by
Bochartus.

Who well observes (L. III. C. XVII. Part. 1. de Animal.) that the sense of the
last Words ( upon the mountains, etc.) is to be made out by adding one Word, in
this manner, Be thou like the young Hearts running (or when they run) upon the
mountains of spices, i. e. the Mountains where Spices grow; such as those
mentioned IV. 6. Such perhaps was Bether, II. 17. (where we meet with these
Words before) and I have sometime thought, that they should be so translated
here, the Mountains of Besamim; as there the Mountains of Bether.

But what these Mountains were we are now ignorant though this is certain, that
the Creatures here mentioned were bred in the highest Mountains of the Country;
as Aelian testifies in the latter end of his fifth Book: The Hearts in Syria are
bred in their highest Mountains, Amanus, Libanus, and Carmel. For there they
were safest and most secure from danger; there it was difficult to pursue them,
especially when they climbed up the steepest places. And therefore the Psalmist
and the Prophet Habakkuk, when they would represent themselves as in a state of
perfect security, say God had made their feet like hinds feet, and made them to
walk upon their (bamoth) high places, XVIII. Psalm. 33. III. Hab. ult. Which
Words allude to the inaccessible Mountains, which those Creatures frequented;
especially the Females, that they might there secure their young ones. Besides,
as there they could feed and bring forth their young most securely; so there
was the sweetest feeding.

In short, Solomon here seems to long for the first coming of the Messiah, as
St. John does for his last: who concludes his Book of the Revelation in the
same manner as Solomon does this: saying, Come, Lord Jesus, XXII. Revel. 20.

There are those who fancy that in the foregoing Verse the Bridegroom asks her
consent, for the perfecting their love in Marriage; and desires her in the
audience of her Companions to lift up her voice and sing the Nuptial Hymn:
Which she now, say they, in this Verse professes her self to be ready to do; if
He would but be present with her, and assist and direct her to do it aright.
And then it is thus applied and paraphrased by the forenamed Almonazit.

Thou command me that I should with Morning and Evening Hymns and Songs
celebrate thy Omnipotent Wisdom and Goodness, etc. vouchsafe then speedily to
adjoyn the eternal force and flame of thy Holy Spirit unto my voice; that in
spirit, and truth, and sanctity of heart, I may sing thy praises: and not only
with my mouth and sound; but in my mind and heart especially, worthily worship
thy incomprehensible Majesty.

Whence it is, that the Church, being moved by a Divine Inspiration, says thus
in all her Prayers.

O Lord, open Thou our lips:
And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.
O God, make speed to save us.
O Lord, make haste to help us.
Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock Rector of Winwick.
PRactical Meditations upon the Four Last Things: (viz.) Death; Judgment; Hell;
Heaven.

The Principles of Holy Christian Religion: Or, The Catechism of the Church of
England Paraphrased; The Objections against it answered: With short Prayers for
the Morning and Evening annexed. The Eighteenth Edition.

By the Reverend Dr. Goodman.
THE Penitent Pardoned: Or, A Discourse of the Nature of Sin, and the Efficacy
of Repentance under the Parable of the Prodigal Son. The Fourth Edition,
corrected.

A Winter Evening Conference; in Three Parts.

The Old Religion demonstrated in its Principles, and described in the Life and
Practice thereof.

A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England: With several
seasonable Considerations offered to all English Protestant, tending to
persuade them to a Compliance with, and Conformity to the Religion and
Government of this Church, as it is established by the Laws of the Kingdom.

By the Reverend Dr. Patrick, Lord Bishop of Ely.
THE Christian's Sacrifice: A Treatise showing the Necessity, End, and Manner
of Receiving the Holy Communion; together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savor. In Four Parts. The Fourth Edition, corrected.

The Devout Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to God: Or, A Book
of Devotion for Families, and particular Persons, in most of the concerns of
Humane Life. The Eighth Edition, in Twelves.

Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves.

A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist. Two Parts, in
Octavo.

Jesus and the Resurrection justified by Witnesses in Heaven and Earth. In Two
Parts, Octavo.

The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians Love to it. In Octavo.

The Book of Job Paraphrased. In Octavo.

The whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased. Two Volumes, in Octavo.

The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased; with Arguments to Each Chapter, which
supply the place of Commenting.

A Paraphrase upon the Book of Ecclesiastes and the Song of Solomon, with
Arguments to each Chapter, and Annotations thereupon. In Octavo.

The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books; written in Latin by Hugo
Grotius, and now translated into English, with the Addition of a Seventh Book
against the present Roman Church. Octavo.

Search the Scriptures: A Treatise showing that all Christians ought to read
the Holy Books; with Directions to them therein. In Three Parts.

A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the daily Public
Prayers. In Two Parts

A Book for Beginners: Or, a Help to young Communicants, that they may be
fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it with Profit.

A Treatise of the Necessity and Frequency of Receiving the Holy Communion;
with a Resolution of Doubts about it: In Three Discourses, begun upon
Whit-Sunday, in the Cathedral Church of Peterborough, 1684. To press the
Observation of the Fourth Rubric after the Communion-Office. In Twelves.

The End of the Catalogue.

