THE Batchellors Answer TO THE Maids Complaint OR THE YOUNG MEN'S VINDICATION.

Clearing themselves from those unjust Aspersions, and setting forth the subtle
Tricks and Vices of the Female Party.

WITH The Terms they resolve to stand upon if ever they Marry.

LONDON Printed for J. Coniers, at the Black-Raven in Duck-Lane, 1675.

The Batchellors Answer TO The Maids Complaint
AFter so many Proofs of our Affection as we have given you, little did we
think you could have been so ungrateful, as thus publicly to exclaim against
us; we would freely excuse your modesty without an Apology, if you had really
cause to complain; but your Reproaches are as unjust as they are confident, and
your Alligations no less false in themselves than unbecoming your Sex. We
appeal to all History, whether there were ever a more Amorous Age, and are
confident Venus was never so much worshipped in Cyprus, as she has been of late
amongst us: Formerly indeed the good Lasses were wont to expect the Teens, but
you now adays prevent them.

We are not ignorant of those little Arts you mention, used by you to whedle us
into Dotage; but we know also that for all your Angelical looks you are the
Tailors Creatures as much as Natures; and owe your Rosy Complexions to the
dressing box, we are partly sensible how many loathsome hereditary Diseases you
derive from your wanton Mothers: and care not much for an everlasting
Bedfellow. We understand right well your treacherous Smiles, and your
dissembling Tears too, which you have always ready at a Minutes warning. What
Pride you take in the number of your Servants, and how subtlely you manage them
to the best advantage; feeding all with equal hopes to make every one the freer
of his presents. Thus you sit in Jacks Lap, and at the same instant tread Will
on the Toe; sell a kind look to one for a Diamond Ring, and half a Kiss to
another for a Rich Locket, or Bracelet; and then laugh at both the filly Fops,
for being bubbled so easily: well therefore may you reckon your Temptations
amongst your Studies, but that the Soul and Gallantry of a Man should be basely
prostituted to them, is as ridiculous, as for an Eagle to stoop at Flies. We
know not (to use your own Comparison why a Woman should not be viewed with as
little Ardour as an handsome Statue. For what is the Influence of Flesh, as to
the Eye, above that of Marble? When we come into a spacious Gallery variously
behung with Curious pieces, we can walk it round, look on this Picture, and
like it, then turn our Faces, and forget it in the Beauty of the next; why may
we not do so with Women, since they upon the whole matter are but Pictures too;
and for the most part scurvily Painted? Not but that we could be content to
trifle away our idle hours with you; and allow you the end of your Creation, as
things born (Ad usum and lusum virorum) for our Pastimes and Delight; but you
would have us passionately in Love with you (Heaven bless us) and not only so,
but to put on the Marriage Shackles, a slavery worse than those miserable
wretches suffer at Algiers, that tugg continually at the Oar. We could love you
like any thing, no body knows how long, but for settling of Joynctures, and
Coupling for ever and a day, for better, for worse (good Girls) we must therein
beg your Diversion.

To be tied for term of life like a Monkey by the Loins to a Bed post, with the
same Woman is a most unconscionable Proposal. Alas, It Is Variety that is the
Mother of delight, and never was there such a strong Stomach but would be
cloyed being confined perpetually to one Dish: Besides, it ^eems an
Infringement of the Liberty of the Subject and a Violation of Natures Magna
Charta we must tell you every one that wears a Petticoat is not capable nor
merits the Affections of a man: nay, Commonly it may be said, That the fairest
of your Sex (were a mixture of pure white and red, supposing it natural
accomplishes the Face) are fitter for Mistresses than Wives and yield a more
pleasing entertainment in a Belcony or Coach than Bed: Hence it is that so many
Men repent their Bargains so soon, and with the same eagerness have in one
years time studied both a Marriage and a Divorce, having not more longed to
obtain, than having obtained to desert. Their hopes and their Loves perishing
together, the fruition of the one proving the expiration of the other: on this
occasion the Proverb of Honymoon came into the World; and if any can continue a
long affection for such, either the Man is extraordinary good, or the Woman
exceeding cunning; or else he is a raw Novice, who having no experience of the
Sex, imagins all to be as his Wife is; as the Roman Dame supposed all Men's
Breath to stink (she having never kissed any else) because her Husbands did so:
Nor are we therefore to be Reproached for our zealous Profession before
Marriage, because few live up to them after it, or to be censured so bitterly
for Inconstancy, because we do not persist in our first affection, and
declarations: for perhaps the pretty Lady is changed, or does by surrender
acquaint us with Discoveries, we neither knew, nor could make before; and
therefore being deceived, and knowing our selves to be so; that we should Act
and Compart our selves, as if we were not so, is a Constraint every Man's Spirit
cannot submit to, and to be excused as well as the princepal frailties
whereunto Humane Nature is liable,

But we need not argue the case thus seriously, The plain Truth is, you would
not be so fond of Marriage, but to gain the greater Liberty, and make the Fopps
your Husbands Cloaks for your wanton Sallies, knowing how much soever you are
rifled abroad, you lose nothing that they are like to miss when you come home,
and that whoever you afford the pleasure of getting your Children, They must
certainly be at the Charge of keeping them; Talk not then to us of making loves
to your Virtues, if that be the only Charm, what need we lie with you. And
though possibly it may be true that there may be some Virtue in some Women, yet
we are pretty confident there is any such stock of it in any of you, as to make
a Man run out of his Senses for the love of it; Nor think to fright us with
your predictions that we shall dote on Dowdies at last, or marry Old Women for
their Money, that are ready to be Hanged for Witches, for their ugliness; For
even that is better than your silly Beggarly Love-marriage which is both the
Paradise and Purgatory of Fools. A Wife being in no case so allowable as for
getting an Estate.

The pretense for propogation of posterity is insignificant, for we humbly
conceive more Children have been begat in these last 4000 years, for the sake
of the means, than of the End. And though Land must be Tilled, yet since there
are enough, Drudges and Slaves'ith World what need we Plow.

Let the good Common-wealths-men you talk of look to that, who have not Wit
enough to distinguish between the Embraces of a Wife, and the Charms of a Miss,
whom you rail at out of mere Envy, because you cannot get Gallants your selves;
yet do not despair absolutely, If you will but be obliging and kind, we will free
you from the dread of leading Apes in Hell, and perhaps when become well
stricken in years, we may descend to the Folly of Wedlock with you, If you will
in the mean time be good House-wives and scrape together losty Portions to
Bribe us to it; and withal put us in good security that when we purchase you
in Fee-tail, we shall not be liable to the Rent Charge of a Gallant, nor the
Encumbrance of the Horn, For to tell the naked Truth we have no great Stomach
to marrying till we see other Men's Wives live honester.

Given at our general Assembly in More-fields, this Easte^. Your ^ery ready and
most affectione Servants.

FINIS.

