CERTAIN Miscellany Works OF The Right Honorable, FRANCIS LORD VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban.

PUBLISHED By WILLIAM RAVVLEY, Doctor of Divinity, one of His Majesty's
Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed by T. J. for H. R. and are to be sold by Will. Lee, at the
Turks=Head in Fleet Street. M. DC. LXX.

TO THE READER.
I Have thought good, as a Servant, to the Labors and Memory, of that Noble
Lord, the Lord Viscount St. Alban, to Collect into one, these few, rather
Parcells, than Just Works, of his excellent Pen. Which I have done for these
Causes. First, to vindicate the Wrong his Lordship suffered, by a corrupt and
surreptitious Edition, of that Discourse of his, Touching a War with Spain,
lately set forth. Secondly, by way of Prevention, to exempt from the like
Injury and Defacements, those other Discourses of his, herein contained.
Lastly, to satisfy the Desires of some, who hold it unreasonable, that any the
Delineations of that Pen, though in never so small a Model, should not be shown
to the World. I know, it carries the Excuse with it, after the Authors Death,
to publish Fragments. Therefore I will make none. These Works, being all, for
the Argument, Civil, I cannot represent better, than in Resemblance of
Aristotle's Parva Naturalia, to account them as his Lordships Parva Politica.
Howsoever, I doubt not, but every Judicious Reader, finding of his Lordships
Spirit in them, will know them to be his; And will afford them, a Place of
Reputation, amongst his Greater Works.

W. RAWLEY.

CONSIDERATIONS Touching a War with SPAIN.
To the Prince.
YOur Highness has an Imperial Name. It was a CHARLES that brought the Empire
first into France; A CHARLES that brought it first into Spain: Why should not
Great Britain have his turn? But to lay aside all that may seem to have a show
of Fumes and Fancies, and to speak Solids: A War with Spain, (if the King shall
enter into it,) is a mighty Work; It requires strong Materials, and Active
Motions. He that says not so, is zealous, but not according to knowledge. But
nevertheless, Spain is no such Giant: And he that thinks Spain to be some
great Over-match for this Estate, assisted as it is, and may be, is no good
Mint-man; But takes greatness of Kingdoms according to their Bulk and Currency,
and not after their intrinsique Value. Although therefore I had wholly
sequestered my thoughts from Civil Affairs, yet because it is a new Case, and
concerns my Country infinitely, I obtained of my self, to set down, out of
long continued Experience in Business of Estate, and much Conversation in Books
of Policy and History, what I thought pertinent to this Business; And in all
humbleness present it to Your Highness; Hoping, that, at least, you will
discern the strength of my Affection, through the weakness of my Abilities: For
the Spaniard has a good Proverb; Desuario siempre con la Calentura; There is
no Heat of Affection, but is joined with some Idleness of Brain.

To a War are required; A Just Quarrel; Sufficient Forces and Provisions; And a
prudent Choice of the Designs. So then, I will first justify the Quarrel;
Secondly, balance the Forces; and lastly, propound variety of Designs for
Choice, but not advise the Choice; For that were not fit for a Writing of this
Nature; Neither is it a Subject within the Level of my Judgment, I being, in
effect, a Stranger to the present Occurrences.

Wars (I speak not of ambitious Predatory Wars,) are Suits of Appeal to the
Tribunal of Gods Justice, where there are no Superiors on earth to determine
the Cause. And they are (as Civil Pleas are) Plaints, or Defenses. There are
therefore three just Grounds of War with Spain: One Plaint, Two upon Defense.
Solomon faith, A Cord of three is not easily broken: But especially when every
of the lines will hold single by it self. They are these. The Recovery of the
Palatinate; A just Fear of the Subversion of our Civil Estate: A just Fear of
the Subversion of our Church and Religion. For in the handling of the two last
Grounds of War, I shall make it plain; That Wars Preventive upon Just Fears,
are true Defensives, as well as upon Actual Invasions: And again, That Wars
Defensive for Religion, (I speak not of Rebellion,) are most just; Though
Offensive Wars, for Religion, are seldom to be approved, or never, unless they
have some Mixture of Civil Titles. But all that I shall say in this whole
Argument, will be but like Bottoms of Thread, close wound up, which with a good
Needle (perhaps) may be flourished into large Works.

For the Afferting of the Justice of the Quarrel, for the Recovery of the
Palatinate, I shall not go so high, as to discuss the Right of the War of
Bohemia; Which if it be freed from doubt on our part, then there is no Color
nor Shadow, why the Palatinate should be retained; The Ravishing whereof was a
mere Excursion of the first Wrong, and a Super-Injustice. But I do not take my
self to be so perfect in the Customs, Transactions, and Privileges of that
Kingdom of Bohemia, as to be fit to handle that part. And I will not offer at
that I cannot master. Yet this I will say (in passage) positively, and
resolutely: That it is impossible, an Elective Monarchy, should be so free and
absolute, as an Hereditary: No more than it is possible for a Father, to have
so full Power and Interest, in an Adoptive Son, as in a Natural: Quia Naturalis
Obligatio fortior Civili. And again, that Received Maxim is almost Unshaken and
Infallible; Nil magis Naturae consentaneum est, quam ut iisdem modis Res
dissolvantur, quibus constituuntur. So that, if the part of the People or
Estate be somewhat in the Election, you cannot make them Nulls or Ciphers in
the Privation or Translation. And if it be said, that this is a dangerous
Opinion, for the Pope, Emperor, and Elective Kings: It is true, it is a
dangerous Opinion, and ought to be a dangerous Opinion to such personal Popes,
Emperors, or Elective Kings, as shall transcend their limits, and become
Tyrannical. But it is a safe and sound Opinions for their Sees, Empires, and
Kingdoms; And for themselves also, if they be wise: Plenitudo Potestatis, est
plenitudo Tempestatis. But the chief Cause, why I do not search into this
point, is, because I need it not. And in handling the Right of a War, I am not
willing to intermix matter doubtful, with that which is out of doubt. For as in
Capital Causes, wherein but one Man's life is in question, in favorem vitae, the
Evidence ought to be clear; So much more, in a Judgment upon a War, which is
Capital to Thousands. I suppose therefore the worst; That the Offensive War
upon Bohemia had been unjust; And then make the Case; Which is no sooner made,
than resolved; If it be made, not enwrapped, but plainly and perspicuously. It
is this in Thesi. An Offensive War is made, which is unjust in the Aggressour;
The Prosecution and Race of the War, carries the Defendant, to affail and
invade the Ancient and Indubitate Patrimony of the first Aggressour, who is now
turned Defendant; Shall he fit down, and not put himself in Defense; Or if he
be dispossessed, shall he not make a War for the Recovery? No man is so poor of
Judgment, as will affirm it. The Castle of Cadmus was taken, and the City of
Thebes it self invested by Ehaebidas the Lace demonian, insidiously, and in
violation of League: The Process of this Action drew on a Resurprise of the
Castle by the Thebans, a Recovery of the Town, and a Current of the War, even
unto the walls of Sparta. I demand, was the Defense of the City of Sparta, and
the Expulsion of the Thebans, out of the ancient Laconian Territories, unjust?
The sharing of that part of the Duichy of Millain, which lies upon the River
of Adda, by the (...), upon Contract with the French, was an Ambitious and
unjust Purchase. This Wheel set on going, did pour a War upon the Venetians
with such a Tempest, as Padoua and Trevigi was taken from them, and all their
Dominions upon the Continent of Italy abandoned, and they confined within the
Salt Waters. Will any man say, that the Memorable Recovery and Defense of
Padotia, (when the Gentlemen of Venice, unused to the Wars, out of the love of
their Country, became Brave and Martial the first day;) And so likewise the
Readeption of Trevigi, and the rest of their Dominions, was matter of Scruple,
whether just or no, because it had fource from a Quarrel ill begun? The War of
the Duke of Vrbin, Nephew to Pope Julius the second, when he made himself Head
of the Spanish. Mutineers, was as unjust, as unjust might be; A Support of
desperate Rebels, An Invasion of St. Peter's Patrimony, and what you will. The
Race of this War fell upon the loss of Vrbin it self, which was the Dukes
undoubted Right; Yet in this case, no Penitentiary, (though he had enjoined him
never so strait Penance to expiate his first Offense,) would have counseled
him to have given over the pursuit of his Right for Vrbin; Which after he
prosperously re-obtained, and has transmitted to his Family yet until this
day. Nothing more unjust than the Invasion of the Spanish Armada in 88. upon
our Seas; For our Land was holy Land to them, they might not touch it: Shall I
say therefore, that the Defense of Lisbon, or Cales, afterward, was unjust?.
There be thousands of Examples; Vtor in Re non dubia Exemplis non necessariis:
The Reason is plain; Wars are Vindicte; Revenges, Reparations. But Revenges are
not infinite, but according to the measure of the first Wrong, or Damage. And
therefore, when a voluntary Offensive War, by the Design or Fortune of the War,
is turned to a necessary Defensive War, the Scene of the Tragedy is changed,
and it is a new Act to begin. For though they the particular actions of War,
are complicate in Fact, yet they are separate and distinct in Right; Like to
cross Suits in Civil Pleas, which are sometimes both just. But this is so
clear, as needs no further to be insisted upon. And yet, if in things so
clear, it were fit to speak of more or less clear, in our present Cause, it is
the more clear on our part, because the Possession of Bohemia is settled with
the Emperor. For though it be true, that, Non datur Compensatio Injuriarum; yet
were there somewhat more Color to detain the Palatinate, as in the nature of a
Recovery, in Value or Compensation, if Bohemia had been lost, or were still the
Stage of War. Of this therefore I speak no more. As for the Title of
Proscription or Forfeiture, wherein the Emperor (upon the matter) has been
Judge and Party, and has justiced himself, God forbid but that it should well
endure an Appeal to a War. For certainly the Court of Heaven, is as well a
Chancery, to save and debar Forfeitures, as a Court of Common Law to decide
Rights; And there would be work enough in Germany, Italy, and other Parts, if
Imperial Forfeitures should go for good Titles.

Thus much for the first Ground of War with Spain, being in the Nature of a
Plaint, for the Recovery of the Palatinate; Omitting here that which might be
the Seed of a larger Discourse, and is verified by a number of Examples; That
whatsoever is gained by an Abusive Treaty, ought to be restored in Integrum. As
we see the daily Experience of this in Civil Pleas; For the Images of great
things are best seen contracted into small Glasses; We see (I say) that all
Pretorian Courts, if any of the Parties be entertained or laid asleep, under
pretense of Arbiterment or Accord, and that the other Party during that time,
does cautelously get the start and advantage at Common Law, though it be to
Judgment and Execution; Yet the Pretorian Court will set back all things in
statu quo prins, no respect had to such Eviction or Disposition. Lastly, let
there be no mistaking; As if when I speak of a War for the Recovery of the
Palatinate, I meant, that it must be in lineae rectae, upon that Place: For
look into Jus faeciale, and all Examples, and it will be found to be without
scruple; That after a Legation ad Res repetendas, and a Refusal, and a
Denunciation or Indiction of a War, the War is no more confined to the Place of
the Quarrel, but is left at large, and to choice, (as to the particular
conducing Designs,) as Opportunities and Advantages shall invite.

To proceed therefore to the second Ground of a War with Spain; We have set it
down to be, A just Fear of the subversion of our Civil Estate. So then, the War
is not for the Palatinate only, but for England, Scotland, Ireland, our King,
our Prince, our Nation, all that we have. Wherein two things are to be proved.
The one, that a Just Fear, (without an Actual Invasion or Offense) is a
sufficient Ground of a War, and in the Nature of a true Defensive; The other,
that we have toward Spain Cause of Just Fear; I say Just Fear; For as the
Civillians do well define, that the Legal Fear is, Justus Metus qui cadit in
constantem Virum, in private Causes; So there is, Justus Metus qui cadit in
constantem Senatum, in causa publica; Not out of Umbrages, light Jealousies,
Apprehensions a far off; But out of clear Foresight of imminent Danger.

Concerning the former Proposition, it is good to hear what time says.
Thucydides, in his Inducement to his Story of the great War of Peloponnesus,
sets down in plain Terms, that the true Cause of that War was; The Overgrowing
Greatness of the Athenians, and the fear that the Lacedaemonians stood in
thereby; And does not doubt to call it, A Necessity imposed upon the
Lacedaemonians of a War. Which are the Words of a mere Desensive: Adding, that
the other Causes were but specious and Popular. Verissimam quidem, sed minime
sermon celebratam, arbitror exitisse Belli Causam, Athenienses magnos
effectos, and Lacedemoniis formidolosos, (...) illts imposuisse Bellandi: Quae
autem propalam (...) utrinque (...), (...) fuerunt, etc. The truest Cause of
this War, though least voiced, I conceive to have been this; That the Athenians
being grown great, to the terror of the Lacedaemonians, did impose upon them a
Necessity of a War: But the Causes that went abroad in speech were these, etc.
Sulpitius Galba, Consul, when he persuaded the Romans to a Preventive War, with
the latter Philip King of (...), in regard of the great Preparations which
Philip had then on foot, and his Designs to ruin some of the Confederates of
the Romans, confidently says; That they who took that for an Offensive War,
understood not the state of the Question. Ignorare videmini mihi, (Quirites)
non utrum bellum an pacem habeatis, vos consuli, (neque enim liberum id vobis
permittet Philippus, qui terra marique ingens bellum molitur,) sedutrum in
Macedoniam legiones transportetis, an hostem in Italiam recipiatis. Ye seem to
me (ye Romans,) not to understand, that the Consultation before you, is not,
whether you shall have War or Peace, (for Philip will take order you shall be
no Choosers, who prepares a mighty War both by Land and Sea;) but whether you
shall transport the War into Macedon, or receive it into Italy. Antiochus, when
he incited (...) King of (...), (at that time in Leagne with the (...)) to join
with him in War against them, sets before him, (...) (...) Fear of the
over-spreading Greatness of the Romans, (...) it to a Fire that continually
took, and spread from Kingdom to Kingdom: Venire Romanos ad (...) Regna
tollenda, ut nullam usquam orbis terrarum nist Romanum imperium esset;
Philippum and Nabin expugnatos, se tertium peti; Ut quisque proximus ab
oppresso sit, per omnes velut continens incendium pervasurum. That the Romans
came to pull down all Kingdoms, and to make the State of Rome an universal
Monarchy; That Philip and Nabis were already ruinated, and now was his turn to
be assailed: So that as every State lay next to the other that was oppressed,
so the Fire perpetually grazed. Wherein it is well to be noted, that toward
ambitious States (which are noted to aspire to great Monarchies, and to seek
upon all occasions to enlarge their Dominions,) Crescunt Argumenta justi Metus:
All particular fears do grow and multiply out of the Contemplation of the
general Courses and Practice of such States. Therefore in Deliberations of War
against the Turk, it has been often, with great judgment, maintained; That
Christian Princes and States have always a sufficient Ground of Invasive War
against the Enemy: Not for Cause of Religion, but upon a Just Fear; For as much
as it is a Fundamental Law in the Turkish Empire, that they may (without any
other provocation,) make War upon Christendom, for the Propagation of their
Law; So that there lies upon the Christians a perpetual Fear of a War,
(hanging over their heads,) from them: And therefore they may at all times, (as
they think good) be upon the Prevention. Demosthenes exposes to scorn Wars
which are not Preventive, comparing those that make them, to Country Fellows
in a Fencing-School, that never ward till the Blow be past: Ut Barbari Pugiles
dimicare solent, it a vos bellum geritis cum Philippo, Ex his enim is qui ictus
est, ictui semper inhaeret: Quod si cum alibi verberes, illo manus transfort;
Idum autem depellere, aut prospicere, neque scit, neque vult. As Country
Fellows use to do when they play at Wasters, such a kind of War do you (
Athenians) make with Philip; For with them he that gets a blow, straight
falls to ward when the blow is past, And if you strike him in another place,
thither goes his hand likewise: But to put by, or foresee a blow, they neither
have the skill, nor the will.

Clinias the Candiaen, (in Plato) speaks desperately and wildly; As if there
were no such thing as Peace between Nations; But that every Nation expects but
his Advantage to War upon another. But yet in that Excess of Speech, there is
thus much that may have a Civil Construction; Namely, that every State ought to
stand upon his Guard, and rather prevent, than be prevented. His words are;
Quam rem fere vocant Pacem, nudum and inane Nomen est; Revera autem omnibus,
adversus omnes Civitates bellum sempiternum perdurat: That which Men, for the
most part, call Peace, is but a naked and empty Name; But the truth is, that
there is ever between all Estates a secret War. I know well this Speech is the
Objection, and not the Decision, and that it is after refuted; But yet (as I
said before) it bears thus much of Truth, That if that general Malignity, and
Pre-disposition to War, (which he untruly figureth to be in all Nations,) be
produced and extended to a just Fear of being oppressed, then it is no more a
true Peace, but a Name of a Peace.

As for the Opinion of Iphicrates the Athenian, it demands not so much toward
a War, as a just Fear; but rather comes near the opinion of Clinias; As if
there were ever amongst Nations a Brooding of a War, and that there is no sure
League but Impuissance to do hurt. For he, in the Treaty of peace with the
Lacedaemonians, speaks plain language, Telling them, there could be no true
and secure Peace, except the Lacedaemonians yielded to those things, which being
granted, it would be no longer in their power to hurt the Athenians, though
they would. And to say truth, if one mark it well, this was in all Memory, the
Main Piece of Wisdom, in strong and prudent Counsels; To be in perpetual watch,
that the States about them, should neither by Approach, nor by Increase of
Dominion, nor by Ruining Confederates, nor by Blocking of Trade, nor by any the
like means, have it in their power to hurt or annoy the States they serve; And
whenever any such Cause did but appear, straightways to buy it out with a
War, and never take up Peace at Credit, and upon Interest. It is so memorable,
and it is yet as fresh, as if it were done yesterday, how that Triumvirate of
Kings, (Henry the Eighth of England, Francis the First of France, and Charles
the Fifth, Emperor, and King of Spain,) were in their times so provident, as
scarce a Palm of Ground could be gotten by either of the Three, but that the
other Two would be sure to do their best to set the Balance of Europe upright
again.

And the like diligence was used in the Age before, by that League, (wherewith
Guicciardine begins his Story, and makes it (as it were) the Calendar of
the good days of Italy,) which was contracted between Ferdinando King of
Naples, Lorenzo of Medici, Potentate of Florence, and Lodovico Zforza Duke of
Milan, designed chiefly against the growing Power of the Venetians; But yet so,
as the Confederates had a perpetual eye one upon another, that none of them
should overtop. To conclude therefore, howsoever some Schoolmen, (otherwise
Reverend Men, yet fitter to guide Pen knives than Swords,) seem precisely to
stand upon it; That every Offensive War must be Ultio; A Revenge, that
presupposes a precedent Assault or Injury; yet neither do they descend to this
Point, (which we now handle) of a Just Fear; Neither are they of Authority to
judge this Question against all the Presidents of time. For certainly, as long
as Men are Men, (the Sons, as the Poets allude, of Prometheus, and not of
Epimetheus,) and as long as Reason is Reason, A Just Fear will be a Just Cause
of a Preventive War; But especially, if it be Part of the Case, that there be a
Nation that is manifestly detected, to aspire to Monarchy, and new Acquests;
Then other States (assuredly) cannot be justly accused for not staying for the
first Blow; Or for not accepting Poliphemus Courtesy, to be the last that
shall be eaten up.

Nay, I observe further, that in that passage of Plato, which I cited before,
(and even in the Tenet of that Person, that bears the Resolving Part, and not
the Objecting Part,) a Just Fear is justified for a Cause of an Invasive War,
though the same Fear proceed not from the fault of the Foreign State, to be
assailed. For it is there insinuated, That if a State, out of the distemper of
their own Body, do fear Sedition and Intestine Troubles to break out amongst
themselves, they may discharge their own ill Humors, upon a Foreign War, for a
Cure. And this kind of Cure was tendered by Jasper Coligni Admiral of France,
to Charles the Nineth, the French King, when by a vive and forcible Persuasion,
he moved him to a War upon Flanders, for the better Extinguishment of the Civil
Wars of France; But neither was that Counsel prosperous; Neither will I
maintain that Position; For I will never set Politiqu's against Ethics;
Especially for that true Ethics are but as a Handmaid to Divinity and
Religion. Surely, Saint Thomas, (who had the largest heart of the School
Divines, (bends chiefly his style against the depraved Passions, which reign
in making Wars, speaking out of St. Augustine; Nocendi Cupiditas, ulciscendi
Credulitas, implacaius and implacabilis Animus, Feritas Rebellandi, Libido
Dominandi, and si quae sunt similia, haec sunt qu ae in bellis jure culpaniur.
And the same St: I hom as in his own Text, defining of the just Causes of a
War, does leave it upon very general Terms; Requirilur ad Billum Cause justa,
ut scilicet illi qui impugnaniur, propter al qu im culpam, Impugnationem
mereantur; For Impugnatio Culpae, is a far more general word than Vltio
Injurae. And thus much for the first Proposition, of the Second Ground of a War
with Spain: Namely, that A just Fear is a just Cause of a War; And that A
Preventive War is a true Defensive.

The Second, or Minor Proposition was this, That this Kingdom has Cause of
Just Fear of Overthrow from Spain. Wherein it is true, that Fears are ever seen
in dimmer lights, than Facts. And on the otherside, Fears use (many times) to
be represented in such an Imaginary fashion, as they rather dazzle Men's eyes,
than open them. And therefore I will speak in that manner which the Subject
requires; That is, probably, and moderately, and briefly. Neither will I deduce
these Fears to present Occurrences; but point only at general Grounds, leaving
the rest to more secret Counsels.

Is it nothing, that the Crown of Spain has enlarged the Bounds thereof,
within this last sixscore years, much more than the Ottomans? I speak not of
Matches, or Unions, but of Arms, Occupations, Invasions. Granada, Naples,
Milan, Portugal, the East and West Indies; All these are actual Additions to
that Crown. They had a mind to French Britain, the lower Part of Piccardi, and
Piemont; but they have let fall their Bit. They have to this day, such a
hovering possession of the Valtoline, as an Hobby has over a Lark; And the
Palatinate is in their Tallons: So that nothing is more manifest, than that
this Nation of Spain runs a race (still) of Empire, when all other States of
Christendom stand in effect at a stay. Look then a little further into the
Titles, whereby they have acquired, and do now hold these new Portions of their
Crown, and you will find them of so many varieties, and such natures, (to
speak with due respect,) as may appear to be easily minted, and such as can
hardly at any time be wanting. And therefore so many new Conquests and
Purchases, so many Strokes of the Larum-Bell of Fear, and Awaking, to other
Nations, and the Facility of the Titles, which hand over head have served their
turn, does ring the Peal so much the sharper, and the louder.

Shall we descend from their general Disposition, to enlarge their Dominions,
to their particular Disposition, and Eye of Appetite, which they have had
toward us; They have now twice sought to impatronize themselves of this
Kingdom of England; once by Marriage with Queen Mary; And the second by
Conquest in 88. when their Forces by Sea and Land, were not inferior to those
they have now. And at that time in 88. the Counsel and Design of Spain, was, by
many Advertisements, revealed and laid open to be; That they found the War upon
the Low (...), so churlish and longsome, as they grew then to a Resolution;
that as long as England stood in state to succor those Countries, they should
but consume themselves in an endless War; And therefore there was no other way,
but to assail and depress England, which was as a Back of Steel to the
Flemmings. And who can warrant (I pray) that the same Counsel and Design will
not return again? So as we are in a strange Dilemma of Danger: For if we suffer
the Flemmings to be ruined, they are our Cut-work, and we shall remain Naked
and Dismantled: If we succor them strongly, (as is fit) and set them upon
their feet, and do not withal weaken Spain, we hazard to change the Scene of
the War, and to turn it upon Ireland or England: Like unto Rheums and
Destuxions; which, if you apply a strong Repercussive to the Place affected,
and do not take away the Cause of the Disease, will shift, and fall
straightways to another Joint, or Place. They have also twice invaded Ireland:
Once under the Popes Banner, when they were defeated by the Lord Gray; And
after in their own name, when they were defeated by the Lord Mountjoy. So as
let this suffice for a Taste of their Disposition toward us. But it will be
said: This is an Almanac for the old Year; Since 88. all has been well, Spain
has not assailed this Kingdom, howsoever by two several Invasions from us migh
tily provoked. It is true, but then consider, that immediately after 88. they
were embroyled, for a great time, in the Protection of the League of France,
whereby they had their hands full; After being brought extreme low, by their
vast and continual Embracements, they were enforced to be quiet, that they
might take breath, and do Reparations upon their former Wastes. But now of late
Things seem to come a pace to their former Estate. Nay with far greater
Disadvantage to us. For now that they have almost continued, and (as it were)
arched their Dominions, from Milan, by the Valtoline, and Palatinate, to the
Low Countries; We see how they thirst and pant after the utter Ruin of those
States; Having in contempt almost the German Nation, and doubting little
opposition, except it come from England: Whereby either we must suffer the
Dutch to be ruined, to our own manifest prejudice; Or put it upon the hazard, I
spoke of before, that Spain will cast at the fairest. Neither is the point of
Internal Danger, which grows upon us, to be forgotten; This; That the Party
of the Papists in England are become more knotted, both in Dependence toward
Spain, and amongst themselves, than they have been. Wherein again comes to be
remembered the Case of 88. For then also it appeared by diverse secret Letters,
that the Design of Spain was, (for some years before the Invasion attempted) to
prepare a Party in this Kingdom, to adhere to the Foreigner at his coming. And
they bragged, that they doubted not, but to abuse and lay asleep the Queen and
Council of England, as to have any fear of the Party of Papists here; For that
they knew (they said) the State would but cast the eye, and look about, to see
whether there were any Eminent Head of that Party, under whom it might unite it
self; And finding none worth the thinking on, the State would rest secure, and
take no apprehension; Whereas they meant, (they said) to take a course, to deal
with the People, and particulars, by Reconcilements, and Confessions, and
Secret Promises, and cared not for any Head of Party. And this was the true
reason, why after that the Seminaries began to blossom, and to make Missions
into England, (which was about the three and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth,
at what time also was the first suspicion of the Spanish Invasion) then, and
not before, grew the sharp and severe Laws to be made against the Papists. And
therefore the Papists may do well, to change their thanks; And whereas they
thank Spain for their Favors, to thank them for their Perils and Miseries, if
they should fall upon them: For that nothing ever made their Case so ill, as
the Doubt of the Greatness of Spain; which adding Reason of State, to Matter of
Conscience and Religion, did whet the Laws against them. And this Case also
seems (in some sort) to return again at this time; except the Clemency of his
Majesty, and the State, do superabound: As, for my part, I do wish it should;
And that the Proceedings toward them, may rather tend to Security, and
Providence, and Point of State, than to Persecution for Religion. But to
conclude; These Things briefly touched, may serve, as in a Subject Conjectural,
and Future, for to represent, how just Cause of Fear this Kingdom may have
toward Spain: Omitting (as I said before) all present, and more secret
Occurrences.

The third Ground of a War with Spain, I have set down to be; A Just Fear of
the Subversion of our Church and Religion. Which needs little Speech: For if
this War be a Defensive, (as I have proved it to be,) no Man will doubt; That a
Defensive War, against a Foreigner for Religion, is lawful. Of an Offensive War
there is more Dispute: And yet in that instance of the War for the Holy Land,
and Sepulcher, I do wonder sometimes, that the Schoolmen want words to defend
that, which St. Bernard wanted words to commend. But I, that in this little
Extract of a Treatise, do omit things necessary, am not to handle things
unnecessary. No man, I say, will doubt, but if the Pope, or King of Spain,
would demand of us to forsake our Religion, upon pain of a War, it were as
unjust a Demand, as the Persians made to the Grecians of Land and Water; Or the
Ammonites to the Israelites of their Right Eyes. And we see all the Heathen did
style their Defensive Wars, Pro Aris and Focis; Placing their Altars before
their Hearths. So that it is in vain of this to speak further. Only this is
true; That the Fear of the Subversion of our Religion from Spain, is the more
just, for that all other Catholic Princes and States, content and contain
themselves, to maintain their Religion within their own Dominions, and meddle
not with the Subjects of other States; Whereas the Practice of Spain has been,
both in Charles the Fifth's time, and in the time of the League in France, by
War; And now with us, by Conditions of Treaty, to intermeddle with Foreign
States, and to declare themselves Protectors General, of the Party of
Catholics, through the World. As if the Crown of Spain had a little of this;
That they would plant the Popes Laws by Arms, as the Ottomans do the Law of
Mahomet. Thus much concerning the first main Point of Justifying the Quarrel;
if the King shall enter into a War; For this that I have said, and all that
follows to be said, is but to show what he may do.

The Second main Part, of that I have propounded to speak of, is the Balance
of Forces between Spain and us. And this also tends to no more, but what the
King may do. For what he may do, s of two kinds: What he may do as Just; And
what he may do as Possible. Of the one I have already spoken; Of the other I am
now to speak. I said, Spain was no such Giant; And yet if he were a Giant, it
will be, but as it was between David and Goliath; for God is on our side. But to
leave all Arguments that are Supernatural, and to speak in an Humane and
Politic Sense; I am led to think that Spain is no Over-match for England, by
that which leads all Men; That is, Experience, and Reason. And with
Experience I will begin; For there all Reason begins.

Is it Fortune, (shall we think,) that in all Actions of War or Arms, great and
small, which have happened these many years, ever since Spain and England have
had any thing to debate one with the other, the English, upon all Encounters,
have perpetually come off with honor, and the better? It is not fortune sure;
She is not so constant. There is somewhat in the Nation, and Natural Courage of
the People, or some such thing. I will make a brief List of the Particulars
themselves, in an Historical Truth, no ways strowted, nor made greater by
Language. This were a fit Speech, (you will say,) for a General, in the Head of
an Army, when they were going to Battle; Yes; And it is no less fit Speech, to
be spoken in the Head of a Council, upon a Deliberation of Entrance into a War.
Neither speak I this to disparage the Spanish Nation, whom I take to be of the
best Soldiers in Europe. But that forteth to our honor, if we still have had
the better hand.

In the year 1578. was that famous Lammas Day, which buried the Reputation of
Don Ihuan d' Austria, himself not surviving long after. Don Ihuan, being
superior in Forces, assisted by the Prince of Parma, Mondragon, Mansell, and
other the best Commanders of Spain, confident of Victory, charged the Army of
the States near Rimenant, bravely and furiously at the first; but after a Fight
maintained by the space of a whole day, was repulsed and forced to a Retreat,
with great slaughter of his men, and the Course of his further Enterprises was
wholly arrested; And this chiefly by the Prowess and Virtue of the English and
Scottish Troops, under the Conduct of Sir John Norris, and Sir Robert Stuart,
Colonels. Which Troops came to the Army but the day before, harrased with a
long and wearisom march; and (as it is left for a Memorable Circumstance in all
Stories,) the Sculdiers, being more sensible of a little Heat of the Sun, than
any cold Fear of Death, cast away their Armor and Garments from them, and
fought in their Shirts: And, as it was generally conceived, had it not been
that the Count of Bossu was slack in charging the Spaniards, upon their
Retreat, this Fight had sorted to an absolute Defeat. But it was enough to
chastise Don Ihuan, for his insidious Treaty of Peace, wherewith he had abused
the States at his first coming. And the Fortune of the day, (besides the
Testimony of all Stories), may be the better ascribed to the Service of the
English and Scottish, by comparison of this Charge near Rimenant, (where the
English and Scottish, in great numbers came in action,) with the like Charge
given by Don Ihuan, half a year before at Glembours, where the Success was
contrary; There being at that time in the Army, but a Handful of English and
Scottish, and they put in disarray by the Horsemen, of their own Fellows.

The first Dart of War which was thrown from Spain, or Rome, upon the Realm of
Ireland, was in the year 1380. For the Design of Stukeley blew over into
Africa; And the Attempt of Sanders, and Fitz Maurice, had a spice of Madness.
In that year, Ireland was invaded by (...) and Italian Forces, under the Popes
Banner, and the Conduct of St. Josepho, to the number of seven hundred, or
better, which landed at Smerwick in Kerey. A poor number it was, to conquer
Ireland to the (...) use; For their Design was no less: But withal they brought
Arms for five thousand men above their own Company, intending to arm so many of
the Rebels of Ireland: And their purpose was to fortify in some strong Place
of the wild and desolate Country, and there to nestle till greater Succors
came; They being hastened unto this Enterprise, upon a special Reason of State,
not proper to the Enterprise it self; Which was, by the Invasion of Ireland,
and the noise thereof, to trouble the Council of England, and to make a
diversion of certain Aids that then were preparing from hence for the
Low Countries. They chose a place, where they erected a Fort, which they called
The Fort del Or; And from thence they bolted like Beasts of the Forest,
sometimes into the Woods and Fastnesses, and sometimes back again to their Den.
Soon after Siege was laid to the Fort, by the Lord Gray, then Deputy, with a
smaller number than those were within the Fort; Venturously indeed; But haste
was made to attache them before the Rebels came in to them. After the siege of
four days oneiy, and two or three Sallies, with loss on their part, they that
should have made good the Fort for some months, till new Succors came from
Spain, or at least from the Rebels of Ireland, yielded up themselves without
Conditions, at the end of those four days. And for that there were not in the
English Army enough to keep every man a Prisoner; And for that also the Deputy
expected instantly to be assailed by the Rebels; And again, there were no
Barques to throw them into, and send them away by Sea, they were all put to the
sword; With which Queen Elizabeth was afterward much displeased.

In the year (...). was that Memorable Retreat of Gaunt; Than the which there
has not been an Exploit of War more celebrated. For in the true judgment of
Men of War, Honorable Retreats are no ways inferior to brave Charges; As
having less of Fortune, more of Discipline, and as much of Valor. There were
to the number of three hundred Horse, and as many thousand Foot English,
(Commanded by Sir John Norris,) charged by the Prince of Parma, coming upon
them with seven thousand Horse; Besides that, the whole Army of Spaniards was
ready to march on. Nevertheless Sir John Norris maintained a Retreat without
Disarray, by the space of some miles, (part of the way Champagne) unto the City
of Gaunt, with less loss of Men than the Enemy: The Duke of Anjou, and the
Prince of Aurange, beholding this noble Action from the Walls of Gaunt, as in a
Theater, with great Admiration.

In the year 1585. followed the Prosperous Expedition of Drake, and Carlisle,
into the West Indies. In the which, I set aside the Taking of St. Jago, and St.
Domingo in Hispaniola, as Surprises, rather than Encounters. But that of
Cartagena, where the Spaniards had warning of our coming, and had put
themselves in their full strength, was one of the hottest Services, and most
dangerous Assaults, that has been known. For the Access to the Town, was only
by a Neck of Land, between the Sea on the one part, and the Harbor Water, or
Inner Sea, on the other; Fortified clean over with a strong Rampire and
Barracado; So as upon the Ascent of our Men, they had both great Ordnance and
small Shot, that thundered and showred upon them, from the Rampire in front, and
from the Galleys that lay at Sea in flank. And yet they forced the Passage, and
wan the Town, being likewise very well manned. As for the Expedition of Sir
Francis Drake, in the year 1587. for the destroying of the Spanish Shipping,
and Provision upon their own Coast; As I cannot say, that there intervened in
that Enterprise, any sharp Fight or Encounter; So nevertheless, it did
strangely discover, either that Spain is very weak at home, or very slow to
move; When they suffered a small Fleet of English to make an hostile Invasion,
or Incursion, upon their Havens and Roads, from Cadez to Capa Sacra, and thence
to Cascais; And to fire, sink, and carry away, at the least, ten thousand Tun
of their great Shipping, besides fifty or sixty of their smaller Vessels: And
that in the sight, and under the favor of their Forts; And almost under the
Eye of their great Admiral, (the best Commander of Spain by Sea,) the Marquis
De Sancta Cruz, without ever being disputed with by any fight of importance. I
remember Drake, in the vaunting style of a Soldier, would call this
Enterprise, The Cingeing of the King of Spains Beard.

The Enterprise of Eighty Eight deserves to be stood upon a little more fully,
being a Miracle of Time. There armed from Spain in the year 1588. the greatest
Navy that ever swam upon the Sea. For though there have been far greater Fleets
for number, yet for the Bulk and Building of the Ships, with the Furniture of
great Ordnance and Provisions, never the like. The Design was to make, not an
Invasion only, but an utter Conquest of this Kingdom. The number of Vessels
were one hundred and thirty, whereof Galliasses and Gallions seventy two,
goodly Ships like floating Towers, or Castles, manned with Thirty thousand
Soldiers and Mariners. This Navy was the Preparation of five whole years at
the least. It bare it self also upon Divine Assistance; For it received special
Blessing from Pope Zistus, and was assigned as an Apostolical Mission, for the
Reducement of this Kingdom to the obedience of the Sea of Rome. And in further
token of this holy Warfare, there were amongst the rest of these Ships, Twelve,
called by the name of the Twelve Apostles. But it was truly conceived, that
this Kingdom of England could never be overwhelmed, except the Land-Waters
came in to the Sea-Tides. Therefore was there also in readiness, in Flanders, a
mighty strong Army of Landforces, to the number of Fifty thousand veterane
Soldiers, under the Conduct of the Duke of Parma, the best Commander, next the
French King Henry the Fourth, of his time. These were designed to join with the
Forces at Sea; There being prepared a number of Flat-bottom'd Boats, to
transport the Land Forces, under the Wing and Protection of the Great Navy. For
they made no account, but that the Navy should be absolute Master of the Seas.
Against these Forces, there were prepared, on our part, to the number of near
one hundred Ships; Not so great of Bulk indeed, but of a more nimble Motion,
and more serviceable; Besides a less Fleet of 30 Ships, for the Custody of the
Narrow Seas. There were also in readiness at Land, two Armies, besides other
Forces, to the number of Ten thousand, dispersed amongst the Coast Towns, in
the Southern Parts. The two Armies were appointed; One of them consisting of
Twenty five thousand Horse and Foot, for the Repulsing of the Enemy, at their
landing; And the other of Twenty five thousand for safeguard and attendance
about the Court, and the Queens Person. There were also other Dormant Musters
of Soldiers, throughout all Parts of the Realm, that were put in readiness,
but not drawn together. The two Armies were assigned to the Leading of two
Generals, Noble Persons, but both of them rather Courtiers, and Assured to the
State, than Martial Men; yet lined and assisted with Subordinate Commanders, of
great Experience and Valor. The Fortune of the War made this Enterprise, at
first, a Play at Base. The Spanish Navy set forth out of the Groyne in May, was
dispersed and driven back by Weather. Our Navy set forth somewhat later out of
Plymouth, and bare up toward the Coast of Spain, to have fought with the
Spanish Navy; And partly by reason of contrary Winds, partly upon advertisement
that the Spaniards were gone back, and upon some doubt also that they might
pass toward the Coast of England, whilst we were seeking them afar off,
returned likewise into Plymouth, about the middle of July. At that time, came
more confident Advertisement, (though false,) not only to the Lord Admiral,
but to the Court, that the Spaniards could not possibly come forward that year;
Whereupon our Navy was upon the point of Disbanding, and many of our Men gone
ashore. At which very time, the Invincible Armada, (for so it was called in a
Spanish Ostentation throughout Europe) was discovered upon the Western Coast.
It was a kind of Surprise; For that (as was said) many of our men were gone to
Land, and our Ships ready to depart. Nevertheless the Admiral, with such Ships
only as could suddenly be put in readiness, made forth toward them: In so much
as of one hundred Ships, there came scarce thirty to work. Howbeit with them,
and such as came daily in, we set upon them, and gave them the chase. But the
Spaniards, for want of Courage, (which they called Commission) declined the
Fight, casting themselves continually into Roundels, (their strongest Ships
walling in the rest,) and in that manner they made a flying march toward
Callis. Our Men, by the space of five or six days, followed them close, fought
with them continually, made great slaughter of their Men, took two of their
great Ships, and gave diverse others of their Ships their Deaths wounds, whereof
soon after they sank and perished; And (in a word) distressed them almost in
the nature of a Defeat; We our selves, in the mean time, receiving little or no
hurt. Near Callis the Spaniards anchored, expecting their Landforces, which
came not. It was afterward alleged, that the Duke of Parma did artificially
delay his Coming. But this was but an Invention and Pretension given out by the
Spaniards; Partly upon a Spanish Envy against that Duke, being an Italian, and
his Son a Competitor to Portugal; But chiefly, to save the Monstrous Scorn and
Disreputation, which they and their Nation received, by the Success of that
Enterprise. Therefore their Colors and Excuses (forsooth) were, that their
General by Sea had a limited Commission, not to fight until the Landforces
were come in to them: And that the Duke of Parma had particular Reaches, and
Ends of his own, underhand, to cross the Design. But it was both a strange
Commission, and a strange Obedience to a Commission, for Men in the midst of
their own blood, and being so furiously assailed, to hold their hands, contrary
to the Laws of Nature and Necessity. And as for the Duke of Parma, he was
reasonably well tempted to be true to that Enterprise, by no less Promise, than
to be made a Feudatary, or Beneficiary King of England, under the Seignorie (in
chief) of the Pope, and the Protection of the King of Spain. Besides it
appeared, that the Duke of Parma held his place long after, in the Favor and
Trust of the King of Spain, by the great Employments and Services that he
performed in France: And again, it is manifest, that the Duke did his best to
come down, and to put to Sea: The Truth was, that the Spanish Navy, upon those
proofs of Fight which they had with the English, finding how much hurt they
received, and how little hurt they did, by reason of the Activity and low
building of our Ships, and skill of our Seamen; And being also commanded by a
General of small Courage and Experience; And having lost, at the first, two of
their bravest Commanders at Sea, Petro de Valdez, and Michael de Oquenda; durst
not put it to a Battle at Sea, but set up their rest wholly upon the
Land-Enterprize. On the other side, the Transporting of the Landforces failed
in the very foundation. For whereas the Council of Spain made full account,
that their Navy should be Master of the Sea, and therefore able to guard and
protect the Vessels of Transportation; When it fell out to the contrary, that
the Great Navy was distressed, and had enough to do to save it self; And again,
that the Hollanders impounded their Landforces with a brave Fleet of thirty
Sail, excellently well appointed; Things (I say) being in this state, it came
to pass, that the Duke of Parma must have flown, if he would have come into
England, for he could get neither Barqne nor Mariner to put to Sea: Yet certain
it is, that the Duke looked still for the coming back of the Armada, even at
that time, when they were wandering, and making their Perambulation upon the
Northern Seas. But to return to the Armada, which we left anchored at Callis.
From thence, (as Sir Walter Rawleigh was wont prettily to say) they were
suddenly driven away with Squibs; For it was no more but a Stratagem of
Fire-boats, Manless, and sent upon them by the favor of the Wind, in the night
time, that did put them in such terror, as they cut their Cables, and left
their Anchors at Sea. After they hovered some two or three days about
Graveling, and there again were beaten in a great Fight, at what time our
second Fleet, which kept the Narrow Seas, was come in and joy ned to our main
Fleet. Thereupon the Spaniards entering into further terror, and sinding also
diverse of their Ships every day to sink, lost all courage, and in stead of
coming up into the Thames Mouth for London, (as their Design was) fled on
toward the North, to seek their Fortunes; Being still chaced by the English
Navy at the heels, until we were fain to give them over for want of Powder. The
Breath of Scotland the Spaniards could not endure; Neither durst they as
Invaders land in Ireland; But only ennobled some of the Coasts thereof with
shipwracks. And so going North wards aloof, as long as they had any doubt of
being pursued, at last when they were out of reach, they turned, and crossed
the Ocean to Spain, having lost fourscore of their Ships, and the greater part
of their Men. And this was the End of that Sea-Giant, the Invincible Armada.
Which having not so much as fired a Cottage of ours at Land, nor taken a
Cock-boat of ours at Sea, wandered through the Wilderness of the Northern Seas;
And according to the Curse in the Scripture; Came out against us one way, and
fled before us seven ways. Serving only to make good the judgment of an
Astrologer, long before given; Octuagesimus Octavus Mirabilis Annus; Or rather,
to make good, (even to the astonishment of all Posterity) the wonderful
Judgments of God poured down, commonly, upon vast and proud Aspirings.

In the year, that followed, of 1589. we gave the Spaniards no breath, but
turned Challengers, and invaded the Main of Spain. In which Enterprise,
although we failed in our End, which was to settle Don Antonio in the Kingdom
of Portugal, yet a man shall hardly meet with an Action, that does better
reveal the great Secret of the Power of Spain: Which Power, well sought into,
will be found rather to consist in a Veterane Army, (such as upon several
Occasions and Pretensions, they have ever had on foot, in one part or other of
Christendom, now the space of (almost) sixscore years,) than in the strength of
their Dominions and Provinces. For what can be more strange, or more to the
Dis-valuation of the Power of the Spaniard upon the Continent, than that with
an Army of Eleven thousand English, Land-Souldiers, and a Fleet of Twenty six
Ships of War, besides some weak Vessels for Transportation, we should within
the Hourglass of two Months have won one Town of importance by Escalada;
Battered and Assaulted another; Overthrown great Forces in the Field, and that
upon the disadvantage of a Bridge strongly barracado'd, Landed the Army in
three several places of his Kingdom; Marched seven days in the Heart of his
Countries; Lodged three nights in the Suburbs of his principal City; Beaten his
Forces into the Gates thereof; Possessed two of his Frentire Forts; And come
off, after all this, with small loss of Men, otherwise than by Sickness. And it
was verily thought, that had it not been for four great Disfavours of that
Voyage; (That is to say; The failing in sundry Provisions that were promised,
especially of Cannons for Battery; The vain Hopes of Don Antomo concerning the
People of the Country, to come in to his aid; The Disappointment of the Fleet
that was directed to come up the River of Lisbon; And lastly, the Diseases
which spread in the Army, by reason of the Heat of the Season, and of the
Soldiers Misrule in Diet;) the Enterprise had succeeded, and Lisbon had been
carried. But howsoever, it makes proof to the World, that an Invasion of a few
English upon Spain, may have just hope of Victory, at least of Pasport to
depart safely.

In the year 1591. was that Memorable Fight, of an English Ship called The
Revenge, under the Command of Sir Richard Greenvil; Memorable (I say) even
beyond credit, and to the Height of some Herorcal Fable. And though it were a
Defeat, yet it exceeded a Victory; being like the Act of Sampson, that killed
more Men at his Death, than he had done in the time of all his Life. This Ship
for the space of fifteen hours, sat like a Stag amongst Hounds, at the bay,
and was seiged, and fought with, in turn, by fifteen great Ships of Spain; part
of a Navy of Fifty five Ships in all; The rest like Abettors looking on afar
off. And amongst the fifteen Ships that fought, the great St. Philippo was one,
a Ship of fifteen hundred Tun; Prince of the twelve Sea Apostles, which was
right glad, when she was shifted off from the Revenge. This brave Ship the
Revenge, being Manned only with two hundred (Soldiers and Mariners,) whereof
eighty lay sick, yet nevertheless after a Fight maintained (as was said) of
fifteen hours, and two Ships of the Enemy sunk by her side; Besides many more
torn and battered, and great slaughter of men, never came to be entered, but was
taken by Composition; The Enemies themselves having in admiration the Virtue of
the Commander, and the whole Tragedy of that Ship.

In the year 1596. was the Second Invasion, that we made upon the Main
Territories of Spain, prosperously achieved by that Worthy and Famous, Robert
Earl of Essex, in consort with the Noble Earl of Notingham, that now lives,
then Admiral. This Journey was like Lightning; For in the space of fourteen
hours, the King of Spains Navy was destroyed, and the Town of Cadez taken. The
Navy was no less than fifty tall Ships, besides twenty Galleys to attend them.
The Ships were straightways beaten, and put to flight. with such terror, a the
Spainards, in the end, were their own Executioners, and fired them all with
their own hands. The Galleys, by the benefit of the Shores and Shallows, got
away. The Town was a fair, strong, well built, and rich City; Famous in
Antiquity, and now most spoken of for this Disaster. It was manned with 4000
Soldiers Foot, and some 400 Horse; It was sacked, and burned, though great
Clemency was used toward the Inhabitants. But that which is no less strange
than the sudden Victory, is the great patience of the Spaniards; Who, though we
staid upon the place diverse days, yet never offered us any play then, nor ever
put us in suit, by any Action of Revenge, or Reparation, at any time after.

In the year 1600, was the Battle of Newport in the Low Countries, where the
Armies of the Archduke, and the States, tried it out by a just Battle. This
was the only Battle, that was fought in those Countries, these many years. For
Battles in the French Wars have been frequent; But in the Wars of Flanders,
rare, as the Nature of a Defensive requires. The Forces of both Armies were
not much unequal: That of the States exceeded somewhat in number; but that
again was recompensed in the quality of the Soldiers; For those of the Spanish
Part were of the Flower of all the Forces. The Arch Duke was the Assailant, and
the Preventer, and had the fruit of his Diligence and Celerity. For he had
charged certain Companies of Scottishmen, to the number of eight hundred, sent
to make good a Passage, and thereby severed from the Body of the Army, and cut
them all in pieces: For they like a brave Infantry, when they could make no
honorable Retreat, and would take no dishonorable Flight, made good the place
with their Lives. This Entrance of the Battle did whet the Courage of the
Spaniards, though it dulled their Swords; so as they came proudly on, confident
to defeat the whole Army. The Encounter of the Main Battle, which followed, was
a just Encounter, not hastening to a sudden Rout, nor the Fortune of the day
resting upon a few former Ranks, but fought out to the proof by several
Squadrons, and not without variety of success; Stat pedi pes, densusque viro
vir. There fell out an Error in the Dutch Army, by the overhasty Medly of
some of their Men, with the Enemies, which hindered the playing of their great
Ordnance. But the End was, that the Spaniards were utterly defeated, and near
five thousand of their Men, in the Fight, and in the Execution, slain, and
taken; Amongst whom were many of the principal Persons of their Army. The
Honor of the Day was, both by the Enemy, and the Dutch themselves, ascribed
unto the English; Of whom Sir Francis Vere, in a private Commentary, which he
wrote of that Service, leaves testified; That of fifteen hundred in number,
(for they were no more) eight hundred were slain in the field; And (which is
almost incredible in a day of Victory,) of the remaining seven hundred, two
only Men came off unhurt. Amongst the rest Sir Francis Vere himself had the
principal honor of the Service, unto whom the Prince of Aurange (as is said)
did transmit the Direction of the Army for that day. And in the next place, Sir
Horace Vere his Brother, that now lives, who was the principal in the Active
part. The Service also, of Sir Edward Cecill, Sir John Ogle, and diverse other
brave Gentlemen, was eminent.

In the year 1601. followed the Battle of Kinsale in Ireland. By this Spanish
Invasion of Ireland, (which was in September that year) a Man may guess, how
long time a Spaniard will live in Irish ground; which is a matter of a quarter
of a year, or four months at most. For they had all the Advantages in the
world; And no man would have thought, (considering the small Forces employed
against them) that they could have been driven out so soon. They obtained,
without resistance, in the end of September, the Town of Kinsale; A small
Garrison of 150 English, leaving the Town upon the Spaniards approach, and the
Townsmen receiving the Foreiners as friends. The number of Spaniards that put
themselves into Kinsale, was 2000 men, Soldiers of old Bands, under the command
of Don Ihuan d'Aquila, a man of good valor. The Town was strong of it self;
neither wanted there any Industry to fortify it on all parts, and make it
tenable, according to the Skill and Discipline of Spanish Fortification. At
that time the Rebels were proud, being encouraged upon former Successes; For
though the then Deputy, the Lord Mountjoy, and Sir George Carew, President of
Munster, had performed diverse good Services to their prejudice; Yet the Defeat
they had given the English at Blackwater, not long before; And their Treaty
(too muth to their honor) with the Earl of Essex, was yet fresh in their
memory. The Deputy lost no time, but made haste to have recovered the Town,
before new Succors came, and sat down before it in October, and laid siege to
it by the space of three Winter Months, or more: During which time, Sallies
were made by the Spaniard, but they were beaten in with loss. In January came
fresh Succors from Spain, to the number of 2000. more, under the Conduct of
Alonzo d'Ocampo. Upon the Comforts of these Succors, Tirone and Odonnel, drew
up their Forces together, to the number of 7000. besides the Spanish Regiments,
and took the field, resolved to rescue the Town, and give the English Battle.
So here was the Case: An Army of English, of some 6000, wasted and tired with a
long Winters Siege, engaged in the midst between an Army of a greater number
than themselves, fresh and in vigor, on the one side; and a Town strong in
fortification, and strong in Men, on the other. But what was the Event? Thus in
few words; That after the Irish and Spanish Forces had come on, and showed
themselves in some Bravery, they were content to give the English the honor, as
to charge them first; And when it came to the Charge, there appeared no other
difference between the Valor of the Irish Rebels, and the Spaniards, but that
the one ran away before they were charged, and the other straight after. And
again, the Spaniards that were in the Town, had so good Memories of their
Losses, in their former Sallies, as the Confidence of an Army, which came for
their deliverance, could not draw them forth again. To conclude, there
succeeded an absolute Victory for the English, with the slaughter of above 2000
of the Enemy; The taking of nine Ensigns, whereof six Spanish; the taking of
the Spanish General, D'Ocampo, Prisoner; And this with the loss of so few of
the English, as is scarce credible; Being (as has been rather confidently,
than credibly reported) but of one Man, the Cornet of Sir Richard Gream, though
not a few hurt. There followed immediate y after the Defeat, a present yielding
up of the Town by Composition; And not only so, but an Avoiding (by express
Articles of Treaty accorded) of all other Spanish Forces thorowout all Ireland,
from the Plaees and Nests where they had settled themselves, in greater strength
(as in regard of the natural Situation of the Places) than that was of Kinsale:
Which were, Castle haven, Baltimore, and Beere-haven. Indeed they went away
with sound of Trumpet; For they did nothing but publish and trumpet all the
Reproaches they could devise against the Irish Land and Nation; Insomuch as
D'Aquila said in open Treaty; That when the Devil, upon the Mount, did show
Christ all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, he did not doubt,
(...) the devil left out Ireland, and kept it for himself.

I cease here, omitting not a few other proofs of the English Valor and
Fortune. in their later times: As at the Suburbs of Paris, at the Raveline, at
Druse in Normandy, some Encounters in Britanny, and at Ostend, and diverse
others; Partly because some of them have not been proper Encounters between the
Spaniards and the English, and partly because others of them have not been of
that greatness, as to have sorted in company with the Particulars formerly
recited. It is true, that amongst all the late Adventures, the Voyage of Sir
Francis Drake, and Sir John Hawkins, into the West Indies, was unfortunate; Yet
in such sort, as it does not break or interrupt our Prescription; To have had
the better of the Spaniards upon all Fights of late. For the Disaster of that
Journey was caused chiefly by sickness; As might well appear by the Deaths of
both the Generals, (Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Hawkins) of the same
sickness amongst the rest. The Land-Enterprise of Panama, was an ill measured
and immature Counsel; for it was grounded upon a false account, that the
Passages toward Panama were no better fortified, than Drake had left them. But
yet, it sorted not to any Fight of importance, but to a Retreat, after the
English had proved the strength of their first Fort, and had notice of the two
other Forts beyond, by which they were to have marched. It is true, that in the
Return of the English Fleet, they were set upon by Avellaneda, Admiral of 20
great great ships Spanish, our Fleet being but 14, full of sick men, deprived
of their two Generals at Sea, and having no pretense but to journey homewards:
And yet the Spaniards did but salute them about the Cape de los Corientes, with
some small offer of Fight, and came off with loss; Although it was such a new
thing for the Spaniards to receive so little hurt up on dealing with the
English, as Avellaneda made great brags of it, for no greater matter, than the
waiting upon the English a far off, from Cape de los Corientes to Cape Antonio;
Which nevertheless, in the Language of a Soldier, and of a Spaniard, he called
a Chase.

But before I proceed further, it is good to meet with an Objection, which if
it be not removed, the Conclusion of Experience, from the time past, to the
time present, will not be sound and perfect. For it will be said, that in the
former times (whereof we have spoken) Spain was not so mighty as now it is; And
England on the other side, was more aforehand in all matters of Power.
Therefore let us compare with indifferency, these Disparities of times, and we
shall plainly perceive, that they make for the advantage of England at this
present time. And because we will less wander in Generalities, we will fix the
Comparison to precise Times; Comparing the State of Spain and England in the
year 88. with this present year that now runs. In handling of this Point, I
will not meddle with any Personal Comparisons, of the Princes, Counselors, and
Commanders by Sea or Land, that were then, and that are now, in both Kingdoms,
Spain and England; but only rest upon Real Points, for the true Ballancing of
the State, of the Forces, and Affairs of both Times. And yet these Personal
Comparisons I omit not, but that I could evidently show, that even in these
Personal Respects, the Balance sways on our part: But because I would say
nothing that may favor of a spirit of Flattery, or Censure, of the present
Government.

First therefore, it is certain, that Spain has not now a foot of Ground in
quiet possession, more than it had in 88. As for the Valtoline, and the
Palatinate, it is a Maxim in State, that all Countries of new Acquest, till
they be settled, are rather matters of Burden, than Strength. On the other
side, England has Scotland united, and Ireland reduced to obedience, and
planted, which are mighty augmentations.

Secondly, in 88. the Kingdom of France, able alone to counterpoize Spain it
self, (much more in conjunction) was torn with the Party of the League, which
gave Law to their King, and depended wholly upon Spain. Now France is united
under a valiant young King, generally obeyed, if he will himself; King of
Navarre as well as of France; And that is no ways taken Prisoner, though he be
tied in a double chain of Alliance, with Spain.

Thirdly, in 88. there sat in the Sea of Rome, a fierce thundering Friar, that
would set all at six and seven; Or at six and five, if you allude to his Name.
And though he would after have turned his teeth upon Spain, yet he was taken
order with before it came to that. Now there is ascended to the Papacy, a
Personage that came in by a chaste Election, no ways obliged to the Party of
the Spaniards; A man bred in Embassages and Affairs of State; That has much of
the Prince, and nothing of the Friar; And one, that though he love the Chair of
the Papacy well, yet he loves the Carpet above the Chair; That is, Italy, and
the Liberties thereof, well likewise.

Fourthly, in 88. the King of Denmark was a stranger to England, and rather
inclined to Spain; Now the King is incorporated to the Blood of England, and
Engaged in the Quarrel of the Palatinate. Then also Venice, Savoy, and the
Princes and Cities of Germany, had but a dull Fear of the Greatness of Spain,
upon a general Apprehension only of the spreading and ambitious Designs of
that Nation: Now that fear is sharpened and pointed, by the Spaniards late
Enterprises, upon the Valtoline, and the Palatinate, which come nearer them.

Fifthly and lastly, the Dutch (which is the Spaniards perpetual Duellist) has
now, at this present, five Ships to one, and the like Proportion in Treasure
and Wealth, to that they had in 88. Neither is it possible (whatsoever is given
out) that the Coffers of Spain should now be fuller, than they were in 88. For
at that time Spain had no other Wars save those of the Low Countries, which
were grown into an Ordinary: Now they have had coupled therewith, the
Extraordinary of the Valtoline, and the Palatinate. And so I conclude my Answer
to the Objection raised, touching the Difference of times; Not entering into
more secret passages of State; But keeping that Character of Style, whereof
Seneca speaks, Plus significat quam loquitur.

Here I would pass over from Matter of Experience, were it not that I held it
necessary, to discover a wonderful Erroneous observation that walks about,
and is commonly received, contrary to all the Account of Time, and Experience.
It is, that the Spaniard, where he once gets in, will seldom (or never) be
got out again. But nothing is less true than this. Not long since they got
footing at Breast, and some other parts in French Britain, and after quitted
them. They had Calais, Ardes, and Amiens, and rendered them, or were beaten out.
They had since Verseilles, and fairly left it. They had the other day the
Valtoline, and now have put it in deposite. What they will do with Ormus, which
the Persian has taken from them, we shall see. So that to speak truly of later
Times, they have rather poched and offered at a Number of Enterprises, than
maintained any constantly, quite contrary to that idle Tradition. In more
ancient times (leaving their Purchases in Africa, which they after abandoned,)
when their great Emperor Charles had clasped Germany, (almost) in his fist, he
was forced in the end, to go from Isburg, (and as if it had been in a Masque,
by Torch-light,) and to quit every foot in Germany round that he had gotten;
which I doubt not, will be the Hereditary Issue of this late Purchase of the
Palatinate. And so I conclude the Ground, that I have to think, that Spain will
be no Over-match to Great Britain, if his Majesty shall enter into a War, out of
Experience, and Records of time.

For Grounds of Reason they are many: I will extract the principal, and open
them briefly, and (as it were) in the Bud. For Situation, I pass it over;
though it be no small point: England, Scotland, Ireland, and our good
Confederates the United Provinces, lie all in a plump together, not accessible
but by Sea, or at least by passing of great Rivers, which are Natural
Fortifications. As for the Dominions of Spain, they are so scattered, as it
yields great choice of the Scenes of the War, and promises slow Succors
unto such Part as shall be attempted. There be three main parts of Military
Puissance; Men, Money, and Confederates. For Men, there are to be considered,
Valor, and Number. Of Valor I speak not: Take it from the Witnesses that have
been produced before: Yet the old observation is not untrue; That the Spaniards
Valor lies in the Eye of the Looker on; But the English Valor lies about the
Soldiers Heart. A Valor of Glory, and a Valor of Natural Courage, are two
things. But let that pass, and let us speak of Number. Spain is a Nation thin
sown of People; Partly by reason of the Sterility of the Soil; And partly
because their Natives are exhausted by so many Employments, in such vast
Territories as they possess. So that it has bin accounted a kind of Miracle,
to see ten or twelve thousand Native Spaniards in an Army. And it is certain,
(as we have touched it a little before in passage) that the Secret of the Power
of Spain, consists in a Veterane Army, compounded of Miscellany Forces of all
Nations, which for many years they have had on foot upon one occasion or other:
And if there should happen the Misfortune of a Battle, it would be a long work
to draw on Supplies. They tell a Tale of a Spanish Ambassador, that was brought
to see the Treasury of St. Mark at Venice, and still he looked down to the
ground; And being asked why he so looked down, said; He was looking to see
whether their Treasure had any Root, (so that if it were spent, it would grow
again) as his Masters had. But howsoever it be of their Treasure, certainly the
Forces have scarce any Root; Or at least such a Root, as buddeth forth poorly
and slowly. It is true, they have the Wallons, who are tall Soldiers; but that
is but a Spot of Ground. But on the other side, there is not in the world
again, such a Spring and Seminary of brave Militar People, as in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and the United Provinces. So as if Wars should mow them
down never so fast, yet they may be suddenly supplied, and come up again.

For Money, no doubt it is the principal Part of the Greatness of Spain; For by
that they maintain a Veterane Army; And Spain is the only State of Europe,
that is a Money grower. But in this Part, of all others, is most to be
considered, the tick lish and brittle State of the Greatness of Spain. Their
Greatness consists in their Treasure; their Treasure in their Indies; And
their Indies (if it be well weighed) are indeed but an Accession to such, as
are Masters by Sea. So as this Axeltree whereupon their Greatness turns, is
soon cut in two, by any that shall be stronger than they by Sea. Herein
therefore I refer me to the Opinions of all Men (Enemies, or whomsoever)
whether that the Maritime Forces of Great Britain, and the United Provinces, be
not able to beat the Spainard at Sea. For if that be so, the Links of that
Chain whereby they hold their Greatness, are dissolved. Now if it be said, that
admit the Case of Spain be such, as we have made it, yet we ought to descend
into our own Case, which we shall find (perhaps) not to be in State, (for
Treasure) to enter into a War with Spain. To which I answer; I know no such
thing; The Mint beats well; And the Pulses of the Peoples Hearts beat well.
But there is another Point that takes away quite this Objection: For whereas
Wars are generally Causes of Poverty, or Consumption; on the contrary part, the
special Nature of this War with Spain, (if it be made by Sea) is like to be a
Lucrative and Restorative War. So that, if we go roundly on at the first, the
War in continuance will find it self. And therefore you must make a great
difference between Hercules Labors by Land, and Jasons Voyage by Sea for the
Golden Fleece.

For Confederates, I will not take upon me the knowledge, how the Princes,
States, and Councels of Europe, at this day, stand affected toward Spain; For
that trencheth into the secret Occurents of the present Time, wherewith in all
this Treatise I have forborne to meddle. But to speak of that which lies open
and in view: I see much Matter of Quarrel and Jealousy, but little of Amity
and Trust toward Spain, almost in all other Estates. I see France is in
competition with them, for three noble Portions of their Monarchy; Navarre,
Naples, and Millain; And now freshly in difference with them about the
Valtoline. I see once in 30 or 40 years comes a Pope, that casts his eye
upon the Kingdom of Naples, to recover it to the Church: As it was in the minds
of Julius 2. Paulus 4. and Zistus 5. As for that great Body of Germany, I see
they have greater reason to confederate themselves with the Kings of France,
and Great Britain, or Denmark, for the liberty of the Germane Nation, and for
the Expulsion of Spanish and foreign Forces, than they had in the years 1552.
and 1553. At which time they contracted a League with Henry II. the French
King, upon the same Articles, against Charles V. who had impatronized himself
of a great part of Germany, through the discord of the German Princes, which
himself had so wen and fomented, Which League at that time did the Deed, and
drove out all the Spaniards out of that part of Germany; and re-integrated that
Nation in their ancient Liberty and Honor. For the West Indies, though Spain
has had yet not much actual disturbance there, except it have been from
England; yet nevertheless I see all Princes lay a kind of claim unto them;
accounting the Title of Spain, but as a Monopoly of those large Countries,
wherein they have, in great part but an Imaginary Possession. For Africa upon
the West, the Moors of Valentia expulsed, and their Allies, do yet hang as a
Cloud or Storm over Spain. Gabor on the East, is like an Anniversary Wind, that
rises every year upon the Party of Austria. And Persia has entered into
Hostolity with Spain, and given them the first blow by taking of Ormus. It is
within every man's observation also, that Venice does think their State almost
on fire, if the Spaniards hold the Valtoline. That Savoy has learnt by fresh
experience, That Alliance with Spain is no Security against the Ambition of
Spain; And that of Bavaria has likewise bin taught, that Merit and Service
does oblige the Spaniard but from day to day. Neither do I say, for all this,
but that Spain may rectify much of this ill blood, by their particular and
cunning Negotiations: But yet there it is in the Body, and may break out, no
man knows when, into ill Accidents: but at least it shows plainly that which
serves for our purpose; That Spain is much destitute of Assured and Confident
Confederates. And therefore I will conclude this Part, with the Speech of a
Councellor of State, in Spain, at this day, which was not without Salt. He said
to his Master, the King of Spain, that now is, upon occasion: Sir, I will tell
your Majesty thus much for your comfort; Tour Majesty has but two Enemies;
whereof the one is, All the World; And the other is, Tour own Ministers. And
thus I end the Second Main Part, I propounded to speak of; which was, The
Ballancing of the Forces, between the Kings Majesty, and the King of Spain, if
a War must follow.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Touching an HOLY WAR.

Written in the Year, 1622.

Whereunto the Author prefixed an Epistle to the Bishop of WINCHESTER last
deceased.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Humphrey Robinson, and Sold by William Lee, 1670.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in GOD Lancelot Andrews, Lord Bishop of
WINCHESTER; And Counselor of Estate to his MAJESTY.
My Lord,
AMongst Consolations, it is not the least, to represent to a Man's self, like
Examples of Calamity in others. For Examples give a quicker Impression, than
Arguments; And besides they certify us that, which the Scripture also tendreth
for satisfaction; That no new thing is happened unto us. This they do the
better, by how much the Examples, are liker in circumstances, to our own Case;
And more especially, if they fell upon Persons, that are greater, and worthier,
than our selves. For as it savoureth of Vanity, to match our selves highly, in
our own conceit; So on the otherside, it is a good sound Conclusion, that if
our Betters have sustained the like Events, we have the less cause to be
grieved.

In this kind of Consolation, I have not been wanting to my Self, Though as a
Christian, I have tasted (through Gods great goodness,) of higher Remedies.
Having therefore, through the Variety of my Reading, set before me, many
Examples, both of Ancient and Later Times, my Thoughts (I confess) have chiefly
stayed upon three Particulars, as the most Eminent, and the most Resembling.
All three Persons, that had held chief place of Authority in their Countries;
All three ruined, not by War, or by any other Disaster, but by Justice, and
Sentence, as Delinquents, and Criminals; All three famous Writers, insomuch as
the remembrance of their Calamity, is now as to Posterity, but as a little
Picture of Night-work, remaining amongst the fair, and excellent Tables, of
their Acts, and Works. And all three (if that were anything to the matter,) fit
Examples to quench any Man's Ambition of Rising again; For that they were every
one of them restored with great glory, but to their further Ruin and
Destruction, ending in a violent Death. The Men were, Demosthenes, Cicero, and
Seneca; Persons, that I durst not claim Affinity with, except the Similitude of
our Fortunes had contracted it. When I had cast mine Eyes upon these Examples,
I was carried on further to observe, how they did bear their Fortunes, and
principally, how they did employ their Times, being banished, and disabled for
Public Business: To the end, that I might learn by them; And that they might
be, as well my Counselors, as my Comforters. Whereupon I happened to note,
how diversely, their Fortunes wrought upon them, especially in that point, at
which I did most aim which was the employing of their Times, and Pens. In
Cicero, I saw, that during his Banishment, (which was almost two years,) he was
so softened, and dejected, as he wrote nothing, but a few Womanish Epistles. And
yet, in mine opinion, he had least reason of the Three, to be discouraged: For
that although it was judged, and judged by the highest kind of Judgment, in
form of a Statute, or Law, that he should be banished; And his whole Estate
confiscated, and seized; And his houses pulled down; And that it should be
highly penal, for any Man, to propound his Repeal; Yet his Case, even then, had
no great Blot of Ignominy, but it was thought, but a Tempest of Popularity,
which overthrew him. Demosthenes contrariwise, though his Case was foul, being
condemned for Bribery; And not simple Bribery, but Bribery in the Nature of
Treason, and Disloyalty; yet nevertheless took so little knowledge of his
Fortune, as during his Banishment, he did much busy himself, and intermeddle
with matters of State; And took upon him to Counsel the State, (as if he had
been still at the Helm,) by letters; As appears by some Epistles of his, which
are extant. Seneca indeed, who was condemned, for many Corruptions, and Crimes,
and banished into a solitary Island, kept a Mean; And though his Pen did not
freese, yet he abstained from intruding into Matters of Business; But spent his
time, in writing Books, of excellent Argument, and Use, for all Ages; Though he
might have made better Choice, (sometimes) of his Dedications.

These Examples confirmed me much in a Resolution, (whereunto I was otherwise
inclined,) to spend my Time wholly in Writing; And to put forth that poor
Talent, or half Talent, or what it is, that God has given me, not as
heretofore to particular Exchanges, but to Banks, or Mounts of Perpetuity,
which will not break. Therefore having not long since, set forth a part of my
Instauration; Which is the Work, that in mine own judgment, (Si nunquam fallit
Imago,) I do most esteem; I think to proceed in some new paris thereof. And
although I have received from many Parts beyond the Seas, Testimonies touching
that Work, such as beyond which I could not expect at the first, in so abstruse
an Argument; yet nevertheless I have just cause to doubt, that it flies too
high over Men's Heads: I have a purpose therefore, (though I break the order of
Time,) to draw it down to the sense, by some Patterns of a Natural Story, and
Inquisition. And again, for that my Book of Advancement of Learning, may be
some Preparative, or Key, for the better opening of the Instauration; Because
it exhibits a Mixture, of new Conceits, and old; whereas the Instauration,
gives the new unmixed, otherwise than with some little Aspersion of the old,
for tastes sake; I have thought good to procure a Translation of that Book,
into the General Language, not without great and ample Additions, and
Enrichment thereof; Especially in the Second Book, which handles the Partition
of Sciences: In such sort, as I hold it may serve, in lieu of the First Part,
of the Instauration, and acquit my promise in that part. Again, because I
cannot altogether desert, the Civil Person, that I have born; Which if I should
forget, Enough would remember; I have also entered into a work touching Laws;
Propounding a Character of Justice, in a middle term, between the Speculative,
and Reverend discourses of Philosophers, and the Writings of Lawyers, which are
tied, and obnoxious to their particular Laws. And although it be true, that I
had a purpose, to make a particular Digest, or Recompilement, of the Laws, of
mine own Nation; Yet because it is a Work of Assistance, and that, that I
cannot master by mine own Forces, and Pen, I have laid it aside. Now having in
the Work of my Instauration, had in contemplation, the general Good of Men, in
their very Being, and the Dowries of Nature; And in my Work of Laws, the
general good of Men likewise, in Society, and the Dowries of Government; I
thought in duty I owed somewhat unto mine own Country, which I ever loved;
Insomuch as although my Place, has been far above my desert, yet my Thoughts,
and Cares concerning the Good thereof, were beyond, and over, and above my
place: So now being (as I am) no more able to do my Country Service, it
remained unto me, to do it Honor: Which I have endeavored to do, in my Work,
of the Reign, of King HENRY the Seventh. As for my Essays, and some other
Particulars of that nature, I count them, but as the Recreations of my other
Studies, and in that sort purpose to continue them; Though I am not ignorant,
that those kind of Writings, would, with less pains, and embracement,
(perhaps,) yield more Luster, and Reputation to my Name, than those other,
which I have in hand. But I account the Use, that a Man should seek, of the
publishing of his own Writings before his Death, to be but an untimely
Anticipation of that, which is proper to follow a Man, and not to go along with
him.

But revolving with my self, my Writings, as well those which I have published,
as those, which I had in hand, me thought they went all into the City, and none
into the Temple; Where because I have found, so great Consolation, I desire
likewise to make some poor Oblation. Therefore I have chosen an Argument, mixed
of Religious and Civil Considerations; And likewise mixed between Contemplative,
and Active. For who can tell, whether there may not be an Exoriere aliquis?
Great Matters (especially if they be Religious) have (many times) small
beginnings; And the Platform, may draw on the Building. This Work, because I
was ever an Enemy to flattring Dedications, I have dedicated to your Lordship;
In respect of our ancient, and private Acquaintance; And because amongst the
Men of our Times, I hold you in especial Reverence.

Your Lordships Loving Friend, Fr. St. Alban.

AN ADVERTISEMENT Touching an HOLY WAR.
The persons that speak.
EVSEBIVS. GAMALIEL. ZEBEDAEUS. MARTIVS. EVPOLIS. POLLIO.
THere met at Paris, (in the House of Eupolis,) Characters of the Persons.
Eusebius bears the Character of a Moderate Divine. Gamaliel of a Protestant
Zelant. Zebedaeus of a Romish Catholic Zelant. Martius of a Militar Man.
Eupolis of a Politic. Pollio of a Courtier.
Eusebius, Zebedaeus, Gamaliel, Martius; All Persons of eminent Quality, but of
several Dispositions. Eupolis himself was also present: And while they were set
in conference, Pollio came in to them from Court; And as soon as he saw them,
after his witty and pleasant manner, he said.

Pollio. Here be four of you, I think, were able to make a good World; for you
are as differing as the Four Elements, and yet you are Friends. As for Eupolis,
because he is Temperate, and without Passion, he may be the Fifth Essence.
Eupolis. If we five ( Pollio,) make the Great World, you alone may make the
Little; Because you profess and practice both, to refer all things to your
Self. Pollio. And what do they that practice it, and profess it not? Eupolis.
They are the less Hardy, and the more Dangerous. But come, and sit down with
us, for we were speaking of the Affairs of Christendom, at this day: Wherein we
would be glad also, to have your Opinion. Pollio. My Lords, I have journeyed
this Morning, and it is now the heat of the Day; Therefore your Lordships
Discourses had need content my Ears very well, to make them entreat mine Eyes
to keep open. But yet if you will give me leave to awake you, when I think your
Discourses do but sleep, I will keep watch the best I can. Eupolis. You cannot
do us a greater Favor. Only I fear, you will think all our Discourses, to be
but the better sort of Dreams: For good wishes, without power to effect, are
not much more. But Sir, when you came in, Martius had both raised our
Attentions, and affected us with some Speech he had begun; And it falls out
well, to shake off your Drowsiness, for it seemed to be the Trumpet of a War.
And therefore, ( Martius,) if it please you, to begin again; For the Speech was
such, as deserves to be heard twice; And I assure you, your Auditory is not a
little amended, by the presence of Pollio. Martius. When you came in, (
Pollio,) I was saying freely to these Lords, that I had observed, how by the
space now, of half a Century of years, there had been (if I may speak it,) a
kind of Meanness, in the Designs, and Enterprises of Christendom. Wars with
Subjects; Like an angry Suit for a Man's own, that might be better ended by
Accord. Some petty Acquests of a Town, or a Spot of Territory; Like a Farmers
Purchase of a Close, or nook of ground, that lay fit for him. And although the
Wars had been, for a Naples, or a Millain, or a Portugal, or a Bohemia, yet
these Wars were but as the Wars of Heathen, (of Athens, or Sparta, or Rome,)
for secular Interest, or Ambition, not worthy the Warfare of Christians. The
Church (indeed) makes her Missions, into the extreme parts of the Nations, and
Isles; And it is well: But this is, Ecce Vnus Gladius hic. The Christian
Princes, and Potentates are they, that are wanting, to the Propagation of the
Faith, by their Arms. Yet our Lord, that said on Earth, to the Disciples, Ite
and praedicate; Said from Heaven, to Constantine, In hoc Signo Vince. What
Christian Soldier is there, that will not be touched, with a Religious
Emulation, to see an Order of Jesus, or of Saint Francis, or of Saint
Augustine, do such service, for enlarging the Christian Borders; And an Order
of Saint Fago, or Saint Michael, or Saint George, only to Robe, and Feast, and
perform Rites, and Observances? Surely the Merchants themselves, shall rise in
judgment against the Princes, and Nobles of Europe: For they have made a great
Path, in the Seas, unto the ends of the World; And set forth Ships, and Forces,
of Spanish, English, and Dutch, enough to make China tremble; And all this for
Pearl, or Stone, or Spices: But for the Pearl of the Kingdom of Heaven, Or the
Stones of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Or the Spices of the Spouses Garden, not a
Mast has been set up. Nay they can make shift, to shed Christian Blood, so far
off amongst themselves, and not a Drop for the Cause of Christ. But let me
recall my self; I must acknowledge, that within the space of fifty years
(whereof I spoke,) there have been three Noble, and Memorable Actions, upon the
Infidels, wherein the Christian has been the Invader. For where it is, upon
the Defensive, I reckon it, a War of Nature, and not of Piety. The first was,
that Famous and Fortunate War by Sea, that ended in the Victory of Lepanto;
Which has put a Hook into the Nostrils of the Ottomans, to this day: Which was
the Work (chiefly) of that excellent Pope, Pius Quintus; whom I wonder his
Successors have not declared a Saint. The second was, the Noble, though
Unfortunate, Expedition, of Sebastian King of Portugal, upon Asrick, which was
achieved by him alone; So alone, as left somewhat for others to Excuse. The
last was, the brave Incursions of Sigismund the Transilvanian Prince; The thread
of whose Prosperity was cut off, by the Christians themselves; contrary to the
Worthy and Paternal Monitories of Pope Clement the Eighth. More than these, I
do not remember. Pol. No! what say you, to the Extirpation of the Moors of
Valentia? At which sudden Question, Martius was a little at a stop, and
Gamaliel prevented him, and said. Gamaliel. I think Martius did well in
omitting that Action, for I, for my part, never approved it; And it seems, God
was not well pleased with that Deed; For you see the King, in whose time it
passed, (whom you Catholics count a Saint-like, and Immaculate Prince,) was
taken away, in the Flower of his Age: And the Author, and great Counselor of
that Rigor, (whose Fortunes seemed to be built upon the Rock,) is ruined: And
it is thought by some, that the reckonings of that Business, are not yet
cleared with Spain: For that numbers of those supposed Moors, being tried now
by their Exile, continue constant in the Faith, and true Christians in all
points, save in the thirst of Revenge. Zebed. Make not hasty Judgment, (
Gamaliel,) of that great action; Which was as Christ's Fan, in those Countries;
Except you could show, some such Covenant, from the Crown of Spain, as Josuah
made with the Gibeonites; That that Cursed Seed should continue in the Land.
And you see, it was done by Edict, not tumultuously; The Sword was not put into
the Peoples hand. Eupol. I think, Martius did omit it, not as making any
Judgment of it, either way; But because it sorted not aptly, with Actions of
War, being upon Subjects, and without resistance. But let us, if you think
good, give Martius leave, to proceed in his Discourse; For methought he spoke,
like a Divine in Armor. Martius. It is true, ( Eupolis,) that the Principal
Object, which I have before mine Eyes, in that whereof I speak, is Piety, and
Religion. But nevertheless, if I should speak only as a Natural Man, I should
persuade the same thing. For there is no such Enterprise, at this day, for
secular Greatness, and terrene Honor, as a War upon Infidels. Neither do I, in
this, propound a Novelty, or Imagination, but that, which is proved by late
Examples of the same kind, though perhaps of less difficulty. The Castilians,
the Age before that wherein we live, opened the New World; And subdued, and
planted Mexico, Peru, Chile, and other Parts of the West Indies. We see what
Floods of Treasure, have flowed into Europe, by that Action; So that the Cense,
or Rates of Christendom, are raised since ten times, yea twenty times told. Of
this Treasure, it is true, the Gold was Accumulate, and Store Treasure, for the
most part; But the Silver is still growing. Besides, infinite is the Access of
Territory, and Empire, by the same Enterprise. For there was never an Hand
drawn, that did double the Rest, of the Habitable World, before this; For so a
Man may truly term it, if he shall put to account, as well that that is, as
that which may be hereafter, by the further Occupation, and Colonizing of those
Countries. And yet it cannot be affirmed, (if one speak ingenuously,) that it
was the Propagation of the Christian Faith, that was the Adamant of that
Discovery, Entry, and Plantation; But Gold, and Silver, and Temporal Profit,
and Glory: So that, what was first in Gods Providence, was but second in Man's
Appetite, and Intention. The like may be said, of the famous Navigations, and
Conquests of Emanuel, King of Portugal, whose Arms began to circle Africa and
Asia; and to acquire not only the Trade of Spices, and Stones, and Musk, and
Drugs, but Footing, and places, in those extreme parts of the East. For neither
in this, was Religion the principal, but Amplification, and Enlargement, of
Riches, and Dominion. And the Effect, of these two Enterprises, is now such,
that both the East, and the West Indies, being met in the Crown of Spain, it is
come to pass, that as one says in a brave kind of Expression; The Sun never
sets in the Spanish Dominions, but ever shines, upon one part, or other of
them: Which, to say truly, is a beam of Glory, though I cannot say, it is so
solid a Body of Glory, wherein the Crown of Spain, surpasses all the former
Monarchies. So as to conclude, we may see, that in these Actions upon Gentiles,
or Infidels, only or chiefly, both the Spiritual, and Temporal, Honor and
Good, have been in one pursuit and purchase conjoined. Pol. Methinks, with your
favor, you should remember, ( Martins,) that Wild, and Savage People, are like
Beasts, and Birds, which are Ferae Naturae, the Property of which passes with
the Possession, and goes to the Occupant; But of Civil People, it is not so.
Mar. I know no such difference, amongst reasonable Souls; But that what soever
is in order, to the greatest, and most general good of people, may justify the
Action, be the people more, or less Civil. But, ( Eupolis) I shall not easily
grant, that the people of Peru, or Mexico, were such brute Savages, as you
intend; or that there should be any such difference between them, and many of
the Infidels, which are now in other parts. In Peru, though they were
unapparelled People, according to the Clime; And had some Customs very
barbarous; Yet the Government of the Incae's, had many parts of Humanity, and
Civility. They had reduced the Nations, from the Adoration of a multitude of
Idols and Fancies, to the Adoration of the Sun. And, as I remember, the Book of
Wisdom notes degrees of Idolatry; making that of Worshipping Petty and Vile
Idols, more gross, than simply the Worshipping of the Creature. And some of the
Prophets, as I take it, do the like, in the Metaphore, of more ugly, and
bestial Fornication. The Peruvians also, (under the Incaes,) had magnificent
Temples of their Superstition; They had strict and regular Justice; They bare
great Faith, and Obedience to their Kings; They proceeded in a kind of Martial
Justice with their Enemies, offering them their Law, as better for their own
good, before they drew their Sword. And much like, was the State of Mexico,
being an Elective Monarchy. As for those people of the East, ( Goa, Calecute,
Malaca,) they were a fine, and dainty people, Frugal, and yet Elegant, though
not Militar. So that if things be rightly weighed, the Empire of the Turks may
be truly affirmed, to be more barbarous, than any of these. A cruel Tyranny,
bathed in the blood of their Emperors, upon every Succession: A heap of
Vassals and Slaves: No Nobles, No Gentlemen: No Freemen, No Inheritance of
Land, No Stirp or Ancient Families: A people that is without Natural Affection,
and, as the Scripture says, that Regards not the desires of Women: And
without Piety, or care toward their Children: A Nation without Morality,
without Letters, Arts, or Sciences; That can scarce measure an Acre of Land, or
an hour of the Day: Base and sluttish in Buildings, Diets, and the like: And in
a word, a very reproach of Human Society: And yet this Nation has made the
Garden of the World, a Wilderness; For that, as it is truly said, concerning
(...) Turks; Where Ottomans Horse sets his Foot, people will come (...) thin.
Pollio. Yet in the midst of your Invective, ( Martius,) do the Turks this
right, as to remember, that they are no Idolaters: For if, as you say, there be
a difference, between Worshipping a (...) Idol, and the Sun; There is a much
greater difference, between worshipping a Creature, and the Creator. For the
Turks do acknowledge God the Father, Creator of Heaven, and Earth, being the
first Person in the Trinity, though they deny the rest. At which Speech, when
Martius made some pause, Zebedaeus replied with a Countenance of great
Reprehension, and Severity. Zebed. We must take heed, ( Pollio,) that we fall
not at unawares, into the Heresy of Manuel Comnenus, Emperor of Grecia; Who
affirmed, that Mahomets God, was the true God; Which Opinion was not only
rejected, and condemned by the Synod, but imputed to the Emperor, as extreme
Madness; Being reproached to him also, by the Bishop of Thessalonica, in those
bitter, and strange Words, as are not to be named. Martius. I confess, that it
is my Opinion, that a War upon the Turk, is more worthy, than upon any other
Gentiles, Infidels, or Savages, that either have been, or now are, both in
point of Religion, and in point of Honor; Though facility, and hope of
Success, might (perhaps) invite some other Choice. But before I proceed, both
my Self would be glad to take some Breath; And I shall frankly desire, that
some of your Lordships would take your turn to speak, that can do it better.
But chiefly, for that I see here some, that are excellent Interpreters of the
Divine Law, though in several ways; And that I have reason to distrust mine own
Judgment, both as weak in it self, and as that, which may be overborn by my
Zeal, and Affection to this Cause. I think it were an Error to speak further,
till I may see some sound Foundation laid, of the Lawfulness of the Action, by
them that are better versed in that Argument. Eupolis. I am glad, ( Martius,)
to see in a Person of your Profession, so great Moderation, in that you are not
transported in an Action, that warms the blood, and is appearing Holy, to
blaunch, or take for admitted, the point of Lawfulness. And because methinks
this Conference prospers, if your Lordships will give me leave, I will make
some motion, touching the distribution of it into Parts. Unto which, when they
all assented, Eupolis said. Eupolis. I think, it would not sort amiss, if
Zebedaeus would be pleased, to handle the Question; Whether a War, for the
Propagation of the Christian Faith, without other cause of Hostility, be
lawful, or no, and in what Cases? I confess also, I would be glad to go a
little further; And to hear it spoken to, concerning the Lawfulness, not only
permissively, but whether it be not Obligatory, to Christian Princes, and
States, to design it: Which part, if it please Gamaliel to undertake, the point
of the Lawfulness, taken simply, will be Complete. Yet there rests the
Comparative: That is, it being granted, that it is either Lawful, or Binding,
yet whether other things be not to be preferred before it; As Extirpation of
Heresies; Reconcilements of Schisms; Pursuit of Lawful Temporal Rights, and
Quarrels; and the like: And how far this Enterprise, ought either to wait upon
these other Matters; Or to be mingled with them; Or to pass by them, and give
Law to them, as inferior unto it self; And because this is a great part, and
Eusebius has yet said nothing, we will, by way of Mulct, or Pain, if your
Lordships think good, lay it upon him. All this while, I doubt much, that
Pollio, who has a sharp Wit of Discovery, toward what is Solid and Real, and
what is Specious and Aerie, will esteem all this but Impossibilities, and
Eagles in the Clouds: And therefore we shall all entreat him, to crush this
Argument, with his best Forces; That by the Light, we shall take from him, we
may either cast it away, if it be found but a Bladder; Or discharge it, of so
much as is vain, and not sperable. And because, I confess, I my self am not of
that Opinion, although it be an hard Encounter to deal with Pollio, yet I shall
do my best, to prove the Enterprise Possible; And to show, how all Impediments
may be either removed, or overcomen. And then it will be fit for Martius, (if
we do not desert it before,) to resume his further Discourse, as well for the
Persuasive, as for the Consult, touching the Means, Preparations, and all that
may conduce unto the Enterprise. But this is but my Wish, your Lordships will
put it into better order. They all not only allowed the Distribution, but
accepted the Parts: But because the Day was spent, they agreed, to defer it,
till the next Morning. Only Pollio said. Pollio. You take me right, ( Eupolis;)
For I am of opinion, that except you could bray Christendom in a Mortar, and
mould it into a New Past, there is no Possibility of an Holy War. And I was
ever of opinion, that the Philosophers Stone, and an Holy War, were but the
Rendezvous of Cracked Brains, that wore their Feather in their Head, instead of
their Hat. Nevertheless, believe me of Courtesy, that if you Five shall be of
another mind, especially after you have heard what I can say, I shall be ready
to certify with Hippocrates, that Athens is mad, and Democritus is only sober.
And lest you should take me for altogether Adverse, I will frankly contribute
to the Business, now at first. Ye, no doubt, will amongst you devise and
discourse many solemn Matters: But do as I shall tell you. This Pope is
Decrepit, and the Bell goes for him. Take order, that when he is Dead, there
be chosen a Pope of fresh years, between fifty and threescore; And see that he
take the Name of Urban, because a Pope of that Name did first institute the
Cruzada; And, (as with an holy Trumpet,) did stir up the Voyage, for the Holy
Land. Eupolis. You say well; but be, I pray you, a little more serious in this
Conference.

The next day, the same Persons met, as they had appointed; And after they were
set, and that there had passed some sporting speeches from Pollio, how the War
was already begun; For that, (he said) he had dreamed of nothing but
Janissaries, and Tartars, and Sultans all the night long, Martius said. Martius.
The Distribution of this Conference, which was made by Eupolis yesternight, and
was by us approved, seems to me perfect, save in one Point; and that is, not
in the Number, but in the Placing of the Parts. For it is so disposed, that
Pollio and Eupolis, shall debate the Possibility, or Impossibility of the
Action, before I shall deduce the Particulars of the Means, and Manner, by
which it is to be achieved. Now I have often observed in Deliberations, that
the entering near hand, into the manner of Performance, and Execution of that,
which is under Deliberation, has quite overturned the Opinion formerly
conceived, of the Possibility, or Impossibility. So that things, that at the
first show, seemed Possible, by Ripping up the Performance of them, have been
convicted of Impossibility; and things, that, on the other side, have showed
Impossible, by the Declaration of the Means to effect them, as by a back Light,
have appeared Possible, the way through them being discerned. This I speak, not
to alter the Order, but only to desire Pollio, and Eupolis, not to speak
peremptorily, or conclusively, touching the Point of Possibility, till they
have heard me deduce the Means of the Execution: And that done, to reserve
themselves at liberty for a Reply, after they had before them, as it were, a
Model of the Enterprise. This grave and solid Advertisement, and Caution of
Martius, was much commended by them all; Whereupon Eupolis said. Eupolis. Since
Martius has begun to refine that, which was yesternight resolved; I may the
better have leave, (especially in the mending of a Proposition, which was mine
own,) to remember an Omission, which is more than a misplacing. For I doubt, we
ought to have added, or inserted into the point of Lawfulness, the Question;
How far an Holy War is to be pursued, whether to Displanting, and Exterminion
of People? And again, whether to enforce a new Belief, and to vindicate, or
punish Infidelity; Or only to subject the Countries and People; And so, by the
Temporal Sword, to open a Door, for the Spiritual Sword to enter, by
Persuasion, Instruction, and such Means, as are proper for Souls and
Consciences? But it may be, neither is this necessary, to be made a Part by it
self; For that Zebedaeus, in his wisdom will fall into it, as an incident to
the Point of Lawfulness, which cannot be handled without Limitations, and
Distinctions. Zebedaeus. You encourage me, ( Eupolis,) in that I perceive, how
in your Judgment, (which I do so much esteem,) I ought to take that Course,
which of my self I was purposed to do. For as Martius noted well, that it is
but a loose thing, to speak of Possibilities, without the particular Designs;
So is it, to speak of Lawfulness, without the particular Cases. I will
therefore, first of all, distinguish the Cases; Though you shall give me leave
in the handling of them, not to sever them, with too much Preciseness: For both
it would cause needless Length; And we are not now in Arts, or Methods, but in
a Conference. It is therefore, first to be put to Question in general, (as
Eupolis propounded it,) whether it be lawful for Christian Princes, or States,
to make an Invasive War, only and simply, for the Propagation of the Faith,
without other Cause of Hostility, or Circumstance, that may provoke and induce
the War? Secondly, whether it being made part of the Case, that the Countries
were once Christian, and Members of the Church, and where the Golden
Candlesticks did stand, though now they be utterly alienated, and no Christians
left; it be not lawful to make a War, to restore them to the Church, as an
ancient Patrimony of Christ? Thirdly, if it be made a further part of the Case,
that there are yet remaining in the Countries, multitudes of Christians,
whether it be not lawful to make a War, to free them, and deliver them, from
the servitude of the Infidels? Fourthly, whether it be not Lawful to make a
War, for the Purging, and Recovery of Consecrate Places, being now polluted,
and Profaned; As the Holy City, and Sepulcher, and such other places of
principal Adoration, and Devotion? Fifthly, whether it be not Lawful, to make a
War, for the Revenge, or Vindication of Blasphemies, and Reproaches, against
the Deity, and our Blessed Savior; Or for the Effusion of Christian Blood, and
Cruelties against Christians, though ancient, and long since past; Considering
that Gods Visits, are without limitation of Time; And many times, do but expect
the fullness of the Sin? Sixthly, it is to be considered, (as Eupolis now last
well remembered,) whether a Holy War, (which, as in the Worthiness of the
Quarrel, so in the Justness of the Prosecution, ought to exceed all Temporal
Wars,) may be pursued, either to the Expulsion of People, or the Enforcement of
Consciences, or the like Extremities; Or how to be moderated, and limited; Lest
whilst we remember we are Christians, we forget that others are Men; But there
is a Point, that precedeth all these Points recited; Nay, and in a manner
discharges them, in the particular of a War against the Turk: which Point, I
think, would not have come into my thought, but that Martius giving us
yesterday, a Representation of the Empire of the Turks, with no small vigor of
words, (which you ( Pollio) called an Invective, but was indeed a true Charge,)
did put me in mind of it: And the more I think upon it, the more I settle in
Opinion; That a War, to suppress that Empire, though we set aside the Cause of
Religion, were a just War. After Zebedaeus had said this, he made a Pause, to
see whether any of the rest would say any thing: But when he perceived nothing,
but Silence, and Signs of Attention, to that he would further say, he proceeded
thus.

Zebedaeus. Your Lordships will not look for a Treatise from me, but a Speech
of Consultation; And in that Brevity and Manner, will I speak. First, I shall
agree, that as the Cause of a War ought to be Just; So the Justice of that
Cause ought to be Evident; Not Obscure, not Scrupulous. For by the consent of
all Laws, in Capital Causes, the Evidence must be full and clear: And if so,
where one Man's life is in Question, what say we to a War, which is ever the
Sentence of Death upon many? We must beware therefore, how we make a Moloch, or
an Heatlien Idol, of our Blessed Savior, in sacrificing the Blood of Men to
him, by an unjust War. The Justice of every Action, consists in the Merits of
the Cause, the Warrant of the Jurisdiction, and the Form of the Prosecution. As
for the Inward Intention, I leave it, to the Court of Heaven. Of these things
severally, as they may have Relation to the present subject of a War against
Infidels; And namely, against the most Potent, and most Dangerous Enemy of the
Faith, the Turk. I hold, and I doubt not, but I shall make it plain, (as far as
a Sum, or Breef can make a Cause plain,) that a War against the Turk, is
Lawful, both by the Laws of Nature, and Nations; And by the Law Divine, which
is the Perfection of the other two. As for the Laws Positive, and Civil of the
Romans, or other whatsoever, they are too small Engines, to move the Weight of
this Question. And therefore, in my judgment, many of the late Schoolmen,
(though excellent Men,) take not the right way in disputing this Question;
Except they had the gift of Navius, that they could Cotem novacula scindere;
Hew Stones with Pen-knives. First, for the Law of Nature. The Philosopher
Aristotle is no ill Interpreter thereof. He has set many Men on work, with a
witty speech of Natura Dominus, and Natura Servus; Affirm ing expressly, and
positively; That from the very Nativity, some things are born to Rule, and some
things to Obey. Which Oracle has been taken in diverssenses. Some have taken
it, for a Speech of Ostentation, to entitle the Grecians to an Empire over the
Barbarians; Which indeed was better maintained by his Scholar Alexander. Some
have taken it, for a Speculative Platform, that Reason and Nature would, that
the best should govern; But, not in any wise to create a Right. But for my
part, I take it neither for a brag, nor for a wish; but for a Truth, as he
limiteth it. For he says, That if there can be found, such an Inequality
between Man and Man, as there is between Man and Beast, or between Soul and
Body, it investeth a Right of Government; Which seems rather an Impossible
Case, than an untrue Sentence. But I hold both the Judgment true, and the Case
possible; And such as has had, and has a Being, both in particular Men, and
Nations. But ere we go further, let us confine Ambiguities, and Mistakings,
that they trouble us not. First, to say, that the more Capable, or the better
Deserver, has such Right to Govern, as he may compulsorily bring under the
less Worthy, is Idle. Men will never agree upon it, who is the more Worthy. For
it is not only in order of Nature, for him to govern, that is the more
Intelligent, as Aristotle would have it; But there is no less required for
Government, Courage to protect; and, above all, Honesty, and Probity of the
Will, to abstain from Injury. So Fitness to govern, is a perplexed Business.
Some Men, some Nations, excel in the one ability, some in the other. Therefore
the Position, which I intend, is not in the Comparative, that the Wiser, or the
Stouter, or the juster Nation should govern; But in the Privative, that where
there is an heap of People (though we term it a Kingdom, or State,) that is
altogether unable, or indign to govern; There it is a just Cause of War, for
another Nation, that is Civil, or Polliced, to subdue them: And this, though it
were to be done, by a Cyrus, or a Caesar, that were no Christian. The second
mistaking, to be banished, is; That I understand not this of a Personal
Tyranny, as was the State of Rome, under a Caligula, or a Nero, or a Commodus;
Shall the Nation suffer for that wherein they suffer? But when the Constitution
of the State, and the fundamental Customs, and Laws of the same, (if Laws they
may be called,) are against the Laws of Nature, and Nations, then I say, a War
upon them is lawful. I shall divide the Question into three parts. First,
whether there be, or may be, any Nation, or Society of Men, against whom it is
lawful to make a War, without a Precedent Injury, or Provocation? Secondly,
what are those Breaches of the Law of Nature, and Nations, which do forfeit,
and divest, all Right, and Title, in a Nation to govern? And thirdly, whether
those Breaches of the Law of Nature, and Nations, be found in any Nation, at
this day; And namely in the Empire of the Ottomans? For the first, I hold it
clear, that such Nations, or States, or Societies of People, there may be, and
are. There cannot be a better ground laid, to declare this, than to look into
the Original Donation of Government. Observe it well; Especially the
Inducement, or Preface. Says God: Let us make man after our own Image, and let
him have dominion, over the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Air, and
the Beasts of the Land, etc. Hereupon De Victoria, and with him some others,
infer excellently, and extract, a most true, and divine Aphorism; Non sundatur
Dominium, nisi in Imagine Dei. Here we have the Charter of Foundation: It is
now the more easy to judge of the Forfeiture, or Reseisure. Deface the Image,
and you divest the Right. But what is this Image, and how is it defaced? The
Poor Men of Lions, and some Fanatical Spirits will tell you, that the Image of
God, is Purity; And the Defacement Sin. But this subverteth all Government:
Neither did Adams Sin, or the Curse upon it, deprive him of his Rule, but left
the Creatures, to a Rebellion, or Reluctation. And therefore, if you note it
attentively, when this Charter was renewed unto Noah, and his Sons, it is not
by the words, Tou shall have Dominion: But, Your Fear shall be upon all the
Beasts of the Land, and the Birds of the Air, and all that moves; Not
re-granting the Sovereignty, which stood firm; But protecting it against the
Reluctation. The sound Interpreters therefore, expound this Image of God, of
Natural Reason; Which if it be totally, or mostly defaced, the Right of
Government does cease: And if you mark all the Interpreters well, still they
doubt of the Case, and not of the Law. But this is properly to be spoken to, in
handling the second Point, when we shall define of the Defacements. To go on.
The Prophet Hosea, in the Person of God, says of the Jews; They have reigned,
but not by me; They have set a Signory over themselves, but I knew nothing of
it. Which place proves plainly, that there are Governments, which God does not
avow. For though they be ordained by his secret Providence, yet they are not
knowledged by his revealed Will: Neither can this be meant of evil Governors,
or Tyrants: For they are often avowed, and stablished, as lawful Potentates;
But of some perverseness and defection, in the very Nation it self; Which
appears most manifestly, in that the Prophet speaks, of the Signory in
Abstracto, and not of the Person of the Lord. And although some Heretics, of
those we speak of, have abused this Text, yet the Sun is not soiled in Passage.
And again, if any Man infer, upon the words of the Prophets following, (which
declare this Rejection, and to use the words of the Text, Rescision of their
Estate, to have been for their Idolatry,) that by this Reason, the Governments
of all Idolatrous Nations, should be also dissolved, (which is manifestly
untrue,) in my judgment it follows not. For the Idolatry of the Jews then,
and the Idolatry of the Heathen then and now, are Sins of a far differing
Nature, in regard of the special Covenant, and the clear manifestations,
wherein God did contract, and exhibit himself to that Nation. This Nullity of
Policy, and Right of Estate, in some Nations, is yet more significantly
expressed, by Moses in his Canticle: In the Person of God to the Jews: Ye have
incensed me with Gods, that are no Gods, and I will incense you with a People,
that are no People. Such as were (no doubt) the People of Canaan, after Seisin
was given, of the Land of Promise, to the Israelites. For from that time, their
Right to the Land was dissolved, though they remained in many Places
unconquered. By this we may see, that there are Nations in Name, that are no
Nations in Right, but multitudes only, and swarms of People. For like as there
are Particular Persons, utlawed, and proscribed by civil Laws, of several
Countries; So are there Nations, that are utlawed, and proscribed, by the Law
of Nature, and Nations; Or by the immediate Commandment of God. And as there
are Kings de Facto, and not de Jure, in respect of the Nullity of their Title;
So are there Nations, that are Occupants de Facto, and not de Jure, of their
Territories, in respect of the Nullity, of their Policy, or Government. But let
us take in some Examples, into the midst of our Proofs; For they will prove as
much as put after; And illustrate more. It was never doubted, but a War upon
Pirates, may be lawfully made, by any Nation, though not infested, or violated
by them. Is it because, they have not Certas Seeds, or Lares? In the Pyratical
War, which was achieved by Pompey the Great, and was his truest, and greatest
glory; the Pirates had some Cities, sundry Ports, and a great part of the
Province of Cilicia; And the Pirates now being have a Receptacle, and Mansion
in Algiers. Beasts are not the less Savage; because they have Dens. Is it
because the danger hovers, as a Cloud, that a Man cannot tell, where it will
fall; And so it is every Man's Case. The Reason is good; But it is not all, nor
that which is most alleged. For the true received Reason is, that Pirates are
Communes Humani Generis Hosts; Whom all Nations are to prosecute, not so much
in the Right of their own Fears, as upon the Band of Humane Society. For as
there are formal and written Leagues, Respective to certain Enemies; So is
there a Natural, and Tacit Confederation, amongst all Men, against the common
Enemy of Humane Society. So as there needs no Intimation, or Denunciation of
the War; There needs no Request from the Nation grieved; But all these
Formalities, the Law of Nature supplies, in the Case of Pirates. The same is
the Case of Rovers by Land; Such as yet are some Cantons in Arabia; And some
petty Kings of the Mountains, adjacent to Streights, and Ways. Neither is it
lawful, only for the Neighbor Princes, to destroy such Pirates, or Rovers; But
if there were any Nation, never so far off, that would make it an Enterprise of
Merit, and true Glory, (as the Romans, that made a War for the Liberty of
Grecia, from a distant and remote part,) no doubt they might do it. I make the
same Judgment, of that Kingdom of the Assasins, now destroyed, which was
situate upon the Borders of Saraca; And was, for a time, a great Terror to all
the Princes of the Levant. There the Custom was, that upon the Commandment of
their King, and a blind Obedience to be given thereunto, any of them was to
undertake, in the nature of a Votary, the insidious Murder of any Prince, or
Person, upon whom the Commandment went. This Custom, without all question, made
their whole Government void, as an Engine built against Humane Society, worthy
by all Men to be fired, and pulled down. I say the like, of the Anabaptists of
Munster; And this, although they had not been Rebels to the Empire: And put
Case likewise, that they had done no Mischief at all actually: yet if there
shall be a Congregation, and consent of People, that shall hold all things to
be lawful; Not according to any certain Laws, or Rules, but according to the
secret, and variable Motions, and Instincts of the Spirit; This is indeed no
Nation, no People, no Signory, that God does know: Any Nation, that is Civil,
and Polliced, may (if they will not be reduced,) cut them off, from the Face of
the Earth. Now let me put a feigned Case, (And yet Antiquity makes it doubtful,
whether it were Fiction, or History,) of a Land of Amazons, where the whole
Government, public and private, yea the Militia it Self, was in the hands of
Women. I demand, is not such a Preposterous Government, (against the first
Order of Nature, for Women to rule over Men,) in it self void, and to be
suppressed? I speak not of the Reign of Women; (For that is supplied by
Counsel, and subordinate Magistrates Masculine;) But where the Regiment of
State, Justice, Families, is all managed by Women. And yet this last Case,
differs from the other before: Because in the rest there is Terror of
Danger, but in this there is only Error of Nature. Neither should I make any
great difficulty, to affirm the same, of the Sultanry of the Mamaluches; where
Slaves, and none but Slaves, bought for Money, and of unknown Descent, reigned
over Families of Freemen. And much like were the Case, if you suppose a
Nation, where the Custom were, that after full Age, the Sons should Expulse
their Fathers, and Mothers, out of their Possessions, and put them to their
Pensions: For these Cases, of Women to govern Men, Sons the Fathers, Slaves
Freemen, are much in the same degree; All being total Violations and
Perversions, of the Laws of Nature, and Nations. For the West Indies, I
perceive ( Martins) you have read Garcilazzo de Viega, who himself was
descended of the race of the Incaes, a Mestizo, and is willing to make the
best, of the Virtues and Manners of his Country. And yet, in troth, he does it
soberly, and credibly enough. Yet you shall hardly edify me, that those
Nations might not, by the Law of Nature, have been subdued by any Nation, that
had only Policy, and Moral Virtue; Though the Propagation of the Faith,
(whereof we shall speak in the proper place,) were set by, and not made part of
the Case. Surely, their Nakedness, (being with them, in most parts of that
Country, without all Vail or Covering,) was a great Defacement: For in the
acknowledgment of (...), was the first Sense of Sin: And the Heresy of the
Adamites, was ever accounted an affront of Nature. But upon these I stand not:
Nor yet upon their Idiocy, in thinking that Horses did eat their Bitts, and
Letters speak, and the like. Nor yet upon their Sorceries, which are (almost)
common to all Idolatrous Nations. But, I say, their Sacrificing, and, more
especially, their Eating of Men, is such an Abomination, as (methinks) a Man's
Face should be a little confused, to deny, that this Custom joined with the
rest, did not make it lawful, for the Spaniards to invade their Territory,
forfeited by the Law of Nature; And either to reduce them, or displant them.
But far (...) from me, yet nevertheless to justify the Cruelties, which were
at first used toward them; which had their reward soon after; There being not
one of the Principal, of the first Conquerors, Lut died a violen Death himself;
And was well followed by the Deaths of many more. Of Examples enough: Except we
should add the Labors of Hercules: An Example, which though it be flourished
with much Fabulous Matter, yet so much it has, that it does notably set (...),
the consent of all Nations, and Ages, in the approbation of (...) (...), and
debellating of Giants, Monsters, and Foren (...), not only as lawful, but as
Meritorious, even of Divine (...). And this, although the Deliverer came, from
the one End of the World, unto the other. Let us now set down some Arguments,
to prove the same; Regarding rather Weight, than Number, as in such a
Conserence as this is fit. The first Argument shall be this. It is a great
Error, and a narrowness, or straightness of Mind, if any Man think, that
Nations have nothing to do one with another, except there be, either an Union
in Sovereignty, or a Conjunction in Pacts or Leagues. There are other Bands of
Society, and implicit Confederation. That of Colonies, or Transmigrants,
toward their Mother Nation. (...) unius labii is somewhat; For as the
Confusion of Tongues, was a mark of Separation, so the Being of one Language,
is a mark of Union. To have the same Fundamental Laws, and Customs, in chief,
is yet more; As it was between the Grecians, in respect of the Barbarians. To
be of one Sect, or Worship; If it be a False Worship, I speak not of it, for
that is but Fratres in Malo. But above all these, there is the Supreme, and
Indissoluble Consanguinity, and Society, between Men in general: Of which the
Heathen Poet, (whom the Apostle calls to witness,) says; We are all his
Generation. But much more, we Christians, unto whom it is revealed in
particularity, that all Men came from one Lump of Earth; And that two singular
Persons, were the Parents, from whom all the Generations of the World are
descended. We (I say) ought to acknowledge, that no Nations, are wholly Aliens,
and Strangers, the one to the other: And not to be less charitable, than the
person introduced by the Comic Poet; Homosum, Humani nihil a me alienum puto.
Now if there be such a Tacit League, or Confederation, sure it is not idle; It
is against somewhat, or some Body: Who should they be? Is it against Wild
Beasts? Or the Elements, of Fire, and Water? No, it is against such Routs, and
Sholes of People, as have utterly degenerate, from the Laws of Nature; As have,
in their very Body, and frame of Estate, a Monsirosity; And may be truly
accounted, (according to the Examples we have formerly recited,) Common
Enemies, and Grievances of Mankind; Or Disgraces, and Reproaches to Humane
Nature. Such People, all Nations are interessed, and ought to be resenting, to
suppress; Considering that the Particular States themselves, being the
Delinquents, can give no redress. And this I say, is not to be measured so
much, by the Principles of Jurists, as by Lex Charitatis; Lex proximi, which
includes the Samaritan, as well as the Levite; Lex Filiorum Adae de Massa una:
Upon which Original Laws, this Opinion is grounded: Which to deny, (if a man
may speak freely,) were almost to be a Schismatic in Nature.

The rest was not perfected.
AN OFFER To our Late Sovereign KING JAMES, OF A DIGEST To be made of the LAWS
of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Humphrey Robinson, and Sold by William Lee, 1670.

TO THE KING; OF A DIGEST To be made of the LAWS of ENGLAND.
Most Excellent Sovereign,
AMongst the Degrees and Acts of Sovereign, or rather Heroical Honor, the
First, or Second, is the Person, and Merit, of a Lam-giver. Princes that govern
well, are Fathers of the People. But if a Father breed his Son well, or allow
him well, while he lives, but leave him nothing at his Death; whereby both he,
and his Children, and his Childrens Children may be the better; Surely the care
and Piety of a Father, is not in him complete. So Kings, if they make a Portion
of an Age happy by their good Government, yet if they do not make Testaments,
(as God Almighty does,) whereby a Perpetuity of Good may descend to their
Country, they are but Mortal and Transitory Benefactors. Domitian, a few days
before he died, dreamed, that a Golden Head did rise upon the nape of his Neck.
Which was truly performed in the Golden Age, that followed his times, for five
Successions. But Kings, by giving their Subjects good Laws, may (if they will)
in their own time, join and graft this Golden Head, upon their own Necks, after
their Death. Nay they may make Nabuchadonozors Image of Monarchy, golden from
Head to Foot. And if any of the Meaner sort of Politiques, that are sighted
only to see the worst of things, think; That Laws are but Cobwebs, and that
good Princes will do well without them, and bad will not stand much upon them;
The Discourse is neither good, nor wise. For certain it is, that good Laws, are
some bridle to bad Princes; And as a very Wall about Government. And if Tyrants
(sometime) make a breach into them, yet they mollify even Tyranny it self; As
Solons Laws did the Tyranny of Pisistratus: And then (commonly) they get up
again, upon the first Advantage of better times. Other means to perpetuate the
Memory, and Merits of Sovereign Princes, are inferior to this. Buildings of
Temples, Tombs, Palaces, Theaters, and the like, are honorable things, and
look big upon Posterity. But Constantine the Great gave the Name well to those
works, when he used to call Trajan, that was a great Builder, Parietaria,
Wall-Flower; Because his Name was upon so many Walls. So if that be the Matter,
that a King would turn Wall-flower, or Fellitory of the Wall, with cost he may.
Adrian's vein was better; For his mind was to wrestle a fall with Time; And
being a great Progressour through all the Roman Empire, when ever he found any
Decaies of Bridges, or Highways, or Cuts of Rivers and Sewers, or Walls, or
Banks, or the like, he gave substantial order, for their repair with the
better. He gave also Multitudes of Charters, and Liberties, for the comfort of
Corporations, and Companies in decay. So that his Bounty did strive with the
Ruins of Time. But yet this, though it were an excellent Disposition, went but
(in effect) to the Cases and Shells of a Commonwealth. It was nothing to
Virtue or Vice. A bad Man might indifferently take the benefit and ease of his
Ways and Bridges, as well as a good; And bad People might purchase good
Charters. Surely, the better Works of Perpetuity in Princes, are those, that
wash the inside of the Cup. Such as are Foundations of Colleges, and
Lectures, for Learning and Education of youth; Likewise Foundations and
Institutions of Orders and Fraternities, for Nobleness, Enterprise, and
Obedience, and the like. But yet these also, are but like Plantations, of
Orchards, and Gardens, in Plots and Spots of Ground, here and there; They do
not till over the whole Kingdom, and make it fruitful, as does the Establishing
of good Laws and Ordinances; Which makes a whole Nation, to be as a well
ordered College, or Foundation.

This kind of Work, in the memory of Times, is rare enough to show it
Excellent; And yet not so rare, as to make it suspected, for Impossible,
Inconvenient, or Unsafe. Moses, that gave Laws to the Hebrews, because he was
the Scribe of God himself, is fitter to be named for honors sake to other
Lawgivers, than to be numbered or ranked amongst them. Minos, Lycurgus, and
solon, are Examples for Themes of Grammar Scholars. For ancient Personages, and
Characters, now adays, use to wax Children again; Though that Parable of
Pindarus be true; The best thing is Water. For Common and Trivial Things are
(many times) the best; And rather despised upon Pride, because they are vulgar,
than upon Cause, or Use. Certain it is, that the Laws of those three
Lawgivers, had great Prerogatives. The first, of Fame; Because they were the
Pattern amongst the Grecians. The second, of Lasting; For they continued
longest without alteration. The third; of a Spirit of Reviver; To be often
oppressed, and often restored.

Amongst the seven Kings of Rome, four were Lawgivers. For it is most true,
that a Discourser of Italy says: There was never State, so well swadled in the
Infancy, as the Roman was, by the virtue of their first Kings: Which was a
principal Cause of the wonderful growth of that State, in after times.

The Decemvirs Laws, were Laws upon Laws, not the Original; For they grafted
Laws of Grecia, upon Roman Stock, of Laws, and Customs. But such was their
success, as the Twelve Tables, which they compiled, were the main Body of the
Laws, which framed and weilded the great Body of that Estate. These lasted a
long time, with some Supplementals, and the Pretorian Edicts in Albo; Which
were in respect of Laws, as Writing Tables in respect of Brass; The one to be
put in and out, as the other is permanent. Lucius Cornelius Sylla reformed the
Laws of Rome. For that Man had three Singularities, which never Tyrant had, but
he. That he was a Lawgiver; That he took part with the Nobility; And, That he
turned Private Man, not upon Fear, but upon Confidence.

Caefar long after desired to imitate him only in the First; For otherwise he
relied upon new Men: And for resigning his Power, Seneca describes him right:
Caesar gladium cito condidit, nunquam posuit. Caesar soon sheathed his Sword,
but never put it off. And himself took it upon him, saying in scorn of Sylla's
Resignation. Sylla nescivit literas, dictare non potuit. Sylla knew no letters,
he could not dictate. But for the part of a Lawgiver, Cicero gives him the
Attribute. Caefar, si ab eo quaereretur, quid egisset in Toga; leges se
respondisset, multas and praeclaras tulisse. If you had asked Caesar, what he
did in the Gown, he would have answered, that he made many excellent Laws. His
Nephew Augustus did tread the same steps, but with deeper print, because of his
long Reign in peace; Whereof one of the Poets of his time says;

Pace data terris, animum ad Civilia vertit:
Jura suum, legesque tulit justissimus Author.
From that time, there was such a Race of Wit and Authority, between the
Commentaries and Decisions of the Lawyers, and the Edicts of the Emperors, as
both Laws and Lawyers were out of breath. Whereupon Justinian in the end
recompiled both; And made a Body of Laws, such as might be weilded; which
himself calls gloriously, and yet not above truth; The Edifice or Structure
of a sacred Temple of Justice; Built indeed, out of the former Ruins of Books,
as Materials, and some Novel Constitutions of his own.

In Athens they had Sexviri, (as AEschincs observes,) which were standing
Commissioners; Who did watch to discern, what laws waxed unproper for the
Times, and what new Law did in any branch cross a former Law, and so Ex officio
propounded their Repeal.

King Edgar collected the Laws of this Kingdom, and gave them the strength of a
Faggot bound, which formerly were dispersed: Which was more glory to him, then
his Sailing about this Island, with a potent Fleet. For that was, as the
Scripture says, Via navis in mari; The way of a Ship in the Sea; It vanished;
but this lasts. Alphonso the Wise, (the ninth of that Name,) King of Castile,
compiled the Digest of the Laws of Spain, Entitled the Siete Partidas; An
excellent Work, which he finished in seven years. And as Tacitus notes well;
That the Capitol, though built in the beginings of Rome, yet was fit for the
great Monarchy that came after; So that Building of Laws suffices the
Greatness of the Empire of Spain, which since has ensued.

Lewis the eleventh had it in his mind, (though he performed it not,) to have
made one constant Law of France; Extracted out of the Civil Roman Law, and the
Customs of Provinces which are various, and the Kings Edicts which with the
French are Statutes. Surely he might have done well, if, like as he brought the
Crown, (as he said himself,) from Page; So he had brought his People from
Lacquay; Not to run up and down for their Laws, to the Civil Law, and the
Ordinances, and the Customs, and the Discretions of Courts, and discourses of
Philosophers, as they use to do.

King Henry the Eighth, in the twenty seventh year of his Reign, was authorized
by Parliament, to nominate 32 Commissioners, part Ecclesiastical, and part
Temporal; To purge the Canon Law, and to make it agreeable to the Law of God,
and the Law of the Land. But it took not effect. For the Acts of that King were
(commonly) rather Proffers, and Fames, than either well grounded, or well
pursued. But I doubt, I err in producing so many examples. For as Cicero said
to Caesar, so may I say to your Majesty; Nil vulgar te dignum videri possit.
Though indeed this well understood is far from Vulgar. For that the Laws of the
most Kingdoms and States, have been like Buildings of many pieces, and patched
up, from time to time, according to occasions, without Frame, or Model.

Now for the Laws of England, (if I shall speak my Opinion of them, without
partiality, either to my Profession, or Country,) for the Matter and Nature of
them, I hold them Wise, Just, and Moderate Laws: They give to God, they give to
Caesar, they give to the Subject, what appertains. It is true, they are as
mixed, as our Language, compounded of British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman
Customs. And surely, as our Language is thereby so much the richer; So our Laws
are likewise by that Mixture, the more complete.

Neither does this attribute less to them, than those that would have them to
have stood out the same in all Mutations. For no Tree is so good first set, as
by transplanting, and Grafting. I remember what happened to Callisthenes, that
followed Alexanders Court, and was grown into some displeasure with him,
because he could not well brook the Persian Adoration. At a Supper, (which with
the Grecians was a great part Talk,) he was desired, (the King being present,)
because he was an Eloquent Man, to speak of some Theme; Which he did; And chose
for his Theme the praise of the Macedonian Nation; Which though it were but a
filling Thing, to praise Men to their Faces, yet he performed it with such
advantage of Truth, and avoidance of Flattery, and with such Life, as was much
applauded by the Hearers. The King was the less pleased with it, not loving the
Man, and by way of discountenance, said; It was easy to be a good Orator in a
pleasing Theme; But says he to him; Turn your style; And tell us now of our
faults, that we may have the profit, and not you the praise only: Which he
presently did, with such Quickness, that Alexander said; That Malice made him
Eloquent then, as the Theme had done before. I shall not fall into either of
these extremes, in this subject, of the Laws of England. I have commended them
before for the Matter, but surely they ask much amendment for the Form; Which
to reduce and perfect, I hold to be one of the greatest Dowries, that can be
conferred upon this Kingdom. Which Work, for the Excellency, as it is worthy
your Majesty's Act, and Times; So it has some circumstance of Propriety
agreeable to your Person. God has blessed your Majesty with Posterity; And I
am not of opinion, that Kings that are barren, are fittest to supply Perpetuity
of Generations, by perpetuity of Noble Acts; But contrariwise, that they that
leave Posterity, are the more interessed in the Care of Future Times; That as
well their Progeny, as their People, may participate of their Merit.

Your Majesty is a great Master in Justice, and Judicature; And it were pity,
the fruit of that your Virtue, should not be transmitted to the Ages to come.
Your Majesty also reigns in learned times, the more, (no doubt,) in regard of
your own perfection in Learning, and your Patronage thereof. And it has been
the Mishap of Works of this Nature, that the less Learned Time, has
(sometimes) wrought upon the more Learned; Which now will not be so. As for my
self, the Law was my Profession, to which I am a Debtor: Some little helps I
have of other Arts, which may give Form to Matter; And I have now, (by Gods
merciful Chastisement, and by his special Providence,) time and leisure, to put
my Talent, or half-Talent, or what it is, to such Exchanges, as may perhaps
exceed the Interest of an Active Life. Therefore, as in the beginning of my
Troubles, I made offer to your Majesty to take pains in the Story of England,
and in compiling a Method and Digest of your Laws; So have I performed the
first, (which rested but upon my self,) in some part; And I do, in all
humbleness, renew the offer of this latter, (which will require Help and
Assistance,) to your Majesty, if it shall stand with your good pleasure, to
employ my Service therein.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF KING Henry the Eighth.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Humphrey Robinson, and Sold by William Lee, 1670.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF KING Henry the Eighth.
AFter the Decease of that Wise and Fortunate King, Henry the VII. who died in
the Height of his Prosperity, there followed (as uses to do, when the Sun
sets so exceeding clear,) one of the fairest Mornings of a Kingdom, that
has been known in this Land, or any where else. A young King, about 18 years
of Age, for Stature, Strength, Making, and Beauty, one of the goodliest Persons
of his time: And though he were given to Pleasure, yet he was likewise desirous
of Glory; So that there was a passage open in his Mind, by Glory, for Virtue.
Neither was he un-adorned with Learning, though therein he came short of his
Brother Arthur. He had never any the least Pique, Difference, or Jealousy,
with the King his Father, which might give any occasion, of altering Court, or
Counsel upon the change, but all things passed in a Still. He was the first
Heir of the White, and the Red Rose; So that there was no discontented Party
now left in the Kingdom, but all Men's Hearts turned toward him. And not only
their Hearts, but their Eyes also. For he was the only Son of the Kingdom. He
had no Brother, which though it be a comfortable thing, for Kings to have, yet
it draws the Subjects Eyes a little aside. And yet being a married Man in
those young years, it promised hope of speedy Issue, to succeed in the Crown.
Neither was there any Queen Mother, who might share any way in the Government,
or clash with his Counselors for Authority, while the King intended his
pleasure. No such thing, as any Great and Mighty Subject, who might any way
eclipse, or overshade the Imperial Power. And for the people, and State in
general, they were in such lowness of obedience, as Subjects were like to
yield, who had lived almost four and twenty years, under so politic a King,
as his Father; Being also one who came partly in by the Sword; And had so high
a Courage in all points of Regalitie; And was ever victorious in Rebellions,
and Seditions of the People. The Crown extremely rich, and full of Treasure,
and the Kingdom like to be so in short time. For there was no War, no Dearth,
no Stop of Trade, or Commerce, it was only the Crown, which had sucked too
hard, and now being full, and upon the head of a young King, was like to draw
less. Lastly, he was Inheriter of his Fathers Reputation, which was great
throughout the World. He had straight Alliance, with the two Neighbor States,
an ancient Enemy in former times, and an ancient Friend, Scotland, and
Burgundy. He had Peace and Amity with France, under the Assurance, not only of
Treaty and League, but of Necessity and Inhability in the French to do him
hurt, in respect that the French Kings Designs were wholly bent upon Italy. So
that it may be truly said; there had scarcely been seen, or known, in many
Ages, such a rare Concurrence of Signs, and Promises of a happy, and
flourishing Reign to ensue, as were now met in this young King, called, after
his Fathers name, HENRY the Eighth, etc.

FINIS.

