A COLLECTION OF APOPHTHEGMS, New and Old.

BY THE Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON, Baron of Verulum, Viscount St. Alban.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be Sold at the Green Dragon
without Temple Bar. 1674.

HIS LORDSHIPS Preface.
JUlius Caesar did write a Collection of Apophthegms, as appears in an Epistle
of Cicero; so did Macrobius a Consular Man. I need say no more, for the worth
of a Writing of that Nature. It is pity Caesar's Book is lost: For I imagine
^bcy were Collected with Judgment and Choice: whereas that of Plutarch and
Stoboeus; And much more the Modern ones, draw much of the Drogs. Certainly they
are of excellent use. They are Mucrones verborum, Pointed Speeches. The words
of the wife are as Goads, says Solomon. Cicero prettily calls them Salinas,
Salt Pits, that you may extract Salt out of, and sprinkle it where you will.
They serve to be interlaced in Continued speech. They serve to be recited upon
Occasion of themselves. They serve if you take out the Kernel of them, and make
them your own. I have for my This Collection his Lordship made out of his
Memory, without turning any Book.
Recreation amongst more serious studies Collected some few of them: Therein
fanning the old, Not omiting any, because they are vulgar, ( For man^ vulgar
ones are excellent good; Norr for the Meanness of the Person; But because they
are Dull and Flat; And adding many New that otherwise would have died.

A COLLECTION OF APOPHTHEGMS, New and Old.
QUEENELIZABETH, the marrow of her Coronation, (It being the custom to release
Prisoners at the Inauguration of a Prince,) went to the Chapel; And in the
great Chamber, one of her Courtiers, who was well known to her, either out of
his own Motion, or by the Instigation of a wiser Man, presented her with a
Petition, and before a great number of Courtiers, besought her with a loud
voice; That now this good time, there might be four or five principal Prisoners
more released; Those were the four Evangelists, and the Apostle St. Paul, who
had been long shut up in an unknown Tongue, as it were in Prison; so as they
could not converse with the Common People. The Queen answered very gravely,
That it was best first to enquire of them, whether they would be released or no.

2. Queen ANN BVLLEN, at the time when she was led to be beheaded in the Tower,
called one of the Kings privy Chamber to her, and said unto him, Commend me to
the King, and tell him, that he has been ever constant in his conrse of
advancing me; from a private Gentlewoman he made me a Marchioness; and from a
Marchioness a Queen; And now that he bath left no higher degree of Earthly
Honor, He intends to Crown my Innocence with the Glory of Martyrdom.

3. His Majesty JAMES the First, King of Great Britain, having made unto his
Parliament an excellent and large Declaration, con^luded thus; I have now given
you a clear Mirror of my mind; Use it therefore like a Mirror, and take heed
how you let it fall, or how you soil it with your Breath.

4. A great Officer in France was in danger to have lost his place, but his
Wife ^y her suit and means making, made his ^eace; whereupon a pleasant fellow
said, That he had been crushed but that he saved himself upon his horns.

5. His Majesty said to his Parliament at another time, finding there were some
causeless Iealousies sown amongst them; That the King and his People, (whereof
the Parliament is the Representative Body,) were as Husband and Wife; And
therefore that of all other things, Jealousy was between them, most pernicious.

6. His Majesty, When he thought his Counsel might note in him some variety in
Businesses, though indeed he remained constant, would say; That the Sun many
times shines watery; But it is not the Sun which causes it, but some Cloud
Rising betwixt us and the Sun; And when that is scattered, the Sun is as it
was, and comes to its former Brightness.

7. His Majesty in his Answer to the Book of the Cardinal of Evereux (who had
in a grave Argument of Divinity, sprinkled many witty Ornaments of Poesy and
Humanity) says, That these Flowers were like Blew and Yellow, and Red Flowers
in the Corn, which make a pleasant show to those that look on, but they hurt
the Cor^^

8. Sir Edward Cook being vehemen^^ against the two Provincial Counsels o^
Wales, and the North, said to the King^^ There was nothing there, but a kind of
Con^^^ fusion, and hotch potch of Justice: On while they were a Star Chamber;
Ano^he^ while a King's Bench; Another, a Commonplace; Another, a Commission of
Oye^ and Terminer. His Majesty answered; Why, Sir Edward Cook? They be lik^^
Houses in Progress, where I have not, nor can have, such distinct Rooms of
State, a^ I have here at White Hall, or at Hampton Court.

9. The Commissioners of the Treasure,^^ moved the King for the Relief of his
Estate, to disafforess some Fo^ests of his, explaining themselves of such
^orests as^ lay out of the way, not near any of the Kings Houses, nor in the
course of his Progress, Whereof he should never have use nor pleasure. Why,
(says the King) do you think that Solomon had use and pleasure of all his 300
Concubines?

10. His Majesty, when the Committees of both Houses of Parliament presented
unto him the Instrument of Union of England and Scotland, was merry with them;
And amongst other pleasant speeches showed unto them the Lord of a wreston a
Scotchman, who was the ^allest and Greatest Man that was to ^^seen, and said;
Well, now we are all (...), yet none of you will say, but here is one ^^othman
greater than any English Man, ^^ich was an ambiguous Speech; but it (...)
thought he meant it of himself.

11. His Majesty would say to the ^ords of his Counsel when they sat upon
great Matter, and came from Counsel to him, Well, you have set, but what ^ve
you hatched?

12. When the Archduke did raise his ^ege from the Grave, the then Secretary
^me to Queen Elizabeth; The Queen having first Intelligence thereof) said (...)
the Secretary, Wot you what? The ^rch-Duke is Risen from the Grave: He
^^swered; What, without the Trumpet of ^e Archangel? The Queen replied yes,
without the sound of Trumpet.

13. Queen Elizabeth was importuned ^uch by my Lord of Essex* to supply di^rs
great Offices, that had been long ^^id: The Queen answered nothing to ^e
Matter; But rose up on the sudden, ^d said; I am sure my Office will not be^^^g
void. And yet at that time, the e as much speech of Troubles, and Divisions
about the Crown, to be after her De^^^ease: But they all vanished; and Kin^
James came in, in a profund peace.

14. The Counsel did make Remonstranc^ unto Queen Elizabeth, of the continua^
Conspiracies against her Life; and namely that a Man was lately taken, who
stoo^ ready in a very dangerous and suspicio^^ manner to do the Deed; and they
shew^ed her the weapon, wherewith he though^ to have acted it. And therefore
they ad^vised her, that she should go less abroa^ to take the Air, weakly
attended, as sh^^ used. But the QVEEN answered; The she had rather be dead,
then put in Custody.

15. The Lady Paget, that was very pr^^vate with Queen Elizabeth, declared
he^^self much against the Match with Mo^^sieur. After Monsieurs Death, the
Quee^ took extreme grief, (at least as she mad^ show) and kept in within her
Bed-Cha^^ber, and one Ante-Chamber for thr^^ weeks space, in token of mourning:
A^^last she came forth into her Privi-Cha^^ber, and admitted her Ladies to have
a^^ eess unto her; and amongst the rest, (...) Lady Paget presented her self,
and ca^^ to her with a smiling Countenance. T^^ Queen bent her Brows, and
seemed to (...) highly displeased, and said to her; M^^am, you are not ignorant
of my extreme ^rief, and do you come to me with a Coun^nance of Joy? My Lady
Paget answered; ^las if it please your Majesty, it is impossi^le for me to be
absent from you three weeks ^ut that when I see you, I must look chear^ ^ully.
No no, (said the Queen, not for^etting her former Averseness to the Match) you
have some other conceit in i^, ^ell me plainly My Lady answered* I ^ust obey
you; It is this. I was thinking ^ow happy your Majesty was, you married ^ot
Monsieur; For seeing you take such ^hought for his Death, being but your
friend; If he had been your Husband sure it would ^ave cost you your life.

16. Henry the 4th of France his Queen was young with Child; Count Soisons,
that had his expectation upon the Crown, when it was twice or thrice thought
that the Queen was with Child before, said to some of his Friends; That it was
a but with (...) Pillow; This had some ways come to the Kings Ear; who kept it
till such time as the Queen waxed great: Then he called the Count of Soisons to
him, and said; laying his hand upon the Queens Belly; Come Cousin, is this a
Pillow? The Count of Soisons answered; Yes Sir, (...) is a Pillow for all
France to sleep upon.

17. King Henry the 4th of France, was so punctual of his word, after it was
once passed, that they called him, The King of the Faith.

18. The said King Henry the 4th was moved by his Parliament to War against the
Protestants: He answered; Yes, I mean it: I will make every one of you
Captains; you shall have Companies assigned you. The Parliament observing
whereunto his Speech tended, gave over and deserted his motion.

19. Queen Elizabeth was wont to say, upon the Commission of Sales; That the
Commissioners used her like Strawberry-Wives that laid two or three great
Strawberries at the mouth of their pot, and all the rest were little ones; so
they made her two or three good prises of the first particulars, but fell
straight ways.

20. Queen Elizabeth used to say of her Instructions, to great Officers; That
they were like to Garments, straight at the first putting on, but did by and by
wear loose enough.

21. A great Officer at Court, when my Lord of Essex was first in trouble; and
that he, and those that dealt for him, would talk much of my Lords Friends; and
of his Enemies, answered to one of them; I will tell you, I know but one
Friend, and one Enemy my Lord has; and that one Friend is the Queen, and that
one Enemy is himself.

22. The Book of Deposing King Richard the Second, and the coming in of Henry
the 4th, supposed to be written by Doctor Hayward, who was committed to the
Tower for it, had much incensed Queen Elizabeth; and she asked Mr. Bacon, being
then of her Counsel learned, whether there were any Treason contained in it?
who intending to do him a pleasure, and to take of the Queens bitterness with a
merry concelt, answered; No Madam, for Treason, I cannot deliver Opinion, that
there was any, but very much Felony: The Queen apprehending it gladly, asked,
How? And wherein? Mr. Bacon answered; Because he had stolen many of his
Sentences and Conceits out of Cornelius Tacitus.

23. Queen Elizabeth being to resolve upon a great Officer, and being by some,
that canvased for others, put in some doubt of that person, whom she meant to
advance, called for Mr. Bacon; And told him, she was like one, with a Lanthorn,
seeking a man; and seemed unsatisfied in the choice she had of a man for that
place. Mr. Bacon answered her, that he had heard that in old time, there was
usually painted in the Church Walls, the Day of Doom, and God sitting in
Judgment, and Saint Michael by him, with a pair of Ballan^es; And the Soul, and
the Good Deeds in the one Balance, and the Faults, and the Evil Deeds in the
other; and the Souls Balance went up far too light: Then was our Lady painted
with a great pair of Bends; who cast them into the light Balance, and brought
down the Skale: So he said; Place and Authority, which were in her Majesty's
hands to give, were like our Ladies Beads, which though men, through any
Imperfections, were too light before, yet when they were cast in, made weight
competent.

24. Queen Elizabeth was dilatory enough in suits, of her own Nature; and the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh being a Wife Man, and willing therein to feed her
humor, would say to her; Madam, you do well to let Suitors stay; For I shall
tell you, Bis dat, qui cito dat; if you grant them speedily, they will come
again the sooner.

25. Sir Nicholas Bacon, who was Keeper of the Great Seal of England, when
Queen Elizabeth, in her Pr^gress, came to his House at Gorhambury; and said to
him; My Lord, what a little House have you gotten? Answered her; Madam, my
House is well, but it is you that have made me too great for my House.

26. There was a Conference in Parliament, betweeen the Lords House, and the
House of Commons, about a Bill of Accountants, which came down from the Lords
to the Commons; which Bill prayed; That the Lands of Accountants, whereof they
were seized, when they entered upon their Office, might be liable to their
Arrears to the Queen. But the Commons desired, that the Bill might not look
back to the Accountants that were already, but extend only to Accountants
heareafter. But the Lord Treasurer said; why, I pray yru, if you had lost your
Purse by the way, would you look forwards, or would you look back? The Queen
has lost her Purse.

27. The Lord Keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon was asked his Opinion by my Lord of
Leicester, concerning two persons whom the Queen seemed to think well of: By my
Troth my Lord (said he) the one is a grave Counselor; The other is a Proper
young Man; and so he will be as long as he lives.

28. My Lord of Leicester, Favorite to Queen Elizabeth, was making a large
Chase about Cornbury Park; meaning to enclose it with Posts and Rails; and one
day was casting up his charge what it would come to. Mr. Goldingham, a
freespoken Man, stood by, and said to my Lord; Methinks your Lordship goes not
the cheapest way to work. Why, Goldingham, laid my Lord? Marry my Lord, said
Goldingham; Count you but upon the posts, for the Country will find you Railing.

29. The Lord Keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon, was asked his Opinion by Queen
Elizabeth, of one of these Monopoly Licenses: And he answered; Madam will you
have me speak the Truth? Licentia omnes deteriores sumus: We are all the worse
for Licenses.

30. My Lord of Essex, at the Succor of Rboane, made 24 Knights, which at that
time was a great number. Diverse of those Gentlemen were of weak and small
Means; which when Queen Elizabeth heard, she said; My Lord might have done well
to have built his Almshouse, before he made his Knights.

31. The Deputies of the Reformed Religion, after the Massacre which was at
Paris upon Saint Bartholom^ws Day, treated with the King and Queen Mother, and
some other of the Counsel for a Peace. Both sides were agreed upon the
Articles. The question was, upon the security for the performance. After some
particulars propounded and rejected, the Queen Mo^her said, Why Is not the word
of a King sufficient security? One of the Deputies answered; No by Saint Bartho
omew, Madam.

32. There was a French Gentleman, speaking with an English of the Law Sa^ique,
That Women were excluded from Inheriting the C^own of France. The English said;
Yes, but that was meant of the Women themselves, not of such Males as claimed
by Women. The French Gen^leman said, Where do you find that gloss? The English
answered, I Will tell you Sir, Look on the backside of the Record, of the Law
Salique, and there you shall find it endorsed: Implying that there was no such
thing as the Law Salique, but that ^t is a mere fiction.

33. A Friar of France, being in an earnest Dispute about the Law Salique,
would need prove it by Scripture; citing that verse of the Gospel; Lilia Agri,
non ^aborant, neque nent, The Lilies of the Field do neither labor nor spin:
Applying it thus, That the Flower de Luces of France cannot descend, neither to
the Dr^^^ staff, nor to the Spade; That is, not to (...) Woman, nor to a
Peasant.

34. When Peace was renewed wit^ the French in England, diverse of the great
Counselors were presented from the French with Jewels: The Lord Hen^^ Howard,
being then Earl of Northamp^on^ and a Counselor, was omitted. Where^ upon the
King said to him, My Lord, how happens it that you have not a Iew^^ as well as
the rest? My Lord answered^ according to the Fable in Aesope; No^^ sum Gallus,
itaque non reperi Gemman.

35. The same Earl of Northampton, then Lord Privy Seal, was asked by Kin^
James, openly at the Table, where commonly he entertained the King with
discourse; the King asked him upon the sudden; My Lord, have you not a desire^^
to see Rome? My Lord Privy Seal answered; Yes indeed Sir: The King said, And
why? My Lord answered; Because, if it please your Majesty, it was the seat of
the greatest Monarchy, and the S^minar^ of the ^ravest men of the world,
whilest^ was Heath^n? And then Secondly, bec^^se^ afterward it was the Son of
so many holy Bishops in the Primitive Church, most of them Martyr. The King
would not give ^over, but said; And for nothing else? (...) Lord answered; Yes,
if it please your ^ajesty, for two things more: The on^ to ^him, who they say
has so great a power forgive other men their sins, to confess own ^ins upon
his knees before a Chap^in, or Priest: And the other to hear Anti^^rist say his
creed.

36. Sir Nicholas Bacon, being appoint^^ a Judge for the Northern Circuit, ^^d
having brought his Trails that came ^^fore him to such a pass, as the passing
(...) Sentence on Malefactors, he was by ^^e of the Malefactors mightily
impor^ned for to save his life, which when nothing that he had said did avail,
he at^ ng^h desired his Mercy on the account (...) Kindred: Prithee said my
Lord Judge, ^ow came that in? Why, if it please you (...) Lord your Name is
Bacon, and (...) is Hog, and in all Ages Hog and Ba^^n have been so near
kindred, that they ^^e not to be separated. I but (replied ^udg Bacon) you and
I cannot be kind^^d, except you be^hanged; for Hog is not ^acon until it be
well hanged.

37. Two Scholars and a Country man ^^avelling upon the Road, one night ^^dged
all in one Inn, and supt together, where the Scholars thought to have pu^ trick
upon the Country man, which (...) thus; The Schola^s appointed for Su^per two
Pigeons, and a Fat Capo^ which being ready, was brought up, a^ they having set
down, the one Scho^^ took up one Pigeon, the other Scho^^ took the other
Pigeon, thinking there that the Country man should have (...) still until that
they were ready for t^^ carving of the Capon, which he perce^^ving, took the
Capon, and laid it on (...) Trencher, and thus said, Daintily co^trived, every
one a bird.

38. Jack Roberts was desired by h^^ Tailor, when the Reckoning grew some^ what
high, to have a Bill of his han^ Roberts said, I am content, but you mu^ let no
man know it; when the Tayl^^^ ^rought him the Bill, he tore it as (...) choler,
and said to him, you use me n^^ use me well, you promised me no man shou^^ know
it, and here you have put in; Be ^ known unto all men by these Presents.

39. Sir Walter Raleigh was wont (...) say of the Ladies of Queen Elizabeth's
Privy Chamber, and Bed Chamber, Tha^ they were like Witches, they could do
hurt^ but they could do no good.

40. There was a Minister deprived fo^^ ^^^conformity, who said, to some of his
^^iends, that if they deprived him, it should cost an hundred men's lives, the
^rty understood it as being a turbulent ^low, he would have move sedition, ^^^d
complained of him, whereupon be^^g convented and opp^sed upon that ^eech, he
said his meaning was, ^^at if he lost his Benefice, he would pract^^ Physic,
and then he thought he should (...) an hundred men in time.

41. Secretary Bourns Son kept a Gen^^emans Wife in Shropshire, who lived ^om
her Husband with him, when he as weary of her, he caused her Husband (...) be
dealt with to take her home, and ^fered him five hundred pounds for re^^ration:
the Gentleman went to Sir (...) Sidney, to take his advice upon this (...),
telling him, that his Wife promised (...) a new life; and to tell him truth,
(...) hundred pounds would come well ^ith him; and besides that, sometimes ^e
wanted a Woman in his Bed. By my ^roth, said Sir Henry Sidney, Take her (...)
and take the Money, then when as (...) her Cucholds wear their Horns plain, you
^ay wear yours guilt.

42. When Rablais the great ^ester of ^rance, lay on his death bed, and they
gave him the Extreme Unction, a fa^^^^ liar friend of his came to him afterwar^
and asked him how he did, Rablais a^swered, Even going my Iourny, they (...)
greased my Boots already.

43. Mr. Bron ley Solicitor, giving evidence for a Deed, which was impeac^^ed
to be fraudulent, was urged by (...) Council on the other side with this
pr^^sumption, that in two former Suits wh^^^ Title was made, that Deed was
passed ^^ver in silence, and some other conve^^ ance stood upon: Mr. Justice
Catii^ taking in with that side, asked the Sollic^^tor, I pray thee Mr.
Solicitor, let me a^ you a familiar question, I have two Ge^^^dings in my
Stable; I have diverse tim^^ business of importance, and still I ser^^^ forth
one of my Geldings and not the ^^ther, would you not think I set him asid^^^
for a Jade? No my Lord, said Bro^nle^ I would think you spared him for your o^^
Saddl^.

44. Thal^s, as he was looking upon t^^ Stars, fell into the water, whereupon
was after said, That if he had looked in^^ the water, he might have seen the
Stars, (...) looking up to the Stars, he could not (...) Water.

45. A Man and his Wife in bed together, she toward morning pretended ^^self
to be ill at ease, desiring to lie on^^ Husbands side, so the good man to ^ease
her came over her, making some ^^ort stay in his passage over, where she ^^^d
not long lain, but desired to lie in (...) old place again: quoth he, how (...)
that be effected? she answered, come (...) me again: I had rather, said he, go
(...) and an half about.

46. A Thief being Arraigned at the (...) for stealing a Mare, in his pleading
(...) many things in his own behalf, and last nothing availing, he told the
^^^nch, the Mare rather stole him, than the Mare, which in brief he thus
re^^^ed; that passing over several grounds out his lawful occasions, he was
pursued ^^^se by a fierce Mastive Dog, and so was ^^^ced to save himself by
leaping over a ^edge, which being of an agil body, he ^^^ected; and in^leaping,
a Mare stand^^g on the other side of the Hedge, leap^ on her back, who running
furiously ^ay with him, he could not by any ^eans stop her until he came to the
next own, in which Town the owner of the ^ane lived, and there was he taken,
and ^^re Arraigned.

47. Master Mason of Trinity College, sent his Pupil to another of he Fello^^
to borrow a Book of him, who told hi^ I am loath to lend my Books out of (...)
Chamber, but if it please thy Tutor to (...) and read upon it in my Chamber, he
sh^^^ as long as he will. It was Winter, (...) some days after the same Fellow
sent (...) Master Mason to borrow his Bellows, (...) Master Mason said to his
Pupil, I (...) loath to lend my Bellows out of my Cha^^ber, but if thy Tutor
would come and (...) the fire in my Chamber, he shall as long^^^^ he will.

48. A notorious Rog^e being broug^^ to the Bar, and knowing his case to^^^
desperate, instead of pleading, he took t^ himself the liberty of jesting, and
thu^ said; I charge you in the Kings name, (...) seize and take away that man
(meanin^ the Judge) in the Red Gown, for I g^ in danger of my life because of
him.

49. In Flanders by accident, a Flemis^ Tiler fell from the top of a house upon
(...) Spaniard, and killed him, though he escaped himself, the next of the
blood pro^^secuted his death with great violence and when he was offered
pecuniary re^ compence, nothing would serve him, bu^^ Lex tulionis: whereupon
the Judge sai^ to him, That if he did urg^ that Sentence (...) must be, that he
should go up to the top of (...) house, and then f^ll down upon the ^iler.

50. A rough hewn Seaman, being ^ught before a wife Just-ass, for some
^isdemeanor, was by him Commi^ted to ^rison, and being somewhat refractory,
^^ter he heard his doom, insomuch as he ^ould not stir a foot from the place he
^ood, saying, it were better to stand where (...) was, than go to a worse
place. The justice thereupon, to show the strength (...) his Learning, took him
by the shoul^er, and said, Thoushalt go Nogus vogus, ^stead of Nolens volens.

51. Francis the first of France, used ^r his pleasure sometimes to go
disguised: ^^walking one day in the company of (...) Cardinal of Burhon, near
Paris, he ^et with a Peasant with a new pair of ^oos upon his arm; so he called
him un^^ him, and said, By our Lady, these are ^ood shoos, what did they cost
thee? the ^easant said guess, the King said, I think ^^^me five Sols, said the
Peasant you have ^ed but a Carlois: What villain said the ^ardinal of Burbon,
thou are dead, it is (...) King. The Peasant replied, The D^^ take him of you
and me that knew so ^uch.

52. There was a young man in Rome^ that was very like Augustus Caesar,
Angustus took knowledge of him, and sent for the man, and asked him, was your
Mother never at Rome? he answered, No Sir, but my Father was.

53. A Physician advised his Patient that had sore eyes, that he should abstain
from Wine, but the Patient said, I think rather Sir, from Wine and water, for I
have often marked it in bl^w eyes, and I have seen water come forth, but never
wine.

54. A debaucht Seaman being brought before a Justice of Peace upon the account
of swearing, was by the Justice commanded to deposit his Fine in that behalf
provided, which was two shillings, he thereupon, plucked out of his pocket a
half-crown, asked the Justice what was the rate he was to pay for Cursing; the
Justice told him six pence, quoth ^he then A Pox take you all for a company of
K^uav^s and Fools, and there is half a crown for you, I will never stand
changing of Money.

55. Augustus Caesar was invited to Supper by one of his old Friends that had
conversed with him in his less fortunes, and had but ordinary entertainment,
whereupon at his going away he said, I did not know that you and I were so
familiar.

56. Agathocles after he had taken Syra^c^sa, the men where of during the
srege, had in a bravery spoken of him all the villainy that might be; sold the
Syracu^ians for slaves, and said, Now if you use such words of me, I will tell
your Masters of you.

59. Dyonisius the elder, when he saw his Son in many things very inordinate,
said to him, Did you ever know me do such things? his Son answered, No, but you
had not a Tyrant to your Father; the Father replied, No, nor you if you take
these courses, will have a Tyrant to your Son.

58. Calisthenes the Philosopher, that followed Alexanders Court, and hated the
King; being asked by one, how one might be the famousest man in the world,
answered, by taking away him that is.

59. Age^ilaus, when one told him there was one did excellently counterfeit a
Nitingale, and would have had him heard him, said, Why I have heard the
Nightingale her self.

60. A great Nobleman upon the complaint of a Servant of his, laid a Citizen by
the heels, thinking to bend him to his servants desire, but the fellow being
stubborn, the servant came to his Lord, and told him, your Lordship I know has
gone as far as well you may, but it works not; for yonder fellow is more
perverse than before, Said my Lord, Let Us forget him a while, and then he will
remember himself.

61. One came to a Cardinal in Rome, and told him that he had brought his
Lordship a dainty white Palfry, but he fell lame by the way; says the Cardinal
to him, I Will tell thee what thou shall do, go to such a Cardinal, and such a
Cardinal, naming half a dozen Cardinals, and tell them as much, and so whereas
by thy horse if he had been sound, thou could have pleased but one, with thy
lame horse tho^ may please half a dozen.

62. A witty Rogue coming into a Laceshop, said he had occasion for some Lace,
choice whereof being showed him, he at last piched upon one pattern, and asked
them how much they would have for so much as would reaech from ear to ear, for
so much he had occasion for; they told him for so much: so some few words
passing between them, he at last agreed, and told down his money for it, and
began to measure on his own head, thus saying, One ^ar is h^re, and the ^ther
is ^^iled to the Pillory in Bristol, and I fear you have not so much of this
Lace by you at present as will perfect my bargain; therefore this piece of Lace
shall suffice at present in part payment, and provide the rest with all
expedition.

63. Iphicrates the Athenian, in a Treaty that he had with the Lacedaemonians
for peace, in which question was about security for observing the same, said,
The Athenians would not accept of any security, except the Lacedaemonians did
yield up unto them those things, whereby it might be manifest, that they could
not burt them if they would.

64. Euripides would say of persons that were beautiful, and yet in some years,
In fairest bodies not only the spring is pleasant, but also the Autumn.

65. There was a Captain sent to an exploit by his General, with Forces that
were not likely to a^chieve the enterprise; the Captain said to him, Sir,
appoint but half so many: why, says the General? the Captain answered, Because
it is better that fewer die than more.

66. There was a Harbenger who had lodged a Gentlemen in a very ill room, who
expostulated with him somewhat rudely, but the Harbenger carelessly said, You
will take pleasure in it when you ar^ ^ut of it.

67. There is a Spanish Adage, Lo^^ without end, has no end, meaning that
(...) it were begun without particular ends (...) would last.

68. A Woman being suspected by he^^ Husband for dishonesty, and being (...)
him at last pressed very hard about it, mad^^ him quick answer with many
protestations, That she kn^w no more of what (...) said, than the Man in the
Moon. Now the Captain of the Ship called the Moon w^^ the very man she so much
loved.

69. Demosthenes when he fled from the battle, and that it was reproached to
him (...) said, That he that flies might fight again*

70. G^^^salv^^ would say, The (...) of^ Soldier ought to be of a strong (...)
meaning that it should not be so fine an^ curious, that every little disgrace
should catch and stick in it.

71. An Apprentice of London bein^^ brought before the Chamberlain by h^^^
Master, for the fin of incontinency, eve^ with his own Mistress: the
Chamberla^^ thereupon gave him many Christian Ex^^hortations, and at last he
mentione^ and pressed the Chastity of Joseph when his Mistress tempted him with
the like Crime of Incontinency. I Sir, said the Apprentice, But if Joseps
Mistress had been as handsome as mine is, he could not have forborne.

72. Bias gave in precept, love as if you should hereafter hate, and hate as if
you should hereafter love.

73. Cineas was an excelleet Orator and Statesman, and principal Friend and
Counselor to Pyrrhus, and falling in inward talk with him, and discerning the
Kings endless ambitions, Pyrrhus opened himself unto him, that he intended
first a War upon Italy, and hoped to atchieve it, Cineas asked him, Sir, what
will you do then? said Pyrrhus, if the gods favor us, we may conquer Africa
and Carthage: What then Sir, says Cineas? Nay then says Pyrrhus, we may take
our rest, and Sacrifice and Feast every day, and make merry with our Friends,
Alas Sir, said Cineas, may we not do so now without all this ado?

47. Lamia the Curtizan had all power with Demetrius King of Macedon; and by
her instigations he did many unjust and cruel acts; whereupon Lysimachus said,
That it was the first time that ever he knew a Whore act in a Tragedy.

76. One of the Romans said to his Friend, What think you of one who wa^ taken
in the act and manner of Adultery? the other answered, Marry I think he wa^ toe
slow at dispath.

Epaminondas, when his great Friend and Colleague in War was Suito^ to him to
pardon an offender, denied him; afterward when a Concubine of his made the
same suit, he granted it to her; which when P^^opidas seemed to take unkindly,
he said, Such suits are to be granted to Whores, but not to Personage^^ (...)
worth.

77. T^^les being asked when a man should marry, said, ^oung men not yet, old
(...) not at all.

78. A Company of Scholars going together to catch Conies, carried one Scholar
with them, which had not much more wit th^^ he was born with, and to him they
gave in charge, that if he saw any, (...) should be silent for fear of scaring
them; but he no sooner espied a company of a Rabits before the rest, but he
cried aloud, Ecce, Multi Cuniculi, which in English signifies, B^h^ld, Many
C^ni^s, which he had no sooner said, but the Conies ran to their boroughs, and
he being checked by them for it, answered, Who the Devil would have thought the
Rabits understood Latin?

79. A Welshman being at a Sessions^ouse, and ^eeing the Prisoners hold up
their hands at the Bar, related to some ^f his acquaintance there, Judges were
^ood Fortune tellers, for if they did but look upon their hand, they could
certainly tell whether they should live or die.

80. Solon compared the people unto ^he Sea, and Orators and Counselors ^o
the Winds; For that the Sea would be ^alm and quiet if the Winds did not
trou^le it.

81. Socrates was pronounced by the Oracle of Delphos, to the wisest man of
Greece, which he would put from himself Ironically, saying, There would be
nothing in him to verify the Oracle, except this, that he was not wise and
knew it, and o^^hers were not wise, and knew it not.

82. Socrates when there was showed him the Book of Heraclitus the obscure, and
was asked his opinion of it, answered; Those things which I understood were
excellent, I imagine so were those I understood not, but they require a diver
of Delos.

83. Bion asked an envious man, that was very sad; What harm had befallen unto
him, or what good had befallen unto another man.

84. Stilpo the Philosopher, when the people flocked about him, and that on^
said to him, the people come wonderin^^ about you, as if it were to see some
strange beast: No, ^aith he, it is to see man which Diogene's sought with his
La^ ^^orn at noon day.

85. A man being very jealous of h^^ Wife, insomuch that which way soev^^ she
went, he would be prying at her heel^ and she being so grieved thereat, in
pla^^ terms told him, That if he did not for (...) future leave off his
proceedings in this n^^ture, she would grant such a pair of hor^^ upon his
head, that should hinder him from coming out at any door in the house.

86. A Citizen of London passing t^^ streets very hastily, came at last when
some stop was made by Carts, and for Gentlemen talking together, who kn^^ him,
where being in some passion that^^ could not suddenly pass, one of them^^^ this
wise spoke to him, That others had (...) by, and there was room enough, only he
co^^^ not tell if their Horns were so wide as his^^

87. A Tinker passing Ch^^pside wi^^ his usual tone, Have you (...) work for
Tinker? an Apprentice standing at door opposite to a Pillory there set u^
called the Tinker, with an intent to (...) a jest upon him, and told him that
should do very well if he would stop those two holes in the Pillory: to which
the Tinker answered; That if he would put his head and ears a while in that
Pillory, he would bestow both brass and nail upon him to hold him in, and give
him his labor into the bargain.

88. A young Maid having married an old Man, was observed on the day of
Marriage to be somewhat moody, as if she had eaten a dish of Chums; which one
of her Bridemen observing, bid her^^ be cheery, and told her moreover, that an
old horse would hold out as long, and as well as a young one in travel: to
which she answered, stroking down her belly with her hand, But not in this
Road, Sir.

89. There was in Oxford a cowardly fellow that was a very good Archer, he was
abused by another, and moaned himself to Sir Walter R^leigh, then a Scholar,
and asked his advice, what he should do to repair the wrong had been offered
him; Raleigh answered, Why challenge him at a match of shooting.

90. Whitewood a grave Divine was much esteemed by Queen Elizabeth, but not
preferred, because he was against the Government of Bishops, he was of a blunt
Stoical nature; he came one day to Queen, and the Queen happened to ^^ay to
him, I like thee the better Whitehead, because thou live unmarried, He
answered, In troth Madam, I like you th^^ worse for the same cause.

91. Doctor Lawd said, that some Hypocrites and seeming mortifyed men, (...)
held down their heads like bulrushes, were like the little Images that they
place in the very bowing of the Vaults o^ Churches, that look as if they held
up the Church, but are but Puppets.

92. A Noble Man of this Nation, famously known for his mad tricks, on (...)
time having taken Physic, which h^ perceiving began well to work, called up
his man to go for a Surgeon presently and to bring his Instruments with him:
the Surgeon comes in with all speed; t^^ whom my Lord Related, that he foun^
himself much adicted to Women, and therefore it was his will, that the cause of
it might be taken away, and therefore commanded him forthwith to prepare hi^^
Instrument ready for to gueld him; (...) the Surgeon forthwith prepares
accordingly, and my Lord told him he would not see it done, and therefore that
h^^ should do his work the back way; (...) both parties being contented my Lord
makes ready, and holds up his (...) and when he perceives the Surgeon very near
him, he lets fly full in his face, which made the Surgeon step back, but
coming presently on again; Hold, hold, says my Lord, I will better consider of
it, for I feell the retentive faculty very weak at the reproach of such sharp
Instruments,

93. The Lord Henry Howard, being Lord Privy Seal, was asked by the King openly
at the Table, where commonly he entertained the King upon the sudden: My Lord,
have you not a desire to see Rome? My Lord Privy Seal answered, Yes indeed Sir.
The King said, and why? My Lord answered, because, and please your Majesty, it
was once the Seat of the greatest Monarchy, and the Seminary of the bravest men
in the world amongst the Heathen; and then again, because it was the Sea of many
holy Bishops in the Primitive Church, most of them Martyrs. The King would not
give it over, but said, and for nothing else? My Lord answered, Yes, and it
please your Majesty, for two things especially, the one to see him who they say
has such a power to forgive other men's sins, confess ^is own sins upon ^is
knees before a Chaplain or Priest, and the other is to hear A^tichrist say his
Cr^e^.

94. There was a cursed Page that h^^ Master whipped naked, and when he ha^^ been
whipped, would not put on his cloth and when his Master bad him, he said Take
them you, for they are the Hangma^ Fees

95. There was a Lady of the We^ Country, that gave great entertainme^^ at her
house to most of the gallant Gentlemen thereabout, and amongst other^^ Sir
Walter Raleigh was one; This Lady though otherwise a stately Dame, was notable
and good House-wife, and i^ the morning betimes, she called to one o^ her Maids
that looked to the Swine, an^ asked, are the Pigs served? Sir Walt^^^ Raleighs
Chamber was fast by the Ladie^ so as he heard her; a little before dinne^ the
Lady came down in great state into the great Chamber, which was full o^
Gentlemen, and as soon as Sir Walter Ra^^leigh set eye upon her, Madam, says
he Are the Pigs served? The Lady answered^^ You know best, whether you have had
you^ breakfast.

96. The^e were Fishermen drawing^ the River at Ch^lsey, Mr. Bacon cam^ thither
by chance in the After-noon^^ and offered to buy their D^augh: they were
willing. He (...) them what they would take? They asked Thirty Shil^^ings. Mr
Bacon offered them Ten: They refused it. Why then says Mr. Bae^^on, I will be
only a looker on. They drew and catched nothing. Says Mr. Bacon, are not you
mad fellows now, that might have had an Angel in your purse, to have made merry
withal, and to have warmed you thoroughly, and now you must go home with nothing.
I but says the Fishermen, we had hope then to make a better gain of it. Says
Mr. Bacon, well my Master, then I Will tell you; hope is a good Breakfast, but
it is a bad Supper

97. A Lady w^lking with Mr. Bacon in Grays-Inne Walks, asked him whose that
piece of ground lying next under the walls was; He answered, Theirs. Then she
asked him, if those Fields beyond the Walks were theirs too? He answered, Yes
Madam, those are ours, as you are ours, to look on, and no more.

98. His Lordship when he was newly made Lord Keeper, was in Grays-Inne Walks
with Sir Walter Rawleigh; One came and told him that the Earl of Exeter was
above. He continued upon occasion still walking a good while. At last when he
came up, my Lord of E^^ter met him, and said; My Lord I have mad^ a great
v^nture to come up so high stairs, being a gowty man. His Lordship answered,
p^^don me my Lord; I have made the greatest Venture of all; For I have Ventured
upon your Patience.

99. When Sir Francis Bacon was made the Ki^gs Attorney, Sir Edward Coo^ was
put up from being Lord chief Iu stice, of the Common Pleas, to be Lord chief
Justice of the Kings Pench; which is a place of greater Honor, but of less
Profit; And withal was made Privy^ Counselor. After a few days, the Lord Cook
meeting with the Kings A^^urney, said unto him; M^. Attorney, this is all your
doing; It is you that have made this^ stir. Mr. Attorney answered; Ah my Lord!
your Lordship all this while ^^ath grown in Breadth; You must needs ^ow grow in
Height, or else you would be a Monster.

100. One day Queen Elizabeth told Mr. Bacon, that my Lord of Essex, after
great Protestation of Penitence, and affection fell in the end, but upon the
Suit of renewing his Farm, of Sweet Wines: He answered; I read that in Nature,
there be two kinds of Motions or Appetites in Sympathy; The one as of Iron, to
the Adamant for perfection; The other (...) the Vine, to the Stake for
sustentation, ^at her Majesty was the one, and his ^^uit the other.

101. Mr. Bacon, after he had been ve^^ent in Parliament, against Depopu^^tion
and Enclosures; And that soon ^^ter the Queen told him, that she had ^^erred
the hearing of Mr. Mills Cause, (...) certain Counselors and Judges; and
^^^ked him how he liked of it? Answered, (...) Madam! my Mind is known; I am
^^^ainst all Enclosures, and especially against ^^^closed Justice

102. When Sir Nicholas Bacon the ^^rd Keeper lived, every Room in Gor^^mbury
was served with a Pipe of Wa^ from the Ponds, distant about a Mile (...). In
the lifetime of Mr. Anthony ^^con, the Water ceased. After whose ^^ath, his
Lordship coming to the Inhe^^ance, could not recover the Water ^^thout infinite
charge: When he was ^^rd Chancellor, he built Verulam House, ^ose by the
Pond-yard, for a place of ^^ivacy when he was called upon, to spatch an urgent
business: And being ^^ked, Why he built that House there, is Lordship answered;
that since he ^^uld not carry the Water to his House, He would carry his House
to the Wa^*

103. When my Lord President of (...) Council came first to be Lord Treasurer,
(...) complained to my Lord Chancellor of (...) troublesomness of the place,
for that (...) Exchequer was so empty. The Lord Ch^^^ellor answered; My Lord,
be of (...) cheer, for now you shall see the bottom (...) your business at the
first.

104. When his Lordship was newly ^^^vanced to the Great Seal, Gondomar ca^^ to
visit him: My Lord said; That he (...) to thank God and the King for that
^^^^nour; But yet, so he might be rid of (...), he could very willingly forb
(...) the Honor. And that ^e formerly ha^ desire, and the ^^me continued with
(...), to lead a private life: Gond^^ answered, That he would tell him (...)
Tale, of an old Rat that would (...) leave the World: And acquai^ted the you^
Rats, that he would retire into his H^^ and spend his days solitarily* and
wo^^^ enjoy (...) comfort: and comman^ them upon his high displ^^sure, not to
(...) to come in unto him. They for^^re two (...) three days; At last, one that
was (...) hurity than the rest, incited some of (...) Fellows to go in with
him, and he wo^^^ venture to see how his Father did: For ^^ght be dead. They
went in, and found (...) old Rat sitting in the midst of a rich ^^rmizan
Cheese. So he applied the Fa^^ after this witty manner.

105. Rablais tells a Tale of one that ^s very Fortunate in compounding
dif^^rences. His Son undertook the said ^^^ourse, but could never compound any.
^hereupon he came to his Father and ^^ked him, What are he had to reconcile
^ifferences? He answered; He had no (...) but this; To watch when the two
par^^^ were much weari^d, and their hearts ^ere too great to seek Reconcilement
at (...) ^^others hands; Then to be a means be^wixt them, and upon no other
Terms. After which the Son went home, and pros^ered in the same undertakings.

106. Alonso Cartilio, was informed by ^^is Steward of the greatness of his
Ex^ence, being such as he could not hold ^ut therewith. The Bishop asked him,
(...) it chiefly arose? His Steward told ^im, In the multitude of his Serv^^ts:
The Bishop ^id him make him a Note of those that were necessary, and those
that: ^ight be spared. Which he did* And the Bishop taking occasion to read it
before ^ost of his Servants, said to his Steward; ^ell, let these remain
because I have need of them; And these others* because (...) have need of me.

107. Mr. Marbury the Pr^acher wo^^^ say; That God was fain to deal with
wi^^^ed men, as men do with frisking jades a pasture, that cannot take them up,
(...) they get them at a gate: So wi^ked (...) will not be taken up till the
Hour (...) Death.

108. Pope Xyst^^ the fifth who wa^ very poor Man's Son, and his Fath^^ House
ill thatched, so that the Sun ca^^ in in many places; would sport with (...)
Ignobility, and say; That he was, Na^ di casa Illustre; Son of an Illustri^^
House.

109. When the King of Spain Conquered Portugal, he gave special charg^ to the
Lieutenant, that the Souldie^ should not spoil, lest he should aliena^^ the
hearts of the People: The Army al^^ suffered much sca^city of Victual. Where
upon the Spanish Soldiers would after wards say; That they had won the King
(...) Kingdom on Earth; As the Kingdom (...) Heaven uses to be won; By Fasting
an^ abstaining from that which is another Man's.

110. They feigneda Tale of Sixtu^^ Quintus, whom they called Size-A^^^* ^^at
after his Death he went to Hell, ^^d the P^^ter of Hell said to him; You ^^ve
some reason to offer your self to this (...), because you were a wicked Man;
(...) yet, because you were a Pope, I have ^er not to receive you: You have a
place your own, Purgatory, you may go thi^^. So he went away, and sought about
^^reat while for Purgatory, and could (...) no such place. Upon that, he took
^^rt and went to Heaven, and knocked; (...) St. Peter asked Who was there? He
(...), Sixtus Pope. Whereunto St. Peter (...), why do you knock? you have the
Keys. ^^uts answered, It is true, but it is so ^g since they were given, as I
doubt the ^^rds of the Lock are altered.

111. Charles King of Swide, a great ^emy to the Jesuits; when he took (...)
of their Colleges, he would hang (...) old Jesuits, and put the young to
(...) Mines, saying; That since they wrought ^ard above ground, he would try
how ^d they could work under ground.

112. In Chancery at one time, when (...) Counsel of the Parties set forth the
^^undaries, of the Land in Question, by (...) Plot; And the Counsel of the one
^^rt said; We lie on this side, My Lord: ^^d the Counsel of the other part
said; And we lie on this side, The Lord Chancellor Hatton stood up and said; If
you lie on both sides, whom will you ^ave me to believe?

113. Sir Edward Cook was wont to say, when a great Man came to Dinner to him,
and gave him no knowledge of his coming; Sir, since you sent me no word of your
coming, you must dine with me; But if I had known in due time, I would have
dined with you.

114. William Earl of Pembrook, upon the complaint made of a Servant of his,
laid a Citizen by the heals, thinking to bend him to his Servants desire: But
the Fellow being stubborn, the Servant came to his Lord, and told him; Your
Lordship I know has gone as far as well you may, but it works not; For yonder
Fellow is more perverse than before. Said my Lord, Let Us forget him a while,
and then he will remember himself.

115. Pope Julius the 3^^, when he was made Pope, gave his Hat unto a Youth, a
favorite of his with great ^eandal* Whereupon, at one t^^e a Cardinal that
might be free with him, said modestly to him; What did your Holiness see in
that young man to make him Cardi^^l? Julius answered, What did you see (...)
me, to make mr Pope?

116. The same Julius upon like occa^sion of Speech, why he should bear so
great affection to the same Young Man, would say; That he found by Astrology
that it was the Youths destiny, to be a great Prelate; which were impossible,
except himself were Pope. And therefore that he did raise him, as the Driver on
of his own Fortune.

117. Sir Thomas Moor had only Daughters at the first, and his Wife did ever
pray for a Boy. At last she had a Boy, which being come to Man's Estate, proved
but simple. Sir Thomas said to his Wife, Thou prayedst so long for a Boy, that
he will be a Boy as long as he lives.

118* Sir Fulk Gravil, afterward Lord Brook, in Parliam. when the House of
Commons in a great Business, stood much upon Precedents, said unto them; Why do
you stand so much upon precedents? The Times hereafter will be good or bad. If
good, precedents will do no harm; If bad, power make away, where it finds none.

119. Sir Tho. Moor, on the day that he was beheaded, had a Barber sent to him,
because his Hair was long; which was thought, would make him more commiserated
with the People. The Barber came to him, and asked him, whether he would (...)
pleased to ^e trimmed In good faith honest fellow, (said Sir Thomas) the King
and I have a suit for my head; and till the Title be cleared, I will do no cost
upon it.

120. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, a great Champion of the Popish
Religion, was wont to say of the Protestants, who ground upon the Scripture;
That they were like Posts, that bring truth in their Letters, and lies in their
Mouths.

121. The former Sir Thomas Moor had sent him by a Suitor in Chancery two
silver Flagons. When they were presented by the Gentleman's Servant, he said to
one of his Men, Have him to the Celler, and let him have of my best Wine: And
turning to the Servant, said; Tell they Master if he like it, let him not spare
it.

122. Michael Angelo the famous Painter, painting in the Popes Chapel the
Pourtracture of Hell and damned Souls; Made one of the damned Souls so like a
Cardinal that was his Enemy, as every body at first sight knew it. Whereupon
the Cardinal complained to Pope Clem^^t, humbly praying It might be defaced:
The Pope said unto him; Why, you know very well, that I have power to deliver a
Soul out of Purgat^ry, but not out of Hell.

123. There was an Agent here of the Dutch, called Carroon; And when he used to
move the Queen for further Succors, and more Men, My Lord Henry Howard would
say; That he agreed well with the Name of Charon, Ferry-man of Hell; For he came
still for more men, to increase Regnum umbrarum.

124. They were wont to call, Referring to the Masters in Chancery, Committing.
My Lord Keeper Egerton, when he was Master of the Rolls, was wont to ask What
the cause had done that it should ^e Committed.

125. They feigned a Tale, principally against Doctors Reports, in the Cancery;
That Sir Nicholas Bacon, when he came to Heaven-Gate was opposed, touching an
unjust Decree which had been made in the Chancery. Sir Nicholas desired to see
the Order* whereupon the Decree was drawn up; and finding it to begin Veneris,
etc. Why (says he) I was then sitting in the Star Chamber; This concerns the
Master of the Rolls, let him answer for it. Soon after came the Master: of the
Rolls, Cordial; who died indeed a small time after Sir Nicholas Bacon; and he
was likewise staid upon it: And looking into the Order, he found, that upon the
reading of a Certificate of Doctor Gibson, it was Ordered, that his Report
should be decreed. And so he put it upon Doctor Gibson, and there it stuck.

126. Sir. Nicholas Bacon, when a certain nimble-witted Counselor at the Bar,
who was forward to speak, did interrupt him often said unto him; There Is a
great difference beiwixt you and me: A pain to me speak, and a pain to you to
hold your peace.

127. The same Sir Nicholas Bacon, upon Bills exhibited to discover where Lands
lay; upon proof, that they had a certain quantity of Land, but could not set it
wont to say; And if you cannot forth; was find your Land in the Country, how
will you have me find it in the Chancery?

128. Mr. Houland, in conference with a young Student, arguing a Case, happened
to say, I would ask you but this Question. The Student presently interrupted
him, to give him an Answer. Whereunto Mr. Houland gravely said; May though I do
ask you a Question, ye^ I did (...) mean you should answer me, I mean to answer
my self.

129. Pope Adrian the sixth, was talking with the Duke of Sesa, that Pasquit
gave great scandal, and that he would have him thrown into the River: But Sesa
answered; Do it not Holy Father, For then he will turn Frog; And whereas now he
chants but by day, he will then chant both by day and by night.

130. There was a Gentleman in Italy, that writ to a great Friend of his whom
the Pope had newly advanced to be Cardinal; That he was very glad of his
Advancement, for the Cardinals own Sake; But he was sorry that himself had lost
a good Friend.

131. There was a King of Hungary, took a Bishop in Battle, and kept him
Prisoner: Whereupon the Pope writ a Monitory to him; For that he had broken the
Privilege of Holy Church, and taken his Son. The King sent his Embassage to
him, and sent withal the Armor wherein the Bishop was taken, and this only in
writing; Vide number hae sit Vestis Filij tui: Know now whether this be thy Sons
Coat.

132. Sir Amyas Pawlet, when he saw too much have made in any matter, was wont
to say; Stay a while, that we may make an end the sooner.

133. A Master of the Requests to Queen Elizabeth, had diverse times moved for
audience, and been put off. At last he came to the Queen in a Progress, and had
on a new pair of Boots. The Queen who loved not the smell of new Leather, said
to him; Fie sloven, thy new Boots stink. Madam, said he, It is not my new Boots
that stink, but my stal^ Bills that I have kept so long.

134. At an Act of Commencement, the Answerer gave for his Question, That
Aristocracy was better than Monarchy. The Replyer, who was a dissolute man, did
tax him that being a private bred man, he would give a Question of State. The
Answerer said that the Replyer did much wrong the Privilege of Scholars, who
would be much straightened if they should give Questions of nothing, but such
things wherein they are practiced; and added, We have heard your self dispute
of Virtue, which no man shall say you have put much in practice.

135. Queen Isabella of Spain, used to say; Whosoever has a good Presence, and
a good Fashion, carries continual Letters, of Recommendation.

136. Alonso of Aragon was wont to say in commendation of Age, that Age
appeared to be best in four things: Old Wood best to burn, Old Wine to drink,
Old Friends to trust, and old Authors to read.

137. It was said of Augustus, and afterward the like was said of Septimius
Severus: Both which did infinite mischief in their beginnings, and infinite
good toward their ends; That they should either have never been born, or never
died.

138. Constantine the Great, in a kind of Envy, himself being a great Builder,
as Trajan likewise was; would call Trajan Parietaria Wall flower, because his
name was upon so many Walls.

139. Alonso of Aragon, was wont to say of himself, That he was a great
Necromancer, for that he used to ask Counsel of the dead: meaning of Books.

140. Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, in a Famine, sold all the rich Vessels
and Ornaments of the Church, to relieve the Poor with Bread; and said, There
was no reason that the Dead Temples of God should be sumptuously furnished; and
the living Temples suffer pe^^^ry.

141. Many Men* especially such as affect gravity, have a m^^ner after other
men's speech to shake their heads. A great Officer of this Land would say, it
was as men sh^ke a bottle, to see if there we ^ any wit in their Heads or no?

142. After a great Fight, there came to the Camp of Consalvo the great
Captain, a Gentleman, proudly horsed and armed: Diego de Mendoza, asked the
great Captain; who is this? who a^swered; It is Saint Ermin, who never appears
but after the storm.

143. There was one that died greatly in Debt: when it was reported in some
Company, where diverse of his Creditors casually were, that he was dead; One
began to say; Well if he be gone, then ^e has carried 500 Ducats of mine with
him into the other world. And another said; and 200 of mine: And a third spoke
of great sums of his. Whereupon one that was amongst them said; I perceive
now, that though a Man cannot carry any of his own with him, into the next
world, yet he may carry away that which is another Man's.

144. Francis Car^ajal, that was the great Captain of the Rebels of Peru, had
often given the Chase to Diego Centeno, a principal Commander of the Emperors
party: He was afterward taken by the Emperors Lieutenant, Gasca; And committed
to the custody of Diego Cente^o; who used him with all possible courtesy;
insomuch as Carvajal asked him; I pray Sir who are you that use me with this
courtesy? Centeno said; Do you not know Diego Centeno? Carvajal answered;
Truly Sir, I have been so used to see your back, as I knew not your Face.

145. Go^domar would say, Love without ends, has no end: Meaning, that if it
were begun, not upon particular ends, it would last.

146. There was a Merchant died, that was very far in Debt, his Goods and
Housholdstuff were ^et forth to sale. A stranger would needs buy a Pillow
there, saying; This Pillow sure is good to sleep upon, since he could sleep
that owed so many Debts.

147. A Lover met his Lady in a close Chair, she thinking to have gone unknown,
he came and spoke to her: she asked him, how did you know me? he said, Because
my wounds bleed afresh; Alluding to the common Tradition, that the wounds of a
Body slain, will bleed afresh upon the approach of the Murderer.

148. A Gentleman brought Music to his Ladies window. She hated him, and had
warned him often away: And when he would not desist, she threw stones at him:
whereupon a Gentleman said unto him that was in his company: What greater
Honor can you have to your Music* then that stones come about you, as they
did to Orpheus?

149. Coranus the Spaniard, at a Table at Dinner, fell into an extolling of his
own Father; saying, If he could have wished of God, he could not have chosen
amongst men a better Father: Sir Henry Savil said, what not Abraham? Now
Coranus was doubted to descend of a Race of Jews.

150. Consalvo would say, that the Honor of a Soldier ought to be a good
strong Webb: meaning that if should not be so fine and curious, as for every
small disgrace to catch and stick in it.

151. Pre^quet, Iester to Francis the first of France, did keep a Calendar of
Fools, wherewith he did use to make the King sport; telling him ever the
Reason, why he put any one into his Calendar. When Charles the fifth Emperor,
upon confidence of the noble nature of Francis passed through France, for the
appeasing of the Rebellion of Gaunt, Brisquet put him into his Calendar. The
King asked him the cause? he answered; Because you having suffered, at the
hands of Charles, the greatest bitterness that ever Prince did from another,
nevertheless he would trust his person into your hands. Why Bresquet, said the
King, what will thou say, if thou see him pass back in as great safety, as if
he marched through the midst of Spain? says Bresquet; why then I will put him
out, and put in you.

152. Archbishop Grindal was wont to say; That the Physicians here in England,
were not good, at the Cure of particular Diseases; but had only the power of
the Church to bind and loose.

153. Cosmus Duke of Florence was wont to say of persidious Friends, That we
r^^^d, that we ought to forgive our Enemies; but we do not read that we ought
our friends.

154. A Papist being opposed by a Protestant, that they had no Scripture for
Images, answered, yes; For you read, that thy people laid their sick in the
streets, that the shadow of Saint Peter might come upon them: and that a shadow
was an Image, and the obscurest of all Images.

155. Sir Edward Dyer; a grave and wise Gentleman, did much be^^eve in Kelly
the Alchymist; That he did indeed the work, and did make Gold, ins^much, that
he went into Germany, where Kelly then was, to inform himself fully thereof.
After his return he dined with my Lord of Canterbury: where, at that time, was
at the Table Dr. Prown the Physician. They fell in talk of Kelly. Sir Edward
Dyer turning to the Archbishop said; I do assure your Grace, that that I shall
tell you is Truth: I am an eyewitness thereof; And if I had not seen it, I
should not have believed it; I saw Mr. Kelly, put of the Base Metal into the
Chrysible; and after it was set a little upon the fire; and a very small
quantity of the Medicine put in, and stirred with a stick of wood; It came
forth in great proportion, perfect Gold; to the Touch, to the Hammer, a^^ to
the Test. My Lord Archbishop said; you had need take heed what you say, Sir
Edward Dyer; for here is an Insidel at the Board. Sir Edward Dyer said again
pleasantly; I should have looked for an Infidel sooner in any place, then at
your Graces Table. What say you Dr. Brown, said the Archbishop? Dr. Brown,
answered, after his blunt and hudling manner; The Gentleman has spoken enough
for me. Why, says the Archbishop, what has he said? Marry, says Dr. Brown,
he said, He would not have believed it, except he had seen it; And no more will
I.

156. Doctor Ionson said; That in sickness there were three things that were
material, the Physician, the Disease, and the Patients* And if any two of these
joined, then they get the victory; For, Ne, He^cules quidem contra duos. If the
Physician and the Patient join, then down goes the Disease; For then the
Patient recover^; if the Physician and the Disease join; that is a strong
Disease; and Physician mistaking the cure, then down goes the Patient, if the
Patient and the Disease join, then down goes the Physician, for he is
discredited.

157. Mr. Bettenham said; That virtuous men were like some herbs, and spices
that give not out their sweet smell, till they be broken or ^rushed.

158. The Lord Archbishop Laud said; That some Hypocrites and seeming mortified
Men, which held down their heads, were like the little Images in the Vaults, or
Roofs of Churches; which look and bow down, as if they held up the Church, when
as they bear no weight at all.

159. There was a Painter became a Physician; whereupon one said to him; You
have done well; for before the faults of your work were seen; but now they are
unseen.

160. There was a Gentleman, that came to the Tilt, all in Orange Taw^ey, and
ran very ill. The next day he came again, all in Green, and ran worse. There
was one of the Lookers on, asked another; What is the reason that this
Gentleman changes his Colors? The other answered, sure, because it may be
reported; That the Gentleman in the Green, ran worst than the Gentleman in the
Orenge-Tawney.

161. Mr. Whitehead, a grave Divine, was much esteemed by Queen Elizabeth, but
not preferred, because he was against the Government of Bishops. He came, one
day of the Queen, and the Queen chanced to say to him; I like thee the better,
Whitehead, because th^^ live Unmarried. He answered again; In troth, Madam, I
like you the worse for the same cause.

162. Zelim was the first of the Ottomans, that did shave his Beard, whereas
his Predecessors wore it long. One of he Bashaws asked him; why he altered the
Custom of his Predecessors? he answered, Because you Bashaws, may not lead me
by the bread, as you did them.

163. Aeneas Sylvius, that was Pope Pius secundus, was wont to say; That the
former Popes did wisely to set the Lawyers awork, to debate; Whether the
Donation of Constantine the great, to Sylvester, of St. Peter's Patrimony, were
good or valid in Law or no? The better to skip over the Matter in Fact, whether
there was ever any such thing at all, or no?

164. The Lord Bishop Andrews, was asked at his first coming over of the
Archbishop of Spal^^o, whether he were a Protestant or no? he answered; Truly,
I know not; But I think he is a Detestant; That was, of most of the Opinions of
Rome.

165. It was said amongst some of the grave Prelates of the Counsel of Trent,
in which the School-Divines bare the sway; That the School men were like the
Astronomers, who to save the Phenomenon, framed to their conceit, Eccentricks,
and Epicycles, and a wonderful Engine of Orbs; Though no such things were: so
they to save the practice of the Church, had devised a great number of strange
positions.

166. Aeneas Sylvious would say; That the Christian Faith and Law, though it
had not been confirmed by Miracles, yet was worthy to be received for the
Honestly thereof.

167. Mr. Bacon would say; that it was in his Business, as it is frequently in
ways: That the next way, is commonly the foulest; And that if a man will go the
fairest way, he must go somewhat about.

168. Mr. Bettenham, Reader of Grays-Inne, used to say, That Riches were like
muck; when it lay upon an heap, it gave but a stench and it Odor; but when it
was spread upon the ground, then it was cause of much Fruit.

I69. Cicero married his Daughter to Dolabella, that held Casars pa^ty: Pompey
had married Iulia, that was Caesar's Daughter. After, when Caesar and Pompey
tock Arms one against the other; And Pompey had passed the Seas, and Casar
possessed Italy; Cicero staid s^mewhat long in Italy; but at last sailed over
to join with Pompey. Who when he came to him, Pompey said, you are welcome, but
where left you your Son-in-Law? Cicero answered, with your Father-in-Law.

170. Vespasi^^, and Titus his eldest Son, were both absent from Rome, when the
Empire was cast upon Vespasian; Domitian his younger Son was at Rome, who took
upon him the Affairs; and being of a Turbulent spirit, made many changes; and
displaced diverse Officers and Governors of Provinces, sending them Successors.
So when Vespasian returned to Rome, And Domitian came into his presence,
Vespasian said to him; Son I looked when you would have sent me a Successor.

171. Nero loved a beautiful Youth, whom he used vitiously, and called him
Wife. There was a Senator of Rome, that said secretly to his Friend, It was
pity Nero's Father had not such a Wife.

172. Galba succeeded Nero, and his Age being despised, there was much License
and Confusion in Rome, during his Empire: whereupon a Senator said in full
Senate; It were better to live where nothing is Lawful, than where all things
are Lawful.

173. Augustus Casar did write to Livia, who was over-sensible of some ill
words, that had been spoken of them both: Let it not trouble thee, my Livia, if
any Man speak ill of us; for we have enough that no Man can do ill unto us.

174. Chilon said, that Kings Friends, and Favorites, were like casting
Counters; That sometimes stood for one, sometimes for ten, sometimes for an
Hundred.

175. Theodosius, when he was pressed by a Suitor, and denied him, The Suitor
said; Why, Sir, you promised it. He answered; I said it, but I did not promise
it, if it be unjust.

176. The Romans, when they spoke to the People, were wont to style them, ye
Romans: When Commanders in War spoke to their Army, they styled them my
Soldiers. There was a Mutiny in C^^sars Army, and somewhat the Soldiers would
have had, but they would not declare themselves in it, But only demanded a
Mission or Discharge; Though with no intention it should be granted: But
knowing that Caesar had at that time great need of their service, thought by
that means to wrench him to their other desires: whereupon with one Cry, they
asked Mission. C^^sar after silence made, said; I for my part ye Romans, this
Title did actually speak them to be dismissed: which voice they had no sooner
heard, but they mutinied again; and would not suffer him to go on with his
Speech, until he had called them by the Name of his Soldiers, and so, with
that one word he appeased the Sedition.

177. Caesar would say of Sylla, for that he did resign his Dictatorship; Sylla
was ignorant of Letters he could not dictate.

^78. Seneca said of Caesar; That he did quickly show the Sword, but never
leave if off.

179. Diogenes begging, as diverse Philosophers then used, did beg more of a
Prodigal Man, than of the Rest which were present. Whereupon one said to him:
See your Baseness, that when you find a liberal Mind, you will take most of
him: No, said Diogenes, but I mean to beg of the Rest again.

180. Themistocles, when an Ambassador from a mean estate, did spoke great
matters; said to him, friend thy words would require a city.

181. Iphicrates, the Athenian, in a Treaty that he had with the Lacedaemonians
for peace; And that Questian was made about security, for observing the same
peace, said; the Athenians would not accept of any security, except the
Lacedaemonians do yield up unto them, those things, whereby it might be
manifest, that they could not hurt them, though they would.

182. They would say of the Duke of Guise, Henry; That he was the greatest
Usurer in France, for that he had turned all his Estate into Obligations.
Meaning; That he had sold, and oppignerated all his Patrimony, to give large
donatives to other men.

183. C^^sar Bo^gia, after long Division between him and the Lords of Romagna,
fell to accord with them. In this Accord there was an Article, that he should
not call them at any time, all together in person. The meaning was, that
knowing his dangerous Nature, if he meant them Treason, he might have
opportunity to oppress them altogether at once. Nevertheless, he used such fine
Art, and fair Carriage, that he won their Confidence to meet altogether in
Counsel at Cinigalia; where he murdered them all. This Act, when it was
related unto Pop^ Alexander, his Father, by a Cardinal, as a Thing Happy, but
very Persidious; The Pope said; It was they that broke their Covenant first, in
coming all together.

184. Titus Quinctius, was in the Counsel of the Achaians, what time they
deliberated, whether in the War, then to follow, between the Romans, and King
Autiochus, they should confederate themselves with the Romans, or with King
Antiochus? In that Counsel the Aetolians, who incited the Achaians against the
Romans, to disable their Forces, gave great words, as if the late victory the
Romans had obtained against Philip King of Macedon, had been chiefly by the
strengh and Forces of the Aetoliaus themselves: And on the other side the
Ambassador of Antiochus, did extol the Forces of his Master; founding what an
innumerable Company, he brought in his Army; And gave the Nations strange
Names; As Elymeans, Caducians and others. After both their Harangues, Titus
Quinstius, when he rose up said; It was an easy Matter to perceive what it
was, that had joined, Antiochus, and the Aetoliuns together; That it appeared
to be by reciprocal lying of each, touching the others Forces.

185. Plato was amorous of a young Gentleman, whose Name was Stella, that
studied Astronomy; and went often in the clear Nights to look upon the Stars.
Whereupon Plato wished himself Heaven, that he might look upon Stella with
(...) thousand eyes.

186. The Lacedaemonians were besieged by the Athenians, in the Port of Peile,
which was won, and some slain, and some taken. There was one said, to one of
them, that was taken by way of scorn: Were they not brave Men that lost their
^ives at the Port of Peile? He answered; Certainly, a Persian Arrow is much to
be ^et by, if it can ch^se out a brave Man.

187. Clodius was acquit by 2 corrupt Jury, that had palpably taken shares of
Money, before they gave up their Verdict. they prayed of the Senate a Guard;
that they might do their Conscienches, for that Clodius was a very seditious
young Nobleman. Whereupon all the World gave him for Condemned. But acquitted
he was: Catulus, the next day seeing some of them that had acquitted him,
together, said to them; What made you ask of us a Guard? Were you afraid your
money should have been taken from you?

188. At the same Judgment, Cicer^ gave in Evidence upon Oath: And when the
Jury which consisted of 57. had passed against his Evidence, one day in the
Senate Cicero and Clodius being in Altercation, Clodius upbraided him, and
said; The Jury gave you no credit: Cicero answered, Five and Twenty gave me
credit; But there were two and thirty that gave you no credit; For they had
their money beforehand.

189. Sir Henry Savil was asked by my Lord of Essex, his opinon touching Poets?
He answered my Lord; That he thought them the best Writers, next to them that
writ Prose.

190. Diogenes having seen that the Kingdom of Macedon,(...) before was
contemptible and (...) alo^t when he dyed (...), How he would be buried? He
answered; With my Face downward: For within a while, the World will be turned
upside down, and then I shall ^e right.

191. Cato the Elder was wont to say; That the Romans were like sheep; A Man
were better to drive a flock of them, than one of them.

192. When Lycurgus was to reform and alter the State of Sparta; In
Consultation one advised that it should be reduced to an absolute Popular
Equality* But Lycurgus said to him; Sir begin it in your own House.

193. ^ion that was an Atheist, was showed in a Port-City, in a Temple of
Neptune, many Tables of Pictures, of such as had in Tempests made their Vows to
Neptune, and were saved from Shipwreck: and was asked, How say you now? Do you
not acknowledge the power of the Gods? But said he; I but where are they
painted, that have been drowned after their Vows.

194. Cicero was at Dinner, where there was an ancient Lady that spoke of her
own years, and said; she was but forty years old. One that sat by Cicero,
rounded him in the ear, and said; She talks of forty year old; But she is a far
more out of question. Cicero answered him again; I must believe her, for I have
heard her say so, any time these ten years.

195. There was a Soldier that vaunted before Julius C^^sar, of the Hurts he
had received in his Face. Julius Caesar knowing him to be but a Coward, told
him; you were best take ^eed, next time you run away, how you look back.

196. There was a Suitor to Vespasian, who to lay his Suit fairer, said it was
for his Brother; Whereas indeed it was for a piece of Money. Some about
Vespasian told the Emperor, to cross him; That the party his Servant spoke
for, was not his Brother; but that he did it upon a Bargain. Vespasian sent for
the party interessed, and asked him; Whether his Mean employed by him was his
Brother or no? He durst not tell untruth to the Emperor, and confessed He was
not his Brother. Whereupon the Emperor said, This do, fetch me the Money, and
you shall have your Suit dispatched. Which he did. The Courtier which was the
Mean, solicited Vespasian soon after about his Suit: Why, (says Vespasian,) I
gave it last day, to a Brother of mine.

197. Vespasian asked of Apollonius; What was (...) Who answered, Nero could
tune the Marp well, but in Government he did always wind up the strings too
high; or let them down too low.

198. Dionysi^s the Tyrant, after he was deposed, and brought to Corinth, kept
a School. Many used to visit him; And amongst others, one when he came in,
opened his Mantle and shook his Clothes; Thinking to give Dionysius a gentle
scorn; because it was the manner to do so, for them that came in to see him
while he was Tyrant. But Dionysius said to him; I prithee do so, rather when
thou go out, that we may see thou stealest nothing away.

199. Diogenes one terrible frosty Morning, came into the Marketplace, and
stood Naked, shaking to show his Tolerance. Many of the People came about him,
pitying him: Plato passing by and knowing he did it to be seen, said to the
People as he went by; If you pity him indeed let him alone to himself.

200. Aristippus was earnest Suitor to Di^^ysi^s for some Grant, who would give
no ear to his Suit. Aristippus fell at his ^tet, and then Dionysius granted it.
One that stood by, said afterward (...) Philosopher and be so base as to throw
your self at the Tyrants Feet to get a Suit: Aristippus answered; The fault is
not mine, but the fault is in Dionysius that carries his Ears in (...).

201. Solon when he wept f^r (...) death, and one said to him* (...) will not
help, answered; (...) weep, because weeping will not (...).

202. The same Solon being asked; Whether he had given the Athenians the best
Laws? answered; The best of those that they would have received.

203. One said to Aristippus, It Is a strange thing, why should men rather give
to the Poor, than to Philosophers: He answered, because they think themselves
may sooner come to be poor, than to be Philosophers.

204. Trajan would say of the vain Jealousy of Princes, that seek to make away
those that aspire to their succession; That there was never King, that did put
to death his Successor.

205. When it was represented to Alexander, to the advantage of Antipater, who
was a stern and Imperious Man; That he only of all his Lieutenants, wore no
P^rple, but kept the Macedonian habit of black; Alexander said yea, but
Antipater is all Purple within.

206. Alexander used to say of his two Friends, Craterus and Ephestion; That
Ephestion loved Alexander, and Craterus loved the King.

207. It fell out so, that as Livia went abroad in Rome, there met her naked
young men that were sporting in the strects; which Augustus went about severely
to punish in them: But Livi^ spoke for them, and said: It was no more to chaste
Women, then so many Statua's.

208. Philip of Macedon was wished to banish one, for speaking ill of him: But
Philip answered; Better he speak where we are both known, than where we are
both unknown.

209. Lucullus entertained Pompey in one of his Magnificent Houses: Pompey
said, This is a mavelous Fair, and stately House for the Summer; but methinks
it should be very cold for Winter: Lucullus ^nswered; Do you not think me as
wise (...) diverse Fools are, to change my habi^ation in the winter season.

210. Plato entertained some of his ^riends at a Dinner, and had in the Chamber
a Bed or Couch neatly and cost^y furnished. Diogenes came in, and got (...)
upon the Bed, and trampled it, say^^g, I trample upon the pride of Plato; Plato
mildly answered; but with greater pride Diogenes.

211. Pompey being Commissioner for sending Grain to Rome, in time of Dearth,
when he came to the Sea, found it very tempestuous and dangerous; Insom^ch as
these about him, advised him by no means to embarque; but Pompey said; It is of
necessity that I go, not that I live.

212. Demosthe^es was upbraided by Aeschines, That his speeches did smell, of
the Lamp. But Demosthe^es said; Indeed there is a great deal of difference
between that which you and I do by Lamp-light.

213. Dem^des the Orator, in his Age was talkative, and would eat hard:
Antipater would say of him; That he was like a Sacrifice, that nothing was left
of it but the Tongue and the Paun^l.

214. Themist^^^es after he was banished, and had wrought himself into great
fav^ur, af^erwards, so that he was honored, and sumptuously served, seeing hi^
present Glory said unto one of hi^ Friends; If I had not been undone, I ha^
been undone.

215. Philo Iadaeus says, That the sens^ is like the Sun; For the Sun seals
(...) the Globe of Heaven, and opens the Glob^ of Earth: So the sense does
obscurs Heavenly things, and reveals Earthly things.

216. Alexander after the Battle of Granicum, had very great Offers made him by
Darius: Consulting with his Captains concerning them, Parmenio said; Sure I
would except of these offers, if I were as Alexander: Alexander answered; so
would I, if I were as Parmenio.

217. Alexander was wont to say; He kn^w himself to be mortal, chiefly by two
things; Sleep, and Lust.

218. Augustus Caesar would say; That he wondered that Alexander feared he
should want work, having no more worlds to conquer: As if it were not as hard a
matter to keep, as to conquer.

219. Antigonus when it was told him that the Enemy had such Volleys of Arrows
that they did hide the Sun, said; That falls out well, for it is hot weather,
and so we shall fight in the shade.

220. Cato the Elder being aged, buried his wife, and married a young woman.
His Son came to him, and said; Sir what have I offended, that you have brought
a Stepmother into your house? The old man answered; Nay, quite contrary Son;
Thou (...) me so wett, as I would be glad to have more such.

221. Crassus the Orator had a Fish which the Romans called Murena, that he
made very tame and fond of him; The Fish died, and Crassus wept for it. One day
falling in contention with Domitius in the Senate, Domitius said; Foolish
Crassus, you wept for your Murena* Crassus replied: That Is more than you did
for both your Wives.

2^2. Philip, Alexanders Father, gave Sentence against a Prisoner, what time he
was drowsy, and seemed to give small attention. The Prisoner, after sentence
was pronounced, said, I appeal. The King somewhat stirred, said; To whom do you
appeal? The Prisoner answered; From Philip when he gave no ear, to Philip when
he shall give ear.

223. There was a Philosopher that disputed with Adrian the Emperor, and did
it but weakly. One of his Friends that stood by, afterward said unto him:
Methinks you were not like your self last day, in Argument with the Emperor; I
could have answered better my self: Why said the Philosopher; Would you have me
contend with him, that commands thirty Legions?

224. When Alexander passed into Asia* he gave large Donatives to his Captains,
and other principal men of Virtue; insomuch as Parmenio asked him; Sir, what do
you keep for your self? he answered, Hope.

225. Vespasian set a Tribute upon Urine: Titus his son emboldened himself to
speak to his Father of it: And represented it as a thing indigne and fordid,
Vespasian said nothing, for the time; but a while after, when it was forgotten,
sent for a piece of Silver out of the Tribute-money; And called to his Son,
bidding him to smell to it; and asked him, whether he found any offense? who
said, No: Why so, says Vespasian again; Yet this comes out of Urine.

226. Nerva, the Emperor, succeeded Domitian, who had been Tyrannical; and in
his time many Noble Houses were overthrown by false Accusations; The
Instruments whereof were chiefly, Marcellus and Regulus. The Emperor Nerva one
night supped ^rivately with some six or seven: Amongst which there was one that
was a dangerous Man; and began to take the like courses, as Marcellus and
Regulus had done. The Emperor fell into Discourse of the Injustice and
Tyran^^^ of the former Time; And by Name, of the two Accusers; And said; What
should we do with them, if we had them nox? One of them that was at Supper, and
was a free-spoken Senator, said; Marry, they should sup with us.

227. There was one that found a great Mass of Money digging under ground in
his Grand fathers-House; And being somewhat doubtful of the Case, signified it
to the Emperor, that he had found such Treasure. The Emperor made a Resc^ipt
thus; Use it. He writ back again; That the sum was greater than his Estate or
Condition could use. The Emperor writ a new Rescript, thus; Abuse it.

228. Julius caesar, as he passed by, was by Acclamation of some that stood in
the way, termed King; to try how the People would take it. The People showed
great murmr and distaste at it. Caes^r finding where the wind stood, slighted
it, and said; I am not King but Caeser: As if they had mistaken his Name. For
Rex was a surname amongst the Romans, as King is with us.

229. When Craesus, for his glory, showed Solon his great Treasures of Gold;
Solon said to him; If another King come that has better iron than you, he will
be master of all this Gold.

230. Aristippus being reprehended of Luxury, by one that was not rich; for
that he gave six Crowns for a small Fish; answered, Why, what would you have
given? The other said, some Twelve pence. Aristippus said again; And six Crowns
is no more with me.

231. Plato reprehended severely a young man, for entering into a dissolute
house. The young man said to him; why do you reprehend so sharply for so small
a matter? Plat^ replied, But custom is no small matter.

232. Archidamus, King of Lacedemon, having received from Philip, King of
Macedon (After Philip had won the victory of Cherone^, upon the Athenians)
proud Letters, writ back to him; That if he measured his own shadow, he would
find it no longer than it was before his victory.

233. Pyrrhus, when his Friends congratulated to him his victory over the
Romans, under the Conduct of Fabritius, but with great slaughter of his own
side, said to them again; yes, but if we have such another victory, we are
undone.

234. Plato was wont to say of his Master Socrates; That he was like the
Apothecaries Galley-Pots; that had on the outside Apes, and Owls, and Satyrs;
but within precious Drugs.

235. Alexunder sent to Phocyon a great Present of Money. Phocyon said to the
Messenger; Why does the King send to me, and to none else? The Messenger
answered, Because he takes you to be the only good (...) in Athens. Phocy^n
replied; If he think so, pray ^et him suffer me to be so still.

236. At a Banquet, where those that were called the seven Wisemen of Greece,
were invited by the Ambassador of a Barbarous King; The Ambassador related;
That there was a Neighbor mightier than his Master, pict quarrels with him, by
making impossible Demands, otherwise threatening War, and now at that present
had demanded of him, to drink up the Sea. Whereunto one of the wise men said, I
would have him undertake it. Why, says the Ambassador, how shall be come off?
Thus, (says the Wise man) let that King first stop the Rivers, which ran into
the Sea; which are no part of the bargain; and then your Master will perform it.

238. The Lacedaemonians had in custom to speak very short, which being an
Empire, they might do at pleasure: but after their Defeat at Leuctra, in an
Assembly of the Grecians, they made a long Invective against Epaminondas; Who
stood up, and said no more but this; I am glad we have brought you to speak
long.

239. Fabius Maximus being resolved to draw the War in length, still waited
upon Hannibals progress to curb him: And for that purpose he encamped upon the
High Ground: But Terentius his Colleague, fought with Hannibal, and was in
great peril of overthrow, But then Fabius came down from the High Grounds, and
got the day. Whereupon Hannibal said; That he did ever think that that same
cloud that hanged upon the Hills, would at one time or other give a Tempest.

240. Hanno the C^^thaginian, was ^ent Commissioner by the State, after the
^econd Carthaginian War, to supplicate for Peace; And in the end obtained it:
yet one of the sharper Senators said; you have often broken with us the Peaces,
whe^eunto you have been sworn; I pray, by what God will you swear? Hanno
answered; by the same gods that have punished the former perjury so severely.

241. Caesar when he first possessed Rome, Pompey being fled, offered to en^er
the sacred Treasury to take the Mo^eys that were there stored: And Metel^^ us,
Tribune of the People, did forbid him; And when Metellus was violent in it, and
would not desist; Caesar turned to him, and said; Presume no further, or I will
lay you dead. And when Metellus was with those words somewhat astonished,
Caesar added; Young man, it had been easier for me to do this, tha^ to speak it.

242. Caius Ma^ius, was General of the Romans against the Cimbers, who came
with such a Sea of People upon Italy. In the Fight there was a Band of the
Cadurcians of a thousand, that did notable service; whereupon, after the Fight,
Marius did de^ison them all for Ci^izens of Rome, though there was no Law to
Warrant it. One of his Friends did present it unto him; That he had
transgressed the Law, because that privilege was not to be granted but by the
people. Whereunto Marius answered; That for the ^oyse of Arms he could not ^ear
the Laws.

243. Pompey did consummate the Wa^ against Sertorius, when Metellus ha^
brought the Enemy somewhat low. H^ did also consummate the War against the
Fugitives, whom Crassus had before de^feated in a great Battle. So when
Lucul^lus had great and glorious Victori^ against Mithrid^tes and Tigranes; ye^
Pompey by means his friends made, wa^ sent to put an end to that War. Where
upon Luce^^us taking indignation, as disgrace offered to himself, said; The
Pompey was ^ Car^ion Crow, when o^thers ha^ stricken down the bodies, the
Pompey came and preyed upon them.

244. Antisthenes being asked of one what learning was ^^st necessary for man's
life? Answered, To unlearn that which is naught.

245. Alex^nder visited Diogenes in his Tub; And when he asked him, what he
would desire of him? Diogenes answered; That you would stand a little a ^ide,
that the Sun may come t^ me.

246 The same Diogen^s, when Mic^ came about him, as he was eating, said; I
see* that even Diogenes nourishes Parasites.

248. Heraclitus the obscure said; The dry light is the best soul: meaning when
the ^acul^ies intellectual are in vigor; not drenhed, or as it were, blouded
by the affections.

249. One of the Philosophers was asked; what (...) wise man differed from a
^ool? He answered, send them both Naked to those that know them not, and you
shall ^^^ceive.

250. There was a Law made by the Romans, against the Bribery and Extor^^^n of
the Governors of Provinces. Cic^^o says in a speech of his ^o the People;
That ^e thought the Provinces would petition to the state of Rome to have tha^
^aw repeated, ^^r (^aith he) before the Governo^rs did brib^ and extort, as
much as was sufficient f^r themselves: But now ^hey bribe and ext^rt as much as
may b^ enough, not only for themselves, but for the Judges, and Jurors, and
Magistates.

251. Aristipp^^ sailing in a Tempest, showed signs of fear. One of the Seamen
said to him, in an insulting manner; W^ that are Plebeians, are ^ot troubled;
you that are a Philosopher, are afraid. Aristippus answered; That there is not
the like wager upon it, for you to perish and ^or me.

252. There was an Or^tor, that defended a cause of Aristippus, and prevailed.
Afterward, he asked A^i^tippus; Now, in your distress, what did Socrates do
you good? Aristippus answered, Thus, in making that which you said of me to be
true.

253. There was an Epicurea^ vaunt^d, that diverse of other Sects of
Philosophers did after turn Epicureans; But there was never any Epicur^an that
turned to any other Sect. Whereupon a Philosopher that was of another Sect,
said; The reason was plai^, for that Cocks may be mad^ Capons; but Capo^s could
never b^ mad^ Cocks.

254. Chilo^ would say: That Gold was tried with the touchstone: and m^n with
G^ld.

255. Si^onides being asked of Hier^ what he thought of God? asked a sevennights
time to consider of it: And at the seven-nights end, he asked a Fortnights
time: At the Fortnights end, A Month. At which Hier^ marvelling, Sim^nides
answered; That the longer he thought upon the matter* the more difficult be
found it.

258. A Spaniard was censuring to a French Gentleman the want of Devotion,
amongst the French; In that, whereas in Spai^, when the Sacrament goes to the
sick, any that meets with it, turns back and waits upon it to the house whither
it goes; But in France, they only do Reverence, and pass by. But the Fr^^ch
Gentleman answered him; There is reason for it; For here with us, Christ is
secure amongst his Friends; But in Spain there b^ so many Jews, and Marano's,
that it is not amiss for him to have a conv^y.

259. Mr. Popham, (afterward Lord chief Justice Popham) when he was Speaker;
And the House of Commo^s had sat long and done, in effect nothing; coming one
day to Queen Elizabeth, the said to him; Now Mr. Speaker; what has passed in
the Commons House? He answered, if it pl^ase your majesty, seven weeks.

260. Agathocles, after he had taken syrac^s^, the men whereof during the
siege, Irad in a bravery spoken of him, all the Vi^any that might be; sold the
Syracus^^s for slaves, and said; Now if you use such words of me, I will tell
your Masters of you.

261. Themistocles, in his lower Fortune, was in love with a young gentleman
who scorned him; but when he grew to his greatness, which was soon after after
he s^ught him; Themistocles said; We ^re both grown wise, but too late.

262. Bion was failing, and there fell out a great Tempest; and the Ma^i^er^
that were wicked and dissolute fellows, call^^ upon the Gods; but Bio^ said to
them, pe^ce, let them ^ot know you are here.

263. The Tur^s made an expeditio^ i^to Persia; and because of the strai^ Iaws
of the Mou^tai^^ of A^me^i^, the Bashaws consulted which way they should get
in? One that heard the Debate said; Here Is much (...) how you shall get in; but
I ^ear no body ^^ke care h^w yo^ should (...).

264. Philip (...) of (...) maintained argua^^nts with a (...) in points of his
Art, somewhat pe^e^ptorily; but the Musician said to him; God forbid Sir, your
Fortune were s^ hard, that you should know these t^ings better than myself.

265. Antalcidas, when an Athenian said to him, ^e Spartans ar^ unlearned, said
again; True, ^or we have learned no ^vil nor vice of you.

266. Pace the bitter Fool, was not suffered to come at Queen Elizabeth,
because of his bitter Humor. Yet at one time, some persuaded the Queen that he
should come to her; undertaking for him, that he should keep within compass, so
he was brought to her, and the Queen said; Come on Pace, now we shall hear of
our faults: ^aith Pace; I do not use t^ talk of that, that all the Town talks
of.

267. Bishop I atimer said, in a Sermon at Court; That he heard great speech
that the Kind was poor; And many ways were propounded to make him Rich: For his
part, ^e had thought o^ one way, which was; That they should help the King t^
some good Office; for all his Officers were rich.

268. After the defeat of Cyrus the younger, Falinus was sent by the King to
the Grecians, (who had for their part rather victory, than otherwise) to
command the^ to yield their arms; which when it was denied, Falinus said to
clearch^s; Well then, the King lets you know* that if you remove from the place
where you are now e^camped, it is War; if you stay it is Truce: What shall ^
say you will do? Clearchus answered, It pleases us, as it pleases the King.
How is that? faith Falinus, says Clearchus; If we remove, War; If we stay,
Truce; and so would not disclose his purpos^.

269. Alcibiades came to Pericles, and stayed a while e're he was admitted.
When he came in, Pericles civilly excused it, and said; I was studying how to
give mine account. But Alcibiades said to him, If you will be ruled by me,
study rather how to give no account.

270. Mendoza that was Viceroy of Per^, was wont to say; That the Governament
of Peru was the best plave that the King of Spain gave, save that it was
somewhat too nea^ Madrid.

271. When Vesp^sian passed from Jury, to take upon him the Empire, he went by
Alexendria, where remained two famous Philosphers; Apolloniu^ and Euphrates.
The Emperor heard the discourse, touching matter of State, in the presence of
many. And when he was weary of them, he brake off, and in a secret derision,
finding their Discourses but speculative, and not to be put in practice, said;
Oh that I might govern wise men, and wise men govern me.

272. Cardinal Xime^es upon a Mu^ter, which was taken against the Moors, was
spoken to by a servant of his to stand ^ little out of the smoke of the
Harque^uze, but he said again, That that was his ^^c^ns^.

273. Nero was wont to say of his Master seneca, That his ^^ile was like mortar
without lim^.

275. Augustus Casar, out of great indignation against his two daughters; and
posthumus Agripp^, his Grandchild, whereof the two first were infamous; and
the last otherwise unworthy, would ^ay; That they were not his seed, but ^ome
imposthumes tha^ had broken from ^im.

276. A Seaman coming before the ^udges of the Admiralty for admittance ^^to an
Office of a Ship, bound for the ^ndies, was by one of the Judges much ^lighted,
as an insufficent person for that Office he sought to obtain; the ^udg telling
him, That he believed he ^^^ld not say the points of his compass. The ^eamen
answered; That he could say them, under favor, better than he could say his
^ater-Noster. The Judge replied; That (...) would w^g^r Twenty shillings with
him upon that. The seaman taking him up* it came to Trial: And the Seam^n
began, and said all the points of his Compass very exactly: The Judge likewise
said his Paternoster: and when he had finished it, ^e required the wager,
according to agreement; Bec^^se the S^^man was to say his compass better, t^an
he his Paternoster; which h^ had ^ot performed. Nay, I pray sir, hold (quoth
the seaman) The^wager is not fi^ished; For I h^^e but hal^ do^e: And so he
immediately said his compass backward very exactly; which the Judge ^ailing of
in his Paternoster, the Seaman carrled away the Prize.

^77. There was a Conspiracy against the Emperor Cl^udi^^, by Scrib^nin^^s*
examined in the Senate; where Cl^udius sat in his chair, and one of his Freed
Servants stood at the back of hi^ Chair. In the Examination, that Freed
Servant, who had much power wi^h ^^a^di^^, very ^aw^ily, had almost all the
words: And amongst other things, (...) asked in scorn, one of the Examinates*
who was likewise Freed Servant of S^ribonianus; I pray Sir, i^ Scribon^anus had
been Emperor, what would you ^ave done? he answered, I wo^ld have stood behind
his chair, and held my pe^ce.

278. One was ^aying; That his great Grandfather, and Grandfather, and Father
died at Sea: Said another, that heard ^im; And I were as you, I would never
come at Sea. Why (says he) where did your great Gra^d-father, and
Grand-f^^her, and Father die? He answered; Where, but in their Beds? He
answered; And I w^r^ as you, I wo^ld never come in B^d.

279. T^ere was a dispute, whether great Heads, or little Heads had the better
Wit? And one said; It must needs be the little; for that it is a Maxi^e; O^^ne
m^jus (...).

280. Sir Thom^^ Moor, when the Counsel of ^he party pressed him for ^ longer
day to perform the Decree, said; Take Sai^^ Barnabies day, which is the longest
day in the year. Now Saint Bar^^^ies day, was within f^w days following.

281. One of the Fathers says; That there is but this difference between the
death of old Men, and young Me^; That old Men go to Death; and Death comes to
young Men.

283. Jason the Th^ssalian, was wont to say; That some things may be done
u^justly, that many things may be done justly.

^84. There was an Harbinger had lodged a Gentleman in a very ill Room, who
expostulated with him somewhat rudely: but the Harbinger carelessly said; yo^
will take pleasure i^ it, when you are o^t of it.

285. Dem^trius King of M^c^don, would at times re^i^e himself from business,
and give himself wholly to pleasures. One of those his retirings, giving out
that he was sick, his Father, Antig^nus, came on the sudden to visit him; and
met a fair daintly youth coming out of his chamber. When Antigonus came in,
Demetrius said; Sir the Fever left m^ right now. Antigonus replied; I think it
was (...) that I met at the door.

286. C^^^ Maj^r would say, Tha^ wise men lear^ed more by Fools, than Fools by
wise men.

287. When it was said to A^axagoras; The At^^^ians have condemned you to die;
He said again; And ^^t^re them.

288. Alexander, when his Father wished him to run for the prize of the Race,
at the Olympian Games; (for he was very swift) answered; He wo^ld if h^ ^ight
run with Kings.

289. Antigonus used often to go disguised, and to listen at the Tents of his
Soldiers; And at a time heard some that spoke very ill of him. Whereupon he
opened the Tent a little, and said to them; If you would speak ill ^f me, you
should go a little furthe^ off.

290. Aristippus said; That those that studied particular Sciences, and
neglected Philosophy; were like penelopes wooers, that made love to the
waiting woman.

291. The Ambassadors of Asia Minor, came to Antonius, after he had imp^s^d
upon them a double Tax; and said plainly to him; That if he would have two
Tributes in one year; He must give them ^wo seed times, and ^wo Harvests.

293. An orator of Athens, said to Demosth^nes; The Athenians will kill you, i^
they wax mad: Demosthenes replied, and they will kill you if they be in good
sense.

294. Epicletus used to say; That one of the vulgar, in any ill that happens to
him, blames others; A Novice in Philosophy blames himself; and a philosopher
blames neither the one nor the other.

294. Caeser in his book, that he made against Cato, (which is lost) did write
to show the force of opinion and reverence, of a Man that had once o^tained a
popular Reputation; That there were some that found Cato drunk, and were
ashamed instead of Cato.

295. There was a Nobleman said of a great Counselor; That he would have made
the worst Farrier in the world; for he never shod Horse, but he cloyed him: For
he never commended any man to the King for service, or upon occasion of suit,
or otherwise, but that he would come in, in the end with a But; and drive in a
Nayl^ to his disadvantage.

296. Diogenes called an ill Physician, Cock, Why? (says he) Diogenes
answered; Because when you crow, men use to rise.

297. There was a Gentleman fell very sick, and a friend of his said to him;
surely, you are in danger; I prayed send for a Physician: But the sick man
answered; It is no matter, for if I dye, I will dye at leisure.

299. A certain friend of Sir Thomas Moors, taking great pains about a Book,
which he intended to publish (being well conceited of his own wit, which no man
else thought worthy of Commendation) brought it to Sir Thomas Moor to peruse
it, and pass his judgment upon it; which he did: And finding nothing therein
worthy the Press; he said to him with a grave Countenance; That if it were in
verse, it would be more worthy. Upon which words, he went immediately and
turned it into verse, and then brought it to Sir Thomas again, who looking
thereon, said soberly; yes marry, now it is somewhat; for now it is Rhyme;
whereas before it was neither Rhyme nor Reason.

300. Sir Henry Wotton used to say: That Critics were like Brushers of Noble
M^^ts Clothes.

301 Hannibal said of Fabius Maximus, and of Marcellus; whereof the former
waited upon him, that he could make no progress: and the latter had many sharp
fights with him; That he feared Fabius like a Tutor: And Mercellus like an
Enemy.

302. When King Edward the second, was amongst his Torturers, who hurried him
too and fro, That no man should know where he was, they set him dow^ upon a
Bank: And one time the more to disguise his Face shaved him, and washed him
with cold water of a Ditch by: The King said: Well, yet, I will have warm water
for m^ Beard: And to shed abundance of Tears.

303. One of the seven was w^nt to say; That Laws were like Cop we^s: wh^re the
small Flies were caught, and the great brak^ through.

304. Lewis the Eleventh of France, having much abated the greatness and power
of the Peers, Nobility, and Court of Parliament, would fay; That he had brought
the Crown out of Ward.

305. There was a cowardly Spanish Soldier, that in a Defeat the Moors gave,
ran away with the foremost. Afterward when the Army generally fled, thi^
Soldier was missing. Whereupon (...) said by some, that he was slain: No ^^re
(says one) He is alive: For the Moors eat no Hares Flesh.

306. A Gentleman that was punctual of his word, and loved the same in others:
when he heard that two persons had agreed upon a meeting, about serious
affairs, at a certain time and place; And that the one party failed in the
performance, or neglected his Hour; would usually say of him; He is a young man
then.

307. Anacharsis would say, concerning the popular Estates of Graecia; That he
wondered how at Athens, Wise men did (...) and Fool dispose.

308. His Lordship, when he had finished this collection of Apophthegms,
concluded thus; Come now, all is well: They say, he is not a wise man that will
lose his friend, for his wit: But he is less a wise man, that will lose his
friend, for another man's wit.

FINIS.

