A SERMON Preached to the SOCIETY FOR Reformation of Manners, In Kingston upon
Hull;

On Wednesday, January the 10th. 1699/700.

By JOHN BILLINGSLEY, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for A. and I. Churchil: And Thomas Ryles, Bookseller in Hull.
1700.

Mr. BILLINGSLEY's SERMON FOR Reformation of Manners.

THE Epistle Dedicatory, TO The Worthy Members of the SOCIETY for Reformation
of Manners, in Kingston upon Hull.
Honored Sirs,
THAT I make bold to Entitle You to the Patronage of the following Plain
Discourse, I think needs no other Apology, but to mention, That it was first
Preached, and is now made Public, at Your Request.

You have undertaken a Difficult Work, and (thorough the Goodness of God) made
some Considerable Advances in it, in Circumstances that were enough to have
Disheartened a Piety and Courage less than Yours. And I hope you have found,
and, by the Blessing of Heaven upon Your Honest Endeavors, will find, that the
farther You go on in this Service, the more your Difficulties will abate, and
the more Your Encouragements (those especially of the Best sort) will increase.

I have endeavored to lay before You Plain Scripture-Rules for Your Management
of this Weighty Business, and to represent to You the manifold Obligations You
lie under to Persevere in it. I hope I have herein spoken nothing but Words of
Truth and Soberness, even such Truths as all Wise and Good Men, of the most
differing Parties (Alas! that we cannot avoid still using the unhappy word
Party!) are agreed in.

And if any will call this Canting, they shall (for me) enjoy the sole
Privilege of adhering to their own, beloved, and long-accustomed Dialect: For
when Men are fallen out with God and their own Consciences, with Reason,
Authority, and Sobriety, it is no Wonder if the Light of Scripture-Truth, any
thing warmly applied, set them a raving. The worst I wish such, is, That they
may awake and come to themselves in time; else they will e're long know (what
they will not now consider) that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, Heb. 10. 31.

It was, I confess, some Discouragement to me in both Parts of this
Undertaking, (but especially the latter) that I was to manage this Weighty
Argument after so many, of every way greater Abilities, and who had, in a sort,
exhausted the Subject. Yet since I could not, without being rude to You, and
unfriendly to the Truly-good Cause You are engaged in, decline it; I shall
leave the Judgment of this Confessedly-mean Performance, to the Pious and
Candid Readers, without being concerned at the Scoffs of Debauched and Profane
Persons, with whom, the Apostle St. Peter has foretold us, these last Days
should abound, 2 Pet. 3. 3.

That the following Sermon may be blessed of God, for the strengthening of Your
Hands in the present Eminent Service You are employed in; That You may, all of
You, approve Your Hearts unto God, and Your Actions to the Consciences of Men;
That all Mountains may become a Plain before You; That the present Inhabitants
of this Place, and even late Posterity, may reap the Happy Fruits of Your Good
Endeavors; That we may be as Eminent for Real Holiness and Brotherly-Love as
we have long been for the Remarkable Care of a Gracious Providence about us,
is, and shall be, the Earnest Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your very Affectionate, Obliged, Faithful Servant, John Billingsley.

JUDE 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a difference:

And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: hating even the
garment spotted by the flesh.


THESE Words I have chosen to speak to at this time, as containing a Complete
Directory for such, as either by the special Obligations of a separate
Function, or the more Common Bonds of Humanity or Christian Charity, are
concerned for the putting a Stop to the Growth of Error, or any Impiety in any
Church, City, or Nation.

I shall not detain you with any Account of the Apostle St. Jude, by whose
Ministry this Epistle was written, in Compliance with or Conformity to the
Dictates and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; neither will I so far trespass upon
the narrow Limits of Time allotted to this Exercise, as to give you the
Analysis of this Epistle: You may be furnished, as to Both, by consulting
Perkins, Manton, Jenkins, Roberts, Clark, etc.

I shall only hint, That the Principal Scope of the Epistle seems to be the
Confirming those who were newly converted to Christianity, against the Errors
and Impieties that had, even so early, begun to creep into the Church: Whether
specially those of the Gnostics, or any other, I determine not.

The Words of the Text suggest to us a Threefold Rule for our Behavior, with
respect to those whose Miscarriages are grievous to us, and whose Reformation
we desire, and in Pursuance of such Desire do endeavor. Here is (1.) The Rule
of Compassion. (2.) The Rule of Severity, animated by an unaffected Zeal. (3.)
The Rule of Caution.

I. The Rule of Compassion: Of some have Compassion, making a difference. I
know the Vulgar Latin reads otherwise; and Beza tells us, that Reading is
supported by the Authority of Three Ancient Copies: But I do not think this
needs give us any Stop, since they that are capable to compare both, will
easily see that the Reading which our Version follows ought to be preferred;
and to others, a nicer canvassing the Point would be but a needless, because
useless, Amusement.

The Apostle here teaches us, in dealing with Offenders to act judiciously; to
found all our Proceedings upon a right Discernment both of Persons and Actions.
Partial accepting of Persons is a Fault, but due Discrimination of Persons is
our Duty; that we may know how to behave toward every one, as the Case
requires.

Some offend ignorantly, and their Ignorance is rather owing to their unhappy
Circumstances than to Sloth or Affectation; others are wilfully ignorant, and
others sin against Light.

Now in the former of these Cases, which this Rule respects, Lenity, Pity,
Tenderness, Compassion, are required; as most likely to gain upon such Persons,
and to set them right: Harshness discourageth them, Kindness wins them.
Besides, their Case is truly Compassionable; had they known better, they had
done better; and had their Opportunities of Knowledge equalled ours, probably
they had out-stript us, both in Knowledge and Good Life.

We ought therefore to pity and pray for such, and by no means to carry
haughtily, much less cruelly toward them. It Is the Commendation of our great
High Priest, that he can have Compassion on the Ignorant, and on them that are
out of the way, Heb. 2. 5.

II. The Rule of Severity, animated by unaffected Zeal: Others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire.

Others,] i. e. Such as sin knowingly, wilfully, obstinately.

Save,] We must not despair of the Salvation even of such, but do what in us
lies to recover them out of the Snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

Save.] This only God and Christ can do principally and efficiently; yet it is
not ordinarily done without our Concurrence: Men are Instruments in this
blessed Work, though God only be the Author of it. So the Apostle exhorts his
Hearers to save themselves from that untoward Generation, Acts 2. 40. and St.
Paul tells Timothy, that in so doing he should save himself, and those that
heard him, 1 Timothy 4. 16. The Salvation here spoken of, is from Sin, the Cause;
and Judgments here, and Damnation hereafter, the dismal Consequents of it. What
should not any of us be willing to do or suffer, to promote so blessed a Work?

With Fear,] i. e. Either with Fear, lest we miscarry in our Undertaking, and
so with Prudence, Caution, and Circumspection: So the Apostle exhorts us to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. Where the
Consequence is so important, the Care cannot be too much. Or,

With Fear,] i. e. By means of Fear: Laboring to stir up in the Sinners we
would reclaim, an Holy Fear of the Divine Majesty, and of his most terrible,
and no less righteous Judgments, both in this Life, and that which is to come.
Thus the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men.

Hardened Sinners are not ordinarily to be dealt with by Arguments of Love, but
of Fear: They must have Hellfire flashed in their Faces; they must be dealt
plainly and roundly with; a mild Reproof does but harden them: The Tenders of
Mercy (too often) embolden them in Sin. They must be made to know that God is a
Just and a Holy God; and that he has ordained Tophet of old, he has made it
deep and large; the pile thereof of fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord
(like a stream of brimstone) does kindle it, Isa. 30. 33.

Impenitent Sinners must be acquainted, that the Punishments that await them
are insupportable and eternal; that God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.

And if any of them be so hardened, as through Infidelity or Inconsideration,
to slight and disregard all this, they must be made to feel the present Smart
of their Sin and Folly, by the strict Execution of just Laws against their
Impieties and Impurities; that a Stop may be put to the growing Contagion of
their pernicious Examples, and they themselves may be awakened to remember and
show themselves Men, (Isa. 46. 8.) till they see what Beasts they have hitherto
made themselves.

Pulling them out of the fire.] This Expression notes the Zeal with which we
must endeavor the reforming of heinous Offenders. They are like Children, or
Epileptick or Frantic Persons, fallen into the Fire, that cannot, or will not
help themselves: It Is a barbarous thing to let them lie there, and not lend
them an hand for their Rescue. And here we are taught, that our Endeavors of
this kind must be speedy, lest our help come too late; we must be active and
industrious, that our help may be effectual; and all our Endeavors must
proceed from Love, as prompted by a Desire to save the Life, the Soul of our
offending and endangered Brother.

III. We have here, The Rule of Caution: Hating even the Garment spotted by the
Flesh. We must so deal with others, for their Good, as to take heed we our
selves receive no hurt from them; at least not of that kind we would save them
from. A Physician will not visit a Pesthouse without fortifying his Spirits by
some proper and sufficient Antidote beforehand.

We must labor so to converse with Bad Men, for their Good, as to see that we
our selves become not Bad thereby.

We must therefore stir up in our Souls a settled Hatred of all that Sin which
we would dissuade others from; and not only so, but of all the Appearances of
it; and likewise of all that may be an Occasion, Allurement, or Inducement to
it.

This I take to be, in short, the meaning of the Expression the Apostle here
makes use of, viz. Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

Waving therefore many other Particulars which might be fitly gathered from the
Words, we shall sum up their main Scope and Import, especially with respect to
the present Occasion, in the following Proposition or Point of Doctrine, viz.

That it is the Duty of every Christian, so to endeavor the saving of Others
from Error and Impiety, and the dreadful Consequences of both, as to see that
himself be not entangled in either. In speaking to which Proposition, I shall,
with what Plainness and Brevity I can, treat on these Three Heads following,
viz.

I. Of the Duty to be performed. II. Of the Manner of its Performance. III. Of
the Obligations we are under to such Performance.
I. Let us enquire concerning the Duty to be performed. Now, in order to the
right stating this Duty, Of endeavoring to save Others from Error and Impiety,
and the Destruction consequent thereupon, let me desire your attentive
Consideration of the following Particulars:

1. Error in the Fundamentals of Religion and Impiety, or Looseness of
Conversation, do certainly expose those who live and die in them to utter
Destruction. The Apostle assures us, Romans 6. 23. that the wages of sin is
death. And Heb. 12. 14. that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. See
also Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness,
let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints: Neither filthiness, nor
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient; but rather giving of
thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous
man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of
God, Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Phil. 3. 19. They whose God
is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things; their end
is destruction. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind: Nor thieves,
nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of God. Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness.

There is nothing plainer in the Word of God, than that a lewd and vicious
Life, impenitently persisted in, will certainly issue in the utter Destruction
both of Soul and Body. They that live like Beasts on Earth, must certainly be
the Companions of Devils in Hell. The Burnings of Lust here, prepare for the
unquenchable Burnings of (...) hereafter. There are few will seem to doubt of
it, though few live as if they believed any thing of it.

But that Errors in the Fundamentals of Religion are of like Fatal Influence,
will hardly be admitted by many: Yet the Apostle Paul reckons Heresies among
the Works of the Flesh* Gal. 5. 20 and assur^s us the Word of such eats as a
Canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17. and bids us beware of such, as we love our Souls, Tit. 3.
10. It Is little considered by many, that a sound Faith is as necessary to
Salvation as a good Life; nay, these two are indeed inseparable. If the Plague
of Leprosy be in the Head, the whole Person is thereby rendered unclean, Lev.
13. 44. He is in danger of perishing himself, and his Society becomes
infectious. I know this Matter has been carried too far by some who have
rashly haereticated their Brethren, See the Postscript.
and boldly usurped the Title of Orthodox to themselves, and (not knowing what
Spirit they are of) would cast out of the Church, and (if it were in their
Power) ou^ of Heaven too, all that cannot glibly pronounce their Shibboleth.

Yet if some reel into one Extreme, it does not follow that therefore we must
reel into the other. We are to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered
to the Saints, Jude 3. And the Corrupters of that Faith are to be looked upon
as the most dangerous Enemies Religion has. Such as deny the Divine Authority
of the Scripture, as the Deists; such as interpret away its vital Sense and
Meaning, as the Socinians; such as subject it to a private Interpretation,
allowing no gloss but what their own Infallibility stamps upon it, as the
Romanists abroad, and our modern Enthusiasts at home: All these lay dangerous
Snares for the Souls of ignorant and unstable Men. If our Faith be blind, our
Practice will be lame; and both the one and the other of these will sadly find
at last that they have but deceived themselves, or been deceived by others,
with vain words, Ephesians. 5. 6.

2. Yet while we are in the present probationary State, there is hope that
those who are involved in these Snares of Death may be rescued from them. The
great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls came to seek and to save that which was
lost, Luke 19. 10. And the great Design of the Gospel is to publish Pardon and
Life to the Penitent, without Exception. Jesus Christ (the Apostle acquaints
us) came into the world to save sinners, not excluding the very chief, 1 Timothy
1. 15. And it is often seen, that Publicans and Harlots enter in before proud
Pharisees and confident Self-justitiaries, Matthew. 21. 31.

Where the Gospel is duly preached, it is glad tidings of great joy to all
people, Luke 2. 10. It Is a black Catalogue to which the Apostle subjoins, such
were some of you, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

They who, as to their external Conversation, have been most blameless (though
that be commendable) are not to be flattered, as if they needed no Repentance,
or might get to Heaven without Regeneration, and Faith in the Death and
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ; nor are the most guilty and abominable to be
treated as if there were no hope for them upon true Repentance and Faith in the
Redeemer. There is certainly a great deal of Truth in that Assertion of sundry
of our old English Divines, viz. That all Men naturally have a strong
Inclination to a Covenant of Works, and would be as little beholden to the
Redeemer and his Grace as ever they can.

True it is, Great Transgressions call for deep Humiliation: Yet we must take
heed we think not of washing away our Guilt in our own Tears; it is only the
Redeemer's Blood can do that: And by virtue of that Blood, together with the
sanctifying Influence of the Divine Spirit, purchased by it, and dispensed by
our ascended Redeemer, there is hope that the vilest Sinners may become first
justified and then glorified Saints.

3. There are Means appointed by God (and usually attended with his Blessing)
for the saving of Sinners from the Guilt, Defilement, and Dominion of Sin, and
from the Temporal and Eternal Judgments due to it.

God has declared upon Oath, That he has no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, Ezekiel. 18. 32. and chapter 33. 11. And the long Exercise of his Patience
toward guilty Sinners, may abundantly assure us of it; much more, when we
consider the Gifts that our risen and ascended Lord has given to men, (Ephesians. 4.
8.) the Ordinances he has se^tled in his Church; the Charge he has entrusted
every Man with, not only of his own, but likewise of his Brother's Soul: So
that the Preaching of the Word, the Administration of Sacraments, the Wise and
Spiritual Management of Discipline, Fraternal Correption, the Shining Light of
a Good Example, Providential Chastisements, are all so many proper Helps to
reduce Sinners from the Error of their Ways, and prevent that Ruin which will
else certainly and speedily overtake them.

4. It is the unquestionable Duty of Christian Magistrates (and that by virtue
of their Office) to punish Vice and Profaneness. The Magistrate is a Minister
of God to us for Good; a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, and
one who bears not the Sword in vain, Romans 13. 4.

Whether, or how far Errors (even the most dangerous) are punishable or
restrainable by the Magistrate's Sword, is a Question that has been boldly
ventilated; but whether accurately decided or no, of late, I shall not
determine: But that the punishing of Vice and Profaneness is his Duty, is what
no body does or can dispute.

All the Difficulty is, to get Men to the Discharge of a Plain and Necessary
Duty, to the Performance of which they are under all the Obligations of Loyalty
both to their Heavenly and Earthly King; of Conscience to their Solemn Oaths;
of Interest (if the Peace of their Consciences, and their good Reputation among
Men, be looked upon by them as any part of their Interest.) But while the
gratifying of a Friend, or (which is worse) a deadly Enemy, a base Lust, is of
more value with them (as with some it most evidently is) than all the
abovementioned Obligations, there is but too much Cause to fear that the so
necessary, so much desired, and so hopefully-begun Work of Reformation of
Manners will die in their hands. And then what Outcries their Consciences and
their Posterity will e're long make against them, I leave them to think: I pray
God they may in time.

5. It is also the Duty of Ministers, by sound Doctrine, by serious
Exhortation, and by the shining Light of an Exemplary Behavior, to give all
the Check they can to growing Error and Impiety. This is their Office-Work, to
which they are specially to attend, as called and consecrated thereunto. They
are in a peculiar manner, the salt of the earth, and the light of the world,
Matthew. 5. 13, 14. They are sent on this very Errand, To turn men from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. It ought to be
their whole Business to save themselves and those that hear them, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
The Epistles to Timothy and Titus do thoroughly acquaint them with the Weight
of their Work, Obligations, and Account: On the heedful Reading whereof, where
is he to be found, that may not justly cry out, with the blessed Apostle St.
Paul, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. And if it be difficult,
faithfully to acquit our selves of so great a Trust, in any times, how much
more must it be so in Times of so great Degeneracy as these last and worst of
Days, the Ends of the World, the very Dreggs of Time, wherein not only our
Persons, but our very Office is despised, and we are accounted and used (as our
Betters once were) as the very filth and offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.
13. Deists and Socinians on the one hand, and giddy Enthusiasts on the other,
having used all the Arts of subtle Malice to render Ministers and the Ministry
base and contemptible; and to get us looked upon by all whom they can
influence, as a pack of Chargeable Cheats, useless, nay, Pernicious Impostors.
These are Discouragements which some former Ages were, in a great measure,
unacquainted with: Yet will not all this, nor a great deal more, excuse us from
doing what we can; no more than our Persenal Weaknesses will excuse others for
hindering us, by their Oppositions or Underminings, from doing what else we
might.

We are listed as Captains in Christ's Army, and we must endure Hardships, as
good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2, 3.

We must labor to be excited by Difficulties, and emboldened by Opposition,
and, not fearing the Faces of Men, to show them their Transgressions and their
Sins, Isa. 58. 1. To warn Sinners, that they die not, Ezekiel. 33. 7, 1. To
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. And
then, whatever our present Entertainment or Success be, we shall at last be
accepted and rewarded.

6. Yet is not this Work so peculiar to Magistrates and Ministers, but that all
who profess themselves Christians are likewise obliged, according to their
Abilities and Opportunities, to endeavor the Promotion and Furtherance of it.

Magistracy and Ministry are distinct Offices, peculiarly appropriated to the
great Ends of Restraining Wickedness, and Furthering and Countenancing
Sobriety, Righteousness, and Godliness in the World: And the respective
Offices, with the proper Work of them, are by no means to be invaded by
unqualified or uncalled Persons, for God is a God of order, and not of
confusion, in all the Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 33. Yet this hinders not, but that
Private Persons may, and ought, in their respective Places, to make the Work of
the one and the other as easy as they can. And were but what in this kind
might and ought to be done, faithfully performed by Persons in Private
Stations, the Work of Public Persons would be rendered much easier to them.

How impossible is it for Magistrates to execute Laws on obstinate Offenders,
if no body will bring them Informations? How heavily must the Work of Ministers
proceed, if Parents neglect the due Instruction and Government of their
Children and Families? How many Public Miscarriages might be prevented, and
the Trouble of Magistrates and Ministers therein, would but Christian
Neighbors prudently watch over, and faithfully admonish one another? according
to that Apostolical Injunction; Exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.

But if Private Persons throw all their Duty upon Public Officers, were they
Angels, a great deal of it is like to be left undone. Consider seriously that
pregnant and often-mentioned, but too little regarded Text, Lev. 19. 17. Thou
shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise reprove thy
Brother, and not suffer sin upon him. We must admonish one another, reprove one
another, and, if need be, inform of one another; (see Lev. 5. 1.) unless we
have a mind to be guilty of each others Blood, and draw down Vengeance on the
Nation, and Damnation on our own heads: He is not duly concerned for himself,
that is concerned; for no body but* himself.

7. The greater Advances Error and Impiety have made in any Part of the Visible
Church, the more, strongly are all good Men engaged to appear with the utmost
Vigor against them.

If never so small a Leak spring in a Ship, it is every one's Concern to do
their utmost to stop it betimes; but if the Vessel fill with Water, and
threaten to sink, each Man pumps for his Life, and puts to all his Strength.
The least Declensions of Piety in a Nation that has long enjoyed the Gospel,
are of threatening Aspect; but when Wickedness comes -- in like a Hood, and the
impetuous Torrent threatens to bear down all before it, it is then of highest
Concernment, that all, in whom there is left any Sense of God and Goodness,
should unite as one Man, and apply all their Skill and Force for the taking
timely and effectual Methods, in order to the preventing that utter Ruin that
will else certainly overtake an impious and impenitent People. Righteousness
exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach [and Ruine] of any people, Prove. 14.
34. And if so, what is like to become of England? There needs little of a Spirit
of Prophecy to pronounce its Doom, unless the late, and yet continued Attempts
for Reformation, meet with an happier Effect than the Managements of too many
among us seem to presage. I dare not say our Wound is incurable; I would fain
hope otherwise: But if the most proper Remedies do but exasperate, I leave it
to the Abler Physicians of Church and State to judge of so unpromising a Crisis.

In a word, Gross Ignorance, damnable Heresies, daring Blasphemies, vile
Hypocrisy, scandalous Divisions, horrible Oppression, base Selfishness,
insufferable Pride, and incorrigible Obstinacy, I think, hardly ever more
prevailed in a Land professing the Gospel, than they do in England at this Day.
So that we may well say, in the Words of the Prophet, Isa. 1. 9. Except the
Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as
Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. And what can such a State of
things bespeak, of that very small remnant, but that they endeavor speedily to
stand in the breach, to turn away divine wrath? Psalm. 106. 23. That they be
clothed with Zeal for the Honor of God, and the real Reformation of a sinful
People: And who knows but the Prayers and Endeavors of the few, may prevail
against the Impieties and Blasphemies of the many of those hardened and
obstinate Sinners among us, that yet hate Instruction, and refuse to be
Reformed?

II. Let us next Inquire, How this Duty of Endeavoring to save others from Sin
and Ruin is to be performed?

I have been so large on the former Inquiry, that I must be the briefer in this
and that which follows.

The Text, as we have opened it, furnishes us with a full Answer; give me
leave, as succinctly as may be, to set before you the Particulars of it.

Endeavors for the Reforming of Others, are to be managed,

1. With Judgment and Discretion; making a difference, of Persons, of Crimes.
We are not to be partial to the Persons of any; but we are to be prudent in our
Applications to Persons of different Ranks, Capacities, and Qualifications. See
how the Apostle directs in relation hereto, 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. Rebuke not an
elder, but entreat him as a father; and the younger men as brethren: the elder
women as mothers, the younger as sisters: with all purity.

Reproofs are Arrows that must not be shot at Rovers. It must be considered not
only what every one needs, but wh^t he can bear, and what he is like to make a
right use of; yea, and what may be the Consequence of the Treatment we give
him, with respect to others.

Persons in Public Stations are not to be made vile, (unless they have first,
in an extraordinary manner, made themselves so,) lest the Office fall with the
Person, and the Ignominy of the one issue in the Detriment of the other.

So likewise as to Faults, we must take heed that we use not the same sharpness
of Rebuke, or severity of Prosecution, on account of smaller Infirmities, or
sudden Surprises, or single Instances of Transgression, as in studied and
deliberate, or malicious and habitual Wickedness. A wise Physician suits the
Remedy to the Strength of the Patient, and the Nature of the Disease: So should
we endeavor to do.

2. With Compassion: In smaller, more unwilling, or rare Offenses, much
Tenderness, Pity, and Gentleness is to be used; and even where our Brother's
Offense is more heinous, we are still to mix Pity with our greatest and most
just Severity; as considering the Frailty of Human Nature, the Malice and
Subtilty of the Tempter, considering our selves, lest we also be tempted, Gal.
6. 1. He has little Sense of his own Frailty that insults over another's
Folly. It Is true, this must not hinder us from punishing, or bringing to
Punishment, obstinate Offenders; but yet it must make us humble and mournful,
and tender in the Frame of our Spirits, when we are forced upon such unpleasing
Work. Even God himself styles Judgment his strange Act, Isa. 28. 21. And it
would fare hard enough with the best of us, should he (with Strictness and
Rigor) mark Iniquity; should he lay judgment to the line, and righteousness to
the plummet, as the Expressions are, Psalm. 130. 3. Isa. 28. 17.

3. Our Endeavors for the Reformation of Others, must be accompanied with, and
encouraged by the Hope of Desired Success; That we shall deliver our own Souls,
(Ezekiel. 14. 14.) that we shall save our Brother's Soul from Death, (Jam. 5. 20.)
and that we shall contribute to the turning away of Wrath from a sinful Land,
and to the lengthening out the Public Tranquillity. If we have no Hope of doing
any Good, we shall have no Heart to do any, nor so much as to attempt the doing
it. It was Hope encouraged the Ninevites to repent and reform, when they had
heard the dreadful Doom of utter Destruction denounced against them by the
Prophet Jonah, Jon. 3. 4, 9. And, blessed be God, our Case, though sad, is not
so desperate as not to leave us any encouraging Grounds of Hope. The Experience
we have had of the Divine Favor, in delivering us from the intolerable
Miseries of Popery and Slavery by a just War, and from the remaining Miseries
of War by an happy Peace; the Preservation of the King's Life in so many
Dangers as he has been exposed to, both at Home and Abroad; His Majesty's
Forwardness to countenance the Work of Reformation by his Speeches to the
Parliament, Proclamation to all his Subjects, and by being himself a Pattern of
what he recommends; together with the like Forwardness in the High Court of
Parliament, and the most eminently dignified and distinguished Persons both in
Church and State; the Readiness of many, both in City and Country, to join in
this blessed Work; and the visible Success of their honest and pious
Endeavors. These, sure, give us some Ground of Hope, and Encouragement to
expect, that our Labor in this matter, shall not be in vain: But that if we
heartily set to the Work, God will work with us, and for us, and his Blessings
will crown our Endeavors with greater Success than we have yet seen, or even
durst hope for.

4. With a due Sense of the great Honor God puts upon us, in making use of us
as Instruments for the saving of Others from Sin and Ruin. We may well say
with Admiration, Lord! what is man, that thou should cloth him with such
Honor! The Apostle St. Paul thought it worthy of his utmost Acknowledgements,
that God should so highly honor him, as to account him faithful, and put him
into the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1. 12. In a proportionable measure every one is
greatly honored of God that is made an Instrument to convert an erring
Brother, and by turning a Sinner from the error of his way, to save a Soul from
Death, and hide a multitude of Sins, Jam. 5. 20. It Is the Joy of Angels to
behold the Conversion of Sinners, (Luke 15. 10.) it must needs then be the
Glory of Mortals to be instrumental in it. This was the great Errand the Son of
God came down from Heaven upon; and to be the Savior, is one of his most
glorious Titles: What must it be then for us to be subservient to him in this
great Work, and to be conformed to him, in saving our selves and others? Such
Honor have all his Saints! even they who were once themselves notorious
Sinners, and stood in as much need of Saving Mercy as any the vilest of the
Sons of Men.

5. With a Prudent and Pious Fear, lest the Work miscarry in our hands, by our
bad Management; lest we harden those we design to soften, and ruin those we
endeavor to save. They that take upon them the Work of Reforming others had
need look well to themselves; such are as a City set on a Hill, which cannot be
hid, Matthew. 5. 14. They that envy or hate our Endeavors for Reformation, will
be forward to spy out and aggravate our Miscarriages: And though, when all is
done, it cannot be expected we should be Angels, yet it becomes us to labor to
be of the best of Men; that none may justly taunt us with that Proverb,
Physician, heal thy self, Luke 4. 23. Meekness, Prudence, Watchfulness, Zeal,
Self-denial, Brotherly-love, must shine brightly in the whole course of our
Behavior, and especially in our Endeavors to convince and reclaim others.

6. With needful Severity, where milder Methods would not be likely to
succeeed. Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Some Sinners are such Sons of Belial, that, like thorns, they cannot be taken
with hands; but the man that shall touch them, must be fenced with iron, and
the staff of a spear, 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7. With these there is no dallying. God and
the Magistrate have put it into our Power to punish them; and we draw the Guilt
of their Blood, and the Hurt they may do, by their infectious Example, to the
Souls of others, upon our own Heads, if, by a foolish Pity, we be tender of
their Credit, Profit, or Ease, to the hardening them in their Sins, and giving
them the Advantage of recommending Vice to others by their own Impunity.

Where Warnings and Reproofs signify nothing, the Smart of Punishment may
awaken, or at least restrain. What though such, for the present, count us their
Enemies, perhaps they will not do so always. However, it is better bearing the
Efforts of their Anger than the Burden of their Guilt.

7. With Zeal. A cold Reproof is a palliating, and in a sort a praising of Sin.
Thus Eli reproved his Sons; but because he did it coldly, and restrained them
not, God charge the Guilt, and exacteth the Punishment of their Impieties on
his Person and whole Posterity, vide 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.

True Zeal will make us speedy in our Endeavors to reclaim Sinners, lest the
proper Season for it be lost; active and industrious, both to discover Sin, and
bring the Sinner to just Shame and Punishment; that our Sloth occasion not the
Growth of Impiety, and the Spreading of this Fire, till all be devoured by it.
And above all, we must see that our Zeal be not of an earthly, much less an
hellish Original; that it be not owing either to our Self-love, or our Envy to,
or Hatred of our Brethren: But that it be wholly of a Divine and Heavenly
Extract, altogether animated by a Principle of Love to God, and to the Souls of
Men; and then we may well be clad with Zeal as a Cloak, and to be eaten up by
it, (Isa. 59. 17. Joh. 2. 17.) will be our Commendation at present, and the
Occasion of our receiving a full Reward at last.

8. And, Lastly, with due Caution as to our selves. We are to love our
Neighbor as our selves, and therefore our selves in the first place;
especially this is to be observed in Matters of a spiritual nature, and wherein
the Health and Happiness of our Souls is concerned. And it is this which, as I
take it, we are here taught: When the Apostle had been giving Rules for our
Behavior toward others, in order to their Recovery and Reformation, he
subjoins, hating even the garment spotted by ihe flesh.

Here then, we must with a careful Eye look to these thimgs.

1. Lest we render our selves guilty, by our Endeavors to reform others, for
want of due regard to our Principles from which, our Ends for which, and the
Means by which we act in so good a Work. God requires of us, not only that what
we do be good, but that we do it well: Else Prayer may become Sin, Sacrifice an
Abomination, and the Execution of Justice Murder; as it was in Jehu's Case,
Hos. 1. 4. See then that the Love of God and Christ, and Souls, constrain us;
that we have no Squint-regards to our own Credit, or Secular Advantage, much
less that we be not puffed up with the haughty Pride of thinking more highly of
our selves than is meet to think; that our Looks and Gesture do not say, what
we would be ashamed our Tongue and Lips should, Stand off, I am holier than
thou, Isa. 65. 5. But let our Hearts and Consciences bear us witness, that we
sincerely aim at the Glory of God, the Salvation of Men, the Good of the
present Age and Posterity, and the keeping our selves from partaking of the
Sins of the Times and Places where we live, that so we may shun the Punishment
due to them. And farther, we must see that all the Means we use to so good Ends
be just and allowable. Id solum possumus, quod jure possumus: God needs not
my lie to his glory, (Romans 3. 7, 8.) nor must I go out of my place, though it
were to stay his Ark when ready to fall, (2 Samuel 6. 6, 7, 8.) Blessed be God,
we want not warrantable Means enough, to promote the good Ends of Reformation,
that we should need to betake our selves to unlawful or doubtful ones: Nor do I
in the least suspect your combining into Societies, or the Magistrates
concealing the Names of Informers (especially in some Cases) for such. They
have both of them been so fully vindicated by abler hands, that I need say
nothing of them here.

2. We ought to take heed, lest the frequent conversing with gross and
notorious Sinners (as we think, with a Design to reform them) do gradually and
insensibly abate our Abhorrence of Sin, and infect us with its Contagion; that
we partake not of other Men's Sins, nor become like those whose Reformation and
Amendment we profess to desire and endeavor. It is sometimes seen that a
Physician catches the Disease he was sent for to cure. If we choose bad Men
for our Companions, it is a sign we are such our selves; and if we are cast
into their Company, be the Occasion what it will, we are to look upon it as an
Hour of Temptation, and accordingly to double our Watch, by awakening the Fear
of God and the Hatred of Sin in our Souls. It is a dreadful thing to behold Sin
with an unconcerned Indifferency of Spirit, or to hear the Name of God
blasphemed, without being moved with inward Horror and Remorse. We ought to
enter a solemn Protest, in the Secret of our Souls, against all that Impiety we
are constrained to be Witnesses to; yea, and to make our inward Displeasure
against it visible and evident by all proper and prudent Methods. Thus we read,
Just Lot vexed his righteous soul from day to day, in seeing and hearing the
ungodly deeds of the impure Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 8. We must keep, as far as we
can, from the contagious Breath of impudent Sinners. And even while Their and
the Common Good obliges us to converse with them, our own must engage us to be
upon our Guard. We must have no fellowship with those unfruitful works of
darkness which we are called to reprove and suppress, Ephesians. 5. 11. Our corrupt
Natures are like Tinder, apt to catch Fire at every Spark; and therefore, though
we may be jealous over others with a godly jealousy, (2 Cor. 11. 2.) yet it
must be so, as ever in the first place to maintain the same Jealousy over our
selves. He forfeits his Innocence and his Peace (two of the most precious
Jewels in the World) that grows bold with Temptation. Let us therefore be sober
and vigilant, because our Adversary the Devil goes about as a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. The better we are, or seem to be, and
the more excellent and useful the Work we are engaged in is, the greater is
Satan's Malice against us; and therefore the more strict should be our Care and
Vigilance over our selves.

III. I should now proceed to the Third General Inquiry, the Import whereof is,
to set before you the Obligations we lie under to endeavor the Reformation of
others, and to save them with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire: But the
Matter treated of under the former Inquiries, has so multiplied and lengthened
on my hands, that instead of a more distinct Consideration of the several
Obligations that lie upon us to so important a Duty; I must content my self
with a brief Representation of them, in the way of an Hortatory Address to the
Worthy Gentlemen of the Society for Reformation of Manners in this Palce; which
I think is all the Application that either the Subject requires, or the Time
will admit.

Let me therefore (Much Honored and Dearly Beloved) in the Name of my great
Lord and Master, beseech and exhort you, as you have put your Hand to this
Plough, so not to entertain the least Thought of looking back, Luke 9. 62. Let
no Discouragements affright you from continuing with unwearied Diligence in the
Prosecution of your Endeavors, for the effectual Suppressing of all Vice,
Immorality, and Profaneness amongst us.

Error and Impiety have their Patrons and Advocates every where, and they are
bold, restless, and importunate; be not you ashamed or afraid to plead the
Cause of Truth and Holiness, which is evidently, and beyond Dispute, the Cause
of God. It Is God himself who requires and expects this at your hands; the God
who made you and redeemed you, the God whom you profess to love and serve, the
God who has prepared a Crown of Glory and blessed Immortality for all them who
are Faithful to his Interests, here on Earth, and who is able to punish with
inconceivable, endless Torments of Body and Soul, all those who falsely betray
their Trust, and has threatened so to do.

Your Profession of Christianity obliges you to Zeal and Diligence in this
Work. Christianity is a Doctrine of Love; and surely this Love ought not to be
confined to the Bodies of Men, but to be first and principally extended to
their Souls. If he that has this World's Good, and sees his Brother have
need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him, do thereby evidence
himself utterly devoid of the Grace of Charity, as the Apostle assures us, (1
John 3. 17.) What Charity, what Love to God or Man can he be thought to have,
that sees his Brother running post in the direct Road to Hell, and will do
nothing to stop or turn him? Do I need to set before you the Excellency of your
Work? To oppose the Kingdom of Satan, and the Powers of Darkness; To Advance
the Kingdom and Interest of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; to Rescue poor
Souls from Temporal and Eternal Destruction; to Promote the Security, Peace,
and Happiness of your Native Country: All this, the Work you are engaged in,
has a visible Relation and hopeful Tendency to.

Consider farther, whose Character it was, that he went about doing good, Acts
10. 38. and how much it is your Concern, and will be your Credit, to be
Followers of him. Remember also, that it is too late after Vows, to make
enquiry, Prove. 20. 25. You are the devoted Servants of God-Redeemer by the
Bonds of your Holy Baptism, in which you were listed as Christ's Soldiers, and
engaged in a perpetual War against Satan, your own Flesh, and this present evil
World. Christ came into the world, to destroy the works of the devil, 1 John 3.
8. and we are under all imaginable Obligations to be subservient unto him in
that great Design of his.

Besides, I might urge upon you the heavy Judgments growing Sensuality and
Profaneness have brought upon other Countries and our own; the wonderful
Patience God has long exercised toward us; and the innumerable Benefits and
Favors he has conferred upon us: So that if we now neglect a real and hearty
Reformation, and Return to God, we show our selves the most stupid and
ungrateful Creatures upon Earth.

If the present Conjuncture seem not to us a fit and favorable one, to
undertake and go through with such a Work, when do we hope there may such a one
arise? Are we ever like to have a Prince that will more favor Reformation? Do
we ever expect better Laws to enable us for it? Can we hope (till the Work it
self have made some considerable Progress) to find the Nation in a greater
readiness to embrace and comply with it? So that this seems to be the very
critical Minute for England's Reformation; and we have Reason to conclude, (or
at least strongly to conjecture,) that it must be now or never. Let it be
farther thought on, that the Desires and Expectations of all good Men, at Home
and Abroad, are, that now something should be made of so good a Work. Our poor
Brethren of France, under all the Miseries and Hardships they endure, comfort
themselves, that the Reformation and Settlement of the rest of the Protestant
Churches, and of Us in special, may be the Presage and Beginning of Peace,
Rest, and Restoration unto them: And this has been, for many Years, the
Prayer, Hope, and Endeavor of the wisest and best among our selves.

We have, alas! too long been divided in Communion and Affection, and have
thereby made our selves the Sport of our Enemies, and the Pity of our Friends;
and all Endeavors hitherto used, for the healing of our Breaches, have been
fruitless and ineffectual: But I verily persuade my self, that if the Work of
Reformation of Manners were but once brought to a considerable pitch of
Perfection, the other would, as it were, fall in of course: For, whence come
wars and fightings among us, (even Ecclesiastical Wars, for I think it is too
great a Solaecism to call them Religious ones,) come they not hence, even of
our Lusts that war in our Members, Jam. 4. 1.

Again, What could more contribute to our Comfort in Death, and Confidence at
Judgment, than our Faithfulness to God, and his Interest here in this World?
When our Consciences should bear us witness, that we have shunned no Labor,
Cost, Shame, or Suffering, so we might promote Righteousness, Godliness, and
Sobriety, in the Places where we lived.

And to Conclude: Of how great Advantage might our Faithfulness and Success be,
not only to the present Age, but to Posterity also? How might an happy
Contagion spread it self over this and neighboring Kingdoms? Vice has been
propagated by Example; Who knows but (by the concurrent Blessing of Heaven)
Virtue and Piety may be so too? And then how great Cause would Posterity have
to rise up, and call us Blessed.

I close all with the Apostle's Exhortation, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore, my
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHereas I have been given to understand, that those Words, Page 12. I know
this Matter has been carried too far, etc. were taken by some, in the Hearing,
for a designed Reflection on the Church of England; and it is possible this
Sermon may fall into the Hands of Persons not more knowing, nor less
prejudicate, than the aforesaid Objectors: I thought meet here to declare,
(what I suppose every intelligent and candid Reader will concur with me in,)
That in what is there said, I had no Thoughts of the Established Church, nor of
any other Body or Society of Protestants, of whatever Denomination; but those
Words did entirely refer to the Bigots of all Parties, who place Religion in
things very accidental, if not wholly extrinsick to it; and value themselves
more upon those things which divide and distinguish them from other Christians,
than upon those much weightier and more important ones, wherein the whole Body
of Christ's Catholic Church are agreed. In a word, that Passage is wholly
levelled against an unwarrantable, false, furious Zeal for doubtful, or little
things, to the Neglect and Detriment of the greater and weightier Matters of
the Law and Gospel; Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: (Matthew. 23. 23.) Whether the
Object of such Zeal be Presbytery and (Doctrinal) Calvinism, or Episcopacy and
Arminianism, or Anarchy and Antinomianism. If Men of this Temper be capable of
any Cure, (as I hope some may,) I would commend to their serious Reading, Judge
Hales's Three Short Tracts of Religion, and the Appendages to it; Bishop
Wilkin's Two Sermons on Romans 4. 17, 18. Mr. Chandler's Effort against Bigotry,
on the same Text; and Mr. Corbet's Kingdom of God among Men.

Reader, I have no farther Trouble to give thee, but to conclude with that
Apostolical Benediction, in which thou may read (if I know any thing of it)
my very Heart; 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16. Now the Lord of Peace himself give you Peace
always, by all means. The Lord be with you all. Amen.


